THE True History of the Civil VVarres of France, between the French King
Henry the 4. and the Leaguers.

Gathered from the year of our Lord 1585. until this present October. 1591.

By Antony Colynet.

Romans 13. He which resists the power, resists the ordinance of God.

Printed at London for Thomas Woodcock, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the
sign of the black Bear.



REVERENDISSIMO IN CHRISTO PATRI AC DOMIno D. Iohanni Cantuariensi
Archepiscopo, and totius Angliae primati, ac Metropolitano, domino suo
colendissimo gratiam and pacem exoptat.
SApienter a Sophocle scriptum est mundum esse (...), quod vt Paulus testatur
adeo luculenter (...) eius, nimirum and (...), vt nedum oculis conspici, imo
and mambus facile contrectari possint. Nam cum in mirifica coelorum, terrae,
marisque pulchritudine, bonitate, ordine and motu, eius sapientiae vestigia
elucescant: imprimis vero in hominum consociatione tuenda conseruandaque
apparent. Etenim cum propter multiplices humanae mentis errores, cordis
deprauationem, and voluntatis auersionem, quae secuta sunt primi parentis
lapsum, tanta (...) omnes and singulas naturae humanae facultates muaserit, vt
nihil nisi labi, nescire, errare, decipi, and in exitium ruere hominum genus
possit: sapientissimus ille Graecorum Socrates, apud diuinum Platonem in his
quos de republica scripsit libris, intelligit and diserta inductione ab ipsa
universally experientia sumpta demonstrat: equos ab equis, boues a bobus, capras
a capris, oues ab ouibus regi nullo modo posse; sed a praestantiori natura and
humana: ita hominum genus sine diuina prsentia nullo modo gubernari potest.
Ideo bonus ille rerum opifex hominum quasi tutelae procurationem suscipiens,
res humanas non modo curat, vrumetiam ea prouidentia, qua praeterita,
praesentia and futura, cernit, homini salutaria consilia suppeditat, actiones
fortunat, distortas cogitationes, affectibus prpedita consilia and iniustos
conatus damnat euertit and punit. Et vt tutius res hominum agantur ipse (...),
clam per civitates obambulans singula speculatur, aliorum consilia regit,
aliorum v^ro obseruat ad vindictam, immanem improboru^ audaciam retundit, and
diabolorum furores coercet. Quam ob causam hominum coetus potestatis and
obedientiae docendi and discendi iudiciorum, and multorum cum multis
contractuum, officijs arctius colligauit. Neruos autem huius consociationis
familiam, ecclesiam and regnum esse voluit; quarum altera sua foecunditate
generis humani propagationem suppeditaret, and specei conseruationem
perpetuaret. Altera vero veram sapientiam, dei agnitionem, veros cultus, ac
denique suppellectilem omnium doctrinarum and bonarum artium ta^quam in arce
repositam, custodit fidem and veram innocationem, bonos mores and salutem
monstrat, rationibus, commonefactionibus and obiurgationibus tanquam fraeno
hominum cupiditates vndique diffluentes obstruit. Regnum vero autoritate and
dignitate conspicuum, robore and potentia instructum ta^quam in summo loco
positum eminet, vt quos neque paterna autoritas, neque docentium diligentia, in
officio retinere potest: vi and via peruulgata legu^ cohibeantur. Quae cum
(...) and ordine coherent, suauissimum diuinae sapientiae, bonitatis iustitiae
and (...) odorem, generi humano reddunt: Sin abrumpantur haec societatis
vincula, patrum docentium and legitime imperantium autoritatem labefactari and
humana retro conuersa ruere and concidere necesse est. Vt autem haec
manifestius cernerentur voluit ille sapiens rerum opifex sua^ ipsius imaginem
in ipso patrum, docentium and magistratuu^ vultu insculpi, and insculptam
elucere. Muniuit his propugnaculis deus generis humani societatem, vt ad eum
tanquam ad fontem boni in natura hominum salus referretur, vt naturae
intelligentes autorem huius opificij, and colligationis hominu^ inter se
celebrarent, colerent, inuocarent, ei co^fiderent, and abeo solo penderent.
Verum (...) iste mendax and (...), haec vincula humanae societatis apud omnes
and omniaetate dissoluere, and abrumpere conatur. Parricidijs, idolomania,
seditionibus, clandestinis consilijs proditionibus familiam, ecclesiam, and
ciuitatem implet: In parents qui primum legitimi imperij gradum tene^t
contemptum excitat, odijs, schismate, (...), and haeresi, ecclesiam vndique
turbat, respublicas ciuitatum euersionibus vastat, sanguine irrigat, caedibus
contaminat, regna funditus euertit, and orbi vastitatem affert, prole impia,
leuibus ingenijs, turbulentis ciuibus. (...) in hominum cordibus delet, veram
religionem corrumpit, officium and obtemperationem debitam magistratibus ex
ciuium animis euellit, impietate, ambitione, prauis consultoribus, malorum
consuetudine fraterculis, Iesuitis, and perduellibus. Harum pestium testis est,
and vetus and recens historia omnium imperioru^, retumpub. and gentium. Sed
imprimis florentissima Gallia, Europae decus, quae totos hos 30. annos
intestinis dissidijs exarsit; and facta est immanis saeuitiae, and pontificiae
truculentiae laniena, hominum luxu, ambitione and impietate perditoru^
domicilium, scelerum omnis generis sentina, rapinarum and hominum rapidorum
receptaculum, malorum lerna, and teterrimi odoris camarina. Cum autem in otio
minime otiosus esse vellem, and magnopere cuperem carissimae patriae excidium
cognoscere, causas, progressus, periodos and euentus rerum gestarum exquirere,
(...) quaedam ad priuatum vsum annotaueram: vt tantaru^ calamitatum causas
exquirentibus satisfacerem, vt deplorare^ patriae interitum, and vt ad dei
timorem me inspectione ta^tarum pooenaru^ excitarem. Tandem approbatione and
iudicio amicorum maiore, dilige^tia rem aggressus sum, and vt plurimum ex his
libris qui Gallice ijsdem de rebus scripti sunt, transtuli; ex varijs regu^
Henricoru^ 3. and 4. declarationibus, edictis, proscriptionibus,
proclamationibus, apologijs, accusationibus, articulis, and multoru^ Epistolis,
and id genus scriptis narrationes plurimum auxi, and perpetuam rerum
explicationem consarcinaui, sperans hunc meum laborem bonis viris gratissimum
futurum.

Hae narrationes tot sunt conciones de ira diuina in contemptores euangelij,
and eos qui caeca ambitione, aut praua aliqua cupiditate incitati civitates,
respublicas, regna, and imperia concutiunt legitimis magistratibus obsistunt,
orbis pacem turbant, humanae societatis neruos resecant. Hae narrationes poenas
a lege diuina propositas, and mercedem impietati debita^, homines scelestos
subijsse digito monstrant. Praesentiam vero diuinam in conseruanda, and
liberanda ecclesia, fidem promissionum, timentibus dei iudicia ratam certamque
permanere. Anglica vero and vernacula lingua rem descripsi, aspera quidem and
inculta, sed qua proprietate homini peregrino licuit, vt lectores etiam
ineruditi iudicia diuina admirari, and timere discerent, euangelium reuerenter
amplecti, and vitae nouitate poenas peccatis debitas, retardare and auertere,
magistratibus diuitius constitutis, se qua decet obseruantia subijcere,
reipublicae and ecclesiae pacem, non temere ira, odio, morositate, libidine aut
ambitione turbare, and disciplina^ laxare: denique mortales vt discant
iustitiam moniti, and no^ temnere diuos. Si quid autem videatur acerbius dictum
id no^ ni veram nobilitatem and familias de republica, Christiana benemeritas,
dictum boni viri autument. Nam vt est vetus dictum (...), huiusmodi mycterismis
sarcasmis and acerbioribus verbis degeneres a vera nobilitate mores impietatem,
hypocrisin, ambitionem, libidines, saeuitiam, and immanitatem sacro sanctoru^
regum laesam, and violatam maiestatem, a perduellibus, and proditoribus, sacri
istius (si dijs placet) foederis taxaui. Desinant igitur malefacere malefacta
ne audia^t sua. Existimo enim nullis satis atrocibus verbis rebellionis crimen,
defectionem, and coniurationem in maiestatem regiam a sacri istius foederis,
autoribus and principibus excitata^ exprimi posse. Quod si violatae maiestatis
crimen summum in toto genere humano malum, malis verbis tanquam proprijs
epithetis ornauerim, veteres oratores Demosthenem, Aeschinen, and praecipue
Ciceronem autores habeo, imo ipsum Christum and Apostolos, Petrum, Paulum,
Iacobum and Iohannem, qui acerbis verbis impios insectantur. Quos eo consilio
secutus sum, vt atrocia flagitia, atrocibus verbis monstrata omnibus execranda
proponerem. Vt enim acutis morbis, acutam curationem adhibere solent medici,
ita similem in genere humano, non ante auditam defectionem, and Christianis
regibus and principibus seruitutem, aut exitium minitante^ istius foederis
coniuratione^ non satis odiosis verbis regni legitimi amantibus odiosam reddere
conatus sum, non vt foedus istud curare^ (curatione^ enim non patitur) sed vt
quantu^ in me esset alios a similibus malis auertere^ and reuocare^. Calumnias
vero pontificioru^, and eor^m qui sunt euangelij and legitimae potestatis
hosts haud moror. Mihi vero satis probe satisfactu^ erit, si bonis quibus
placere studeo, satisfecero, and exe^pla in hac narratione proposita alios
cautiores efficere possint: ne in eosdem errores prolapsi easdem subeant
poenas. Tuae vero sapientiae huius narrationis iudicium permitto: vt quicquid
hic narratu^ fuerit tuo iudicio stet cadatue. Quod tuis auspicijs vt
testimoniu^ meae in te gratitudinis and obseruantiae in lucem prodeat, and vt
pro tua benignitate and fauore, quo and bona and bonos omnes excipere soles,
aequi bonique consulas, te magnopere oratum velim October. vigesimo. 1591.

Tui ex animo obseruantissimus. A. C.

To the Christian Reader.
TVlly (the glory of the ancient Rome) defines the history to be a witness
of time, and a remembrance of things that are past; this is to say somewhat,
but not enough. For it is a witness and record of the execution of Gods
justice in revenging the corrupt judgments, unclean affections, and wicked
deeds of men, and of Gods good will and fatherly goodness in defending,
delivering, and rewarding the just. Therefore (Christian Reader) I have to
warn thee of three things; of the use, order, and locution of this history:
desiring thee to read this, not only to delight thine affection in seeing
this man do prosperously and commended for his prowess and virtue, and
another dispraised according to the desert of his actions; but specially to
consider the presence of God in governing the one, and prospering him, in doing
profitable things for the defense of a just cause and his country: and the
judgment of God, which according to the threatenings of his law, does lead the
wicked to punishment: if not at all times and after all ill actions, yet most
commonly and at length, always does make him swallow down the dregs of his
wrath. Fear therefore and keep thy self within the bounds of that vocation,
which the law of God has prescribed thee.

The greatest part of this History is translated out of French, which was set
forth concerning these affairs of the holy League, increased much out of the
seeds of actions, dispersed in the declarations, edicts, proscriptions,
apologies, aduertisements, agreements, articles and letters written by the
Kings Henry the iij. and iiij. now reigning, and other noble men acquainted
with the public affairs and estate.

The latter part of the History, to wit, from the death of Henry the third, is
a gathering of such events as have been published from time to time. And as for
the distressing of Paris, and the horrible famine there, I have for the most
part followed the report of Pedro Corneio a Spanyard, which was then in the
city during the siege thereof, which does report it after a more incredible
sort then I dare lay down.

Of such things which I do suspect, I do note the uncertainty thereof by the
word of report, following therein that famous Historiographer of our time John
Sleyden.

I have written this History in form of Annals, reducing the actions of
every several year into a sundry book, save only the first, which is a
collection of the secret practices of many years, to bring that state to that
confusion which we see it now. The new Popish Calendar has brought some
diversity in the date of days, months and years, some following one
Calendar, and some another: yet I have reduced it to the old so far as I
could do it.

Forasmuch as the rebellion of the holy League is the greatest conspiracy that
ever was heard of against all Christian Kings and Princes, threatening all of
bondage and subversion, and first put in ure in the kingdom of France, as most
fit to receive the same, by reason of the dissentions long continued there,
wrought by the vilest men and means that ever were heard of, having attempted
and achieved most heinous and outrageous murders, I have thought good to
deck the parties with titles and ornaments fit for such deeds, to wit, with
sharp words to express more effectually the greatness of the offenses,
protesting not to touch the noble families of Christendom, whom I reverence,
but the degenerating of them, who having put aside the robes of true Nobility,
are become slaves of all treacheries and rebellions, and have clothed them
selves with dishonor and infamy: to the end that the Christian reader may by
the signification of grievous Epithetes, comprehend the greatness of such
transgressions as do boil in such men, and learn to avoid the society of
all damned congregations of Corah, Dathan and Abiram.

THE TRAGICAL History of the civil Wars raised up in the Realm of France.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CLaude of Vaudemont, otherwise of Lorrayne, came into France in the time of
Lewis the xii. in a manner with a wallet and a staff, that is to say, a
beggarly gentleman, in comparison of the great revenues which he and his have
had afterward in France. For all his revenues when he came into France, was
not above xv. M. Franks. He began to grow under King Francis the first, by
crouching and capping and double diligence: under whom, after that all offices
had been bestowed, he obtained to be the Kings Faulkner, at the suite of
other Noble men. That was an office given before that time to Gentlemen of
small account. Notwithstanding ye baseness of his degree in Court, he was
beholden with a suspicious eye by King Francis, carrying in his mind a certain
presage of that which has happened afterward. For when he had marked with a
wise prudencie the sawcines of him and his children, he uttered his judgment
concerning them in these words; That they will turn his children into their
doublets, and his subjects into their shirts.

The year 1515. in the absence of the Duke of Guelders, he had the charge of
the Swizzers, which King Francis had hired for his journey to Millaine.

The year 1523. the Lord Trimouille left him the government of Burgondie.

The year 1527. at the suite and intercession of Noble men, the King erected
his Village of Guize, situated upon the river Oyse in the confines of
Vermandoyse, into a Duchy.

His Children were the Dukes of Guize, Aumale, the Marquise D'albeuf, the two
Massing Priests of Lorraine and Guize.

These Faulkners did so apply their business, partly with flattering, partly
with the aliance of lagrand Seneschal, which was the Paramour of King Henry the
second, and the Duke D' Aumale married her daughter, as good as the mother, but
especially by the facility, or rather fondness of the said Henry the second,
that within few years they obtained in land and pensions one milion of
Frankes, beside their Civil and Ecclesiastical offices, dignities and
livings, which did amount to so much. But specially they advanced themselves
greatly in the time of King Francis the second, by reason of their aliance with
him, who had married their Niece the Queen of Scots.

In his time they disposed of all things after their own wills. For the King
saw nothing but by their eyes, heard nothing but by their mouths, did nothing
but by their hands; so that there remained nothing but only the wearing of the
Crown upon their own heads, and the name of King.

In this great prosperity they lacked nothing, neither will nor means to
attain to their intent, but that the Nobility of France was a perilous block
in their way, which they could not lep over, for to ascend to so great and
high seat of Majesty, and in stead of a velvet cap to wear a Crown of pure
gold.

In this prosperous success it has happened to them as the Proverb is, Set a
beggar on horseback, and he will ride until he break his neck: which the
tragical end of them has verified.

But they fearing no such bloody events, and intending to turn their master
out of the house, and to seize on the possession, and to lodge themselves
therein, they used cunning and policy.

The first step to reach to that which they intended to get, was a dream in
this Iulling of Fortune, unaccustomed to them or theirs. For they in their
dream, dreamed and saw in a vision, that they were descended from Charles the
great, and consequently that they had right to the Crown, and that Capet (who
had dispossessed their ancestors) (as they say) and his posterity, which now
enjoy it, are but usurpers.

But considering that to enter into any action of law about such a matter,
would be a dangerous course, and that a peaceable state would rather help them
backward, than forward; and that such a fish would be caught rather in a
troublesome, than in a clear water, the stream must needs be stirred.

The occasion of the time fell out fitly to further their intent, and to
trouble the state: They therefore took the dissension of Religion to color
the same: (than the which they thought no better could be devised) for the
people was already in jealousy one against another through the diversity of
religion. Unto this opportunity came many helping causes, as the minority of
the house of Valoys, the ambition and atheism of the Q. Mother, the great
credit and power which the parties themselves had gotten already before hand
in the Realm: the facility or rather inconstancy of Anthony of Burbon King
of Navarre: and last of all, the headie frowardnes of the Constable, and Annas
of Monmorency: which things conspiring together fitly to further their desires,
they thought it was time in stead of Atheism to put on Popish superstition,
and their ambition should run for burning zeal of Popery. This part they
took not for any religion which they cared for, but being the stronger and
more favorable side, by the which they might get both credit and strength.

By these means the civil wars being easily stirred up, they thought all by
one mean both to weaken the Nobility, and to oppress the house of Burbon;
which being made away, they supposed either that they could easily subvert the
house of Valoys, being all children: or else to survive them, and as then to
make an open claim to the Crown.

The civil wars being by them and their means begun, they have entertained
them from time to time. And when through wearines or weakness of their part
they have come to peace, they have through treachery so manured it, that peace
has been more domageable to the professors of the Gospel, than open war; as
it may appear by the murders which they procured and performed at Paris, and
in other Cities in France the year 1572.

After the which murder, they also procured King Charles the ix. to imprison
the King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, and afterward Monsieur the Kings
youngest brother.

The King of Navarre having been kept prisoner with a guard the space of three
years and more, at length in the year 1576. went forth out of Paris to
hunting in the Forest of S. Germayne en faye, accompanied with a great number
of Catholic Gentlemen, among whom was also the Duke Espernon. When he came to
the Forest he opened his mind unto them that he was not determined to
return to the Court. The Gentlemen considering his hard intertainement, and
the greatness of his person, were so far from compelling him to return from
whence he came, that they proffered to conduct him wheresoever he would, and so
they brought him to the Town of Alenson 45. leagues from Paris, where was a
great number of them of the reformed Religion, whether also he had requested
the Gentlemen to accompany him.

Shortly after his arriving there, when the reformed Church had assembled
together, the said King in the face of the said congregation, confessed that
for fear of death he had consented to the abominations of Popery, and with
many tears very fervently prayed to God to forgive him, exhorted the Church to
take heed, not to follow his frailty, willing them not to be offended with
his fall, and with an earnest invocation of Gods most holy spirit, promised
ever hereafter (by Gods grace) constancy and stedfastnes in the confession of
the truth.

After a long and woeful war (the particular accidents whereof I here omit,
as hastening to my purpose, and refer the reader in that respect Navarre,
Monsieur the Kings only brother, the Prince of Conde, and Casimire, and other
Nobles with the lifting up of their hands.

The King, to wit, Henry the 3. to show how well pleased he was with this
peace, willed and commanded, that it should be called his peace, because he
had granted it with his own will and proper motion.

The King of Navarre then had not only a just cause, but also opportunity to
complain of diverse injuries done unto him, at and after the murder of Paris,
and also to demand amends for his great losses, yet he never moved one word,
least by any private commodities of his own, the peace should have been
hindered.

By that conclusion of peace the King granted eight Towns (beside them which
they held before) unto them of the reformed religion, to be governed under his
obedience by the King of Navarre, for the space of six years. It was agreed
also at the request of the reformed religion, that the King should call the
States of the Realm, to confirm this peace, and to restore the ancient
dignity of that kingdom.

These States were so cunningly handled, that it did almost fall to the utter
undoing of them of the religion. For the Guizes, with the collusion of the
King, made such means as none other might be admitted to the same States, than
the professed enemies of the Gospel. For they caused conuocations to be
assembled in the several Provinces, who appointed such, as were far from
peace, with secret instructions to be presented at the said States, without
making the Towns, Cities, or Commonalties privy to the same.

They also caused infamous Libels to be printed and proposed in their several
conuocations, denouncing open war unto them of the reformed religion, and
unto all that would not consent to the undoing of them. Furthermore, they
devised also the means to interrupt that peace, which of late concluded by
their consent, and yet so politickly, that the causes should not be found in
themselves, but in the professors of the Gospel. For they procured infinite
injuries and violences to be done unto them of the Religion by their partakers,
hoping that through despair and impatiencie they would break the peace, and
so the King would arm the Duke of Guize against them, that in the mean time
having the Kings power in hand, he might grow in authority, and the King

Immediately after the conclusion of peace made, the Guizes perceiving that
these three noble Princes had avoided their claws, (for the King of Navarre
was gone into his kingdom, the Prince of Conde had avoided into Germany, and
Monsieur had bin set at liberty) without any hope to bring them again within
their reach, and that not only they were a terror, but also would be great
lets to their drifts, and that they were able to cut them out more work, than
they would be able to patch as long as they should live, considering the name,
room, authority and power that they were of, both in France and with foreign
Nations: To the end that at the States appointed they might oppress these
Princes, with the rest of the Nobility which would not take part with them; to
ground a sure foundation upon a strong Council, then sent they their agent the
Bishop of Paris, and the advocate David (a worse man did not live then upon the
earth) to Rome the holy City, to take good advise and spiritual counsel of
their ghostly father.

The Bishop of Paris and David with him came to Rome, the School of all
murders, treasons, poysonings and slaughters, against all the Princes and
States of Christendom. There assembled all the schoolemasters and teachers of
the Sciences above said, I mean the Cardinals, among whom Sir Hugh bon
companion Vicar of Rome, (for so was his right name before he was Pope) was the
forman.

There was great complaints framed against the King, Monsieur his brother, the
King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, against all the house of Burbon, and the
Nobility of France.

The King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde were heretics and relapse. The
King and his brother, with a great number of the Nobility, if they were not
heretics, yet were they favorers of heretics, they caused heresies to grow
and to take root, by making peace with heretics, to the utter overthrow of
holy Church of Rome. And that it was high time that Sir Hugh (Vicar of Rome)
should provide for some speedy remedy to prevent the mischief.

There it was showed (to render the King and all the Princes odious) how the
house of Capet had always withstood the holy Church of Rome, and that they had
supported in old time the Valdenses and Albigeoys, and now that either they are
joined with the Hugonets, or else are favorers of them.

But on the contrary side, the house of Charles the great (which was wrongfully
dispossessed of the Crown) by the Papal blessing, had a special grace given
them to help holy Church, and had left yet some lusty buds, which are they of
the house of Guize, in whom is all the hope of holy Church, to root out the
heretics, and to restore all things. The fable of this Popish blessing here
above mentioned, is in the Chronicles of Rhegimon a Monk of S. Benet.

In the time of Pipin father to Charles the great, Stephen Pope of Rome being a
factious and turbulent man, through his ambition did trouble Italy. And when
Arstulphe King of the Lombards (a nation not used to be controulled by
Priests) went about to chastize him, fled into France, to stir Pipin (which a
few years before had usurped the Crown of France by the help of Pope
Zachary) against the said Arstulphe. This Pope being at S. Denis nigh Paris,
fell brainsicke, and in his sickness the devil deluded him with an entusiasme,
making him to see in a vision Peter and Paul before the high Altar in their
Surplesses, by the which (as he said) he knew them. Then came in S. Denis with
a lean face, having a Censor in his hand, whom Peter and Paul sent to the
said Stephen to heal him, who charged him to hallowe the said Church. Pope
Stephen could this vision to them which were present there, and being about to
rise out of his bed to do what he was commanded, they said unto him that he
doated. But after he had told this folly to Pipin, the 13. of August 753. he
anointed Pipin King of France and Berte, and with his Popish blessing
sanctified all the Barons and Nobles of France, binding them with an oath never
to choose King of France but of that raze of Pipin. Thus goes the sottish
fable of the brainsicke entusiasme Pope Stephen. The Guizes fayning to have
descended out of that raze by the help of this fable, besides the
determinations, set down concerning other States of Christendom, it was
concerning France thus decreed. That the house of Capet, which was the house
of Valoys and Burbon, with the rest of the principal Nobility, must needs be
rooted out, and that these lusty buds of Charles the great must have their
turn: and for to bring to pass these things, the woeful Tragedy must be thus
played.

The Guizes must kindle the fire.

The Priests, Friars and Jesuits shall blow it with the bellows of ^ayling
and sedition.

The King shall sit still until his brother and the Burbons come to their
trial.

The Pope shall play the Monarcho. This Monarcho was of late years a frantic
Italian, well known both in Germany and England, who imagined that all the
Kings of the earth were his vassals: so Sir Hugh Vicar of Rome, sits a far
off, will not draw nigh the fire, and imagines that all is his: whereupon he
condemns the Valoys and Burbons and the Nobility of France, to the slaughter.

The name of the States shall be used and wait upon the Guizes to play the
hangman, and when all things be in a readiness, the King, all the

When all this is happily performed, there will be a new heaven and a new
earth. For the Guizes, and Sir Hugh bon companion Vicar of Rome, and all his
bands, Ganimedes and Chaplains shall have all, and may take their pastimes
with their Curtizans, without any fear or controulment of the Hugonets.

Here follow the acts of this Tragedy, or the sum of the secret Counsel of
Rome holden, containing the means how to destroy the kingdom of France, as
they were delivered by Sir Hugh unto his stage players.

First, the house of Guize and their partakers shall procure new Commotions in
the Realm, and intertaine wars. They shall also league the Nobility with
their oaths to persecute the Gospel, and that they shall not acknowledge any
other Captain and head of the League but only the Duke of Guize.

2 The King shall be counseled to fit still, and to take no care for such
vprores: but to let the Duke of Guize alone, for he knows well how to handle
the matter.

3 The King shall send his mother to Monsier her son, to persuade him to come
to Bloys to the States.

4 In the mean time the King shall go from Paris into a place of sure
access, and void of suspicion, where he shall entise by fair promises, by
fair means and fair words, the King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, if it
may be done; whom he shall receive with as much entertainment and courtesy, as
he may show them. So the King was made a fool at Rome by a sort of beggarly
Friars and godles rabble. But in the mean while that the King shall show such
feigned courtesies to his brother and the Princes of his blood, the Guizes shall
retire from the Court with tokens of discontented minds.

5 These things being a working, the King shall assemble the States at Bloys,
and such as be devoted to the League shall be sent to the several Provinces,
to pick out such Deputies as may be well taught and skillful to play their
parts.

6 During these stirs, the Friars and Jesuits, shall move up the people to
vprores, by seditious Sermons against the Hugonets.

7 The Priests in their Parish Churches shall secretly take the names of able
men, and by appointed Captains it shall be ordered what weapons be most fit
for them, and in their shriuing they shall warn them to provide such weapons.

8 The States holding shall swear to observe and obey whatsoever

9 But if Monsieur, the King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, and others of the
house Burbon, do not appear, they shall be condemned of contumacie, and as
Rebels. And furthermore, all other who shall seem to oppose themselves against
the States, shall be executed if they can be taken, and if not, reward to be
appointed to such as shall kill them.

10 All these things being thus compassed, the States shall be sworn to the
Sea of Rome, and to observe the Council of Trent.

11 Request also shall be made to the King by the States, that in case any man
should resist these proceedings, he shall appoint the Duke of Guize his
General to pursue them by all means to death.

12 Yet the morrow Mass Priests must come once more upon the stage, and
there they shall cause their Captains to muster them of the conspiracy, and
to make them ready to march when the assembly of the States is once begun.

13 All these things being so brought to pass, the States shall pick out
Minos and Rhadamanthus to enquire and judge of the life and deeds of Monsieur,
for joining himself with the Heretics, and to make his process, after the
natural and godly example of the King of Spain, which sacrificed Charles of
Austrich his natural son a Prince, (a Prince of great hope) unto Moloch the
Idol of the Jesuits.

14 When Monsieur is condemned, the forces secretly gathered shall march to
strengthen the execution.

15 Then immediately the conspired Soldiers shall set upon the Hugonets in all
Provinces, without any respect of persons.

16 The Duke of Guize, that great Captain, yt great Charlamaigne with his
power shall destroy all, shall take the King and his mother, either put them in
Monkeries, or else to rid them out of this world, according to the Proverb,
(...). By this we see that the King long ago was condemned at Rome either to
be a Friar, or else to be slain by a Friar.

So all these things thus happily done, lo the Duke of Guize shall have all,
and in so doing the Crown shall return to the blessed stock of Charlamaigne,
and he and his successors henceforth shall hold the Crown of France of the
Apostolic sea, and shall abolish the prerogatives of the French Church. Valete
and plaudite Calliopius recensui.

Now I pray you good Sir Hugh good master Vicar, seeing you have so well sped,
let us have a fine Te Deum landamus, and a demure solemn Procession, and all
in your Pontificalibus, such as we had for the noble and famous victory of
the Spaniards against the Englishmen before Calis the 29. of July 1588. And
after a sweet Mass of that Holy ghost which appeared to your predecessors at
the Council of Laterane, in the Hugonets will do all that while: or else
seeing you have that power to bind and to loose, I pray you bind them hand
and foot, that we may make quickly an end of them, or else every one will say
(to the great slander of holy Church) that Sir Hugh is a great Pazzo, for not
being able to perform all that he takes upon In Italio^ a Sot.
him to do.

And of all love be good to master Francis of Lorrayne, devise some good means
that when the Crown is set upon his head, the heaviness thereof should not put
him to pains, and perhaps break his neck. And then what would the world say,
beshrew you Sir Hugh, for in following your counsel we have lost a great
Captain and a new King, and then be sure that you will never be good after.

But now to speak in sadness, by these instructions, according to the which
all the civil wars have been directed ever since the year 1576. until the
death of the last Duke of Guize, we may judge what wisdom and blessings are
to be expected from Sir Hugh and his Chaplains.

Whilst these things were at working in Rome, the Guizes followed diverse ways
to interrupt the peace: but now by the return of David from Rome, with these
aforesaid instructions, they went to work substantially, and by the collusion
of the King, they made such means as none might be admitted to the States, but
the professed enemies of the reformed Churches. For they caused private
conuocations to be assembled in the several Provinces, which appointed such as
were far from peace, and were of the conspiracy of Guize, having their
secret instructions to be presented at the States, without making privy to
their counsels any Towns, Cities or Commonalties.

They spread abroad, that the Edict of peace could not be published nor
admitted in Towns and Cities, than the which nothing was more desired of all
sorts of men, except only them of the conspiracy.

They caused also infamous Libels to be printed and proposed in their several
conuocations, being of such men, as knowing the reports to be most false, yet
were ready to make themselves to be true. As that they of the reformed
religion requested the exercize of the same, not for satisfying or contenting
of their consciences, but for the maintenance of factious and practizes against
the King, and to fortify themselves, that upon opportunity, they might shake
off the yoke of obedience due to the King.

They spread abroad also, that they of the reformed religion had surprised
Lachorite, and many Towns and Forts in Poytow, Xainctonge, Guyen, Languedock,
and Daulphine, and that they had committed sundry murders and cruelties upon
the Catholics, and therefore in the same assemblies they did denounce war
unto them of the reformed religion,

They procured infinite number of injuries and violences to be done by their
partakers every where, to them of the religion, hoping through impatience, to
cause them to break the Edict of peace, so that the causes being found in
them, the King arming the Duke of Guize, should increase his secret enemies
authority, and decay his own.

Notwithstanding these manifold injuries proffered unto them of the religion,
and the breaking of the peace, they of their part observed the Edict of
pacification, without molesting the Catholics, but stood only upon the
defensive.

The Guizes hasting so much as ever they could, their enterprises (by their
partakers) procured many Towns and Provinces to rebel and to break the
peace, pretending that they of the religion sought the oppression of the
Clergy.

Besides the practizes before mentioned, these good husbands being loath to leave
any stone unstirred, that happily might any way further their devised plot, did
not stick to attempt even contrary means. For in like case they followed the
old trick of Barcocab, they went about closely and under hand, to draw into
their League them of the reformed religion, promising them the exercize of
their religion, according to the Edict of peace, and more if they would.

They solicited also John Casimier Prince Palsgraue to enter in league with
them, promising to do nothing against the reformed religion, and to deliver
him Towns in their governments for pledges. And herein if they could have
effected their desire happily, they would not have pretended so rigorous a
course against them of the reformed religion, as afterward they did, when they
perceived that they of the reformed religion did smell, detect, and abhorred
their treacherous ambition, and that they were taken forbeu cozba. If they
might have prevailed with the reformed, they would have stood upon some
plausible Commonwealth. For their intent herein was (not that they cared or
regarded any religion) but to bring the King and the Princes of the blood into
hatred, and the people into a mistiking of the government.

And seeing their offers were rejected by the reformed, they determined to
root them out, assuring themselves generally of the Catholics, under color
of zeal of Popery which they feigned more and more.

And to begin, the Q. Mother (according to the Gospel brought from Rome by
David, as is above said) was sent to bring Monsier her son to the States at
Bloys, which she performed.

Many fair words were spent, many fair promises given, and many sore
threatenings were uttered, either to entice, or else to enforce the King of
Navarre and the Prince of Conde, to the States at Bloys. But Burbons, which
could not be done (as they thought) without the rooting out of the professors
of the reformed religion.

The secret Council of Rome could not be kept so close, but that the King of
Navarre had intelligences what was passed at Rome, and therefore sends a
Gentleman of his to the King, with remembrances to advertise him of the
conspiracy already concluded at Rome, against him and his estate. Monsieur his
brother in like manner informed him, that there were things passed at Rome,
against him, his Crown and state.

John Casimier Prince palatine out of Germany, sends in like manner
aduertisements unto the King about the same matter: and besides by Praillon
gives him notice of the drifts of the Leaguers, which were to let the free
holding of the States, by corrupting of the Deputies, and by letting that none
of the Princes of the blood, or any that have cause of complaining, might
appear with free access.

Thus the Guizes furthering their business by all means (as is above said) in
the Provinces, for the making of a strong league with as many as they were
able, they procured the town of Montmarsan in Gascoyne, to rebel against the
King of Navarre: which he shortly after surprised in one night, and brought the
inhabitants to their duty without any blood shedding.

By their means also the Town of Rause, in the County of Armignake,
belonging to the King of Navarre, as the said King had entered into the Town,
without any mistrust, with eighteen Gentlemen, the partakers of Guize there
let the Percullis fall at his heels, and setting upon him one offered the
Caliuer at his breast. But the said King nevertheless seized upon a Tower
with his company, and made way to the rest of his train to enter into the
said Town, not suffering any of the inhabitants to be put to death, bu^ only
him which had leuelled the Caliuer at his breast, and that at the earnest suit
of the Magistrates of the Town, accusing him with diverse other crimes.

In January the King sends an Ambassador to the Prince Casimier Palatine of
Rhine, named Vilaquier, to excuse his doings with lies, surmiz^s but for
fashion sake only, and that his States will not suffer him to execute the Edict
of peace.

Unto this message the Prince Casimier answered, as showing how

The Prince Casimier also sends Butrich his Ambassador to the King, to
persuade him (if possible were) to entertain the p^ace which Bloys the 23. of
February.

The 7. of March ensuing, the said Butrich Ambassador, surrendered in his
Masters name, the lands, Lordships, pensions and offices which the Guizes had
spread abroad both through France, Germany, and other countries, that the said
Prince (in consideration and respect of his particular profit) was
prejudicial to the public commodity of his Soldiers.

The parish Priests about this time took the names of able men; Soldiers were
every where secretly mustered, according to Sir Hugh his counsel, as is
aforesaid. The Jesuits also began to take the matter in hand, to further
conspiracies by railing Sermons, who by these meaues crept so deeply into the
Kings favor, that he preferred the sawciest of them, and them who could
thunder most furiously against the reformed religion, to Bishoprics, Abbeyes,
Prebends, and other fat Benefices; nourishing in his bosom from time to time
the firebrands, to set him and his Realm in combustion at the first
opportunity.

The Guizes seeing they could not win them of the religion to favor their
doings, but rather that their agents were taken forbeu cozba, considering also
that they were not able to have their desire upon them, fearing greatly the
King of Navarre, whose wisdom, virtue, and valor they knew well, go about
to make him to some hateful, and to others contemptible. Therefore the
Admiral Villars, father in law to the Duke de Main, raised up upon him the
old lie and flander reported of the Christians of the Primitive Church, up the
Pagans, (to the end that Satan might be like to himself) to wit, that the
said King being at Again, in the night, the candles should be put out. That
false report was spread abroad throughout France, before that any man had heard
of it in the City of Again. It was also reproved for a most false lie by many
Noblemen and Ladies of both religions which were then present.

Now, the conclusion or rather collusion of the States, was that they required
the Edict of peace to be revoked, the exercize of the reformed religion
inhibited, and Popery to be set up every where.

The King was as desirous to grant them, as they to require the breach of the
peace: whereupon fearful persecutions were raised up every

And for as much as the condemnation and execution of Monsieur could not be
brought to pass as yet, for many considerations, it was kept close, and
deferred to a fitter time. But specially for that he might be a good instrument
to be occupied against the King of Navarre, and them of the reformed religion.

Therefore they thought good to make him and the Duke of Guize General over
the Kings forces. Him I say, to give the more authority to the actions and
enterprises with greater terror. The other was joined in Commission to prevent
what might happen, that Monsieur should not in any wise favor the King of
Navarre, nor his partakers any whit at all.

The King of Navarre having such power as he could make in Guyen, prepared
himself upon the defensive; and having a mighty power of Germans ready to
enter into France, his enemies hearts were somewhat cooled, and began to faint.

On the other side, the King wanting money, nothing was done. By this
expedition, and a great terror of the Germans, having seized France, the King
now shows himself as desirous of peace, as he was not long before of war,
and sends his Mother to the King of Navarre to treat for peace. Now old Catie
must show some Italian iuggling, or else farewell Popery. After much chopping
and changing of words, the bargain was made. The King of Navarre being at
Nerack in Gascoyne, received the peace, with some restructions of the former
Edict, abhorring the slaughters of the Nobility, and oppressions of the people.

This peace being concluded at Nerack, the Guizes took it very grievously, as
unprofitable for the advancing of that mystery which did lie hidden in their
brain: and also for that the King went about to reform many abuses, brought
in by war, and to restore the Nobility, to ease the people of diverse
charges. For the Guizes would have all these abuses to continue, that in time
it might serve for an old cloak to cover withal their treacherous drifts, as
they did afterward at the rising of them in arms 1585. Diffidence and
iealousies therefore did grow daily between the King and the Guizes. But the
King to obtain his intended purpose, thought good to pacify them, calls
them to the Court, does assigue them great pensions, bestows great gifts and
honors upon them. Yet they having always a hartburning, tickled with their
accustomed ambition, watching for the death of Monsieur, determined to hasten
them: forasmuch as they feared him more than the King.

In the year 1579. the Guizes sent Friar Claude Matthew (abusie Jesuit of
Pontamosson in Lorrayne) to Rome, to put Sir Hugh to work, Rome, seeing that
the former devises had failed.

Fri^r Claude from thence took his journey into Spain, to give some ghostly
counsel to Dom Philipporey despagna. Out of this voyage came the expedition of
Italians and Spaniards into Ireland, under the leading of Captain Saunders,
which there dyed mad wandering in ye woods. From thence also came the lusty
flight of Locusts the Jesuits into England, under the banner of their General
Campion, to root out the Gospel, and to plant Popery, if it could be done.
But if not, to work some busy piece of work to her Majesty, that the Guizes
in the mean time might work more surely in France, without hope of any help
out of England to the King, and to the King of Navarre, or to them of the
reformed religion, if they should stand in any need. The Guizes of their part
were not idle, but by sundry practizes had renewed the civil wars: and by
the Kings consent Monsieur his brother and the Duke de Main were in Commission
for the conducting of the Kings Armies: which thing they did as well as they
could, with as great preparations as might be, but yet without doing any
harm. But because the common report went that Monsieur should pass into
England, and from thence should go take possession of the Dukedom of Braban^,
which was offered him by the States of the Low Country, they were content yet
once again to wink at peace, that they might be rid of him, hoping that he
would never return into France to trouble them.

Therefore in the year 1580. Monsieur (before he took his journey) was sent
to the King of Navarre, which both met at Fleyx, a Town in Perigord, situated
upon the river of Dradogne, where they concluded a peace, not much varying
from the former. Which thing being done, Monsieur hasted to his journey.

Now this being done, Friar Matthew (the Guizes Pursiuant) of mere devotion
must needs post to Rome yet once again to visit the Stews, and to aduertize
Sir Hugh what was past in France, to know of him how the Guizes should work
upon this present occasion. There Sir Hugh stayed somewhat his wisdom, before
he would give answer, knowing not well what counsel to give or to follow,
because his Armado in Ireland, under the conduct of Captain Saunders Doctor of
Military Discipline, and his Locusts, under the leading of the lusty Campion,
had sped but so so, and had a very hot entertainment. His brains therefore was
driven to peruss his Christerosse, so that in this dumpe Sir Hugh must take
counsel of Dom Philipporey despagna. Therefore master Friar must trudge over
the world. Have with you master Friar into Spain to eat a penny worth of
Raphams. Upon this hard mischances of fortune, Sir Hugh thought good that Dom
Philippo should play Xerxes, Monsieur and the Prince of Orange, that by the
death of the one, the Low Countries should be left headless and unable to
resist the petie Duke of Parma; and by the others death, the drists of the
Guizes might be easily executed in France. The procuring of ye death of the
Prince of Orange was committed to the petie Duke of Parma, petie son to the
holy man Pedro Aloisio, who for his religion, vz. his abominable and monstrous
whoredoms, was hanged at the window of his own house, a holy Martyr, and
bastard son to Sir Alexander Farneso Vicar of Rome, called otherwise Paulus
tertius. This Duke of Parma acquitted himself pretily well of his charge, as
shall be said hereafter. The death of Monsieur was undertaken by the Guizes,
that that if GOD himself would not kill him, they would do it, which they
also performed in time.

Friar Matthew Jesuit (carrier of the Court of the Guizes) returning out of
Spain, fell sick at Barbaste in Gascoyne, not for any surfeit which he took
in Spain, except it were for eating too little. The poor Pardoner there was
so sick, that he would have eaten any kind of meat if he could have had it.
But his good Masters did so diet him, that according to his profession he
afflicted his body with fasting out of measure, to pull down his courage,
least when he should come into the Stews to give ghostly counsel to the
Curtizans, he should do any thing to the discredit of holy Church* and to the
slaundring of the holy order of Jesuits: for such fasting as he used in that
journey would do greater miracles in keeping a Friar cha^^, than all the
weeping which the Jesuits do use can do.

The King sending his brother into Brabant, determined to appoint him a
Counsel. But the Kings Counsel being in a manner all Leaguers, appointed him
two manner of men, one to accompany him, and the other to counsel him. They
therefore provided that such counsel should be given him, as either should
altogether nousell him in all filthy life, or else should work such means as
might dishonor him, or put him in danger of his life. Another company was
appointed him of virtuous Noble men of both religions, only to accompany him
to countenance the matter, but not to counsel him.

Monsieur therefore in this equipage of men of so sundry colors and England,
and from thence into Brabant the year 1582. there to be invested of that
Dukedom of the holy Empire, which was duly and sumptuously performed.

Whilst Monsieur soiorneth in the Low Country, the partakers of the Guizes,
thinking ye time long, were very importunate to set the Duke Monsieur. For if
he should return (said they) and find all things peaceable, it would be hard
for them to work any thing; for as much as Monsieur had knowledge of their
drifts, who assuredly would seek to overthrow all, and being in France of
such power, would go nigh to do it. To these and like persuasions the Duke of
Guize was wont to answer, that he will enterprise nothing openly, whilst the
King had any brother; but if he could see one day the last of the house of
Valoys to sit upon the Throne, he promised them with a round oath to set his
hand to work so surely, that if he did not carry away the whole, yet he hoped
to have a good part of the cake. In the mean time the Guizes began to sell the
most part of their offices, and to gather great sums of money, making their
reckoning shortly to have all and to dispose of all. But thinking the time
long, that neither sickness, nor the fortune of war had shortened the life of
Monsieur, which greatly they desired, they determined to do that which God
would not do, and to execute Sir Hughs spiritual counsel.

There was one Salcedo a Spanyard, which before had escaped the gibbet of Roan,
for coining false coin, with his false gold and silver wrought by Alchimie,
fled into Spain, and from thence into Lorrayne, where the Guizes hiered him
for six thousand Crowns (which they paid him at Nancie in Lorrayne) to
murder Monsieur. This Salcedo therefore having his money and his lesson
without the book, went into France, proffered his service to Monsieur before he
went into the Low Country, and at the recovery of Cambray showed some token
of dexterity, and in the Low Country did all that could be to creep into
greater favor with Monsieur. But withal entered in familiarity and
communication with the youngest son of Egmond, for which cause the said Egmond
began to be suspected both of Monsieur and the Prince of Orange: who being
examined by the said Prince about Salcedos familiarity, answered that their
communications were about Alchimie. The Prince with a certain presagious mind
replied, that he feared that a more dangerous Alchimie would ensue of their
familiarity: admonished the said Egmond to call to remembrance the dealing of
the King of Spain with his father. The Prince of Orange and Monsieur departed
from Antwerpe to Bridges in Flanders, where they arrived the 17. day of
February.

Now, this conspiracy devised at Rome, confirmed in Spain, brought from
thence by Friar Mathewe the Pardoner, set in readiness to Nancie in Lorrayne,
the Duke of Parma aduertized thereof, thought good with one days work to
dispatch these two noble Princes: He thought good to bring somewhat of his
own, least the Leaguers only should have the Salcedo he joined two
companions, knowing that a string twisted is not so easily broken. These two
fellows were Francisco Baza an Italian, of the band of Fernando Gonzago (which
was in the Camp of the petie Duke of Parma) and a Wallon.

During the time these two Princes were in Bridges, Salcedo advanced himself
so near Monsieur, that upon suspicion he was apprehended: then stayed there in
the Court without the said Italian and the Wallon tarying for Salcedo. This
Italian expecting with great desire when Salcedo should come forth, asked of
another whether Salcedo were within still. Answer was made that he was, being
asked the question whether he knew Salcedo. When the Courtier was gone in
again, the Italian entering in fear would have fled: but being suddenly laid
hold on, was examined, and confessed the whole conspiracy. Salcedo which would
not know the Italian before, now when he was accused by Baza, said that the
said Baza was a muletier and a liar. But Baza answered, he would show before
Salcedo his face such proofs of this matter, that his declaratio^s should be
found true. The malcontent Wallon fled away.

The 24. of July the young Egmond being brought to the Court to Monsieur, and
perceiving how Salcedo had accused him, revealed all whatsoever Salcedo had
opened unto him. Upon which confession Egmond was committed prisoner to the
Magistrate of the town.

The 28. Francisco Baza the Italian was examined upon the Rack,

The 30. this desperate Italian with a knife which he had craftily gotten,

The Wallon malcontent named Nicholas Hugo, alias de la board, being afterward
taken and examined, confessed the conspiracy.

The King understanding what was done, purposed and attempted, sent two of his
Counsel into the Low Country to Bridges, to bring the said Salcedo into
France, took the pains in his own person to examine him, and having by the
said Salcedo his own confession known what was intended at Nancie, attempted
at Bridges, caused the said Salcedo to be condemned of treason by the Court of
Parliament of Paris, and by their sentence the said Spanyard Salcedo was drawn
and torn with four Horses. There were also some prisoners at Paris about that
matter.

About the same time, or not long after, one Monsieur de Muy being wounded at
the siege of Fere, the Duke of Guize went out of Paris in post to be his
ghostly father, and to give him some good ghostly counsel, not to tell tales
out of the school, nor to discover holy mysteries.

The Archdeacon of Toul in Lorreyne, named des Rosiers, had written a book of
genealogies of the Lorreyns, bringing them out of the belly of the Eroy, to the
defacing and disalowing the possession of the crown by the Valoys. About the
same time the King sends the president Brulard to make his process, and by
him was condemned of high treason: but afterward by intercession made, was
quited by recanting and condemning his book before the Kings counsel.

The Guyzes being thus disappointed of their driftes with the loss of 6.
thousand crowns, faint not for all yt, but follow on their course: for they
must needs to see an end of Monsieur whom they think to be such a block in
their way, as they cannot ouerl^ape without stumbling dangerously.

There was a holy woman in Paris, by name Madam saint Geneuieue, who was so
holy, that both the King Henry the third, and Monsieur his brother, would often
times go a pilgrimage to her with much Romish devotion, but with little
honesty, she must do the feat for the aduauncing of the holy League, and
upholding of the holy Church. The Guyzes therefore to speed well, must offer a
candell to that Saint of Paris, to be good to them, and to do for them that
which God would not do, at their earnest prayers to repair to Monsieur, which
was thenat Chasteautierry, upon the river of Marne in Brie: and that she should
have with her boxes of Concerues.

This blessed Virgin therefore took her journey to Monsieur ward with her holy
boxes with her: she was the more welcome to Monsieur, because he had not seen
her of a long time: he being otherwise somewhat pensiu^, for missing of his
purpose in the low Country, and for the loss of his credit, which he left
behind him at Antwerpe, yet for the recreating of him self with his old
acquaintance, they must banquet together, and have a good merry day once ere
they depart. She came forth with her holy boxes, where holy dregs of Rome
had been, out of the which she gave him a bole so hard of digestion, that it
did him no good: for it did lie so heavy upon his heart, that he never left
vomitting of blood as long as there remained life in him, and in like manner as
his brother Charles the ninth did before him: he died the 10. day of July, on
the which day his father Henry the second died 24. years before.

As soon as the King was certifyed of the death of his brother, he sends the
Duke de Espernon to the King of Navarre, to advertise him that he held him for
his son and true heir of the Crown in France, in case he does decease
without issue.

But to come to the matter: now here is a blessed days work for the Guyzes
and holy Church. Up master Friar, and get you to Rome the holy City once
again, to Sir Hugh, to show him what good luck we have, and that all things
do happen as we would have them: but that we have need of his ghostly
counsel.

Whilst Friar Matthew (carier of the Guyzes) goes to do his message as well as
he could, they of the Guyze with their partakers do dispearse themselves into
all parts of the Realm, to allure Towns and Cities, but especially them that
were Malecontentes, to their devotion: after the which progress of theirs with
importunacy, they do procure the King to call the assembly of the states of the
realm at Bloys, to the which they had altogether labored their favorers, and
such as did desire nothing more then the decay of the King, and increasing of
the Guyzes.

In the same assembly, that the King might have the blame himself of the
breaking of the peace, it was requested.

First, that the edict of pacification should be revoked, and the exercise of
the reformed religion forbidden.

Secondly, that the King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, and all the nobility
professing the same religion, should be exiled out of the realm, and all
others of the same profession should be enforced either to abjure, or else to
depart forthwith out of the Realm.

Thirdly, that the 8. towns which were given them for 6. years, should be put
into the kings hands, alleging that the time was expired.

The king being desirous to entertain his subjects in peace, knowing well the
fruits of civil war, dissolved the states, promising shortly to assemble the
best, wisest, and most experienced of his realm, to have their advise for the
reformation of all things.

About the same time of the states being at Bloys, the king of Navarre sends
new aduertisementes to the king, about the intent and open practices of the
league, willing him to have some care of himself, and shows him the present
danger that he stood in.

After the return of Friar Matthew from Rome, the Bariesuits in the latter end
of September held a certain Synod or Clandestine conuenticle in Paris, in the
which the said Friar Matthew as president, did rule the roast, having received
direction of Sir Hugh vicar of Rome, where according to the said directions,
they lay down the method to stir up the coals, to raise up seditions and
rebellious in all parts, but especially to increase the hatred of all men
against them of the religion, but namely against the king of Navarre, and the
Prince of Conde, and for that end they forged an infamous libell, as more amply
shall be showed.

The king according to his promise made to the States at Bloys, in the latter
end of the year 1584. called (at Saint Germayn in Faye) his cheifest and best
learned Senators of all his Parliamentes, there to show him the best and
readiest means to ease the people, and to restore the realm to some good
state.

On the other side, the king of Navarre, considering that the time appointed to
surrender the 8. towns committed to his custody, was expired, Montaulban, a
strong City in Quercye, where Monsieur Belieure (one of the kings counsel)
was present to provide for their common affairs.

And whereas the king of Navarre his enemies had spread abroad, both by false
rumors and libels, that immediately after the death of Monsieur, he Navarre
therefore to satisfy all men against that false rumor, and slander, protested
openly that he knew the truth to be on his side, and that by Gods assistance he
would stand to the profession and defense of the reformed religion, unto the
end, and that he would acknowledge none other fortune but only that.

There by the common advise of all that assembly, it was thought good, that
considering the great dangers which seem to threaten them of the reformed
Religion, and generally all France, a supplication should be presented to the
king, that of his mere favor and clemency be would continue the keeping of
the said Towns to the king of Navarre for certain years more.

Upon this conclusion the Lord Laual, with other deputies, were sent to the
King at the assembly which was at Saint Germain, and showing the cause of their
coming to the king, and complaining of diverse iuiuries daily done to them of
the reformed religion, by the leaguers: the 11. of December (...)
the king granted them the keeping of the said towns for 2. years longer,
charging them that for injuries done to them, they should not seek to revenge
their own cause, for breaking of the peace. But that they would show their
greefes to the King of Navarre, who thereupon should make means to him for
amends.

Whilst all these things were working on every side, the king of Navarre,
seeing that neither so many aduertisementes from every part of France given to
the king, neither that which he himself saw, namely the partialities,
societies, fraternities, leagues, confederacies, and preparations of the house
of Guyze, did any whit move or warn the king to look to himself and to his
affairs (which thing he might easily have done in time.) The said king of
Navarre had sent the Lord de Segur Pardillan superintendent of his house to the
Queen of England, the king of De^marke, the Princes electors, the Lands-graue
of Hessen, and to other States of Germany for three causes: first to compound
the controversies about certain articles of religion not as yet agreed upon in
the reformed Churches, yt the enemies of the common cause might not distoine
them by that occasion.

Secondly, to renew the ancient friendship and aliaunce in that sort, as it had
veene of old.

Thirdly, to dispose a sum of money in Germany, in such order that thereby he
might there provide succor, if he were assaulted by his enemies. The said Lord
Perdillane returned home to the king of Navarre in December 1584. when the king
did hold his counsel at Saint Germayn.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK.
NOw when the Guyzes do draw near their time, to bring forth that monster of
treason which they had conceived: they have many secret conferences with yt
Duke of Parma, pety son to Peter Aloyse Pharnese the Popes bastard, hanged at
his windows by his own subjects for his execrable life. Also with Bernardine
Mendoze, and Giouan Bardachino the king of Spain his Coriero: the Bishop of
Cominges, bastard son to the Lord Lansake, playing Dromo between them. For a
Stage play can not have good grace to make the people laugh, except there be a
popish Priest to play the Devils part. All this whispering among them was about
a great sum of money, which the king of Spain should lay out for to begin
the play: and least the said king of Spain should be cosened of his money, the
Duke of Guyze to deliver him the dukedom of Britayn, yt Cities of Bourdeaux,
and Marseilles: and for the performance thereof, he should send some of his
children to the Duke of Sauoy in hostages.

Therefore now the Guyze is as full of Spanish pistolets, as a Dog is full of
Fleas (as the Proverb is, when we will signify great abundance of things).
He gives great sums of this Spanish liberality to his partakers, but
specially to discontented persons. He profereth also of this Spanish money to
many, which neither require it, neither would have of it. But all men did
exceedingly wonder whence should come this plenty, seeing that it was well
known, that he was deeply indebted.

Now when all things seemed to be in a readiness, to begin the tragedy, the
Friars of the society of Bariese the sorcerer, named by cutting short Jesuits,
do play the prologue: for they step up into Pulpits every where, whom they
have turned to trompets and drommes of the Devil,

There they do show the decay of popery, which they call the Catholic faith:
they do urge the miseries of every degree to proceed from the Hugonoets and
their favorers (meaning and in a manner openly declaring the king.) They do
propound ye great dangers which did hang over the heads of the Catholics.

There they did tell, how that there was a certain confederacy of the
Hugonoets with the heretics of Germany, England, Denmark, and Swisserland, to
oppress the Catholic Church.

It is said before that in September last, there was holden a certain
conuenticle of conspirators against Christendom in Paris by the Bariesuits,
commonly called the Jesuits, where they forged a certain infamous libell, to
serve them for a firebrand of the sedition.

There they say and lie all at once, that the 14. day of December 1584, there
was concluded at Magdebourge in Saxony, that the kings of Navarre and
Denmark, the Queen of England, the Princes of Germany, the Princes Palsgraue,
and Orange, the Landsgraue of Hessen, they or their Ambassadors should appear
at Basil the next month of May following. Where is to be noted the impudency
of these lying Friars. For the Princes Palsgraue and Orange were dead, the one
a whole year before, the other they had procured to be murdered in Holland by
one of their own Jesuits 6. months before. But these two Princes they should
raise up by the Boriesu their master, whom these Coniurers found in their
Pamphlets to appear at Basil.

They affirmed also in the said infamous libels, that the King of Navarre
should have taken arms the 18. of April, the year 1585. which in deed was
the time appointed for the League to rise up.

They affirmed also, that the king of Navarre had promised in the assembly of
Montaulban, that in case he should survive the king, and that he might attain
to the Crown, he would root out of France all Popish religion, and deprive
them of the said religion of all state, dignity and authority.

They said also that the ministers had persuaded the king of Navarre to revenge
the murder of Paris, and that it was concluded, that out of every town and
city 3. of the cheifest Burgeses should be delivered to requite the said
murder.

They did read these forged lies in their Pulpits, where they omitted no point
of Monkish railing rhetoric in their sermons, to stir up the people to
sedition and war against them of the reformed religion. They cry out, they
rage and fume, saying that now the time is come, that holy Church (for by this
word they mean, the pride, pomp, and voluptuous life of Bishops, Cardinals,
Monks, Friars, and Priests) do crave their help, or never. They do exhort
the people both in their Sermons, Charlemaigne, meaning the Guyzes, which have
undertaken the defense of holy Church against the force and attemptes of
heretics, and favorers of them. They preached also their valor, their
wisdom, their wounds and noble feats for the defense of the realm, and holy
Church. They showed how easy it would be to root out the heretics out of all
France, having such Captains to manage the wars.

About the beginning of this year 1585. there was a Bachiler, or rather a
lodger of divinity in Sorboune, which dyed a holy Martyr in this wise (let
good men judge.) This Divine had holden in disputation publicly in the
College of Sorboune this Theologall proposition, full of Iesuitical divinity,
which he dedicated to the Abbot of Cluny, bastard son to the Cardinal of
Lorreine: that was, to wit, That it was lawful for any man private or
otherwise, to depose or kill any King or Prince, which were wicked, evil men,
or heretics.

The king hearing of this new and strange kind of Divinity aryued now of late
into the land, was greatly offended, and intended to call this Bachiler to
account: but he was prevented by these means,

For they which had made him so speak with Pistolets of Spain, hired a good
fellow likewise with Pistolets, which slew this divine with all his divinity in
the court of the College: which act done, fled and avoided, least he who had
set both of them to work for Pistolets should be disclosed.

Thus the Prologue being so well played, and the hearts of the beholders so
prepared: the Duke of Guyze also with his Pistolets having drawn the Malcontes
to help to play the rest: and the principal Authors themselves almost ready
to come forth. There rested one practice more to be set down before the
entrance, which was as follows.

Between the rivers of Charante, Botonne, and the towns of Niort, Fonteney,
and Ralmond, cituated upon the Ocean sea, lies a Country called Annix,
pertaining to the government of Rochel: the River Seure coming down from
Niort, before it falls into the sea, meeting with an other river running from
Fontency, deuideth it self into many channels, which do make diverse Islands,
commonly called the Islands of Maran, by the name of the chief town there
called Portmaran. At every access into those Islands, there are fortes builded
upon the channels of the said river.

The third day of February the Minister of Maran being at Rochel, been before
time: and also that there were drifts to seize upon the Isles of Maran, the
Castle and other Forts, if it were not looked to. For the Guizes intending
shortly to bring to light their intents heretofore hidden in the darkness of
their brain, and aforehand to seize upon as many places of importance as they
could; determined by all means to seize upon Rochel, which had been always a
great eyesore to them. But knowing well that Rochel could not be surprised,
they hoped to bring to pass by war that which could not be done by treason
nor surprise, and therefore they concluded to take these Islands before hand, out
of the which they supposed greatly to molest, and in the end to block in the
said town of Rochel.

The Guizes had purposed to raise their insurrection the 18. of April. But the
spirit of ambition did so disquiet them, that without taking any rest they
thought a day to be a year; which impatient abiding caused them to abridge
their time, and to anticipate from the 18. of April to the 4. of March.

Therefore now the Guizes Leaguers (for so shall they be called hereafter) with
their leagued came forth upon the stage the 4. day of March, which had been a
fatal day to that house to work mischief. For 25. years Francis Duke of
Guize, father unto this last, upon the same day committed the cruel murder of
Vassie, which was the breach of the Edict of January, and the ground of all the
civil wars which have followed. The Leaguer and leagued (I say) came forth
galloping in troops in every part of France, but specially in Normandy,
Picardie, Brie, Champaigne, and about Paris. They seize upon Towns, Cities and
Fortresses, upon the Kings money, and upon every thing which might do them
good. They surprised Compeigne, Guyssons, Chalons, Toul, Meziers, Montreul,
Peronne, and diverse other places in diverse Provinces.

The King on the other side desirous to keep his realm in peace, with the
good advise of his Senators, assembled at S. German, for a beginning to ease
the people, had remitted seven hundred thousand Frankes, discharging also
diverse offices, which were greatly chargeable, and hinderfull to the people,
and intended to do a great deal more hereafter, giving himself wholly to
restore his realm in his former flourishing estate. But hearing of this sudden
taking of armor, at the first was greatly amazed thereat; yet afterward did
bear it with great patience, to see what end these new tumults and attempts
would come to.

The 15. day of March the Leaguers being in armor, and doing all parts of
hostility upon the Kings subjects, supposing that all France not

And among all others which missed of their purpose, Monsieur des Roches,
according to the determination of the Leaguers, (as is aforesaid) Maran a
certain friend of his named Gareune (who heretofore Monsieur des Roches) to
seize upon the Castle, with the help of five Soldiers disguised in Merchants
apparel, whom he had brought with him, hoping there also to have the help of
certain Papists of the Town, but specially of him who had the Castle in
keeping named Piguard, a Popish soldier, which in times past had been in
garrison there, and had married a wife in the Town. But the watchful
diligence of them of the Religion there dwelling was such, that they discovered
him the same night, and chased him away with his Merchants.

About the latter end of March, the King perceiving the drifts of the

The King also armed the Dukes Ioyeuse and Espernon, with authority and power
to set upon the Leaguers, who defeated their companies in diverse places. The
Marshall Byron also was appointed with certain horsemen to ride in the country
about Paris, and to set upon as many as could be found.

Marshall Matignon governor of Bourdeaux, puts out of the Castle Trompet
the Lord Vailhac, Governor of the said Castle, for being one of the Leaguers,
and for having intelligences with the King of Spain.

These beginnings of the Leaguers being as yet doubtful, not so well
frequented, nor so lucky as they hoped it would have been, nor yet so well
repressed and prevented as the King might have done, if he had had good
counsel, or might have followed his own. These beginnings (I say) being but
wavering, and such as might procure them a great fall, they thought that it was
high time to bestirre themselves about their business, and to join policy with
such small power as they had, least that in galloping over hastily, they should
fall and break their necks. For considering that to wrap the Realm of
lustines into new troubles, against the Kings will, without rendering a
probable reason, would procure to them and their house more hatred, than they
were able to sustain, they labor to do two things, to wit; to derive the
hatred upon them whom they had determined to destroy, and then to seek to draw
the king in process of time to their faction, as at length they did, as it
shall appear hereafter.

To cover therefore their ambitious rebellion under some color of right,
Bourbon, as the author of this Tragedy, whereon they make him play Getas part.
Oh regem me esse opportuit. A man of great years, to contend with his Nephew
the King of Navarre, about the Armor of Achillis before his death. And for
because the Cardinals hat would not warrant this claim and rebellion, they
go about to shadow it with some color of piety and justice (which indeed
were trodden under foot by themselves, and by the wars and tumults which
they had kindled, fostered and intertayned five and twenty years together, to
bring to pass these their now manifest intents) they set forth a declaration
containing plausible causes among men of all degrees, of their taking of Arms,
bearing date the 31. of March.

Where note how the Guizes have hid their treason under ye Cardinals name, and
the Cardinal takes the cloak of religion and justice; so they abusing that
old Noble man as a Geta or slave, do make him speak in such sort as
follows.

But do not think (gentle Reader) that I speak irreverently of that noble
Prince, issued out of such an ancient and noble raze, but to show the
unadvised facility of that man, who suffered himself to be so abused, as to
become a slave and a Geta unto the ambition of other men, and by the same mean
has set his Country, (in the which he did bear so many honors) his natural
and lawful Prince, his house, his kindred and family so honorable, ancient
and famous, in a miserable combustion and danger to be rooted out, for a vain
imagination to become a King. But to return to the purpose.

First, they make him require the abolishing of the reformed religion, and that
the stablishing of the Catholic religion may not be interrupted hereafter,
whatsoever alteration may happen in the succession of the Crown, they all of
them (I mean the Leaguers) naming themselves falsely (only except the Cardinal
Bourbon) Princes of the blood, do require that a Catholic successor may be
nominated, which to be the Cardinal himself, because he had (as they
supposed) but few years to live, and therefore was not like to stand long in
their way.

Secondly, they do require that the K. of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, and
their heirs may be declared incapable to succeed to the Crown* in case the
King should dye without issue, alleging that they are heretics and relaps.
And note, that for the rest of the Princes of Bourbon, to wit, the Cardinal
Vendosme, the Earls, Princes, and County of Soyssons, they do exclude them
from the succession of the Crown, because they are sons of an heretic, or
otherwise contemptuously pass them over, as not able to buckle with them. The
house of Monpensier is beyond the x. France, they must proceed to election of
a new King. And who should be elected (I pray you) but Master Francis of
Lorreyne?

Thirdly, they do quarrel with the king for favoring the Duke Espernon: as
though the king may not favor, but whom the Leaguers shall appoint him. The
cause they do pretend is, that Espernon is a fauorer of heretics, that is to
say: he is too faithful to the king for their turn.

Fourthly, they do allege, that the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons are
charged with intolerable bondage and exactions, whom they would restore to
their old dignity and liberty.

The king had given the government of Prouance to Monsieur the great Pryor, who
had published the edict of peace according to the kings Prouance. But the
Leaguers had drawn to their conspiracy a great number of that Country with
Spanish pistolets, and specially among others, two noble men, to wit, Monsieur
de Saultes and Vines.

These two applied the market for the League in Prouance with Spanish
Pistolets, and won on their side the Consul of Marseilles named Darius, and a
Captain of the town named Boniface.

The 9. day of April these two heads of sedition came in the evening to the
door of one Boniface, brother to this Captain aforenamed, who was the kings
receauer in yt country, with fained letters from Mo^sieur great Prior, which
was at Aix the head town in Prouance. The said Boniface the kings receauer
came to the door, his own wife carrying the Candel before him, who was
immediately slain by the said Captain his own brother, the Consul Darius and
their company at his own door, and in his wives presence. This exploit done,
the Parricide himself with few of his own company, went up to ransake the
house, and rifled all that was there to their lyking.

From thence with a company of seditious people armed, they went to the houses
of them of the reformed religion, whom they lead with great violence, and a
great number of prisoners into the tower of Saint John, and afterward made
great havoc of their goods.

The 10. day they took 4. of them more, and manly, one named Chiousse, and the
other Antony Lambalent: which they cruelly murdered: and after John's tower,
intending to dispatch the rest in like sort the morrow, or shortly after.

The 11. day the seditious seize upon ye fort of Nostre Dame de la guard, and
wrote letters to Monsieur Vines, praying him to come in all have,

The Duke of Neuers a man of his own Country, to wit, an Italian did then
lurk in Auignon, and had procured 4. Galleyes of the Duke of Florence to be in
readiness in the haven, under the color to go to a marriage into Italy: at the
first news to have hasted out of Auignon, and with his company joining to
Monsieur of Vines, to have made that town sure for the king of Spain
according to their agreement, when they cosened him of his Pistolets, or else
to some pety Duke of Italy.

There was a certain man in the City of great wealth, credit and power, named
Boukier: for fear of this man many of the chiefest citizens, by reason of some
particular displeasures, standing in great distrust of him, and supposing that
now he would take occasion to be revenged of them, fled into the Abbey of
Saint Victor. But Boukier, considering the danger that the town stood in,
and the common peril of them all, sent to them that had fled into the said
Abbey, aduertysing them that the time did not require to call to remembrance
private injuries, assured them of his goodwill and safety of his part, and
required their assistance in keeping the said town in the kings obedience,
and to look to the common preservation of themselves.

These fearful Citizens being so reconcyled, and encouraged by this weighty
occasion, and joining together, went to know of the said Consul Darius, and
Captain Boniface, by what authority they did that which they had done. And
when they answered to have done it by the commandment of the grand Prior, and
could show nothing for it, they were apprehended: and the same day letters were
dispatched to the grand Prior being then at Aix, to aduertize him of the
intended and attempted treason, and what had passed there.

The 12. day the graund Prior came from Aix to Marseilles with Prouance, who do
hold their court there.

The 13. Day, the said Chamber (after due examination of the fact, and Darius
and Boniface, which out of hand were executed. Also they set at liberty them
of there formed religion, with commandment on both sides to keep the kings
edict, and so by these means the town was delivered from danger of changing
of mastery, the people from death, and undoing, and the tumult ceased. This
speedy execution did greatly weaken and prevent the monopols of the League in
the country of Prouance.

About the 15. day the Leaguers hasting to seize upon as many towns and
houldes as they could in all France, to make their part strong, as Belgik,
where they could do more then in any part of France, there they committed great
cruelties in many places, where having the upper hand, they were withstoode:
namely in the town of Chastilion upon the river Marne in the country of
Brie, they murdered as well the Catholics as the Hugonets, because they made
resistance against them.

About the 20. day the Leaguers did present their association, which

First, they do protest that they do acknowledge none other faith then that, in
the which they have been baptized, which then they did promise to believe and
defend, and to that promise they do stand still.

Secondly, they do refuse and condemn all manner of associations, under what
soever color, which bind them to obey any other then their Soueraygne.

Thirdly, they do show the League to be nothing else, but the circumuention of
the king, the confusion of the State, a dangerous alteration of y^ Realm, the
bringing of a new Prince of a strange blood: and finally caryeth with it self
a proscription, havoc, and bondage of all good men in all degrees.

About the 22. of April, the King of Navarre in silence beholding the
Clairuant, and Chassincourt with letters to the King, in the which he
complains of the injuries of the Leaguers proffered unto him in their
declaration, requiring justice to be done for the said injuries done unto him.
He offers also his service and power to the King, for to repress the
traitorous intentes and attempts of the said Leaguers.

About the 30. of April the King wills the said Lords Clairuant and
Chassincourt to give this gentle answer to the King of Navarre from Navarre as
his son, and heir of his crown: wills him also to arm himself with
patience, and to cause the edict of peace to be observed by them of the
reformed Religion. Furthermore, that he acknowledges the driftes of the
Leaguers, as well against his own person, as against the said King of Navarre,
but hops that

The second day of May the King by edict and proclamation does condemnethe

At the same time also the King answered to every point of their declaration of
the said Leaguers, whereof the sum follows.

First, the King protests of his Catholic Religion, and calls to witness
his actions, victories, dangers, and labors taken for the same.

Secondly, he shows that the peace was made, and approved by the counsel of
the Cardinal (in whose name they do seem to autorize their

Thirdly, he declares how he has favored the Clergy, in giving them liberty
to call provincial counsels, and to ref^rme such abuses, as the civil wars
had brought in, how he has also preferred the woorthiest sort to the best
Ecclesiastical liuinges, and has restored to their liuinges them who were
dispossessed thereofby the former civil wars.

Fourthly, that the Leaguers have no cause to complain for the giving of
offices. For his predecessors and he after them, have bestowed upon the Guyzes
the best sort, and most honorable dignities, and that in great number, when the
Princes of his blood have been neglected.

Fifthly, that it is to force nature, and time to compel him by violence of
arms to appoint a successor, he being alive in strength, health, and flower
of his age, and not out of hope to have issue.

Last of all, he complayneth that this new commotion is very unfit and out of
season, considering that he was now earnestly bent and occupied to restore the
Nobility to their ancient honor and dignity, and the people to their due
liberty. But by this leauie of arms they have stopped his godly proceedinges,
and have taken the way to oppress and root out the Clergy, nobility and
people.

About the same time also the King sent Ambassadors into foreign countries,
and commanded his ordinary Ambassadors in the courts of foreign Princes, to
give them knowledge of the wicked intentes, and traiterous attemptes of the
Leaguers.

The Leaguers in a short space had scattered abroad the Pistolets of Spain,
and about the beginning of June they began also to take money; great and
excessive sums of money upon the towns and cities, which Bourge being a
small town in Xainctonge situated upon the fall of the river Dordonne, into
Garomne, a town leagued and extremely addicted to the Leaguers, was by them
raunsomed to ten thousand crowns, and afterward the inhabitants so cruelly
entreated, that in leaping by night over the walls, were enforced to steal
away for fear of worse, supposing them selves to have sped well in escaping
with their lives.

About the same time the Lord Saint Luke, governor of Browage, sent a certain
Captayn into the Isles of Maran, under color to buy Oats for his provision, to
see whether he could work some surprising of the Castle. But the Captain
was so roughly shouldered and coursed, that he was glad to retire with his
whole skin. And after that (least the Papists should put some into the
Castle) every night 6. or 7. of the reformed religion with Caliuers, conuayed
themselves privily in the dark of the night into the gate of the Castle
until day. The Papists understanding this, and also hearing the threatenings
ofthem of the Religion, to wit, that if they should be driven away, they would
burn the Papists houses before their departing, more for fear then for love,
were content to admit 4* of them of the Religion into the Cast. I, whom they
did choose from among them that were altogether unskillful in war. But
afterward the Foriners (which are all for the most part of the religion)
desired to be admitted into the keeping of the said Castle, and at length it
was agreed, that a greater number of them of the Religion should be admitted to
the keeping of the said Castle: but always notwithstanding the greater number
was of Catholics, yet it was so kept until the 20. of July next following.

About the 5. day of June, the King sent the Lords Claimant, and Chassincourt
to the King of Navarre, willing him to do nothing against

About the same time the Leaguers perceiving the judgments of the King and of
his Courts of Parliament pronounced against them, the executions done upon the
persons of diverse their partakers, the declarations and detections of many
Gentlemen by their writings, their forme^ cruelty upon the Kings subjects,
and misdemeanors toward their Prince, might procure the hatred not only of the
people, but also of their own favorers, did set forth an Apologye, such as it
was, to wash away their traitorous blemishes and spots, in the which they do
labor to make men believe that they are honest men, and good Subjects, and
that they seek nothing but the preservation and defense of the Romish Religion
against the heretics, as they term them.

First, they say that they can not be attaynted, nor touched of treason,
without condemning many Noble men with them, and that the former Bourbon, were
such as could have perceived their driftes, if they had been tending to any
such thing.

Secondly, they do disalow the deeds of Rosier, for drawing their genealogy
from Charles the great.

Thirdly, they reckon their kindred, and aliaunce with the house of Bourbon.

Fourthly, sua quae narrant facinora? quae ostentant vnlnera?

Fifthly, they do all that they do, least that France should be reduced to
that extremity that England is now in.

Last of all, they counsel the King to join with them, because (say they)
they are armed with God his own hand.

Now let the Reader consider, what necessary conclusion may be inferred out of
the reasons above rehearsed.

The 9. day of June from Chalons a town in Champagne situated upon the river
Marne, the Leaguers sent a supplication to the King, in the

First, that according to the supplication presented by the states, assembled
at Bloys the year before, to wit, 1584. representing the whole realm: he will
forbid the exercise of the reformed religion, throughout the whole realm.

Secondly, that all men be compelled to profess the popish religion, and that
such as have heretofore professed the reformed religion, may be enforced to
abjure the same: and in case they will not, to be exiled out of the realm for
ever.

Thirdly, that all heretics (for so they term them which will not consent to
their treasons, or idolatrous superstition) be declared incapable of any
office, dignity or public charge.

Fourthly, they require the towns given to them of the reformed religion, to
be taken out of their hands.

Fifthly, that the King shall give over the protection of Geneua, against the
Duke of Sauoye.

Last of all, that the King shall swear before his court of Parliament of
Paris: the contents of this their request reduced into the form of an edict,
to be perpetually, and inuiolably observed: and likewise shall cause all the
Princes, Peers, officers of the Crown, Senators, Governors and Magistrates,
to swear to observe and defend the said edict.

To be short, they aduertized the King that they have refused all manner of
conference, except it be upon these conditions, and in case he will not do
this, they will make him do it whether he will or not.

But for the right understanding of this supplication, the Reader must

There were there in France three sorts of men, who (as the Leaguers thought)
would mar all the play, to wit, the Princes, Nobility, and People. Of the
first, they feared greatly the forces, the valor, authority and fidelity,
knowing very well that they were able both in power and credit, to minister
them play long enough to weary them, and by their valor able to encounter with
them every where, and that through their fidelity, they would never forsake
the King in his need, although that otherwise they were divided in religion:
considering also that they have the chiefest interest to the Crown.

As for the Nobility, they considered that they were of three sorts, Leaguers,
Catholics, and Protestants. The Nobles and the Commons which do profess the
reformed religion, they knew by long experience to be so skillful and
experienced in war, as thereby to be invincible, and that by all their fair
promises proffered unto them, they could not be removed from their alleagance
to their sovereign King and Prince, whom God had ordained over them. By this
their supplication therefore, covered with the hypocritical cloak of
Catholikisme, they would feign to be rid of the Princes and Nobility
reformed, or else to divide them a sunder, that the more easily they might make
them give room, or else root them out.

As for the common people reformed, they suppose that they being scattered into
diverse popish Provinces, could be so used, as that they might not flock
together, but every man in an imminent danger would be careful how to save
himself in some place of safe exile. That is the cause that they cry out in
their supplication, banishment and exile.

As for the Catholics both Noble and Common, they are in hope that
superstition it self would win them on their side. But if the riddance of them
of the reformed religion out of the Realm might not be thoroughly done, yet
the King and the Catholics being bound with an oath to execute their demands,
would at the pleasure of the Leaguers nourish an immortal war: by the which
the King should consume his subjects, and the subjects their King with mutual
blows, until the room being either made void or weakened, and they having
that thorn (which so sore pricked them) out of their foot, might uprightly
(without any halting) either set themselves in place, or else easily shoulder
him out who had right to it.

The 10. of the said month, the King of Navarre being at Bergerack, a great
Town in Perigord, situated upon the river of Dordonne, answers

Secondly, he shows that he was bred, borne, and brought up in the same
religion, which they call heresy, and that he never learned, nor knew any
other, and that he believes in his heart to righteousness, and confesses
with his mouth to salvation, that the same doctrine which he does profess is
the infallible truth of God; yet he refuses not to be taught better, if
better they can teach him out of Gods word in a general or national Council
duly assembled.

Thirdly, in that which he does in repurging and sweeping away the errors and
abuses brought in by long continuance of time, therein he follows the
examples of many Kings and Princes, of many godly and learned men, who for
these five hundred years have desired and attempted the same.

Fourthly, whereas his enemies do charge him to be a persecutor of the
Catholic religion, he will be judged by all men void of passion, who has
greater cause to complain in that behalf, he or his enemies.

Last of all, after a long consideration of the miseries which fall upon the
heads of men of all degrees, and the oppression of the poor people, which
infallibly will follow these attempts of the Leaguers, he does wish (seeing
the enemies have made him party) the quarrel which they have to him might be
ended with a Combat. And debasing himself from that high degree of a King, in
the which God has placed him, for an abridgement of all miseries, the sparing
of Christian blood, for the ease and quietness of the poor people, does proffer
to his enemies to try the matter by a Combat, between him and the Duke of
Guize, or two to two, ten to ten, or more to more in like proportion.

It is reported how the Duke of Guize after the fight of this challenge, being
urged to accept it, excused his cowardice by the example of his father, which
in like case excused himself upon the inequality of the persons. To wit, that
it was not lawful for him to accept that challenge at the hands of one of the
Princes, as being after the royal house in degree above all the rest of the
Nobility.

But rather and more truly may it be said, that he (who being not a Prince,
did reckon and write his name among the Princes, or rather preferred himself
before the Princes of the royal blood) did refuse this proffer,

These things passing to and fro, many exploytes of hostility were done and
executed on every side, rather to the loss than the advantage of the
Leaguers, being crossed every way by the true subjects of the King. Whereupon,
considering that the world frowned upon them, so that if they had not the King
on their side to salve the sore, they were like to have a great fall: therefore
they must follow some other course.

Hitherto the Guizes have covered themselves under the Cardinals hat, having
derived all the hatred (so far as they might) upon that old man, whom they
greatly abused. Now, when the Cardinals hat would not serve the turn, they do
put in practice the other part of their dilemma, as the Cardinal or the King
must cover us, or else we fall: but the Cardinal cannot, ergo the King must.
And that the King may do it, we must set Achitophel to work: therefore let him
come upon the stageto play his part.

The Kings Counselors were either servants to the Guizes, or else alied or
otherwise devoted unto him, except the Dukes Espernon and Ioyeuse, whereof the
last afterward was won to the Leaguers side; Espernon remained always more
faithful to the King, than the King to himself. For the which cause (by the
means of a Curtizan in Paris, named Saint Beufue) they hired Villeroy (one of
the Kings Secretaries) to have murdered him, so to have been eased of that
heavy burden. These Counselors must play Achitophels part, they must help up
with the pack by the means which follow.

They in the midst of these broils, did of purpose attenuate the growing and
forces of the League, as a thing weak of it self rather to be despised than
regarded, as not able to continue long, but that it would decay of it self,
and that some certain inconsiderate zeal of the Catholic Religion had made
them somewhat passionate: and for to make him more secure on yt side, they
derived his thoughts from the Leaguers with a but.

But if he would once show a token of displeasure toward them of the reformed
religion, or would only feign to intend war against them, the Leaguers of
themselves would fall down upon their knees before him, therefore it were
better to let them alone, for as much as they would be ready to be with him
whenever he would employ them.

Also that it were better for him to war against them of the reformed
religion in Poytow, Guien, Gascoyne, Languedocke, and Daulphine, than against
them of his own religion. For although the Protestants were dutiful and
obedient enough, yet were it better to have them for enemies, being the weaker
side, than the Leaguers and Catholics which were the

The King carried away by this counsel, and otherwise inclining to attempt
against them of the reformed religion, ordayne^ the Lord Ioyeuse his General
for Languedock. Espernon for Prouance, and he in his own person would assault
Poytow.

Therefore the 18. day of June, partly for hatred which he bare to ye reformed
Si non sua sponte insanit: instiga. For being in the City of Paris, he takes
order how to victual his Army in Poytow, for the which thing he appointed
certain Towns in Poytow and Xainctonge, to wit, Chatelerault, S. Merxent,
Niort, Fonteney, Towars, Engolesme, Xainctes, and Coignack, there to have
always in store a certain quantity of Corn, Dates and Wine, as in store
houses, which order he sends to the said Towns to be put in execution.

The King being thus deluded by his Counsel, and busying himself about these
matters of war against them of the reformed religion (whether it were in
earnest or by dissimulation, God knows, but at length it turned to earnest)
he gives leave and time to the Leaguers to grow greater in strength and
number, and forgoeth the occasions and opportunity to provide for necessary
remedies against them.

These Counselors at length when they saw time, came once more upon the stage.
And on a sudden they terrified the King again (as of a thing happened beside
their expectation) with the great strength of the League, showing what great
danger might ensue, if he should seem to sail against that violent tempest.
Considering that the resolution of restoring the Catholic religion, and of the
suppressing the reformed, had possessed generally the minds of the people. So
that if he should seem to withstand the zeal of the Leaguers (for their
treason was with them zeal of the popish religion) he would be commonly
thought to be a favorer of heretics, and thereby an universal rebellion of
his subjects might ensue, to the utter undoing of him and his estate.
Therefore, that as a good Pilot he must obey the weather, and seek for some
reconciliation, and make peace with them as much to his advantage, as the
necessity of the affairs may suffer him. And that in such an extreme case
he must hold with the strongest side.

These and many other considerations propounded unto him, which had lost his
authority (and that by them which wholly ruled him) through a just judgment
of God (for despising the voice of him, and for persecuting

Thus the King (through Gods just judgment, and the pernicious persuasions of
his unfaithful Counsel) bewitched, does determine to make peace with enemies
as good cheap as he may: and for that thing he must seek out some good
chapman skillful and practiced in old Italian tricks. Therefore he thought
that his Mother was most fit, as most skillful in such markets.

This accursed woman, as she had always an ambitious and busy soul, so she
had also a double mind, by the which she studied to have great thanks for doing
no good, and to keep her self in authority, and in the possession of the
government, thought it should cost her the subversion of her own house and
children, and the utter desolation of the Realm. For the which cause she
thought to keep the King always busied and hampered in trouble, vexation and
danger, that she might always have thanks for her bad service.

The King as a natural son put her always in great trust, judging of her
naturalnes and love toward him, as he did judge of his toward her. The
Leaguers on the other side were assured that she would do nothing for the
Kings advantage and ease, for fear she should be no more employed. Therefore
she was well liked on both sides.

Up then old Medea, you must show yet once again some of your old Italian
tricks. Old Catie must be the market woman, she shall make the bargayne. But
for as much as two eyes do see more than one, she shall have some counselors
appointed her in that negotiation, such as would not suffer her to do any good
unto the King and the Realm, if she had been willing so to do; for they were
all the Kings enemies, addicted to the Leaguers, and such as would have taught
Italian tricks the bus^est head of all Florence, yea such as would have sent
the great Prophet of Italy Machiuell, with all his devilish Prophecies, to his
Christcrosse.

Now we will leave the Q Mother with her counsel to do their market as well
as they can, whilst we discourse of some other matters incident to the cause
and the time.

About the beginning of July, the King of Navarre hearing of the Nerat the 10.
day of July, in the which he repeateth the Kings proceedings against the
Leaguers, as the condemnation, proscription and execution of some of their
partakers; he advises the King that if he make peace with the Leaguers, he
armeth rebels against himself, his state and Crown: he does lament the
miserable Navarre will not serve his turn; the King must follow the stream,
and will be shortly promoted to a higher degree. For he shall be one of the
fellows of the League who shall pay for all, and have least to do in it.

It is said before, how the Papists and they of the reformed religion consented
jointly to keep the Castle of Marans. Now, about the beginning of July, the
Lord S. Hermin had gathered together some three hundred men of the Leagued in
Poytow, to bring them to the Lord S. Luke into Browage (as he said): but
indeed it was to seize upon the Castle of Marans and other Forts in the Isles.
The said S. Hermines with them would have passed through Marans: but they of
the religion withstood his passage, and began to fortify the Fort called
Alowete, so that he was enforced to take his journey through Maillezais and
Ronde, and in that journey shortly after they were discomfited and slain by
them of S. Ihan d' Angely.

The night following, the coming of S. Hermin nigh Marans, there was a great
alarm in the Town, and the Papists which were in the Castle to the number of
five and twenty, supposing that S. Hermin and his company had entered the
Town, began to rejoice, sing and dance at the sound of a bag-pipe, which they
caused to play the most part of that night, threatening them of the religion who
were but four in number. But these four standing on their ward, charged them
not to make any innovation with them of the League; so that not only they kept
the Papists in fear, but also at length (with a certain amazement of them)
caused their pag-pipe to cease.

About the same time, the Prince of Conde understanding how things were like to
pass between the King and the Leaguers, departed from Rochel to repair to
the King of Navarre, and leaves the Lord Rohan in Poytow, to ouerlooke and
withstand the attempts of the Leaguers there.

The said Lord. Rohan about yt 12. of July, departed from Rochel with four
score horses, and rode to Marauns, to assure those Islands. The Brune where
through the said Lord should pass: but their hearts so failed them, that they
durst not resist him. Entering therefore without any resistance into the town of
Marans, he called the inhabitants of both religions, and told them, that he
had determined to place a gentleman within the Castle to keep the same in
obedience to the King, under the government of the King of Navarre, governor
of Guyen for the said King, which thing if they would refuse, he would burn
all their houses into ashes. And therefore bid them out of hand to choose a
gentleman of his company, such as they would themselves,

There was a certain Notary, who had professed the reformed religion after a
sort: he the day before the Lord Rohan his coming, having intelligence
thereof, went to the Papists from house to house, warning them to stand to
their defense against the said Lord Rohan, and to enter into the Castle first,
to let the said Lord Rohan from the entering. By whose persuasions, a great
number of Papists, and of the most skillful in war with their Notary seized
on the Castle. But four Gentlemen of the reformed religion, having gotten the
tower of the gate, which commanded over the court of the said castle, did
threaten to shoot against all such, as would presume to let the said Lord
Rohan enter in, or any other whom he would place there.

So the Papists with their Notary began to speak fair, and to open the gate
to the Lord Sowsaye of Beauregard, whom the inhabitants had required there to
command: he entered therein with the Lord Mortaygne his brother the 15. day of
July: and having received the oath of the inhabitants to be faithful unto the
King, under the authority of the King, of Navarre, governor for the King in
Guyene departed, and left his brother the Lord Mortaygne there as his
lieftenant.

Whilst these small quarrelinges did so pass at Marans, we have left the Q.
Mother with her Counselors, to make the bargayne, and to sell to the Leaguers
the crown of France, the Kings authority and honor, for as little as they may
afoord it, that is, gratis, and for just nothing.

The affairs were handled with such faithfulness, that these Counselors as
soon as they came out of their chamber, went into another to sit in counsel
by them selves, to advertise the Leaguers day by day of all which they had gone
about, and with the Q. Mother: also, what was the disposition from time to
time, to advise the Leaguers what they should request, and how far they
should yield: at length, after long changing and chopping of words, saeuis
inter se conuenit vrsis. Certain Articles are concluded Chalons in Champaygne
the twelfth day of July, which do consist of three principal points.

First, that the King shall make an edict, in the which he shall grant them
all that they requested at Bloys the last year to wit 1584. in the assembly of
the states there.

Also, all whatsoever they demanded by their declaration, bearing date the
last day of March: and all what was required of them in their last resolution,
dated the tenth day of June at Chalons: and that is as much as they would for
this time.

Secondly, that leuying of arms, all actions of hostility committed

Hereby the actions of hostility are comprehended, the murders, spoils,
robberies, ransackinges, riflinges of public or private things, all rapes,
whoredoms, and villanyes committed by them of the League, which all the King
must think, and publish by his authority, to be done for his service, and the
defense of the Popish Church. Here is a King but badly served.

Also that all judicial proceedinges, judgments, proscriptions,
condemnations, and executions passed against them of the League, shall be
revoked and declared void, wrongful and unjust.

Thirdly, before his own face, they enforced him to divide his kingdom among
them: and of a King of France (for to please the League) he has made himself
one of the three kings of Colen.

Now follows the good bargayne, which they when the King had sent to make his
market, had agreed on: whether it be to the kings advantage and honor, let
every man judge. Here is an other point of the Leaguers good service to their
King.

First, the Cardinal of Bourbon, the new king of the Friars must be provided
for, and let him be sure that he shall have the least part. For besides the
places belonging to his Bishopric of Roan, he shall have the old castle of
Deep, which no body else will have.

The Duke moreover shall have the government of Britain, and two of the
strongest places that he shall name in that Province, with the admiralty of the
same.

The Duke of Guyze shall have the citadel of Mets, because his government of
Champaigne has no places good enough for him.

The Duke de Mayn in his government of Burgondie shall have the castle of
Dyjon, or the citadell of Chalons upon Sawne.

The Cardinal of Guyze shall have Rhemes, and the country about so much as he
will.

The Duke Aumall shall have the holds of his government of Picardie.

We see how the great masters be indifferently well provided for: now their
servants and partakes must have part of the kings spoil, or else they will
frown and tell tales.

First, the Lord Antragues shall have Orleance.

The Lord D'ho shall have Ca^n and Constances in base Norm^ndy.

The Lord Brissacke shall have the government of Anjou.

The Lord Saultes shall have the government of Prouance in the absence

The Lord Chastre shall have the government of Bourges.

The Lord Vailhac shall have the Castle trompet in Bourdeaux.

Mandelot (Q. Mothers Scullion) shall have Lions, and the Citadel there.

I pray you masters hold your hands, you be well if you could consider it: use
him no worse then his granfather Francis the first prophesied of you: lethim
have his doublet and his breech to cover his shame.

But how chance that in your partition you have forgotten your selves? Is
Poytow, Xainctonge, Engomoys, Limosin, Perigord. Quercye, Rowarges, Viuarets,
Auvergne, Gascoyn, Languedocke, and Daulphine nothing worth with you? Be not
these countries worth the having. If you be such great Captains as you would
seem to be, there you may have occasion to make proof of your valiantnes, if
your stomach serves you: but you will say, it would cost blows, and that you
love not.

Here gentle Reader, consider the course which these lusty buddes of
Charlemayne do follow, they will root the heretics (as they say) out of
France, they will exile them, and rid the realm of France of them: yet they
seize upon the kings Cities and Dominions, and do enforce him to divide his
kingdom among them: but specially they assure themselves of those provinces,
towns, cities and holds, as had not in a manner one of the reformed religion
left among them: but they either had been murdered, or else so vexed and
disquieted by the continual dangers, which every day compassed them, that they
had retired most into those provinces in France, which were safer from the
violence of the Leaguers, or into foreign Countries. So they war against the
heretics by subduing the Catholics to their devotion. They war against the
heretics, where none were to make them resistance: and dare not look on the
provinces where the heretics (as they term them) were in great number. But
to the matter. Although the unjust and inconstant dealinges of the house of
Valoys, had empayred greatly their honor and renown: and that this king by his
own actions, at the massacre of Saint Bartholemy had greatly stained his
garments with a spot that would never be washed: yet did he always retain
the authority and reputation of a Soueraygne Prince: until that for hatred of
the Gospel he suffered the ambition of the house of Guyze to encroch too much
upon his royal authority and prerogative, under color of Catholic zeal.
Thus he weakened his royal authority, by following the counsel of Italians,
thrusted into his service by the cunning of the Guyzes for that intent. These
Italian scholemasters did endeavor always to rule him by the precepts of
Machiauell the Italian prophet: so that after he came to the Crown, the Guyzes
with their adherents interrupted diverse times the peace made with them of the
religion, made continual monopols and secret practices and associations

So that the king now having not only lost part of his Princelike strength,
which consisted in his towns cities and holds, but also part of his authority,
which lies in commanding alone as a soueraygne, is become a fellow of the
League. If you demand why? the question is soon answered, because he set
himself against him, of whom he had received all power and authority, He
which had given him, took it again for his unthankfulness.

But now let us return to the League. These articles called, the holy League
being concluded to the kings great disadvantage and dishonor, the edict must
be made thereafter, which was published the 18. day of July, and is commonly
called the edict of union: wherein the king does all

First, he forbids the exercise of the reformed religion throughout all his
Dominions, commanding the ministers of the Gospel to depart the realm out of
hand.

Secondly, he commands all men to profess the popish religion, and that the
professors of the Gospel without any respect of persons, either shall believe
popery, or else within six months shall depart out of the Realm: with
license in the mean time to sell their goods to their own uses.

Thirdly, that as many as have been infected with heresy (for so he calls
the Gospel of truth) or are known to favor it, shall be incapable to be
are any office within the Realm.

Fourthly, he does dissolve the bipartit and tripartit chambers of judgments,
which were ordained for the indifferent ministration of justice, in respect of
religion.

Fifthly, that the towns granted to the keeping of the King of Navarre, at
Saint Germane the year 1584. shall be surrendered into the Kings hands.

Sixthly, that all whatsoever offensive actions have been committed by the
Leaguers, their adherents, Towns, Cities, or comunalties of their

Where note gentle reader, that the King is come to that bondage, that he is
persuaded to allow and approve all the murders, exactions, spoylings,
excorsions, treasons, rapes whoredoms blasphemies, and sacriledges, as done
for his service, the defense of the Church, and aduauncing of Gods honor. Will
not the Lord revenge this pusilanimitie, in such a great Magistrate; with some
notable example of his justice, according unto his threatenings: woe be to you
which call evil good.

Last of all, he commands all manner of officers, and the Nobility, to
swear the observation of the said edict, which he caused to be published and
sworn in the Parliament of Paris: he himself sitting in judgment the 18.
day of July.

The King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, understanding the conclusion and
publication of the edict of July, appointed a certain meeting with the Duke of
Monmorency, at Saint Paul de cadioulx in the Province of Albigerys, to take
advise together what were to be done in those extremities.

They therefore the tenth of August, concluded a certain protestation: Navarre
has sought, and what he has proffered for the preservation of the state.

What his behavior had been ever since the League did rise, how he has kept
himself quiet, and unarmed, to the extreme danger of his person when he had
great occasions to do great exploites.

At last, they protest that they are not the cause of al those miseries, which
are like to ensue out of those troubles, and seeing that no reason will take
place, committing their innocence and equity of their cause unto God, do
resolve upon the defensive.

This resolution being made, the King of Navarre returned to Nerak, the Prince
of Conde to Rochel, and Monmorency to Languedock, to view the attempts, and
expect the events of this new and strange union.

This union being concluded, the King considering that in some manner he had
been enforced to break the edict of peace, and that it was not the proclayming
only, which would cause the edict of union to be obeyed, but that a certain
cauell war would ensue, and that there must be some s^newes to hold it.
Therefore he turns all his thoughts to make some preparation for the war:
for the which cause the 11. of August he calls Paris, the Provost of Paris,
the Deane of our Ladies Church, and prayed the Cardinal of Guize to be
present. Who all being come in his presence, he made unto them a short
declaration of his will: wherein he shows himself glad, that at the instant
request of his good and faithful subjects, he has revoked the edict of
purification, and yet cannot believe, that at this time it will be easier to
execute this last resolution, then the former. Yet being incoraged and assisted
with so many and so good men of all degrees, he conceaueth some good hope which
makes him enter into these actions. And first, to come to that which is
expected of all men, he does intend to have three mighty armies, the one for
Guyen, the other by himself, the third upon the borders of Germany, to let
the passage of strangers, which will amount to four hundred thousands crowns
a month.

Secondly, that he does not mean to undo himself alone, but seeing that he
has admitted other men's counsel against his own, in breaking the edict of
peace, they must help him in maintaining of the war.

Thirdly, for that the first president of Parliament was one of the chiefest,
who procured the peace to be broaken, neither he nor his fellows may look to
be paid of their stipends during the war.

Fourthly, for that the people of Paris had showed so great rejoicing at the
breaking of the peace, he commands the Provost of the Merchants to levy
upon the inhabitants of the said City, the sum of two hundred thousand
crowns, for the charges of the war.

Fifthly, the King beholding the Cardinal of Guize, somewhat with a stearne
countenance, he let him understand, that forasmuch as the heads of the Clergy
had chiefly cast him into this war, for his part he is content to bear the
charges the first month, but that the rest should be maintained at the costs
of the clergy, and for that he would never expect the Popes license.

When the King had stayed in silence to hear what they would say, they began
to find the matter strange. Then the King with a token of indignation cried
out, it had been better (said he) then to have believed me: I fear me, that
when we go about to put away the preaching, we will hazard the Mass. I were
better then to make peace: and I know not whether they will accept it when we
will proffer it: so the meeting was ended.

The Priests being well stoared (be like) provided within few days
voluntarily (yet more willing to have paid nothing) one milion of frankes for
their portion.

Whilst these things were a doing, the King had sent three Noble men to the
King of Navarre, to wit the Lords Leuoncourt, Poigny and the president Barlart,
to try their cunning, whether they might induce the said Navarre, to join
with him both in forces and religion. These Lords came to the King of Navarre
after his return from S. Paul de Cadioulx to Nerak, greeting him in the Kings
name: declared to him, how the King did hold him as his son and heir of the
crown, in case he should decease without issue.

And after they showed the causes which moved the King to join with the
League, which was the division of the Catholics, which would redound greatly to
the prejudice of his estate, and the unquietness of his Realm.

Thirdly, that for the love he bare to him, he wishes him reunited to the
Catholic faith, both for the good of his soul, and also that he might the
more easily, by the means of the Catholics be established in the kingdom,
which otherwise would be hard for him to bring to pass.

Fourthly, they go about to persuade him to cause the exercise of the reformed
religion to cease, during the term of six months perfixed.

Fifthly, they required him in the Kings name, to surrender the towns which he
did hold for the King.

The King of Navarre with like courtesies answers to the first, that if it
had been his Majesty's pleasure to have used his service in the suppressing of
the Leaguers, he would have showed a proof of his duetifull obedience toward
him.

To the second he answered, that from his cradle, he has been brought up in
the reformed religion, in the which he never knew any error, and yet has,
and does proffer himself to be taught by the word of God, in a lawful
council.

To the third demand he answered, that the reformed religion, was established
by a solemn edict, confirmed by an oath, and that it was not in his power to
let the exercise of the same: and therefore purposed to deal in that matter.

To the fourth he answered, that considering the malice of his enemies
toward him he has more need to require others, then to surrender those.

These Ambassadors also moved the King of Navarre, that if he would confer
with the Q. Mother, she would advance as far as Champaigne in Toureyne. The
King of Navarre answered, that he would go as far as Bergerake in Perigord.

Whilst these things passed to and fro, many Nobles, Gentlemen, and others of
both religions, even of the Kings companies, retired from the Court home, and
among others the Prince Monpensier. But the raging of the League, and
persecutions which increased daily, caused Henry de la tour, Vicount Turenne to
assemble some Forces in Limosine and Perigord, to whom many Captains repaired
out of the Countries about Limosine and Perigord and Quercye, as the Lord
Meriake with his regiment. Paris, Niuernoys, and all the countries between
Seyne and Loyre, many also out of Bourbonnoys and Berry, being at the South
side of Loyre, accompanied with many men of sundry qualities and degrees, to
forsake their houses and take arms and the field, and to repair to these
Provinces, that were of sure access unto them. These companies assygned the
rendes vous in Berry, intending thence to join to the king of Navarre in
Gascoyne. They were all Gentlemen and Hargebusiers on Horseback, between two
or three hundred. The men of Mark in these companies were the Lord of
Pueilles, Fort, Laborde, Lands, Tauennes, and others. These companies of
France marching toward Gascoyne, joined with the Vicount Turenne about the end
of August, who within a little space of time did increase to the number of five
or six thousand men.

About the same time another company of Noble men and Gentlemen likewise
retired out of their houses, accompanied with great troops of soldiers, and
gave the rendes vous in Berry, among them these were the chiefest of name: the
Lords D'ouant, Roysdulie, Sauiere, Campoys, and diverse others which joined with
the Prince of Conde being then at Pons in Xainctonge.

The Lord Montgomery with his company went as far as to the king of Navarre
into Gascoyn: his brother the Lord of Orges went to the Prince of Conde. Other
companies out of Brie, Champaigne, Vermandoys, and other countries there
bordering retired to Sedan, the capital town of the principality of Boillon.

Out of Burgondy, and the countries about, retired to Geneua, and into the
signory of Berna.

The professers of the reformed religion out of Normandy, low Britayn, and
Picardie, passed over into England for their safety.

Good Christian Reader I beseech thee to stay here a while, and learn both to
fear and tremble at the dreadful judgments of God, and also his mercy
toward his Church, showed at this time: which when I do consider, it puts me
in remembrance of the like event, which did happen a little while before the
siege and destructions of Jerusalem, by Vespasian and Titus his son. That
city, which here on earth had borne the Image of the true heavenly Jerusalem,
having most wilfully resisted the son of God, and stopped their ears at his
voice. When it had fulfilled the measure of her iniquity, and that God would
make it a wonder, a hissyng and nodding of the head unto all Nations of the
world for her obstinacy and unthankfulness: a little before the siege, there
was at midnight heard a voice in the Temple thus, Migremns hinc: at the rumor
thereof all men were greatly amazed, musing what should be signified by that
warning. The Saints which were there, took that to be the voice of God (who
according Pella, which was beyond Jordan, in the ancient inheritance of the
Rubenites, where it was preserved, and out of a place of safety, did behold the
mighty storms of Gods tempests, which fell upon that so noble and famous a
City, which by Strabo was thought to be the greatest and fairest of all the
East. Even as Abraham long before did behold the subversion of Sodom: so when
the Lord had determined to power the storms of his anger upon those Nations
which are between the Loyre and the English Seas, for their offenses like unto
them of Jerusalem: first he takes his Church, which was scattered among
those Nations, Towns, and Cities, and brings most of them beyond Loyre, some
into England, some to Sedan, some to Geneua, some to Suisserland, some to
Germany, least the presence of them who do call upon his name should hinder the
execution of his wrath upon his enemies, for the publication of the edict of
union, commonly called the edict of July, although that in another form, was
as it were the voice of God heard out of the Temple, Migremus hinc. For those
nations lying on the North side of Loyre, who had conspired to destroy the
Gospel of Christ, have drawn the war from the Provinces which do profess
the Gospel, upon their own heads. For not only have they felt all the former
oppressions and outrages of the Leaguers, but also by this edict, all the
burden of this last civil war raised up by the Leaguers has fallen, upon
them, beside the horrible murders and seditions, which they have committed
among themselves by the evil Angels, which the Lord in his wrath has sent
among them: which also do continue still with greater calamities then ever
before, and is like to continue until that those wicked Nations, polluted with
idolatry, blood of the saints, and whoredom, be utterly rooted out, that God
may be avenged of his enemies: giving in the mean time a little rest unto the
reformed churches beyond Loyre, and to make them thankful for his great
mercyes, who has rewarded his enemies with evil, which they had imagined
against his people without a cause. So the Lord does turn all things to good
unto his Saints.

Now the Leaguers are masters of all (for the king had delivered his royal
authority unto them, and divided his kingdom among them, reserving unto
himself the name of a King) have all the Country at their devotion, and do
replenish all France with arms, violence and boastings. Now they will play S.
George, they will kill the Devil, either on horseback or a foot, they will work
miracles, or else the Devil shall fail them.

And for to begin these miracles, the Duke Mercure, brother in law to Britayne,
Hugonets in Poytow, and that easily he might tame all the Country, and that
b^ing in the field, not one Hugonet durst lift up his head: therefore supposing
there to have to fight with dead men, and making himself sure of the conquest,
to make proof of his valor, the 23 of August passed Loyre, at Nantes out of
Britayn in Poytow, with two thousand men, entending to roue and ransake all,
and having Florent, and Plainpied, by Saumure, and like an horrible tempest did
march forward, sparing neither holy nor profane things, making havoc of all
things until he came as far as Fontenay.

The Prince of Conde, turned from Saint Paul Decadewalx to Saint Ihan D'
Angelye, having assembled some friends, as well out of Xainctonge, Poytow, as
other parts, within few days saw himself to have a lusty company as well of
gentlemen as Harquebusiers on horseback, and with that force expecting the
rest, took his journey with as much diligence as he could to meet with the
said Mercure.

The Prince arrived at Chandeuier, a town not far from Niort, understood
Mercure was about Fontenay, where he determined to give him battle. Mercure
hearing that the Prince approached, with his companies, so ready and willing to
fight, was amazed, considering that it fell out contrary to the counsel given
him before: and that now be must fight with men alive. This increased his fear
so much the more, for that he had not so soon heard of the Princes coming,
but that presently he was certifyed that the said Prince was in battle array.
Whereupon he resolved to retire home: but being hardly pressed by the said
prince he was feign to retire to Fontenay. And because the governor of the
town knowing not well how things had passed between the King and the
Leaguers, would not suffer him nor his to enter the town (yet otherwise
showing him such favors as he might:) therefore he with his troops betook
themselves to the Suburb of Fontenay called the Loges.

The Prince desirous to see his enemy face to face, advanced toward the Loges
for certain days, the said Duke fearing, either at length to be forced, or
else that the Prince would cut his way in his return to Nantes, by night
secretly did steal away, and with the main galop, amaze and many alarms which
he gave to himself (fear making him to imagine things which were not)
recovered to Nantes without any bayte, the fourth day of September, leaving
behind him his companies with great disorder, and discontented minds, some of
his

About the 5. day of September, the Prince returning from Fonteney, Mele, where
the Country of Rochefocault, which not long before had repaired to him, left
him again taking his journey to his own house. And for as much, as the plague
was very sore at S. John D'Angelye, the Prince took his way to Iarnak upon
Charante, where the Lord Lauaughion, and other Gentlemen, left him to retire
to their houses.

Whilst these Princes soiorned at Iarank, the Lord Laual a young Noble man, in a
little body, having a mind endued with notable godliness and virtue, with a
ripe wit and courageous heart, which did make him no less beloved and
honorable unto all honest virtuous, and peaceable men, then feared of all
wicked and perturbers of the state of France. This Lord accompanied with his
three brethren, the Lords Rieulx, Taulay, and Saulye, Vitre in Batangue, with a
150. Rutters, and 300. Harquebusiers on horseback, and with that company
passed over Loyre, partly a forde, and partly with boats, at Manues, three
Leagues about Nantes, by the help of the Lord Chargroys, who was afterward his
Lieutenant. From thence he took his journey through Poytow, to S. John
D'Angelye: where he entered not, because of the pestilence which was there, but
passing through Tailborge, went to the Prince at Marennes, when the said Prince
besieged Browage, about the 12. of September.

About the 9. of September, from Iarnak, the Lord Saint Gelays, with the Lord
D'Aubigny, and some other Gentlemen took their journey toward Mele, for some
great affairs. There they had knowledge, that certain companies of the League
were coming to compass them about: which thing being found true, the Lord S.
Gelays Marshal of the Princes camp, sends all night to the Lord Charboniere,
who was two leagues of with his company: he sends also to certain
Gentlemen there abouts, who were of the religion: which with great diligence
came toward him all night, and at the break of the day, joined with the said
Lord Saint Gelays.

The Leagued companies were conducted by Captain Saint Katarine, and others
who perceauing themselves on a sudden, and beside their expectation compassed
about, without any further a do required parley with the Lord Saint Gelays:
who after few words yielded, and promised to forsake the League, and to cause
their fellows to do the like: and also that they would never carry arms
against them of the reformed religion: Pons: they which would not, were sent
away without weapons. And this is the second miracle which the Leaguers did in
Poytow.

About the same time, the Lord Saint Mesmes, Ranques and Orges, went toward
Tonnecharante, at whose approaching the Lord Saint Luke, who was then at
Soubize, with nigh two hundred Soldiers, with great terror departed: and
burning the bridge and gate of Soubize retired to Browage, leaving most of all
his garrisons at the bourg of Moses. These Lords might have pursued and taken
the Lord Saint Luke, but delaying the time, from Friday to Sunday, they lost
the occasion.

The 13. day, these Lords took the tower of Foncras, upon Charante, which did
hold for the League. About the same time, the Prince of Conde, Rohan and
others with him from Pons, withal their companies took their way toward the
Isles of Xainctonge, for to recover Sonbiez and the castle Augle, which the
Lord S. Luke had fortified with Garrisons of the League, and also to sease upon
the salt of the Isles, whereof great sums of money might be made.

And for to bring to pass these things more easily, to have munition and
means of artilerie and other necessary things: in the mean whiles the Prince
with a certain number of horsemen, took his journey to Rochell:
notwithstanding the plague was very great there, where he obtained of the
City, both munition, ships, and power of men to conduct all to Browage,
Oleren, and other places there abouts. About the same time these Lords Douault,
Boysdaliz, Sanuere Campos, with many other Gentlemen, having given the rendes
vous in Berry (as is aforesaid) repaired to the Prince, then being at Pons in
Xainctonge.

About the 15. of September the Lords Saint Mesmes, Ranques, and Orges, after
the taking of the Tower of Foncras upon Charante, pursued Soubieze, and had
stayed at the bourg of Moses (as is said) between Soubieze and Browage, and
followed them to a place called Graund Garrison, right against Browage on the
north side of the river: where after they had skirmished a while in the sight
of the town, and of the Lord Saint Luk, who was on the other side of the
water, on the key of Browage, and being reduced there at the low water, and
hardly set on by them of the religion: through despair of rescue, cast
themselves into the oose, where the most part were slain: others that could
not get out were drowned when the tide came.

The Lord Saint Luk was in great agony, to see the best of all his Garrisons so
cast away, without any remedy to save one of them: certain shot

Among other prisoners were the Captains Luchet Meanbourg and Savage, with
some other whom the Lord Orges sent home without any ransom, to the great
discontentation of the Prince, because they were they who did most service, in
the defending of Browage, against the said Prince.

About the same time the Lord Clermont enterprised to pass over Loyre, with
few with him, among whom was one Captain Rochemorte, for to assemble them who
could not dwell in their houses, by reason of the publication of the edict of
union.

About the 16. of September, the prince having done his business in Rochel,
Gennes, and so marched toward the siege of Browage, and from thence to Saint
Just. Here is to be noted, that in that part of Xainctonge, lying between the
river of Browage and Garemme, commonly called Almert: there be four towns, to
wit Saint Just, distant a mile and a half from Marennes, Hyers between
Marennes and Browage, whereof this last lies upon the mouth of the river,
having a haven very safe for ships, to come to the salins to be laden with
salt. This town of Browage began to be builded about the year 1550. but
increased and fructified to a great and strong town, during the civil wars,
to molest Rochel, and has changed the first name into Iacopolis. The Papists
have held in it, always since the beginning of the civil wars a strong
Garrison. This town the Lord Saint Luke kept for the League: it is distant
from Marennes somewhat less then two miles, from Hyers less then a mile, it
is strong in situation, because it lies in the salins, and by reason of that,
there is but one way to come to it.

Between Marennes and Hyers, there is a little creek to pass over, which
cannot be passed on foot but at low water, which is called le pass d'hiers.
The Lord of Saint Luk had fortified the same with a barricado, intending there
to shut up the passage to Hyers, and consequently to Browage: there he placed
three hundred shot, and a few horses, he himself staying at Hyers, about half
a mile distant from Browage, to let the approaching of the Prince.

The 19. of September, the Prince being at Saint Just, a mile and a half from
Marennes, set all things in order, for the siege of the said Browage, and about
three a clock being low water, he marched toward Marennes, commanded his
gardes and other Gentlemen, who marched a foot, to set upon the barricado,
which was made at the pass d'hiers, where they found some resistance, there
was wounded Bargnobet, Captain of his guard, another Gentleman slain.

In the mean time the Lord Boulay, commanded to charge of another side, from
Saint Just took his way through the Salins, a way not used to travail through
at all, and with his band of armed men: with a Hiers: Saint Luk had him upon
his top sooner then he had discovered him, and considering that he was feeble,
and that if he should lose that force which was with him, he should lose the
strength and defense of Browage, retired in have. They which were at the pass
d'hiers, seeing their Captain to flee, followed him, accompanied with terror
and dread. They were pursued nigh to the gates of Browage, though they were
defensed with shot of Ordinance from the towns, against them that pursued. So
that within an hour and a half, both the pass and town D'hiere came into
the Princes power: the Prince lodged at Marinnes, distant from Hyers about a
mile.

These easy and prosperous successes and beginnings, made the Prince to
consider more touching the siege of that town of Browage, considering also
that there was not within great power of men, neither had they great stoare of
victuals, candell, fresh water, neither medicines for them that were hurt.

The 20. of September, there was continual skirmishes before the Orges had
sent home before, a man much esteemed by the Lord Saint Luk, because of his
valor.

The same day was taken the Tower of Mornake, where the Lord of S. Luke had put
garrison, which was besieged by certain Companyes whom the Prince had sent
thither. The garrison withstood for certain days: but being without hope of
help and in danger to be forced, yielded themselves by composition. There was
taken the Captain John Peter, who was in great favor with the Lord S. Luke.

About that time arrived to the Prince at Marans, the Lord Lauall with his
three brethren and all his forces.

The 22. of September, the Lord Trimouille (who long before had entered Marennes
with a great number of Gentlemen. The Prince received these Noble men with
great courtesy and rejoicing. There was a great contentation thereof in all
them of the reformed religion, for the good hope which they had conceived of
that young Lord that he would embrace the religion, as he did shortly after,
having obtained great reputation among all men for his valor and modesty.

The same day arrived to the Prince certain ships of war from Rochel, so
that by these means the sea and the river of Browage were shut up: which thing
doubled the fear of the besieged. The Prince seeing his enterprise to succeed
better than he had hoped, began to enterprise further, and determined to press
the besieged nearer, knowing that there was not

The Lords S. Gelayse and Boysduly were lodged in the house called
Blanchardier, out of the Town of Hyers, there appointed by the Prince to
provide for necessaries and inunition. They did what they could, but not what
they would: whereupon the Soldiers seeing that they were like to stay there
some time at that siege, began to mutiny, and to ask money to buy victuals,
which were brought there to sell out of the Country, and for lack of money
began to steal away, until that a certain sum of money was gotten out of
the Islands, and some Gentlemen also did lend some: by which means the Prince
mustered, and the Soldiers taking pay took also courage, skirmishing daily in
the Marsh out of the Town.

It is said before how the Lord S. Mesmes, Ranques, and Orges, took S. Ihan
d'Angely and Soubize, and discomfited the Popish garrison in their flight right
against Browage. From thence the said Lords with their companies passed in
certain ships of Rochel into the Island of Oleron.

About the 24. of September, the Lord Ranques (who was best to command there)
took upon the Coasts of the said Island the master of the field of the Lord
Matignon governor of Bourdeaux, named Beaumont, accompanied with a certain
Captain of Browage named Thiebert: there was in that ship as well Gentlemen
as other Soldiers, to the number of 22. they came from the Lord Matignon then
resident at Bourdeaux, about the succor for Browage. They were in a ship of
war, and were set on by three little ships of the said Lord Ranques, who
enforced them to flee, and at length they cast themselves into the Sea to
recover the Island of Oleron, and so seized upon a house to defend themselves.
But being pursued and compassed about by the said Lord Ranques, at length they
yielded themselves. This Captain Thiebert it was accounted a busy fellow and
factious, who also had traffic with the Spanyard for the League, they were
most part brought to Rochel to be safely kept.

The 25. the Prince began to fortify a house a little above the Waren Hyers to
Browage.

We have said how about the 15. of September the Lord Clermont departed from
the Prince at Pons, and passed the river Loyre at a place called Rosiers,
thence passing through a place la clousiere des montils, to the intent to pass
unknown, did feign himself to be Secretary to the King of Navarre: from
thence he takes his way to Bange, where Rochemort departed from him. The said
Rochemort takes his way to Beaufort, which is Angers and the river Loyre,
where he was borne, and soiorned there to see his brother and other friends,
and also to gather as many men as he could in that country.

Beaufort is a little Town between Loyre and Angers, which is commanded by a
Castle of a reasonable strength, which did hold for the king, and was in the
keeping of Captain Broke.

Rochemort arrived thither, and visiting his friends, who were the chiefest of
the Town, and among them also Captain Broke, by their speeches he understood
the state of Angers, and the particularities there about the Castle. There was
a Captain named Halot, who had the keeping of the said Castle of Angers,
whilst the Lord Bussy of Amboyse lived, which had the government of the
Country, City and Castle, during the life of Monsieur the Kings brother. But
after the death of the said Bussy, the Lord Brissack had the government, and
had put out of the Castle the said Halot, whereof by all means he sought to
be revenged, and to surprise the Castle. And to bring this thing to pass, he
acquainted himself with Captain Fresne, who had commanded over a company of
Brissack at the beginning of the League. This Brissack was one of the chiefest
of the League, and discharged the said Fresne (after the edict of union was
published) in July before: for the which thing Fresne was greatly offended with
Brissack.

These two Captains consented together to enterprise upon the Castle, and
repaired to Beaufort to Captain Broke to have of him some company of men,
where they met with Rochemort: and after certain speeches, opened unto him
their enterprise; who promised to furnish them with certain men. Rochemort
aduertized the Lord Clermont, praying him to send him men, which shortly after
sent him four stout Soldiers.

This their counsel was wonderfully disguised, as also the eue^ts fell out to
be strange and tragical: for Halot (as he said) would recover the Castle for
the King, of whom (said he) he had letters to that effect, to recover the said
Castle out of the hands of Brissack, who was of the League, as is before said:
but indeed he respected himself, thinking thereby to get the Kings, or the
King of Navarre his favor. Captain Fresne was desirous to be revenged of
Brissack at any price whatsoever. These two were sure to have men for the most
part Papists. Rochemort was in good hope that if he could get in the Castle, he
would find the means to make it fall into the hands of the King of Navarre.
Halot and Fresne do promise themselves, that if Rochemort being the weakest
and an Hugonet, should attempt to innouate any thing, they could easily
dispatch him: so that under the hope of one drift, every man had his meaning
unknown one to another. The enterprise is concluded, the day appointed. The
26. of September some do repair at the time prefixed to the Suburb of
Pressigny; Lisses. Captain Fresne used to enter into the Castle easily, as
well acquainted with the Soldiers of the guard. The day therefore prefixed,
he goes to see Captain Greek his friend, who then commanded in the Castle
with ten or twelve Soldiers. The said Captain Greek bids Fresne to
dinner: Fresne excused himself that he had company, with whom he had promised
to dine that day. Captain Greek presses him and prays him to bring his
company with him. Fresne had before hand won some of the guard, whom he had made
privy to the enterprise; he prays them of the second guard to let in them of
his company, whom he assured to be of his acquaintance: but some of the
soldiers mistrusting, went about to shut the gate: Rochemort and his company
withstoode them, and taking weapons in hand did kill some of the guard.
Captain Fresne went up into the Captains chamber, who hearing the fray would
have gone forth; but being encountered by the said Fresne was slain.

Captain Halot seeing the tumult, in stead to enter into the Castle, ran into
the Town, and upon the rumor of the surprising of the Castle, bids the
Citizens not to stir, for he had (says he) caused the Castle to be taken for
the King: but incontinently he was taken prisoner by the Citizens.

Fresne and Rochemort being masters of the Castle, the alarm was very hot in
the town: notice was given every where in great diligence. Rochemort
forgets not to send to the Lord Clermont, to certify him, what was passed,
desiring him to send greater forces, and also to send word to the Prince.

Whilst these news fly every where, diverse events happened, which deceived
both them and others. They of the town grieved to have that thorn in their
heels: sleep not, but take arms, beset the Castle, and within a while have
succor of the Nobility of the country. In the evening the inhabitants would
feign have parley with Fresne, and used the means of Halot, for to draw him
forth of the Castle, having placed in the dark of the night nigh the bridge
30. or 40. soldiers with Caliuers, either for to take him, or else to seize
upon the drawing bridge, when he should come forth.

Fresne upon this parley going forth, and being yet upon the bridge, one of ye
soldiers hasting to shoot, Fresne would have returned in, but Rochemort with
his company seeing the peril, did draw the bridge. Fresne not able to recover
the drawing, held fast at the chayns: they without, cut off his hands: so he
fell into the ditch, which was very deep, and cut in a rock: his Cloak was
left hanging on the draw bridge. There was a red Dear in the ditch, which
tore him with his horns. They of the Town by the license of them of the
Castle took him up with a coard: But the coard breaking, he fell down
again, and at length was taken

Captain Halot within few days after by the town was condemned and executed.

These two being dead, Rochemort a Hugonet remained master of the Castle,
whereof he gives notice to the Lord Clermont, who immediately dispatched a
messenger to the Prince being at the siege of Browage.

The inhabitants, who could have borne it with some contentation (because they
knew Fresne to be a Papist, and that he said, he held it for the king) after
his death asked Rochemort, for whom he kept the castle. When he had answered,
that it was for the king of Navarre, they were greatly moved, and immediately
began to make Trenches both to force the said castle and also to let succor
from coming in. Companyes do arrive from every where. The Lord Bocage is sent
by the king with commandment to defend the trenches without enterprising any
thing, but only to besiege the castle until the Lord Ioyeuse his coming,
who shortly after came thither with the Lord Chastres. In mean time Rochemort
and his companions rifled the chestes and treasures of Brissak, and other which
had conveyed their goods into that fort. There was a great Booty in plate and
Jewels. Neither could it be known what he had done with the great horn of
Unicorne which was kept there of old.

Certain days being spent about the 29. of September in an after noone
Rochemort leaning upon one of the windows of the Castle, and there
slumbering, received two pellets of a gunne shot, whereof the one cut his
throat, and the other his tongue, and so dyed shortly after without speaking:
so by his death the castle was left without a guyd. There were 9. Papists, and
5. of the reformed Religion within which could never agree, but were still in
disorder and confusion: which caused that after the coming of the Lord
Ioyeuse, they within began to demand parley, which continued for certain
days.

Whilst these things so passed at Angers, the Lord Clermont not knowing the
death of Rochemort, who was the ground of his drift, had assembled in
Normandy, and in the country of Perch, about six hundred men, and sends a
messenger to the Prince at the siege of Browage, to aduer^ize him how the
affairs do go.

The 3. of October, news were brought unto the Prince by expressed messenger,
of the taking of the Castle, and how the inhabitants had trenched and besieged
it with the forces of Brissak, and of the country of. Suy, and after by the
Lord Bocage sent by the King. This news caused the Prince to leave his
footmen before Browage, and he with his horsemen and certain number of
Harquebusiers on horseback, to pass over the river Loyre, to succor them who
were within the castle, and kept the same for Navarre, being thereto
encouraged by the appearance of the great advantage, which seemed to consist
in it, for the aduauncing of the affairs of them of the reformed religion,
considering also that Brissack who by the partition of the League, had obtained
the government of Aniow, ^s is before said, was one of the busiest Leaguers:
he waighed well the dangers which might ensue, as to draw all the Kings forces
upon himself, and the difficulties of repassing the river Loyre: he considered
also that the remnant of his army lest at Browage, might be discomfited by
the Marshall Matignon and Bellegarde governor of Xainctonge, who might join
their forces together.

But on the other side he hoped, that being strengthened by receiving the
companies of the Lord Clermont, which he had gathered (as is before said) to
the number of six hundred, he would be able to fight against whom soever.

Also that by that new supply of the Lord Clermont, and by the favor of some
Castles which favored him upon the Loyre, he might pass well enough, and so
return with greater forces to the siege of Browage.

God had determined, that no consideration nor counsel might dissuade this
Prince from this journey, to the end that he might show in the beginning of
this perilous war, how mighty his arm is in the preserving of his children,
and how able he is to weaken and dissipate the strength and arrogancy of his
enemies, who fret and fume, take counsel and conspire together against his
anointed son. That by this example all the children of God may learn, not
always (even in a good cause) to promise themselves victory, but to assure
themselves that God will defend the just cause always, and preserve them that
call on his name, whether they be few or many.

The same day arrived from Rochel before Browage six pieces of battery,
conducted by Mounser Person, who followed the ships of war, which few
days before had arrived as is before said.

About the 6. of October, there was a great stur in the camp before Browage by
reason of the Princes departing to Angers. For in his absence Rochell, whereby
the soldiers (there appointed to remain) were greatly discouraged. At length
the Lord Saint Mesmes governor of Saint Jhan. D'Angelye an aged man, famous,
and of a long continued experience, a man of great authority and well-beloved of
the country, was requested to take the government of the companies, appointed
to continue the siege: which thing after many wise declarations of the
dangerous events which he did foresee, might happen both to them that Monser
Person, was made governor of the Navy: the Lord Ranques remained governor
of Oleron: Captain Belon was appointed to gather them of the Islands, and to
command over them. The chiefest regiments which remained for t^ continue that
siege, were the companies of the Lord Orges, Saint Seuerin, and Boysrond, with
whom were many voluntary Soldiers, beside them of the Islands, and two
hundred Harquebusiers, sent by the town of Rochel.

On the 7. of October, some captains showed themselves unwilling to remain,
considering the events and inconveniences, which might befall in Turene, who
was in perigord with great forces, praying him to draw near, to favor that
siege. But he could not do it, having some occasions in hand, and waiting for
the coming of the King of Navarre, out of Gascoyne, as it shall appear
hereafter.

About the same time, the Senate of Paris, having considered upon the Popes
excommunication, gives answer to the King, in the which they grievously
condemn the Leaguers, do blame the King, for having broken the edict of
peace, do show it to be impossible to bring to pass their enterprises, do
reprove the Pope, for usurping upon Princes authorities, and the liberties of
the Crown of France, do condemn the excomunication worthy to be burned,
counsel the King to pursue them: who have procured the same, and to execute
justice upon them, as upon traitors.

About the same time, the King lead by his counsel, who for the most part
wear of the League, and servants to the Guyzes, by them was borne in hand,
that they of the reformed religion had to great advantage, by the edict of
Iulie: and that many, both of the religion and Catholics, had flocked together
to the King of Navarre. Therefore, he sets forth a declaration of the edict
of Iu^ie, by the which he does admonish them, that have borne arms against
the League, of whatsoever religion they be: either to lay them down, or else
to be taken for Rebels, and their goods to be sold for the maintaining of the
war. He commands them of the religion, which have not borne arms, to do
with their goods what they will, and to depart the Realm within 15. days
after the publication of the said declaration, charging his officers to make
diligent inquiry for the performing of the premises: by the said declaration
he gives liberty to women and children, according to the former edict.

It is said before, how the Prince (notwithstanding all counsel and advise to
the contrary) determined to pass the river of Loyre, all difficulties
Taillebourg, appointing the rendes vous, at a place nigh S. Ihan d'Angely. His
forces did consist of the companies of the Lord Rohan, who were above six
score brave Gentlemen, the companies of the Lords Nemours, and Laual, who had
much nobility with him. There were also the companies of the Lords Trimouille,
and Boulay, and his own company, which in number and nobility passed all
others. The Harquebusiers on horseback were they of his guard; the Regiments of
the Lord Aubigny, Ousches, Campoyse, Touch, and Flesche, and others, with many
Gentlemen of Xainctonge, and Poytow, who were sent for by the Prince, and put
themselves under Noble men, as they would themselves. The whole of his forces
came to the number of eight hundred horsemen, and between one thousand or
twelve hundred Harquebusiers on horseback. There was a great deal more
carriage, than was expedient for a voyage to be done with celeritie and
diligence.

The 9. day the Prince being at Taillebourg, the Artillery which was sent from
Rochel to the stege of Browage, arrived in the river Charante, Rochel by
Captain Bordeaulx. For the Prince at his departing from Marans, had taken
order to retire the Artillery, to avoid what might ensue, not intending to
occupy it at Browage, but only to keep the Town blocked until his return,
which he hoped to be shortly.

The same same day the Prince from Taillebourg went to lodge to Villeneufue la
contesse, where he understood that the Lady Trimouille was at S. Stephen,
about a league from thence, where he went to salute her: and after many
speeches about his marriage with her daughter, the said Lady used many
persuasions, to make her son (the Lord Trimouille) to break his resolution,
in the which she saw him to embarke himself on the side of the king of
Navarre, threatening him of her accurse, if he proceeded further. But the said
young Lord showed her, with much submission and obeisance, that if she would
weigh the reasons, which moved him so to do, grounded upon justice and
honor; and on the contrary side, the unjust cause of the League, he was
assured that she would turn her cursing into blessing: so that he remained
resolute both to follow that part, and also not to forsake the Prince in that
voyage.

The tenth day of October all the companies took their way toward Niort,
Baesuiere, Argenton, Viers and Tence. There the Lord S. Gelayes Marshall of the
Princes camp, with the company of the Lord Boulay, with a certain number of
Harquebusiers on horseback, departed to go before to get the bancke of Loyre:
and following the side of the river upward, to search some occasion to pass
the river, either by surprising of boats or milles, met with a certain
company of Gentlemen of the Angers, whom they took, and all their carriage.

The 11. day the Lord Aubigny and Bouet took the strong Abbey of Maure upon
the river of Loyre, where was a garrison of the League. There they did no
violence to the Monks, but licensed them to depart whether they would. They
took the Prior and sent him to the Prince at S. Gemes, who courteously
entertained him in his own house, and safely sent him to Angers.

The 14. day Captain Flesche being of that country, had advanced, and began
to pass at the town of Rosiers: for there were no companies of the enemies on
all that coast. For as much as it was thought incredible, that without any
other intelligences the Hugonets durst pass so great a river, in a manner in
the sight of two great towns, to wit, San^^re above where they had retired all
the boats thereabouts, and Angers beneath, where they had forces both of
footmen and horsemen greater than any the Prince had: so that many seeing such
silence, suspected yt there was some lying in wait. And as for the Lord
Clermont, whom we have said to have left the Prince at Pons to pass over
Loyre, to gather the forces of them of the reformed religion, scattered in
those popish countries, there was no more news of him, than if he had not been
in the world: and indeed then he was above thirty leagues from them. But
Captain Flesche had seized upon three boats laden with wine: which after he
had caused to be landed upon the water side, he prepared them to carry the
army over.

The 15. of October he passed first, and lodged at Rosiers, and after him
Aubiguy with his Regiment: that day the Prince arrived at S. Gemes with his
troops, which lodged in the villages about. The same day also arrived the
Lords Saint Gelayse, and Boulay, to the Prince: they had been scouring the wast
of the river. For the right understanding of this voyage, the situation and
places of the country is to be noted. In all this discourse, we will make
mention of three rivers, the Loyre, Lolion, and Loir. On the South side of
Loyre there be two towns, Samur and Pont de sell: between these two towns
there be four other little towns, the Abbey of Planpierd, S. Gemes, the Abbey
of S. Maure, and S. Mathurine. On the North side of the river, Loyre right
against S. Gemes is the town Rosiers, and between these two towns in the
river is an Island: in this place passed over the Prince and his army. The next
river on the North side of Loyre is Lolion, a little river, but very deep, and
running slowly; it washes part of Vandomoys and Anjou, and falls into the
river of Loyre at Pont de sell. On the North side of the river Lolion in the
middle way between the said river and Angers, is situated the town of
Beaufort.

The third river is Loire, falling from the country of Beause through
Vandomoys and Anjou, receiving 2. other rivers coming from the country called
Perch, which are Sarthre, and Huyne, and a little above Angers do fall into
the river Loyre, and somewhat beneath Angers: these three rivers in one are
received into the river Main, and so altogether in one about 2. miles beneath
Angers, and 3. miles beneath Pont de Sell, do run into Loyre.

Upon this river of Loyre are situated these towns following, Flesche, Lude,
Lauerdine, Chastean de Loyre, Vendosme and Chasteaudine. Between Chasteaudine,
and Reisgencye, which lies upon Loyre, between Orleance, and Bloys, is the
Town Forest of Morchesuoyr: in that Forest was the army of the Prince
scattered (and as it were) became invisible, as shall be showed in the
discourse following.

The 16. of October, the whole army began to pass over with great
discommodity. For from Saint Gemes they had but three mean boats, Rosiers,
they had but two boats, and few Ferry-men, who were Papists, they did the
woorst they could, and ready at every hand to steal away. These discommodities
caused great confusion at the passage, which was increased with a great number
of cariages which followed the Camp.

At this passage, every man did presage the evil success which afterward
ensued. For although there was no want of courage, yet one might perceive a
certain sadness unaccustomed, which caused many to say, let us go and dye: for
every man was resolved to vanquish or to dye. But the Lord disposed otherwise:
for a more meru^lous deliverance has not been seen in our days. For neither
did they vanquish, neither dyed, but every one drank a reasonable draught of
the cup of bitterness.

At this passage did arise great diversity of opinions among the heads: for
none of the Captains thought good, that the Prince should pass over for the
care which they had of his safety, and their reasons were, that it was most
like, that the enemy would not withstand their passage, but would wink at it,
that afterward they might bring all their forces together to stop their
return, thinking it an easy thing with many to overcome few. For they had
already news that Ioyeuse hasted to Angers, with all his forces, which were
about three hundred Horses, twelve hundred of Suissers, and some regiments of
Frenchmen. They alleged also, that there was nothing sure at Angers, and that
it was to be feared, that it would be surrendered before they could aryue
thither, so that their passing over stood upon no reason, but upon an
uncertainty to venture such an army with all the state of their defeuce. There
was also news brought to them (though false) that Brissake had seized upon
Beaufort, a town between the river Lotion, and Angers, whither the Prince
thought to have gone to lodge that day. The 17 of October, notwithstanding the
reasons aforesaid, Rosiers with some noble men and Captains, where he took
about thirty gentlemen of the company of the Lord Boulaye, who was already
passed, and certain Harquebusiers with him, commanding them to lie in ambush
in a wood nigh Beaufort, and commanded the Lord Valiere, who was among the
said gentlemen, to make semblance toward the gates of Beaufort, and to draw
them who should issue out into the advantage of them which lay in ambush in the
wood. But when they came to Beaufort, there they found none but the
inhabitants who did profer their Town to the Prince, and assured that there
came no man except the County Carauas, to whom they denied entrance.

Upon this report the Prince determined to pass the rest of his army, grounded
upon many reasons: but especially upon the news which he had received of yt
Lord Clermont, whom he had heard to be about Angers, with six or seven
hundred men: who was not willing notwithstanding that the Prince should enclose
himself in that sleeue.

All this while the Lord Rohan with his company made a road toward Saumur, and
the Lord Laual down the river toward Angers, for he passed last of all.

The Prince also sends a trompet under the color of certain prisonners, to
know of Angers what he might. But they of Angers would not suffer him to go
further then the Suburbs, who reported only that they which kept the Trenches
were resolved to stand to their defense manfully.

Few days the Prince Monpensier had gone to Angers to profer his service: but
within few days he went away discontented, because they of the city had
preferred the Lord Bocage before him: which thing caused some to think, that
the said Prince Monpensier would join with the Prince of Conde, considering
that this war was against the League: and for the same cause the Lord
Auantignie was sent to him from the Prince: but all was in vain.

The 18. the rest of the companies passed all over Loyre with leisure, but with
much discommodity, by reason of the great continual rain.

The Prince left Captain Serpent with a strong garrison at the Abbey of Saint
Maure, to fortify the passage, and to favor their repassing at their return.

The 19. they departed from Rosiers, to pass the river Lotion, which lies
between Loyre, and the town Beaufort, a river narrow, but very deep, Loyre,
because the country all about is coppses and Marshes dangerous for the
horsemen.

They of Beaufort being so mened to open the gates to the Prince, did it
without any delay, and taking away their Guard, received such as were Laual for
the safety of their passage of Lotion, who came to the Prince the next day
after.

The same day about noone, the Lord Clermont came to the Prince at Beaufort
with thirty horses: his horsemen were about nine hundred, and lodged in the
villages between Beaufort and Angers.

The twenteeth day being the Lords day, they soiorned at Beaufort, and the
night following they began to march toward Angers, and appointed rendes vous at
a certain place within a league of Angers.

The Lord Ioyeuse understanding the Prince of Conde to be at hand, (fearing
least he might enterprise upon the Castle, by the help of those few men,
being only 16. in all) by reason that he thought them to be of the religion,
or otherwise to favor the Prince, and that thence he might molest the League,
and hold the whole country in subjection, he thought that it were not good to
delay the regayning of the said Castle: but to recover it at any price
whatsoever. Therefore he conditioned with them who were within, that the
Papists which were there nine in number, might there remain, if they thought
it good. They of the religion 7. in number should be safely conducted to yt
Princes camp, and that they should not be searched. Also that they might carry
away what they would.

Furthermore, that at their going away out of the Castle, they of the League
should all retire away.

Last of all, that every one should have one thousand crowns in money, and a
good Horse, with a pardon from the king, and security, that they should never
be called to any account, all these Promises were faithfully kept to them.

At their coming forth they divided amongst their friends the mouable goods
of Brissak, as Plate, Aras, and other such things as they could not carry, and
loded themselves with the best jewels, as much as they could carry away.

The 21. of October, the Princes companies began to march from the camp, where
the rendes vous was given through a narrow way, toward the place of execution,
nigh the Suburbs. There by the forrunners were three soldiers taken, not
supposing the enemy to have been so nigh: who reported that the Trenches were
very strong, and would be stoutely defended. They also took certain peasants;
who reported Rochemort to be dead, and the castle to be surrendered for a
great sum of money: but they were not believed.

The same day the Prince sent certain Harquebusiers to Pontdesel which is a
town situated upon the fall of Lolion into Loyre, where is a bridge to
passover the river, where they of Angers had put a strong garrison, to keep
the bridge.

At the discovering of the approache of the Princes power, both the town, and
also the castle gave a hot alarm, and sounded the Toxin in all the parish
Churches of the City, and also at the high church, called Saint Maurice.

This was a marvelous thing, that in so great and populous a City, wherein
were more men of war strangers, then the Prince had in all his army, yet no
sallie out was made, no more then if there had been no man; considering also
that the place where the Prince was in battle array, did favor greatly them of
the town: for there was but a broad way where the horsemen only stood, and
on both sides were vineyards and copses. In that broad way, were set in battle
array all the Harquebusiers: where the Minister of the church, L. Blanchardiere
pronounced a form of prayer before the army. And upon this preparation, were
received certain news of the rendering of the Castle the day before: which
thing made all men believe it, because that at the ariuing of the army, there
was no taken from thence (notwithstanding the alarm, and pieces of shot given
out.) Others that were against that opinion alleged, that it was no marvel
if they did not discharge the canon out of the Castle, because they were so
few, that they were not able to remove it. They added also, that the fire which
they of the town had set to an house, between the army and the Castle,
which continued all the day by the smoke, was to let them of the Castle, to
see the troops which came to succor them. Upon these conjectures, the
captains (according to the commandments received) set upon the subburbs of
Passiguie, and Magdalen, and forced the same, even to the Bari^ados, which they
of the town had made out of the gates, within the subburbes, which were
forsaken. There the Captain Flesche was wounded with a shot, who dyed within
few days after; he had protested before, that either he would dye, or else he
would enter the Trenches, passing not for death, seeing that it was in, and for
his country: both hapened unto him. He was borne at a town named Flesche,
situated upon the River Loyre, flowing from Vendosme, to Angers, a gentleman
borne of good parentage. All that day passed away in skirmishes, for the army
of the Prince had also trenched themselves, in the subburb of Pressiguy. The
horsemen were all that day in battle array, until nigh at the end of the
subburbs, while the Harquebusiers won by little and little, the Trenches of
the enemy, pearcing the houses, to advance to the gate.

That day, the Prince sends his Troumpet into a meadow, under the Castle, in
the sight of them that were within, to give them token with the sound of the
Troumpet: but seeing no token out of the Castle, they began to suspect in
deed, that the Castle was surrendered. At evening it was thought good to
retire, and that the Soldiers should give over their Trimouille, Boulay, and
Auantignie, with their companies, were appointed to make the retire, which was
no further then the houses next to the subburb of Pressigny. The horsemen
lodged that night in the nearest parishes about the Prince with his company,
and the Lord Rohan dis lodge at the Pont of Sorges, not without great
confusion, by reason that there was but few lodgings. In the night, they of the
town issued forth, overthrew and burned the Trenches and Barricadoes, which
were made the day before, and lodged within certain houses in the subburb,
even in the hospital of the leapers, so that they could not be displaced
thence the nextday.

The 22. about eight a clock, the Lords Trimouille, Auantigny and Saint
Gelayse, with their companies resorted to the cross way, nigh the place of
execution, where all companies were commanded to appear. Then they of the
town showed a countenance, as though they would have issued forth, and
certain demilances appeared within the subburb of Pressigny. There was a great
alarm, which hasted the companies from their lodgings, to put themselves in
battle array, where they did the day before. Then were the footmen commanded
to set on the subburbs, but they went not to it with that courage as they had
done the day before: for many had not refreshed themselves: some the day before
had lost their horses, when they left them to fight at the Trenches: some did
steal away and returned to Beaufort. The Captains were discontented, that
they had been enforced to give over the advantage, which they had the day
before within the subburbs: which they could not recover without great losses.
The army was scattered here and there, the high ways were covered with
bagage, carriage, charets, horses, mules, servants, which wandered al night, not
knowing whether to retire. To be short, all things went far otherwise then
the day before, yet they recovered within the subburb as much as they could,
not without hazard and difficulty.

The Prince arrived from Pont Forges, and got him within the Suburb of
Pressigni, where he perceived the countenance and courage of his men changed
and amazed: but on the contrary, them of the town to have taken heart. Then
every one alleging what might have happened to them in the Castle: some
obstinately affirmed, that they had shot in the night: other said the contrary.

The Prince assembled the Nobles and Captains at the cross way, nigh the
place of execution (save them which were assaulting yt Suburbs) on horseback,
their helmets on: they consulted whether they should set on

Others reasoned to the contrary, and among others, the Lord Rohan withstoode
strongly that advise, aleaging many evident reasons. And first, that it was too
plain, that they of the Castle had yielded to the enemy, having not given one
token to the contrary, that it was no reason to say, that they had no
knowledge of their coming, considering so many signs given them for the space
well near of two days.

Secondly, that it were a rashenes to hazard so great and brave forces, and
such a notable company of Nobility, to so imminent danger upon uncertainties,
and that they were to be reserved to a better opportunity. For the enemy was
as strong within as they were without, and that it was as easy to take the
city as the Trenches so well fortified, and that there was no hope of any to
show them any favor: much less out of the castle which was already
surrendered, or else dissembled with them, to entrap them and to cast them away
headlong.

Thirdly, they ought to consider that they were in a strange land, in the
enemies country, enclosed between two dangerous rivers which they must
repasse, in a country covered with woods, enemy to the horsemen, whereof
consisted all their forces.

Finally, that there was no doubt, but that the King on the one side, and the
League on the other were not idle, but did their endeavor to gather their
forces on every side, to seize upon the passages, and fortify the banck of
Loyre, to stop their repassing. That the forces of Angers were on their backs,
which were equal in strength to them, and all the country was favorable to
the enemy. Therefore they concluded to retire, and that delay might bring them
great hurt: and that the Lord Laual, who was at Beaufort to make the rereward,
should go back to repasse the Loyre. The greatest part followed this advise.

It grieved greatly the Prince to retire, and (as he said to the Lord
Clermont) to vnbit. But overcome with reason, he concluded that the Lord
Trimouille, Auantigny, and Boulay, should retire the Harquebusiers from the
suburbs, so that about two of the clock in the afternoon they marched toward
Beaufort.

In retyring, they first met with ye Lord Laual with two hundred gentlemen
galloping toward Angers, who being aduertized of the retire, went nevertheless
forward to the Prince. In the retyring there was confusion Beaufort, for it was
two hours within night before they arrived there, and many had but a short
supper. The same day the company of Captain Fresche (whom we have said to
have been killed at the assault given in the suburb of Pressigny the day
before) guided by his Lieftenant, was sent to get boats for the repassing of
Lotion.

The 22. day the Prince with all the troops soiourned at Beaufort, to take
advise how to repasse Loyre. There the Lord Plessis get was appointed to
search out boats and men to conduct them, to avoid the disorder which they
had the first passing, and to that intent money was delivered him.

The same day the Lord Campoyse was sent with his company of light horsemen, to
seize upon certain houses upon the banck of Loyre, right against the Abbey of
S. Maure.

The same day, whilst the Prince with the Nobles soiourned at Beaufort, came
to the Lord Clermont the four men which he had sent to Rochemort, who were
entered into the Castle of Angers, and there remained until the day of the
rendering thereof, conducted by the Lord Suze: There they showed to the army
what was passed in the Castle of Angers: one of them showed a Cross (which he
had for his part) made of pure gold, having two and thirty great Diamonds, and
a great Saphir which made the head of the Crucifixe: the ladder and all other
things accustomed to be painted in the passion (as they call it) was all of
Diamonds, no less artificially, than costly wrought: he was proffered for the
same fifteen hundred Crowns.

The 24. of October, whilst the Prince with many Noble men soiourned at
Beaufort, to pacify a quarrel risen among certain Gentlemen, the Lord Laual
in the afternoon passed over Loyre, his me^ of arms and light horses, to
defend S. Maure, and to favor the passage of the rest.

This day soiourning at Beaufort, was the cause of the disorder which followed
after, and many marueiling at so long abode there, foresaw what would ensue,
knowing that Ioyeuse had set certain boats in a readiness with small pieces at
Saumur, to let them down the river to stop the passage. If they had passed
that day and night, all things had gone well and safe: but God had otherwise
determined. The same day the Lords Ioyeuse, and Chastre, went up the river
Loyre on the South side of the said river from Angers to Saumur with 150.
horses.

The Lord Laual being passed over, and understanding that the said Lords had
passed on that coast toward Saumur, early in the morning made a road toward
Saumur, and took the Mules and rich carriage of Ioyeuse. The Lords Trimouille
and Boyseuly passed the Lotion, and encamped themselves in a Common upon the
bancke of Loyre, whilst the Prince and the rest passed Lotion. There was at
that passage of Lotion above five hundred

The same day about nine of the clock in the morning, was heard on a sudden a
peale of Ordinance, with some small shot, which put the Army in great rumor.
Some said that it was at Angers, in token of joy for the rendering of the
Castle. But within a while after were seen two great boats furnished with
Ordinance and men of war, who cast anchor a little beneath the Abbey of S.
Maure, in the place where the passage over was appointed to be, and immediately
began to shoot on both sides of the river, both against them who had passed,
and against them that were about to pass.

The news of the said boats were brought to the Prince incontinently, with
amplification of the impossibility to repasse: and it was indeed so, for
lack of two field pieces to have shot from the bank against the boats, which
by these means could have been easily sunk: but they had carried none,
although they had once determined so to do.

These news so amazed the whole Army, as though a stroke of a Thunderboult
had smitten them from heaven, and that so much the more, because the enemies
forces did flock together from every side.

The army then was scattered in sundry places, without hope to be able to
succor one another: for the Lord Laual had passed over the River the day
before, and the Lord Borlay had ventured to pass that day at S. Mathurin, not
without great danger, yet without loss. The one part of the army was between
the Loyre, and the Lotion, an unfit place for horsemen, by reason of woods and
marshes. The troops of the Lord Clermont, with the rest of the army and
carriage, were yet at Beaufort, beetweene Angers and Lotion: so that if the
enemy in such disadvantage had charged them, it would have gone hard with them:
but the enemy had no good spials.

The Lord Auantigny in that disorder having passed Lotion, retired to the Lord
Campoyse, who had seized on some houses right against ye Abbey Saint Maure, and
had made a baricado upon the bank. In the mean time they sent the Lord Chesue
to the Prince, who caused the Prince to pass his army back over Lotion, to
make a ready resolution to pass in fighting, or else to take his way at
adventure over the country of Beause. For if he should make any delay, without
doubt he should be discomfited, having the enemy within a little league both
above and beneath, who reenforced themselves every hour, and that there were
other armed Boats discovered, which followed the former. Therefore to take
readily advise, and to inform them thereof, and that if need be the Lord
Laual might repasse to them although not without danger.

The Prince understanding these news, assembled all the heads and Lorion, nigh
the place of the passage: where they reasoned more then two hours, what was
expedient to be done in this extremity. Some gave counsel to take their way
toward Beause, and to get to the Loyre above Orleans, for that they had forces
sufficient enough to pass all hazardes, and to fight if need were.

Others were against that, and alleged, that the army was weak by passing
over of the forces of the Lords Laual, and Burlay, and therefore did advise to
descend into Britayne, where ships might be had out of Rochel, and so it were
easy to pass beneath Nantes: and by these means to save their men with the
loss of their horses.

In this diversity of opinions they could conclude nothing: but seeing the
night approached, they returned to Beaufort, their to take resolution of their
affairs.

There was a Noble man, one Lord D'ouault, an old warrier, who not long before
the passage over Loyre, put him self willingly in the company of the Lord
Laual. This Noble man understanding that the Prince could not repasse, and that
he was determined to take his way over the country of Beause, which could not
be done without great hazard, did Ieaue the Lord Laual his company (who was
about to retire from the bank of Loyre to Poytow) and did venture to repasse
Loyre, notwithstanding the great danger, protesting that he would die with the
Prince if occasion should require it: and so with great danger repassing the
river, ouertooke the Prince at Beaufort.

The resolution to repasse the Lorion, caused the Prince and the Lords who
were with him to resolve themselves against whom so ever. Notwithstanding every
one did look upon his fellow, as commonly is done in such inevitable dangers,
where is seen no remedy. Some said, saltem olim si meminisse iuuaret: others
said, vnasalus victis nullam sperare salutem. Few thought, that these blows
came from Heaven for the punishment of their vices: and specially for swearing
and blaspheming, which were not punished in that army, where were many of the
League, who induced others to their wickedness and licentious life.

All that day there was a great disorder for them that had passed to repasse
again over Lorion, having but one boat which could not receive above ten
horses at once, and that caused the disorder, for that every one would be
first and no man last.

This was to be noted in the Prince, that he changed not his countenance, but
as he did at the passage of Loyre: so now he answered to them yt represented
him the danger, saying, we will fight. And because the confusion increased at
the passage of Lorion, sending sufficient number of horsemen to every place,
where the enemy might come upon them, he lyghted of his horse, and caused
men, horses, and carriage to pass: and when

The night following the 25. day of October, it was concluded by the Prince and
Nobles with him, to take over ye country, which lies between the Lorion, and
Loiz, which is a River coming from Vendosme to Angers, to the end to recover
Beause, and so to pass Loyre at Bogeancye, Bloys, or Sancerre: or if the worst
came, with long iourneyes to attain to the head of Loyre, with resolution to
fight against whomsoever.

All that night there was hot skirmishing between them that came down from
Samur in the boats, and the garrison, which the Prince had left at the Abbay of
Saint Maure, under Captain Serpant, where was also the Lord Laual and Boulay,
who as is before said, had repassed the Loyre.

The Lord Auantigny, who remained all that night in the house called
Menetriere, not far from the bank of Loyre to make the retire, passed the
Lorion, with all the residue very early, and arrived at Beaufort with the
Prince about eight a clock in the morning, the 26. and the same day was the
passage of Saint Mathurine beneath Saint Maure, stopped with boats, furnished
with ordinance and garrison.

The 26. the Lords Laual and Boulay, with the garrison which was at Saint Maur,
understanding that the Prince was returned beyond Lorion, with determination to
cross over the country of Beause, and that the passage of Saint Mathurine was
stopped, thought necessary to retire into Xainctonge, with all diligence, and
with such forces as they had, to oppose themselves against the attemptes of ye
enemies which might rise there, to assemble the nobility and other soldiers
which were left there, and also to afsist the troops which were left at the
siege of Browage, and to make the places sure in Poytow and Xainctonge: and in
very deed, God did work all the said euentes, by their presence there.

The King advertised what was passed at Angers, puts forth his forces out
of all parts, to set upon the Prince.

It is said before, how the King intended to make civil war in Guyenne, and
first of all to begin in Poitow and Xainctonge, as being next neighbors to
him of all the Provinces which do profess the Gaspell: for the which cause he
had ordained aforehand provisions of corue, and wine to be set up in certain
towns and cities: and among others the Duke de Main was appointed, to that
war, not as one who was thought fit for that charge, but for the causes which
do follow.

As the Guyzes, to wit, the Dukes, Guyze, Mame and Cardinal, brethren and
Aumale cousin unto them, did consent in these three points, to wit in altering
the state by transporting the crown from the true owners, and hairs into
their family, in killing, degrading, or at least disinheriting the house
Bourbon, and destroying the ancient nobility whom they knew, would resist
their atempts, and bear vnpacientlie their usurped tyranny. The Priests were
the fire brands to kindle this ambitious rage, and by their money to advance
the same.

So they all did provide to bring this treason to effect, that of all things
the kings forces should not fall into any other hands then in to their own, or
of their partakers: but specially that none of the Princes of the blood should
by any means be armed with the guiding of the Kings power. We see then how
they all did agree, to undo the King with his own forces.

But herein they did vary, for every one had particular fetches and drifts,
which did swim in their brains, whereby they went about to advance their
particular affairs, by the Kings forces: for the Duke of Guize did determine
to stay nigh the Kings person, and not to go far from Paris and Belgike,
where he had gotten great favors and many partakers, there expecting either
fit opportunity to strike the blow which he had long before hand purposed, or
else at the least, he bearing the sway about the Kings person and counsel,
might both spy and prevent the Kings driftes and policy, if he should seem to
waver never so little, and keep of the Princes of the blood and Nobility,
from entering into favor with the King, whereby they might disapoint his
driftes.

He also imagined, that whatsoever might happen, Paris and the Belgike being at
his devotion, either were able to defend him againstthe Kings attempts, or else
if the King might be cut off by any misfortune, the said city and country
would be able to lift him up into that room, whereon he did so greatly desire
to sit; even against the consent of the rest of the realm, and against his
own brother the Duke De Maine, whose emulation he not only always suspected
and desired to prevent, but also endeavored to send him far from the said
King, city and country: beside that, he knew to be a fit instrument, by
skillful entising and policy to seduce their great and populous cities of
Poytiers, Limoges, Perigueux, Bourdeaulx, and others where he should come,
regarding not at whose devotion those cities might be, so that they were not
in the power and fidelity of the King, or of the King of Navarre, that by so
much they might be weakened.

The Duke De Main being appointed for Guienne, not to subdue it, but to have
the Kings forces, in the hands and at the devotion of the League, and far
from him, if at a pinch he should have need of them, was very unwilling to
depart from Paris to his journey: aleaging always some excuse. The causes of
his unwillingness were love, ambition, and fear, the objects of these
affections were Masters Saint Beusue, and other Courtesans in the town of
Paris, where he walowed himself in filthy pleasures Paris over his head: for
he was acquainted with the intents and driftes of the League, as one of the
chiefest of them yet uncertain of the events, and what in his absence being so
far from Paris, might happen unto the King: he would feign have kept Paris
still in possession, so that if either nature or violence should bereave the
King of his life, ^e might have that capital, mighty, rich, and factious
city in his own possession, by whose help he supposed to ataine to his long
wished desires, and become his eldest brothers master.

The third cause was fear, and the object thereof, the King of Navarre, for
knowing that the said King of Navarre was privy to their driftes, not only by
his deep and princelike prudencie, many evident tokens: and their own too
manifest attempts, but specially by their enticing him, and them of the
reformed Religion, to their conspiracy and faction, knowing him also to be a
Prince most faithful to the state, Crown and Realm of France, a Prince of
great valor, and implacable to traitors: thus having a conscience (which is
more then a thousand witnesses guilty) fear made him continually to enter
into such apprehensions, that he thought certainly to go into Guienne, was to
go to a most assured death.

Thus these two brethren aspiring both to the crown, yet did vary in
thoughts, as the ancient saying is, (...). For the Duke De Main would feign
to keep the possession of Paris, and therefore makes many excuses, having not
sometime money enough, another time having to weak forces, sometime aleaging
health, sometime the unseasonable weather. The Duke of Guize was greatly
desirous to have him out of Paris, supposing that there his shadow did infect
the city: and therefore to take away all excuse, least he should aleage his
forces, not to be sufficient to march with the King of Navarre, he caused the
King to add unto him the regiments of Swissers. So the Duke De Main having
eight thousand Swissers, twelve regiment of French footmen, twelve hundred
horsemen French: Forces sufficient for a good Captain to subdue the whole
country, received eight and twenty thousand Crowns, which the treasorer of
the Clergy delivered him: and shortly after eight and twenty thousand more,
and not long after his departing sent him four and fifty thousand more. Yet
the King could by no means persuade him to take his journey (for the Kings
commandments he regarded not) until the news came to the King, that the
Prince of Conde had passed Loyre out of Poytow into Anjou, so that at length
with great importunacie, being persuaded by his brother, that in the absence of
the Prince (being as if it were enclosed in) he might easily subdue all that
country, and that it was need with his army all by one voyage to go to the
other side of Loyre, to let the Paris, assured of stripes, if he should come
within the reach of the said King of Navarre. And where, as at his departing, he
had opened his timerousnes to euiuently, he thought good to cover it with the
cloak of vanity for want of a better, in breathing blood, slaughter, and
fire, in words and bragges: which at length were turned into a blast of cold
wind, yet fully resolved not to come within the reach of the King of Navarre,
for fear of the Bastonado, or Strapado, or some such like thing: being in good
hope in the mean time, that in walking and taking his pleasures in Guyenne at
the Priests costs, he might make his part strong with seducing the forenamed
Cities and other, from the Kings obedience, to his devotion: but he was as far
deceived in that, as in escaping the Bastonado.

But now to return to our purpose, the Duke Ioyeuse was at the back of the
Prince of Conde, the Duke De Main passing through Orleans, over the river of
Loyre was at his right hand, and as far as Bloyse, stopped all the passages,
least the said Prince might pass over. The King had sent Biron with forces
into Beause, which marched right against his face, least he should escape that
way, on the left hand the way to the sea through Britain and Normandy, was
long difficulte and dangerous, by reason of many towns and Garrisons therein
placed.

The Prince being thus compassed about with all these forces of enemies was in
less danger, because that they knew not what, and how things passed in his
army, and supposing the same to be far closer and stronger then it was in
deed, did greatly fear to aboard it: whereby he and all his Captains had
opportunity to beguile them, and to steal away from them.

Now, to know well the rest of this voyage, until the dissolution of the
army, it is necessary to know the situation of the country. There is on the
north side of Lorion, a river called Loire, washing the towns of Chasteau
dune, Vendosme, Chasteaudeloy, Lude, Flesche, and Luche, which meeting with the
river Sartre at Angers, falls into Loyre, beneath Pont de sell. The Prince at
his departing from Beaufort, followed this river almost as far as Chasteau dune.

The 26. of October, the Princes army dislodged from Beaufort, intending to
lodge at the town of Luche in Anjou, belonging to the Lord Clermong, there
purposing to pass over ye said Loyre upon the bridge, into the country which
lies between the said river Loyre and Sartre, called Vaudeloyre: but the
river was so overflowed, (as though the four Elements had set themselves
against that army) that it did cover half of the said bridge: and the Lord
Clermont (which is Lord of the place) sounding the Lude.

There happened unto them other things which increased greatly the amaze. For
news came that the Duke Ioyeuse, with greater forces than theirs, pursued with
great have after them, and that not long after the departing of the Prince, he
had seized upon Beaufort. On the other side, the country (which before
trembled for fear of them) began to rise upon them: for they of the Flesche
the selfsame day issued out, and intercepted some soldiers and carriage. That
day according to the determination they lodged at Lude.

The 27. of October they would have passed over Loyre upon the bridge of Lude,
but it was so highly overflowed, that although it was easy to pass the
bridge, yet at the further side of the said bridge there was another great
river, which they must needs pass over by a foord, for there was but a little
boat which would scarce carry three men without danger. The horsemen passed
and set themselves in battle array, until all had passed: there a great many
gave over their carriage, and they which had friends in the country gave them
their stuff. That day from Lude they sent the Lords Boysduly, and Aubiguy,
toward Boysgency, Mere, and S. Die, to find some passage, and that the
morrow after they should all meet at Orges, or the Chapel S. Martine.
Whilst they stayed in that plain in battle array, for the safe passage of all
the companies, there happened a thing which would have wrapped a superstitious
soul into sundry and fearful thoughts: for not far thence beyond them was
a Hare started by the enemies, between the Loyre and Lotion, with a great cry
after, which gave them the alarm, and all prepared themselves to receive the
enemy courageously: but at length the Hare was seen with more than two
hundred horses with few dogs. That poor Hare passed and repassed among the
horses feet with many stripes, and yet was not taken, but saved her self
though she was pursued more than half a mile. Some took this for an evil,
and some a good presage; saying, that if God had care to preserve that poor
feeble and fearful beast, much more would he have care of that little flock
amazed: which howsoever it was hollowed and pursued by all the forces of
France, notwithstanding would escape safe and sound, in receiving but fear
without great hurt: which thing also happened.

From Lude they at length arrived at Prillay two hours in the night: this is a
great town belonging to the Prince County, the Prince of Conde his younger
brother. At their coming thither, there was such a confusion and press in the
streates, that they could neither go forward nor backward for the space of an
hour, not the Prince himself, until that the doors of some houses broaken
gave some room.

The 29. day they marched through Vandeloyre, and at night came to Arnol, and
the villages about not far from Lauerdine, but the said S. Arnol was a poor
little village, where was small store of lodgings; so that the further they
went, the nearer they approached to their miseries. There also news came that
the enemies followed after them as courageously and with such have, as they
went about to go from them with great iourneys. The Lords Espernon and Byron,
and most of the Nobility of the Court, were at Bonaual in Beause to meet with
this terrified army. The Duke de Mayn on the other side with a great army,
was on the other side of the river of Loyre near Bloys, to cut them off by the
way, if by chance they should repasse. The Towns between Bloys and Orleans
were all be set with strong garrisons. The Lord Chastre had sent into Soloigne
to keep the river of Loyre, and to retire the boats and milles into the
towns. The Commons were set to watch, ready to rise upon them at the first
sound of the Toxine.

The companies of the Prince were as weary, as their enemies were lusty, and
as men may be weary with courses and watches, so horses much more with
galloping night and day without resting. The means to pass between Bloys and
Amboyse failed them: all these things being known of all, made them to have
little hope of their affairs. Yet there is no doubt that if the enemy had
appeared, the necessity had much increased their courage. But it seemed that
by a singular providence of God, the enemies stood in such fear of these
companies, that he would have them defeated through wearines, that it might
appear to be Gods own hand, and his proper work to scatter them, and that his
enemies should not have the praise, nor triumph over them. For afterward it was
confessed by the enemies which were in the army of Ioyeuse and the League,
that this handful of men, wearied, scattered, amazed, and already overcome,
was to all those troops (who would have swallowed them up) such a terror,
that if they had offered to set upon them, they might happily have found them
easy to be dealt withal. For the enemies were persuaded that the Prince
would never have enterprized such a journey, unless he had been able to beat
down all that had come before him.

All that night in the which they lodged at S. Arnol, there was great reasoning
among them of the Counsel, what was expedient to be done. The Lord Rohan
(with many Gentlemen of his company) said, that the further they should go
that way, the deeper they should sink in danger; that the best part of their
forces had passed over Loyre with the Lord Laual, and that the army did slide
away daily: they that had friends in Vandomoys, Beause, Main and Perch, did
steal away; the enemy being fresh and strong did approach on them on every
side; and that the further they went upward, the nearer they did draw to their
misfortune. Let him carry his head to Paris who would (said he) for I will
carry mine into Britain, Britain, whether he came through many difficulties
and dangers, and in time (notwithstanding the endeavor of the Duke Mercure)
with safety he passed the river of Loyre beneath Nants, and repaired to
Rochel, with great joy and contentation of all men for his safe return.

This separation was as a second thunderboult from heaven upon this army,
which is no more to be called an army, but a small company: for there was no
more but the companies of the Prince, and of the Lord Trimouille, whereof some
had forsaken him, There were also left some companies of the Harquebusiers on
horseback of the Lord Clermont, of whom many had already retired to their
houses: then they began to look every one upon his fellow, shrugging with
their shoulders, every one did believe that if there were any safety, it must
miraculously come from heaven, and many which before in matters of prayer and
conscience had given themselves to great licentiousnes, began to enter into
consideration, and to reform themselves.

The Prince remaining so with these few companyes, had a number of carryage,
wherewith he was so hampered that he could not rid himself of it. He sent the
Lord Saint Gelays, with some gentlemen of Poytow, to the number of 30. horses
to ride toward Vendosme, and some where to take loginges commodious for the
companies which followed. But in the way they heard news, that the Lord
Lauerdine with some number of men had entered into Vendosme, to cut that way
from the Prince: and that the night before some Soldiers of the company of the
Lord Clermont took prisonners some of the company of the Lord Benhare governor
of Vendosme, who brought some store of armor to their master.

The 30. of October, the rest of the companies arrived at Saint Anne, nigh
Vendosme, where they thought to have departed logings, but for the poverty of
the place they stayed not there.

In this wandering through the country of Beause, some of the company of
Captain Bonet, took the Lord Rosins, who coming from Paris with a Pasport
from the King (which he showed them, not supposing they had been of the
religion) was going to the King of Navarre. This Lord had four notable great
horses. The Dragons (for so were called the Harquebuziers on horseback) weary
of their tired horses, changed with the great horses of the fayd Lord Rosins,
and with great joy carried him away with them. But he being known by the Lord
Saint Gelays, he caused them to restore him his horses, and to take their
tired horses again.

The said Lord Rosins, was conducted to the Prince, and showed him the rage
wherewith his enemies prepared themselves to compass him about: and besides,
he told him many things sufficient to make him take some

But it was nothing to the aduertisements sent him from diverse places, as that
he was enclosed on every side, and that shortly he should have the enemy to
come upon him with forces far unequal to his: and that it was high time to
handle his affairs wisely without delaying, till tomorrow.

On the other side, he was aduertyzed that the means to repasse Loyre toward
Bloys, were cut off, by reason that the enemies nigh at hand had prevented it.
The Prince arryuing at the town of Salowme, a league beyond Saint Anne,
gathered his counsel, and all reasons wayghed on every side, he was earnestly
requested by all them that were present, to provide for the safety of his
person: the which being conducted in a safe place, the rest by Gods help would
in time find out some way of deliverance.

The reasons whereby he was persuaded to take some resolution, were these.

First, that his retire would be more honorable to him, and more shameful to
the enemy, then to hazard (as if it were through despair) upon a battle,
whereof the issue could not be but very perilous both to his person, and to
the whole estate of the reformed religion.

Secondly, that in such extremity and disfavor, there was gotten honor enough,
by a singular grace of God, to have avoided the rage of so great forces of his
enemies, who did hold him as if he were enclosed and compassed round about:
and to snatch from them the glory which they had promised to themselves already
of his death, before that ever they durst look him in the face: and that the
valor of noble courage was showed as well in avoiding an evident danger, as
in the exploits of battle.

Thirdly, that the passages were not so closed up, but that there was means to
escape to some safe place. It was hard to make him condescend to these reasons,
yet at length convicted by the way of entreaty and necessity, he concluded to
retire.

But before he would depart, that night with his constancye accustomed, he
took order for the parting of his companies, even of his own household. The
Lord Saint Gelayes with some of the companies, and part of his Gards should go
toward Loyre, to join with the Lords Aubiguy, and Brisduly, who were gone to
search passage toward Loyre: and such of his household servants as would
not, or could not follow the Lord Saint Gelays, he directed them to retire to
some friends of his in the country. Furthermore, that the Lord Clermont
should retire some where with his companies. This being done, about 11. of the
clock at night he departed with a small company, with the Lords Trimouille, and
Auantigny, and other gentlemen with few of his chiefest household servants. The
ways which he took, the courses which he ran, the dangers which Gernsey,
lying in the narrow Seas between England and France, what courtesies and
Princelike intertaynment he received of that great Elizabeth Queen of England,
and how with a great number of Nobility and ships of war he returned to Rochel:
also with great rejoicing of all men he was received by them of Rochell, is the
argument of an other book, which the time shall produce.

But here be three things worthy to be noted. First, how God does lay heavy
crosses upon his children, and do compass them with inevitable dangers (after
man's wisdom) both to make them see with the eye how weakly man is stayed,
which trusts in the arm of flesh, and worldly power.

Secondly, to make them understand, how nigh he is unto them that repose
themselves in him, and how safe that man is, who rests under the shadow of
his wings, by an assured trust and confidence in his promises.

Thirdly, to show how many ways he has to deliver his children out of those
dangers, which in man's reason cannot be avoided: as this was to that end to
make them taste how sweet his deliverances be, to warn them thereby to amend
their lives, and to walk more circumspectly in his ways, and to be more
watchful in the invocation of his name, and thanksgiving.

Of all ancient histories, this has a similitude and liknes of the returning
of the Greeks from Persia, brought into their country by that noble
Philosopher and Captain Xenophon, reported by himself in expedition, Ciri
minoris. But to return to the matter.

By this time, are the Lords Laual, Boulay, Rohan, the Prince of Conde, the
Lords Trimouille and Auantigny, by Gods special favor delivered, and brought
(as if it were) by the hand into certain places of safety.

Now there remained the Lords Saint Gelayse, Clermont, and others with them,
left in the claws of the Lion and a pray to the enemy, to try the self same
presence of God, and to be led by ye hands of his Angel out of all danger into
a haven of safety. The head being gone, the rest within a while vanished away
as dust blown in the air, and that which is marvelous, without the loss of
any one man of account, or any other that ever could be known, every one had
his life for spoil: which has made ridiculous the lying pamphlets spread.
b^oad in Paris, of the terrible and dreadful overthrow of the Prince of Conde.
But this short discourse does represent all things passed in that army.

For the discipation of that army is not to be attributed, neither to the
King, neither to the Duke Ioyeuse, much less to the Duke de Main, or to any
ather of that side. For none of them al approached nigh to the Prince of Conde,
since his departure from Lude, not by five or six leages, neither did they
ever draw Sword against him.

Whereas that night resolution was taken, that ye day following, the Lord Gelays
should take his journey toward Meare, a town upon the river of Loyre, between
Boysgencie and Bloys: in so doing, he disappoynted greatly the enemies, and
gave great advantage to the Prince to avoid their hands, for the escape of the
enemies was his person, more then all the rest: for they cared not for any
thing else, so that they might have him dead or a live; so eagerly were they
bent against him. But the companies being divided, some took their journey
toward Orleans, others toward Normandy, some toward the Main, by which means
the enemies knew not which of them the Prince was in, and so the chiefest power
of the enemy was in doubt still, which way to take to follow after him: and in
the mean while, he and his little company did slide into Bri^ayn, and from
thence over the sea into England.

The Lord S. Gelays (to save the remnant of the army) exposed himself as a
pray to the enemy that could catch him, notwithstanding without the loss of
any one man: but he escaped with his company which was with him, with
incredible labors and loss of the^^ carriage and stuff.

That night therefore, about twelve a clock, one hour after the departing of
the Prince, with the gardes of the said Prince, who were about threeshore
Harquebusiers, he took his way to Vilelnisant, where the rest of the companies
were lodged, to take their journey to the Chapel Saint Martin, and from thence
dislodging together, came to the said Chapel one hour before day. There were
about 500. horses of all sorts, but not above 200. fit to fight, and yet of
them, who might have fought, many should have been feign to fight on foot, for
their horses were ready to fall upon their noses, and the men but a little
more worth.

The 31. of October, they arrived at the Chapel Saint Martin very easily, and
because they needed to bait their horses, and refresh themselves, the
inhabitants saw their doors broken before they were called up. In that vilage
the Lord Saint Gelaise learned, that the evening before there were two men on
horseback, which said, that if there should ariue any men of war, they
should not stay there, but pass further to Orges. And as the day began to
appear, the Lord Saint Gelaise received letters from the Lord Aubigny,
wherein he willed them to take the direct way to Ralsy, where he should meet
him. And when they came thither, the said Lord Aubigny reported that there
were no boats, nor any hope to repasse Loyre: for there was 800. Swartrutters
of the League, who had lodged at Saint Die, a walled town, three Leagues above
Bloys, upon the high way to Orleans, where they thought to have found passage.
There were also all along the river at Mir de Nonain, Saint Laurence, and other
vilages about the river, three or four regiments of footmen: seeming
therefore to them an impossible thing to pass Loyre that way: the Lord Saint
Gelays consulted with the Lord Tiffardiere and others, who concluded to go
Orges, and to some vilages thereabouts, with commandment to soiourne there,
not above an hour and a half.

There was in the Castle of Orges, an old Gentleman Papist, who hearing that
the Lord Saint Gelaies was in that company, desired to see him, and to speak
with him, and knowing that his company was weary and weak, and weather
beaten, asked him whether he went, and what he meant to do with his company,
and swearing with a great oath, told him that he was undone, and that if he
had three times as many men as he had, within an hour (if he soiorned there)
he and his would be cut in pieces.

This Gentleman was very stout, because of the Kings and the Leaguers forces,
which he knew to be thereabout: he showed him that there was great
companies, as well on the side of the river, as on the side of Beause, not
distant from him above half a League nigh the Forest of Marchenoyre, with
this intent to charge that remnant of the army, which was with him: how all
the commons had the watch word, and looked to have some warning to begin. There
was no hope to escape being few (and they weary and weatherbeaten) without any
hope of succor.

The Lord Boysduly met nigh Talsy two Gentlemen papists of his acquaintance,
who showed him the selfsame dangers abouesayd: and yet more, that neither
he, neither they who were with him were far from spoil. The Lord Boysduly
perceiving, that a Gentleman called la Mot, (in whom he had much confidence)
knew very well the amaze of that company, after assurance of amity for
himself, and the Lord S. Gelays, he certified them that they were in a worser
case than they knew: and that the Prince perceiving that he had so great
forces against him, had dissolved his army, and that his person was already
in place of safety, and almost all his army: and that there remained no more
but that which he saw with the Lord Saint Gelays, who at all adventure had
undertaken to save the rest.

La Mot then offered him friendship, and his houses for to retire with such of
his friends as he would, but his house was distant from thence eight leagues:
which his courtesy the Lord Boysduly accepted.

In these terrors, all the troop (being on horseback) marched at large in a
plain field, not far from the Castle Orges of one side, and near the
Forest of Marchenoire on the other side: no man knew which way to turn
himself too, nor what to follow; for a present danger was on every side. The
Lord S. Gelays, and other Captains with him, were long before they could
conclude of their way. The enemies did approach and held that small company in
sight: of which being aduertized, they marched within the Forest of
Marchenoire: and being somewhat entered within the said Forest, in the high
way to Chasteaudune, the Lord S. Gelays showed them the inevitable danger
whereunto they were fallen: he showed

The Lord Aubigny undertook to conduct one troop one way, Captain Ryeux went
another way: some took the way to Orleans; others drawed toward Paris. A
Gen^leman Papist which was with the Lord la Mot, took with him the Lord
Tifardiere, and the other Gentlemen of Poytow, to whom he showed great
courtesies.

The Lords S. Gelays, Boysduly, Campoys, Chesmi, and others, to the number of
ten or twelve, went under the assurance of the Lord Mot, the way to
Chasteaudune in Beausse. As it was a strange thing to see the dissipation of
that army without blows, bloodshed, or loss of any man by the fight of the
enemy: so it was a pitiful sight to see the separation of the Soldiers from
their Captains; of the servants from their masters: the servants did cast away
the things which they had greedily gathered, to save themselves upon their
horses. The ways were full of good stuff, arms, baskets, males, apparel,
and other things of value: every one did cast away the things which they had
taken from others more willingly, than when they took it. God did then require
an account of many disordered persons, in whose hands Manna did rot, which they
had greedily gathered: And it is to be confessed, that God testified from
heaven, that he will have his work advanced by other means than by such
arms: for a great company of this army were not accompanied with piety and
Christian modesty. On the other side, God took away all matter of boasting
and glorying from the enemies: for it was a strange thing, that considering
the small distance of places, where these companies of the enemy were, the
great multitude of lusty, fresh, and well furnished companies which they had,
the Countries and Towns three or four score leagues round about all
favorable to them, having compassed the others round about, yet not one after
this separation appeared to fight, nor to assault these vanquished few men, as
he which durst not come nigh the skin of a dead Lion.

The Lord Saint Gelays, with them of his company, had scarce gone a League in
Beause, when he discovered three cornets of Launcers of Italians, and
Albanoyces, who were from Chasteaudune marched in good order, and came trotting
forward at the end of the Forest, where the separation was made. The Lord Mot
(who lead the Lord Saint Gelais and his company) did fear, and felt himself
in great danger (as he said) with such company of Hugonets after him: and
faining to discover, he forsook his guests, and got to a village far before
them.

The Lord S. Gelays and his company, believed certainly that those troops
came upon them, and thought themselves as good as dead. But behold, the eyes of
these armed men were so blinded by the power of him which blinded Bilham the
son of Beor, and Elimas the Sorcerer, that without perceiving him, or any of
his company, they passed by within the distance of fifty paces from them:
there was only a barn of a Farm betwixt them, and the Lord S. Gelays stood
still in the high way before the barn. It was a wonder that this company was
so carried away invisible out of sight of that multitude, as if it were in a
cloud: and that none of the enemies went through the high way, whereby they
might have been discovered. These companies of Italians and Albaneses went into
a village not far of, where they perceived some horses and Harquebusiers:
they set upon the house where the Lord Aubigny was, with others, who
nevertheless took their horses and saved themselves without any damage. These
horsemen found much spoil by the way without any man to claim it. The Lord S.
Gelays riding along in the champiane country of Beausse toward Chartres, with
the Lord Mot, without keeping any high way, the night being rainie and dark,
began to enter in suspicion of the said Mot, being a Papist. So the Lord Mot
returned back with this opinion, that the Lord S. Gelays with his company,
would go to Cheuroles toward Orleans: but he took his journey to Ianuile
lying between Chartres and Orleans: and there crossing the high way from Paris
to Orleans, passed through many companies of armed men, who were lodged in
Beausse, and so recovered upon him the Forest of Orleans*

The returning back of the Lord Mot (as is above said) was to play a popish
trick with the Lord Saint Gelays: for perceiving that he was not strong
enough, he went in the night to gather company to have set upon them at
Cheuroles, and so to have taken them prisoners to his advantage, as he did not
dissemble afterward to speak openly. So that his professing of amity, was an
allurement to draw them into his snare: for afterward he followed them as
far as Ianuile with thirty horses in a company.

The first day of November, with much pain all the day long ranging and
galloping through the Forest, at length they got the banck of Loyre, not far
from the town of Guyen, about midnight.

The Lord Mot for his pains had many horses, but specially one, for the which
was refused four hundred Crowns. And seeing himself disappoynted of his
intent, afterward he could not dissemble to say, that he hoped to have had
fifteen thousand Crowns of ransom for the Lord S. Gelays only, which was
the cause (said he) that he left the following of other Hugonets, whereby he
might have made himself rich.

The Lord Boysduly was in hope to have passed the river, by favor of some
friends which he had in that country: but he was disappoynted of his hope:
which thing put them in despair both of repassing, and of their Seuilly was a
great garrison, which Antragues (governor of Orleans) had sent thither. All
the boats either were retired to the towns, or to the other side of the
river, and the selfsame day commandment was given to all Watermen and
Fishers, upon pain of death either to sink their boats, or to let them
down to Seuilly. The Lord Chastre (governor of Berry) had commanded to do
the like at Sancerre. The Provost of Borbonnoys and Berry, with companies of
Soldiers, did gallop along the river seeking some Hugonets straggling. The
horses of this small number could go no more but a soft pace, and did fall
down for wearines: all things seemed contrary to them, so that in that
despair they determined to have followed the way of Gien, or Briare, towns
situated upon the banks of Loyre above Orleans, where doubtless they had been
all slain or taken; for all was full of men of war going down the river to
Orleans. But on a sudden a little boy coming, conducted them to a town
called Omiroer, they went into an June where they said they would bait, saying
that they went toward the Lord Antragues, and that they pursued some Hugonets
who had passed over the water. A peasant upon these words, (desirous that they
should do some good exployt that way) being there said, There was yesterday a
little boat beyond the water, which to morrow must go down to Seuilly: there
it is yet, (this was about midnight) if it could be had you might pass
quickly. They enquiring how to come by it, it was found very hard, the river
was broad, the owner of the boat was in bed, the wind was great, and to call
him were in vain. But there was yesterday (said the peasant) a quarter of a
league off a boat mill, which draws a little boat; if you could get that
you might (said he) two or three of you pass over to get the great boat.
Without further delay they forsook the bait, the peasant was their guide, the
small boat was at land, wherewith few passed to the mill, which was far in
the water. The Miller was surprised, who at the first resisted; for he should
be hanged (said he) if he aided them: at length he passed over five of them
in his small boat, with their swords and pistols in hand, thinking they should
be resisted: for it was said that some Soldiers were on the other side to
keep the boat. They took the boat and the boatman, who withstood them much;
for it might cost him his life (as he said): notwithstanding being enforced, he
went to fetch the rest of the company which stayed on the other side. This
passage so unlooked for, revived both men and horses, for neither of them were
any more weary: so that without any staying, they rode two leagues overthwart
the fields in Soleigne, where they found a Farm, wherein they soiourned the
rest of that night.

The 2. of November they advanced toward Bourges, and separated Gelais
soiourned for a while in Berry, and after passing the rivers Creuse, Vienne,
Cher and Cline, arrived at Saint Ihan D' Angely, and Rochel, about the same time
that the Prince returned out of England, where he met the said Prince, with
the Lords Rohan, Clermont, Laual, Boulay, and other Nobles and Captains,
without the loss of one man. Considering how these noble men (but especially
the small company of the Lord Saint Gelays) were pursued through Beause, ye
Forest of Orleans, along the river of Loyre, it is a wonder how they did
escape without leaving a hare behind, for the hare at Lude was never so hardly
hunted, as this small company was.

Here we have to mark well the work of God in this History of deliverance:
first, how the Lord set his Angel between his Children and his enemies, so
that the companies of Chasteaudune passed hard by them, intending to charge
them, and yet being within 50. paces, they could neither see nor hear them,
but as if they had been covered with a cloud, were passed over.

Secondly, here is to be considered, that the Lord turned those things (by
the which they had provoked God to anger) to their good. For while the greedy
enemies were a gathering the stuff which was cast away, this little weak and
^^red company had time to slide off the hand of that enemy, which is most
insolent, filthy, crafty, and profane, as is the Italian.

Thirdly, how the Lord did delude the dissimulation of the Lord la Mot, who
under color of amity, would have snared them, either to the slaughter, or
otherwise to their undoing.

Fourthly, how when they were clean gone out of hope of their lives, and that
it was time the Lord should pull them out of the deep mire with his own hand,
he sends a boy, or rather an Angel, I mean a messenger to direct them,
where the means of their deliverance should be showed unto them.

Last of all, the Lord did use the very malice of the enemy, to wit, of the
poison which he did bear to them of the religion, to be the mean and the
guide how to pass the river, and to deliver them out of so many inevitable
dangers, and intollerabe labors, to bring them to a place of safety and rest.

This is also a marvelous thing, that the other Soldiers and companies
scattered, as dust blown in the air, repassed the river Loyre, upon the
bridges of Orleans, Bloys, Amboyse, Tours, Saumur, and others, even with their
armor, making any excuse to serve their turn, as they would themselves, when
the said briges were narowly kept.

Now having set the Prince his Nobles, and all his scattered army in safety,
who will return back again, and see what course the Lords Laual Boulay took.

It is said before, how that the 24. of October, the Lord Laual was sent by
the Prince to repasse the river Loyre, which thing he did very easily without
danger or let, and how the morrow after the passage over was stopped by the
boats which came down from Saumur.

The 25. of October, the Lord Boulay also and his company passed at Saint
Maturine beneath Saint Maures Abbey, but that passage also was stopped the next
day after with boats, which descended thither.

The 26. day, Captain Serpent skirmished all the day long, as he had done all
night before, out of the Abbey Saint Maure with the enemies, who were in the
boats.

The Papists of high and low Poytow, understanding how the Prince of Conde was
compassed on every side beyond Loyre, and supposing that he was already made
sure, enterprised to do the like of the Lord Laual, and these few companies
which were with him. Whereupon Captain Serpent, seeing that the Prince did not
repasse, and that the enemy was armed upon the river, being out of hope of his
return that way, dislodged out of S. Maure Abbey, where the enemy soon after
lodged, and joined himself with the Lord Laual the 17. day. The Lord Laual
notwithstanding, yt day early in the morning, marched toward the passage, for
to understand news of the Prince, but considering the impossibility of
repassing, and foreseeing that he would take over the Country, and that if he
should stay there any time, he was like to be hemmed in by the troops of high
and low Poytow, which hasted to set upon him: he therefore with Captain
Serpent took his journey to Saint Ihan D' Angely. The same day the Lord Boulay
(seeing as much as is aforesaid) followed after the L. Laual, and ouertooke him
two Leagues from the river. These two companies joined together, made about
150. horse, and about 300. Harquebusiers on horseback, for many of their
companies had not passed, and some had retired where they thought to be in
security. They marched with reasonable iourneys, passing above Niort to Saint
Ihan D' Angely without any resistance.

The 29. of October, they came to Saint Massure about Niort, where they found
the bridge which they must needs pass over broaken: for the rain was so
great and continual, that it had made little small brooks great rivers, and
having none other way to pass, there they made a bridge with carts, and other
such things as were at hand.

The 30. of October, the Lord Laual lodged at Fors, and his companies in the
vilages thereabouts.

The 31. of October in the morning, parting thence as they took their horses
to go on their journey, there apeared unto them some Launcieres of Mercer
Albanese, who issued out of Niort. The Lord Laual marched always in battle
array, the way to Saint Jhan, only he sent some to view him, which thing
Captain Mercure perceauing, retired without bickering.

The second day of November the Lord Laual aryued at Saint Ihan where yt
company of the Lord Boulay retired every one where he thought

A thing happened worthy of remembrance, the pestilence being very hot in Saint
Ihan D'Angelye, when the Lord Laual arrived there, yet afterward there dyed not
so much as one of his companyes, nor of the inhabitants of the town.

As all things are governed by the providence of God, disposing of the
counselles and actions of men after his own will: so he turned all things to
the benefit of his children, and the preservation of his Church. For the
Prince, as is above said, having sent the said Lord Laual to pass to Loyre
before, to favor the passage of the rest of the army, delaying his own
return, and in the mean time the river being beset by the enemy, so it fell
out, that the said Lords Laual, and Bowlay, could not repasse to the Prince
again. This great good therefore the Lord did draw out of this disjunction of
the army.

First, here appears evidently the gracious love and favor, which God
bears to his children. For the power of man which was so great, the rancor
and hatred so hot, the stomach so eger, the enemy spread so thick every where
round about, lying in wayt for them, and making their full account to have them
as in a net, yet could they not take away one hair of their heads, whom God
had taken under his protection.

Secondly, the same Lord was disioyned from the Prince by a certain counsel
of God, to confirm the towns and strong places in Poytow, and Xainctonge, and
to let them from reuolting to the enemy, to resemble the companies scattered
and beaten, with the breaking of that army, to hold the enemy in awe: so that
in such great dismay and fear of all the country, the enemy durst enterprise
but very little, or nothing at all. For even the Duke de Main with his strong
and puissant army passing nigh the gates of Saint Ihan D'Angelye durst never
stay there: although he knew well that the town was not well provided, and his
army being for Guyenne, there he might have begun to do some more honorable
exployt by winning Saint Ihan, then by Castilon. By the which events it
appears, that the presence of the said Lord, and other of his company did
greatly bridle the rage of the enemy there.

Now having placed the Prince, his Nobles, and all his scattered army in safety
and rest from the great dangers and labors which they sustained during the
month of October, we will return back to see what in the Browage, and tell
you the true report thereof

The tenth day of October the Lord Saint Mesmes, who was left there to continue
the siege by the appointment of the Prince, received intelligence how that the
governor of Xainctes, Coignak, Engolesme, and other forces of the country, did
flock together to set upon them who were at Hyers, where they continued the
siege of Browage: and supposing himself not strong enough, to resist
suchforces as he expected, specially for lack of horsemen, forsook Hyers, and
with all his regiments lodged at Marennes. Which thing amazed greatly the
Country: he sent also the Lord la Hay at Saint Just to aduauncethe retire.

The same day about four a clock in the evening aryuing at Saint Just the
Lord Saint Disan, and Captain Bordeaux, with their companies of footmen: who
seeing the inhabitants of the country run away and knowing what had
happened, went to Hiers, and they there arrived about midnight, where they
found many soldiers of Saint Luke, who issued out of Browage, had set the fire
on some houses, and were busy in rifling, and ransacking the others: they were
so heavily charged by the Soldiers of Saint Disan, and Bordeaux, that they
were all either slain or taken prisonners.

The Lord Saint Mesmes aduertized what had passed at Hyers, and of the new
supply come to him, returned with the companies to Hyers, and continued the
siege twenty days longer, during the which time were given many skirmishes,
and many on both sides slain and taken. But at length the said Lord Saint
Mesmes knowing that the Prince had passed Loyre, and looking not for any
succor, and that many reports going abroad of his ill success, and that many
Soldiers did daily depart and other waxed faynte, and that aduertisementes
came of the succor, which the governors of the abouesayd Towns would give to
Browage, and that they intended to enclose him and his companies, in the Isles
(as it had been an easy thing to do) with the advice of his Captains,
determined to raise the siege.

He sent also to the Lord Ranques, who was left to command in the I Will of
Oleron, to aduertize him, that he was pressed to retire, willing him to
repair to him, that they might retire in a strong company to prevent further
milfortune. So the 2. day of November, he rhysed the siege, and took his
journey toward Charuaut. At the passage whereof was great disorder, which
caused that at a place called Loupin, part of the carriage was taken by the
enemies, and many Soldiers lead away prisonners, the residue retired some to
Rochel, and some to Saint Ihan D'angelye.

The Lord Ranques, notwithstanding remained in Oleron with the Nauall army
until the tenth of November: during the which time he sent Rochell to have
succor, as well for yt safety of the Navy, as of the Island. But when he could
obtain nothing, the inhabitants also supposing that all had been lost (for
the discomfiture of the Prince was bruted which great amplifications by the Lord
Saint Luke) showed unto Ranques that their custom was to give place to the
stranger, which caused the said Lord to determine upon the retyring of his
fleet.

This also made him the more willing, because he had discovered one County,
and a Franciscane Friar, who had been always during the siege hidden in the
Island, who were sent to the Lord Saint Luke, to practice with him against the
said Lord Ranques, whom when he would have punished, they of the Island
withstood him, so that fearing the worst he retired to Rochel not without
danger of his life.

We have showed how the Dragon had sp^ed floods of waters to drown that
virtuous and godly Prince, his Nobles, and his little company, and how they
fled into the wilderness, where God had prepared unto them a place of safe
refuge and rest for a time, and how the army before Browage is brought to Saint
Ihan D'Angelye and Rochel. Now while these scattered companies are at rest, and
preparing again to meet together, we will see what exployts were done in
diverse places of the Realm.

It is said, how the Lord Saint Mesmes (at the departing of the Prince of
Conde) had the charge of the siege of Browage. Now the Lord Matignon who
commanded for the King in Guyenne, understanding that Saint Luke was hardly
pressed, and that the Prince taking his journey to Angers, had left a small
company to continue the siege of Browage, determined to oppress them: and
about the latter end of October from Bourdeaux took eight hundred horsemen,
four thousand footmen, with four double Canons, and arrived in Xainctonge
about the third of November: which understanding that they of Hiers had raised
up the siege, and had reretyred to Rochell, and S. Ihan D'Angelye soiorned
nevertheless in Xainctonge, seeking and watching the opportunity to do some
piece of service, making ordinary courses toward S. Ihan A' Angely and
Tailkebourg.

The Lord Laual about the eight of November, aduertized that the Lord Matignon
was in the field (not far from the town) with all his horsemen and some
footmen, issued out of S. Ihan about two leagues from the town: he
encountered the said Matignon: they saw one another so nigh, that the Lord
Chargoys (who did lead the light horses of the said Lord Laual)* was about to
charge the enemy, when he was warned, that he should have to do with all the
forces of the enemy, which were six times as many as all that the Lord Laual
had. That inequality of forces caused him to draw back toward Saint Ihan with
all his companyes in such an order, as the enemy durst never set on him, though
he pursued him within a quarter of a league of the town.

It is said before, how that the Prince in his journey to Angers, passing
through Taillebourg (which is a town situated upon the fall of the River
Botonne into Charante) left there in the Castle much plate and jewels, with
some pieces of Artillery, and much stuf^e and carriage of the Lords, who
accompanied him in his journey. That Castle is strong by situation, and on
diverse sides inaccessible situated upon a rock, compassed with the town,
otherwise not strong. The houses for the most part are builded at the foot of
the rock. The said Castle is fortifyed with platformes by nature, and do
command on every side as well over the Town as over the fields. Charante of
one side does wash the foot of that rock. There is a fair and commodious
bridge to pass over the river. All these circumstances, with the disfavor of
the time, gave Matygnon great desire to possess that place. Yet the special
commandment which he had from the King to seize upon the Mother and the
Daughter, urged him the more to attempt upon that Castle, that so he might
stop the marriage begun.

It happened about the thirteenth of November, that the Lord Matygnon was
commanded to retire toward Garonne, to meet the Counsels of the Vicount
Turenne, who with six thousand Soldiers was in Limosin, and had taken the City
of Triles: or for some other occasion, having concluded with the Duke de Maine
to meet with all their forces in Agenoys, to stop the passages of Garonne to
the King of Navarre.

But before his departure out of Xainctonge, he took order for to surprise the
said Castle: for he placed in the Town the Captain Beaumont, with four
companyes of soldiers, under color of keeping of the bridge, he promised to
the said Lady Trimouille all favor and safety, but it was without any effect.
For they that were left there did first work all subtle means which they
could devise to get the possession of the Castle: and when trust would not
prevail, they turned to force. For they planted a Barricado before the gate,
and there placed a strong Guard, blocked the entreyes into the said Castle,
supposing by these means to fear the sai^ Lady, and so to enforce her to
yield her self and the place, considering that there was but few men within to
assist her. The enemies not dissembling any longer, shot with their Pieces
continually against them that were within the Castle: and to do it more safely
on their part, lodged themselves in the nearest houses to the Castle, which
they pierced, and made them to serve for trenches.

They within the Castle resisted this force with shot of ordinance, and did
roll great heavy stones upon the howses, to beat them down. The skirmishes
did dure five days.

The lady Trimouille in that necessity found means to aduertize of this force
done to her: the Lord Laual, who was at Saint Ihan, and prayed him to send her
succor. The invention by the subtilty of the said lady was, that she feigned
to drive out of the Castle certain pages of the Prince, Frederick his
chamberlayne had there with him. They gave aduertifement to the lord Lauall
what had passed at Tilleburge, also of the means how to enter into the Castle.

The 20. day at night, captain Pickard came out of Xainctes, with 120. with
him into the town for succor.

The 21. the Lord Laual with the Lords Saint Mesmes, governor of Saint Jhan
and Bonlay, and others determined to rescue the said Lady, and taking about one
hundred armed men, and four hundred Harquebusiers, after dinner took their
journey toward Tailebourg, and about twenty men of arms did alight down on
the side of the waren, and entered into the ditch, which is between the town
and the Castle, (followed with a certain number of shot) and furiously charged
the enemy in diverse places. In the beginning, the enemies defended themselves
stoutely, as well out of the houses as out of the Trenches, which they had
planted at the gate of the Castle. They of the Castle (perceauing that
succor was come to them) leaueled their artilerie, partly against the
Trenches, partly against the houses, among whom, the house of one Bordet was
clean beaten down. The diverse charges began to amaze the enemies, which
without long resistance, began to look how to save themselves, and their lives
by flight or otherwise. There were found dead ofye enemies side, about 4. score
men, of our side only six: many were taken, the other were put to flight,
whereof the night covered the shame, ye marshes and the river saved many: the
wounded and prisoners were courteously entreated, many were sent away without
ransom, and especially the Captain Beau Mont, and Roke and others, which were
of commandment, during the skirmish within the town, the Lord Laual remained
without the town in battle array, upon the high way to Xainctes, and from
thence discovered some of the enemies, who were issued out of the gates of
Tailebourg, with their colors, and sought to save themselves. The said Lord
commanded his brother, the Lord Ryeulx to charge them: who with twelve horses
set on them, whereof many were killed, some wounded, and some taken with four
ensigns.

The enemies being thus beaten, the Lady Trimouil gratified the said Lord Laual
with the other Noble men, who had accompanied him, for the assistance given her
in such a convenient time. And although that before, she would not suffer any
further forces then she had to enter into the castle, yet she admitted them in
now: and so they advised before their departure, of the means how to prevent
like inconveniences, and that it was better, that this place should be kept by
them of the reformed religion, to the which the said Lady had no great
fantasy. Notwithstanding, Captaiee Bousier Leutenant of the Princes gardes,
with certain Harquebusiers was appointed to keep the said Castle, and
afterward there was joined to him Boulay.

It is said before, how the King understanding of the Princes going to Angers,
with much adoo sent the Duke De Main out of Paris for Guyenne, with a mighty
army, that all with one voyage he might help to enclose up the Prince, and
also in his absence to invade Poytow and Xainctonge provinces of Guienne, for
which he was appointed. Who taking his journey from Bloys (after the Princes
army was dessolued at Salonne) to Poitiers, under the color of the lying in
of his Wife, soiorned there three weeks, to seduce that great and populous
City to his faction, and at length when he could not obtain his purpose, by
diverse express commandments from the King, he departed about the fifteenth
of November. And boasting, that within three months, he would root all the
Hugonets out of Guyenne and Gascoyne, having that mighty army as we have
said before: in his way, he took by surrender Lusignen and Mele, and passing
by Saint Ihan, he sent a few horsemen beyond the bridge Saint Iulion, in the
sight of the town, intending by that small number, to draw the Lord Laual to
fight, who (he thought) would have issued out and pursued those forerunners: he
thought also, that the said Lord Laual would have passed the bridge Saint
Iulion, and to have taken him in ambushes with the whole company of his
horsemen, who did lie in a wood and a dingle on the other side of the bridge,
which the said Lord Laual could not have repassed without hazard there to have
been discomfited. The Lord Laual discovering the light horses issued out of the
town, but not after the mind of the Duke. For having put a good guard upon
the bridge, he sent a few light horses only to view the enemy, and ordered
the rest of his men of arms, and Harquebusiers in battle array, upon the bank
of the river, in the view of the enemy, which seeing that he ventured not
rashly, retired without attempting any thing.

About the 28. the Duke De Main with his army lodged about the town of Saint
Ihan. The Lord Chassegay, ensign bearer of the Lord Laual, accompanied with
the Lord Orges, and five and twenty horses more with him, issued out to
skirmish with the army of the Duke. They met nigh Varezes a little town not
far distant, twenty Launciers of the enemy, followed at hand, by two
hundred men of war, French, and Jtalians. The said Chassegay was charged
with these troops, and pursued to the bridge, where he stayed in the face of
the enemy, to favor the retraite of his men, but there he was beaten down,
and taken prisoner with some others: they which saved themselves, gave the
alarm in the town, the forces whereof issued out, but the enemy had retired.

About the latter end of December, the Duke meeting with the Marshal Matignon
about Coignake, at length parted a sunder, and the said Matignon went to
Bourdeaux: but the Duke being rid of the company of Matignon, who would be
but a let unto him to bring to pass his intents, Perigord, Limosin, Quercy,
and Agennoys, at the charges of the Priests, and expenses of the holy Rood,
having a great deal of money, even so much as the Sacraficers could spare, to
recreate himself, when he should find himself weary of winning of Cities
and strong Holds in those countries.

It is said before, how that after the publication of the Edict in July, the
Vicount Turenne had assembled some forces, partly out of his own land in
Limosin and Perigord, and partly many Noble men and Captains of the countries
about had repaired unto him. For the persecutions had enforced many, as well
Gentlemen as others, to forsake their houses to take arms, and to repair to
such Provinces as were of sure access unto them. This was the cause that Noble
men and Gentlemen from about Paris, Gastinoys, Niuernoys, countries between
the rivers of Loyre and Seyne, (which purposed to repair to the King of
Navarre) joined themselves with the Lord Turenne, who within a short space grew
to the number of six thousand.

With this power the Vicount Turenne kept the field in Limosin and Perigord:
and about the time that the Prince departed from Browage to his journey to
Angers, letters came unto him from the Prince, by the which he willed him to
draw near Browage to favor the siege thereof. Upon the receipt of these
letters, the Lord Turenne called his counsel together, to know what was to be
done. There was then reasoned among them of the necessity of his presence at
that siege. On the other side, advertisement was given that the army of the
League (under the conduct of the Duke de Main) was drawing nigh toward
Guyenne, (although it was not yet scarce out of Paris) and that the same was
beaten with diverse disseases, (and among others the Swissers) which made them
conclude, that occasion might be given to work some good exployt upon that
army; and if not discomfited, yet greatly it might be molested. Again, he had
received letters of the King of Navarre, who aduertized him, that he was at the
point to depart out of Bearne to Bergerake ward in Perigord, and therefore
warned him to be in a readiness, that (if need should be) he might join with
his Majesty. So that considering all these weighty occasions, he could not
succor the siegr of Browage, staying for the Duke de Main, and expecting the
King of Navarre his coming. He had many good occasions to enterprise upon
certain Towns in Limosin, as upon the City of Trile, Brune la galiarde, and
others in those quarters. Trile is a City in Limosin, a Bishops seat,
situated in a valley, compassed about with high hills, which do command the
Town: It has three fair Suburbs about it, and there is a little river named
Vestere, which washing the walls passes by the Suburb, which is greater than
the city. Therein is a Frierie Franciscans, which is enclosed about with a
strong wall, and for that cause the inhabitants had retired and committed their
goods to the Friars keeping: which thing fell out very ill for them. The high
suburb is like the first in greatness: the third is lesser than the other
twain.

The 8. day of November the Lord Choupes, with a great number of Gentlemen and
Soldiers, set on the low Suburb. The Lord Turenne (who commanded over the
Harquebusiers which came out of France) staying at the Franciscans house, which
is situated at the end of the Suburb, set the gate on a fire, and upon
occasion entered further even to the Trenches, which they of the Town had
made: and after long skirmishing and killing of some of both parts, won the
same.

The high Suburb at the same time, by other companies (as they were appointed)
was also assaulted, which they of the Suburb did resist at the Trenches: but
at length enforced, did retire within the Town. They of the Town being
besieged all round about, defended themselves upon the walls (without issuing
out at all) for the space of six days.

The 13. day of November were applied two pieces at the gate, which made some
way to enter in: but they of the Town did their endeavor to defend the breach;
which being not assaultable, the assault was given over. The siege continuing,
many of the Town were slain: which caused the rest (fearing to be forced)
not to refuse the persuasions of Amaury, who counseled them to capitulate.
Hostages being given of both sides, the Kings Lieutenant (with some of the
chiefest Citizens) came forth to the Lord Turenne, who was lodged at the gray
Friars; the agreement was long debated, and at length concluded.

The 16. day of November, they of the Town consented to redeem the Town, and
the ransaking of their houses, with a certain sum of money. Furthermore, it
was agreed that a Captain stranger, with such as were left of his company
(for most of them had been slain) should go forth out of their Town, and
they should receive Captain Amaury. This Captain Amaury was he of all the
army whom they feared most, and yet did they requested to have him, whom they
received for their governor: and there he remained in that charge until the
coming of the Duke de Main.

About the 10. of December (considering that the place was not sufficient to
resist such an army) he gave over the Town into the hands of the Citizens,
and within few days after was slain, as follows. Within a while after the
taking of this City, the Lord Turenne retired his companies in garrisons in
places of greater importance.

The 25. of December, Amaury was aduertized that the Lord Sacramore of Birague,
(this is that Sacramore whom after the Duke de Main killed in his anger with
his own hand) one of the Leaguers, was not far Turenne with a company of
Harquebusiers, to lay in ambush: and as he advanced himself, one of his own
Soldiers (too hasty to shoot) with his piece hit him by misfortune and
killed him, and after they retired to Turenne.

The Duke de Main sporting himself, made good theere at ye Priests costs,
(but it was no matter, for holy Roode did pay for all) and does conquer
Kingdoms in Perigord and Limosin: and about the 27. of December took
Montignake le conte, an old Town and ruinous Castle belonging to the King of
Navarre. He took also Beaulieu, such a Fort as no man (which has any skill in
warlike affairs) would make any account of. And ten days after, the
inhabitants (who were al of the reformed religion) redeemed their Town with
one thousand Crowns, which were paid to Antefort.

About the 17. of December the Duke de Main recovered Trile, which the Lord
Turenne had caused Amaury to surrender into the hands of the inhabitants about
ten days before, because that place was not defensable. The D. de Main at
length perceiving yt his practices against the Cities and Towns of Limosin and
Perigord would not frame, determined to pass the river Dordonne at Souliake
into Quercy, leaving behind him Monfort, a strong place, and many other Towns
and Holds, because he could not carry them away with him.

It is said before, how that the King of Navarre in August last, went into
Languedock to S. Paul de Cadeioux, where he met with the Prince of Conde, and
the Duke of Monmorency, to advertise them of their defense. The said King
remained afterward in Bearne, in great silence and quietness, viewing how far
all this league and union would proceed, expecting the producing of some
lamentable events, and (as if it were out of his watch) would become of the
three great armies prepared for Guyenne, Languedock and Daulphine: and (being
hidden under the wing of the most high) mused what would be the end of the
fiery threatenings and bragges of his enemies, bearing patiently their
insolency, even to the danger of his own person.

It is also said, how that the Leaguers had procured an excommunication from
Friar Sixtus vicar of Rome, against the King of Navarre, and the Prince of
Conde, therewithal (and with the sedicious inuaighing of the Jesuits and
Friars) to make them odious unto the people, whose lives they could not touch,
neither by violence, nor by any heinous act. It is said also, how the Senate of
Paris gave their judgment (by the way of admonition) to the King against the
said excommunication, the Pope himself, and the procurers of the same.

The sixth day of November, the King of Navarre answers to the said
excommunication of that beggarly Friar Sixtus, and caused the same answer to
be set and fixed upon the corners of the streates in Rome, where

First, he does hold the said excommunication false, wrongful, and void, and
does appeal from him as no Judge, unto the Senate of the Peers of France,
whereof he is the first.

Secondly, whereas the said frantic Sixtus does lay heresy to his charge,
and presumptuously calls him heretic, the said King in one word does
answer, that he maliciously and most impudently (with reuetence of his goose
cap be it spoken) does lie.

Thirdly, the said King does charge the beggarly Friar Sixtus to be an
heretic himself, and does proffer to prove him so in a general Counsel
lawfully assembled.

Fourthly, he does declare him Antichrist, and as unto such a one he does
denounce a perpetual and irreconciliable war, until that the miurie done to
the house of France be satisfied.

Fifthly, he assures himself in God, that (as he has assisted his
predecessors, and made them able to chastize such saucy companions, as he is,
when they have forgotten their duty, and passed the bounds of their vocation,
confounding the ecclesiastical power with the civil): So he trusts in God,
that being nothing inferior unto them, God will make him able to revenge the
injury offered to the King, Crown, State, and Parliaments of France.

Last of all, he does implore all Christian Kings and Potentates, all States,
alied and confederated with the Crown of France, to assist him, to repress
the raging tyranny and damnable usurpation of the said Friar Sixtus, and of
all Leaguers, and conspirators against the Crown of France. So much also does
protest Henry of Bourbon Prince of Conde.

This answer of the King of Navarre being fixed (as is said in the ordinary
places of Rome, where such writings are wont to be set) did not move Friar
Sixtus to repentance: but as being (...), did cast him into fear so deeply,
that he sends not long after a Coriero to the Duke (...) is one that puts
me together by the cares, and then runs his way.
Momorencye to excuse the matter, and to remove the fault from himself, and to
lay it upon the Leaguers, who (as he says) had deceitfully induced him to do
what he had done, praying him to smooth the matter with the King of Navarre,
and to pacify his displeasure.

About the 11. of November, the King sends forth an iniunction to all his
officers, to seize upon the persons and goods of al them that have born arms
with the Prince of Conde: who after the breaking of the army at Saloune, had
returned to their houses, or returned to their friends: and to proceed against
them according to the edict of Iulye, and the declaration thereof vearing date
the 6. of October.

Also, that such as will be reduced to Popery, he is willing to pardon and

The 19. of November, the Shauelinges, Cardinals, and Bishops, made a long
exhortation to the King by Sir Emare Henekin Bishop of Saint Bryen, a city in
Britayne. In the same long and tedious oration, Sir Henekin first did show him
the duty of Kings toward the holy Church, to wit, to magnify it to the
uttermost of his power.

Mark this Christian Reader, that by the name of Church, he means Note.
the shauelings; and by the duty of Kings toward the Church, he (although in
other words) goes about to persuade the King to yield himself prisoner to
their wills and affections: and to make it short, to let them have what they
would have, and to approve whatsoever they would do.

Secondly, he teaches the King that it is the holy Ghost, who has inspired
him to make the edict of union.

To make the edict of union, was to replenish his kingdom with blood, Note.
murder, and desolation, and to yield his authority into the hands of
traitorous conspiratours of the League: this is a work of inspiration of the
holy ghost, by Sir Henekyn his divinity. Well said Sir Henekyn, go too, this
is good stuff.

Thirdly, he blames the King, that heretofore he has not showed cruelty
enough against them of the reformed, but has suffered them to have the liberty
of their religion, by his edictes of peace: but now he trusts, (that having
revoked the edict of peace) he would play Pyrgopolynices in Plautus.

Here Sir Henekyn shows whose son he is, breathing nothing Note.
but murder, and whose scholar, to wit, Antichrist of Rome, which is the
trompeter of all mischieues in Christendom.

Fourthly, after breach of the edict of peace, Henekyn hops that the King
will play the man, and that all things shall go well.

Here Sir Henekyn does suppose, that all things shall go well, Note.
when the King has thrown himself, his Nobility, his Kingdom, and Subjects
into a heap of miseryes, and has opened the door to desolation and
desperation most miserable: this is to have a new heaven and earth to Sir
Henekyn.

Fifthly, he assures the King, that he shall have power enough to break the
forces of the Heretics.

Here Sir Henekyn knowing not, that there is neither counsel, Note.
nor power against God, to resist his will, warranteth the King (like a good
divine) that he shall perform what Sir Henekyn wishes.

Sixthly, he wills the King to use such discipline among his Soldiers, as
that the Priests be not molested by them.

Here Sir Henekyn, foreseeing what euilles the breach of the edict of peace
would breed, is well content that other men perish, so that he Note.
and his fellows may live in all pleasures and voluptuousnes, without any
molestation. Sir Henekyn is a good, reasonable, and kindly fellow.

Seventhly, he wills the King to publish the counsel of Trente, and to
reform the Priests, and to cause them to be good and virtuous.

The King has resigned into the hands of the Leaguers a great part of his
royal authority. Now Sir Henekyn will have him to publish Note.
the counsel of Trente, that is, to resign the rest of his royal authority
to Friar Sixtus. I think that his mind is in plain terms, the King to
become a begging Friar: and to go to Friar Sixtus to have a dispensation to
forsake his wife, and to enter into a Fryery. But if the king would follow good
counsel, he should keep himself as he is.

For the eight point, he prays the king to give over the preferring and
placing of Abbots and Bishops to their livings, but to refer that to the
Priests themselves, to the Chapters of Canons, and Monks: and to leave the
disposition of Bishoprics and Abbeyes to their elections and discretions.

Here Sir Henekyn is very careful for the king: he wills him to forbear to
swallow such big morsels, as Bishoprics and Abbeyes, for the Note.
danger which may ensue, which is choking: but to leave such fat morsels to
them that have throats big enough to swallow down whole Steeples.

The king has resigned part of his royal authority to the Leaguers: now to do
well he shall resign another part to Friar Syxtus, and the third to the
Priests: and then let him walk careless.

Ninthly, he prays the king, to take some good order, that the Priests may be
honored, renerenced, and capped: and that their jurisdiction may be restored
to them, and not interrupted hereafter. Dixi.

Here is the fourth part of the kings authority, which Sir Henekyn Note.
would feign to wrest out of his hand, that the Priests may execute an
infernal tyranny, over the souls and bodies of men.

And to conclude his chattering, he does promise to the king great blessings
here upon earth, and afterward the kingdom of heaven, so that he will root
out, and destroy them, whom he calls heretics.

Note here, that Sir Henekyn does call them heretics, who does distroy their
ungodly lewd lives, and filthy pleasures, as dronkennes, glottony, whoredom,
and worse then that.

Also he would have the King to root out, that is, to kill all whom these
ghostly fathers shall appoint him.

Last of all, to play the Turk, to make hauock of all things, to fill the
earth with blood, is the way to ascend up to Heaven, quoth Sir Henekin: well
said sir Henekin, by Saint Mary, you have said as well as ever

About the 30. of November, the King of Navarre being at Bergerak, and
understanding that his pa^iencie had kindled the rage of his enemies, and his
moderatenes had increased the insolency of the Leaguers, and that after the
dispearsing of the Princes army, the cruelty of the edict of union, and
declaration thereof, the 7. of October was every where executed, with
proscriptions, murders, losses of goods, dignities and honors, does make an
edict throughout his government of Guienne, to be executed: wherein he
shows, that whereas his silent patience and moderatenes had served nothing,
but to increase the outrageous excesses and cruelties of the seditions and
rebels, he is enforced to follow the course and order following.

First, that all the goods, lands, rents, fruits, debts, actions, and accounts
of all the inhabitants of those towns and places, where the edict of Iulie,
and declaration thereof has been published and executed, and also of all
Gentlemen or others, bearing arms with the Leaguers, and their partakers: also
of all Ecclesiastical persons wheresoever, who are contrary unto his part,
and of all whatsoever, who are contributaries unto his enemies, within the
Government of Guienne, to be seized upon, stayed and put in the hands of his
commissioners, to be sold or farmed to him that will give most.

Secondly, forbids all manner of persons, who are indebted unto such, to pay
them or their assigns or partakers, any debt, but commands them to repair
unto his Lieutenants general, or officers of his receites, to declare and
reveal al debts upon pain of death, and to pay fourefold: that the said goods
may be employed to the use of war, and al grains and fruits to be put in
such places for store houses, as shall be appointed by his officers.

Thirdly, he commands the like to be executed upon them, who shall refuse to
pay the contributions, or the work men at the fortifications, and also, that
shall refuse to be contributaries in the dividing of their fruits, for the
provision of stoare houses, which shall be conveniently made, for the
sustaining of the war.

Fourthly, the like intertainement to be done unto the above said, as the
enemies shall entreat them of the reformed religion, or Catholics who have
joined themselves to him in that just cause, and necessary defense, charging
all officers, both to publish and execute the same edict without delay.

About the 25. of December, the King as a man that studied nothing else, but
only how to vex, molest, trouble, torment, and utterly (even with the loss
of his realm and estate) to root out them of the reformed religion,

The first of them, that having borne arms, have retired back, and meant to be
converted to popery.

The second of them, who have or do bear arms.

The third of them, that according to the edict, have departed out of the
realm.

The fourth of them, that have not departed out of their houses, but are
returned to popery.

The fifth of them, that have remained in their houses, and do persist in the
reformed religion, which he calls heresy.

All the penalty came to this, that they shall be persecuted all to death,
except they will abjure, and all their goods seized upon, and employed to the
use of war.

Furthermore, he does promise a certain form of abiuration to be sent into
the country, and wills the Bishops to appoint in towns of their dioces,
their vickars generals, to receive their abiuration, and to give them
absolution.

About the same time, one Sir William Ruse, Bishop of Angers did set forth in
his dioces, unto al Priests, a form of abiuration, which the said Priests
should enforce upon them, that had professed the true religion, and had obeyed,
or would obey the Kings edict. Wherein first, he does propound unto them the
Nicen simbole. Secondly, they shall allow all the traditions of the Apostles,
and of the holy Mother Church of Rome.

By the traditions of the Apostles and holy Church, he understands Note.
all the intusiasmes, and dronken dreams, all the sottish and heathenish
devises of the fantastical frantic, and dronken Popes, Cardinals, Bishops,
Monks and Friars, which we must needs to hold for articles of the faith:
because sir William has said so.

Thirdly, they shall believe, that there is seven Sacraments.

And why shall we not believe seven thousand, as well as seven, seeing Note.
that the seven thousand, are as well proved by the word of God, as the
seven.

Fourthly, that all rites and ceremonies, used in the ministration of the said
seven sacraments, are good.

All the crossings, charmings, duckings, kissings, howlings, chauntings, Note.
mumblings, iuglings, coniurings, blowings, slomberings, gaddings, turnings,
moppings, etc. Are either articles of faith, or else as good as the articles of
our belief.

Fifthly, they shall believe, that in the transubs^antiation, the bread and

Sir William Ruze, either is an ass, who knows not what he says, or else a
false Prophet, which leads men to a strange God: for such a paradoxe Note.
was yet never heard in Christ's Church, that the Bread and Wine was changed
into Christ's deity.

Sixthly, he says, that we must believe the Mass, to be a sacrifice
propiciatorie for the sins of the quick and the dead.

What proofs has Sir William Ruze, to show out of Gods word, that the Mass
is a propiciatorie sacrifice for sin, more then the sacrifices of Note.
the heathens?

Last of all, the fire of purgatory: the having and worshipping of their
Images, the adoring of Relics and praying unto them: and also that the
counsel of Trent is to be received, as good Catholic, and an article of the
faith of the Church of Rome.

All these things are articles of faith, which they that will go to the devil
must needs believe; but clean contrary unto the faith of the true Note.
Catholic and Apostolic Church. The persecutions, imprisonments, seazing of
goods, and abiurations, had begun and went forward in diverse places, but
especially in such as were addicted to the League long before, and had
received the last edict set forth by the King. And among other places, there is
a town in Poytow, called Niort, great and rich, where the faires and martes of
the country beyond Loyre are kept. This town had been seduced of long time,
and of all towns in France most earnestly adicted to the League: there of all
places, and in the towns there abouts, they began most cruelly to persecute
the Church, which was assembled at Saint Gelays, in the which persecution, many
bowed down the knee to Baall. Therefore, about the 20. of December, Lewis
Blachiere, Pastor of that Church, having retired to Rochel, and understanding
the fall of many in that heat of persecution, writes a letter to raise them
that are fallen, and to bind that which was broken.

In the which, first he shows the use of persecution, that is, to discern
the true Disciples of Christ, from false brethren and hypocrites, who yield and
turn after every wind of doctrine.

Secondly, he does terrify them that are fallen, by the threatenings of
Christ against them, that shall deny him before men.

Thirdly, he detecteth the subtlety of the enemy, in the form of his
abiuration, in that he has made a door of gold, to enter into a privy or
dongeon full of filth, stinking and poisoned air, placing in the beginning the
Nicen simbole, afterward patcheth to it all the filthy abominations of
Antichrist.

Fourthly, he shows to them that are fallen, the gate of mercy to remain
always open to them which seek the right means to enter in, and that
repentance is never too late.

Last of all, them who do stand, he does encourage to prefer the confession
of the son of God, wherein does consist eternal life before this present life,
or the commodities and pleasures thereof.

Thus we will make an end of this second Book of this Tragical History,
raised up in the Kingdom of France, by the Leaguers.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK.
IT is showed in the former Book, how the Leaguers, after having long under
hand, practiced the supplanting of the house of Valoys, at length did burst out
into a manifest rebellion. I have showed what pretense, color, and buckler
they took, to wit, religion, justice, and the Cardinal of Bourbon.

Thou have seen gentle reader, how the King took them for enemies, rebels and
traitors, and some of their partakers were condemned and executed for such.

Also, by what means, practices, and wicked counsel, the King was drawn to
join friendship and armor, and to divide his kingdom with them whom he a
little before, had declared rebels and traitors.

What edicts, declarations, injunctions, the King afterward set out in favor
of them, against the reformed religion.

The atemptes of Merceur, in the Low Poytow, the exploytes done by the Prince
of Conde in Xainctonge, Poytow, and his voyage beyond Loyre, to Angers, and the
success of that voyage: the exployces done by the Vicount Turenne; the coming
of the Duke De Main, with his army, and all his conquest in Perigord, and
Limosin.

Now will we begin the third Book with the beginning of January. The first
day of January, the King of Navarre being at Montoban, a Quercie, wrote
letters unto all the states of France, and first of all unto the sacrificing
Priests, commonly called the Clergy, in the which he protests, first of
his moderatenes which he has used toward all men, even in the middle of war,
and that he has often times remitted sundry and great injuries done to him,
in respect of the public peace.

Secondly, he complains of them, that they do assist with their power and
means them, who making their ambition, a zeal to holy Church, and the
revenging of their private discontentments with a public war, have set the
whole realm in a miserable cumbustion.

Thirdly, he lets them understand, that he fears neither their money,
their names, nor the arms of his enemies, but pittyeth the state of the poor
people, who does suffer all the oppressions and miseries which will ensue these
enterprises of his enemies.

Fourthly, he threatens them, that they who should be the vpholders of peace,
and the support of the poor people, shall answer before God, for all the
bloodshed, confusions, vices, and miseryes which the war caryeth with it, for
entertayning with their means, and norishing with their goods, this unjust and
damnable war, with the disorders which ensue thereof.

Fifthly, he protests that he has proffered himself to be tried by a
conference and distentation in a free counsel, but they have preferred war,
fire and sword before these good, lawdable, and ordinary means of conference,
which is most worthy of man.

Last of all, he shows them that this war is most unworthy of Christians,
but specially of such as do pretend to be teachers and Doctors of the Gospel,
and committing his innocence and just cause to God, warns them, that the
dangers of war are common as well to them as to him and his: so makes an end
with them.

Unto the Nobility he rehearses the sum of all things passed ever since
the raising up of the League.

First, how that in the midst of peace, these sturres are bred and borne.

Secondly, he recites with what patience he has borne all the injuries
proffered unto him by the Leaguers, who have made him the subject and scope of
their war.

Thirdly, he puts them in remembrance of all the Kings actions before the
edict of union, how the King declared them rebels, and persuaded them, as such
in all his courts of Parliament. And how they, to wit, the Nobility, have been
armed against the Leaguers, and that all these actions of the king did proceed
out of a good and sound judgment and free will, without any compulsion.

He wills them to remember also, how on a sudden all these things have been
changed, and the kings will not change, but partly enforced, and partly by
the craft of the enemies, with ill counsel induced to contrary actions.

Fourthly, he complayneth of the injuries done to them of the reformed
religion, who heretofore had been suffered with liberty of the free exercise
of the same, without any offense by them given, and armed by the kings

Fifthly, he declares how for the avoiding the calamities incident to war to
satisfy unto the Leaguers, he has debased himself so far under his degree,
as to proffer to the heads of the League, the combat to be performed by himself
in person, or by more, number to number, as by the adversary it should be
accepted.

Sixthly, he lets them understand, that he fears not their arms, whereof
he has had the experience so long time, whereby he knows well what they are
able to do.

Last of all, he cannot but lament their blood which they have, and do spill
against him, for whose service they should have reserved it in stoare.

But specially this does grieve him, that in the lot of the battle he may not
discern them whom in mind he discerns from his enemies.

Unto the third estate he writes to the same purpose, as he has done to the
Nobility, and besides shows unto them first the horrible miseries which they
have sustained by the civil war, and what confusions are like to ensue of
these troubles. He shows also how the end of all the former wars has been a
peace.

Secondly, whereas they (meaning the Leaguers) do pretend to ease the people of
taxes and charges, he aduertyzeth them, that by this war the taxes, impost,
and subsidies must needs to double, and that their rising in arms has done
already terrible havoc and wast. He warns them also to consider how that
the reformation of impost, taxes and subsidies, they have turned to their
private commodity, having done nothing, but enforce the king to divide his
realm among them, and to weaken his authority, without making mention not one
word of the easing of the people. He writes the same effect to the
inhabitants of Paris: but surdis narrat fabulam. The contempt of the Gospel,
the innocent blood of the Saints which they have spilled like water must be
better revenged. The wrath of God must walk now beyond Loyre, to execute his
judgments upon these nations, that lie between the low country and Loyre,
because they have not repented at the former scourges, but have hardened their
hearts, and have blasphemed the God who lives for evermore.

The dispersing of the Princes army, and declaration of the edict of union
dated the seventh day of October, did cast a marvelous amaze and dread upon
all them of the religion generally: but specially upon them who were left
through the Popish countries in France, hoping for a better time.

There were also many of the contrary religion, who being lovers of the State,
and wishing well to the house of Bourbon, and to the right of the cause, began
to waver and to alter their minds according to the unableness

There followed after in December, the bloody proceedings of Ruze Bishop of
Angers, and the Kings Iniunction to his officers to execute his edict, with the
allowing of ye abiuration penned by ravening Ruze. These things made a great
dissipation in the families of them of the religion. For by these means the
rage of the Papists increased against the reformed religion, and emboldened to
attempt any violence and injury against them. For the enemies supposing that
the Prince had been lost, (for it was very long time before it was known what
was become of him) they judged also that the faith and hope of them of the
reformed religion had been buried with him.

The inconstancy of many of them who had remained in France, after the
declaration of the edict of July, did appear. For many esteemed more the
commodities of their houses, and the pleasures of their country, than the
quietness of their consciences, and the keeping of those good precepts which
they had learned in the school of Christ, which is rather to dye under the
Cross, than to live in committing Idolatry.

The Papists on the contrary side, forgot no means to throw down them that
stood on slipperie places: for beside the rigor of the edict which had
abridged the time of anoydance to fifteen days, with dreadful threatenings,
the Jesuits, Friars, Massing and parish Priests, and other firebrands of the
Romish route, thundered against them, whom they termed heretics in their
bloody and sedicious sermons. And if they could not dissuade them from their
religion, then they stirred up the people to murder them, or else pursued them
before the Magistrates, who were eagerly set against them, being for the most
part of the League.

They who had been of the religion, or had been suspected to have favored the
same, persecuted them who remained constant, thereby to terrify that they had
never been of them.

Their friends on the other side had no small power to try the constancy of
those simple souls, who before had fastened too much the a^cker of their
safety in the forces of man.

There were also which did great pleasure to their friends and kindred, in
obtaining to them prorogation of time to give order to their affairs, and
after to retire some where.

Many remaining constant in the truth, esteeming more their faith to God, than
worldly goods, (foreseeing also a more stormy tempest than that which was
past, would ensue) without any further bargaining left al, and retired some to
the principality of Sedan; some into Germany; great number to Geneua; great
multitudes to Saint Ihan d'Angely, Rochel, and England. It was a lamentable
thing to see the woeful vanishments and dissipation of so many families,
without any succor or comfort.

They which were touched with a greater zeal, would not leave their children
behind them, in danger to be thrown into the mire of Idolatry, which they
detested, esteeming of the conscience of their children as of their own,
knowing that they should answer before God for the same. This caused many of
them to carry their children upon their shoulders, for lack of other means.

God showed in such a stormy tempest, that he has havens of safety always
in store for them who (being tossed and tormoyled under the heaviness of the
Cross) do cast (as children upon their fathers) their eyes upon him. For this
is a wonderful work of GOD, that for the space of three whole years the
pestilence had so afflicted Rochel, that there was no part free of the same.
Saint Ihan d'Angely also (when this persecution waxed so violent) was so beaten
with it, that the town was almost destitute of inhabitants and Soldiers.
Notwithstanding, neither the Governor, the Lord S. Mesmes, nor the Ministers,
would at any time forsake the remainant of that Church which was there. All the
fields about were full of Tents and Cabbins replenished with men infected of
the plague: the villages all round about were in the same case.

The faithful exiled out of their own countries and houses, flowing from
every side of France, and flying from the contagious pestilence of their
souls, esteemed less than nothing the plague: and sickness of the body
(rather than should cast away their souls in denying the son of God) was to
be wished for of them. But God (according to his truth) kept to them both the
one and the other: for even then the pestilence vanished away from all those
places, as if God had commanded the sickness to make room for them who were
exiled for his name: for after that there was no more sickness seen.

In this auoydance there was a number murdered, but specially in those
Provinces where the gouenours were most passionate and addicted to the League,
by whose permission the common people took much liberty to commit cruel
murders upon them of the religion. They who had not the means to recover some
place of refuge, and continued in the pureness of religion, and escaped the
slaughter, did lie sousing in prisons and dongeons, where they sustained many
combats, looking every day when they should be had away to death.

Many of them who forsook the confession of the truth went to Mass, and so
were sent to their houses again: but (by a certain judgment of God) they for
the most part dyed every where through sorrow, or by the pestilence.

Some of them who had charge in the Church, died of notable kindness of death.
For some going into the Country about their business, fell of their horses,
and brake their necks, and some dyed otherwise, verifying

It is said, how the Duke de Main powered his fu^y upon the old walls of the
vilages of Montigne le Conte, and Beaulrien, and how he took Trile, which no
man will keep. In the latter end of January, the said Duke drawing into the
furthest part of Perigord, set upon Gaignak, a poor little vilage belonging
to the Vicount Turenne, a place void of all fortifications, save that at the
ends of the streets, there remained yet few old walls, which did show that
there had been a gate: the inhabitants being poor husbandmen, first sustained
an assault, supposing to have to do with companyes of robbers, for so they
took them. But at length being not able to withstand such a multitude, they
fled another way, and saved themselves, except only four, who either for
age or wounds could not avoid: them this great Duke caused to be hanged, to
power his gall upon those poor simple country men.

Thus this great Emperor, weary to conquer vilages in Perigord, and seeing
that his practices against the great and populous Cities of Limoges and
Perigueux, would not frame, he turned short Southward toward Quercy: and
passing over the river Dordonne at Soilak, left at his left hand the towns of
the vicount Turenne, Saint Cere, and Turenne in Perigord, and coasted Figeak,
Cadenak, and Cayak in Quercye, whom he knew to be well furnished with
garrisons. He coasted also the houses of the Vicount Gourdine, and Montfort, a
strong place upon Dordonne, which he sent to view.

This Duke soiorned long in Quercy, sent commandment to the marchantes of
Tholouze, and Bourdeaux, and others which do tra^fike upon Garonne, that upon
pain of death they should not agree with the towns which did hold for the
king of Navarre, and situated upon that river, did stop the commerce
thereof, promising that shortly he would set all that river at liberty, yea
that he would.

Whilst he soiorned so long in high Quercye, rouing and wasting the country,
the Bishop of Cahors, the Lords Saint Sulpice and Comburat did instantly
require him, that he would assault those places above said, which being holde^
by them of the religion, did daily annoy and molest them. which thing when the
Duke could not be persuaded to do. The Bishop blessing him with his Episcopal
benediction: and the two said Lords with hot terms, licensed him to depart
out of their country in the devils name. Besides eating, drinking, spoiling
and whoring he did no good there, save that he licensed some Gentlemen of the
country for money, to have the exercise of the reformed religion in their
houses, so that thence they would not make war: and to color his
cowardlines, he excuses himself unto the Bishop, and other Lords above
said, that he would go to open the river of Garonne, and to put the commerce
upon that river at

Thus this second Hannibal, coasting the river of Lot at his left hand, and
Dordonne at his right hand, (for he would have that river of Lot as a wall
between him and mount Auban) entering in Agenoys, there issued out certain
companies out of Monts^anquine upon the tail of his army, which did slay in
one conflict two hundred Harquebusiers of his, and discomfited the company of
Captain Guerche.

At length he came with his Ianissaries to the fall of the river of Lot into
Garonne, where is situated an old Town called Tunnings, consisting of low
and high Town and Castle. That place (about the insurrection of the League)
certain Ruffians of Again had seized upon, where they did greatly molest the
country. The King of Navarre in August after, passing by, sent Captain
Lestele to take that town: which thing he did at the first approach, and did
cast down those ^^lthie ruffians with their harlots out of the window into
the ditch, and kept the said town unto the Dukes coming, which then was given
over, and that small garrison that was there retired to the other side of
Gharonne, to Caumont and Clerake to reserve themselves to a better
opportunity. The Duke de Main took valiantly the said town of Tunnings,
which no man kept against him. And having done this valiant exploit, he does
coast the river Garonne descending toward Bourdeaux. In that way he sent a
Coriero to the king, promising him that he will do him such notable service,
as never no man did, for in great sadues he will take the King of Navarre dead
or alive, if he did not resolve himself to depart out of the Realm: and if
he can take him he will send him his head in a Charger, as Herod did S. John
Baptist.

As this great Duke went down the river, the forerunners met with thirty
scattered and unarmed poor lads, which belonged to the garrison of Chaumont:
they were sent to cause the provision (contributed by the country) to be
brought to the said town of Chaumont. These poor lads were killed by these
stout warriors: which notable victory was afterward published in Paris, by the
title of the notable overthrow of the garrison of Chaumont and Nerake, by the
Duke de Mayn.

The next exployt done by this victorious Captain, was at Castets. This is a
little town and a Castle belonging to the Lord Fabas, which place the Marshall
Matignon had besieged before the space of ten days before the Dukes coming,
and had made a sufficient breach. The Duke de Main to defraude the said Lord
Matignon of that little honor, compounded secretly with the said Lord Fabas,
thus: That the Lord Fabas first should have twelve thousand Crowns for the
loss of the house and of the goods which were in it, and so should surrender
the same Castle to the Duke de Main to be rased, which was performed: so
Castets was Matignon was defrauded, and the Duke de Main had the glory: and
if it pleases him he shall be called Castensis of Castets, as Scipio
Carthaginensis of the winning of Carthage.

The next place was Meylan, an old ruinous Town, wherein was Captain Melune
with a small garrison, who considering the weakness of the place gave it over,
supposing that it was more profitable to let ye Duke de Main to have that
place for a while, than to defend it. There the Duke with all his army took
great pains to beat down old ruinous walls, which no man did defend, least
it should be said that he had done nothing.

From the rasing of the walls of Meylan, he went to Saint Bazeile, a Garonne,
having like ruinous old and decayed walls and forts, as the aforesaid towns
had. There were few of the religion in garrison, who after having sustained
certain shot of ordinance and assaults, they considering that it was not a
place to obstinate themselves therein, compounded to their great advantage.
Amorith did never so rejoice at the winning of Constantinople, as this Duke did
for Saint Bazeile. By and by the Lord Saisseual (the Dukes Curiero) was sent to
the King in post with have have have, to aduertize him of these great
conquests, and to fetch money to conquer more.

This dispatch done, he marched with this army to Monsegne: This is an old
Town decayed in Bayadoys, where the exercize of the reformed religion had been
appointed to be had by the edict of peace so chosen, not for the strength
thereof, but for because it was thought most commodious for the whole country
there to assemble. This town was kept by few of the religion: These few made
so little account of that army, and of the Captain thereof, that after they
had caused him to bestow two thousand and some hundred shot of ordinance, with
certain weeks of siege, and certain assaults which were dear unto the
enemy, they yielded themselves with conditions very honorable, but pernicious
to them. For the Soldiers coming forth with their arms against faith and
promise, were slain for the most part of them in the midst of that cowardly
army; part of them notwithstanding saved themselves and retired to Chastilion,
where afterward they had their penyworth of the enemy for that treachery, and
the death of their fellows. The town was given to the spoil, but there was
nothing found but the bare walls.

When he had done these conquests and exploytes upon the river of Garonne, he
went to rest himself at Bourdeaux, for the space of two months, to wit,
April and May, and part of June, as though he had won Carthage: where he
practiced the citizns to the League, and when he was weary of his conspiring,
allured by the pleasantnes of the place, and felicity of the Country, he
puts off the person of a Captain, and played the Poet, in writing such
riming verses as he could, of his love. And while this Meylan, and many other
towns upon the same river of Garonne, and made them stronger and better
furnished then ever heretofore they had been: so that the traffic of that
river, between Bourdeaux and Thoulouse, was stopped more straightly then ever
it had been before. Whereupon, many who had commerce upon that river, being
greatly decayed, and some having broken their credit, and other which were in
danger to do the like, did agree with them of the religion for the opening of
the traffic, blessing with many bitter curses, the League, the Captain, and
the army, which had bragged and promised much, and done nothing, but only
provoked them of the religion, and wasted the country.

The Duke de Main, having recreated himself so long, was urged by the King
(who expected daily to hear miracles wrought by this captain and his army)
to lead the same out of that city to do some exploite, more moved by the
earnest suit of the Lady de Main his wife, which had a stomach to them of
Chastilion, at length he determined to besiege the said Town.

Chastilion is a little town upon Dordonne, three Leagues above Liborne, and
three Leagues beneath Saint ^oy, having Montrauell on the one side, about a
League, and Gensak another town on the other side, so much distant: of this
town the Duke was Lord, it was almost forsaken of the inhabitants. Therein
the King of Navarre had placed the Baron Saliniak, with a small Garrison, not to
obstinate himself therein, but to minister some play to that army, that weary
with doing nothing, at length it might be reduced to nothing. Captain Alen and
Coronnean, with some other gentlemen and others, had followed of their own
motion the said Baron: there they were in all, to the number of nine hundred
Soldiers.

About the 18. of June, at the first approache of the enemy, they issued out
with such courage, that their sallie cost the lives of a great number

During this siege of Chastilion, the Lord Saissiual returned from the King,
and brought letters of credit, of thirty thousand Crowns, but no man was
willing to buie so dear a piece of paper. Yet the Duke gave not them over so,
hoping that the priests would have him in their memento at Mass, and would
bless him yet with some more money: but to satisfy his wives stomach, he
would venture that little remuant of credit of his which rested: wherefore he
caused many great rampires of earth to be made, as though he had to besiege
Jerusalem. The siege continued seven weeks, Turenne with a few
(notwithstanding that great army) victualed the Town, and fortified
Montrauil, a town situated upon a hill, and Gensak on the other side, each of
them distant from Chastilian a little League. On another side, Captain
Beutune, a man of great valor went forth out of Saint Foy, to attempt upon
that army, and in the conflict, the said Beutune, and the Lord Maligny, a
valiant young Gentleman, Son to the Lord Beauuoyr, with two Soldiers more
were slain, and the Lord Piles hurt. On the side of the Leaguers, were slain
three men of arms, Charles of Birague and Grimaldie, were taken prisoners and
Monardy was wounded. During this long siege, the plague waxed so hot within the
town, that of nine hundred there remained but two hundred a live, whereof many
were infected, other were wounded, their Chirurgions were dead, medicines to
heal with, powder and shot failed them: there was left but two old women,
which served them in stead of Chirurgions and cooks. So that God disposed of
those invincible hearts that were almost destitute of force and means of
defense, after the discharging of six thousand shot of ordinance, and seven
weeks of siege, at length having lost but six skore persons only by the lot
of war, and among them, but six Gentlemen only, Chastilion was surrendered
by composition.

In the surrendering, they that were whole did escape away, they that were sick,
were sent forth. The Duke to please his wives mind, would Aubeterre, they were
promised to receive no hurt, but notwithstanding (contrary to promise) most of
them, who were found in the town were executed: the spoil of the town was
given to the Soldiers, but there they found nothing but few rags infected
with pestilence.

The Lord Salignak, Captain Alen and Coronnean, with thirteen Gentlemen more
were taken prisoners, and sent to the Castells of Bourdeaux and Blaye, to be
safely kept, whence not long after, they were delivered by exchange for Popish
Gentlemen, who were prisoners at Bergerark, Saint Foy and Rochel. The folly,
c^wardlines, leaud and voluptuous life of this conqueror, his traitorous
intent, which was, that under color of conducting the Kings army, sought
nothing but to make himself strong against the King, by seducing his people
under color of the Catholic religion, being spied of the most part of the
captains, but especially by the Swissers, and Colonel of the French footmen:
also the small gain which they have had, for the space of a whole year, and
the little service which they had done to their Kings intolerable charges, and
the small reputation which they had gotten, by serving under such a Captain,
caused Bourdeaux, the Duke of Guize upon advertisement of his brother, who
greatly feared the Vicount Turenne which watched for him under every hedge,
came to Paris, to show the King that if his brother (the Duke de Main) were
not assisted, it were impossible for him to withstand the forces of the
heretics in Guienne, which did join to the Vicount Turenne out of every
province of the realm, to oppress his brother: he prayed therefore his
Majesty to provide some speedy remedy, which might not be done otherwise
than by diuerting their forces, he showed also, how that might be done by
sending diverse armies into diverse countries, and so set upon them on every
side.

This policy being approved, now they began to please themselves in their own
conceits: whereupon the Marshall Byron was appointed to lead an army into
Xainctonge: the Marshall Ioyeuse was appointed for Languedock, the Lord Ioyeuse
his son for Auuergne, the Duke of Espernon for Prouance.

The Lord Chastre should have a navy in a readiness on the coast of Britayne, so
that at the Leagues commandment like mad men they ran to it by land and by
water. The brute of these new armies being noysed abroad, made the Captains of
the Duke de Main his army to be less willing to remain in his service, and
more willing to serve others, under whose conduct they hoped to speed better,
and do service with more credit. These new armies a preparing were as the
rocks, upon the which this Sardanapalus army was cast and broken to pieces.
The soldiers therefore first, and then the Captains began to slide away,
after they had the spoil of Chastilion, which was just nothing but the plague,
and such as continued with him were employed yet once more as you shall hear.

There is a little town in the way to Chastilion, to the City Perigueux, named
Puynormand, in the which there is an old Castle belonging to the king of
Navarre, wherein the said King had put a Captain of the Catholic religion,
named Captain Roux, not to make war, but to keep the Castle as his house.
The inhabitants (except a few) were all of the popish religion: The person
himself did never depart from thence, knowing well, that for the number of
them of the Religion he needed not to fear. The inhabitants brought daily
victuals, and the artificers of the said town necessary wares to the Dukes
army, at the sieg of Chastilion, Into the said Castle the Country had sent
their goods to be safely kept.

The said Captain Roux had in the Castle a prisoner named Cussel, who had
confessed, that the Lord Lansake had hired him to kill the Marshall Matignon:
which Cussel, during the abode of the Duke de Main Bourdeaux, the said Lord
Matygnon had determined to put to death for some offenses: but at the request
of the Duke de Main, his life was spared, and he set at liberty: such a one by
the means of the Lord Lansake the Duke had procured to murder the Marshall
Matignon, that he being made out of the way, his faction in the city of
Bourdeaux might have surprised the same with the castles.

The Duke de Main to be revenged of Captain Roux, for giving notice to the
said Matygnon of the enterprise confessed by Cussell, laid the siege before the
said town and castle, which within few days was rendered with these
conditions, that the Soldiers should go forth safe, with their lives and
goods, and that the goods of the inahbitants should be preserved.

There went forth sixteen Soldiers, and four country men, for the most
part all catholics: the castle contrary to promise being ransacked, was set
on fire and burned.

The Duke de Main being at the siege of Puynormand, sent Saisseual to the
king, to advertise him of his great conquest of Chastilion, but specially to
have money, and within few days after he followed his messenger to do his
message him self. From Puynormand, the rest of that army fell to pieces, and
within a while became invisible. That army I say, that had boasted within six
months to root out of Guyenne and Oastroyn, all them of the reformed
religion, or else to force them to a perpetual exile, without having any more
liberty, not so much as to turn their forces toward their country.

This valiant warryer had bestowed a whole year, and wasted a million of
Franks, which the Priests had contributed toward that war: he has for his
money the villages of Montignak, Beaulieu, Triles, Castets, which he bought
with the Priests money, Saint Bezile, Montsegure, Chastilion, Puynormand,
which immediately came again into the hands of them of the reformed religion,
and were fortifyed stronger then ever they had been. Now, if this great Dukes
Chaplens will have more war and conquestes at his hands, they must pay for
it, or else let them go against the heretics themselves, for he will go
home. Thus ends the tragical comedy of this Captain.

In October the cheifest of the reformed religion in the Isles of Maran,
perceauing the disorder which was in the guard of the castle of Portmaran,
Angers, had determined to put in a Governor, with a certain number of
Soldiers, and that there were many which made suit for that government,
advised to demand of the Prince some gentlemen of the government of Rochel,
who had means to defend them without oppressing either the one part or other:
which thing being granted unto them, they demanded the Lord Essars of
Montalambert, a valiant and expert Captain, who had given a Jhan D'angelie, in
the year 1569. and also at Rochel 1572. and 1573. The said Lord Essars
accepted it under the authority of the Prince, with 20. Soldiers appointed
him, whom he undertook to pay with his own hand, upon the payment of a Sous
for every pound of merchandise which should pass through Marans, and upon
promise to receive one thousand crowns for the fortifications of the Castle,
as he should think good: and into that government he entered in October.

But within few days after, the said Lord of Essars began to vary with the
inhabitants, who were of the religion for the most part. For the said Lord
having found the castle wholly unfurnished of all household and necessary
commodities, required that they would furnish it both for him and his
soldiers, and also that in case the said castle should be besieged, they
would repair to it for the defense of the same, and also willed them to bring
in their moueables.

Then answered the said Lord Essars, that with moueables every one had
furnished what they could, and that the best of their goods were transported to
Rochel. As for to retire within the Castle, they thought it not expedient, for
if the enemy should besiege it, and beat it, they knew well by experience,
that it was not defensible. They answered also, that they would not put in any
more of their goods, but such as they passed not greatly to lose: and as for
the fortifications, the Prince before his departing, was content to quit them
for one thousand crowns, considering their unableness, whereof his receauer had
already received part. This answer the L. Essars did greatly mislyke, which
misliking continued until the Princes return out of England to Rochel, who
being aduertized thereof, sends the L. Resseus, and an other, to be fully
informed of all ye matter. And finally to prevent al inconveniences which might
ensue thereof, unfit for the time and place of so great importance, thought
good that the L. of Essars should surrender yt government into the hands of the
L. Iarry nigh the sands of Ollonne, who entered therein as governor the x. of
April 1586. and there remained almost two years: who was enforced with ye L.
Boysduly to surre^der it to Lauerdine the 25. of March 1586. as it shall
appear more plainly hereafter.

It is said before, how the Prince of Conde (after the dissolution of his army
at Solonne in Vendomoys) through great dangers and difficultyes, repaired to
the Island of Gernesey, and from thence into England, where he was received in
most princelyke sort of that gracious great Elizabeth Queen of England.

During his soiorne there, many noblemen and gentlemen passed over the sea into
England, to accompany him home again, among whom was the Lord Clermont. The
Queen of England (after innumerable courtesies Rochel to meet the said Prince,
among whom was the Lord Plessis Gettey, who conducted two ships, being then
governor of the I Will of The for the king of Navarre.

The said Prince arrived at Rochel with that train the 3. of January, about
eight a clock in the night. This return home, was no less wonderful Rochel,
and Saint Ihan D' angely, and to the inhabitants of the towns and country,
who showed great rejoicing every where, as having (by the special gift of God)
received this noble Prince, of whose health and preservation they had been a
long time doubtful.

The Prince being returned home so happily, soiorned not long at Rochel, but
within few days took his journey to S. Ihan, to provide for the necessary
affairs, and to muster the companies which were or could be gathered.

Few days before the Lord Laual was gone forth out of Saint Ihan, with some
companies to besiege the Castle of Tours: but they which were within stayed not
the ordinance which was coming from Saint Jhan, but yielded themselves without
any delay. The said Castle was rendered into the hand of the Lord Caze, to whom
it did belong.

At that time, to wit, after the coming of the Prince to Saint Ihan, the
Lords, Captains and companies, began to order themselves under the said Prince
in form of an army, where with about the 17. of January he began to besiege
the Castle of Dampierre, pertaining to the Marshall of Bets, nigh the town of
S. Ihan, situated upon the river Botonne, within the which was a popish
garrison: which through their insolency and ordinary roades upon them of the
religion, did draw this storm upon their heads. The said Castle being
battered for certain days, was surrendered about the 24. of January.

There was found within that Castle great quantity of corn and mooueable
goods, which the people of the country round about had carried in. It was hard
to let the Soldiers from the pillage, considering that they had so long
suffered insinite miseries after the breaking of the army in Vendomoys: for
they which had reassembled themselves in Poytow, had kept themselves within the
favor of the towns of S. Ihan, and others, which were holden by them of the
religion.

The companies of the Prince (after the taking of Dampierre) were divided into
three parts, which went into three several coasts of the country. The first
was the Lord S. Gelays, who followed the river Botonne, and took the towns
thereupon situated, as Arnay, Monde^is, and Chizay.

The Lord Ranques (with the fourth part of the companies) went toward Niort,
and enterprized upon the Castle of Sassoy, and took it from Malicorne
(governor of Niort) had put there in garrison. That castle by situation is
very strong: the garrison did great injuries to them of the religion about
Rochel, Saint Jhan, Marans, other places and high ways, by their ordinary
courses. The Lord Ranques knowing the nature of the place, searched out the
means to obtain it: he accompanied him with nine or ten gentlemen and
certain resolute Soldiers, to the number of two and twenty: he carried
through the marish a little boat on a cart, wherewith he went through a
channel which waters the garden of the Castle. To this garden does answer a
gate of the said Castle, through the which he thought to surprise the said
Castle. Notwithstanding, the day before the taking of the same, the garrison
having intelligences of the purpose of the said Lord Ranques, by one of the
reformed religion, who entertained himself with them of the garrison; they
stopped that gate with brick, dung, and other things which were at hand, and
doubled their gards, and so thought to have well provided the surprising of the
said place. Notwithstanding their thoughts beguiled them: for the said Lord
Ranques following his enterprise, applied a petaird against that gate which
issued out into the garden: the said piece opened the gate and brake their
rampire, and gave the alarm to the garrison: whereof part ran to the great
gate, other were surprised within the Castle and slain, other leapt over the
walls. They who had retired to the great gate, yielded themselves with promise
of their lives: which thing was also performed. The place was by the said Lord
Ranques put in the keeping of Captain Faueran and Vaunean, who within a while
after being sommoned by Captain Merceur to render the same, and for not so
doing, being threatened of the Canon, put the said place in the hand of
Malicorne governor of Niort.

About the beginning of April, the Lord Saint Luke enterprised upon the I Will of
Oleron, where were certain companies of the religion commanded Aubigny, and
Captain Luuaille his Lieutenant. For to bring to pass his enterprise, bearing
impaciently that neighborhood, conuayed certain companies into that Island:
and among these, was the regiment of Tierceline, consisting of four hundred
harquebuziers, fifty Muskets, and two hundred pikes, resolute Soldiers.

The Prince aduertyzed, how this regiment of Tiercelyne had passed into that
Island, the Friday before Easter, being the first of April, he took his way to
Marennes, nigh Browage, where he thought that the said Tierceline was returned,
and went all night to surprise him more easily: but finding them not, he
returned to Taillebourge, with the Lords Laual, and Boulay, and other Lords and
Captains who had accompanied him.

The 3. of April being Easter day, the said Prince had advertisement, that the
said Treceline, with his regiment, had repassed from Oleron, to Marennes, for
to return to Xainctes: upon these intelligences, the said Xainctes. At his
ariuing, there issued out of the town about 16. or 20. men of arms, with a
certain number of Harquebusiers, who were charged by the Lord Chargroys, which
conducted the forrunners of the Lord Laual, he passed them so hardly, that
they could not retire within the reach of their Harquebusiers, before one of the
enemies remained on the place, and many were hurt. After this skirmish, the
Prince seeing that Treceline removed not that day (for that it was Easter day,
or otherwise) retired for the second time to Taillebourg, without doing any
thing else. Treceline was advertised, that his return was spied, but he made
no account of it, trusting in the force of his regiment, and resolved (as he
said) to fight against whom soever would let his way, as well in the field as
in a strong place.

So the fourth day of April, being Easter monday, departing out of Marennes, he
took his journey toward Xainctes, marching in good order with countenance of
men resolute to fight, whereof the Prince being admonished, about two a clock
in the after noone speedily took his horse, accompanied with the Lord
Trimouille, his brother in law, the Lords Bowlay and Auantigny, to the number
of 30. horses, and so many Harquebusiers of his guard, and some other who could
be found at hand: with that small number, he went the ready way to Xainctes,
where he found the enemy in the self same place, where he had stayed for him
the day before, which was not much more than one thousand paces from the
suburb: he found them too far passed toward the town, and were covered with
hedges and ditches, yet he set upon the rereware of them, whereat the first he
laid on the ground about 30. or 40. of the enemies: the rest put themselves in
battle array, being favored with the hedges and high way. In the first onset,
the horse of the Lord Trimouille, (who did lead the adventurers) was beaten
down with the shot of a musket, and he also under, who was in no less danger
then the Lord Batardiere, which being struck with an Harquebush shot in the
shoulder, was slain in that place: the Lord Chanterelles also was wounded, and
dyed shortly after, with Captain Trauarre who being wounded on the head, died
also shortly after: the Lord Auantigny was hurt in the hand and in the knee.
The Lord Laual, who with great speed was gone to fetch his company (which was
at Port d' Anneaulx, and scatteringly lodged) approaching to the lane of this
skirmish, yet timely enough, galloping with 35. horses of his, by the
commandment of the Prince, set upon them on the side of the hedges, aiming
still to the Colonells Ensign, for there was no more, which was compassed and
covered with a squadron of Pikes, whom he discomfited: after he had spent all
their shot, he fought hand to hand with him who carried the Ensign, which at
length he gave Peschays was taken, Tiercelin himself was hurt in the arm.

The Lord Laual had three brethren, whereof the Lord Taulay, a little before
died of sickness at Saint Ihan: the Lord Sailly, his third brother in that
skirmish was hurt in the head, whereof he died: the morrow after, the Lord
Rieulx his other brother, also was wounded in the belly with a pike, whereof
he dyed the sixte day of the same month. The Lord Chargroys, Lieutenant of
the Lord Laual, was hurt with shot in the knee: the Lord Monsche likewise in
the Leg: few Soldiers of the Princes guard were hurt, and few slain.

During this skirmish, the Prince having gathered his company together, set on
a fresh upon such of the enemies as flocked together again: but especially
upon the horsemen of the enemy, who made show to advance themselves. The night
interrupted the fight, and gave occasion to the Prince to retire, who carried
away the spoil and armor of that regiment, with the Colonels Ensign: the
Victory was fair, but bloody, by reason of the death of the Lords above said.
The Lord Rieulx spoke to the very last breath, and rendered a notable
testimony to all them that were present, of his faith and generositie, and of
his good nurture which he had learned in the school of godliness, so that it
may be said of him, that he dyed a true Christian Knight.

The Prince conceived a marvelous grief for the death of these two Lords, but
especially the Lord Laual their brother, who conceived such sorrow thereby,
that he fell sick and dyed eight days after, to wit, the 11. of April he was
opened, and there was sound an apostume in his head, full of yellow stinking
water: so in few days died these four Lords and brothers, to the great grief
and heaviness of all good men: they were buried in the Temple, which is in the
Castle Taillebourg.

Now we have to speak of the King of Navarre, who did nothing all this time,
but only in great silence, viewed whereto this voyage of his enemies would
come. For first perceiving that the Leaguers had a special quarrel to him,
because they knew him to be in their way, and a special stop of all their
traiterous intents; they feared greatly his prudent counsel and wisdom. He
made his complaynt to the King, answered to the articles of the declaration of
his enemies, exhorted the King to take heed of them, proff^red him his
service, prayed him to let him alone with them, for if it pleased his Majesty
to give him leave, he doubted not, but with his own power he would so
chastise them, that they should be an example to their posterity.

The King by letters and messengers, exhorted and willed him to quiet himself,
to see his Edict of pacification to be observed in his government, showed him
that their cause is but one, that he sees the intents of the said Leaguers
well enough, and trusts that GOD shall make him able to repress their
madness, protested that he had care of the said K. of Navarre, as of his own
self, and held him as a dear brother, the true and rightful heir of his
Crown, in case he should die without issue.

It is said also, how the King notwithstanding this, was driven to join with
them whom he had condemned before, and to allow and justify their treasons,
was enforced through the pernicious counsel of his mother; and not only
enforced, but induced to take condition^ and laws at their hands, to assist
and arm his enemies whom he had so declared and judged few days before, even
traitors against his person, state, Crown, and life, against them I say whom
he had protested to be his faithful subjects, good brothers, and cosins, and
had received under his protection.

It is said also how the King of Navarre before had forewarned the King to
beware of such association, showing him the evil which would surely ensue, and
at length certifieth the King that he had admitted a higher power, a master
and controuler over himself, and that he had weakened himself, and
strengthened his enemies. How he went to Saint Ihan de Cadeioux into
Languedock, there to advise of his affairs, and his friends, with the Prince
of Conde, the Duke Monmorencie, and other Nobles, where they concluded upon the
defensive.

The King of Navarre returned into Gascoyne, kept himself in silence, abiding
all the injuries that might be possible, the preparations, braggings,
boastings, and attempts of his enemies, even to the great imminent danger of
his person, before that he would take arms in hand. From Gascoyne he went to
Bergerak, in Perigrod, as a time of peace, where having soiourned for a time,
he took his journey to Montauban, knowing very well that the army conducted
by the Duke de Maine was against him, and already in Perigord, rauaging,
pilling, spoiling, and wasting all that they came by. From thence he returned
into Gascoyne again about the latter end of January. 1586.

And whereas he knew well, that if he had joined all his forces with the power
of the Prince, and the Vicount Turenne, he had been able to stop the way of
the Duke de Maine, that he had not walked so long at his pleasure as he did.
But that wise, prudent, and moderate Prince perceiving by the attempts of that
army, the qualities of the leader, and the disorder that was among them; but
specially having Gods favor on his side: And seeing yt Gods curse and wrath
was powered on his enemies side, he never thought it meet to trouble himself
nor his friends about that accursed company, and villayno^s rabble of
rakehells, knowing that

At length the King of Navarre determined to pass the river of Garonne, to
repair into Poytow, to visit the places of his government about Loyre, and
being returned from Montauban into Gascoyne, the Marshal Matignon had besieged
Castets, a Castle situated upon the river Garonne, pertaining to the Lord
Fabas, about the month of February.

The King of Navarre, having knowledge thereof, accompanied with two or three
hundred horses, and eighteen hundred Harquebusiers, did raise the siege, and
dined in the said Castle that day, in witness that he accomplished his purpose
for that time.

The K. of Navarre from thence sent al his companies to garrisons, and took his
way to Bearne, to see the Lady his sister, and to take order for all
necessary things, concerning the security and preservation of the towns and
country.

That being done, he took his journey to Nerak, and passing through Eause,
(which is his) provided for the safety of the same in good time (for otherwise
it was in danger to be lost) and for that purpose there he soiourned 2. days.

There news was brought unto him, that the Duke de Main hasted to let his
passage over the river Garonne: for all that he took his way to Nerak, where
he soiourned a whole day more to take order for the safety of the town.
Thereunto more aduisement was given him, that the said Duke de Mayn was at
Villeneufue d' Agenoys intending to stop his passage over the river Garonne.
There was in appearance occasion enough, to cause the said King to advance and
hasten extraordinarylie his voyage, but notwithstanding, despising all the
endeavors of the said Duke, he would change nothing of his purpose: but to the
contrary, having done at Nerak all his affairs with leisure, departed not
thence until that it was already far in the day.

From Nerak he took his journey to Barbase, and continued as though he would
go to Castelialoux. Many did carefully muse the day before what way he would
take, uncertain whether it would be through Caumont, or Saint Bazile, or
through the Mas de verdune, but they could know nothing at all until they
came within two leagues of Cast^lialoux: For then being in the middle of the
heath, he declared the way and order which would be kept in his passing over
the river, he separated the men of war who accompanied him: he kept with him
about 20. gentlemen well horsed and 10. Soldiers for his guard, with whom he
went toward Cammont. He appointed the Lord Roque for the conducting of the
rest, Roque to pass at Saint Bazile, which thing he did without any let,
although the marshall Matignon was but at 3. leagues from thence. The King
being arrived at Cammont, although he knew the Duke de Main to be within 2.
leagues from that place: notwithstanding there he dined with as much leisure,
as any man could do in the greatest and most assured peace; and after dinner
passed the river without any let or hindrance of his men.

The King of Navarre came the morrow after to Saint Foy, which is a town upon
Dordonne. The Lord Roque also with all them which had followed him, aryued
there about two hours after. His Majesty soiorned there, and at Bergerak a
whole month. These be two towns situated upon Dordonne: Bergerak is great
and rich: Saint Foy is lesser a great deal, yet very rich, because of the
traffike upon the said river: S. Foy is beneath Bergerak three leagus:
Chastilion beneath Saint Foy three leagues, and above Liborne, a great, strong,
and rich town about three leagus of. Bergerak and Saint Foy received the
Gospel above fifty years ago by the man of God Edmond Lauoy, who suffered at
Bourdeaux for the testimony of Christ. These two towns have always ever since
persisted in the confession of the Gospel. in these 2. towns the King of
Navarre remained (as is above said) a whole month, expressly to see the
countenance of his enemies. All that while his enemies were within 3. leagues
of him, he went daily to hunting, and none of his enemies that ever durst show
their faces: which thing did show evidently, that de Main had so little courage
in him, that he durst not let him to take his pleasures when he was willing so
to do, much less to execute his enterprises, and proved for wayghty and
necessary affairs.

It is said before, how that by the advice of de Main, Guyze came to Paris, to
require help for his brother. For as a conscience guylty of grievous crimes is
always timorous, and suspecteth all things: so the woorm of the conscience
gnawed these men, and feared them so, that he apprehended Gods justice: and
supposed that all them of the reformed religion in France (out of hand) would
oppress the Duke de Main his Brother.

Therefore he persuaded the king to divert their forces, and to assault them
in all quarters of the Realm. Whereupon diverse armies were prepared for diverse
countries, and namely the Marshall Biron was appointed for Guyenne.

The Leaguers understanding that the King of Navarre had passed Garonne, did
greatly have the voyage of the said Marshall Biron. The inhabitants of Niort
having sold themselves to the Leaguers to work iniquity, Marans, Annix,
Rochel, and other parts of Xainctonge and Poytow, might be spoiled and wasted
before the ariuing of the king of Navarre into that country, whom they knew
(by his valor and wisdom) was able to disappoint al their attempts.

The king of Navarre understanding of these new preparations, and knowing, yea
seeing with his eyes that the most miserable vilages of Guyenne were good
enough to occupy that army, and that the time of the infallible Biron, the said
king of Navarre would rather show a proof of his valor and courage in
opposing himself to that valiant, old, and experienced Captain, then to seem
to strive with that effeminate, and slavish army.

Therefore departing from Saint Foy in the end of April, and passing through
Perigord, Engomoys, Poytow, and Landimoys, went to visit the places of his
government upon the river of Loyre.

Whilst the army for Guyenne is a preparing, and the king of Navarre makes
his progress into Poytow, and the towns upon Loyre, the King understanding,
that in the execution of the edict of October, and of the declaration thereof,
given in December last, touching the seazing on the goods of them of the
religion: and others, which did bear arms against the League, many creditors
and others which pretended right in the goods, made claim to the^, so that the
officers could have no gain thereof to the kings use and advantage. Therefore
the king about the 26. of April sets forth an edict, that the said goods
shall be seized and sold, or given to farm to the kings use, and that after
such as did pretend any title to the same goods, having proved their right,
they then to be satisfied upon the fruits of the years following.

And for as much as some were returned home from the countries, where Browage
with their courses did greatly hinder the traffike upon the Sea, which caused
them of Rochel to bar their haven, in sinking old ships in the mouth of the
river, replenished with great stones for to make them sink in the bottom of
the water.

For the performance of this, the Rochellers prepared a navy of twenty ships
well furnished, three Galiots, with other small vessels to the number of 35. or
40. in all. Over this army commanded the Lord Saint Gelays, assisted with
Captain Gardeleau: and a number also of Gentlemen Rochel.

The Lord Saint Luke upon the aduertizement which he received of this
enterprise, with all diligence prepared himself, and would have stayed all the
Galleyes which he had before received from Bourdeaux, but few remained there:
notwithstanding he made a Fort upon the bank nigh the place where they would
bar the said haven: which thing profited him a little, for in the keeping of
the same he lost a great number of men.

Whilst this was a doing at Browage, the King of Navarre returned from
Poytow, and fro the Coast of Loyre, and entered into Rochel the last day of May
(being the Lords day) with a marvelous reioy sing of al men, which received
much comfort of his presence there: for the said King had always no less
virtuously than happily opposed himself to all the attempts and endeavors of
all the armies of the enemies, which had been sent against them.

The same day the said King of Navarre embarked himself, to go to visit the
Navy which was before Browage, where he soiorned some days.

In the mean while there had arrived certain ships to the Lord S. Luke
governor of Browage, who with them went about to let that enterprise; but all
was in vain: so that without any great loss, all the ships appointed for that
exployt, were brought in and su^ke in the mouth of the Haven, according to the
deliberation taken. So the channel by these means was barred in such a sort, as
the Haven has been in a manner rendered unprofitable. Notwithstanding that,
the Lord S. Luke has bestowed much labor to open it, and at the charges of
the inhabitants of the Islands, he has drawn out four or five vessels. Yet is
that Haven always suspected unto ships, and they need to set marks to the
ships that will enter in, least they take hurt.

This being done, the Navy returned to Rochel, without any loss, except of
one Captain named Mercur, and few Soldiers which were taken in the
skirmishes that were made at the Fort above mentioned.

About the fourth of June, the King being returned to Rochel with this Navy,
and understanding that the Marshall Byron with this army approached, Lusignen,
Mele and Chizay (Towns not defensible) had yielded themselves, took his
journey to Marans, to consider the places whether they were able to make head
against that army.

The army lead by the Marshall Byron did consist of twelve hundred horsemen,
and four thousand footmen with a convenient furniture. This army was very
small; the cause was, that the King (at the commandment of the Leaguers) had
divided his forces into sundry armies for sundry Provinces, to divert the
forces of them of the religion from the Duke de Main, as is before said.

The King of Navarre having well viewed the Forts of the Isles of Maran,
concluded to defend the places against that army,

The 7. day of June came two sorts of deputies appointed to require of the King
of Navarre two contrary things: namely, the ^^putie of Rochel required his
Majesty that he would cause the Castle of Maran to be rased, for the reasons
which they then alleged. On the other side, the Gentlemen of Annix required
him not to do so, for as much as the Papists would take occasion to do the
like to their houses. The King of Navarre answered to them both, that thereupon
he would take advise.

Whilst these things were a doing, the King of Navarre had advertisement that
the Duke de Main distressed Chastilion: whereupon he assembled as great a
company of horsemen as he could, and with the Prince determined to rescue that
place: which he could not bring to pass, by reason of the advancing of Byron
and his army. For the army of Byron was already advanced to Niort, and
having no nearer place than Maran to assault, made his reckoning not to besiege
it, but only to fright the inhabitants and about fifty soldiers, which he
knew to be lodged in the forts: and in the greater of the said forts there was
not above nine or ten Soldiers; the said forts being very ill furnished, which
made him believe that such a small company would not withstand him, but
surrender the said forts.

The fear indeed was great among many, whereof some of them had already
retired to Rochel. But the Lord Iarry (governor of the place) and his
Soldiers (with some of the inhabitants) took courage: many did despair of
the succor of the King of Navarre, whom they thought to have passed into
Gascoyne. They resolved notwithstanding to hold against that army. And on the
monday the 7. of June at night, they sent messengers to Rochel, to demand
succor both of men and munition of war, and of certain pieces. They of
Rochel answered, that they could not conveniently spare men; as for munition
and pieces they would willingly let them have, so that they might have
security to be paid the price that it cost them.

This refusal of men did so fear the inhabitants, that even that night many
did retire, and carried away the rest of their goods.

But on the Wednesday morning about four of the clock arrived from the King
of Navarre two Gentlemen, to wit, the Lord Fouqueroles, and Valiere, whom he
had sent in great diligence: they calling the governor, the Minister of the
place, and some of the inhabitants, assured them that the King of Navarre was
coming in great diligence for to succor them, and that he would arrive even
the same day: and after they had rested a while, the said Lords went to view
the Holds and entrings into the Islands, and so likewise the day following.

The 12. day of June, the King of Navarre came with few in company, but his
troops followed him apace.

The 13. 14. and 15. days of that month, there entered brave companies of
Soldiers, as they of the Lords Puelles, Granuile, Drakuille and S. Foy,
Normands. There entered also Barache, the regiment of Sorlus, the Lord of
Neufuy, under five Ensigns, for the most part Perigordins and Limosins, yet
very well trained in Military Discipline. All these companies were placed in
the forts by the King of Navarre, namely, the Lord Puelles was in the Bastile,
Drakuille in Beauregard, Barache at Barnay, Granuile with Saint Foy, were put
in the Brune, and Repentne on the way to Rochel: Captain Plaune with his
company of Poytiuines, was placed at Poyneuf, Captain Saint Ihan at Clousie,
Captain Treille in Brault: there was a company of Rochellers, few in number,
but men resolute under Captain Mot, they were put to keep the entrey of the
mill in the Marsh.

The Lord Iarrie governor of Man's, undertook to keep the Forts Paulee,
Allowete, and Botsblauk, with his company, and some of the inhabitants. The
King of Navarre commanded all to obey the Lord Fonquereles, who showed a
marvelous care and diligence in the same siege.

The 10. day of Iulie, the Marshall Byron with a company of horses, Bastile,
but approaching a little too nigh, he was saluted out of some small forts,
which the Lord Puelles had placed upon the high way; he had his thumb and
some other fingers taken off with a shot; the same shot did greatly (as it was
reported) hurt a Gentleman, who was by him.

All that week, the enemy did none other thing, but advanced himself toward
the Bastile, set his gabions nigh the farm of Angle, there to place three
pieces to batter the fort of Bastile. In the mean time, the King of Navarre did
show a wonderful diligence, as well in fortifying the Island, as in bringing
companies to make head to the enemy at every coming in, and also in
providing of victuals and munition of war, as well out of Rochel, as out of
the I Will of The, and out of Lusson, whence he brought great stoare of corn,
meal and wine. He had a great ship out of the I Will of The, well furnished,
having two great pieces before, to defend the Fort Paulce, he had also seven
great pieces carried from Rochel, which were divided in the Forts, to wit, one
in the Brune, two in the Bastile, one at Beauregarde, two at Paulce, and two
remained at the Castle.

The 22. of July, was seen that the enemy passed through the Marshes of
Beauregard, and coming forth out of a little Island named Cigogne, began to
set up a fort in the middle of the Marshes, distant from the firm land about
five hundred paces, on the other side, our men made a trench and Drakuille, he
regarded it not, so that as the minister returned from prayers, the said
Soldier was shot through with a musket, and presently departed, before that
the Minister had any time to admonish and comfort him. The same day, the enemy
with great diligence set up a great fort, within six score paces of our
trenches, it was made with great pieces of timber, fagots and earth, and
hogsheads filled with earth, which were disposed by seven, set one against
another; that fort might be of 30. foot square, and 15. in heigt, and for to
bring all the stuff from the Island Cagogne, they caused the water of the
Marshes to rise above a foot in heigt, by the means of opening the sluses
and mills, about Fontenay and Niort. This thing our men did help also, for
because of the great heat, they feared that the water would dry too fast, and
so give too easy access to the enemy through the Marsh, for they stopped the
sluices below nigh the sea, therefore the water course being opened above, and
stopped beneath, did rise in a short space. By this means the enemy had
opportunity to bring a very great Culuerine, with other small pieces,
wherewith they began to shoot upon our men, and upon the house of Beauregard
the last day of July, about two a clock, without doing any hurt to any man.

This battering, notwithstanding did amaze a great many, because they never
thought that they would have brought such pieces; for it was bruted, and even
the Papists had given out, that the enemy would raise the siege: but by this
it appeared, that he meant in good earnest.

For all the great diligence and care of the King of Navarre, in providing for
victuals, there was so many mouths who lived of the stoare, that they who did
best service, oftentimes dined worst. For during the space of eight or ten
days, they had not in a day but one or two loaves of Barley bread; for other
corn was not ripe as yet in that country, which caused that scarsitie. There
were yet two discommodities which urged them greatly; the one was an extreme
heat, which continued ten weeks and more: the other (...) that in ^he night*
especially the Gnats were so importunate, that many were stung with them, even
with blood drawing in the face and other parts of the body which were
uncovered, so that the stockens of linen cloth, could not defend them from
such molesta^ions.

Some days before, the King of Navarre had taken order, that one of Rochel
came within the haven of Marans, with a long Culuerine, bearing the arms of
Britayne, which in the former wars, the Rochelers had taken out of the
Castle of Marans, which afterward was called Chassebiron. That evening it was
had out of the Galiot, and carried with horses and men half the way to
Beauregard, but there it was overthrown, and one of the wheels broaken: from
thence it was drawn upon rowles, and being placed against the fort of the
enemy, in such sort as it could not be indomaged, did them good service. For
the 2. of August, about six a clock in the morning, the enemy brought down
the water from Niort, a double Cannon upon two boats, and with them began to
shoot against the Fort Paulee. There they did no other hurt, but shooting
within a short piece of iron, they did break it about a foot, and the pieces
stroke off the arm of the Gunner, and did hurt two Souldious; they hurt also
a Soldier of the Ship, who did show great endeavor to shoot at the enemy,
with a number of Harquebuses and Muskets.

And below the fort Paulee, the Lord Iarry with his harquebusiers, but
specially with the long fowling pieces of the inhabitants of Maran, who did
incessantly shoot upon the boats, and also into the coppes nigh the river,
did so molest the enemy, that about nine a clock they were enforced to forsake
their boats, and their double Canon, which remained in the middle of the River,
until that having tied the beats with coardes, they drew them away up the
river, and did no other thing therewith: for although they might have endomaged
the fort by a long battering, yet had it been impossible unto them to approach
to it to seize upon, considering that the river was staked thick, and the shot
fell upon them as thick, if they discovered themselves never so little, so
they were not suffered to appear within their reach. While they drew their
boats, there was a rash fellow to occupy our harquebuziers, which did discover
himself armed a great while in the sight of our men, playing with his two hand
sword: and although they shot an infinite number of pellets at him, yet was he
not hit but of two, and was very little hurt, as it was afterward reported.

The third of August there was a great alarm given at the trenches of
Beauregard, for the enemy made a countenance to advance forward upon us.

At midnight we set upon the towers of the castle with great lanterns of
light, because that the enemy had great fires in all their watches, and a
mighty fire upon the vaultes of S. Ihan of Lauersay nigh the lodging of the
Marshall Biron, half a league off from Bastile. At that time was there means
made for the agreement between the king of Navarre, and the Marshall Biron
general af the Popish army, which was concluded upon the fifth day of the same
August. So that the night following the enemy Navarre: for it was first agreed,
that the Marshall Biron should lead away his army beyond the river, without
attempting upon Tonnay Charante, a place very weak, which he di^ hold for
the king of Navarre.

Secondly, that Marans should remain free for the traffike.

Thirdly, that the king of Navarre should have a Gentleman of his in the
caste^l, with certain number of soldiers to hold the inhabitants of both
religions in the same liberty which they had before the war. This agreement
they of Fontenay and Niort would not hold, and never ceased to make war
until that they were well punished: for wicked robbers did continually issue
out of Fontenay, Maillezayes and Niort, having for their Captain a certain
Mass Priest, named Sir Merye, parish Priest of Ronde, who did daily rob
Merchants and travelers of their goods, and often times of their lives, until
they were reduced under the hands of the king of Navarre.

The seventh of the same month, the king of Navarre came from Rochel, when it
was very late, entered the Isles of Maran, by the fort Brune, and from thence to
the Bastile, viewed all the fortes and trenches on that side: and about ten in
the night did suppe at the sign of the Moon.

The eight day he divided his companies, sending some into Poytow, other into
Annis to refresh themselves, whilst the L. Byron lead his army into
Xainctonge: so that army began to be broken against Reeds and Rushes of
Marans, doing afterward nothing: but within a while after by little and little it
was scattered and reduced to nothing.

The Papists spoke diversely according to their passion, as though this army
had not done what they might have done. But the truth is, that the king of
Navarre had provided such a good order within the Island, and that there was
such a number of men of valor, that the Lord Biron could not do otherwise then
he did, except he would have thrust his me^ to the slaughter without endomaging
much his enemy.

Secondly, the marshes which at that time were wont to be dry, were yet full
of water even a foot high, for the causes above recited.

Thirdly, the men of war have made fortes at every entrance into the Island,
furnished with good and resolved men: for they were about one hundred of brave
and (...) gentlemen, making about two hundred good horses, a^le to oppose
themselves against the enemy, if he had attempted to enter. Also the enemies
had to go above fifteen hundred paces in the Marsh, not above five in a
rank, all discovered to our men who were in the forts.

Fourthly, the Marish was full of steps, which the Cattle made in winter: so
that if the horsemen had waded, the one foot had soonke very deep, and the
other would have stayed upon the firm ground, with a great number of
Galthrops, which were cast in diverse places. Such was the state of Maran, when
the composition was made. The king of Navarre left the Lord Iarry governor
there as before, with charge to war against no man if they should not war
against him.

The Lord Nemours (whom the King had sent thither to command over the men of
arms) stayed not there long: for he was commanded by the king of Navarre to
retire in Poytow, and after went to Bruant.

Few days after the distributing of the companies out of Marans, captain
Lommeau discovered the money of the tributes and Impost of Poytow, conducted
toward Loyre by certain Albaneses: and some gentlemen with Popish soldiers of
the country, whom they set upon: but they saved them selves in a Priory. Not
far from thence he compassed them immediately with certain companies.

The king of Navarre being advertised thereof at Rochel, departed speedily, and
caused the great Culuerine of Marans to be brought before the Priory, which
was strong without canon: they within yielded themselves by composition, which
was, that they should go away safe, leaving behind them six thousand crowns,
which was the charge of their conuoy.

As the king of Navarre used a wonderful diligence in going thither, so was
his diligence no less in retyring thence, and commanded all the companyes to
do the like, knowing well that ye enemy (which was yet at Morye, and about
Fontenay with his army) would not fail to set on him; which thing did happen.
But the said king of Navarre had already repassed the fort of Brault, which
thing all his companies did not, for many remaining at Lusson to refresh
themselves, and to fare French-like, were charged and put to flight, some were
slain, some taken prisoners, most of them saved them selves, leaving behind
them their stuff and baggage, and among them captain Lommeau.

It is said before, that by the advice of the Duke of Guyze, diverse armies were
appointed for diverse provinces, and namely the Duke Ioyeuse for Languedock,
where he entering with a power took the Cities of Lodeue and Saint Ponce: he
took also Montesquion: but Marueiolx he took by treason. In all these places
he committed incredible cruelties, and such as it were needful to find out new
words to describe them. But as God is a just revenger of wrongs, so did he
not suffer these crueltyes long unpunished, but showed tokens that his justice
is neither feigned nor idle, nor his hand shortened in punishing such insolent
Tyrants: For after diverse and manifold excesses and injuries done in the
country, he besieged the mas Saint Puelles, the weakest, most miserable, and
least defensible of Loragoys: there was he so shamefully beaten and put back,
that after they had slain him thirty Captains, and five hundred
Harquebusieres, they scattered his regiments, and so leaving his credit behind
him cracked among men of valor, was feign to return home as well as he could,
well chastized, to tell news of his good speed to his Master.

Shortly after, the Nobility of Languedock advised better by the proud and
insolent outragiousnes of the man and of his companies, and taught by the
execution of Gods justice upon that rabble of savage robbers, assembled the
states of that province, at Castelnawdarry, where they concluded never to
meddle any more with the leaguers, neither to proceed any more by the way of
war and vyolence against them of the Religion.

It is said before how the Duke d'Espernon was appointed for Daulphine and
Prouance, and the son of Ioyeuse for Auuergne. The Lord Espernon therefore
entering into Daulphine with his power, had better success: for first he took
Valance, Tallard, and Guileslie from the league, and reduced them to the Kings
obedience. He took also many towns from them of the Religion, as Sorges and
others: he was more moderate and void of cruelty and sauagenes, yet at
length seeing that as he had taken one place he left andther, and that war
was an endless thing there, and that with long toil of war, and lack of
money, his army was scattered, (as at length it went invisible) leaving his
brother the Lord Valete there with such forces as he had left, to do what he
were able: so he went to the King again (and not without cause) considering he
was one of his most faithfullest about his person.

The young Ioyeuse in Auuergne walked at liberty, took his pleasures, spent
the Kings money frankly, and when that was done, for lack of more, returned
from whence he came as wise as when he went out.

Thus we see that within the compass of a year, 6. armies have been sent
(with great preparation of all necessary things) into several provinces, to
war against heaven and earth, and to oppose themselves against all that is
good and godly, and how they are all fallen to pieces, as though they had been
smitten down by the hand of the God of armies, as the Lapithes and Centaures
are reported by the Poets.

During these lamentable tempests, the which did so toss France with these
six armies in diverse provinces: The Princes and certain Germany moved with
compassion, pitying the miserable subversion and ransaking of France their
next neighbors: sent an Embassage to the King, to persuade him (if it were
possible) to extinguish that co^bustion raised by the league, and by peace to
restore the state of his Realm

The Ambassadors were sent by the Princes Electors of Saxony, Palatine and
Brandenbourg, and by other Princes of the sacred empire as the Noble Princes
Ioachim Frederick, Marquess of Brandenbourg, and administrator of Magdebourg,
July of Brundswik, and Lunebourg, William Lewis, and George Landgraues of
Hessen, brethren: Ioachim earnest Prince of Chatten, with the four principal
imperial cities, Strasbourg, Vlmes, Mersebourg, and Fr^nckefort, with the
ambassadors of Vtten and Issenbourg, they al came, except they of Vtten and
Issenbourg, which upon certain urgent affairs went back (delivering their
co^missions to their fellows) to Saint Germain in Lay, and had audience the
tenth of October.

First, they offer the commendations and services of their Princes and
commonwealths unto him.

Secondly, they recite how they had been aduertized, even by the letters of
Mandolet, governor of Lions for the King, that his Majesty's intention had
been to preserve the edict of pacification, stablished upon the faith of the
Majesty of a Prince.

Thirdly, that they understand that he had been enforced, contrary to his
godly intention, to revoke the said edict of peace, and by way of arms to
persecute his most faithful subjects, even the chiefest of the Princes of his
blood, which thing they would hardly have believed, if it had not bee^ne made
known by his own letters sent unto some of the said Princes, by the Lord
Schemberg, hearing da^e the 22. of October. 1585.

Fourthly, protesting of the good affection of their Princes and common wealths
toward his Majesty, they do in their names in most humble wise beseech him,
that considering into what pitiful state France had been reduced by the
former wars, and the good benefits which have ensued the last peace: he will
not be induced by the perswasio^s of the Pope, to bring in again blood shed,
hatred of the Crown of France, loss of so many Princes, Lords, and Nobility,
and of so many his faithful subjects, which have done to him and his
predecessors so many notable services; which thing undoubtedly will ensue, (if
not worse) if he do not defend the edict of peace, considering that by his own
declaration he confess, seth, that the reformed Religion will not be rooted out
by the sword.

Fifthly, whereas he had showed by his declaration, that the edict of peace was
made by ripe deliberation and counsel, and published with all sole^nities
requisite thereunto, and that the said edict was sworn by his brother of happy
memory, Duke of Alancon, by the Princes and Lords, in lifting up their hands
to heaven, and that he himself would have that peace to be called his peace,
which he made (as he said) voluntarily, without any compulsion, and for that
would have it kept inviolable, there was no reason why the benefits of that
peace should be cut off, by raising war France.

And by the way of conclusion, they beseech his Majesty, that considering the
reasons by them showed, and taking some pity of his poor Realm, it may
please him to reject the persuasions of the Pope and Leaguers, and to preserve
the edict of peace: offering unto him in the names of their Princes and
Commonwealths, that if there be any means in them that may further a good
peace, and restablish his estate, his Majesty shall understand how they are
affectionate to procure all things which pertain to his honor and greatness:
and if it pleases him, they will employ all their faithful service in the
assuring of his dignity and royal Crown, and to the benefit of all
Christendom, but specially to suppress this war, whereunto (in their
judgment) he had been enforced.

Having made an end of their embassage, they delivered him their instructions
both in Dutch and (...). The King gives answer the 11. of October, but such
an answer as he seemed rather to be offended with them for their duty and
good will of their Princes and Commonwealths, than to be moved to any moderate
counsel.

It is said before, that in April of this year 1586. the King made great
preparation of war in providing five armies all at once: at which time also
they made a motion for peace unto the King of Navarre. By this it was an easy
thing to judge, that they who disposed themselves to war so furiously, could
not be brought to condescend to any moderate counsel or reasonable peace.

But whilst al these armies were ready, and marching to do some great
exployts, and to invade the Provinces (whereunto they of the reformed religion
had retired and were strong) the Q Mother also marched toward Guienne, in hope
to obtain a greater victory in assaulting the King of Navarre with a parley,
than al those armies with force. For she took with her out of the stoare of
Italian tricks, temptation, disuniting and weakening. For first she will try
the trick of Satan in the 4. of Matthew, when he tempting Christ proffered him
all the kingdoms of the earth: So she thought to win this godly and noble
Prince, in showing him, that if he would forsake the Son of God, he should be
declared the right heir of the Crown, in case the King should decease without
issue: otherwise it would be impossible to him to attain unto that Crown,
considering the great strength of the Catholics, and how eagerly they are bent
against the reformed religion.

If she hears the same answer of him, which Satan heard of Christ, then
will she take the second weapon of her war in hand, which is Disuniting: for
if the said King will not consent (upon the proffer of peace) to abolish the
exercize of the reformed religion, then she will render him odious France, both
to them of the reformed religion, and also to the Catholics; for both were
desitous of peace: so she imagines, that by these means she might disunite
them from the King of Navarre, laying to his charge, that it rested but in him
that France was not at rest.

If this would not serve neither, then she thought sure that the third would
do the feate; which was to abuse the true intentions of the said King of
Navarre, that holding him long about the hope of peace, and whilst he should
labor about it, he might be surprised by some point of Italian valor: and if
not, his partakers would be so weakened in the Provinces, with these armies,
that either he would not be able hereafter to defend himself, or withstand his
enemies: or else that he would be enforced by this weakening, to accept at
their hands a most disaduantagious peace.

And to begin withal, she sends to the Lords Monpensier and Monmorency,
willing them to dispose the heart of the said King to peace (as she said):
which thing was diversely taken. For the Leaguers feared the authority of the
Prince Monpensier, mistrusting that by these means the Queen unawares would
unite him to the head of his house. They of the religion feared his facility,
that he was made a mean for peace, least he should join himself to the King
of Navarre in this quarrel and war, (raised by the Leaguers) to destroy the
house of Bourbon: so that by one thing both parts took occasion to distrust
this message.

As Soon as the negotiation of peace began, the practizes of the Leaguers began
also to interrupt the peace, which they greatly feared. For after the message
of these two Lords, the Abbot of Gadaigne was sent to the King of Navarre, (for
no Tragedy can be well played without a Priest) who being well entertained at
Rochel by the said King, every man began to hope well of that thing which was
so greatly desired.

But when the Q. Mother came to Cheuonceau, a town lying upon the river Chere,
which falls in Loyre beneath Tours, all this hope vanished away like a
lightming. For then the hatred and deceitful meaning of the Q. Mother was
discovered, which had lien hid under those courteous messages. For the Abbot of
Gadaigne was sent to Browage, there to play Symons part (if he could): but his
going thither was much suspected of the Rochelers. The victualling also of
Browage was taken for a stoare house against their Town.

There was a Gentleman named la Roche the lesser, who went many voyages
between the King of Navarre and the Q. Mother, to agree of the place, and
other means of the interuiew. The Q. by little and little did draw nere to
Xainctonge: the King of Navarre would have advanced as far as Champaigne in
Tourene, so that the Marshall Byron, who had passed Loyre, to assault Poytow,
would retire beyond Loyre, and that

The Queen would, that he should trust in her; the King willed her to trust in
him; she aleaged her good will, he aleaged his fidelity and innocence, who
did never break his word toward any person. She did lay to his charge, that
he was the cause that the parley could not be brought to pass. He answered,
that it did stay but in her, that France was not in quietness, and that he was
ready to see her, so that it were in a sure place, and that his way might be
sure.

Whilst these thing passed so between the^, by messengers, some counseled
the King of Navarre to help Chastilion, which was then besieged by the Duke
d'Mayne: others willed him not to take heed to her deceitefull words, and to
expect the same courtesies which he had received heretofore at their hands.

It is said before, how that among those five armies which were prepated in
April and May, the commander Chastre was appointed to furnish a Navy in
Britain, well provided. And in August, as they were taking Rochel, which thing
was the cause, that all was on the point to be broken. The King of Navarre
complained to the King by the Lord Riaulx, beseeching his Majesty to call
back that army, showing that he could not leave a town of such importance as
that was, in that state, without seeking for the quietness and safety thereof.
The army notwithstanding removed not thence, as long as they had any provision
of victuals, whatsoever means the King of Navarre made for it: but at length
in the month of November, the famine made them hoyse up sails, and not the
Kings commandment.

The self same day that the Navy took up ancker, Captain Arman was taken
with letters of the Queen, to the commander Chastre, by the Rochel: these
letters fell into the hands of the King of Navarre. He notwithstanding
ouercomming with patience all these occasions, which he might take to refuse
the parely, he offered to see the Queen, upon the conditions above said,
requiring that in the mean time, there should no act of hostility be done of
either sides.

The Queen required a truce to be taken, and published. The King of Navarre
answered, that he could not consent thereunto, for as much as he had promised
to his partakers, to enter into no agreement of peace, without their advise and
consent: she found (to her thinking) that answer very strange. Thus like the
Carthagenians, who wept when they should pay tribute to the Romans, but were
not moved at all, when they yielded themselves tributaries to them.

For when the King of Navarre, answered to the Kings messengers, that he would
stay yet six months for the Kings succor, before he would employ his
friends, and that he would first be demanded of peace, before he would resolve
himself to war. Now, when she finds that he has given his word* she
weepeth: it had been better to have wept when the edicts were broken, the
innocent judged guilty, the obedient rebels, and the just malefactors. After
much a do, the Q. Mother granted certain pasports, which the King of Navarre
demanded for to advertise his friends what he was in hand to do. At the self
same time, she caused the truce to be proclaimed, which almost mard all, for
the King of Navarre suspected, that under color of that truce, she would stay
the leauie of the Germans.

Thereupon the King of Navarre showed unto her, that this truce had a Germany.

As they were about to conclude the said truce, certain of the companies of
the Lord Neufuy were charged, which did greatly offend the King of Navarre.
Thus this negotiation of peace going forward by messengers to and fro, the Duke
d'Mayne in the mean while (supposing that the Q. Mothers absence from the
Court, might be a good help to do some good exploit) hasted his journey from
Puynormand, where his army partly weary and ashamed to obey such a cowardly
Captain, partly for want of money was scattered, every man repairing where he
thought to speed best: the Duke de Main (I say) came to Paris, where he and
the rest of that house began to make new broils.

But to return to the matter, at length after many voyages to and fro, la
Roche brought an order, both for the place and manner of the interuiew, and
also of the truce granted of both parts. For the accomplishment thereof,
therefore the King of Navarre came to larnak, a town situated upon the river
Charante between Coignak and Engolesme the 11. of December, so the 13. day he
want to Saint Brice with a good company.

At the first meeting there were many complaints of both sides: the Queen
reproached him of his disobedience, and passing over the former actions, she
stayed upon the present calamities which do afflict France; she lets him
understand, that the King was enforced to make peace with the League to save
his estate, and that without that remedy, all was lost.

Secondly, that the pretense of religion ought to be taken away, to take away
the war out of the realm.

The King of Navarre on the other side answered to the first complaining, that
he had none other way been damnicted or endaungered, but by

Thirdly, he showed that the preservation of the Kings estate, depended of the
intertaining of his edicts, and that they were his edicts in deed, which he
had voluntarily sworn.

Also, that they were edicts of peace, which chased away war, and not they
which (for to satisfy certain seditious persons raised in some province)
replenished the realm with sedition.

Madam (said he) you cannot accuse me, but of too much fidelity: I do not
complain of your faith, but of your age, which doing wrong to your memory,
has made you to forget what you had promised me: This was the end of the first
interuiew.

The sum of the principal articles of this truce, was, that it should
endure unto the sixth of January, that she might advertise the King what was
done, and that the said truce, if the King does not agree to it, shall be
prolonged fifteen days, for every one to retire, or else to take further
advise.

Secondly, to avoid the disorders, the impostes, subtilties, and other
payments, shall not be gathered by neither side, and that within the first of
January next coming, fifteen thousand crowns shall be delivered or leauied
upon the places, which they of the religion hold for the maintaining of the
Garrisons of the reformed religion.

Thirdly, that the Protestants shall cease to leauie the tenths, goods and
rents of Priests, where they have heretofore leauied them: and as for the
goods of the Catholics, seized on by them of the reformed religion, they shall
not meddle neither of the one side, nor of the other.

Fourthly, the men of war of both sides, shall make no roades, oppressions,
nor any act of hostility, during the said truce.

Last of all, the Q. Mother shall grant passeports to the King of Navarre, his
servants, friends, alleyed and partakers through the realm, and out of the
realm, to advertise them of that which he is about, and also that he may send
to the King, to let him know what endeavor the said King of Navarre has
used, to bring all things to a good peace. This was concluded at Tours, the 19.
of December: in this truce were comprehended Poytow, Xainctonge, Engomoys,
Lodumoyes, Mirebaloys.

The Vicount Turenne was sent to Coignak, a Town upon the river Charante,
between Xainctes and Iaruk, to agree upon the particularities of the truce
with the Q. Mother.

There the Q. having agreed to these articles, and some other depending of
these, gave him to understand, that for to have peace the king of Navarre must
needs cause the exercise of the reformed religion to cease in the towns which
he did hold: and gave him a special charge to declare to the said King of
Navarre, that this was the kings will.

The King of Navarre being in the way to come to see her, was met by the said
Vicount, who declared unto his Majesty, what he was encharged by the Q. Mother
to show him. Whereupon the king was about to turn back, but supposing tha^
she had said so by the advice of the Counsel, he determined nevertheless to
see her, and to satisfy his mind in answering her.

When he had kissed her hands with a sad countenance, she asked him whether
the Vicount Turenne had spoken with him, and assured him that it was the kings
resolution.

The king of Navarre answered, that he mused much, that she would take so
great pains to t^ll him that whereof his ears were already weary to hear,
and that she being so wise went about to resolve a difficulty by the self same
difficulty. Also that she proposed to him that thing which he could not, would
not, nor ought to do.

For first, if he should forget himself so much, as to go about to do that
which she required of him, yet were he not able to reduce all them of the
religion, nor to cause them to leave the exercise of the same.

Secondly, he himself would not, for then should he greatly hurt his
conscience and honor: and for the one he has God only for judge. His honor
he should greatly empayre, doing injury to himself, when he should seem to
yield more to the arms of his enemies, then to the commandment of his Lord
and King.

Thirdly, he answered that he ought so do: for if he should seem to allow of
that which was proposed to him, he should seem to allow the color which the
Leaguers have pretended: in whose pretenses does consist the strength of their
arms, and in the strength of their arms the decay and undoing of the state.

And although he knew well, that in so doing he should approach near the
favors of ye king, yet should he give the^ opportunity to take from him both
the right which to him appertains, and to bereave the king of the
faythfullest friend and servant he had.

But they will not have such men as I am above the king (said he) for thereby
they should be miserable, he should be better served, and all his subjects
better governed.

To this answer the Queen replied nothing, but went about to make himself
feel the discommodities which he suffered by means of that religion which
he professed.

I bear them willingly (said he) when you have laid them upon me (as it
seems) to ease your self.

Atlength she reproached him, that he did not in Rochel what he would.

Yes Madam (said he) for I will nothing but what I should.

The Duke of Neuers took the word, that he could not set an impost in Rochel.

True (said he) for we have no Italians among us.

After these speeches she opened unto him again a general truce for a year,
on that condition, that there should be no exercise of the reformed religion
within the realm, and within that time the states should be called.

He answered, that if they of yt religion should so lightly give over their
holds, that the League would be stronger, the king weaker, and the states
more unprofitable.

Also, that it were impossible to cease the religion in France, except it were
by a counsel duly assembled.

So he taking his leave of the Queen, she often times repeated the same
speeches which she had with the Vicount Turenne, and willed him to let the
nobility which followed him understand of it: which thing themorow after he did
with great grief, fearing to cause some alteration in their minds.

After that, he sent two noble men of the mildest spirits in all his troops,
to wit, the Lords Mauguyon and Force, to witness unto her what sorrow every one
of them had conceived, to see things reduced to such an extreme resolution:
and also to know whether they had any other thing to hope of the power which
the king had given her.

The Queen seeing, that all was upon the point to be broken, said, that shouee
wld send the Lord Ramboullet to the king to know his last determination.

She after told the Prince Monpensier, that all which she had said to the
Vicount Turenne, was but by the way of discourse, dissembling to have had such
speeches in plain terms to the king of Navarre, and willed the said Prince
to let the king of Navarre understand, that she had a great desire to see him
again, and also prayed him to make means of some prorogation of truce, which
thing the said Prince showed to the king of Navarre when he went to take his
leave from him.

These double dealings of the Queen was diversely spoken, for some thought (to
content the League) she would not open the means topeace.

Others thought, that her Counsel being Leaguers, fed her with new hope,
grounded upon the afflicted affairs of the religion, promising her at length
to obtain a peace to the kings contentation: so they lead her closly to
entertain a war profitable for the League.

The Lord Rambouillet returned from the court, brought the oath, which the king
had sworn in the solemnities of the order of the holy ghost, never to consent
to the exercise of the reformed religion: at whose return the Q. Mother was
very important to have a third parley with the king of Navarre, giving forth
that the return of the Lord Rambouillet should be agreeable to him: to the
which thing he was very unwilling to condescend, supposing the hope which he
had conceived of that interuiew would be if not lost, yet far wide out of the
way.

They of his side discouraged him, fearing that he would not only continue the
speeches which she had uttered before, and also to reiterate often times the
truce, having aduertizements that the truce was sent into Germany and
Suisserland.

Others advised him, that she held him in hand about a treaty of peace, in the
mean time to prepare war against him. That she proposed him of France, as
the only hinderer of the peace thereof.

Some others gave him notice, that she solicited the next towns and cities to
execute the kings last edict: and that fayning to seek the common benefit of
the state, she did much hurt in particular to the state of Rochel.

Upon this earnest suit of the Q Mother, in February the Leaguers took by
force the Town of Vouans, and fair Montau, the which being places of no
importance, caused men to suspect some treachery. The K. of Navarre also
thought that he might not expect yt they would give him any good thing, which
took so great pains to take away so little from him: notwithstanding the Queen
did so press him, that he granted the third interview, either to make the
world know and see, that the fault was not in him if they did not obtain
peace: or else that he persuaded himself that the Queen would not take so
much pains to bring him ill news. She therefore took her journey to
Fontenay.

The 20. of February the king of Navarre came to Marans, accompanied with many
noble men and company of Rochelers about threehundred men, guyded by the Lord
Gargoleau and other Captains, having the Colonels ensign of Rochel: his
coming thither was to parley with the Q. Mother, which was already at
Fontenay. But for because the interuiew was to be made first in the I Will Ellen,
and after for her ease at the Fort Veluyre, the Lords Biron and Sarisack, with
many other came to the king of Navarre to agree of the place.

As the will to see one another did increase; so the mistrust did grow in
their counsels. For the Q. Mother (or rather some of hers) did fear to go to
the place where the Rochelers were stronger. And for as much as it was reported
that the Ensign Colonel was at the foord Veluyre, they made as though they
did fear to approach, considering also that the Rochelers had set up strong
Barriers for the safety of the King of Navarre. These things she pretended to
be the causes that she would not come thither. Navarre did fear the entrances
and turnings of these Marshes: for the natural situation of that country is
such, that a man may do a feate without great hazard.

Whilst these going too and fro were between them, the League took the
alarm by these actions of the Q. but partly to let the peace which they did
greatly fear, and partly (seeing some occasion) to execute their intended
purpose, did conspire against the Kings person.

The Q. Mother perceiving that she could not execute that for which she was
sent, (for no doubt she never intended to make any peace, but to commit some
treachery upon the King of Navarre his person) and (by the just judgment of
God) that which she had devised against that virtuous and innocent Prince, she
heard that it was practiced upon her son. She departed from Fontenay to
Nyort, intending thus to take her journey to Paris, where she thought her
presence to be needful. But before her departing out of the country, she
would feign to do somewhat, least it should be said she had done nothing.
Therefore she sent to the King of Navarre, that he would send to her the
Vicount Turenne; to whom she offered liberty to talk withal. To the which
thing he consented easily. The Q. showed that she would treat with him, being
informed of his prudence. The King of Navarre consented to that thing, being
sure of his fidelity. All sorts of men deemed (that because he was known to
love the blessed state and quietness of the Realm) he was indeed a fit
instrument, if the counsel of the Q. would have used him unto that purpose.

The Vicount Turenne for that purpose came to Fontenay, and having certified
the Q. that he was there to receive his commandments, she proposed unto him to
make a general truce, and that the affairs were such as there could be no
talk of a peace as yet: for the which proposition he answered.

That the King of Navarre would easily consent to that, and that he would
always allow the name of truce, so that it would produce the events of a good
peace. But that hitherto they had so stopped their cares to his requests, that
he had been enforced to employ his friends to that end he might be heard,
and that he could make neither peace, nor general truce without their advise
and consent, for he was elected protector of a part, forsaken by the King,
which consisted of many particular persons who had been particularly iniuryed,
to whom no satisfaction could be made without hearing their complaints: that
if it please her to grant the requisite pasportes, and a reasonable time to
call them together, that it should be done with all speed. And for to bring
this thing to pass, he thought good to make a particlar truce for the
Provinces of Poytow and Xainctonge for two months, during the which the King
Navarre might provide and advise upon the means how to make the peace, for the
treaty whereof, the deputies of the Provinces might come together.

The Queen thought that truce very ill, and commanded her counsel to show the
reasons.

One of them answered, that it were prciudiciable to the King, for as much as
during that time of truce, the King of Navarre would have means to bring the
strangers into the Realm.

Also that the Catholics would become idle, and accustom themselves to rest:
also that they of the league, would take that truce for a shadow of peace, of
the which fearing the body, they would make a second insurrection.

To those reasons the Vicount of Turenne answered, that the place of the
entering of the strangers, had no correspondence with the high and low Poytow,
and that the treaty of peace, did rather stay, than further the leauie of them.

He answered also to the second reason, which he said to be common to both
parts, and that they of the reformed Religion would abuse rest sooner, than the
Catholics, because they were less used to it.

As for the insurrection of the league, he would say nothing to it, because he
knew not not what they might do. But this he knew that the Duke of Guyze had
but a small power: The Duke de Main had broken his army, and that of small
rubbell there was never great buildinges made.

But for because he had spoken hitherto without charge, being come only to
hear, the Queen thought good that he should return to the King of Navarre,
to be particularly instructed of his pleasure.

Coming then to the King of Navarre, he found him well assured of the leauie
of Germans, by a man which came the selfsame day.

The same day the Vicount Turenne returned to the Queen speedily, and found
her at Niort, determined to take her journey to Paris: he was heard, and made
an ample discourse of ye prosperous state of the K. of Navarre.

First, that he had sustained the burden of five armies, which have served for
nothing else, but to show that he was still in readiness, for the trial of the
forces of his enemies: contrariwise that they were deceived both in forces and
credit, and that they had reasons to the conspiracies and seditions of a town
not able to war in the field.

Also that they could hope for no more succor of the spantard, who was so
occupied to defend himself, that he could not do so much as to dream to
assault others: that if the King of Navarre had lost some weak villages, he
had fortified strong holds. And whereas he had been hitherto

Furthermore, that notwithstanding he has received extreme injuries, yet it
never came in his mind to use that to be revenged of them, whom he knew to
be servants of this Crown.

The Lord of Neuers assured him whether the King of Navarre had not bound
himself to the prejudice of his crown.

The Vicount continuing his discourse, beseeched the Queen in most Navarre had
done nothing with the strangers which be not for the good and quietness of the
state, and to restore to the King and his faithful servants their authority.

And to that end Madame (said he) that you may judge of his intent, he
protests that whenever your Majesty's pleasure is to use his forces, he
will ever turn his face that way, whither the commodity of the Realm and
your commandment shall call him.

The King of Navarre (said he) continuing his discourses, has always believed
that the King having taken war in hand being the weaker, will never be able
to restore peace before he be stronger. And then shall he be stronger indeed,
when the Princes of his blood shall have his forces in hand, to restore the
obedience which is due to him.

This is the last remedy Madame (said he) which I could wish to be otherwise.
And I do tell you this particularly as servant to your Majesty, and not as a
Hugonet, to whom (it may be) it were more sure to expect an army, than a
Negotiation, and a battle, than an edict. Believe not Madame, that damage of
the State is sought by the friends thereof; it is more profitable and
honorable to consent voluntarily to a peace, and to choose by time with a good
will the means thereof, then to take the same enforced by necessity.

The Queen said, that they should then stay the army of strangers, and did
much braule about the form of pasportes.

Then the Vicount replied, Madam, if ye be so unwilling to give us good
words, we are not come to that pass to expect good effects, for the which we
should stay the longer if we should stay for the means whereby, to enforce you
thereunto. Madam, the time is no more that we will assure our selves upon a
single promise, seeing that the edicts have failed us.

The Queen did so give ear to these reasons, that she seemed to have her
mind occupied more upon the aduertisements which were given her d'Mayne was in
Paris, practicing against the Kings person: the Duke of Guize was about to put
himself into Paris also. They made her see in their aduertisements, the
occasions which the heads of the League had to give the last blow of despair,
they did show her that the hope which the Leaguers had of England was dead with
the Queen of Scotts, and that the devotion of the Clergy did cool as fast
as the ambition of the League did heat. They showed her how the six armies
already were spent and consumed without doing any thing, that they of the
reformed religion were grown strong, so that there was no more hope for them
to build out of the ruins of them, whereby it appeared evidently in what
danger of them the King stood. All these things being set before her eyes,
made her to take her journey in haste from Niort to Paris, fearing least these
seditious persons, who had left nothing more to enterprise, would execute their
mischievous intents upon the Kings person: therefore at the same time, the
mistrust did greatly increase at the Court, where there were diverse factions,
for the King mistrusted the Leaguers, and the Leaguers the King, and among the
Leaguers, one mistrusted another. Every one going about, under the color of
defending the Romish religion, to lay down the foundation of their greatness by
rebellion, murder, and particide: which sturring of rebellion, caused also
that this general truce which was in hand was not brought to effect.

It is said before, that the 13. day of December 1586. the Q* Mother Navarre,
that a truce for a whole year might be taken, which the King of Navarre
granted, so that it might be by the consent and advice of his friends,
servants, and confederats, and such as had elected him for their protector and
defender, whom the King had forsaken by his edicts, ploclaiming war against
them, and also to certify the Germans thereof, which were his friends and
alyed: whereupon she agreed to give passeports, that with safety of the
messengers, they might be advertised thereof.

Upon this promise of passeports the 29. of December, the King of Navarre to
omit nothing, which might show the desire he had to pacify the miserable
troubles of the realm: and for to dispose as well them of the religion, as his
friends, confederates, and servants, he sent forth notable gentlemen into
diverse countries, as well of the realm as out of the realm, with letters of
credit, and ample memories to inform them of all that had passed in the
interuiew between him and the Q. Mother, to that end that nothing should be
disguised and falsified to them, as it had chanced often times in the former
civil dissensions, by them who do watch nothing more

The King of Navarre sent to them, to whom he directed his letters, this
Gentleman N. carrier of the said letters to visit them, and to let them
understand the state of the common affairs, and how all things had passed at
the meeting of him and the Q. Mother: he prays them to believe the
messenger, as well about the particularities of the meeting, as about all those
things which he had to tell them from him: he prays them also to be of good
courage, and not to be weary, because of the good hope which he has of the
blessed issue of so many labors: and for his part he will omit no point of his
duty, touching the preservation of the common cause. As touching the
memories, the write enclosed in the letters, contained the sum of them.

The King of Navarre protector of the reformed Churches in France, supposing
that to be the charge of his duty, after so many storms passed, to visit and
to confirm the remnant of the dissipation: has sent this the Lord N. to
represent unto all them of the religion, in the Province N. what the estate of
the common affairs is. And to this effect the said Lord shall repair to the
Lords, Gentlemen, and other persons of meaner quality, who have retired to
their own houses, or unto other places of the said. Province, for the rigor
of the edicts (if it can be possible that he may find them) and shall certify
them, how that after so many lettes and delays, which mistrust brings, he
has seen the Q. Mother nigh Coignak: that he has entered into no treaty of
peace, but only has hearkened unto all that should be proposed to him,
touching the attaining to the same, and that he has promised to do nothing
therein, without the advice of the Churches, kinsmen, friends, confederats and
servants.

And that acknowledging the honor which the said Lady has done to him,
considering the labor which she had taken at that time of the year, and in
that age that she is of (after many discourses which she has made of her
desire and inclination to peace) he has consented to a truce of two months in
the provinces of high and low Poytow, Laudonoys, Mirabaloys, Angomoys and
Xainctonge, as well on this side of Charante as beyond, as also in the town
and government of Browage and Aluert, the country of Aunis, the town and
government of Rochel: in the mean time to send for the deputies, as well of
the churches of France, as of the con^ederats out of the realm, for to entreat
of the peace by their common advise.

But having sent the Lord Turenne with six men of honor with him to Coignak,
for to agree upon the conditions necessary for the entertaining of the said
truce. The said Q. mother (among other discourses) had declared unto him, that
the king would suffer but one religion in the realm, to wit, his own, which
determination of the King she sa^d she would Navarre and to his partakers.
Which message the said Vicount reported unto the king of Navarre, as he was
upon the way to go to the place appointed for the second interuiew. The said
Lady also had made him more particular declaration, and also commanded him to
make acquainted the other nobles and gentlemen which were with him, and to send
her answer the morrow after.

Which thing the said king of Navarre showing her to be impossible to grant,
after having supported for so many years the weight of arms, for the defense
of the self same thing only: and that if so it were indeed, that there was
no need to take so much payns as she did to loose it. She persisted therein,
notwithstanding, so that thereupon the said king of Navarre took his leave of
her.

And the self same day at night, the said king of Navarre giving notice to the
said Lords which were there at Iarnak of the kings determination: all
answered with one mind and consent, that it was impossible the said
determination to be obeyed and performed. The morrow after by a common accord,
they sent to her the Lords Montguyon and Force, to desire her most humbly to
declare again whether that was the last resolution of the king. For as much as
they were all resolute, after having shed their blood, and fought for so just a
quarrel to live and die: yet for the defense of the same, and upon that to
finish the truce, which was to end six days after.

Upon that occasion she sent the Lord Monpensier, and the Marshall Biron, to
excuse her self, that she had not spoken so rawly, and that her discourse
about that matter was of advise, and not of resolution: desiring that they
would stay until the sixth day of January next, whilst she sends the Lord
Rambouillet to the king to know his answer: and expecting the kings answer,
the truce has been continued according to the articles agreed upon for that
purpose.

Since the K. of Navarre returned from Rochel, whens he had likewise sent a
gentleman to the king, to notify unto him what was passed in that interuiew,
to the end that he might also know the duty of the king of Navarre therein.

Which thing likewise he has done to the churches, and to the chiefest who
make profession of the religion, to let them understand in what manner he has
proceeded, least the adversaries should give out things otherwise then they
are, as their manner is to do, for to sow hatred and dissension among us, to
divide us by such crafty means.

The self same message has the King of Navarre sent to other provinces and
Lords, strangers, our partakers, of whom we do expect succor.

Now therefore knowing the state of the affairs, the king of Navarre prays
them to give him their advise what is expedient to be done, greatly desiring in
that which concerns the honor of God, and the common quietness of his whole
church, to proceed (as he has done before) not in following his own opinion,
but by the common advise and consent of all.

He wills them to know, that as partaker of the miseries, of the griefs, and
vexations, which so many persons do suffer in their souls, bodies, and goods,
being partaker of so many gronings and tears, of so many poor families
scattered and deprived of their commodityes: he has always desired that for
their deliverance it might please God to give us a good peace. But perceauing
the crafts and deceites of our adversaries, and their hardness of heart, he
has bent himself to patience, finding all his pains and labors whatsoever
light and easy in the defense of so good and just a cause: wherein he has
felt in himself a wonderful great favor and assistance of God, having seen
that which he durst not have thought on, and done that which he would never
have believed. Whereupon he exhorts them that have remained constant,
expecting the goodwill and pleasure of God, to persevere and hope shortly of a
good issue.

And them, which through feeblenes, or heavy burden of evils, have fallen to
keep their hearts to God, and that they will not suffer that fire of zeal,
whereof they do feel yet the heat, to be cooled and quenched, hoping for their
deliverance, that by the means thereof, and the grace of God, they may reunite
themselves, and join to that body where from they are gone.

That they will assure themselves both the one and the other, that there shall
never be peace before affairs be established as well beyond as on this side of
Loyre: and that the said king will provide for necessary safety in case of
imminent danger for their safe retire, otherwise there should be nothing done.

As the king of Navarre bears to them, and all that concern them a singular
love and affection, that they would render unto him the like: that Godblessing
such a correspondance of good wills, we may all enjoin to his honor and
glory the fruit, which such unity and concord would bring to the confusion of
Gods enemies.

Also other particularities necessary to this Argument, the said gentleman N.
shall show unto them of the Religion following what he has seen and heard by
the course of the affairs, being otherwise impossible to reduce them all in
writing.

And above all things he shall assure them of the good firm, and constant
resolution of the said king of Navarre, and of them who do assist him to employ
their lives and means for the glory of God, and deliverance of Rochel the 29.
of December. Henry, and below, Berzeau.

The end of the third Book.
THE FORVTH BOOK.
IT is said before, how the Duke of Guize in the apprehension, of a great
fright, and in a great heat went both to complain to the King, how all the
heretics of France had conspired to join their forces together, to oppress
his brother the Duke de Main, almost destitute of defense: and also to give
him counsel how to let such a dangerous association of them, to wit, by
diuerting their forces. And that could not be done, but by sending several
armies into several Provinces, where they of the religion were strong. It is
also said, how upon this advise the King provided six armies, whereof be sent
one into Poytow, and another into Languedock, the third into Daulphine, the
fourth into Auuergne, and the last was a Navy conducted by the Commander la
Chastre, and the sixth most dangerous was lead by his Mother against the King
of Navarre, under the color of parley of peace, having with her a legion of
Italian wrenches and figs which did her no service.

Whilst the King was left alone, and his forces scattered far and wide from
him, the Duke of Guize advised himself of a dilemma, that either he might
easily oppress the King, or else at least might work iollily the seduction of
the people. Therefore he called his brother the Duke de Main, began to
complain greatly of the King, and to impute the ill success of his brother in
Guyenne to him, to wit, how his brother was forsaken, destitute of men, money
and munition. That this was the argument, that the Catholics were betrayed,
that the King was corrupted by counsel, and that he hated and despised them
whom he should love and embrace: and that he had intelligences with the
heretics. And that if he would not dishenerite and degrade the King of
Navarre and the Prince of Conde, then there was no cause why the Catholics
should commit their lives to a dissembling King, who had nothing in his tongue
but war, and in his heart did seek for peace with heretics. And therefore
they cried out that the enemy was at hand, and stood at the door, and that
omitting and leaving

By these false reports and traiterous slanders, much hatred and misliking of
his government was procured to the King. Yet considering that both he and his
partakers were very near danger, the Q. Mother was sent out of Poytow, where
she had been parlying and brawling with the K. of Navarre four or five
months, seeking occasion to make her Italian pipes play. She in great have
(fearing the breaking of good fellowship between the King and the Duke of
Guize) (for by such frayes she had kept her self always in authority)
comes to the Court, and by the Leaguers who were about the Kings person,
easily do persuade him to hold with the Leaguers; and so once more the heads
of the Leaguers do obtain security, and do pause a while waiting for a
better opportunity.

For as much as the voyage and practizes of the Q. Mother against the King of
Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, in the parley and interuiew at Saint Brice,
could not bring to pass the effects pretended, her return to Paris, and the
intelligences of the leauie of the Germans, gave matter unto the King to enter
into new deliberations to defend the Leaguers. For without his counsel, power
and countenance, they had been reduced to that plunge, as they had never been
able to get out.

With this new year therefore 1587. we will begin this fourth book,
Daulphine, and then we will return to pursuing of the great stirs and
preparations of this year.

It is said before, how the Duke Espernon appointed for Daulphine and Prouance,
did there what he could, and in displacing the Leaguers out of many towns and
holds, he did good serui^e to the King, but seeing that war in that country
to be endless, committing the remnant of his forces to his brother the Lord
Valete, and repaired to the King in November 1586 after the siege of Sorges.
After his departure out of Daulphine, the Lord Diguieres recovered the town
of Sorges, and employed three-moneths, to wit, January, February and March,
in visiting the country, viewing of the places, fortifying the holds, and
repairing the ruins which the armies had made the year before, looking to
have a new army upon his back the spring following (which notwithstanding came
not to pass) by reason that the King made all preparations which could be
possible against the Germans, both in the heart of France, and on the way
which they should come in, to receive them with small courtesy. This thing
caused, that the des Diguieres had apportunitie to do great things this year
1587. in that Province, as follows. In the beginning of April, the Lord
Diguieres took the Castle of Champer, two Leagues from Grenoble, at which time
the Court of Parliament there opened a way to a truce, which notwithstanding
did not let the exploytes of war, for as much as in the mean time, the said
Lord Diguieres brought three pieces of battery to Nants, to batter Venterol
town and Castle, but they surrendered themselves before they saw the cannon.

The 7. of May, the company of men of arms, of the Lord Diguieres, Poligny
his Lieutenaunt, and the company of the Lord Rosse, a popish Gentleman, lead
by himself, did draw forth to skirmish the Garrison of Saults. There they
killed six skore men, among whom there were twenty of commandment, took
six prisoners, and well nigh had entered into the town mingled with the
enemies: all this was done with the loss of one man, only of the religion.

The 31. and last of May, the Castle of the Lord Menestrier, strong, and
Diguieres, assisted by the Lords Brikmaut, Morges, and others.

A little before that, the Pont of Coignet (surprised few days before by the
Lord Valete) was yielded at the diseretion of the Lord Diguieres. The town
of Quinsieur in Merindol was compassed about by the Lord Gouernet, and a while
after, the Lord Diguieres (assisted with the Lords Poet, Blacons, Montbrune,
Vacheres, Brikmaut the younger, and the troops of the Province) there
conducted three pieces of artilerie; at the ariuing and sight of the, the which
town was surrendered with their safety, and the Castle at discretion.

The 18. Beniuay was surrendered likewise.

The 19. the towns of Pierrelongue and Esgalieres were taken.

The 22. Ionquieres a town belonging to the principality of Orange was
compassed, and the same day taken, after it had sustained 25. voleys of
Ordinance. Gygondas also was rendered at the news of rendering of Ionquieres.

The 23. Poet Laual was besieged, and after it had sustained one hundred and
fifty shot of two field pieces, at length was surrendered the 29. of the same
month, although that the breach was not sufficient, and that they who
besieged, had set up the ladders, and after took them up with further assault.

The thirteenth day of July, the Lord Valete took Pierrelongue by
composition, after six score shot of pieces of battery. They who were

The eightenth day the Lord Diguieres went to Oste, a town unwalled, and
bestowed the rest of the month in fortifiyng of that place, wherein he
employed the Lord Vacheres, to make war against the town of Cerf, half a
mile distant from that place.

The Lord Chastilion having gathered certain forces in Languedock, to join
with the Suissers, who were coming into Daulphine, was expected Rosne by all
the forces of Daulphine from the 19. of July. The Lord de Poet, governor of
the town of Montlimart, went forth with a good part of the forces there, to
favor his passage. The said Lord Chastilion and Diguieres passed over the
Rosne the first day of August, and soiourning long there, they gave leisure to
the Lord Valete to seize upon the banck of the river Lizere, and so letting
their passage, had opportunity to do what he did.

Whilst the L. Chastilion soiourned in Daulphine, the said L. Valete practiced
a secret execution upon the town of Montlimart, and so began to draw his
forces thither ward: but the inhabitants mistrusting his approches, prepared
themselves, which caused him to retire back again: yet he set such an order,
that the Lord Balathye surprised the town, but the Castle remained still in
the hands of them of the reformed Religion. The L. Valete did greatly fear,
that the said town would be surprised again by the Castle, and would have
provided a greater power to put in for the keeping of the same: But the said
Lord Balathye answered, that he was strong enough to defend the same town.
This was done the sixteenth of August.

The seventeenth day at 9 a clock in the morning, the Lord Chastilion and
Diguieres understood of this exployt done, though they were more then twenty
leagues off. The said Lord Diguieres dispatched speedely the Lords Poet,
Blacons, Sales, and Sousbrochet, with their companies, they took also the Lord
Vacheres, with some other companies.

In the mean while, the gentlemen of Viuar^ts which do lie right against it on
the other side of the Rosne, understanding of this surprise, did send forces
into the Castle by two Noblemen of the country, to wit, the Lords Mirebel and
Allard.

When the enemy had possessed the said town of Montlimart three days, the
Lord Poet with his companyes (being about three hundred men and fifty horses)
entered at night into the Castle, and proposing what was to be done, determined
to set speedily on the town, and the 19. day about 7. a clock in the morning
he assembled all his forces, which were about two hundred pikes, and one
thousand Harquebusiers, issued out of Suze, the Lords Ancone and Logieres, Teil
the son, and Dupuy, Saint Martin, with many others, Noblemen, Gentlemen,
Captains, and men of fame, remained dead upon the place. There were a great
number wounded, among whom were Ancone and Saint Fereol.

Many were taken prisoners among them, men of name which were these; the eldest
son of the County Suze, the Baron Guard, Chemlak, governor of Viuarets,
Straung, Teil the Father, Pracontat, the young Cossans, the young Vauterel,
Balathye the Captain of the enterprise upon Montlimart, all Noble men. The
Lord Ramfort had arrived in the town but four hours before, not willing to
fly away shamefully, found the means to get into a tower of the town, where
he defended himself three days: but at length seeing the pieces, yielded
himself to them of the reformed Religion: there died not many more than
twenty, among whom was the Lord Tissieres: there was about six and twenty
hurt.

This blow did greatly weaken the Papists in that Country, so that afterward
they were more flexible unto a reasonable peace, than they had been before.

This was the work of God which used the valor, diligence, and good
government of these Noble men, but specially of the Lord Poet, chiefest
governor of the said place. There excelled also the valia^tnes of the Lord
Blacons, Vacheres, Mirebel and Allart, Gentlemen of Viuarets, the which being
in so small number, to wit, about twelve hundred men, forced more than three
thousand men of war, furnished and lodged aduantagiously within their
Barricadoes, flanked and defended in front with three Cannons, to revenge the
cruelties which they had used, and to beat down their pride

The Lord Chastilion had procured certain regiments of Suissers, to come out
of the Lordships of Berne, to descend along the lake of Losanne, and to repair
into Daulphine, there to assist them of the Religion against the Lord Valete,
and to bring that country, and the next provinces about, out of the bondage of
the Leaguers and Catholics. The Lord Chastilion came (as is said before)
into Daulphine the first day of August, and went accompanied with the Lords
Diguieres and Poet, to receive them at the river Lizere. But the Lord Valete
having left Balathye in Montlimart for the safe keeping thereof, went with
speed over Lizere, to let the L. Chastilion with his company, to pass over
that river to join with the Swissers.

The Swissers being two thousand Pikes, five hundred Corstets, Lizere, to have
joined with the said Chastilion. But the Lord Valete accompanied with Alphonse
Corse, having intelligences of their coming with five hundred Harquebusieres,
and four companies of horsemen, set upon them, defeated them, and took eleven
Ensigns which he sent to the King, and one Coronet of horsemen. This
overthrow was given the same day of the recovering of Montlimart, and in the
sight of the Lords Chastilion and Diguieres, who were on the other side of the
river, and by no means could pass over to rescue them. There were slain
about one thousand men, twelve hundred taken prisoners, and were sent to
Valence, to work to the fortifications there: a greatnumber saved them selves
in Daulphine. God makes the number and arms prevail as pleases him. They
which were prisoners, were redeemed by exchange of them that were taken at
Montlimart.

Thus things passed on both sides, the Lord Chastilion at length having
intelligences of the Germans coming with his companies, took his journey to
meet them, whom he met in Basignye nigh Chaumo^t the 22. of September next
following, as shall be noted hereafter.

The 31. of August, the eldest son of the County of Grignan, at the
solicitation of the Lord Diguieres, took part with the king of Navarre against
the League, and seized upon the town of Clausures and Monsegur, towns well
situated in the County of Grignan, wherein the Lord Valete had put garrisons
few days before.

About the same time, the Lord Blacons took the town of Suze, which after it
was ransacked, was given over because the castle could not be taken.

The first day of September, the Lord Diguieres accompanied with Gouernet,
Brikmaut, and the young Morges besieged Guylhestre, and battered it with four
mean pieces, and two little field pieces: so that after having sustained two
hundred shot, and the breach being reasonable, the enemy forsook the town,
and retired into the castle: the which also after certain volyes of canon
shot, rendered themselves the 5. of September by composition; by the which it
was agreed that the Gascoynes should depart and be sent away with a white
staff in their hands, and they of the country to remain upon discretion.

The tenth of October the Castle of Quyras, besieged since the 25. of
Diguieres, assisted with ye Lord Brikmaut and Morges, where is a thing worthy
of remembrance, that the ways being so high and difficult for the artillery to
be carried over the

At the same time the Lord Diguieres knowing that the enemy fortifyed a temple
in the town of Saint Peter in the Marquisat of Saluces, sends thither ye
Lord Brikmaut with his companies, who forced that place in the middle of the
day the twelft of October, took the captain prisoner, and cut to pieces the
rest: this was the first exployt beyond the mountains.

The eight of November the Lords Ramefort, Espornakes, and Signak, Ionquieres,
had seized upon all the town, save one tower only: the news were brought to
Orange to the Lord Blacons, the which three hours after the taking thereof,
appeared before the town with 30. horses. This his sudden and unlooked for
coming, did so terrify the footmen who were within the town (calling to
remembrance the entertaynment which they had at Montlimart) that they sorsooke
the place, the captain being not able to hold them, although they were in
number four hundred footmen, and six score horses, which were not yet entered
into the town, whom the Lord Blacons let go without any pursuing, content
only to enter into the town for to chastize the traitors.

In the month of April, the States of the country, and Senate of Grenoble
had some speeches of peace, as is aforesaid: but it was delayed December. from
time to time, the people being not willing to conclude any thing without the
good will and advise of the King of Navarre, knowing him faithful to the king,
lover of the good, and prosperity of the realm, and that he desires nothing
more then the wealth and quietness, as well of the State in general, as of
their province, as also to be a true Prince of the blood, a Prince true and
faithful in his word, having never altered his word in respect of any person,
whose singular valiantnes, mildnes, and gentleness (if there were no other
things in him) might move the people to honor and acknowledge him, according
to that degree which he has in the realm of France. These were the causes
which moved the States and people of Daulphine to conclude nothing without his
direction.

The Articles proposed in the provincial States of Daulphine were three.

First, that protestation be made to the obedience due to the King, and to the
issue male, which it shall please God to give him.

And that for lack of issue the king of Navarre be acknowledged as head of the
Princes of the blood, first successor of the crown, and after him the other
Princes, according to ye prim^geniture of their degree, with detestaon of the
manifestes, and other such libels, whereby they of the League

Secondly, that the reformed religion be received throughout all the Province
of Daulphine indifferently: and that they of the reformed religion shall permit
the Romish, and suffer the church men to enter and enjoy their goods and
liuinges: on both sides they do promise to acknowledge the court of Parliament
of Grenoble, and to obey the Lord Maugyron: and that whatsoever alteration may
happen to the State, the king of Navarre shall employ his authority present,
and to come to the observation of the agreement, namely, in that which does
concern the dignity of the court, of the Lieutenant, of the King, and of the
church men.

Thirdly, that in expecting a peace, in more ampie manner every one shall keep
that which he holds, shortning notwithstanding the garrisons as much as shall
be possible.

This was concluded and agreed in the provincial States of Daulphine, with an
agreement upon their common defense about the 20. of December.

Although the Lord Espernon be a most zealous and devout Catholic, and that he
did against them of the reformed religion all that ever he could, yet with some
moderatnes he had committed the government of his charge to the Lord Valete his
brother, which used the same valiantnes, with the like modesty: God did so
bless the good intents of these two noble Catholics indeed, as issued out of
an ancient and noble stock, without any degenerating, that having well rid
that Province of Daulphine of seditious and factions Leaguers, afterward the
Catholics and reformed have fallen to a good and peaceable composition, by the
which they have entertained themselves in amity, and kept their country from
ransacking, and subversion.

So we see now these two great and large provinces Languedock, and Daulphine,
the one through ye savage cruelty of Ioyeuse, the other through the faithful
service and modesty of the Lords Espernon and Valete, brethren, to be set in
good peaceable state.

It is said how the king of Navarre had certain meetings and parleys with the
Q. Mother, and how the last parl^y appointed, was interrupted by the
conspiracies of the Leaguers, seeking to lay the foundation of their greatness,
under color of defending the Romish religion: after the which interruption,
the King of Navarre retired into Rochel, where he continued until the end of
April.

Now let us lay down what the said King of Navarre did from this time, to wit,
the latter end of April unto the end of December, and then we will take the
course of those things which have passed in other countries, and by the setting
down of other men.

About the end of April, the King of Navarre departing from Rochel Chizay by
composition, and Sassay by assault, where he commanded certain robbers of
Niort, (who had obstinatly resolved to withstand him) to be hanged. From thence
he went to S. Mexent, which yielded upon composition after they had seen the
Canon. From thence (fayning to go somewhere else) departed in the evening, and
in the morning early was before Fontenay, and on a sudden (without great
resisting) took the Suburb called Loges, and at the same instant compassed
the town on every side, least any succor should enter in. But seeing that he
had need of more ordinance than he had, speedily departed to Rochel to have
more; which thing the Rochellers did very willingly and speedily grant: so
that within less than five days he returned, and began to batter Fontenay
with nine pieces. The Prince also brought certain pieces from S. Jhan d'
Angely, so that Captain Rossiere, who commanded there over the Albaneses and
inhabitants, were enforced to yield by composition, almost at the discredition
of the said King of Navarre, who used them very courteously, performing
inuiolably whatsoever he had promised them.

From Fontenay the King of Navarre sent the Prince of Conde to Manlion, a
little town, with three pieces of ordinance, which notwithstanding was taken
with ladders before the ordinance had played. The morrow after, the King of
Navarre arrived thither, who had retired to Lusson, after the taking of
Fontenay, fayning to retire to Rochel.

The King perceiving that his* Mother could neither execute her secret
practizes, nor bestow her Italian figs upon the King of Navarre, nor the
Prince of Conde, immediately after her return to the Court, to please the
Leaguers, and to entertayne their favor, for that he was so much beholding to
them, immediately he determined to send a mighty army into Guyenne, against
the King of Navarre and of them of the religion. And supposing that the
Marshall Byron had gone too slowly about his matters in the last army, he was
desirous to try what another Captain of a hotter spirit could do. And
because the Duke Ioyeuse the Kings brother in law was somewhat famous, not for
his valor, but for incredible and monstrous excesses of cruelty, which he had
showed the year before at Lodeue, Saint Ponce and Marueiolx, and other places
in Languedock: for the true description whereof, new t^^rmes and words had
need to be devised. The King (I say) supposing him a fit iustrument to
execute his choler upon them of the religion, which so valiantly had
heretofore resisted the injuries of the Leaguers, and despised their forces,
for the great wrongs proffered to his Majesty by the Leaguers, sent him with a
mighty army to pass over the river Loyre. The King of Navarre and the Prince
of Conde were in the low Poytow with their companies very brave and lusty,
though very small in comparison of the multitude of the enemies. And as some
companies of the Duke Ioyeuse had passed Loyre, and advanced Navarre his men,
the said King of Navarre wholly discomfited a band of the enemies: which thing
being done, he caused his companies to retire, some to Saint Mexent, others
into Xainctonge, to employ them as occasion might serve, to the overthrowing of
that new mighty army. But not long after it happened (I know not by
Charboniere, and of Captain Debory, were left within the town of Mote Saint
Eloy, nigh Saint Mexent, being not assured of the Castle, but only by the
promise of them who did hold it. Which afterward, seeing the enemy assault the
said Charboniere and Debory, did not favor them, but took part against them,
and that more is, delivered two pieces of ordinance to the enemy, wherewith
they brake the Barricadoes of our men: so they were discomfited by the Lord
Ioyeuse, Debory was taken prisoner. Charboniere was then at S. Mexent, where
he did good service at the siege, which the enemy shortly after laid before
the said town. Among other examples of barbarous and savage cruelty in
diverse places, by the said Ioyeuse executed, deserves a special note of
infamy, that the posterity may discern men from monsters. The Soldiers of
the said Charboniere and Debory, (to whom upon his faith he had promised
safety of life) yet contrary unto the same, having caused them to be stripped
stark naked, and so they falling upon their knees, crying unto God for mercy,
and unto the enemy for compassion, without any pity or feeling of humanity,
commanded his Soldiers to try their strength of their arms, and the
sharpen^s of their swords upon those naked bodies, destitute of all defense.

After that he besieged Saint Mexent, which resisted the fury of his army,
and of all his ordinance for the space of 15. days, and about the 22. of June,
the town was surrendered by composition: which the King of Navarre did greatly
mislike, because that L. Iarriete being known and stayed at the gate, as he
went forth among the rest was brought to the Lord Ioyeuse, which committed him
to the hands of the Marshall, with commandment to put him to a shameful
death. This learned and godly man had faithfully and virtuously executed the
ministry in that town, and there he confirmed the doctrine which he had
preached, with a most constant and Christian death, which was unhappy to them,
who without a cause put him to the same. For they themselves who executed that
unjust commandment, would not dissemble to say (after they had heard the
earnest confession of his faith and prayers which he made in the end of his
life) that certainly God would revenge the death of so good and godly a man,
in whom there was found no cause of such punishment, and in deed the Duke
Ioyeuse and his army did not survive him long.

After the taking of Saint Mexent, the Lord Ioyeuse came to Niort, with show
to sease upon Marans, as well to cut the way into Poytow, to the King of
Navarre, as to shut him up into Rochel, and by these means to besiege Fontenay
with less danger, which as yet was but slenderly fortified: also to sease upon
Talmound, having all the rest to his devotion; which thing seemed to him easily
to perform.

For although the King of Navarre feigned that he would defend Maran against
that army, as he did the year before against the Marshall Byron, at the
selfsame season, yet notwithstanding he had not determined so to do, as also
it was a thing impossible to defend it, for the Marshes and ditches and
channels were so dried up, and the earth so hardened, that the footmen could
easily go thorough every where: there was some more discommoditie for
horsemen, by reason of the steps, but yet it was accessible every where.

In the mean time, the King of Navarre sent in the regiment of Captain Preau,
with some other companies, who showed great diligence in fortifying the holds
of Bastile, Brune, Poyneuf, and Clowsie: as for the Fort Brault, the King made
it in form of Sheeres on the side of the land, and had determined to defend
that only and the Castle. The others were only to hold the enemy in hand,
and in the mean time that this resolution might be stayed, the heads having
commandment to retire into the town, and not harden themselves obstinately
in the defense of the said Fortes. After that the Castle was furnished with
necessaries, Captain Preau should retire to Fontenay, the Lord Iarry with a
number of Soldiers should retire into the Castle, when he should be enforced
to forsake the town, and there to abide the force of the enemy for eight
days: which thing he could do well enough. In the which space, the King of
Navarre and the Prince having assembled their forces, would have given so many
crosses to the Duke Ioyeuse, that perhaps he should not have needed to take
the pain to go to dye at Coutras: notwithstanding, for these considerations
or other, the Duke Ioyeuse set not on Marans, but at the request of the Lord
Saint Luke and others, going out of Niort through the country of Aunix, and
the town Sorgeres, went to batter Tonnay Charante, which he took by
composition: and there understanding that the company of the Lord Puelles was
at Croixchapeau, half the way between Tonney Charante and Rochel, he went
with the choice of his army, to set upon them at the breaking of the day.

This company commanded by some officer (for the Lord Puelles was then at
Rochel) did most courageously defend themselves: but the place was such, as the
enemy had means to enclose them on every side, and to get to the top of the
houses through the back side, and to drive them out by setting the houses on
fire: great part of them was slain in the fight; other yielded Debory and
Charboniere were at the Mote Saint Eloy.

This done, the Lord Ioyeuse returned to Tonney Charante (understanding that
the King of Navarre was gone out of Rochel to set upon him) and thence to
Niort. At the same time, they which were at Marans did look to be set on, but
he understanding that some companies of the Prince Tonney Charante, upon the
Garrison which he had left there, in have returned thither with his Ordinance,
took it again, being kept only by a sergiant of a band, who with 15.
Soldiers only, had obstinatly undertaken the defense thereof.

In the self same place he was advertised of the evil watch, and of the small
company which was at the Abbey of Maillezay, a very strong place, thither he
went with speed, and the Lord Malicorne governor of Poytow with him, he
compassed it so, that it was not possible to put in new forces, so that the
fourth day after it was surrendered by composition.

After the taking of Maillezay, it was thought that the Duke Ioyeuse would set
on Marans, but he durst not, fearing the King of Navarre and the Prince, who
were in the field seeking occasion. Some days after Ioyesue made a show to set
upon Talmound, but the Lord Saint Stephen having seized upon it first, caused
him to have no great affection thereto. So as his army decayed daily, being
infected with the Pestilence: the King of Nauarres on the other side waxed
strong.

The Lord Ioyeuse having stayed in Poytow somewhat lesser then three months,
about the 15. day of August he rode in post to Paris to the Duke of Guize, as
well to inform him of his noble acts, and what Kingdoms he had conquered in
winning few villages in Poytow, as to minister texts unto the Friars and
Jesuits to preach upon unto the sottish people of Paris: to wit, the notable
slaughters which he had committed upon the heretics in Poytow, he was
received with exceeding joy of the Parisions, he left his companies with the
Lord Lauerdine, who conducted them after him all by ease.

But the King of Navarre who slept not, went forth out of Rochel upon the news
of the retiring of the said Ioyeuse, with a marvelous celeritie, and passing
through Marans with some horsemen, pursued the remnant of that army so lively,
(and that with few men) that he discomfited three companies of men of war,
conducted by the Marquis Renel, took their Ensigns, and many of them, with a
great number of Gentlemen.

This being done, he pursued after Lauerdine, which conducted the footmen with
two culuerines, but with the favor of passages over the rivers, saved himself
in the Hay in Tourenne, where the king of Navarre besieged Monsoreau upon the
river of Loyre in Tourenne, where he made a Fort upon the river, and there he
stayed 15. days to expect the companies which were brought to him out of
France, by the County Soissons.

Whilst these things were passing thus in Poytow, the king about the 23. of
June understood that the army of Germans, both great and strong was in readiness
to take their journey into France: whereupon the King determined to prepare not
only to defend himself, but also to invade the enemy. Therefore he sends
his commissioners into all Provinces, to assemble all his Nobility, with all
their forces, and them to divide into three several armies, whereof the rendes
vous of the one under the conduct of the Duke of Guyze, comprehending the
Nobility and others who were known notorious leaguers, was given the 20. of
July in the town of Chaumont in Bassignye. The second army under the conduct
of the K. himself, was of the Nobility, in the which he had most trust, out
of Picardy, France, Normandy, Britayne, and other Provinces between Seyne and
Loyre. The rendes vous was appointed at Saint Florentine in Bourgony, between
the cities of Troyes and Auxer, the first day of August. The third under the
conduct of the L. Ioyeuse, was of the Nobility of ye countries beyond Loyre,
and the rendes vous was assigned at Gien.

The Duke of Guize with his army of conspirators and Leaguers should stop the
passage to the Germans, upon the borders of Lorreyne, and specially should
hinder them from taking their way through Champaigne, on the north side of the
river of Seyne.

The King of Navarre about the beginning of June, understanding that his army
of Germans was in readiness to depart out of Germany to come to his succor,
sent Ambassadonrs to the King, humbly to entreat him to take some pity of his
kingdom and poor subjects, both to show him some ways of peace, and also
because that heretofore the said King had acknowledged the heads of the League
to be his enemies, and to have raised all these vprores, not so much against
the house of Bourbon, as against his own person: he requested the King to use
his, and the Germane forces against the common enemy of the Realm. But the
King having many disloyal servants, both about his person and in his counsel,
who were greatly addicted to the league, they disloyally betrayed him, making
him believe that if he should accept the King of Navarre his offers, and so
change his mind, it were the nearest way to raise an universal rebelliou of all
his subjects against him, and that this Embassage of the King of Navarre did
proceed, not from love and duty, but from fear and dread* who saw his
manifest overthrow at hand, by these three great and mighty armies which he
was setting in a readiness. The Duke of Guyze with his conspirators, aduertized
by his special friends (which he had always about the Kings person, and who
were privy to al his secrets) Navarre, was not a little amazed, fearing that
the King now was better advised, having a fit opportunity to revenge himself
upon the pride, arrogancy, and injuries proffred him by them, considering that
they were not able to withstand so great a power, and that they might be undone
ere ever they should perceive it, uses two shifts to avoid the tempest he
saw coming: First writes a letter full of flattering prayers, protestations,
and fear: for he with an humble style, endeavors to make the king believe
that he had been gentle and tractable, never refusing the means of a good
peace. The^ he prays the King to think no hurt in that which they had done,
as not proceeding from any malice, but rather from zeal of the Catholic
Religion, and inflaming him to oppose himself and all his forces against the
Germans, the ancient enemies of the Realm, promises him for that purpose, a
strong aid and succor against them. Last of all, he feigned himself, his
partakers, and all the Catholics, to stand in great fear of a successor
unknown, and like to be much inferior unto him, and an enemy of the
Catholic Religion, and that if he would resolve his subjects in that matter,
do assure him that all things would prosper and succeed after his own
wishing.

The King with his army of Catholics should stay for them in Berry, and keep
their passages over the Loyre, but should suffer them to go forward between
the rivers of Seen and Loyre, that at length when they had gone forward in that
sliue between the said two rivers, the Catholics on the one side, and the
Leaguers on the other side, following after them, either should enforce them
through difficulties to retire homeward, the self same way that they came, or
else by some occasion or surprise should oppress them. The Duke Ioyeuse with
his army should go to get the advantage between the K. of Navarre and the
Germans.

Upon this occasion the Duke Ioyeuse (as is said) repaired to Paris, there to
have his instructions, and to receive the Kings commandments.

According to this orer the Duke Mercure, (almost then king of Britain) taked
out of Britain as many Leaguers as he could, and being sent unto the Duke of
Guyze under the conduct of the Lord Hautboys, they miscarried by the way: for
about the beginning of September they were met and slain by the King of
Navarre, being then at Monsorean.

During which time of the soiourning of the King of Navarre at Mo^soreau, the
Duke Mercure took his journey out of Britain to join with the army of the
Duke Ioyeuse his brother in law, who having increased his army with a new
supply of men of arms, artillery and inunicion, stayed at Tours, to march
against the King of Navarre. The Vicount Turenne having intelligence thereof,
set upon him and took his rich carriage nigh Saumur: and shortly after the
said King of Navarre having received the County of Soyssons with his French
companies, returned to Xainctonge, and so went to Rochel, where after he had
remained some Taillebourg, repaired to Pons, where having assembled and
mustered all his forces, determined to pass into Gascoyne, partly to gather
more forces in going, partly to join with his army of Germans (which were
already far entered into Bourgundy) passing through the Provinces, which were
favorable to him.

For to execute this determination, it was needful for him to pass the rivers
Droune and Lisle, which were the nearest, with resolution to fight with Ioyeuse
if need were.

The Duke Ioyeuse, had advanced already to Saint Mexent, when the king of
Navarre departed out of Rochel, and knowing the intent of the said King of
Navarre, thought to cut his way: and with great iourneys passing through Poytow
and Engomoys, came to Barbesieulx, and so to Rochechalays in Perigord, with
commandment (as he said) not to spare the extremity of the battle, if other
means would not serve: concluding, that by the overthrow of the king of
Navarre (which he made sure in his conceit) the army of the Germans would not
be able to continue.

The chiefest advantage in this exployt, was to pass over the said rivers, for
it seemed that he who first might go over these two Rivers, would have great
advantage upon the other; for the which cause the king of Navarre using that
providence and accustomed diligence, which does render him admirable,
accompanied with the Princes of Conde and Soyssons, the Lords Trimouille and
Turenne, and others, takes his way to pass the river Droune, and lodged at
Archiak and Montlieu, and other places thereabout.

The Marshall Matygnon had given counsel to the said Ioyeuse, to seize upon
Coutras, a town and castle situated somewhat above the meeting of the said
rivers Lisle, and Droune, a place of importance.

Both the King of Navarre and Ioyeuse did strive to get that town, the one did
strive to pass over the river Droune, the other to stop the passage thereof.

The Lord Ioyeuse caused his light horses to advance to the place, who arrived
there one hour sooner then he could have done himself. But as they were
taking their lodginges, there they found the companyes of the king of Navarre,
which came thither also, to whom the enemy gave place quickly, as being the
weaker.

The king of Navarre therefore passed his forces over the foord of Droune, but
the Duke Ioyeuse having great desire to do some great exployt: and considering
that the king of Navarre was enclosed between two great rivers, he promised
himself an assured victory of him, as not able to avoid any way. Therefore he
gives the rendes vous the morrow morning after being the 20. of October, to a
certain place between Rochechalays, and Coutras.

The day being come, he took his place for the battle, with as much
advantage as he could choose within half a league of Coutras.

Here is the place, the persons, the causes, and euentes to be consideres. The
place is in the very edge of Xainctonge, where he had committed horrible and
savage cruelties, and other excesses against them of the reformed religion,
which have no names in any language. The persons were Leaguers for the most,
Atheistes walking among them, under color of zeal of popish religion, men
besides polluted for the most part with the blood of the Saints which they had
spilled like water upon the earth, and other abominations which follow
treasons, Idolatry, and Atheism: they were more in number without comparison
better armed and furnished with all necessaryes.

The causes were, that after they had for these four years refused all
reasonable offers of the king of Navarre, they hated him without a cause, they
did draw their tongues and swords against the God of heaven, and his Gospel
with a Ciclopicall rage. Therefore Adrasta did stay them in that place, swolen
with pride, arrogancy, contumely, vain hope and confidence in the arm of
flesh, which could not deliver them. There they do^ prove the force of the God
of Battles, and drink a hearty draught, or rather a carowse of the Dregs of
Gods wrath and justice, least that their abominable crueltyes should be known
further. And also, that the saints, as it were out of the midst of those
provinces, which do embrace the Gospel, might see that the Lord is the just
revenger of such abominations, and defender of the just cause. And that they
may learn to fear him, and in him only to trust and repose themselves. Here
therefore Adrastia does stay them to answer unto Gods judgment.

Now let us come to the events. The King of Navarre early in the morning being
first aduertyzed of this preparation, was not moved at it; no more was he
upon the second warning. But at the third time he showed no lesser desire to
fight, then the enemy to whom twice before he had proffered the occasions.

He takes horse, rydeth forth out of Coutras to meet ye enemy, commands the
Lord Clermont master of his Ordinance, in all have to pass over the canon
(for he could not do it the day before:) he puts his army in battle array,
places his artillery in the forefront so commodiously, that all pieces did
service without harming any man of his own, and greatly did endomage the
enemy. At length having encouraged his soldiers to the battle (whom he found
full of desire and readiness) caused prayers to be made from company to company.

About 9. a clock in the morning the artillery began to play on both Navarre
was so commodiously placed, that it did wonderfully annoy the men of Arms,
which the Lord Ioyeuse had at his right hand, and the regimentes which did
flank those men of arms. Many being beaten down with it, some of the heads
took resolution rather to go to the charge, then to die so miserably without
any fight.

The Harquebuziers in like manner began to join, and there was no man on both
sides who showed not to have a great desire to do well.

The Ordinance of Ioyeuse did let fly certain shot toward the company of the
Prince of Conde, but without any effect, save a horse whereon a page did ride,
which was slain. The cause of this small effect, was a little rising of the
ground, which did let the free aspect and aiming of the Ordinance, so that many
shot did light upon the ground.

About nine a clock the light horsemen of the Lord Ioyeuse, to the number of
four hundred horses, conducted by the Lord Lauerdine, and captain Mercure, set
on the horsemen of the king of Navarre: but after some fight, began to waver
and to make room.

The rest of the horsemen of the king of Navarre consisted of 4. Squadrons,
distant the one from the other in this wise.

The Squadrons of the King of Navarre, and of the Prince of Conde were distant
about a hundred and fifty paces.

The Squadron of the Prince of Soissons, at the left hand of the king of
Navarre about three score paces.

The Squadron of yt Vicount Turenne, distant so much from the Prince of Conde
at his right hand. The Lord Lauerdine charged the Vicount Turenne, but without
any endomaging of him.

These three squadrons (where stood the Princes of the blood standing fast)
did behold all this fight, until the Lord Ioyeuse followed with his main
force of horsemen; and having both on the right hand and the left two great
hedges of horsemen, advanced to give the general onset.

Then these three Princes marching every one at the forefront of his squadron
close, first went a soft pace, then began to gallop, last, the watch word being
given with a loosed bridle, set on so lively (every one severally by himself
according to his course) upon that multitude, that incontinently the companies
were mingled, and came to handiblowes. The spears which were in great number
in the army of Ioyeuse, did but small service, for they joined nearer.

It is a wonderful thing, that in a moment such a furious troop as was that
of the Lord Ioyeuse, armed and furnished to the advantage, flanked both on the
right hand and the left with two great battaillions of footmen, was overthrown
and vanquished, by a troop which had neither in number, nor in furniture, nor
in arms, nor in situation of the battle any advantage at all. God (who
governs all things, and holds in his hands

And as the men of arms were quickly overthrown, trodden under foot, and put
to flight; so in as little space were the footmen discomfited, being set on by
the regiment of the King of Navarre, where commanded as Masters of the Camp,
Castelnaw, Parabiere, Salignake, and others. And at the left hand of the King
of Navarre, Charboniere, Preau, Orges, and others, who all every man right
forward (following the occasion of the victory) cut in pieces all that made
any resistance, and put to flight the rest which were on the side of copses at
the right hand, as on the side of the river Droune at the left hand. And as a
little before nine a clock these two armies came to hands, the quarrel was so
soon decided, that at ten a clock there was found not one only man of the
enemies which stood to his defense, nor that was in sight, but such as were
laid dead upon the ground, or taken prisoners, or in flight. The place where
the battle was fought, remained so covered with men of arms, horses and
armours, but specially of Lances matted so thick that they stopped the way.
There remained the Lord Ioyeuse, and also his brother, with a great number and
notablest Lords.

The King of Navarre, the Princes of Conde and Soissons, with the rest of the
army pursued the victory. There were taken many notable Gentlemen, and among
others the Lord Belegarde governor of Xainctonge, the Lords S. Luke, and
Montigny of Berry, who commanded over a company of horsemen: he was noted in
joining of the battle to have pierced further then any of the company; for
he entered even to the side of the gardes of the King of Navarre, which were
at his right hand, and there by them beaten down was taken by some of the said
gardes.

God gave this notable victory to the King of Navarre, and in that journey did
shine the valor wherewith he has endued him in all the special graces which
may deck a noble and virtuous Prince, and great Captain, not only for the
counsel, resolution, diligence, and wise government, but also in the execution
of arms. For doing the office of a Captain and Soldier, he pressed so far
as to take the enemy by the collar.

The Prince of Conde also showed himself valiant; for he had his horse slain
under him; the Prince of Soissons also took prisoners with his own hand. The
horse of the Vicount Turenne was also slain. God made these Princes strong in
this days work, according to the order of their pre-eminence, by them to do
the execution which pleased him: so that every one in his own person did some
honorable exployt in this victory. This victory was the more honorable unto
the said King of Navarre, that it was not bloody to him. For so great number
being slain on the side of the Lauerdine, who saved himself with much a do.
Captain Mercure while they were in battle, ran to Contras to seize upon the
king of Navarre his baggage, supposing that the Duke Ioyeuse had gotten the
victory. But when he heard the cry of victory for the King of Navarre, he
went out in have, and following the bancke of the river Droune toward
Rochechalays, saved himself by flight and shame.

The victory was pursued three hours and more, in the which pursuing were
slain and taken a great number: the ordinance was carried away, and the
baggage lost. After the return from pursuing of the enemy, thanks were given
to GOD upon the place of the battle, the wounded were taken up, the dead
buried, the camp of the enemy burned up.

But that which filled the measure of the King of Navarre his virtue and
honor, was, that he showed himself no less courteous and gentle toward the
prisoners and wounded, than he had showed himself valiant in the fight. Let
them who have tried him by experience, give the testimony thereof, who also
have acknowledged by effect, ye good affection which he bears to good French
men, discerning by a wise prudence all good men, from the conspiring and
traitorous Leaguers, enemies of the state. He commanded the wounded to be
diligently dressed and attended: he sent away almost all the prisoners without
any ransom: he gratified many of the chiefest, and to some he rendered their
Ensigns, namely, unto the Lord Montigny. If he could have guided the lot of
arms in the battle, many were left there upon the place to whom he would have
willingly forgiven. For there was seen in him in this prosperous success not
one token of insolency or passion, which is commonly the mother of cruelty.

Here follows the names of the most notable men, who dyed in this battle.

The Lord Ioyeuse general of the army, and Saint Suuer his brother. Bressay.
Roussay. County of Suze. County Ganelo. County Aubjyou. Fumel. Neufuy in
Perigord the elder. Rochefort. Gurat. Saint Fort. Vaulx, Lieutenant of
Bellegard. The Ensign bearer of the Lord Montigny. Tierceline, master of the
Camp. Chesner. Valade. Baculard. Champel the younger. Pluuiault. Brangerie. Al
these were lords, having charg in
These following were taken prisoners and wounded.

Bellegard taken, wounded, and afterward dyed. Saint Luke. The Marquis of
Prennes. County Monsoreau. Sansak. Cipiere. Saultray. Montigny. Villecomblin.
Chasteaurenauld. Maumont. Parriere. Chasteauuieulx. Chastelou. Auuerdiere. All
these were men of commandment.
Beside these were a number of Gentlemen, Captains, and other men of name,
part of them slain, part taken. The body of Ioyeuse was embaumed and brought
to Paris. God in that day and place, rained from Heaven his fearful
judgments, and made them of France, who love the blood of civil wars, to
know, that in the end the loss is common, and that such pestilence destroys
the authors thereof.

The King being at Gien upon Loyre, above Orleans, with his army, to withstand
the Germans at the passage of Loyre, received news, that the two armies had
met, and it was first reported, that it was but a little skirmish, where the
King of Navarre was put to the worst. But the truth could not be hidden long,
for at length it was known to all men, that the King of Navarre had obtained
the notablest victory, which was yet in all the civil wars of France, for
the defense of the religion, with an irrecuperable loss of them, who would
have it rooted out. The Court kept a great mourning thereof, which qualified
well the great joy that they had for the overthrow of the Germans, which they
had promised to themselves. After this victory the King of Navarre followed his
purposed journey into Gascoyne, for the causes before said: he brought with him
the best part of all the companies, he was accompanied with the Prince of
Soissons. The Prince of Conde repaired into Xainctonge, for to assemble
moreover all that he might, and to be at the appointed rendes vous, when they
should take their journey toward the army of the Germains upon the river of
Lisle, and afterward willing to go further for to haste with great diligence
his way, he left the body of his forces with the Vicount Turenne, who loosing
neither time nor occasion, took many places upon the said river, and in the
rountrey round about, which he reduced under the power of the King of Navarre.

Here follows the names of the places taken by force, or composition after the
battle of Coutras.

The house and mill of Auber demont nigh Coutras was rendered by composition:
there were garrisons placed.

The Mill of Penot beaten down.

The Mill of Cause taken, and the fortifications destroyed.

The Castle and Mill of Saint Seuerine, forsaken by night of them who did
hold it. Captain Roux commanded there for the King of Navarre.

The new Mill given over, and burned to the very foundations, with all the
moveable goods and victuals which were within, whereby many men were undone,
having lost their evidences.

The Mill of Co^y put under the protection of the King of Navarre, with the
condition to make no war there. The Uicount Miles answered for it.

The Mill of Meneplet did the like upon the same condition: so did the mill of
Vauclere.

The house of Captain Fay.

The Abbey of Vauclere.

The Church of Saint Laurens.

The town and Abbey of Guistre* taken by force, and a Garrison put there.

Saint Denis was forsaken, and a Garrison put therein.

Lapalays taken by assault, after threeskore and five shot of Ordinance, there
were about 31. persons killed, and 32. hanged for the great outrages and
violences committed therein, and many other reasons which were found worthy of
Justice, the strong hold, the Church and the town wholly consumed with fire,
with all the fruits and goods which were within, for that it was a very den of
thieves and robbers.

The Castle of Vigneron rendered by composition, and a Garrison put therein.

The town and Church of Puisiguin sustained the siege a day and a half, and
was rendered to diseretion: there were some executed iudicially, for the great
injuries and complaints laid against them.

The Lord Semens who was wont to be one of the pillars of the League in that
country, brought the rest there abouts, to the service of the King of Navarre,
and did show himself more adicted to the said King of Navarre, then he did
ever to the contrary side.

The fort and town of Lussak forsaken, after they had stayed for the cannon.
It was utterly destroyed.

Montague abandoned by night, ransaked and destroyed. The house of Mondesier
rendered, and after put in the hands of the Uicount Myels, who gave his word
for it. Monpaun forsaken by night, and the wales destroyed, no living soul
left dwelling in. They did fortify it again.

The 4. of December, the strong hold and town of Sorzack was rendered by
composition, after six days of siege: the cannon could not ariue

The Castle of Greenholds, one of the strongest places of all the country was
surprised, and Garrisons put therein.

The house of the Lord Oulmes given over.

The Castle Franckes forsaken, the fortresses were rased.

The Castle of Mussidan a strong hold, with the town, were put in the
protection of Salignak, who answered that they should make no war thence.

The houses of Herbasses, Gaudilak, and Mazeroles were put in the protection of
the King, with the house of the Lord Brouillet, with the house of Viuant, and
the noble house and ancient Castle of Marsilak.

The Castle of Saint Pardoux, which was belonging to the Lord of Neufuy, was
put into the hands of his brother, the Lord Foillons.

The 10. day of December, the army departed from Sorzak, to go to bes^ege the
town of S. Astier, and Bishops Castle, distant two Leagues from Perigeulx.

These Leaguers about the Kings person, did cast forth their forcering
perfumes, to wit, if his Majesty should accept the King of Navarre his offers,
first he should put the holy Catholic Roman faith in danger to be wholly
subverted in few years, and at length he should be by the Heretics
supplanted, deposed and displaced.

Secondly, that there would ensue an universal rebellion of the Catholics, so
that the heretics themselves, if they would* (which thing they would never
(carrying always in remembrance the injuries and massacars by him committed
upon them) be able to keep him in the possession of his estate.

Thirdly, that the holy father, and all other Catholic potentates of
Christendom, would take it in very ill part, and would bend their forces
against him, so that Jupiter himself would not be able to defend him.

Last of all, that it would dot be honorable for him so to do: for it would be
thought, that after the fresh loss at Coutras, fear had compelled him to
yield to dishonorable conditions, and to receive law of his subjects, and so
against the honorable acts of his ancestors, he should seem to have joined
himself, though not in opinion, yet in society with the heretics, and so
thought not to have forsaken, yet to have been himself against the Catholic
religion.

Furthermore, the heathens did never give so much credit to the oracles of
Apollo, as this besotted King (whom God had endued with good parts, if he
would have used them with liberty) did attribute unto his mother, being unto
him as Vates fatidica, and a she Priest of Apollo, a ex aurcatripode, that by
no means the King should accept the offers of the King of Navarre. Fearing
that if the King had received the offers above said, having the Princes of the
blood about him, to help by their counsel and wisdom the establishing of the
decayed state, she should have been turned out of government, and de Ponte
Deiecta, commanded to sit at home to mumble her beads. So this great King,
yet once more traiterouslie was be witched, and by the abouesaid counselors
and Mother, was sold to his own ruin, and woeful fall.

The King of Navarre, after the victory obtained at Coutras, became not
insolent of the victory, but moved with compassion for the miseries which
afflicted France, submitted himself, and searching out the means to pacify the
troubles, sent Ambassadors to the king the^ being on the South side the river
Loyre in Berry, to require him yet most earnestly and humbly to consider the
pitiful state of his realm, and to pity and remedy the manifold oppressions
of his people. And although they might have considered his good success for
the space of three years in beholding so great forces and strong armies
prepared and sent against him, partly to have vanished away as dust blown by
the wind, and partly overthrown by the singular assistance of the mighty God
of battles, yet does proffer with many humble prayers and submission, not only
peace to his disadvantage, but also his forces with the army of the Germans, if
it pleases him to use the^, to take reuengement of the injuries, and so often
reiterated rebellions of the League.

But the Duke of Guyze, head of the League, hearing of this message, and seeing
himself, his practices, hope, and all that ever he had with his fellows,
followers, and companions to be in a dreadful precipice, like to be thrown
down into a miserable headlong downfall, takes order by policy to devise some
means to avoid the danger, that is, to work by all means possible to let the
accomplishing of this embassage. And that this thing may be brought to pass,
the king is to be enchaunted with that kind of sorcery which in old time was
called (...), which is a ^eluding of man's reason, as to make a man think to
see that which he sees not. Two sorts of witches are to be employed, to wit,
the Leaguers of his counsel, as Villeroy, Rets, and others, but specially his
mother, whose deuillish and factions craftines was admired of him, as a most
perfect wisdom. These persons must uphold the League, or else all will be
spilled.

It is said before how the King with all the forces he could make, gave his
last endeavor to oppress the King of Navarre, and with him them of the
Religion, for the which purpose he ^et up three great mighty armies, the one
to abide upon the passages of out of Germany into Lorreyne, France.

The second, the king himself should have about him in his own person, to let
the passage over Loyre, least the said Germans should join with the King of
Navarre.

The third was conducted by the Lord Ioyeuse into Guienne, where we showed the
same to have been buried in perpetual infamy at the battle of Coutras.

Now remains to speak of the other two, what they did, and what became of
them.

The King had in deed gathered mighty armies, but he had no money to maintain
them, for the Priests would have no more war so costly as they had two years
before: the Parisiens would hear no more these words, da mihi, affer mihi: The
Kings money either was intercepted by the way in diverse chances, or else his
Taliages, Tributs, or subsidies were not paid, either by some for lack of good
will, or else by some for lack of money. Therefore in the latter end of August
having four thousand Swissers at Estampes, and eight thousand more entering
already into France, with four thousand Rutters, which were every day
expected, he must needs provide money for them. For these shameless Mercenaries
(who sell themselves to dye at other men's commandment, never considering the
justice of the cause) will make no war longer than they are fed with money.
Considering the great charge which he through evil counsel had drawn upon his
arms; he gathered a great sum of money upon the Courts of his Parl^aments,
wherewith he paid those Soldiers.

But whilst the K. was so busy to fight against the God of battles, and his
Son whom he had anointed upon his holy hill Sion; and poll^d his judges and
Magistrates, that they might recover money with advantage by perverting
indgement. Behold a preamble of that rebellion which followed against him in
Paris the month of May next ensuing.

There was a certain Mass Priest, Parson of Saint Seuerine, at the lower end
of Saint James streate, named Preuost, who preached most seditiously against
the King and certain other Lords, who were his faithful servant, without any
respect of persons, degree, or dignity. This Priest being threatened to be had
before the King, a certain notarie made a great assembly, both of arms and
men for to defend the Priest.

The King being aduertized of this mis^emeanour, commanded one of the porters
of his chamber, accompanied with two Archers of his guard, to go to the said
Notary, to bid him come to speak with the King. They which were assembled in
the Notaries house, seeing the said company to enter into the house, set upon
them with great violence, and enforced them to save their lives by flight
^rying arm, arm, and so put all the side of the University in such a
wonderful commotion, that there was nothing else to be hoped, but a tragical
event, and afterward until the 8.

Now to return to the course of the history: The King having three great
mighty armies, and no money to entertain them, turned himself to the old
shifts, brough^ into France by the Cardinal of Lorreyne, and paltring
Italians, who came with the Q. Mother, and gouernd King Henry the second
(father to this King) at their pleasure, when they were disposed to make him a
slave to their passions. For the ninth of September the King went to
Parliament, for to establish fifteen Edicts, among the which there were three
notable: the first was of the establishing 27. Secretaries: The second was to
choose the sixth chamber of enquests, consisting of twenty counselors, and two
presidents. The third was the creation of the Masters of accounts, with two
presidents: out of the which estates, he made his reckoning to pluck two
Millions of gold. Where thou may see (gentle Reader) in what miserable
state France was then, from the highest to the lowest. The Leaguers secretly
against the king: They openly made war against God, distroyed his subjects
to bring to pass his own subversion, and to hide the treasons of his enemies,
refusing to harken unto any motion of peace proffered him by the king of
Navarre, or to any good counsels: and for to maintain this his enterprises,
justice must be perverted by plurality of offices, which is one of the
principallest pillars of kingdoms: by the which magistracy is vpholden and man's
society entertained.

As concerning the armies which were in hand, that which should be lead by the
king himself consisted of four score and eight companyes of men of arms, and
ten thousand footmen, twelve thousand Swissers, 4. thousand Rutters, he carried
twelve double Canons, and two thousand Pioners, and about the 1. of September
the companies began to repair to Montereau faut Yoynne, with commandment to
stay there abouts, and about Sens in Bourgony, until his coming, and then to
repair all to S. Florentine there to be mustered.

The king sent to Marshal Biron to Montereau, to view the place where they
should camp: for the king had determined to camp always: and for that cause
all the Lords had provided tents. He took for his counsel, the Lords
Villeroy, and Bruslard, secretaries, the Dukes Espernon, Danuile, Retes, and
the Marshals Biron and Aumont.

The Prince Soyssons was with the king of Navarre, and the Prince County, was
in Normandy, Main and Aniow, to gather as many companies as he could, to join
with the Germans, knowing well, that these great armies were specially provided
to destroy the house of Bourbon, under the color of defending the popish
religion. The Duke d'Aumaule was appointed Colonel of the Swissers: this army
went not further Eastward Sens, from thence turning South and West ward, and
crossing the Country of Auxeroy, and Gastinoys, passed Loyre into Berry, after
the determinatiun of the Germans was known.

As for the third armies, thus is it: the Duke of Guize and Lorreyne, at the
beginning of September were at Nancy, there they had between 20. and 25000.
men, among them were many horsemen, there they received 400. Lances of the
Duke of Parma, all old Soldiers, 2000. footmen Italians, and between six
or seven hundred light horses, they made no great account of the Italians: the
son of the Lord Antragues, governor of Orleans, about the 15. of September
brought unto the Duke of Guize, beside horsemen, about 700. footmen, when a
little before, all the companies of the Leaguers of Britayn, sent unto him by
the Duke Mercure, under the conduct of the Lord Hault Boys, were discomfited by
the King of Navarre nigh Monsoreau, upon Loyre, as is before reported.

The army of Germans for ye king of Navarre when it departed out of Germany,
was of five thousand Rutters, five thousand Launceknights, armed with cors^ets
and lances, sixteen thousand Swissers, four thousand harquebusiers on
horseback, and about three hundred horses of French men. But after they had
passed the mountain of Sauerne, the further it went forward, the more it did
increase: for the Lord Mouy brought two thousand Harquebusiers French men on
horsbacke. The L. Villeneufue Cormon one thousandand, the Lord Lours one
thousand.

The Lord Chastilion the 22. of September brought to it fifteen hundred
Harquebusiers, and about 200. horses, so that the total sum might amount to
34. or 35. thousand, besides the companies which the Prince County brought
afterward.

They had 16. pieces of ordinance, to wit, four great culuerines, eight field
pieces, and three pieces which were taken from Salabrine.

The Lieutenant of the King of Navarre was the Prince Bullion, assisted with a
counsel, consisting of these which follow: the Lords Guitri, Oneaulx, Cleruan,
Beauuoys la Nocle, Vezins, Digoyne, Louet, Ramboillet, Laube, Cheuorles,
Huguery, and Beauuieu.

This army was the terror of the one side, and the hope of the other, and yet
both were disappointed of their expectation. For God showed to the one part,
that he has means enough to chastife whom, and when he pleases: to the other
part he showed, that they are not safe who do trust in man, and make their
force the arm of flesh.

Beside these three mighty armies, and the armies of the king of Navarre and
Ioyeuse, whereof it is spoken before: The Lords Mommorency and Diguieres had
the fifth in Daulphine against the Lord Valete, beside the arms and assembled
forces scattered elsewhere.

Such was the state of miserable France, which had great cause to groan

But now we have to speak of these three armies conioyntly, to wit, of the
Leaguers, lead by the Guyzes: of the Catholics, conducted by the king
himself: and of the Germans, guided chiefly by the Duke of Boillon.

Here we have to consider the judgments of God, which were powered upon these
armies. First, ye Leaguers by the K. forces did work ye K. undoing, yt by his
fall they might be lifted up on high. The king in pretending ye defense of the
Catholic religion, which no man did oppugn by violence, but the Leaguers,
went about to root the Gospel of Christ out of France. The Germans for the
most part were mercenaries, who regarded not the right of the cause, neither
came to serve him, who procured them, but did in mind swallow down the spoil
of France. And some among them who were lead with an upright mind, yet being
mingled with profane and irreligious men, and trusting in the outward
appearance of that army, turned their confidence from God to the arm of flesh:
therefore all were disappointed of their intents, for neither of them all had
any benefit by this great war, but blows, slaughters and calamityes.

About the latter end of August, after this great army, had passed the
mountain of Zauerne, and began to enter into Lorreyne, the Dukes eldest son,
with certain regiments approached so nigh them at Salabrine, that 3. of his
companies were discomfited, and six Ensigns sent to Strasbourg, and proceeding
further they took Blasmond.

The said army drawing near to Nancy, about the beginning of September,
certain servants going about to forage with their carts, were set on by
certain companies which issued out of Nancy: and when they had seized upon
some carts, were pursued and beaten into the very gates of Nancy.

This army of Germans being about Nancy, there was a counsel holden, to wit,
against whom they should first turn their arms.

The French men were of that aduile, to make war in Lorreyne, and that it was
the pleasure of the king of Navarre, that they who had of lustines kindled that
miserable war in France, might first of all feel the heavy burden of the
same: but specially the Duke of Lorreyne, who was one of the heads of the
League.

The Germans in taking a certain sum of money, which the Duke of Lorreyne
proffered them, were at length content to pass by as neighbors and friends:
yet notwithstanding they concluded war, and did there many acts of
hostility, such as war does commonly draw after it.

This army being yet new and lusty, did neglect a notable occasion to
oppress the enemy at the bridge S. Vincent: upon what occasion that
opportunity Lorreyne. But upon the determination of the way which they should
follow, there was great difficulty found. For the Germans desired to pass
toward Sedan, from whence they might hope of many good commodities, and if
need should be they might have a new supply of forces out of Germany: which
thing could not be, if they enclosed themselves among so many rivers which are
on the South side of Seyne. Some French men on the contrary, said, that they
should turn right to the river of Loyre, for to join with the King of Navarre.

The Lord Boillon desired greatly that they would approach to Sedan, as they
had (as he said) promised him, and that in hope of it he had made great
preparations of powder and artillery, which he had made of purpose.
Considering also that he had to provide for the security of his places, which
might incur some danger if they were not provided for. All reasons debated
and weighed on both sides, the course to the river of Loyre was concluded.

Whilst these things so passed in Lorreyne, the Lord Chastilion the 22. of
September came to the army with his troops: he had much adoo to pass, and
was as if it were enclosed in the town of Gresille, but was rescued by the
County de la Mark, younger brother to the Duke of Boillon. The army drawing
near to Chaumont in Bassigny, there it was put in deliberation to execute a
certain enterprise which the Lord Chastilion had in hand; but it could not be
done.

The army came to Chasteauuilaine, where they soiorned some days: and in the
mean while they took a Gentleman named Viliers, coming from Rome: his
journey to Rome was to solicit the Pope to help his master with money, to
make war against them of the reformed religion, and also to pray the Pope
(Friar Sixtus) to name the King head of the League, assuring him that it would
greatly move him to war, and root out them of the religion, whom he named
heretics. The answer which the Pope made him (as it appeared by his words)
was, that they should live in peace with their neighbors, and that he could
not furnish them with money, being not willing to make war against any man,
who desired peace among all men.

The said gentleman carried a letter very ill written, which he said to be the
hand of the Duchess of Lorreyne, mother of the Duke, containing thus much. I
am very glad to understand the state of your affairs, and I advise you to go
forward, for never a fayrer occasion was offered you to put the Scepter in your
hand, and the Crown upon your head. This letter Navarre.

The army soiourning at Chasteauuilaine, the King with his great army stayed
about Montereau faut Yonne and Sens: but understanding the determination of the
Germans, retired with his army into Berry beyond Loyre, there to stop the
passing over to the King of Navarre, and to give them freer access between
the two rivers of Seyne and Loyre, where he thought either to weary them, or
by joining his with the army of the Leaguers, at the tail of them easily he
might oppress them. During this soiourne, the Baron Oneau brought the
artillery before the Abbey of Cleruaulx, which compounded to give a certain
sum of money, and some quantity of wine and meal: notwithstanding, that
capitulation did not hold, because the said Lord Oneau had not taken hostages
for the performance of the said conditions, contenting himself with the faith
of the Captain which was within: but as the army marched forward he kept not
promise.

The army departing from Chasteauuilaine, made four days journey to the
river Seyne, where they arrived about the 2. of October, and passed over the
said river above Chastilion upon Seyne, without enterprizing upon the town,
because the Lord of Guize had put into it the Lord Chastre with a certain
number of horsemen and footmen, which made a sallie. The Lord Chastilion was
commanded to make the rereward with three companies of light horsemen, and
seven Cornets of Rutters, and three hundred Harquebusiers.

The Colonel Berbistroph was a little more toward the river to favor the Lord
Chastilion: which thing the Lord Chastre seeing, he made have with his horsemen
(being favored with certain harquebusiers which he had set in a coppes) to
charge Berpistroph, who incontinently aduertized the Lord Chastilion, to the
end he might cut off the return of those horsemen of the Lord Chastre: which
thing he did. The seven Cornets which were with the Lord Chastilion, followed
him with a show of good will to fight: but coming not in time, the Lord
Chastilion (with the Frenchmen) began to charge the harquebusiers of the guard
of the Lord Chastre, who were all cut to pieces, and the horsemen followed unto
the gates of the town. One of the Rutters on a sudden forsaking his band,
killed a French Lance with the shot of a pistol.

From thence they went to lodge at Leyne, where they soiourned two days. The
Germans complained much of their lodgings. The Marshalls could not deny but
that they had oftentimes ill lodgings: but the fault was in the dear year, as
they among the principal Rutters could testify, who in the years before in
their former voyages, had been well

In the same place dyed of sickness the County de la Mark, younger brother to
the Duke of Boillon, who had hitherto always conducted the auauntgard about
the third of October.

From Leyne they removed to Ansi le frank, and to Taulay, where news came
that the Duke de Main was in a Castle not far off. The Baron of Oneau, who
was lodged nigh the said Castle, wrote about it to the said Lord Chastilion,
with a declaration of the good will which the Rutters had to assault him, if
they would send them some number of footmen. And if the Duke of Guize would
have approached to the right hand of the said Lord Chastilion, they would come
to his succor as soon as need were. There was then a fair occasion (as it
seemed) to enforce the Duke of Guize to battle: notwithstanding, there was
found some difficulties. For some of the country said that the Castle was
strong: others, that it was a wood land fit for the harquebusiers of the Duke
of Guize, and disaduantagious for the horsemen of the army, and that it would
be hard in camping there to get victuals, and therefore they stayed not there.

From Ansi the army took course to the river of Yonne, and came to it the
second day after. About the fifth of October the said army passed the river at
Mally la vile, where also arrived the Lord Longa from the King of Navarre, and
willed them in the name of the said King to direct the army toward the head of
the river Loyre, where he determined to receive it. Many (notwithstanding)
thought that the Germans would hardly take that way, supposing that if they
should take yt course, many of the Swissers would disband themselves, drawing
so nigh their country, considering also that with much adoo the artillery
would pass through the Niuernoys, partly by reason of the foul ways, and
partly for the great scarcity of victuals which would be found in Niuernoys
and Moruant. Upon this incertitude, the army marched forward, the resolution
of that matter being referred to the incident occasions. This thing moved the
Germans to complain, and to require another government to be used in marching.
The form of marching which they desired, was in form of a triangle, so that
the Rutters should make one wing: the other wing toward the side of the enemy
should be of the Frenchmen, and the middle should be the guard of the artillery
and the Swissers, which notwithstanding was not so resolved: then also began
the discommodities to increase in the army.

Thus the matters passing in that army doubtfully, and without any resolution
upon any expedient counsel, at length they determined to try the passage at
Charity, and for this purpose were chosen both horsemen and footmen: but the
enterprise being delayed off one day for want of some commodity, the King had
leisure to send thither men of arms, who arrived there at the same instant
when the army did approach, which gave occasion to retire without doing any
thing.

The Lord Chastilion, with the Marshall of the Camp of Rutters, and the
Colonel Book, with two thousand horses, drew near to Cosnes, partly to
favor them who were gone to seek passage at Charity (if need were) partly to
seek occasion to see the enemy. There they missed the Duke Espernon but a
little, who had passed the river at Neufuy.

The same night the said Lord Espernon set upon the Camp of the footmen, but
did very little prevail, and after that returned to Cosnes, carrying away with
him the Captain Bonourier sore wounded.

In the mean while the King with his army was on the other side of the river
to oppose himself to the passage: so that the day being come, the two armies
could see one another.

At evening all the army arrived at the river side, and that night the K. made
great trenches at the foord of Neufuy, and fortifyed the same with a garrison
of Harquebuziers and Musketters: and for to favor them, caused 3. great boats
well furnished with ordinance to be brought. The river of Loyre was to be
passed at foordin many places until that time, and there was yet in some places
foordes, yet had they no means to pass, because the kings army kept the
bancke of the river every where. If that army had marched somewhat speedily, it
might have passed well enough in preventing the kings army which came out of
Paris somewhat late: for the king reposed himself upon the assurance of the
Duke of Guyze, who assured the said king to stop the passage of that army,
which thing he could not perform, and had not been done, if the king had not
opposed himself to them at the bank of the river.

The morrow after, the Lord Boyllon came to sit in counsel at Neufuy. There
the Lords Oneau and Huguerie made many complayntes in the name of the Germans,
by reasons of the safetyes and exemptions which were given as well to ye popish
gentlemen as to them of the religion, in favor thereof they received into their
houses ye goods of the vilages where ye army was lodged: and that was true
indeed, and therefore required that there might be no more given to any man,
or else that they might be taxed to pay money for the army. They requested also
that they would take order for the paime^t of the Rutters for a month, which
was promised them: and for lack of the said pay, they would go no further,
adding many difficulties concerning the passage of Loyre: beside that the
winter did draw near, and that there was but two months to keep the field.
They were requested patiently to stay a while until they might aduertize the
king of Navarre to know his pleasure. That in the mean time they would go to
soiorne in Beausse, where was great quantity of corn, and of fodder for the
hor^es, so that the armies might there easily berefreshed. As for the pay, it
was impossible to the French men at that present time to Beausse and Vandomoys,
there some money might be had.

The Germans were contented with that, so that speedily they would send to the
K. of Navarre with promise to stay until they might hear from him.

They quartered themselves the next day, and all the army was lodged upon the
lands of the Lord Chastilion, who offered it willingly, to show example to
others to prefer the public commodities before the particular.

The Lord Boillon lodged at Chastilion with other noble men, to advise upon the
affairs of that army.

Some days before, Tilman colonel of the regiment of Bearne, departed through
sickness. Bouschet his Lieutenant wrote a letter to the Lord Cleruaut in the
name of all the Swissers, that they had determined to let the king understand
the causes wherefore they were come into France, and to that effect would send
Ambassadors to the king. That resolution seemed to many very dangerous: they
sent to him nevertheless.

The town of Bleneau upon Loyne above the town of Chastilion had resisted the
Baron Oneau: for which cause they forced them, and upon that occasion the army
soiorned 2. days about Chastilion. In the mean time news came that the Duke
of Guyze did approach with his forces, and was to lodge about Chasteau-renard,
distant from Chastilion three small leagues.

The Lord Chastilion then opened them the means which he had, therein to
enclose the said Duke of Guyze: but many difficultyes were aleaged, which did
hinder his enterprise: Notwithstanding, the said Lord Chastilion went on
horseback with twenty horsemen in company even to the gates of
Chasteau-renard, and there having taken some of that place, learned that Guyze
was gone thence about one hour before, for to join with his brother the Duke
de Main, and that he had lodged in the town with three hundred horses only,
and before his going away, had put garrisons in the Castle.

The said Lord Chastilion brought with him about 25. Harquebusters on
horseback, whom he sent to the Lord Boillon: by them he learned (as is
aforesaid) that the Duke of Guyze was gone to join with his brother, and that
all their Bands were so scattered here and there in the Vilages about. Some
gave counsel to turn the faces of the army against the Duke of Guyze and his
brother; that it was an easy thing to force him to battle, before that he
should approach nearer to the Kings army, or to Montargis to favor one an
other: notwithstanding some were of a contrary opinion: and that it could not
be done, but the Lord of Guyze would have knowledge thereof, and then would he
retire into some sure and safe places, Yonne on the East, Loyne on the West,
and Seyne on the North; over whom they could not find passages when need
should require it: and that if they should do no exployt, they should repasse
that way which they came, where they should find all things eaten up: which
thing would increase the discomodities, and the complaints of the strangers:
this opinion prevailed, and therefore nothing was enterprized.

They went to lodge about Montargis, leaving the river of Loyne at their right
hand for to get the way to Beausse.

They lodged at Landon and Vimory, and other Towns there abouts. This way is
moorish, broken, foul, and full of quakmiers, where the wagons of the Germans
and Frenchmen did so sink, that the Rutters were feign there to lodge.

The 27. of October, the Lords of Guyze, Main, Elleufe, Aumall, Bar, the
young Ianuile, and the brother of the Lord Mercure, with other heads of the
League and their forces, which were about fifteen hundred horses, and five
thousand Harquebusiers went to lodge at Montargis, and thereabouts on the East
side of the river Loyne, which running between both, let the Germans to go to
them of the League: but on the contrary, gave this advantage to the Leaguers to
pass to yt armies side when they would, because they had the foordes and
bridges at their devotion. This advantage, with the favor of the Town of
Montargis, and of the Country, gave them occasion to enterprise to set upon
Vimory, where the Baron Oneau was lodged, with seven Cornets of Rutters, that
place being not distant from Montargis above a League and a half.

The Enemies arrived at Vimory in the end of Supper about seven a clock at
night. The Rutters (the alarm being given) do repair to their Cornets with
great speed: and whilst the enemies were busy in the streets to rob, the
Baron Oneau did oftentimes charge as well their horsemen as their footmen: the
first onset was upon the Duke de Main, who with a good company of horsemen
made head to the Rutters. At this onset the Rutters did so play the men, that
many notable gentlemen were left dead upon the place, as well of the companies
of the Guyze, as of his brother de Main.

The Cornet of the Duke de Main, with the gentleman that carried it, Rowray of
Burgondy was taken. There were two other Cornets taken, whereof one was of the
Lord Bordesiere. The Duke de Main received two shot of Pistol within his
armor, whereof he was so amazed, that he came not to himself until the
morrow after about eight a clock. There is no doubt but the League would have
had much ado, if it had not been for a great rain, darkness and thunder,
which on a sudden came and d'Arques, eldest son to the Lord Listenay, and the
Lord Cigoigne, son to the Duches de Main, and others were sore wounded.

The Rutters lost above fifty men, about one hundred serving men, and three
hundred wagon horses: they lost three Cornets of their servants, wherein were
painted the Star, the Horse-comb, and the Sponge.

The Baron Oneau received a blow with a sword upon the forehead, but he was
shortly after whole.

The Lord Chastilion was lodged three leagues from that place, who
understanding of the alarm, went on horseback, as also others in other
places, where the rumor came.

The said Lord Chastilion went into the Uillage where he found some of the
enemies wandering, whom he took there: he noted a great number of dead men,
but more Frenchmen then Germans.

The morrow after the Guyze sent to ask for the dead, which were above two
hundred in number, he sent also to know of the Rutters whether they would be
content to exchange their Cornets and prisoners. They answered, that as for
the prisoners, they would advise upon that matter but for the Cornets they
would send them to the king.

That day the Baron Oneau, who had kept possession of their lodgings, sending
all night for the regiment of Lance-knights, went to present him self in
battle array before Montargis, where he was more then an hour to draw the
enemies to battle: but no man appeared, and therefore he retired.

The same day the artillery in going forward, came within a league of
Montargis, where it was in no small danger, being so nigh the enemy, with a
small company: the which after the Lord Chastilion had found in that case, he
accompanied the same until two hours within night: and not able to go
further, they vnstalled it to send the horses to bait in the next Uillages.
The said Lord Chastilion left fifty Harquebusiers on horseback to keep all
night.

The Lord Chastilion arrived at his lodging, learned by a Trompet which had
been in the kings camp, the overthrow of the Duke Ioyeuse, and of the
prosperous success of the king of Navarre in the battle at Coutras, whereof
all the court made a great mourning.

The 30. of October there was a great mutiny of the Rutters, partly for the
loss which they had at Vimory, and partly because they were denied to enter
into Chasteaulandon, which was appointed for their lodging. The Baron Oneau had
much adoo to pacify them: but when the Lord Chastilio^ was come, he was
requested by the said Baron Oneau to besiege that Castle, for the which he
sent his footmen, and in the mean time he went to

During which exployt, the Duke of Boillon, accompanied with many other Lords,
came to the Rutters upon their mutiny. There they said that they would not
pass further, and that they were lead to the slaughter, that they were lodged
at the face of the enemy, without any Frenchmen to guard them. They alleged
that it was reported the King of Navarre to be dead in the overthrowing of
Ioyeuse, that they had lost part of their baggage, that their servants demanded
their wages, and threatened to forsake them if they had no money. To be short,
they said they had no means to follow, and therefore required to have leave.

The Swissers did help much to appease that mutiny, showing the aliance which
they had entered into nigh Chasteauuilaine, promising each other never to part
asunder until the war were ended. This mutiny was pacified upon promise of
the Frenchmen, which was to make among them selves a sum of money, to horse
them which were spoiled at Vimory.

When the Counsel had made an end of their sitting, there came a young man
names Pau, saying, that he had to speak with the Lord Cleruaut, to whom he had
heretofore brought letters from the King of Navarre: this young man had already
come three or four times in the army, saying, that he would bring to them his
regiment which he had in the army of Guize, that he had not assembled it for
any other end then for the King of Navarre his service, and that in taking his
part he would do him, beside some piece of notable service in seazing upon
some place, and that he had good means in Bourgondy, but the army had not
favored him. That now they might take Montargis, as he had informed them,
when they camped at Chastilion. That he had his company in the Castle, which
the Lord of Guize had put in for his safety when he lodged there: but now when
the army marched, the Duke of Guize went aside of them still on the other side
of the river Loyne, and that he pressed him with his company to come to meet
him, and that he could not disobey any longer: therefore let them speedily take
advise.

After some speeches had on both sides, the Lord Chastilion answered him, that
all that came from the Duke of Guize was suspected to him. Notwithstanding,
that if he would do as they would show him, they would send thither. Pau
answered, that there he was to do all that they should command him.

The matter being reasoned, they determined to send the Lord Cleruaut with two
hundred harquebuziers and two Cornets of Rutters to execute that enterprise.
When they came to the place, the Lords Cleruaut and Chastilion, and others of
the company, called Pau unto them, and after they had sent to visit the
Castle, they put fifty harquebusiers upon the gate: and as they were about to
enter in, one of the company of the Lord Chastilion Montargis, the Lord
Boillon, with the rest of the Counsel, had arrived at Chasteaulandon, and sent
the ordinance, having considered where it should be placed: but because there
were neither Swissers nor Launce-knights to guard it, the charge was committed
to the Lord Chastilion, after his return from Montargis, who began the
battery about two of the clock. Then the heads of the army arrived, and in
the evening they showed countenance to give the assault. They within rendered
themselves with their lives safe.

For to keep the lodgings to the Rutters, and to avoid confusion, the Lord
Chastilion would not suffer any companies to enter in, but sent in some
gentlemen to keep it for the Rutters, and sent to the Baron Oneau to come very
early; which thing he did not. And because the Lord Chastilion had to do with
Germans, Swissers and Frenchmen, he could not keep them from spoiling the
Castle: but notwithstansting, what could be had in money from the Soldiers, it
was given to the Baron Oneau for the Rutters. There was much spoil in that
quarter, for the Rutters put fire in every village where they had lodged.

From thence they went to lodge along the river which goes to Estempes.
Bouschet and others, who were sent to the King by the Swissers, returned to the
army about the beginning of November. Their answer was, that the King had
commanded them to speak to the Duke of Neuers, who had showed them the wrong
that they did to their ancient aliance which they had with the King, so to
bear arms against him; he showed them the danger wherein they put their
Commonwealth to be troubled, by the occasion which they had given him to
remember their enterprise: but that they might easily remedy it, by retyring
themselves from so many discommodities and necessities whereunto they were
reduced. Also, that if they would determine to retire home, he would make
means to the King in their behalf to give them money, with all the security
which they might ask. Also, that after he had so spoken to them, the said
Lord of Neuers brought them to the King, who showed them a very angry
countenance, reproouing them very sharply for the offense done against their
aliance and their oaths, so to arm themselves against him. That it was he
which was King of France, that he did wear the crown upon his head, that he
was not a spirit, that it was he himself who ventured both his person and all
his means against them who had employed their forces: he thought that they had
been circumuented

To these things they are reported to have answered, that they had borne these
arms to support the crown of France, and to oppose themselves to the wicked
practices of the Leaguers, whom his Majesty heretofore both by words of mouth,
and also by his edicts had declared his enemies. And that being every way
dulye informed of the truth of this matter, they could do no less, then to
satisfy the just request of the King of Navarre first Prince of the blood, who
was most faithful unto him, for to accompany him in such a just quarrel. They
said also, that they added all which they thought might have served for that
purpose.

Notwithstanding whether they were amazed at the word of the King, whether they
were already won by money, at their return they changed the minds of their
fellows, who then openly began to mutiny, and to ask two or three months
wages, or else to have leave to depart.

The Baron Oneau, with all the Colonels, employed them selves very faithfully,
showing them what wrong they did to themselves, and to their nation, to pick
quarrels for to separat themselves from them, and the Frenchmen, which they
could not do with a good conscience.

The morrow after the Duke Boyllon, with the Baron Oneau, and other Lords ofthe
Counsel, went to the quarter of the Swissers, to see how to remedy that
disorder. The matter was pleaded with many words, but at that time there was
nothing done. The Colonels and Captains determined to send once more to the
king, to have pasportes to send to the king of Navarre, to know to know of him
whether he did bear arms against the crown of France: and that if he should
deny it, they would serve him for money: if to the contrary, they would take
their leave from him, with entreatie to be content with that which is past.

This answer was received as words, for they themselves were sufficiently
informed of the good and right affection of the king of Navarre toward the
king, his crown, and estate: and though they had not known it, yet was it not
time now to enquire thereof. This answer also was not regarded, but that they
made this quarrel, moved from some where else. The alleged also their
necessityes, and that without money they would not pass further.

As these things passed in the army, they of Estempes made a sally by night
upon the Swissers, but without any notable effect.

At the same time the enemies gave an onset upon the footmen: but by reason
they were succored by the Lord Chastilion, they did but a little hurt, save that
they took prisoner the Lord Cormon, who was incontiuently brought to the Duke
Espernon: they used him to bring to pass that whereby

The 15. of November the army removed toward Chartres, and there was put in
question whether they should proceed further or return back: it was agreed
that they should make one days march yet further, to favor the coming of the
Prince County, of whom they had news by the Lord Essars, who had seen him in
returning from the king of Navarre.

The next lodging was within two little Leagues of Chartres: the Duke Espernon
with the kings aduangard was at Bonauall, which was the only passage which
rested for the army to pass, if they would have gone further along the river
of Loyre: from thence departed the Lord Chastilion by the common consent of all
to go to receive the Prince County, who came the 20. of November to Prunay,
where all the Nobles came to meets him.

There they represented unto him all the great discommodities which they
suffered. For the king was on the one side upon the border of Loyre, the
Leaguers were on the right hand of them, and if the army would turn back,
they mustrepasse the way they came, and fighting with the Duke of Guyze on the
one side, they should have the kings army at their heels. All reasons wayghed,
it was concluded to return back as speedily as might be, and with great
iourueyes to recover the head spring of Loyre.

Some of the Germans thought good at midnight next following to depart, and
proposed it in the Counsel by Huguery^: but on the one side the way was not
yetresolued: on the other side they had no time to aduertize the whole army:
and also it was not thought honorable to depart in the night, as though they
had been carried away with terror. The departing therefore was deferred until
the 24. of November, and that it should be by day.

Whilst these things were a doing, the messengers of the Swissers returned,
and gave to understand, that at this third time they had found some alteration
in the discourse he had with them, and that the king had commanded them to
repair to the Duke Espernon: so that it seemed by their discourse, that they
were ashamed that ever they were entered into any negotiation with the King: so
there was some hope to stay them.

To the same end Huguerie was sent to the Baron Oneau, to propose that it was
necessary for the contentation of the Germans, to try by all means to stay
the Swissers: it was alleged for a principal reason, that the same huge body
going away, would carry with them some companies of Rutters, who might move the
others, and render them more unwilling to do that which they were requested.

The matter being proposed in the counsel, some thought their departure to be
not greatly hurtful, bringing these reasons to verify their opinion: Loyre,
which was the only sure way which the army could take.

The other on the contrary showed, that such separation could not be done with
out great alteration in the rest of the army, and that if it were not let, it
would be the beginning of a dissipation, which was like to have an evil end,
and that the Germans would do the like at the least occasion, and that with the
Swissers they were able to beat the kings power: which thing they could not do
without their aid. The K. of Navarre had showed what should be done in such
extremity, to wit, to turn their faces toward the Duke of Guyze, to enforce
him to fight, or else to enclose him in what soever place he were: which thing
did not seem very hard, considering that he had no good town to make his
retrait unto.

That the Swissers would not refuse to fight against the League, and unto all
these things above said, would help much the prosperous victory which God had
given to the king of Navarre: but the Swissers could not be kept, having so far
dealt with the king.

They upon the resolution to depart, required their Rowles to be sealed, to
that end that the bodies being asunder, the affections might remain joined
together: and that in so doing, they would be sworn to promise to bring to the
king of Navarre two or three regiments of Swissers at the time and term
prefixed.

The counsel stood upon a letter which the Baron of Oneau had written, by the
which he warned them, that if they gave assurance of pay to the Swissers, who
contrary to their duty did forsake the service of their master, they should put
no difference between the good seruitors and the bad.

The day for the army to depart, which was appointed the 24. being come, the
Duke of Guyze either of his own motion, or else by intelligences, marched all
Night, and put certain Harquebuziers into a Castle, which was at Aulneau,
where certain countrymen had repaired, and had agreed with the Rutters to
furnish them with all that they needed.

The gardes of the Baron Oneau, who was lodged at Aulneau, a little town
enclosed, did not perceive the said Harquebusiers.

The Duke of Guize with the rest of his troops, stayed till the day breaking,
when the wagons of the Rutters began to go forth, and the gardes were taken up
for to depart: that hour seemed unto him most fit to surprise the said
Rutters, whom otherwise he durst not assault. Having given the watchword, they
entered into the gates, which they found open, and

The Rutters upon the alarm, took horse, and found the gate seized upon, and
the streets hampered with their wagons, so that they could never join
together to take the field.

The Baron Oneau with six or seven, being the first at the gate, pierced
through them which came in. The gate was quickly shut. They of the Rutters
which had got on horseback, ran about the walls to find a way to get out:
and when they found none, standing on the horse saddle, leaped up the wall, and
so threw themselves into the ditch, where some saved the Colonels Cornet, and
five others: but all the Gentlemen of all these Cornets were for the most part
taken, or slain.

The Baron Oneau with the rest of the Rutters, stayed within half a league of
the Town. The Swissers repaired thither in battle array, where also came the
Lord Chastilion. There it was propounded to send for the rest of the army and
ordinance, and presently to compass ye town, where they might find some yet
busy about the ransacking; but there was no order to hearken unto that: so the
Duke Boillon and all the Counsel concluded upon their departing. The Lords
Cleruant and Chastilion were sent to the Rutters to comfort them about their
loss, and to cause them to follow the way. But the morrow after the Colonels
were moved to mutiny, saying, that they would go to the Swissers, and so
with them into Germany, and cause their wagons to turn that way. These news
were brought to the Prince County and the Duke Boillon. Notwithstanding, an
hour after the Baron Oneau sent for the Lords Cleruant and Chastilion, to
return to them, and that he had so wrought with them that they would come to
the rendes vous. There it was showed them that it would not be honorable to
them to retire so upon a sudden loss, and that there was no safety for them,
if they would follow their determination, but that it was far better to
remain with the Frenchmen, with whom they were able to fight against
whomsoever, and that the way which they would follow, was the nearest for them
to return into Germany.

Upon these persuasions they agreed to follow the next day to the rendes vout,
where they said they would see the Frenchmen, and that there they would
entreat of all things.

A certain man, a friend of the Lord Chastilion, had sent word unto him from
the Kings army that he had weighty things to tell him. The said Lord
Chastilion had showed the letter to the Lord Boillon and the rest of the
Counsel, which willed him to send thither some faithful friend: which thing
he did. The messenger who was sent, returned with the Lord Cormon, Germany, or
else to their houses, with many reasons which were alleged, which could not be
presently answered, because the army marched on.

There was some aparance of danger, least the army should be pursued by the
King and the Leaguers joined together, which was the cause that it was
propounded to the Rutters to burn their wagons, and to set as many as they
could on horseback, promising that the Frenchmen should do the like. At the
rendes vous it was showed to the Rutters, that within twenty days they should
be brought into the presence of the King of Navarre, or else they should be set
in place of safety. That the Prince County, the Lords Boillon, or Chastilion,
or other such as they would choose, should answer them for the sum which was
due to them. And in case the King of Navarre would not content them all,
as soon as they should come unto the said Lord King of Navarre, they would
yield themselves their prisoners: this was an agreement by words, which should
have been put down in writing, and afterward sealed on both parts, with
assurance and promise given by them, that they would repair to the King of
Navarre.

The rendes vous on the next day was at Landon, four leagues from Montargis,
an unfit place, by reason of a bridge which is in the middle of the Town,
where was great confusion in going over. The Lord Chastilion was commanded to
go to try the passage at Gien: but many inconveniences let that enterprise,
although he had gone part of the way. In the mean time the enemy advanced in
such sort, that the forerunners did charge the Launce-knights, and unarmed
about one thousand or twelve hundred, did hurt a great many, took the
artilterie and munition. About 25. horsemen did all that.

The Launce-knights did retire in good order toward Buissiere, as also the
wagon men with their horses, and other such stuff as they could save. The Lord
Chastilion went also to the said Buissiere, who did incontinently send to the
horsemen on every side, for to take advise what was to be done; for they were
like to have the enemy very shortly on their backs: but the companies went to
the rendes vous, which was appointed at Bouuy. The Lord Chastilion having stood
in battle array at Buissiere, to receive the Launce-knights who did pass in
order, made the retraite, having not with him above three score armed men, and
six score harquebusiers on horseback at the most.

The same long soiorning which the Lord Chastilion made at Buissiere, gave time
to the enemy to follow him; so that in marching the high way to Bouuy, the
enemy appeared marching along the park: at whose discovering

The Lords Morinault and S. Albine did lead the forerunners, who discovering
that the enemy was of more then two hundred horses, sent word to the Lord
Chastilion, who strengthened them of ten men of arms which were with the Lord
Byramont, and willed them to march a small pace after the companies. But a
little after they were so pressed, that they turned their faces against the
enemy with sword in hand, who then stayed, and after in that manner followed
the Lord Chastilion more than three leagues.

The said Lord Chastilion giving to understand to the Prince County, that the
enemy was at hand: the Duke Boyllon went back to the said Lord Chastilion,
with 2. hundred horses: and going back to a little brook which they had left
behind, thought good to stay there for the enemy: but the Lord Monluet (who
always had remained behind) gave to understand to the Lord Chastilion, that he
doubted somewhat: and for to know better what it might be, they went toward the
enemies, and at the discovering of them, began to speak either to stay them,
or else to make them come nearer, but at length the enemy began to retire: upon
which occasion the Lord Monluet and Chastilion pressed them so far, that they
pursued, beating them beyond the Brook, where they left dead of the enemy
seven or eight upon the place.

The Lord Chastilion pursuing the disorder of the enemy, was aduertized by the
Lord Boillon, that the Rutters were more then five leagues before with the rest
of the Frenchmen, and that the companies which he pursued was the whole power
of the enemy, where were the Lords Espernon, Nemours, and Mercure, and that
necessity required to march forward without any further delay: which thing
stayed the Lord Chastilion, who in returning passed by a little wood, where he
spied about four score Harquebuziers of the enemy, who hid themselves in the
said Wood, whom the said Lord Chastilion made countenance to charge, that in
the mean time he he might retire his forerunners, whom the said
Harquebuziers made their rekoning to surprise in their return: but they came
again without any damage.

The truth is, that there was in all those troops but only the Dukes
Espernon, Nemours, and Mercure, who were greatly amazed when their forerunners
so fearfully did cast themselves in their arms.

That same day they went to lodge five leagues from thence, and the next day
they began to enter into Moruaut, which is a wood land, and so thick, that
with much adoo they could not go above two and two.

They appointed the rendes vous for the chief of the army, to hear what
commission the Lord Cormon had brought: which was, that the King would give
such surety unto the Germans as they would, to retire into Germany, and to the
French men Papists (who would live Popishlie in France, might enjoy their
goods, so that they would bear no arms against him: requiring furthermore in
token of their obedience and good intentes, by the which they had declared to
have borne arms only for his service, that all the French men should
surrender him their Cornets and Colors.

All these things being debated on both sides, it was advised not to despise
these offers, but for the sureties and ensigns to take further advise.

The reasons which induced them, were the great amazednes wherein the whole
army was, and to that fear there was such negligence joined, that there was
no more means to keep any order, neither among the Germans nor Frenchmen.
Many French gentlemen had and did daily resort home: there was no assurance
that any great number would stay any longer. There was no resolution to fight
against the enemy: the ways were full of stuff and arms, as well of Germans
as Frenchmen, the Horses were weary, they had to make long iourneys to go
far from the enemy: when they came, they found no guide to lead them the way
to the Vilages, so that they traveled some time one or two leagues after they
were arrived at the rendes vous for to take their lodginges. The most part of
them remained either in the woods, or else in the first houses which they met:
men without bread; horses without fodder: many horses were tired for lack of
shooing. There was four days journey to go through woods.

The Harquebuziers and footmen did diminish on both sides: all the regiment of
the Lord Villeneufue had dis^anded themselves not passing three days before,
because the master of their camp was prisoner: there was almost no men left in
the regiment of the Lord Mouy.

They whom the Lord Chastilion had brought out of Languedock, for lack of
horses could not follow, or else for to follow in so long iourneyes were
enforced to cast away their armors: most of them had no powder, nor means to
recover any. Their Pieces were either broken or unprofitable for lack of
workmen to mend them. There remained not above two hundred Harquebuziers.

They which rested of Launce-knights, being about two thousand, were unarmed:
all these reasons made them conclude, that it was better to save the men to do
service another time, then to loose them and give the praise to the enemy, to
have wholly destroyed that army.

Upon these deliberations, they dispatched to the king the L. Cormon:

In the mean while the army went forward, followed still by the Lord Espernon,
accompanied with seven or eight hundred horsemen, and with

The Army marched five days journey unto the town of Lancy in Masconoys,
where the rendes vous was given. The Rutters and Frenchmen assembled themselves
the 6. day of December. The Lords Cormon, Lisle, and Moriuault came from the
Lord Espernon: there the heads and the troops being assembled, conferred
together of the things which were to be entreated.

The king fearing greatly that the remnant of that army should escape into
Viuarets and Languedock, and so into Gascoyne to the king of Navarre. Therefore
they invented surmises to increase the terror and impossibility, to divert them
(if it were possible) from going that way, which they saw was the easyest and
safest to escape the danger into the which they did cast themselves, and to
cause them to accept of disauantagious offers.

The Lord Lisle Moriuault (being sent by the Duke Esperno^) opened a roll, in
the which was read how many companies of armed men and regimentes of footmen
were in the forest country to stop the way to the army, if they should take
their journey to Viuarets: he reported also how Mandelot was enforced to retire
his army, by reason of the great Snowes which were fallen there, so that there
was no means for them to pass: this thing discoraged the army greatly.

Upon this deliberation appointed to determine what was to be done: the Lord
Chastilion showed that the hardest and most dangerous part of the Forest was
past already, that within four days they could be in a place of safetye,
and showed them to the eye the mountains of Viuarets, where within 24. hours
they might have the Lord Chebault with fifteen hundred Harquebusiers: that he
knew well the means of Mandelot, how that he could not gather such companies
as could be able to stop their way: he warned them to take heed of rumors which
were spread abroad by the enemy to terrify them: offered upon his life to
conduct the companies into Viuarets without danger. The means which he
proposed, were to divide the army into two parts, to put one half of the
Rutters and Frenchmen in the vaungard, with as much of the stuff as was
necessary, and that which they could not spare, and to cut off all the rest,
but specially all the tired horses which served for nothing but for lets.

The other half of the army should march after, and that they should resolve
themselves to fight against whomsoever would oppose themselves in their way,
either before or behind. And that in so doing he trusted by Gods power, that
they might overcome all impediments which might be proffered: considering that
God had plucked the army, as if it were by the hand, out of more and far
greater dangers, then they which remained behind. Thereunto he added, that
the Lord Espernon was left a long days journey behind the army, Guize three
days journey, the King Loyre, and that before the army there was nothing
which might do hurt. He showed furthermore, that there was no cause to accept
the disaduantagious and dishonest conditions which were offered, unworthy to
be accepted of them who professed the true Christian reformed religion. On the
other side, he showed the small assurance which they might have of the Kings
proffers, and the impossibility to return home in safety the way which they
determined to take.

For first, the King did offer safety to retire wheresoever they would, with
assurance of enjoying their goods, as well to them who would repair to their
houses and live according to the Romish religion, as to others who would retire
out of France, to live in freedom of conscience without bearing of arms. He
did offer also safety to the strangers, to repair to their country with
their Cornets and Ensigns, requiring only the Colors of the Frenchmen. But
now he alters these conditions, and will give no surety to return home, nor
liberty to enjoy their goods, but only to them who will live after the Popish
manner, or would promise never to bear arms, except by his express
commandment: and beside asked all the Cornets and Colors indifferently as
well of the Germans as Frenchmen.

This alteration made him think that there was some false dealing even in the
army it self, which gave occasion to the King to revoke his former proffers,
and to offer harder: considering that it was not unknown that the Lord
Espernon has not at this present time five hundred horses, and not so many
harquebusiers on horseback: so that if he would stay for them which be had on
foot, he would never overtake the army going forward. But if he should come
with them which he had, he would be still the weaker, and himself as weary,
as the army in danger still to be well beaten: having no reason that he
should do so now, seeing that he durst not do it when he had greater forces
nearer the army, and in a country favorable to him every way. He concluded
therefore, that there was nothing so sure for the army as to pass the Loyre.

He showed also, that it was impossible to return into Germany safely: for to
go thither they ought to pass the river Saosne, and that still upon bridges,
because it cannot be passed by foor^ any where. He showed that the bridges and
boats were in the power of the Duke de Main, and that if the Saosne might be
passed, yet must they go through the enemies lands, so that they must needs
commit themselves into the Leaguers mercy, whose cruelty he knew the King
himself were not able to stay. Many Germans and others showed that they
approved well this advise as the surest way. But this is to be confessed, that
God would not use the means of this army, and that he would wholly scatter it.
For although they saw Languedock, would have others to follow them for to
assure their way. Others alleged the impossibility by reason of the Snowes:
others, the barrennes of yt country, where they should find food neither for
men nor horses. The Rutters thought upon the loss of their horses, when they
should pass the downefalls of the mountains of Viuarets, where the country
men alone were able to resist them: so that easily they were withdrawn from
that voyage. For then the common sort of them without their Colonels flocked
together, to hear what the Lord Lisle mariualt would say, who (persuaded to
diminish somewhat of the conditions) proposed unto them, or else to carry away
their Cornets, and swear never to return into France, except it were for the
Kings service, or the Emperor: or else to surrender their Cornets and to go
with liberty, and to return when they would.

Upon this proposition, the Lord Chastilion breaking through ye preace, showed
that the Lord Lisle mariuault had no authority nor writ to treat with them,
nor that could bind the King to entertain that which he proposed: he showed
also, how in all that there was no security, and that the Kings offer was as
good as nothing, in offering to men of war and Soldiers conditions shameful
and unreasonable, and such as could not be accepted, without forcing both
their religion and honor. But the tumult increasing (as is commonly seen in
such diversity of opinions) the Germans concluded to accept one of the two
proffers, and that same day at evening they would show which of them. Upon this
resolution, the Prince County with his white Cornet separated himself, and
went to lodge at a Castle not far off. They made some proffers to the Lord
Chastilion, to dissuade him from his return into Languedock, amplifying the
great dangers which did attend him, if he should hazard that voyage.
Notwithstanding, he went to the Lord Boillon, and (having made a discourse of
the dangers whereinto he did cast his life and state upon the fear which he
conceived) showed him ^ow this delay of resolution would give leisure to the
enemy to stop his passage: and taking his leave from him, took his way to his
troops which stayed for him. This being done, there came 25. or 30. Rutters
after him to call him, saying, that they had somewhat to say to him. Then he
began to mistrust them, as that they would arest him: and being in the middle
of them, understood that they talked among themselves, that they had no
security for their payment, and that the French men should give them
assurance. There some of the princi^allest of them said unto him twice in the
ear, my Lord go your way, fearing the mutiny of the common Soldiers. The
Lord Chastilion then speaking to the company of the Rutters, it is reason said
he, that you should have security of your payment, and for my part I am ready
to bind my self, and to de what you will. But said he, I must have the Lord
Boillon, whom I go

And upon these words ^urned bridle, and making room took the galop to the
forefront of his troops, the which (with sword in hand) took their way with a
soft pace about two miles, and thence got easily to S. Laurence where was the
rendes vous.

The said L. Chastilion (through great dangers) with his company arrived the
11. of December at a Castle in Viuarets, called Retortou, where was a garrison
of them of the Religion, the fifth day after his separation from the army.

The Lord Chastilion so retired from that army, the Rutters and others who
remained among them, concluded the capitulation with the Lord Espernon, as
appears by the articles which were brought to the King* and afterward by his
commandment sent into the Provinces and governments of his realm, whereof
the tenor follows.

Articles and capitulations, concluded by the Lord Espernon, with the Lords,
heads, and guides of the army of strangers, Baron Oneau, Col^nels, Captains,
Writmasters, Lords, and Knights, etc.

The Frenchmen who are in the army, shall render their Cornets into the hands
of the Lord Espernon, to be sent unto his Majesty, to whom the King gives
liberty to enjoy their goods in safety in their houses, so that they obey the
Kings edicts. They also shall make promise to him, signed and sealed with their
hands, never to bear arms, except it be for his service, and by his express
commandment, except it be out of the realm. They of his said subjects, who
will retire out of the realm without obeying his edicts, and yet will make the
said promise, the King does grant them liberty to enjoy their goods, and
security to return with the strangers out of the realm: but they who will
promise nothing at all, they shall only have safety to retire out of the realm
with the strangers, without inioying any of their goods. And for as much as
some of the Captains may make doubts to surrender their Ensigns, the King
will that such shall not at all enjoy the benefit contained in these Articles.

As for the strangers, the King does grant them passeport unto the Frontiers
of his estate, on that side where they are now nearest, upon condition that the
said Colonels, Captains, and Writmasters, shall promise to the King, never to
carry arms in France against the King, being thither called by his subjects,
without his express commandment: and shall lap up their Ensigns, in
returning to their Country.

Also they shall not take, nor carry away any prisoners of the Kings subjects,
without his express license, neither shall commit any act of hostility in his
realm, in which doing, the King shall provide them necessary things for the
performing of the premises the 8. of December.

This was the end of this army, by the which God did evidently show to his
children, that it is he only, upon whom they ought to cast their eyes in
their afflictions, and that other means are altogether unprofitable, except
that he will further them, neither will he further them, except they be well
used, with an upright mind and intent.

This separation of the army took away from the enemies of Gods people, all
occasion to swell of the victory, which they may not attribute to their
valor, who durst never look them in the face, and in skirmishes the enemy had
always the worst, except at Aulneau only, where through their negligence they
were surprised.

Now Christian Reader, consider well the use of this dissolution of the Army.
The King prepared great power to oppose himself to it, used great policy to
draw it into that straight whereinto they wilfully did cast themselves, for
not following the good counsel of the K. of Navarre, who would have them to
pass above the head of Loyre. But as men destitute of understanding, heedily
went into a manifest mishap, and knew not wherefore, as to close up themselves
between so many rivers, whose passages they knew well to be holden by the
enemies.

And as the king used great policy in snaring them that way, so he took
great care and labor to disunite them, that without blows he might throw them
down: and at length being by themselves weakened, sent them away to the
slaughter, under the shadow of a pasport. If the King had been so long at
schole with Solomon as he was with his mother (the only fury that has been
these many ages) he could have learned that it was an unseemly thing for a
king to speak a lie.

But mark the fruit that he received thereby, all this redounded to his
undoing: for of evil can no good be done by man. The Duke of Guyze as he had
turned all his actions heretofore to his viscredit, so did he this: for he
caused certain horses which he had taken of the Rutters at the skirmish at
Vimory in Gastinois, and at the surprise at Aulneau, to be lead some into one
City, and some into another, almost through all France, by his horsecorsers and
riders with this song, Saul has killed a thousand, and David ten thousands, as
it shall be showed in his place: So he made the world believe that he had been
the only instrument, by the which that army had received all the harm which
they received. And whereas the Kings only policy had undone that army, yet
made he the world believe by his horsecorsers, whom he sent to walk the said.
Dutch horses, whom be used for sowers of false rumors, that not only the king
had willingly let them to escape, but also had given them the means to retire,
some into Germany, and some into Languedock, and from thence to the king of
Navarre, so that the pulpits of Friars and Jesuits in Paris and other cities,
did sound nothing else but of these news, extolling the valor, wisdom, and
glory of the Duke of Guyze, with procuring to him much popular Guyze might
easily bring to pass his enterprises, and the king should not be able to let
him.

Now let us know what became of the fragments of this army.

First, the promise was not observed to them, for a great number of the^ were
slain, robbed and spoiled in diverse places. The Duke of Lorreynes eldest
son, called Marthuis de Pont, accompanied with the forces of the League, set
on them in diverse places, and enuaded the county of Montbeliard, where he
committed horrible cruelties, putting all to the sword, with execrable
whoredoms and abominations.

Many dyed in the way, many dyed when they came in place of safety, even of the
cheifest noble men.

The Lords Boillon, Cleruaut, and Vau, with many other noble men retired to
Geneua, where after so many labors and greeues they dyed in the Lord.

The like happened to the Swissers, whose Colonels and Captayns (who were the
authors of the first parley and capitulation with the king) were punished by
their seignories, so that few either of the Germans or Swissers returned home,
or escaped unpunished.

It is said before, how that France in this year was groaning under the
burden of seven great armies, besides many particular assemblies: whereof it is
said how Ioyeuse and his army was made sure at Coutras, and their reduced
carcasses were left in perpetual infamy, not for their death, but for the
causes of it.

The Germans have made shipwreck upon the Rocks of Lancy in Mosconoys the
eight of December, and after.

The kings army was broken against the bank of Loyre, and from thence
scattered every man home.

The Leaguers are excluded out of Daulphine, where the Catholics and they of
the reformed religion (after much bloodshed) at length agreed to live like good
fellow cityzens under the lawful government of their king: and so the year is
ended, and Christ reigns for evermore.

The end of the fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
THis year is notable; not so much by reason that it was holden by the
Mathematicians to be fatal Boillon, and other Nobles at Geneua: The Prince of
Conde at Saint Ihan d'Angelye: The Duke of Guyze and some of his partakers: The
invincible armado of Spain intending to have invaded England, was beaten both
by God and man: And last of al, the famous enterprise achieved by the French
King Henry the third, with the famous victories of the Church of God in the
principality of Boillon, against the conspirators and enemies of mankind of the
League.

It is said before, how after the capitulation of the King, with the army of
Germans, at Lancy in Masconoys, the Duke of Boillon, the Lords Cleruaut, Vau,
and others, retired to Geneua, where these three especially dyed.

Not long after their aryuing there, the Prince of Boillon fell sick, and the
27. of December (feeling in himself his end to be at hand, and that he had to
pass to a most blessed life, careful for the state of the Church of God)
gathered in his Sovereign principality of Boillon, disposed of his affairs
as follows.

He made his soul heir generally of all his goods holden, as well in
Sovereignty as otherwise: the Lady Charlote de la mark his sister, upon
condition yt she shall neither alter nor innouate any thing in the state, nor in
Religion, the which there she shall maintain as it is established. Also that
she shall not marry without the advice of the King of Navarre, the Prince of
Conde, and the Prince Monpensier her* Uncle, upon pain of forfeiting the right
of those Soueraignties, from the which (in case she should otherwise do) he
utterly excludes her. And in case the said Lady of Boillon should decease
without heirs, the Prince of Monpensier her Uncle is substitute as next to
inherit: and after him the Prince Dombees his son, conditionally that they
shall change nothing in the state nor Religion, upon pain of the like
forfeiture: And in case the said princes should make there any innovation, he
does substitute the King of Navarre, and in like case the Prince of Conde, in
case the first should fail in the performance of the premises.

The said Lord Boillon made executor of his Testament, and the Lord la Noue:
the which done, the first of January he was delivered out of this mortal
li^e, to enter into the full enjoying of the society of God, being the day of
his nativity and the 25. of his age.

This was a Prince of great ancient and famous nobility, issued by the father
side out of the stock of that renowned Argonante Godfrey of Boillon, who was
crowned King of Jerusalem, a noble and virtuous man, his Mother was one of the
most virtuous women of our age, daughter unto the Prince Monpensier, and sister
unto this Prince, now at this year living: her virtue, godliness, and
constancy in the confession of the true doctrine, shall be in an everlasting
remembrance. For she being very oftentimes requested by her Father (a great
and devout Catholic) to forsake the Gospel, and to return to popery, at
length she agreed unto him, with this condition, that if the popish Doctors
could bring better proofs for their religion, then the ministers of the
reformed would for hers, she would fulfill his will. Whereupon a disputation
being obtained at the hands of King Charles the ninth, and the matter being
reasoned between two Doctors of Sorbonne, and two Ministers of the Gospel,
for many days in her presence, her own husband sitting as moderator, it fell
out, that in stead of that which her Father looked that she should have been
converted to popery, she was confirmed in the truth: by whose singular wisdom
and special care, afterward the Churches of the Sovereignty of Boillon were
reformed.

This Principality of Boillon is a small country, holden in sovereignty, yet
commonly under the protection of the Crown of France, between the rivers Mose
and Moselle, a part of the ancient Nation, called Eburones, having on the East
side Lorreyne and Ardenues, on the West Henault, on the North Liege, on the
South Baroys and Champaigne: it has two strong places, Sedan and Iamets, and
many other strong holds and Castles, the Country is Woody, Moorish, and
strong, lying altogether upon the banck of the river Mense. This Country since
it had embraced the Gospel, and become the Garden of Eden, has been the place
of refuge for them of the reformed religion of the Nations, which do lie
between the rivers of Marne, Seyne, Mosselle, and Saosne, a place most fit to
retire unto, in time of persecution.

There were two brethren, the Duke of Boillon, and the County de la Mark, two
Noble young men of great virtue, valor, and godliness, who had from their
cradle, as if it were sucked the true religion and virtue, with the milk of
their virtuous and godly Mother: They ventured all that they had, lives, goods,
and state, for the defense of the Crown of France and true religion, and
opposed themselves against the conspiracies of the Leaguers, not as
Merceuaries, but moved with a true zeal and love toward

These two noble men were called out of this life, unto that which never
decays, and to enjoy the inheritance of the Saints in light, whose names
shall be in the everlasting remembrance of the righteous. The one, to wit, the
County de la Mark, dyed at Lancye, about the beginning of October, as is said
before: but the eldest, to wit, the Prince Boillo^ at Geneua, the first of
January, as is said.

It is said before, how the Duke of Guize set upon the Rutters at Vimory, where
many were slain and taken on both sides, and the Duke of Guize took also
about three hundred wagon horses, and in like manner took some more in the
surprise, which he did enterprise upon them at Aulneau in Beausse. This man
being possessed with a legion of unclean spirits, named Ambition, this
unclean spirit did so torment him, that it made him to think an hour a day,
a day a year, and a year an old man's age, so he longed to see the royal
family rooted out, and the crown of France to fall to his lot: he advised
therefore himself of this point of policy, to make his name ring over all
France, his victories sung out, and to store up the love and admiration of the
people toward him, and to procure hatred and en^ie to the King. He divided
these horses and armor which he had taken from the Rutters at Vimory and
Aulneau, into sundry companies of horsecorsers and riders, transported with
affection, and factious malcontents and unquiet, to make a progress through
the realm into those Provinces, whereunto they durst venture, and into those
Towns and Cities, specially which were favorable to him. There these
horsecorsers carried (as if it were in a triumph) through the cities the
Germans spoils, horses, weapons, and all other array. And when the people
were flocked together in great troops, to see these new shows, there were the
Orators ready among them. The number of the dead, horses and Ensigns taken,
were increased by the figure of multiplication, one killed a hundred, and a
hundred ten thousand, as Pyrgopolinices in Plautus: the manner of the fight was
made very difficult, and dangerous for the conquerours. They showed also, how
not one of the Guizes Soldiers were found wanting: to be short, vanitas
vanitatis.

Then they applied their shows, how that the Duke of Guize had atchiued
himself all the difficulties of the war, and either slain or taken the
chosen and valiant Captains and Soul^iers thereof, and if he had been
assisted by the King, he would have gotten such a victory, as never the like
had been heard of in France. For he knew the means how to have made such a
slaughter of them, as not one had been left to tell the news in Germany: all
the realm might have inioyed the commodities of such a victory. But the King
he retired beyond Loyre, as though he had been unwilling or afeard of them,
for he would or durst never show his face, or draw his sword against them, and
for to show some outward countenance, Guize had left the small remnant, who
were but pages and scullions, so hurt, weary, and sick, that they could not
fly, trusting that they would have been dispatched by the King, they were
followed so slackly, that not only he gave them leisure to escape without
running, but also helped them to overcome so many distresses whereunto they were
driven by the said Duke of Guyze, and also under color of a counterfeit
yielding and submission, he granted unto them their lives, horses and
furniture, and to some of them their goods, and by these means they came all
to their iourneys end, and safely arrived to the King of Navarre.

Now the conclusion of these infamous reports, was left to every man to
infer, that either there was not in the King such princelike virtues as
should be in him, or else that he was a favorer of heretics, and a
dissembler with the Catholics. Then what should we do with such a King: Let
us have another. And whom should we have, but him that has done such
exployts, and delivered France from so many dangers and terrors.

By these devises, hatred and contempt was no less procured against the King,
as, gloria in excelsis, praise, love, favor, and authority to the Duke of
Guyze.

The Jesuits and Friars on the other side took these lyings and slanderous
reports for a theme to discourse upon in the pulpits, he that was of a
timorous mind cried, that the King was a betrayer of the Catholics, he was
become either a close and desembling heretic, or a favorer of heretics, and
that it was to be feared ere long he would forsake the catholicisme, and
overthrow the Catholic Religion in France: Others which had a more warlike
stomach, discoursed upon the other common place, that the K. had a timorous
mind, durst not look few (Pages and Scullions half vanquished) in the face,
and that was the cause that many attempts upon the heretics had come to small
effect, because the wars were not pursued by men neither of courage nor
wisdom. But the Duke of Guize, that noble branch of Charlemaigne, the
deliverer of France, the only protector of the holy Church, was the only man
to whom they owe their religion, their lives and goods, the only hope of the
Realm. Thus the frogs that rose up out of the bottomless pit, did daily in
their pulpits cry croake, croake, croake.

There was great hope that the sundry lamentable events which did beat the one
and the other part in France by the scourge of war, and execution of armours
as well in the loss of the battle at Coutras, in the death of notable men, as
in the oppression and hauock which the armies did carry with them, would have
assuaged the rage and passion which carried France, and the Churches of the
principality of Boillon, which we will in order recite.

As after the breaking of the army of the prince of Conde in Vandomoys, in the
year of our Lord 1585. they thought that with the same Prince al their hope
had been gone; which thing made them increase their cruelty: even so did they
after the dissipation of the army of the Germans, supposing that they should
shortly see the end thereof.

The authors of these persecutions, were the King, the Leaguers, the Bishops,
the Iesuytes, the Friars, the Monks, the parish Priests and Magistrates. In
these assaults appeared the cowardlines of a great many of them who had
professed the true religion, who looking more on the events and present
dangers, than to the end of such skirmishes (where we ought to show a proof of
our faith, and with patience to expect an happyend) for fear were carried away
to unlawful things against their conscience.

But the Lord (as at all other times) left not his truth without witnesses: for
many in diverse parts of the Realm being cruelly persecuted, showed their
constancy in maintaining their faith and religion, whereupon it seems me,
not to be out of purpose to make mention of the constancy which God gave to a
man of base condition, in defending of his religion, who in this respect showed
the way to many, which in the sight of the world had greater means to do it
than he had.

There was in the town of Marchenoyre in Beausse a poor man borne in
Boysgencye upon Loyre, named Francis Tixier: (as if we should say weauer)
this man by his occupation was a maker of packsaddles, who (by reason of his
family) had not departed out of the Realm according to the Kings Edicts,
neither had obeyed the Kings commandment in conforming himself to the Popish
religion, but had always constantly remained in the profession of the true
religion, praying daily in his house, and often times joining himself secretly
to others to the same effect, and to sing Psalms, as it is used among the^ who
do profess ye reformed religion.

He visited also them who were sick, and strengthened them: and if any were
which stood in need, by the mean of some small collections which was made
among them secretly, he helped them, as he was wont to do Orges, in the which
he did bear the office of an Elder.

God blessed that zeal in time so hard and difficult: for some of the villages
thereabous, by the mean of that small exercise, without fear of the
persecution, forsaking the Romish Church, joined themselves to the pure
religion. But this course was not continued long: for by the watches and
searches of them, who in the former assaults and alarumes could get nothing
upon this man, he was at length discovered and complained off to the
Magistrate. So that the King passing through Marchenoyre, the accusers
addressed themselves to one of his Aulmoners, and instructed him of certain
accusations against that poor man, to wit, that he had not obeyed the Kings
edict, but on the contrary did persevere in his heresy and dogmatize: so they
kindled the Aulmoner in such a sort, that they agreed altogether to put a
complaint to the King: they made also a book of others of the religion, which
they caused the said Aulmoner to present to the King. For his custom belike
was so to bestow the Kings alms.

The King commanded that they should be apprehended: Tixier as the most
hateful, was first taken, and with great solemnity brought before the King,
who was desirous to see him, for he was informed that he was a Minister. The
King himself examined him (when he had appeared) with great assurance. When
the King had asked him whether he was an Hugonet, and wherefore he had not gone
out of the Realm being one, (as he did confess) and whether he would go to
Mass once or twice, and so to escape from punishment. The poor man answered,
that he had not the means to avoid, and that he would not go to Mass, nor
alter his religion which he knew to be the truth.

When the King perceived his constancy, he sent him to Bloys, with letters to
his Judges, there commanding them straightly to make his process, according
to the rigor of his edicts. There in the Kings presence he was greatly reviled
by the Lords, Courtiers and Clawbackes.

Being carried to Bloys, there he was assaulted by three manner of enemies, the
Judges, his friends, and the rest of prisoners. First the Judges had him in
hand, and after they had gone about to withdraw him from his religion to
Popery, with such bald reasons as they could afford, he made them a plain
answer, that he knew the true Catholic and Apostolic Church, and that he
was one of the fellow citizens of the same; but for the Romish Church he
neither knew it, nor cared to know. When these great Deuines had spent all
their reasons even to the bottom, they began to draw out their threatenings to
hang him, and to give him opprobrious words. The poor man despising their
reasons and the dregs thereof, made them a flat answer, that as he had lived
in that religion, which they call heresy, so was he ready to dye for it, if
so it were Gods will.

And after many examinations all about on thing, to wit, whether he would go
to mass, one asked him of whom he held his religion, and who had taught him:
he answered, that he held it of God who had taught him by his holy spirit.

Upon this answer, one Saint Seuerine an Italian replied: my friend, thine holy
spirit will hang thee, if thou come not to thy self. The Lord reprove the
spirit of blasphemy.

This was the miserable state of that realm then, that the most vile, saucy
and blasphemous Atheistes, were raised up by the Q. Mother to high and
honorable dignities.

Saint Paul had learned the Pharisaisme at the feet of Guualiel: but this lewd
Italian had learned Atheism at the Popes feet in Italy, and is welcome in
France by them of his religion to teach Atheism, and to show the way to the
Frenchmen how to blaspheme a l'Italiane. Many other such like trifling talk
they had with the poor man, more fit for gatherers of old shoes and rags
upon the dunghill of Bloys, then for magistrates.

The Prisoners did greatly afflict him with their continual brabling, and
brawling with him, with few popish unreasonable reasons, which they took out
of certain Sermons of popish Frierly Doctors, which they had among them, and
not only did daily complain upon him to the magistrate, but also were some
time ready to set upon him to mur^her him, and the more he was fervent in
prayers, the more they did moiest and vex him.

The third sort of enemies who did assault him, were they which professed
friendship, who oftentimes came to aduertize him in the prison, that the Judges
had concluded to condemn him to die: and that it were high time to look
about, persuading him to avoid the danger, to go to Mass once or twice, and
after he could make some shift to get him out of the way: but he refused all
that counsel.

So he made his will, fully determined to die, which he sent to his wife: yet
the Judges must have a fling more to try what he would do, or otherwise
resolve to condemn him, and made him sit upon the stool, whereupon they that
are condemned of capital crimes are used to sit when they do receive sentence
of condemnation.

But behold, on a sudden they changed their mynds, and sent him again into
prison. The King had written, and set his own hand to a letter commanding
them to make his Process with all ^igour of the law. The Judges were cruel
Papists and Leaguers: the Italian was an Atheist, contemner of all religions,
but a notorious and blind enemy of the truth. The opportunity of the time
might have encouraged them to use all extremity. But the Lord (to the comfort
of his children) did put a ring in their Nostrels, and after a long
imprisonment, the eight of April they pronounced sentence against the said
Tyxier, by the which they banished him Bloys.

It is said, how the two noble Princes of Boillon, and his brother the County
de la Mark, dyed, the one in the Month of October at Lany, and the other in
Geneua in January.

The death of this noble Prince being published abroad, the Leaguers took it
for a presage of their good success, and occasion to increase their power.

As for to enterprise any thing against Guyenne, or the king of Navarre, the
bad success of de Main, and the death of Ioyeuse at Coutras, did not counsel
them. There was as little hope in other Provinces, where they of the reformed
were strong in arms and fortes, as in Languedock, and Daulphine, where now of
late an assotiation upon the defensive was made between the Catholics and
them of the Religion.

To attempt the old plat against the kings person, the time was not yet come.

On the other side, they did greatly fear the tempest which did threaten them
on the side of Germany, by reason of the fires which they had kindled in the
County of Montpeliard, and the execrable outrages by them there committed,
where (as is aforesaid) they charged the Rutters in them retyring homeward.

This fear caused the Duke of Lorreyne to send to the king for succor, for
they thought that it would be greatly for their advantage, if the King in
defending them on that side, might have procured the hatred of the Germans, and
with all consumed his forces in defending and justifying their vilanies: and so
all by one means should spoil himself of the amity of his neighbors, and of
his own forces, in being after more easy to be oppressed by them.

Therefore among so many difficultyes, nothing seemed unto them more commodious
to bestow and exercize their forces, and by little and little to increase their
power, then to invade the said principallity of Boillon, supposing that to be
of an easy execution (considering the opportunity proffered it self) thereby
preparing the way by easy things to harder and more difficult matters.

The opportunity seemed unto them very fit, to wit, the death of the two
brethren, the amaze which fell upon the subjects in the territory of Sedan
and Iamets. The weakness of the young Princess fatherles, in tears and
mourning, by reason of the death of her two brethren, a maid even under age,
destitute of men, armor and Captains, and as if it were disdayned

Other friends of the contrary profession durst not show her any favorable
look, for fear to be heretics, or favorers of heresy, and so to provoke
against themselves the bloody power of the League. And that which is more, she
being accounted an heretic for professing of the truth, and therefore
accursed by the Pope, proscript by the League, and as it were dead to the
world, by the articles of Nancy, whereof it shall be spoken hereafter at large.

And to that end they might the better both to invade that young Princess and
resist the Germans, whom they feared, by reason of the villainies wherewith they
had provoked them, as is above said, they had succor of the Duke of Parma,
Italians, Spaniards, Wallons, Legeoys and Germans, under the conduct of the
Baron of Sarexenbourg, to the number of ten thousand men in all. All these
occasions, opportunities, causes and forces, moved the Duke of Lorreyne to lay
the siege before the Town of Iamets, next of the principality, which lies
nigh the borders of Lorreyne, about the 20. of January.

In the mean while, the Princess caused the inhabitants to swear fidelity
to her, and gave the government of her affairs unto the Lord Nueuile, until
she might understand of the Prince Monpensier her uncle, appointed Ward, and
of the Lord la Noue, executor of the Will of her brother, but specially of the
King of Navarre, whose counsel she desired greatly to follow.

The company which she had were the Princess her self, the Princess
Bourbon, and the Lord Laual, a young child the heir of the Lord Laual, who
dyed at Taillebourg the year 1586. in April, as is aforesaid.

The forces were the inhabitants of the country, and a certain number of
Frenchmen exiled out of their country, by reason of the persecution of the
League.

The Duke of Boillon being dead, the King of Navarre was certified thereof from
Geneua, and also from Sedan an express messenger was sent to the said King, to
let him understand the state and necessity of the affairs.

The King of Navarre understanding the state of Sedan, the injuries and
violences of the League, sent thither the Lord Reaulx, and from thence to the
King, to put him in mind of the protection which he did owe to the said
Princess, and of the services done by her predecessors to the Crown of
France: but specially to show him the importance of the places which the
Leaguers did intend to invade, to make much for the safety of Mets.

She sent also to her uncle the Prince Monpensier, who promised her all
assistance to his power.

The Dukes of Sweibrook sent her word, that they would do what lay in them to
divert those forces from her.

The King not greatly regarding the suit and protection of the said Lady, for
hatred of the reformed religion, sent back again the Lord Reaulx to the Duke
of Lorreyne, where he tarried so long that all things were burned and spoiled
before he returned to Sedan. And at his return he delivered a commission from
the King, to be received as Lieutenant general for the King, and protector of
the Princess: and that after being received when they had given their oath,
then he would declare what order should be taken.

They made answer, that it was a new thing, and that the sovereign Lords of
Sedan had never received such charges, and therefore they could not accept
them, considering that they had given their oath unto the Prince Monpensier her
uncle and Warden, to do her lawful and faithful service, and to keep the
places against all men, under the protection of his Majesty: who would (as he
hoped) be contented with the assurance which the Prince Monpensier would give
him.

About the same time, the Lord Nueuile governor of Mezieres, came to Ioram
nigh Sedan, seeking by fair promises of friendship to have that
Lieutenantship: and propounding certain captious articles, was so answered,
that if he had come into Sedan, there was not of his kin enough for half the
women of Sedan: for even they who moved the matter first stood in some danger.

The Prince Monpensier sent diverse times to visit and assist her, and went to
the Court to obtain the continuance of her protection. But nothing was
obtained; for the King sought nothing else, but to put in such as he thought
would fulfill his desire to oppress and scatter the Church, and to have in his
possession that Princess, to nousse her up in Popery, that there might not be
any hope left hereafter to restore the Church.

Whilst the Duke of Lorreyne besieged Iamets, the Duke of Guize sent to Sedan
to proffer them great friendship, and to preserve them in all liberty of
conscience and religion, if so that there might a marriage be made between the
Princess and his son.

The Duke of Lorreyne using all manner of hostility and villainies that could
be possible, made suite to have the said Princess in marriage for his son
the Lord Vaudimount, both with flattering words, and also by thundering of the
double Canon.

The weakness of this Princess caused the enemy to be very secure and
careless, which encouraged them which were besieged at Iamets, daily to make
sturdy and stout sallies upon the enemies, giving them no advantage, not so
much as to approach to place their pieces, and compelled them to trench
themselves in the Vilages, where they were charged by them

During these two Months of February and March, and the continuance of the
siege of Iamets, the Lord Resne, with certain troops of Italians, Germans,
Wallons, Legeoys, and Lorreins, to the number of 7. or 8. hundred horses, with
certain regiments of footmen, did scowre the country about Sedan, where they
fired all things: so that in all the principality of Boillon there remained in
a manner but ashes and calamity, besides Sedan and Iamets.

Their outrages and cruelties were such that the like were never heard of. For
all manner of whoredom, rauishments, violences and worse, were committed by
those infernal helhowndes, villains, and savage robbers: besides, they put
all women, maidens, and children to ransom as many as they could take: such
violences they continued until the latter end of March, thereby to terrify
this young and desolat Princess.

Whilst the Leaguers (as fire brands blown out of hell, subject unto no law,
government, nor power, do proffer injuries unto all manner of persons, without
any respect, about the beginning of February, while they tried by all means
possible, both by fair words and open violence, to seize both upon the person
and state of the Princess of Boillon: the chiefest of them assembled at Nancy
in Lorreine, where they continued in counsel until the midst of February,
in the which assembly they concluded many articles against the Kings person and
state, also they took order to continue the eiuill wars, which they had
kindled, and that still under the ^olour of popish religion, they might win by
little and little, and so make themselves way to the state, by the undoing of
whom soever.

And for as much as they were out of hope to prevail against them of the
reformed religion in Guyenne, or other where, they advised themselves by
policy, to give the King no rest, by hampring him into new troubles, in
proposing to him unreasonable requests, and still under color of Catholickisme.

For there they framed articles which have three principal final causes, to
destroy the King, the nobility, and to save themselves.

The first is, either to shorten the Kings life by some lot of war, or else
at the least to weaken him, and make him odious to the Churchmen.

The second is, to kindle and entertain the war immortal, that the
nobility may be destroyed by mutual blows and wounds.

Thirdly, to save themselves from blows and charges, and to keep themselves
in authority, until the opportunity which they watched for should proffer it
self: these things are evidently seen in ye articles following.

But here first before we come to these articles, mark well (Christian
Reader) the turkish hearts, who contemning all that is named God and

First, they say the King shall be requested to join himself more openly to
the League, and shall put away from him, and out of his strong holds, and out
of all states and offices of any weight, such as shall be named unto him.

Here first they will have the King, to take upon him all the shame, dishonor,
and hatred of their detestable actions and injuries, which they do intend Note
to proffer to all manner of men, under the name of the League, which they will
the King to take upon him in these words, that they will have him to join with
the League.

Secondly, whereas they seek to displace from about him such as they would,
their intent is to deprive him of his authority, forces, and faithful
friends, to put him vnderward, that he may reign at their discretion, and no
longer then it shall please them.

The second article is, that the King shall cause the counsel of Trent to be
published, authorized, and received in his dominions, only the execution to be
stayed for a time, concerning the reuoking of certain exemptions and
privileges of some Chapters, Abbeys, and other Churches from their Bishops.

This article they do set forth to be the seed of immortal wars, knowing
well that it cannot be published without the sound of the trumpet Note
and double Canon.

The third article is, that the King shall establish the holy inquisition of
Spain, at the least in good towns, which is the only way to root out
heretics, and suspected, so that the officers of the said Inquisition be
strangers, or at the least be not borne in the places, where they may have
neither kindred, friends, nor alyaunce.

This is the means to execute the decrees of the counsel, which in the former
article they have given to the kingdom of France for a law* that by Note
that law all the inhabitants of the realm, who shall be to the Inquisitors,
either heretics, or suspected: for who will not be suspected if it pleases
master Friar the Inquisitour.

Secondly, the inquisitors must needs be either Lorreines or Spaniards, two
nations delighting in the blood of Frenchmen, as the Wolf

The fourth article is, that the King shall grant license unto the churchmen, to
redeem at any time the Church goods, and lands which they have sold, of
whatsoever quality the said goods and lands be, or they that have bought them.
And that the King shall compel the beneficed men to make such a redemption
within a certain time that shall be prefixed to them, according to the
ability that they shall be found to be of, by them that shall be appointed to
see the state of their revenues and lands.

The Leaguers have made the churchmen to blow the Trompet of Note
civil wars, upon that condition that they should not fight themselves, but
pay money to them that would fight for them, and so have made them sell their
church lands. Now they will enforce the poor Priests to buy again their
church lands, that they may sell them again when the Leaguers have need of
them.

The fifth article is, that the King shall put into the hands of some of them,
certain places of importance which shall be named to him: In the which it
shall be lawful for them to build Fortresses, and put in men of war, as they
shall think good, and all at the charges of the towns, cities and countries:
the like also they shall do in the places which they hold at the time of the
making of these articles.

The leaguers do think that the King had too great a portion in the Note
last division of his kingdom which they made with him in July 1585. and that
the King was too strong for them yet. Therefore by this article they do call
him to a new division, wherein they go about to do three things.

First they would have more strong places, and such as they themselves shall
appoint. It is to be thought that they will not make choice of the worst. For
if the King should put them to their choice, I dare affirm that they would
choose Paris, Calis, Anious, Reymes, Bologne, Newhauen, Caen, Roan, Orleans,
Tours, Naunts, Poytiers, Bourdeaulx, Limoges, Perigeulx, Toulouse, Bayone,
Narboune, Marseilles, Lions, Dijous, Auxone, Langaes, Seus, Mets, and other
such which they do mean by places of importance.

Secondly, they would have the King this to do for them, as to suffer them
quietly to build citadels, and therein to put garrisons, which they gently call
fortes, and men of war to keep out the King, if at any time he should change
his mind and call for his own.

The third is, that the king and his poor subjects shall bear the charges of
fortifiyng and keeping these places from his obedience, that thence

The sixth article is, that the King shall give pay to men ofwarre, to be
maintained in Lorreyn upon the borders of Germany, to let the entry of the
Note.
strangers their Neighbors, and for that end shall cause out of hand the
goods of herelikes, and others which be associat with them to be sold.

The cause of this article was fear of the vengeance which their conscience
represented continually before their eyes, for the great enormityes, injuries,
and execrable abominations by them committed in the County of Noubeliard: for
they perceauing their weakness in strength and wealth against that hot,
vindicatiue and mighty nation of Germany, would have the King to defend them,
and so doing, justify their vilanous actions, and thereby to beggar himself,
and procure the hatred of that Nation, which had been always at amity with
the Crown of France.

Secondly, whereas they require the goods of heretics, and their associats (by
the which they do understand the Princes of the blood, the Duke Mommorency,
Noble men) and other qualities of men, which shall please them to be sold.

I marvel when they will go into Guienne and other Provinces to pluck sheaue
with them, it will be hard for them to get y^ sheaue out of their hand: yet the
king must do all this to justify the murders, whoredoms, Sodomi^ryes, and
other abominations committed against the friends and alied of the Realm of
France.

The seventh article is, that al they who have been heretics, or holden for
here^ikes, ever since the year 1560. of what degree soever, may be taxed to
the third or fourth part of their goods.

A research must be made of the space of 28. years past, and all liberty given
Note.
so often, by the Kings and proclaimed by their edicts must needs be made co^yne.
Even they who were reunited by the last edi^t of July 1585. made at their own
discretion, must be called to account: and this is to make the war immortal,
until they attain to the mark they shoot at, if they do not catch a fall by
the way.

The eight article is, that the Catholics shall pay the tenth part of their
revenues every year. And that commissioners be appointed to make the sallies
and taxes, as well of ecclesiastical, as lay persons: others notwithstanding
then officers of the Soueraygne courts, that all things may be executed more
speedily and with less charges.

In this article, first the Leaguers spare neither friends nor foes, but Note.
that they are somewhat more favorable to the Catholics then to the heretics.
For whereas they were promised at the first rising of the league to be eased of
all impost: now three years after they are taxed to pay ye 10. part of all
their goods, until they be discharged of all taxes and impost. And if

Secondly, they will not put in trust about their tirannous devises none of the
kings faithful officers and servants whom they suspect, but such
Commissioners as be of their own making, of their own qualities, and such as
will say to all their doings Amen.

The ninth article is, that the friends of heretics which are of their
associate, shall be enforced by all means possible to buy their goods, in
abating unto them the fifth part of the value: and when they shall be sold to
others, upon their refusing, they shall not be received afterward to have any
action to recover them.

Here be two things full of wrong and Turkish oppression.

First, that any man should be compelled to buy other men's goods, stands Note.
upon no reason.

Secondly, that the ancient law of aguation, grounded upon the civil law of
the Romans, and used in the Realm above one thousand years (by the which the
next of kindred might recover the land of his kinsman alienated, in repaying
the money within a certayine time) should be altered by new men, who within a
man's age had no more to do in the realm then they have this day in Turkey:
that law I say, that the Kings of France never sought to alter, neither had
been able to do it if they would.

The tenth article is, that the first sums of money that shall be made of
that sale, shall be bestowed to pay the most needful debts of the heads of the
League, and the overplus shall be put in the hands of such as shall be named,
with condition that they shall not be employed otherwise.

In this Article we may observe two pretty shameless tokens: for first, these
beggarly Lords, issued out of the cauerns of the beggarly mountains Note.
of Lorreine, do imitate the beggarly Friars in their Sermons, who do exhort
their good Dames to give to their covent: so these Lords being 12. in number
(having spent their goods, and other men's also, partly in practicing
conspiracies against the state, partly in riots, whoredoms, and excess) now
put us in remembrance to fell our lands and goods at what price soever, for to
pay their debts, for these good laws which they send us out of their vilage of
Nancy.

Secondly, order is taken that the overplus of the sale of our goods and lands
be put in store in such hands as they shall appoint for them, least they should
lack to finish their course which they have begun. But what shall we do when ye
is done? for all will be but a gnat in an Elephants mouth: we must begin to sell
again, and for lack of goods and lands to sell, we

The tenth article is, that the life of any prisoner of the enemy, meaning the
heretics, as they term them, be not spared, except he will abjure, and put in
good sureties to live Catholickly, in paying presently the just value of his
goods, if they have not been sold already. And in case they have been sold, he
shall renounce all right which he may pretend hereafter, and shall bind
himself to serve three years and more in any service that he shall be
employed, without receiving any wages or pay.

This is the law wherewith Mahomet the false Prophet did strengthen his
tirannie and superstition, for thus he speaks (...), Note.
if any man shall speak against Corran, either the sword or bondage. The only
difference is, that Mahomets law is somewhat more favorable, in as much as it
is but only against the speakers against his religion, but not against them
who shall be taken in war.

But this does violate the law of Nations, and right of suppleants, which
always have been kept inviolable: and the violating thereof had been always
accounted among all Nations, worthy to be revenged with fire and sword. By
this law of Nancy they will make this Nation so famous in the praise of
humanity, more savage than the very barbarous Nations.

Secondly, life here is redeemed only with abiuration and violating of
conscience, which is more than the Turk, or any other Nation on the earth
does practice.

At last follows bondage, which must endure as long as it shall please the
Lords and Senators of Nancy. This is the nature of this monstrous law borne at
Nancy.

The effects of this strange new law were to root out the Fren^h Nation. For
it makes the Catholics without any hope of remission, to murder the Hugonets
contraius gentium and supplicum: and it inforceth the Hugonets, lege talionis,
to destroy the Catholics for the violating of the right of Nations and
Suppliants. And thus we shall be well recompensed for the selling of our goods
and lands. These articles be such, as if a Lord should offer them to his
slaves, it were lawful for them to use all means possible against him. But
these new Gods on earth dare present so unjust, so unreasonable, so vnreuerent
conditions and laws unto one of the greatest Monarkies in the World: but what
is it that these shameless men dare not presume for advantage?

These articles agreed upon by these wise Senators and Law-giuers in Nancy,
the Metropolitan vilage of Lorreyne, were brought to the King to be approved by
him: but there was some delay in the approbation. And as for such as made for
the suppressing of the reformed religion, he did accord Nancy, but specially
such as touched the Kings strong places and holds to be delivered to them,
could not be approved by the King.

It is said in the first book, how the Guyzes making all have that they might
to vsurp the Crown, thought good to rid out of the way Monsieur the Kings only
brother, and how at Nancy, the shop of all the treacheries in these perilous
days, they hired one Salcedo a Spaniard to have dispatched him one way or
another, and for to bring that to pass, they delivered him for an earnest at
the beginning 6000. Crowns. Now in like manner these Senators of Nancy do
propound in their counsel to search out, and how to take away the impediments
which may let them to come speedily to their intended purpose: it was found
specially to be the King, and the Princes of the blood, but among them
chiefly the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde. Therefore they must be
made away by one means or another: and whereas war and violence were neither
the safest nor the surest way, they concluded that poison must be tried. But
to bring this to an happy end, they must have the help of the Q. Mother, she
must be one instrument to commit parricides: for it is to be thought, that if
she would not spare her own Son Charles the 9. she would not spare them
whom she never loved: for she never cared what she did, so that she might
not do good, she is therefore easily won, to do that which she greatly
desired.

Poysoners are hired, they have their drougges and instructions with them: some
are sent to minister their Physic to the King of Navarre, if by any means
they could. But howsoever it be, either that they which were hired to poison
the King of Navarre did altar their minds, or had not the means to execute so
vilanous an act, so it is, that his death was bruted in Lorreyne, and at the
Court about the same time that the Prince of Conde dyed. But it has pleased
the Lord to have delivered him from their snares, to punish them in time,
according to the measure of the treacheries and innumerable enormities by them
committed.

As touching the Prince of Conde, they had their minds upon him, for at
length, the devil furthering their treacheries, procured some of his own
household servants to be won to take the matter in hand, and among others,
one Brillant and a Page (upon whom he had bestowed great benefits) to give him
poison the third day of March at supper, he fell sick of a great pain of the
stomach, about an hour an a half after supper: that Nicolas Poget, his master
Surgeon. At the same hour was called Master Bonauenture de Medicis, Doctor
of Physic: which considering the accidents, did help the vomitings following
therein, the motions of nature. The sickness notwithstanding continued all the
night, having invaded the inferior belly with swelling and hardness of the
same, with such difficulty to take breath, that he could not lie in his bed,
but was feign to sit still in a chair.

The morrow after were called to counsel Lewis Bontempts, and Ihan Pallet,
Doctors of Physic, who altogether did endeavor to help his Excellency with
all diligence and fidelity, by all the means which they judged fit, according
to the accurrant accidents.

The fifth day of March, and second of his disease, about three a clock in the
after noone, all things went from worse to worse, so that there came a
suffocation of all the famolties of nature, in the which he rendered his soul
to God, half an hour after.

In the death of this Prince, God did shoot an arrow of his wrath against the
ungratefulness and peruersitie of this world, but specially against France, in
plucking this Noble Prince out of so many labors, into the society of the
inheritance of his Saints in light.

Henry Bourbon, Prince of Conde, Son unto Lewis of Bourbon, Prince of Conde,
whose famous name shall be in the everlasting remembrance of the righteous,
was borne and brought up in the Church of God, whose preservation was as dear
unto him as his own life, God had endued him with noble virtues, he was
faithful unto God, duetifull in the true worship of God, true unto his King,
lover of his Country, and of the liberty and honor of this realm, enemy
unto the perturbers of the peace of the same, and of them all whom he knew to
be coniurators against the King and state. His generositie und valor, with the
greatness of courage had been showed in many noble exploytes, done by him, but
specially in ouercomming many assaults, labors, perils, and miseries, during
these miserable civil wars: to be short, God has plucked him in all the
course of his life, out of many dangers.

His death was the more to be lamented, because it was vyolent, and in the
flower of his age, which happened the fifth day of March 1588. at S. Jhan d'
Angely in Xainctonge, to the great grief of all men, among whom from age to
age, the remembrance of him shall be honorable. For the death of this Prince
was hurtful to all France, but gainful only to him, who changed a vain and
paynfull life into one only true and steadfast life, immortal, quiet and
everlastingly blessed, in the assurance of the which he died in our Lord Jesus
Christ.

This sudden and unlooked for accident, gave occasion to the said Doctors,
Physicians and Chirurgions, to think that this sickness came through some
extraordinary and vyolent cause.

For the said Physicians gave out under their hand and seal, as follows.

After his departing about two hours, there began to issue out of his mouth
and nostrels a froth thick and white, which gathered by little and little to
the bigness of ones fist, and out of the same place a little after did issue
yealowish water in great abundance. On the Lords day being the sixth of March,
by the commandment of his Counsel, we Physicians and Chirurgions have beside
called Peter Mesnard, and Focault Chotard, both Masters Chirurgions of S. Ihan
d' Angely, to make the anatomy of his body, and to search altogether the
causes of a death so sudden.

And first we have found all the body bluish and leadie, the belly in a
strange manner swollen, stretched and hard. In the opening of the body, we found
in the lower belly all the parts thereof with the inwards, bluish and black,
and the hollownesse of his body full of yealowish waters. After searching
diligently the stomach, we have also found it bluish, and in the right and
upward part of the same an inch or thereabout under the Orifice of the said
stomach, we have found a round hole eaten through, and through that hole had
fallen the waters and liquours which we found within the capacity of the
inferior belly. Then having diligently taken up, viewed, cut and emptied the
said stomach, we have seen evidently the whole body of the said stomach as
well without as within, specially on the right side black, burned, vlcered and
gangrened in diverse places, but notably about the hole above said. So that we
cannot judge that it could be done otherwise, then by a notable quantity of
burning, vlcering, and caustic poison, which had left evident marks of his
passing in the Oesophage. The liver also in the place joining to the said hole,
was found altered and burned; the rest of the substance of the said liver
bluish, as also the lights. There was no part of ye body of his Excellency
which was not of a very good constitution and very healthful, if the vyolent
poison had not corrupted ye parts above said. All the premises are according to
truth: and for the certitude of the same,

we have sealed this report with our hands andseales at S. Ihan d' Angely the
6. day of March. 1588. Medicis. Bontemps. Pallet. Poget. Mesnard. Chotard.


About the same time the King of Navarre came out of Gascoyne, who being
aduertized of his death, commanded that such as were suspected of Brillaut
ensued: the page also was condemned upon centumacie, and executed in Picture.
Brillaut was drawn upon a hurdle through all the streates of S. Jhan, and in
the chiefest place of the said town was torn in pieces with four horses.

Now we see how the Leaguers when they have not been able to destroy the
Princes by valor, have used treacherous proceedings. For first, having
treacherously shortened the life of the Duke of Alencon by poison, as it is
said in the first book, and seduced the Cardinal of Bourbon, making him
dream of a kingdom in his old doting age, and to oppose himself to two
Kings, to wit, the King, and the King of Navarre, and to all the house of
Bourbons, out of which God had made him that honor as to have issued one of
the chiefest, as is said in the second book. They also have condemned the King
of Navarre to dye by their Italian figs, and there upon proclaimed his death
(which they had promised to themselves) both in Lorreyne and in the Court, and
in Towns and Cities of their favorers: but God has disappoynted them of
their murtherous purpose. At length (by the long suffering of God) to plague
France, they have prevailed against that good godly, virtuous, and famous
Prince of Conde, and that upon such a day as has been fatal to the house of
Guize to work mischief, murder and rebellion.

The death of this noble Prince amazed all men in Xainctonge, knowing that God
had some heavy judgments to execute upon France, and that GOD had taken that
noble Prince, least he should see evil days, as the Prophet Esaias says.

It is said before, how the Lord Lauerdine (who was master of the Camp) saved
himself by flight out of the slaughter of Coutras, and betook himself to the
town of Niort, to the Lord Malicorne his uncle, where he soiourned as his
Lieutenant.

Here (Christian Reader) we have to observe, that although the King and the
Leaguers hated in wardly one another, and in outward appearance did deeply
dissemble their affections; yet we do see, that as Herod and Pilate did
exercise privy hatred between them, and at length in persecuting Christ did
well agree as friends: so in men of like degrees and in like actions the like
affections are boiling in their hearts. For the rumor of the death of the King
of Navarre and Prince of Conde, (which the Leaguers (having set some secret
price upon their heads) had promised unto themselves) did cause the King and
the Leaguers in outward appearance to be great friends, and to promise unto
themselves an utter rooting out of them of the religion, and a sure subduing of
all things beyond the river of Loyre. With speed therefore they sent eight or
nine regiments conducted Courbe, to the Lord Lauerdine, Lieutenant of his uncle
the Lord Malicorne at Niort in Poytow, who with all the forces which he could
gather both in the low and high Poytow, the 16. day of March about two a
clock after midnight, descended into Marans by boats through the marshes of
Beauregard, and with five hundred footmen seized upon the house and farm of
the said Beauregard, having found no resistance, but only of two of the
inhabitants of Marans, with a little boat who were gone to discover the Island
Cicoigne: these two discharging their pieces upon the enemies, retired to the
trenches of Beauregard, there they found but five or six Soldiers, as well of
the inhabitants as others, who also discharged certain shot upon the enemy,
who notwithstanding advanced and came to land. The cause why the Lord Lauerdine
subdued these Islands so easily, was, first the certain news of the death of
the Prince of Conde, and the rumors bruted abroad touching the supposed death
of the King of Navarre; which thing caused great amaze and discouraging among
all men. Secondly, the ill order and providence of the governor: for if he,
his troops and inhabitants had done their duty, Lauerdine had not entered
that Island at that price, or else had been chased out to his dishonor and
loss. The Lord Iarry had been aduertized three days before of the enterprise
of Lauerdine, and might have put into the Islands forces sufficient to resist
the enemy: for the companies of the Lord Trimouille conducted by the Lord
Boysduly, returning from Cotaudiere were very nigh him, to wit, at S. Radagond,
Champaigne, and Puyreneau, who desired nothing more then to enter into Marans.
But the governor and the inhabitants fearing the preace of Soldiers (which
was excessive indeed) would not admit them, but sent to Rochel the Captain
Plaute, Lieutenant of the Governor, to request them of Rochel to send them
about fifty Soldiers, whom they would entertayne, until they might see what
the enemy would do: which thing they of Rochel could not do for that time.

Notwithstanding this refuse, and that the governor was well aduertized, that
he had not sufficient forces to let ye enemy to take land, yet the companies
of the Lord Boysduly passing through the Brault, were sent further as far as
Esuand, through foul ways overthwart the Marshes, whereas they should have
been stayed, to be used as the necessity had required. They sent
notwithstanding the same day at evening to the said Boysduly: but arriving not
before ten or eleven a clock in the night, was the cause that succor could not
come in time, although that the diligence of the said Boysduly and his
companies was wonderful; for without any leisure to lodge, and without any
respect of the indignity proffered him and his troops the day before, they
departed presently, and repaired to Brune one hour and a hal^e before the
enemy took land at Beauregard. But whilst the governor and the inhabitants
made some difficulty to let in all his troops, (being not willing to receive
above 50. or 60.) the enemy on the other side entered at Beauregard (as is
said) so that the entry into Brune was not opened to the said Boysduly, nor
his troops, before that the enemy had already gotten the farm house of
Beauregarde. There had been means to drive back the enemy, if speedely the
troops (who were entered at Brune about three a clock after midnight) had gone
to meet the enemy, as some did give their advise to do. For the L. Lauerdine
was not yet well accompanied, and it had been an easy thing to cut the way to
the rest of his troops which came in small boats. But because the Soldiers
were marueilously weary, they took incontinently their lodgings: the
Captains also did not think good to assault the enemy by night, before they
had discovered him.

By this delay, the Lord Lauerdine received his footmen with leisure, to the
number of five hundred, without any horsemen, whom he set in battle array in
Beauregard, and placed about four score of them in the Farm house of Lommeau.
The day being come, to wit, the 16. of March, the Lords Boysduly and Iarry, and
others Captains, to number of three hundred footmen, and about three score
hrsemen, went to seek out the enemy, who put his men in battle array, in
favor of the Farm house of Beauregard, and durst not advance upon our men,
fearing our horsemen, although they were twice stronger in footmen. Our men on
the other side durst not charge them, having such advantage as they had, but
for that time were content to chase them, who were put in the Farm house of
Lommeau, who retired to their fellows in good order, as men resolute. Our men
on the other side, retired to the town, where every one refreshed himself,
intending to charge the enemy in the evening, but there was noted in our men
much confusion, but small resolution.

The same day about three a clock in the after noone arrived from Rochel the
Lord Noise, with twenty brave soldiers, under the conduct of Captain
Ozanneau: it is certain that it these soldiers had arrived the day before,
and had been placed at Beauregard, with some more forces which might have been
given them, part of the inhabitants, and part of the soldiers of the
governor, the L. Lauerdine had not put foot on land so easily as he did. For
although the Lord Lauerdine had gotten much (as is said) yet he had been
enforced to retire, if it had not been for the treathery committed in the
forte of Bastile, which commanded the captain Ensign of the governor and
some others, who were so frighted by a country man, sent unto them by the way
of aduertizement from Perrerio with threatenings, that if they did suffer
themseues to be besieged, they would be hanged as others were at Cotaudiere:
that there upon they stated not for the enemy, but abandoned their fort, their
armor and munition,

The Lord Lauerdine having intelligence of this fact, immediately sent for his
horsemen, who were three long leagues off: they arrived about 5. a clock in the
morning: he put all his men in battle array, and marched toward the town of
Marans.

The Lords Boysduly and the governor, with other gentlemen and soldiers,
prepared themselves to go to seek the enemy, whom about six a clock they
discovered with his horsemen, which made them conclude that without doubt the
Bastile was in their power: for it was impossible that their horsemen had
entered any other way.

Notwithstanding, they which were in the town, went forth to receive the
enemy to the farthest houses of the high town, where they fought a skirmish,
in the which the Lord Boysduly, Noise, and some others who followed them, with
some of* Rochell, did what they could: but at length being charged with
horsemen of the enemy, were forced to give place, and to retire into the
Castle speedily, so that the enemy seized upon the high town, and thereupon
afterward became master of all the rest.

All the Gentlemen with their horses and Soldiers, and some of the inhabitants
retired into the Castle, to the number of three or four hundred. Within that
place there was no provision of victuals, save some small store of meal,
which the Soldiers in retyring therein could carry away with them. There was
neither shouels, mattocks, picaxes, nor any other tools, to remove the earth
if need should be: there was small provision for horses, and no good store of
powder.

Notwithstanding, the Lord Boysduly, with the governor and other Gentlemen,
determined to hold out for certain days, hoping to have some succor either
by the coming of the king of Navarre (who was not yet returned out of
Gascoyne) or else by them of Rochell, or if the worst should fall out, yet they
would make some honorable composition. With this resolution they prepared to
keep the court of the Castle, which was in a manner trenched, and the dungeon
having one piece which was little or nothing worth to them.

There they were incontinently besieged by the enemy, who seized upon all the
convenient places round about the Castle, and did command the court of the
said Castle: they trenched themselves where it was convenient for them.

They who were besieged in the Castle did likewise their endeavor* so that
without any loss of men they killed many of the enemies. The Lord Iarry
Governor was hurt in the foot, which made his person afterward unprofitable.

But the enemy pressed them within so narrowly, that there could no

The 18. of March the King of Navarre hasting before his company, which
followed him contrary to the opinion of many, came to Rochel with the Prince of
Soyssons, and some other noble men in good deliberation to succor Marans.

Before his arryuing to Rochel, the inhabitants thereof had sent a good number
of Harquebuziers, under the conduct of Captain Gargoleau, and others, for to
enter into Marans: but they understood by the way, that the enemy possessed
the Island with the chiefest fortes, and had besieged the Castle: for which
cause they returned to Rochel. The Citizens of Rochel also had sent two ships
with the bark of Captain Courtault, and certain Culuerings, under the
conduct of Captain Boysseau, and other Soldiers and Captains. They entered
into the river boldly, seized upon the forts of Brault and Clousie, in the
sight of the enemy whom they prevented.

The King of Navarre informed of all things passed at Marans, the 19. day very
early took his journey to Charon, and from thence to the said fortes, where he
put men and munition a^ occasion served. He caused also the ships whereon the
Culuerings were to approach the town of Marans: the Culuerings did beat the
houses of the Town called the boats houses.

The enemy having seized upon the whole town, and trenched himself in the
market house, seeing the preparing of the Ships, presented himself to
withstand the landing of them that came from Rochel, and with two field Pieces
compelled the ships to descend lower: there were flayne some Soldiers of
Rochel.

The King of Navarre gave all the signs that could be possible (as by the
sounding of Trompets, spyals, or other means) to let them who were besieged
understand of his coming. One of his spyals was hanged: but they within could
not perceive any thing, save only of the coming of the Ships, whom they
supposed to have been the Rochellers only, but he could not conceive any hope
to be able to succor them.

The enemy in the mean while increased his forces, which repaired into the
Island out of every side. He had also means to make fortes and trenches in
diverse entringes of the Island, to stop the succor which might come to them
within the Castle, and in the mean time pressed them hard. The King of
Navarre on the other side received some forces, as well them which had followed
him out of Gascoyne, as other who repaired unto him out of Poytow, and
Xainctonge. All these companyes together were fair; and disposed to do well:
and although the forces of the enemy were no lesser, notwithstanding he
determined to enter into

All these discommodityes considered, the King of Navarre chose rather to save
his men to a better opportunity, the^ so dangerously to hazard them, without
any help to them that were within the Castle, who might save themselves some
other way: so he took his forces from Clousy, and gave it over.

He kept only the fort of Brault, the passage into the low Poytow, which
notwithstanding two or three days after came in the power of the enemy.

The enemy waxed stronger and stronger daily, because the castle refused
parley, and harkened to nothing but to defend themselves, seeing no Ordinance.

At length the Lord Lauerdine had three Pieces brought from Niort, which he set
against the castle the 24. of March. The first battery was against a rownd
tower, which makes one of the corners of the Castle toward the town: and
with shot did so enlarge a window which was garnished with a Lattice of Iron,
that he enforced the Rochellers to forsake it: they shot also against the tower
of the gate, and in other places here and there without hurting any man,
although that place be very ill for the shot of Ordinance.

They which commanded in the Castle, and many Souldyers lacked no courage
(although they wanted many things necessary to assist themselves in defense of
a naughty place) but as the affections are diverse, specially in a company
confused, as that was within the Castle: so one gave counsel one way, another
another way: at length they came to that issue, that they would surrender the
place, but upon such terms and conditions as should not be dishonorable unto
them.

The reasons of this resolution were, that they had promised, and so sent word
to Rochel that they might hold eight days and no longer without succor. The
term was expired, they had no more bread but for two days, and yet was not
there enough for all. Many of their horses were dead for hunger, which did
infect them with the stink: there happened also that some horses for lack of
fodder had eaten the tails one of an other, even to the bones. They had no
salu^s to dress them which were wounded, they had no tools to fortify them
selves, having among them all but Navarre, but only what Lauerdine told them,
who made them believe that he was still in Gascoyne: and although they believed
not the words of the enemy, yet did they see nothing to persuade them to the
contrary.

The enemy on the other side fearing to be forced by the king of Navarre,
offered them honest and good suretyes for the performance of the offers, so
that they did choose rather to take him in that mood (seeing that they must
yield) then to expect greater extremity which might ^ender the conditions
harder, having done already that which good soldiers and men of war might do:
therefore they yielded up the castle upon these conditions.

That there should go forth all gentlemen, Soldiers, and inhabitants, with
their armor, horses and stuff, and should be safely conducted whither they
would, which was faithfully kept by the Lord Lauerdine, in the tail:
notwithstanding, some soldiers were spoiled of their good, but few.

The Island of Marans being so reduced into the hand of the Leaguers, the Lord
Cluseaulx, otherwise called Blanchard, obtained the government of that place,
which he kept about two months.

About the same time that these things did so pass in the Isles of Maran, to
wit, the 25. of March, not far from thence, to wit, in Britayne, upon the
North side of Loyre, as at Naunts, and other places thereabouts happened an
earthquake, as a presage of such commotions as have happened, and do continue
there still: which was testified by Lewis Viuant doctor of Phisike in the
university of Naunts to Duke Mercure, governor of Britayne, as follows.

These are to let your Lordship understand, yt on Friday being the 25. of March
about 11. a clock in the morning, the weather being calm, the wind at
Southwest, at the time of the celebration of the high Mass, was heard
throughout all the city a great noise, roaring and groonting with a great
shaking and quaking of the earth for that small time that it did continue, so
that the people which were in Churches, with great multitudes were af^ard of
that sudden noise, except some which thought it to have been carte laden and
drawn through the streets. Other doubted it had been the Mine of the gate
Sauuetour that had kindled: they which were in houses, thought that the fire
had suddenly caught the Chymnies, hearing such noise as when a Chimney is
fyred. This noise and earthquake not only was in the City and Suburbs, but
also at Nozay, Eucenis, Oudon, Mauues, Calquefou, S. Erbline, S. Stephen,
B^oys, la Hay, the low Goulene, and high Goulene, chiefly where the Country
people were so amazed in those quarters, that they forsook both the Mass and
the Priests that said it: the river also was seen bubling at the same time.

This token does presage many calamities, and a wonderful alteration in this
estate: this earthquake does admonish us to search the right knowledge of our
offenses, as also of late we have been warned by fiery men, which have been
seen by the watermen about Tours and Saumur to fight in the air. Thus far
Doctor Viuaut to Duke Merceur.

It is said before how the Duke of Lorreyne both besieged Iamets, and also
asked the Duchess of Boillon in marriage for his Son the Lord Vaudimount:
the Duke of Guize did the like for his. This Noble Princess abhorred their
aliaunce, partly for their false religion, or rather atheism, which was
covered with zeal of popish religion, as with a Mask, partly for their
treacherous intents, which she knew they had against the Crown of France. Yet
these petty Lords of Lorreyn, must needs have her whether she will or not: but
her they may not have before they take Sedan, the chiefest town of her
principality, which they had terrified all this month of March, by the
barbarous invasions of the Lord Rosne. It is said also, how the besieged in
Iamets have kept off the enemies, and had caused to trench themselves in
villages thereabouts, where they were daily assaulted by them of Iamets. Now in
the latter end of March, the army before Iamets was greatly increased
inforces, so that all things being ready, Iamets is pressed and besieged more
narrowly then before, and after many skirmishes between them, the ar^illerie
is placed for the battery.

There remained to them of Jamets for hope of succor, (after man's judgment)
the town of Sedan, in the which under the au^hority of the Duchess commanded
the Lord Nieuile, a Gentleman famous in counsel, valor, and experience: he
had within Sedan a small number of Gentlemen and good Soldiers. The army
which was before Iamets, desirous to cut off all hope of succor from Sedan,
sent part of their horsemen, Frenchmen, Italians, and Spaniards, with a number
of Harquebusiers about Sedan, to spoil and to seize upon all places and high
wai^s, by which they of Sedan might come to succor Iamets, and among others
they took Vaudelincourt, Balan and other places. Their courses were raging,
and their rage spared nothing: the contempt which they had of so weak an
enemy, made them (as the manner is) both insolent, secure, and careless of
their safety, which was the cause, that diverse times, and in diverse places
they were charged by them of Sedan, who issuing out fiercely, made great
slaughter of them, as the time and small means which they had suffered them:
so that they were shamefully driven out of their villages of Vaudelincourt and
Balan.

But to prevent such inconveniences, the Lord Rosne and other Captains, who
conducted the turkish troops of the League, determined to lodge hereafter more
closely, then they had done before: and for that cause, the fourth day of
April, the greatest part of the horsenien and footmen Mense went to Bemily,
situated on the west side of the said river, where the L. Rosne lodged, and the
rest of his companies lodged at Aucourt, Haracourt, and Raucourt, leaving on
the east side of Mense, the Baron of Saraxenbourg, with four companies of
horsemen, to wit, his own, and the Lord Anthony Vize a frenchman, a great
friend of the Duke of Guyze: the third was the company of the Lord Tilly, a
Lorreyne, and the fourth was conducted by Captain Carlo an Italian. These
companies placed themselves within the town of Douzie, belonging to the
principality of Sedan. That town they determined to fortify, by reason of
the situation which is good, being situated upon the river named Chize, flowing
from Iuoy, and within a quarter of a league beneath Douzie falls in the river
Mense, which cannot be passed by foord in winter: the said Douzie lies
directly from Sedan to Iamets, so that having Douzie, they be masters of the
way from Sedan to Iamets.

Nigh unto the village of Douzie beyond the bridge at the ends of the meades,
at a place called Marie, were two companies of horsemen lodged, commanded by
Ihan and Thomas Albaneses, there they were set to succor Douzie, for by the
means of the bridge lying between them and the town, in a moment they could
recover the town. The companies which had passed the river Mense, under the
conduct of the Lord Rosne, were gone to besiege Raucourt, appertayning to the
Soueraignety of Sedan. They besieged it when it was altogether unprovided of
all necessary things, for which cause the Lord Nieuile determined by the advice
of the counsel to furnish it with all necessary things, as well with provision
of victuals as munition of war, and by the way to charge three companies of
light horsemen, which were lodged in Haracourt, and to that end he departed
out of Sedan about eight a clock in the evening the tenth day of April,
accompanied with four score horses and four hundred Harquebusiers: but there
fellout such a terrible tempest and violent rain, that they were enforced to
retire, save only they victualed Raucourt.

The twelfth das of April, the Lord Nieuile aduertized of the diligence which
the Baron of Saraxenbourg used in fortifiyng Douzie, he considered that the
longer he should delay to charge him, the greater the difficulty would be, and
that the sooner the better, without giving hun leave to fortify himself in
that place, which did so press Sedan, and took from him the means to succor
Iamets: he therefore called the counsel, and propounded them two enterprises
which be would willingly attempt, the ^^e was to go to Haracourt, the other
to Douzie: whither it was concluded that they should martch the same night.
They departed about ten a clock at night, with four hundred Harquebusiers,
and fourscore and twelve horses, commauuded by the Lord Arsoune, and
Falayses. It was Dorys and Parramentier, with one hundred H^rquebusiers, should
go to get the bridge of Douzy, upon the river Chize, to stop the sally of them
who were within the town, and by the same means to let the companies of the
light horsemen, who were at Mary, distant only from Douzie the shot of an
Harquebush (between that place and the town, nothing being but the meades and
the river) least they should go into the town to succor their fellows.

Captain Cheuerdery, Lieutenant to the Lord Caulmont, should assault the
lodging of the Lord Saraxenbourg, with 50. Harquebusiers: the Captains Framond
and Massart, with their troup^^ should charge upon the trenches, through the
which, the horsemen should issue forth. The rest of the footmen commanded by
Captain Villepoys Seriant Mayor, should stay with the horsemen, for to help
where need should be, and to favor our horsemen when they should join with
the enemy.

The thirteenth day, about three a clock in the morning, the troops of Sedan
did charge Douize, and they who had the charge to sease the bridge, came so
fitly, without finding any great resistance, that quickly they were masters of
the bridge.

But it was not so at the barritados, whom the Captain Framond and Massart did
charge, for there our men were violently resisted by the Barron of Saraxenbourg
himself and the Lord Anthony Vize, and Dom Ihan Romeroa Spanyard, who made a
salley with five and twenty or thirty horsemen, who notwithstanding were
received so coragiously by our footmen, who had charged the Barricado, that
being beaten back, they were feign to retire within their trenches so
confusedly, that our footmen in beating them before, entered with them, and
seized upon the barricado. In this skirmish were slain many notable Captains
and men of war, among whom were Anthony Vize and his Lieutenant, the rest of
their horsemen, that then for haste and terror could not get on horseback,
would have avoided by the bridge, which was seized on before, but they found it
stopped, and were so rudely seton by our footmen, that the most of them were
sla^ne, some taken prisoners, a great number cast themselves into the river and
were drowned, the Baron and few with him, by the goodness of their horses,
avoided the danger, and most of them in their doublets, and without boots, the
way to Iuoy.

The fight having endured one hour, the rest of the enemies retired into a
Fort, which they had made within the village, and there stayed for the canon.
The Lord Nieuile by hap had caused two mean pieces to be brought with his
troops, wherewith they shot two volleys against that Fort: that disligent
exployte so amazed them within the Fort, that without any bargening, they
rendered themselves at the discretion of the Duchess, with promise of their
lives. The agreement made, the Captains Carlo and Maruile rendered their
Ensigns to the Lord Nieuile, who being entered into the Fort, found therein
about two hundred able men, as well borsemen as footmen, whom he caused to be
brought forth, and be lead captines to Sedan. The chief men of them were the
Captains Carlo, Maruile, and their Lieutenant and Ensigns, Captain Romero a
Spanyard, who commanded over a company of horsemen. There were also a number
of Gentlemen of the company of the Baron, and many light horses Italians:
there were found more then seven score slain upon the place in that flight,
besides them who were drowned and hurt. There were taken more then two hundred
horses, among whom were found twenty or five and twenty of the fairest in
all the army, and many of them had cost the Baron one thousand crowns a
piece: he esteemed the loss which he had sustained in that charge, in
horses, plate, money, and money worth, at more then thirty thousand Crowns.

Of our men it is most true, there dyed but only two, the one was a Soldier
of the companies* and the other a Citizens Son of Sedan, named the Febure,
there were some hurt* but very few.

The enemies did hold a strong house, named Lamcourt, situated between Douzie
and Sedan, which the Lord Rosne had battered with nine and twenty shot of
Ordinance. The Lord Nieuile in returning to Sedan, caused his artillery to
take that way: that house was kept by five and twenty Soldiers, who when they
had seen the canon, yielded themselves upon the same conditions that they of
Douzy had done. The companies which were beyond Mense, commanded by the Lord
Rosne, took such fright by the overthrow of them of Douzy, that they could
never clawe it off after: for the night following, they repassed the river
Menze with great alarm, and retired with the rest of the army before Jamets,
so that there remained not one of them upon the Land of Sedan. This was the
light of ^eliuerance, which God reserved to this fatherles and comfortles
Princess, and the confirmation of his promise that he raised up himself for
the poor, which is afflicted without a cause, and that he will pull down
with shame and confusion the high looks of the haughty. The Papists, in whom
there was some spark of reason and justice, did hold infallibly, that some
horrible vengeance did hang over the head of that army full of villainy and
blood.

The Duchess of Boillon having received the news of that unlooked or
victory, accompanied with other Ladies of calling, who were exiled for the
testimony of the truth, and soiourned at Sedan, went to the gate called
Mesuil, to give thanks to the Gentlemen and Captains, for the notable service
which they had done to her, and to gratify the Soldiers in all that she
could.

The Lord Nieuile presented her two Ensigns, and two Cornets which they had
gotten, which she received thankfully, and incontinently the whole company
with the people went to the temple, where thanks were given to God for this
happy success: this was about noone.

This overthrow did not quench the fire, but rather did kindle the violence of
the army which was before Iamets, so that they doubled their rage, labor and
battery, which they had continued from the ninth day of April, and never
ceased to thunder, until the sixteenth day of the same month, ^^ which time
they were willing to give an assault, and they doubled the battery more
furiously then ever before, in the which for the space of five days they had
employed the greatest pieces they had, which did carry 45. or 48. or 50.
bullets. As they without prepared themselves to give the assault, so they
within prepared all things necessary, with courage to receive them: it was not
possible to do more valiantly, then botl, Captain and Soldiers did; the
more worthy praise, that in the midst of arms (which they acknowledged of
themselves but uncertain and weak) they put their whole hope and confidence
of their preservation only in God, the vpholder of the oppressed, and the
defender of their just quarrel.

Such hope did not deceive them, for the enemies having done their battery, to
the number of twelve volleys of Ordinance, the same day in a moment they closed
themselves in battle array, and headlong set as well on the breach, as on the
curtine toward the tower, called the Cat, where they planted a great number of
ladders, with a full assurance to carry the town away by one way or other: but
they were so courageously received, that after a long fight they were so
beaten, driven back, and overthrown, that the Town ditch remained full of a
great number of dead and wounded: few were taken prisoners by them of the
town, for they did drive them before, still beating them unto their trenches,
so that no man was able to repasse the heat and fury of the Soldiers
following the victory: one half of their army was there wholly destroyed.

Of them of the town were not above six slain, and eight hurt: a thing very
strange and yet most true. God for to magnify his power in taking vengeance
upon tyrants and haughty persons, oftentimes does overcome as well with a
small as with a great number: and so was that the only virtue and force of his
arm, to whom the victorious gave the glory: for after the retire from the
fight they gave publikly thanks to the divine goodness of God, who so mightily
had delivered them.

Afterward, that proud sink of filthy slaves did nothing worthy to be
reported, but grew always lesser and lesser: they attempted afterward some
stratagems, but without any effect, which caused them to conclude not to hazard
further, but to preserve the rest in certain Block howses, which they made
about the town upon the high ways, supposing by that means to compel them in
time through hunger to yield.

It is said before, how the Duke of Guyze sent his horse coursers and riders,
with his Orators to bring in triumph, and to show the horses, armor and spoil
of the Rutters, taken from them at Vimorye and Aulnea^, by Montargis and
Chartres, not only with amplifications of his victoryes and great valiantnes,
but also with deprauing and debasing the Kings doings, with calumnies, lies,
false reports and slanders, into such Provinces and Cities, where these
sycophants did venture to go: for such were the graces and ornaments of their
rhetorike, wherewith these Orators did beautify their demonstratiue orations.

It is said also how the King of Navarre, after the prosperous journey at
Coutras, sent Ambassadors to the King to search the means of peace, and
offered him his and the Germans forces to be revenged of the Leaguers, his
secret enemies. Also, how by what policy the good hope of this Embassage was
prevented and made of none effect by the Leaguers, seeking to nourish
dissension and war in the Realm.

Furthermore, it is said, how after the dissipation of the Germans, the King
retyring to Paris, and hearing of the proceeding of the Duke of Guzye against
his person and honor: and what great discredit he had procured him among his
subjects, too late he saw his error, in having rejected the proffers of the
King of Navarre, and neglected opportunity of reuengement, which he does
purpose to dilay, and refer it to another time, supposing this to be his
best course; first to repair the fault committed: For seeing the communalty
addicted altogether and affectionated to the Duke of Guyze, he determined to
do some thing plausible to the Commons, to recover their good wills and
affections.

In the twelfth Chapter of the Acts, there it is showed how a King killed
James, seeing that it pleased well the people (to get their love to the
uttermost) took Peter also, intending to kill him like wise: so this King
(with dutiful reverence of the sovereign power be it spoken, in comparing the
counsels and actions, not the persons) determined to recover the love of his
subjects by the slaughter of the King of Navarre, Nobility and people, which
follow the example of Peter, and embrace the same form of doctrine which he
has delivered. He concludes therefore to make war against them of the
reformed religion.

The King therefore passing the latter end of Winter in the meditating of these
enterprises, in repairing and renewing his forces, an expedition was published
abroad against them of the reformed religion, whereunto the K. in his own
person would go the next Summer.

The Jesuits fearing least the cold of the Winter and the sweetness of the
spring next following, would both cool and quallify that heat and bitterness,
which did so boil in the Kings mind, importunatly by their outcryes and
tumultuous Sermons did press him forward, their Pulpites Poytow, either
doubting of some new rebellion of the Leaguers, or else mistrusting the events.

But whilst the things abouesayd do so pass in the Sovereignty of Sedan, the
king having opportunity given him, by the death of the Prince of Conde, and the
good success of Lauardine in subduing so speedily the Isles of Marans (which he
thought to be a good beginning to bring under his obedience the rest of Poytow
and Xainctonge, and at length to force Rochel) began earnestly to resolve
himself upon his expedition of Guyenne, and thought good to use some speed
and celerity in inuading Poytow and Xainctonge, as the nearest of them which
did embrace the Gospel. Therefore he prepares all things, and deuyseth all
the means possible to destroy the King of Navarre, to take the I Will of The, to
Block in Rochel, to get the towns of Talmond, Ganach, and Fontenay: and
gyrdeth about his loins to go in his own person to that voyage: there to
fill the measure of his praises and victories, hoping thereby to win again
the hearts of his lost subjects.

On the other side, the master of the league perceiving himself to have crept
deeply into the hearts of the people, and to have dislodged the K. from
thence, forgets the heretics, and the defense of the holy Church, which he
had heretofore pretended, and begins to discover the ha^red against the
King, which had lain hidden in his breast a long time, cries out that the
wars so often times moved against the king of Navarre, had vanished away
without profit, the only fault is the kings intelligences with the heretics,
but the supporter of the king of Navarre being once dispatched, with less
labor shall he be overthrown: he dreameth that Germany and England are so
angry with the king of Navarre for the dissipation of the Germane army, that
he can hope for no more aid nor succor from thence. As for the K. he is weary
of war, his good Soldiers are spent and worn out, the residue weary of the
tediousnes of this war, or else for want and need do only desire quietness
and peace. He does enholden and encourage himself upon the favors which he
had at the court, of the chiefest about the kings person, and concludes that
the king may easily be oppressed, and the king of Navarre cannot defend
himself long: and in the mean time he determined to try what miracles the
slubbersawce Italy can do as is before said.

Of all the armies which were prepared the year before against the K. of
Navarre, remained none but only the Leaguers companyes: such as were together
were occupied at the siege of Iamets, and in wasting the teritory of Sedan, who
in token that there they had been, they left their accursed carcasses for gage
for the most part,

The masters of the League having received the foil before Iamets, and at
Douzie, in the principality of Boillon (as is before said) considering that
their counsels succeeded not, their forces were greatly diminished, and that
they had opened diverse ways, at diverse times, but now specially their intents
too evidently: and considering also that a small hole in such a dangerons
conspiracy, would in a little space turn to a great breach, (which blows
abroad the counsels, weakneth the authority, and mollifieth the courages) took
advise to remedy speedily those dangers which might ensue thereof: for their
goods, their honors, and lives stood thereon. They knew also that their
counsels and treasons had peareed ininto the kings closet, who might
dissemble, but never forget it.

First therefore in hasting the execution of their conspiracy, necessity
compelled them to put fear aside, and respect of all authority under foot.

Secondly, that in such extremi^ie, none but a violent remedy would serve.

Thirdly, that the execution could not much increase the punishment of such a
dangerous conspiracy.

Last of all, Fortune would help their valiant courages, and that high
enterprises could not be brought to pass, but by diligent exploytes. These are
the reasons which made them haste the execution of their enterprise.

The means to exempt their purpose, was to seize upon Paris, the che^fest
town in the realm, and there (with the help of their partakers) to kill, or
take the King therein, and by the self same means to destroy the Pinces of
the blood (as many as should come within their reach) and all other the Kings
faithful servants and officers of the Crown, with all others as should oppose
themselves to their purpose.

As for the prince of Conde, they had dispatched him out of the way by their
paltry pills.

The Cardinal of Bourbon was the Tree, under whose shadow they did work all
their conspiracies.

The King of Navarre they made no account of, assuring themselves of his life
by one mean or other.

To bring this project to a perfect, wished, and blessed end, they needed two
things; to streng then themselves, and to weaken the King.

Their forces were diminished greatly by reason of the Bastinados which they
received at a maidens hands at Iamets and Douzie, in the teritory of Boillon,
yet was it easy with a short warning, to repair them sufficiently. Therefore
the Duke of Guyze sent into those countries and Provinces, which favored him,
to warue his partakers to be in Paris with horse, armor and furniture at the
beginning of May, and there to attend upon his Mastership, for he had a
mistical may game to play, wherein he had need of their service.

For the weakening of the king, they used this Dilemma, we will so work that the
king will send his fores into Picardy, whereby he will weaken the safety of his
own person, and so shall he be easier to be surprised. (or he will not send)
If he send and recall them to Paris, to prevent the danger which we will
prepare him; then will it be a good occasion to the factious citizens to pick a
quarrel, and to make an uproar against him, and so by open violence of many
against few, he may easily well be dispatched.

If the King send not his forces from about him into Picardie, it may be
wrested out of his hand, and in course of time the next Provinces will follow,
and yet will we so provide that in Paris he shall be able scarce to defend
himself. Now let us consider how they executed every part of this dilemma.

The Duke d' Aumale, with all theresidue of the forces which suruiued their
companions at Iamets and Douzie, with other accomplices of ye Guize, who were in
the country of Pycardie, were sent into the said country of Picardie to make
war, not against the Hugonets, for there were men to oppose themselves
against the Leaguers, but against the heretics of the Romish Church, who will
remain faithful to their King: they therefore most furiously did war
against the Kings Cities, Towns and Forts; all was reduced from the Kings
obedience save Calis and Boloigne, which was besieged and greatly distressed.
They in Boloigne were worse heretics then Rochel, although they did worship
our Lady, with all the Saints and the Saints of heaven, and some devils also
among them with greater devotion then ever they did worship God. The like did
he in Normandy, and in all those countries, the Catholics without changing of
their old superstition were on a sudden become heretics: the King by many
degrees worse then an heretic. The King of Navarre had been of good religion,
if he would have cast his lot among them, and have had a common purse with
them, and gone with them to shed innocent blood.

About the beginuing of May (by the secret aduertisements of the Duke Guize)
there repaired into the City of Paris out of diverse parts of the Realm,
Gentlemen, and of all qualities, beside men light headed, rash, malcontents,
and desirous of novelties, above 15. thousand. Besides this great number of
strangers in Paris, most part of the citizens, and an infinite multitude of
sottish and rash people desirous of novelties, who had Guize, great master of
the League in France. This accursed multitude was greatly encouraged by the
strangers, who altogether would have made a mighty army, and had been able
to match with the Turk both in number and qualities. All these were swimming
in that city as in a large and wide sea, being not perceived nor known but by
their partakers.

On the other side, the King lived in security void of any suspicion of
treachery of the people of Paris, who made his right hand of the^, as whom he
had always cherished and loved as himself, and more regarded in a manner then
all the rest of his kingdom.

But as counsels which do draw after such haughty events cannot long be
kept close, but do take wind; so the deep providence of the masters of the
League could not take so good order, (being not able to execute any thing
alone) but distrust began to rise in the hearts of many men who were faithful
to the King: so that after diverse mutterings, sundry aduertisements were given
to the King, that there was some great matter in hand against his person and
estate. And although they could not tell him expressedly that which happened
afterward; yet experienced of long time in the anatomy of the hearts and
counsels of them of Guize, began to mistrust the matter, and determined to
remedy it by all gracious ways grounded upon reason.

The King in the latter end of April, hearing of the commotions of the Duke
Aumale in Picardie and Normandy, sends the Duke Espernon into Normandy with
part of his forces, and some part into Picardie, there to defend his authority.

The Duke of Guize hearing how he was expected in Paris, both by the mutinous
citizens and strangers, who upon aduertisements given them, had flocked
thither out of diverse parts of the Realm: and understanding that the King had
sent his forces into Picardie and Normandy, resolved himself to go to Paris
with a small company for to avoid suspicion, yet assured to find there (as in
a little world) a number of partakers, provided of all necessary things, and
in readiness sufficient to surprise a great King.

The King informed of this deliberation of Guize to come to Paris, and desirous
(as is said before) to prevent all their attempts by gracious ways, about the
eight day of May sent the Lord Belieure to the said Duke whom he met at
Soyssons, to inform him of his will, that his coming to Paris would not be
agreeable to his Majesty; willing him in the Kings name for that time not to
come to Paris; and beside, the king commanded the said Belieure, that in (case
the said Duke would needs continue his

The Lord Belieure gave notice of all the Kings will and intent unto the said
Duke, as he was charged to do. The Duke subtly gave him a doubtful answer,
not declaring whether he would go or not: but as the water being stopped
waxes stronger and more violent; so the prohibiting of him increased his
heat; and ambition by nature impatient, and made him think that the delay was
an irreuocable loss.

So that at one instant after the departing of Belieure out of Soyssons, the
Guize took horse and his way to Paris, and followed the said Lord Belieure so
nigh, that the one arrived the Monday about nine a clock, and the Duke
likewise arrived at Paris the same day about twelve a clock, accompanied with
eight gentlemen, having in all not above fifteen or sixteen horses that could
be seen: and being there arrived, he ligh^ed at the lodging of the Q Mother,
at the penitent Sisters, the 9. of May.

The King being advertised of the Dukes coming to Paris, took great
discontentation thereof, and conceived a great displeasure against the said
Belieure, as though he had not faithfully delivered his commandment, and in
the same terms as he was charged, to the Duke of Guize.

This solitary coming of the Duke of Guize increased the suspicions and
mistrust, making every man that knew him and his pomp, think that such
extraordinary coming had some mystery, which ere it were long should be
revealed. For if it had been simple and without fraud, a cooling of the
partakers had ensued (as commonly they who do obey do frame their actions,
according to the manners of them which do command) so that such a tumult had
not insued it as did.

A little while after the arriving of the Duke of Guize, the Q. Mother caused
her self to be carried to the Loure to speak with the King. The Guize with a
small company to see too, followed the Q. Mother on foot: and it is to be
noted, that by the way the Lord of Guize going through the streates of Paris
with the Q. Mother, the people flocked in great companies to bid him welcome,
and among others, a gentlewoman standing upon a bulk, plucking her mask
down, saluted him with these words, Good Prince seeing thou art come we be
safe.

The Q. Mother and the Guize arrived at the Loure together, entered into the
kings chamber, who then sat nigh his bed, and did not stir out of his place
for the coming of the said Duke, who saluted the King with a fair and humble
countenance, making a courtesy almost his knee to the ground. Few would have
judged by this interuiew, that there had been so dangerous ulcers in their
hearts: the King greatly displeased at his coming,

The King relied, that he had sent him an express commandment, that he
should not come for that time. The Duke made answer, that it was not told him
in such sort, as that he had occasion to fear that his coming should be so
disagreeable to him. The King then turning his speech to the Lord Belieure,
asked him whether he had not commanded him to make him understand his
intention. When Belieure would have recounted, in what sort he performed his
message, the Duke of Guize interrupted him, and said to the King, speaking by
Belieure, that he had told him more.

Upon this, the Q. Mother beginning to talk with the King a side, the Duke of
Guize drew nere to the Queen, raging and talked together with her, during the
parley of the Q Mother with the King. The Guize a little after went away, being
neither accompanied nor followed by any of the Kings servants. The King being
aduertized a new, how Paris was full of armed men, replenished with faction and
madness, and that there had resorted, and howerly did resort a number of
strangers of all qualities, and that the Duke of Guize was the adamant stone,
which did draw the yr^n of that commotion, began to double his mistrust, and
thought it was high time to take order to assure his affairs, and provide both
for the safety of his person, and the state of the City. And first to assure
his forces about his person, sent for two thousand and five hundred Suissers
which were in Picardy, for the companies of his guardes, and some regiments
which were extraordinarily ordained by him, for two companies of Suiss^rs, to
fortify his gardes, and three companies of Frenchmen.

The tenth day he commanded the Escheuins, that is the Aldermen, and chiefest
men of the City, to make search through the City in all houses, of all such
men as were to be found, without any lawful business: they dissembled the
matter, as though they had good liking thereof. He caused also notice thereof
to be given to the Duke of Guize, who had no great liking of it, but took it
for a token which hasted him to do his feate: this order was taken, but not
executed until the morrow after.

The same day, the Master of the League, that is the Duke of Guize, came to
Loure, accompanied with thirty or forty horses, and accompanied the King in
his walking to the artilleries, and there conferred together Guienne against
the King of Navarre.

The 11. day, the search being a making through the City by the chiefest of
the Magistrates, and certain Knights of the order of the Holy Ghost, commonly
called the Kings order, to countenance the matter, gave great occasion of
mistrust: whereupon the King caused the search to cease.

The 12. day very early, the Suissers and the French companies, being 12.
Ensigns of footmen, entered into Paris through the gate Saint Honor, the King
and his nobles being there on horseback to receive them. At the arriving of
them, the Parisians gave themselves the alarm, and feigned great fear, as
though the great Turk had entered the City with an hundred thousand men, every
man ran into his house, shut up their doors and windows many cried that they
were lost, undone, and would be all murdered. It had been an easy thing for
the King if he had had an evil intent against them (as afterward they made
themselves believe) to have let the attempt, which they did that same day, in
raising and trenching themselves against their King. But the King was
accustomed to use patiencie and long delays, even in the midst of mistrust.

The Kings forces being entered the City, were by his commandment under the
conduct of the Lord Byron, distributed into diverse plares of the City, not to
enterprise or to offend any man, but there to hold fast, least that any
mutiny should rise in the City, as all things seemed apparently to be
disposed by the coming of the Duke of Guize. Part of those forces were
appointed to be about the King, to fortify his gardes: and another part was
placed at Saint Ihan de Grieve, before the common house of the City, under the
conduct of Marshall Haumont, the Provost of Merchants, and other of the
chiefest of the City, who knew the Kings intent. Likewise, part of the said
forces were set upon the little bridge, under the commandment of the Lord
Tinteuille. There were also also some of them placed at the new market, under
the conduct of the Lord Dampieore, some were also at Saint Innocent, and many
other places.

This division of the Kings forces was well made, for that end to the which it
was done, but it was not universal, nor in some special places, where the
necessity did specially require. For in the place Maubert was no body placed.
And that place was of such importance, that being seized upon, it might be the
means to recover all the others: but yet if it had been provided with one
hundred Pikes, and thirty Harquebusiers, they had been sufficient to let them
for a time, who would stir. The Lord Byron was warned of it, and himself was
not ignorant of it, but for lack of men, he provided not to it: beside, that
these words were not looked to.

The Duke of Guize, considering that his treacherous intents were already too
manifest, keeps his bed that morning, to dissemble the matter more kindly,
and supposing that all this preparation was for him, whilst the King should
make his process, he thought to prevent the worst: therefore by secret
messengers he sent to his partakers to flock together, to seize upon as many
places as they could, to strengthen and to Barricado themselves, before the
watch word be given, and that he may swear that it was not his doing, he was
a sleep still.

About eight a clock in the morning, behold the Escheuins, whether they were
terrified by threatenings, or accessaries to the rebellion, in a moment of one
side they began to vanish away, and to descend from the university: on the
other side, the people flocking together, seized upon the place Maubert, and
Barricados were planted within ten paces of the Suissers, who might easily have
let it, and immediately they began every where to trench themselves with
Barricados, from thirty to thirty paces, the chains also immediately were
drawn: their Barricados were well flanked, and well furnished with men to
defend them, so that it was no more time to go through Paris any where without
watch word, passeport, or particular bills from the Captains, or Colonels of
the wards.

The Duke of Guize understanding that the Kings forces were severed a sunder,
and disposed in certain places, knowing his partakers to be stronger, and
more in number without comparison, trenched with Barricados, hard by the Kings
Garrisons, set in diverse places (as is before said) even with thirty paces one
from the other, and perceauing that all this while a sleep, he had enclosed up
the Kings forces on every side: how much more can he do, awaking out of his
bed, if he would bestirre himself about his business: now seeing that it
rests no more, but to charge and to dispatch the Kings forces, that destitute
of all succor, more easily he may be had out of the Loure dead or a live,
rests therefore but the watch word to begin the may game.

All things being in a readiness, two sorts of men are appointed, the one to
give the watch word, the other to give the first blow. The watch word was
given by interposed persons, who went about the City, reporting that the King
would establish new Garrisons in the City, and executt one hundred of the
chiefest inhabitants, and many other noble men at the suggestion of the Duke
Espernon, who had intelligences with the King of Navarre.

Others were interposed among the Kings French Soldiers, who did bid the
inhabitants to lay clean sheets in their beds, for the same night they would
lie in their houses. On a sudden therefore the fire was set to the mine, in a
moment Paris was fired into an horrible and confused

The others (who were appointed to begin the fray) were Brissak, Boysdauphin,
Chamoyes, and other partakers of Guyze, who at the watchword given, began to
charge the Swissers, whereof some were killed, some unarmed: the like was done
to the other companies of Frenchmen, many were slain, and all unarmed.

The Duke of Guyze waiting a sleep for this beginning, started up (as he said)
out of his sleep, ran to the fray, showed a double diligence, did endeavor
to show outwardly to the world, that he enterprised nothing, and that he was
utterly ignorant of all these things: and to that end he might have witness,
he caused the slaughter which was made of the Swissers to sease, caused the
arms to be rendered to the Kings companies, who had been unarmed: but after
such a manner as did show how much greater regard they of Paris had of him then
of the King, and what intelligences he had with them, whereof he did show
himself not discontented.

In that commotion some would have killed the Marshal Biron, and the Lord
Belieure, which thing this King of the may game misliked, and would not suffer.
Such occasions did content him greatly, for by such actions he confirmed
himself in the trust and confidence which he had in that people: he would also
have them whom he saved from the slaughter, to believe that he had no small
part in France: and besides that he bound them to him in as much as their lives
were worth. To be short, no man was in danger of ye rage of the people, who
either was with him, or was commended by him.

The Duke of Guyze, after the vnarming of the Kings compan^es set themselves
as prisoners until the evening, and within a little while after these things
were done, they made their approches by little and little, to the Loure where
the king was.

The King being aduertized of all which was a doing, did not show himself
moved therewith at all. But the 2. Queens were greatly amazed, specially the Q
Mother, which all the dinner time did nothing else but weep, with great
abundance of tears. And immediately after dinner she took her coach to go to
the house of Guyze, where the said Lord of Guyze had retired, after having
taken prisoners the Kings forces, to do her best endeavor to passify the
commotion, but it was without any effect: for they who heretofore had in
admiration her deuilish craftines, as a divine wisdom, did now when they had
the upper hand account it a deceitful Italian dissimulation. So that old Ca^ye
is no more regarded then she deserved. For she her self with much adoo could
pass through the streates so thick trenched with Barricados, that she was
enforced to forsake her Coach and be carried in a chair: and every varlet
would presume to bid

As the seditious made all things in a readiness to besiege the King in the
Loure the next day, the Duke of Guyze went out of his house to purchase to
himself some good will of the Master, by showing some curtesy to the
servants, and came to the place where the Kings forces were stayed and
unarmed, in the evening caused their arms to be rendered them. He sent one
Saint Paul (who had grown from a latrey to be a great man, and greatly favored
by the Duke of Guyze) to go before the Kings gards, leading them as captives in
a triumph, and commanded them to be turned out of Saint Anthonies gate, and to
shift for themselves.

The night following, the Rebels besieged the Loure, where the King was, set
their Barricados nigh the gace, stopped the issues, skirmished with them that
came forth: and yet all things are so disguised, that to besiege the King and
kill him in his own house, to execute it dilligently, and that without sparing
the life of any man, at the commandment of Guyze, is to obey the King, to
defend the King and the country, to fight for liberty, to expose valiantly
their lives for their tempels, their altars, their wives and children.

The morrow after, as the tumult increased, the King had advertisement from two
several places (the first by one who was familiar, and household servant to the
Lord of Guyze: the second by a gentleman of good calling) that the said Guyze,
and they of Paris his partakers, had determined to bring forth the night
following fifteen or sixteen thousand men by the new gate, and other gates of
that side of the City, to besiege him without, there to stop all passage, and
to force him in his house.

The King received confirmation of the same determination by one of his
faithful servants, a man of honor and understanding, who labored much to cause
one of his servants to step to the Loure for that purpose, who could not have
brought it to pass if it had not been by the help of one of the Captains of
the wards of the City, who conducted the messenger to the Loure.

The King did step aside to receive this message by the mouth of him which
brought it: which when he understood, judged the mischief and danger to be
greater then he had thought, and began to be amazed (seeing that which he
would never have expected of the Parisiens) without showing any token of dismay.

He was also advised at the same instant, to get him out of Paris, though he
should go forth alone, if not he would be undone, and that when his person
should be without, he might find many servants and faithful subjects.

The K. did not refuse that counsel, for he saw the danger to increase every
moment, and yet he made no great show to follow it. But on ye contrary

He sent the Q. Mother to the Duke of Guyze once again: she with much a do,
having access to him, exhorted him to bring of his own so much as he could to
pacify that commotion, prayed him very instantly to come to the king with
great protestation of assurance, that he would be well pleased thereof,
protesting of his good will and confidence which he reposed in him.

The King delayed his departing out of Paris, meditating reuengement upon the
head of this rebellion, and had sent his mother to the end to have drawn him
within his reach, supposing that the head being off, the members would cool
and wax weak.

The Q. Mother having done all that ever she could with her Italian Rethorick,
could not persuade the Duke of Guyze, having learned by the simplicity of them
of the reformed Religion, and by the tragedies which through his counsel he
had caused the King to play upon them of the religion, how little credit was to
be given to Kings faith, and to her fair promises, but showed himself very
cold in that matter, and contemptious toward her person: for he feared that he
should not be able to execute his enterprise within the Loure so well as
without, mistrusting to be prevented, if he had entered therein.

The Q Mother seeing that he was not moved by her words, sends his answer to
the king, by the secretary Pinart.

The King being aduertized of the hardness of the Duke, and out of hope to
execute his will upon him. To prevent a farther mischief which he saw to be
at hand, commanded his companies to retire, and determined to go out of
Paris, and to take his farewell of the Loure, at the persuasions of many
officers of the Crown, who gave him counsel to give place to that desperate
conspiracy, and to retire into a place of safety: he sent his household to the
place called the Tuilleries, and leaving the Q. Mother there in the Loure, went
forth out of Paris on that side which was most sure for him, to wit, through
newgate with a walking staff in his hand, as though he went (according to his
custom) to walk to the Tuilleries with as joyful countenance, as in the most
joyful day that could shine unto him.

When he was out of the gate, he turned his face toward that city, casting
forth certain speeches of indignation, with protestation against their
ingratefulnes, treachery, and treason. When he came to the Tuilleries, he took
his horse with them of his train, who had means to get horses, they who had
none either stayed behind, or else followed him on foot. Many great Lords
went after him on foot, until they had the means to get horses. Many great
Lords and gentlemen of the Kings Paris in great haste, some without boots,
some destitute of all things, every one under the shadow of some friend, such
as they met withal in the middle of the confused prease.

The King that night, went to Trappes, and lodged in the house of Danuile,
brother to Mommorency, and alyed to the Duke d'Espernon. The flight of such a
great King, so ungratefully dealt with all, by them whom he had so greatly
favored, was lamentable.

The Duke of Guize having removed the Kings power from him, partly by killing,
and partly by sending others another clean contrary way from the King,
supposing that the said King had been still in the Loure, and knowing that
there rested nothing more to do, but to have his person for a gage of the
Crown, determined to besiege the Loure, and to bring out of hand the Artilery
before the gate. But understanding that he was issued out, and gone already a
great way of, he remained Master of Paris, seeing that the Master and the
servants had yielded him the lodging.

Hitherto we have conducted the King to Trappes, and his forces are sent
packing, and the Duke makes merry in Paris, in hope likewise to be Master of
all the rest.

The Duke and his partakers, perceauing how the King had given the slip, and
avoided their bloody hands, do scratch their heads, and see their error: for
although the overthrow was great, yet the victory was not full, the enterprise
not well executed, and the King being not taken, the issue thereof was
doubtful and full of perplexity. For their consciences do represent before
their eyes, the perfidious rebellion which they had committed, as to have not
only dispossessed him of his house, of whom they hold all that ever they
had, but also to have sought to murder him whom God had consecrated, to
represent before their eyes, the image of his Sovereign justice, to destroy
their Prince, who had loved them so tenderly; their benefactor, who had
cherished them as a Father his own natural Children. They accurse their
negligent folly, in that they had not been more watchful to attend upon his
person: fear seized their hearts, when considering the greatness of their
offense, do also know, that yet he will have means enough to bring their
doings to judgment, and to take reuengement of them, according to the
haynousnes of their offense. To be short, they are very sorry, not for that
which they had done, but for that they have not done worse.

But the Duke of Guize considering well that the stinking fame of his
villainous fact would flee abroad unto the ears of foreign Princes, who will
think themselves interes^ed in this injury, and that they will not forsake
such a mighty Prince in his distress, he thought good that the execution
done this day, might be reported unto Princes, neighbors, and England, to
whom he sent the Lord Brissak, accompanied with some others, to offer him a
protection, and to pray him not to be dismayed, and not to remove thence, with
assurance of safety. The Ambassador answered, that if he had been as a private
men in Paris, he would have gone to prostrate himself at the feet of the
Duke of Guize, for to give him most hearty thanks for his courtesies and
honest proffers, but being there nigh the King, for the Queen of England his
Mistress, who had ali^unce and covenant of amity with him, he could not, nor
would not take any protection, but of the King only.

The Lord Brissak showed him, that the Lord of Guize was not come to Paris, to
enterprise any thing against the King or his service, but that he has
resolved himself upon the defensive, and that there was a great conspiracy
against him, and the City of Paris, and how the town house, and other places
were full of gibets, whereon the King had determined to hang a great number of
the City and others. The Lord of Guyze prayed him to aduertize his Mistress
of all these things, to the end the world might be informed of the truth*

The Ambassador answered, that he could easily believe that he said as he
thought, but that hauty and hard enterprises, oftentimes do remain
incommunicable, and closely shut up in the hearts of them who do enterprise
them, which also when they think good, do produce them forth with such
color, as they judge most fit for their advantage. And that he would say
freely, that whatsoever had passed in Paris, would be judged very strange and
wicked, by all the Princes of Christendom, who were interessed in it, and that
no colors, were they never so fair, could make it to seem good, being the
simple duty of a subject, to remain in the just obedience of his Sovereign.

And that if there were so many gibets prepared, it would be believed more
easily, when the Lord of Guyze should bring them in sight. And grant that so
it were, yet is it a hateful thing, and intolerable, that a subject would let
by force the justice which his Sovereign will execute with strong hand. He
promised him, that willingly he would advertise the Queen his Mistress, of
all that which he told him, but to serve him as an interpreter of all the
conceits of the Duke of Guyze, and of them of his part, it was no matter
belonging to his charge. The Queen his Mistress being wiser then he to
believe, and judge what would please her Majesty upon that which he would
write unto her.

The Lord Brissake seeing that neither by fair offers, words, nor prayers, the
Lord Ambassador could be moved to allow their actions, ended Paris had a
quarrel to him, by reason of the cruelty which the Queen of England had
showed to the Queen of Scots. To this word of cruelty the Ambassador
answered. I arest you upon this word of cruelty, my Lord: no man ever named a
justice well qualified, cruelty. Moreover, I believe not that the people of
Paris have any quarrel to me, as you say: for upon what occasion? seeing that
I am here a public person who never molested any bedie.

Have you any armor? (said the Lord Brissake) If you did ask it me (said the
Lord Ambassador) as as of him who has been sometime friend and familiar of
the Lord Cosse your uncle, it may be I would tell you; but being that which I
am, I will not tell you.

You shall be searched here (said Brissake) ere it belong: for it is thought here
is armor, and it is to be feared you will be forced. I have two gates in this
house (said the Ambassador) I will shut and defend them as long as I may, that
it may appear to the world, that vniuftly in my person they have violated the
right of Nations.

To that Brissak replied; but tell me in good friendship I pray you, have you
any armor? The Ambassador answered, seeing you ask me as a friend, I will
tell you as a friend: If I were ^ere as a private man, I would have armor; but
being here as Ambassador, I have none other armor then the right and faith
public. I pray you (said Brissak) keep your doors shut up. I ought not to
do it (said the Lord Ambassour) for the house of an Ambassador ought to be
open to all goers and comers, considering that I am not in France to dwell in
Paris only, but to be nigh the King wheresoever he be.

We have recited (in as good order as such a deformed confusion could be
reduced unto) those things which passed in Paris in that damnable commotion.

Now the King being at Trappes, considering the treachery of that house which
he had favored and honored more without comparison then the houses of his
own blood, the person also whom he had loved and united to himself more then
any other, the sauagednes of his subjects and familiar household servants;
representing to himself the rage of the people, whom he had always tendered
almost more then all the residue of his Realm, the ingratitude of that City
which had been always his delights, and to the which he had never denied any
thing that he could do for the peace, preservation, ease, riches and greatness
of the same, calling to mind the tumuits, rage and violence attempted and
executed against him their benefactor; reasoning with himself how that they
were Catholics, of his own religion, and that they had been his right hand in
persecuting them of the reformed religion, how they were his fellows and
followers in committing

Calling to remembrance the long and daily warning given him by the King of
Navarre, the Princes of the blood, noble men, and gentlemen of all degrees, and
of many foreign Princes of the Guyzes intent against him, his crown, and
state.

Pondering in his mind the token which his eyes had seen, his ears had heard,
and all despised and contemned, and withal in steed of looking to his security
against such practizes, he had from time to time hardened his heart against
Christ, and to shed innocent blood, and under the color of defending the
Catholic religion, had countenanced, strengthened, and armed his enemies
against himself, whereby he has received that foil, shame and confusion this
day. Every man may judge in what distress of mind this great King passed all
that night full of just indignation of sorrow, which although in outward
appearance it might be kept close, yet inwardly inhart it could not be
dissembled.

The self same day of the tumult in Paris, the Duke de Main attempted upon
Lions; but he was put back by the inhabitants.

About the same time also the inhabitants of Orleans, Anious, Bourges,
Abeuille, and in other places did expel the Kings garrisons and officers, with
the Citizens who did hold with the King, whom they did call politickes, and
many of them were taken prisoners.

The thirteenth day the King went to the City of Chartres, where many of his
faithful servants resorted to him, and also his gardes, which had escaped the
slaughter of Paris.

The Duke of Guyze (though very sorry, that so foolishly he had missed to take
the King in the Loure, as he made his full reckoning the day before) followed
the victory as well as he could; and first begins to play the good husband
in Paris, to further the affairs to the premeditate intent. First, he brought
to his house above seven hundred thousand crowns of that which was none of
his, which there he laid for an earnest of the whole.

The same day also he took the Kings Arseuall at the Bastile, and sealed up
the Kings treasury, and in hope shortly to make all his own: in the mean time
he will carry the key.

When the Duke of Guyze had so played the good husband: now he will try in a
small matter how he can play the Kings part in great and weighty matters. For
suspecting the Provost of Marchantes, named Perreuse, and the Escheuins, to be
politickes, and favorers of the King, assembled the state of the city, and
there in his presence, the said Provost and Escheuins were deposed, and by his
commandment one Chapel, a most treacherous and seditious man, was elected
Provost, and one Rowland Compan, with other factious and mutinous companions,
all devoted to the Duke of Guyze were elected Escheuins.

Immediately after these things done in Paris, the fame there flies abroad
from town to town: reports are spread abroad, not as before, that Cities are
surprised, that the people rise in arms, that muster is taken: but the king
was besieged in the Loure, and in great danger to be slain by the Duke of
Guyze: he is fled from Paris, the Duke is in possession of the said City. It
was incredible to many, some made but a ^ush at it, good men were greatly
moved as it, for seeing that such a treason would draw after it many
calamities.

But the Leaguers lifted up their heads, these stoutnes and high courage of the
Duke of Guyze was in the mouths of them of his faction: but specially the
Priests, Monks, and Jesuits did in their Pulpits extol him to heaven: and
upon the news of this exploit done in Paris, by the aduertizements which the
Duke of Guyze gave every where, but specially by the preaching of the Friars
and Jesuits, the partakers make them selves ready to battle.

A sudden fear came upon the Duke of Guiz, and them of Paris his partakers:
for after the Kings departure from Paris, they considering their error, and
that now they are further to execute their enterprise upon his person than ever
they were: the guiltines of their consciences do represent to them the
reuengement, and the King making already (as they see in their fearful vision)
an agreement of peace with the King of Navarre, and calling him with his forces
to his aid to chastize them according to their deserts: Therefore they sent
presently to their partakers to arm themselves: The Friars and Jesuits sound
the allarum every where, their seditious and impudent tongues serving them for
trompets, and their pulpits for a drum, and give the rendes vous at Paris,
about the person of the Duke of Guyze.

When the Duke had so played the good husband, and had no more to take, and had
played the king in altring the state of the city, and seazing upon the kings
arseuall and treasury, and had showed himself a good provident Captain, yet
considering that in a little while the king was like to wax stronger than the
Leaguers, specially if he should join himself to the king of Navarre, whose
name they not only hated, but also feared extremely: in the mean while they
go about both to strengthen themselves, and to amend their error as well as
they can, espetially three manner of ways; by letters, by spyalls, and seeking
the way of reconsiliation.

As for the letters, the Duke himself plays the secretary, to show how
pretily he can skill of that occupation when it pleases him. And for Polypus
wings, wherewith he makes him three pens, and with the one he writes to
the governor of Orleans, of whom he had always as much assured himself, as of
the inhabitants. Therein he shows in plain terms, that he does not repent
of his former actions, but rejoices in them, and will^th him to warn his
friends to come to him speedily with horses and armor, without baggage, and
shows the facility thereof, saying, that the ways (as he supposes) are free.

Secondly, he boasted to have defeated the Swissers, and cut to pieces the
Kings guardes.

Thirdly, he braggeth that he was ready to have besieged the King in the Loure,
making his reckoning to have either taken him, or slain him there. But seeing
that the king had beguiled him in flying away by stealth, he refers that
matter till an other time.

Last of all, he shows that he has determined to seize all that which the
king has in Paris, until he be called to accounts. The copy of this letter
was sent the 14. day of May to the Gentlemen of the League in the Bayliwikes of
Orleans and Bloys, who immediately took their horses to repair to Boysgency,
where the governor had given the rendes vous. But the 15. day they received a
contrary advertisement by a letter which the said governor sent them,
containing as follows.

Our great Duke could not execute his enterprise, the K. having retired to
Chartres: wherefore I counsel you to retire into your houses as softly as you
may, making no semblance to have seen any thing. If you do not think your
selves safe, come hither: I pray you let this letter serve for the Lord
Villecombline, and Cigognes of Marchenoyre, and have me excused if I do not
write to you severally; it is not that I am proud, foolish or drunk, but I am
so glad that I know not what to do.

With the self same pen he wrote also a letter to the Lord Bossempiere, in the
which he boasts of his exployt done at Paris.

First, how he has discomfited the Kings forces of Swissers and French men,
who were bestowed in certain places of the City, and after how the said
companies are beholding to him by saving their lives, armours and goods.

Secondly, he rejoices of the great good will, obedience and reverence of the
persons showed unto him in that commotion.

Thirdly, he complains how he has been assaulted by the practices of the
heretics.

Fourthly, he acknowledges to have been preserved by the bravery and
valiantnes of them of Paris, of whom he assures himself for ever.

Fifthly, he makes a comparison between the King and himself in these words:
The King gathers forces and we also; the King is at Chartres, and we in Paris.

Sixthly, he boasts how he has changed the state of the City. And last of
all, shows that every where the Towns and Cities about do send to
acknowledge him. Also, prays the said Bossempiere to come to see him, where
he shall find him very lusty with forces, courage, friends, and money enough
to make merry withal. To those kind of people whom he durst trust, he wrote
in plain terms with a plain pen what his mind and intent was. But writing
unto some friends in whom he thought that there was some french heart and
nature, and therefore could not trust them so far as to commit the thoughts
of his heart unto the^ in plain terms, he takes another pen which could
disguise the matter, by the which he goes about so to color his actions, as
to make them believe that they are all just and lawful.

First, he deriueth the occasion of all the things which had happened from him
and his ambition, upon the Duke Espernon, whom indeed he knew to be one of
the faithfullest servants to the King of all his Catholics, whom he would
feign have to be put out of countenance, supposing that if he were not, he
might do with the King what he would, and rid him easily out of the way.

Therefore he blames the Duke Espernon to have searched out the means to let
the Dukes journey into Guienne, against the King of Navarre, whether he fained
himself to have been desirous to go and to have had that charge.

Secondly, to bring these things to pass, he charge him to have gone into
Picardie and Normandy, with part of the Kings forces, to pick quarells, to
refresh old inormities, thereby to divert the kings power from Guienne.

Thirdly, he accuses the said Espernon, that to that intent he would have
derived the war against the Duke of Guize, and the rest of the League, by
reporting and persuading the King, that the said Duke intended to make a
slaughter of the Kings friends in the City of Paris, and there either to kill,
or to take the King prisoner, and to ransacke the City, to make money to war
against whom he should think good.

Fourthly, he accuses the king of rashness, for believing those reports, and
for that thereupon he increased his forces in Paris, and for his stealing away
out of Paris.

Fifthly, he shows how things passed in that commotion, so that he washes
still his hands, and is in no fault, and the King and Espernon be the
procurers of all that has passed of late in Paris: and that if it had not been
for his wisdom and care, the King had been undone, and the state in

Last of all, he hops that the King will be a good boy, and if not, he will
make him a boy indeed.

With the self same pen he writes to the Towns and Cities of his
confederacy, and supposing them to be of diverse dispositions, to so many as
may by his actions enter into his thoughts, to them he says nothing of that
which has passed in Paris, leaving the report thereof to such as were his
trusty friends in the said Cities, thereby to color his actions with lies and
surmises. Therefore he specially without naming him, imputes all these vprores
which have been in Paris to the King of Navarre, who for to divert the war
from himself, has sent (says he) diverse express gentlemen, and also has
labored to the same purpose them who were at his devotion about the King, who
have gone about to persuade the King to war against the Leaguers.

Secondly, he exhorts them at the example of Paris, to suffer no manner of
garrisons to be put into their Towns and Cities.

Thirdly, he prays them that they will join their means and wills with him
and the City of Paris.

The inhabitants of Paris borrowed the same pen of the Duke of Guyze, to
write with the self same style as he had done therewith.

And namely, they do charge the Duke Espernon as a secret friend to the King of
Navarre, to have procured the King first to bring forces and accustomed
garrisons within the City of Paris: by which occasion, the mutiny and
commotion had ensued. Then to have persuaded the King in these tumults to
suspect the inhabitants of the said City, and at length to have counseled him
to flee from Paris.

Secondly, they stir up the Cities and Towns of their confederacy, to make
like vprores against the King and his forces, as they have done, warning them,
that now the time is come that they ought to live and dye together, to bring to
pass their intents.

Thus the Duke of Guyze with his Parisiens, having dispatched those things
which they thought necessary either to strengthen or excuse their actions. Now
he takes in hand the third pen to write to the King, wherewith he powers out
the words of a faithful servant, and in disguising his enterprise goes about
to deceive him, and to lul him asleep: but to do it with good grace in his
exordium he does chafe and braule first, for fear the King should have that
advantage over him as to begin with him. And although this his last action did
openly show the intentes of al his former dealings, he must dissemble and make
the words of service and obedience sound highly. There he does lament, and
almost fall a weeping (Crocodils lacrymis) for his estate, that by reason of
the slanders of his adversaries, he has been rendered suspect to the King of
the crime of high treason.

Secondly, to make his innocence appear, he shows how he came to

Thirdly, he blames the King that he would harken to his enemies, who caused
him to put extraordinary forces in Paris, and to dispose them into the cheifest
places of the said City, and that he would be moved by their persuasions to
make such an exemplary execution of so many noble men and citizens, whose
names he does omit in silence.

Fourthly, he says, that when the commotion began, he was altogether unarmed
and fast a sleep in his house.

Fifthly, that his great pains which he took in containing the people from
murder, does declare him that his intent was never to stir that City to
sedition.

Sixthly, the care which he had to save them of his officers, who had not well
deserved of him, does manifestly prove that he never intended any thing
against his servants.

Last of all, the saving of the lives of his Swissers, Captains, and Soldiers
does plainly show, that he never feared any thing so much as to displease him.

These be the pens where with he does so vary his skill, and does write so
contrary things, not to delight (as the art of Rhetorike teaches) but by the
one to confess the truth, with the other to color his actions, dissemble and
lie; and by the third to divert the crime of those things which have happened
from himself and his partakers, and to charge the King of Navarre, and the
Duke Espernon, namely, as the workers and practisers of all the misdemeanors
that have fallen out in that commotion.

On the other side, the King about the 17. of May being at Chartres, sent
letters unto the governors of the provinces of his Realm, to give them notice
according to the truth of things which had happened at Paris. But namely he
wrote letters unto the Lord Boiseguine, governor for his majesty in the city
of Poytiers, and knight of the order of the holy Ghost: wherein he shows
briefly the sum of the matter, of so sudden (and contrary to his will)
coming of the Duke of Guyze, of his own intent in placing new garrisons within
Paris, what had there hapened by the secret practicing of the Duke of Guyze, of
the causes of his retire to Chartres, praying him to give notice of all these
things to the Lords, Gentlemen, and all other of credit in Poytow and
thereabout.

He writes also to the same effect unto the people and inhabitants of his
realm for to divert them from rebellion, to the which they might be solicited
by the Duke of Guyze, and his partakers, and by the example of the City of
Paris.

Whilst these things are so handled on both sides, every one iustifiyng his
cause: The Leaguers seeing themselves farther to execute their intent upon the
kings person than ever before; do seize upon as many towns Guyze went out of
Paris, and seized upon Meaulx and Chasteautiery in Brye.

The king seized upon Corbeil and Meloune, and other holds and places upon the
river of Seyne, right against Brie, and upon the high ways to Paris: but the
Duke of Guize having made sure Meaulx and Chasteautiery (as is said) about the
27. of May returned to Paris, and considering how the holding of Corbiel and
Meloune, was very grievous to Paris; do in have prepare all things for the
siege of Meloune, and does his best endeavor to force it: but seeing that it
was too hot for him, and that it would not be recovered being so strongly
fortified by the king, gave it over.

Whilst these things above said were a doing, there appeared within Paris
spanish captains, every day more than other, and out of diverse parts men did
join with them. Some (who were faithful to the king and of some credit among
the people) went through the streets to persuade the inhabitance to open their
shops, and to do as they have done before.

Other who were of the league, did cry with a loud voice, shut up your shops,
and take arms: if you will not, be ransaked, your wives ravished, and lose
your traffic. Many of the inhabitants went forth out of Paris, and retired
some whither else: they who could not do it, desired greatly the Kings return.

In the mean time, that on every side they make their parts strong, and that
the parties were like to come to handy blows. The Leaguers considering their
strength to be weak, if the king should take the matter at the worst, sent
three manners of spials. First, they sent of their own faction under the
color of service, to view the kings countenance, and to give intelligences
thereof from time to time.

Secondly, the Capuchins were sent thither in procession, that under the color
of hypocritical holiness, they might see what weather was at Chartres, and to
try if the kings mind was any thing altered toward the Friery, Monkerie, and
popish superstition, and inclining in any wise to ye heretics, as they termed
the^. The Capuchins are a sect of hypocrites, differing from the Franciscan
Friars, nothing but in hair, and form of their cowle. Their garments are of
color like the robes of the sweep chimnies here in England, and their cowle
is made after the manner of a sugar loaf, likeso many melancholic Devils
spewed out of hell, to make the world laugh.

Last of all, another sort of spialls were sent, wiser and of greater
countenance, than the other 2. sorts, who would sound better, and make a more
perfect anotomy of the kings heart, to wit, certain picked out of the court of
Parliament, and among others, namely the Lord Dauron, master of the Guyze and
the inhabitants of Paris. To whom he showed himself very casie to be
entreated, as it may appear by his speeches uttered to them as follows.

The Queen my mother has given me to understand, that you were all assembled
and will repair to me, whereof I am well pleased, being assured that you would
not offend in such force, being the first company of my Realm. I have promised
to my self of you always all faithfulness and obedience, such as you have
showed heretofore to my predecessors (Kings) as unto your lawful and natural
Princes: And I know that if it had been in your power to let things there
passed, that you would have done it. I am sorry for that which has happened to
the city of Paris: notwithstanding I am not the first to whom such misfortune
has happenned: And the more I am displeased, that the spare of these
fourteen years that I have been king, I have always honored it with my
abode, showing all gentleness and goodness to the inhabitants, and they have
always found me a good king, gratifiyng them in all that ever I could: I know
that in such a City as that is there be good and bad: when they shall make
their submissio^, and will acknowledge themselves, I will be ready to receive
and embrace them, as a good father his children, and as a good King his
subjects. Your duty is to labor in the matter, for therein consists the
preservation of the City, of your selves, your wives, and your familyes.
Furthermore, continue in your charges as you have accustomed: the Queen my
mother shall certify you from time to time of my will.

In the after noone, the King sent for them again, and used these speeches
following.

I have sent for you, (before you go hence) to let you understand, besides
that which I told you this morning, that I was advertised of certain reports
given out, that I would have put Garrisons in the City of Paris. I do greatly
^^use that ever such a thing came in their minds, I know that Garrisons are
set either to undo a City, or for the mistrust of the inhabitants. They ought
not to think that I would destroy a City, to the which I have showed so many
tokens and witness of my good will, which I have so much benefited by my long
abiding therein, for to have remained there more then ten of my predecessors
before me had done: which thing has brought to the inhabitants, even to the
simplest sort of artifficers, all the commodities which there do appear this
day, whereby ten or twelve other Cities might have been made rich. And when my
officers or Merchants have had need of me, I have done them good: and I may
say that I have showed my self a good King toward them. And therefore Paris,
and desirous to offend no man: I sent even to the Lord of Guize, and other
Lords, to that end they should give me a book of the names of their household
servants, and to cause the residue to avoid. Whereof I was advertised, that
there was a great number, no less then fifteen thousand men, which thing I
did for the preservation of the City, and safety of my subjects. This is the
cause that I will have them to acknowledge their fault, with sorrow and
displeasure. I know well, that they are made believe, that having offended me
in such a sort as they have done, mine indignation is irreconsiliable. I will
you to let them know, that I have not that humor nor will to undo them: and
that as God, as whose Image I am here upon the earth (though unworthy)
desires not the death of a sinner, so do I not desire their undoing. I will
always prove the peaceable way, and when they shall show their duty, and
confess their fault, and testify in deed, the sorrow which they have of
their offense, I will receive, and embrace them as my subjects, in showing my
self as a father toward his children. I will have them to acknowledge me as
their King and Master: if they do it not, but delay the matter, in drawing my
hand, as I may do, I will make them feel their offense, so that the mark
thereof shall remain for ever. For being the first and principallest City,
honored with the first and suprem court of my Kingdom, and other courts,
privileges, honors, and university, I can (as you know) reuoake and remove
thence, all my courts and university, which would turn to their great
displeasure: for these things ceasing, all other commodities and traffic will
diminish, as it fellout in the year 1579. during the great plague, by reason
of my absence, and ceasing of the Parliament, a great number of my officers,
being retired thence, young Children were seen that year to play at the nine
pinnes in the streates. I know that there is a great number of good men in my
City of Paris, and that of four parts, three are of that number who are very
sorry of that which has happened. Let them therefore so deal, that I may be
content, let them not enforce me to show them what I may do, more to do that
which I am able, and will not. You know that patiency provoked, do turn into
fury,

During these practices of the Leaguers, and their running to an fro, to amend
their error, to fortify themselves, to make a way to reconsiliation, they
stoop to the Q Mother, who was left at the Loure, there they cap and crouch
unto her, they kiss her hands, and give her sugared words, excusing the matter,
that they meant no hurt, but were put in some fear by the kings forces, being
lodged and placed in Garrison before their doors, they were all the Kings most
obedient and faithful servants, they require nothing else, but that a
Catholic success be nominated, an immortal war denounced against the
heretics: upon that condition they are ready to be sacrificed at his feet,
that she would be a mean to pacify his anger and displeasure; she had been
hitherto the only vpholder of the state against the heretics, now she may
show a notable proof of her great wisdom, and do great service to the holy
Church.

By these and such like persuasions, she was easily won to be a mediator yet
once for them to the King.

The Q. Mother was as deeply fallen into the crime of treason as they, save
only in one degree: for they had conspired the kings death, and usurping of
his kingdom. She was not desirous of the kings death, nor that his kingdom
should be taken from him, but she was glad and sought all means to keep him
wrapped in troubles during her life, though it should cost him at length his
life and state, that she might always wrest the rule and government out of
his hand, by throwing him headlong from time to time into troubles and dangers.

This accursed woman therefore sees here an occasion proffered her to nourish
still her ambitious humor, and to bind both the king and his enemies unto her
by the means of reconciliation. She from time to time sends Circe her
country woman, she transformed the king from a man (having a Lions heart) into
a sheep, cast him in a sound and vnsensiblenes: whereby after he could not
feel the good counsels of his faithful subjects, who proffered him their help
to revenge such notorious and public contumelies, until that at length
necessity enforced him to do it.

The rumor of such a notable treason, attempted and performed by the Leaguers,
in expelling the king of such an ancient race out of his imperial City, spread
abroad, there repaired unto the king two manner of people, to offer him their
help in the reuengement of such an injury, to wit, some Leaguers, which (seeing
that the Lorreins had proceeded so far as to attempt against his person and
state) now do change their mind, do pity their Prince so much abused under
color of Catholicisme. The Catholics both noble, ecclesiastical and commons,
the better and sounder part of them come in post to the King, exclaiming
against the Guyzes, and against their presumption, requiring the K. to take
punishment equal to the greatness of the offense, do counsel him to let alone
the King of Navarre and all the heretics, who never enterprised such a thing,
and to turn his forces against such notorious offenders. They prayed him to
ouergoe his grief, they proffer him their service, their lives, goods, and
means for the performance thereof.

The King despises not their good counsel and affection toward him, but being
bewitched by the sorcering of his mother, as is abouesaid, answers them
quietly, that he wanted neither courage nor force to revenge his private
injuries, says, that he will not kindle a new civil war in his realm,
thanketh them, and sends them home, intending already reconsiliation with the
Leaguers. It is said before how the Leaguers and the Parisiens leagued with
them, perceauing that the missing of the King might turn to their shame and
undoing, tried to justify their actions by letters,

It is said also, that in the mean time by the means of his mother, they
extinguished that Nemesis, which is in great Princes, and turned it into
pusillanimity: and how be showed some tokens of that baseness of heart in his
speeches with them of his court of Parliament.

Now the Leaguers perceiving by all these means, that the Kings heat was
cooled, and more inclined unto impunitie, which he calls clemency, then unto
punishment and revenge: Before they enter into treaty of peace, they go about
to temper him somewhat better yet, by a form of petition: and to give some
authority to the same, they borrow both the person, and the name of the
Cardinal of Bourbon, whose authority from the beginning they had made a
covering of their negotiation and conspiracies.

This Cardinal being one of the first Princes of the blood, was not ignorant
long time before, of all these co^motions, and of the old hatred which they of
the house of Guyze have borne to the Princes, friends, and servants, of the
house of Bourbon, and that in seeking the decay and fall of the^ they procured
also his own: But through a certain unhappiness, he had suffered himself to be
possessed and handled by them of the contrary part, and following their
counsels, they had made always a buckler of him, considering his quality and
degree, which he has in that realm, as well among the Princes, as among the
priests. So that many of them to serve their turn did not fear, to affirm
that he was the eldest of the house of Bourbon, and that if need were, he was
capable of the succession to the Crown. This man therefore served much to
their faction: him they thrust forward for the negotiation and aduauncing of
their affairs, according to the occasions.

So that having determined to send a supplication to the King, to assuage his
displeasure, while they advise upon other ways, to entangle and entrap him yet
once more. They prepose the said Cardinal his name in the said petition, that
the greatness of his name (only of that faction of all the house of Bourbon)
may serve as a veil to the affections, of them who were more watchful in
handling of their affairs, the^ the said Cardinal was in the governing of his
own. They do present this supplication, in the name of the Cardinal of
Bourbon, and of the Masters of the Paris, and of the other Cities of their
confederacy. In this supplication they make a low coursie and al contemptious
capping, with an humble submission and protestation of their good wills, with
a proffer of their service, and of all that they have, for the defense of his
estate, and of the Catholic religion, so that the Duke of Guize may have the
leading of his forces and managing of their affairs.

Secondly, they charge the Duke Espernon and his brother, the Lord Valette, to
be favorers of the heretics, to have betrayed ye kings forces, in hindering
all good exploytes, to be done against the heretics, and the King of Navarre.
To have favored the army of the Germans in their retiring home, to have been
the cause by his counsel of the uproar happened of late at Paris. To have
wasted the Kings treasure, to be the author of all the disorde^ which is in
the government.

Thirdly, they purge themselves of any private inimitie, or affection toward
him in this accusation, and for proof of the foresaid offenses, do refer
themselves to the testimony of the Queen Mother, and of the officers of his
Crown, if it pleases him to examine them upon the said crimes, and give
them license to speak their minds with liberty.

Fourthly, they demand of him instantly with prayer to put the said Espernon
and Valette his brother, and their adherents, from his person and favor, and
to discharge them from all charges and gouernements which they have in the
Realm, and that the king will provide them of some small charges, of no
importance at all. They also do assure the King, that in so doing, he shall
greatly please the people, in delivering them as they say from that fear,
which they have conceived of the power of the said Espernon. These lets being
taken away, they require him to make war in Guienne, in his own person, to
whom they do promise their ready will, courage and assistance, against the
heretics, and in the mean time to appoint his mother to govern Paris.

Fifthly, they require that the Duke de Maine may have an army to go into
Daulphine, against them of the Religion, they tell him that he may make a
great booty of the spoil of Espernon and his brother, to maintain the war,
and that he will abolish all new subsidies and charges laid upon the people.

Sixthly, they do require that he will name a successor Catholic, fearing it
greatly to fall into the hands of them of the reformed Religion.

Seventhly, they of Paris (as partakers in this request) do feign and gloss
with the king, and pray him most humbly to believe them, that all which had
happened of late at Paris, was not that they thought to do him any harm, and
that it was done by their Magistrates, and that only they doubted least the
authors of the counsel (in bringing extraordinary forces

They feign themselves very sorry, that he went forth of their City in
displeasure and mistrust, praying him to give them leave to live in rest under
his obedience.

Last of all, they require that the Lord d'Ho be discharged hereafter, of his
charge which he had to command in the City, and that he will allow the
deposing of the Provost and Escheuins, and approve the new election which they
have made of others, and that hereafter it be lawful for the Citizens to
choose their own officers.

Also when it shall please him to return into the City, he will not bring
within twelve leagues thereof, any other forces beside his ordinary guards.
This supplication was presented to him the eight and twe^tith of May.

The King having received this suplication, answers it the nine and twentieth
of May at Chartres, wherein first he rehearses the zeal which he has to the
Catholic religion, the great and dangerous wars which he had done, the great
charges which he has been at for the same, the famous victories obtained by
him against them of the reformed religion: and how he has pacified the
troubles raised by the Leaguers, and united the Catholics, which were by the
Leaguers divided.

Secondly, he shows himself willing to put up all injuries, passed against
him in Paris, when the inhabitants shall behave themselves hereafter, as it
becomes them to do, and in so doing he proffereth them to preserve them in
their liberties, as his predecessors have done before him.

Thirdly, he wishes nothing more than that all the popish Princes, Lords, and
subjects may be reunited again to war against the King of Navarre.

Fourthly, he greatly desires the reformation of his Realm in all his parts:
and for because it is a public contagion, he supposes that it can not be well
done, without the assembly of the States, which he intends to assemble in the
town of Bloys the fifteeneth of August, where he promises to satisfy them in
warranting them from falling into the hands of the king of Navarre or any
other here^ick. As touching the complaints against the Duke Espernon he
promises to them justice therein.

It is said before, how the King after the retire of the Germans returning to
Paris, intending to make a voyage to Guienne against the King of Navarre with
all his forces, and in his proper person had prepared the way to do great
exployts, by sending forces unto Lauerdine Lieutenant of Niort, immediately
after the death of the Prince of Conde, and how the said Lord Lauerdine with
those forces seized upon the Isles of Marans, Cluseaulx, otherwise called
Blanchard, obtained the government of the said Island, where he determined to
settle himself: and after many extorsions, ransackings and robberies, done
(during and after the siege of Marans) to them of the reformed religion, who
had abandoned all things to save themselves at Rochel; he promised to himself
to fortify and keep well the said places, in hope shortly after to occupy
the whole government of Aunis, and to plague the inhabitants of Rochel.
Therefore he lodged there his regiment, which consisted of ten Ensigns, whom
he divided in the Forts of the Island: and to make war out right, he ordained
the Lord Tremblay to be in garrison there with a company of forty light
horses.

He caused great store of white Corslets and new Pikes to be brought thither
out of Paris, to arm his garrisons there. He sends Commissioners to the
Parishes round about, even to them which lie next to Rochel, to have a number
of Pyoners, to gather Subsidies and Tallages, and to bring them to Marans.

He prepared a number of Barks and boats for to hold the Sea, and to seize
upon the I Will of The, by the intelligences which he had with the Lord S. Luke
of Browage.

He caused the Corn and Wine to be taken up through the Farms of the
government of Rochel, and took many prisoners. To be short, speaking very
big, he omitted no point of hostility, hoping to make there a second
Browage, and a Blockhouse to famish Rochel.

The King of Navarre did bear with him: and having spied his counsel, during
the space of two months and a half, the said King having on a sudden
assembled certain companies of footmen and horsemen, and made all things
ready, the 24. of June entered the Island at Charron nigh to Marans over the
bridges, which he had caused to be made in diverse places. In this Island were
holden by the enemy the Forts of Charron and Brault, wherein were four score
Soldiers harquebusiers, commanded by Captain Chautery, he besieged the Fort
of Brault, as the nearest of greater importance and more defendable by the
enemy, whose loss drew after it the loss of Charron. He drew by the
channel of Seure two ships set in readiness to batter it: but at night it was
surrendered, their lives safe: notwithstanding, of courtesy he granted both to
the Captain and Soldiers their swords: and immediately they of Charron
surrendered themselves likewise, being in number twenty of the best Soldiers
of the Regiment.

The 25. day he caused a bridge to be made upon the channel of Brune,
approaching still to the I Will of Marans, and went himself to view the fort
Clouzie, and a certain house fortified by the enemy, called the house of
Clouzie, nigh the meetings of two channels which do wash the said house
Marans, distant one from the other about six score paces, and beyond the said
channel between the two forts a new fort was builded, for to let the casting
of the bridge, if any should be made. This new fort was in the sight of the
two forts, to wit, the fort of Clouzie, and the house of Clouzie, whereof is
spoken of before.

All things well viewed, the said King concluded to attempt upon these fortes:
the rest of the day passed away in shooting certain volleys of Ordinance upon
those fortes out of the ships, and in certain light skirmishes. In the
evening the said King caused the ships to go down the water to the Island
Charron, to take from the enemy the suspicion of the thing which he determined
to do the day following.

The 26. day being the Lords day, about three a clock, he came with few of his
men before Clouzie, made his bridges sure, aduauncing forward, his Gabions
prepared the bridge to be cast between the two forts, searched the places
where they might enter into Marans, causes his ships to approach into that
place, where they were the day before, putting his regimentes in battle array,
placing them in the same order that they should march, and also his footmen to
sustain the enemy at the entering of the Island, and to serve for such occasions
as might rise, he being himself in person the foremost to see with the eye what
should be needeful to be done. The morning passed away in such exercises, and
in the mean while the enemy did what he could to keep him off.

At 11. a clock, prayers and singing of Psalms unto God being ended throughout
all his regimentes and troops of horsemen, after he had appointed every man
what they should do, he began to force the passage, kept by a company of the
regiment of the Lord Cluseaulx, and with the company of light horses of the
Lord Tremblay, flanked on ye one side with the fort Clouzie, and on the other
side by the house Clousie, which was (as is aforesaid) fortified and in front
defended by the third fort, and a trench in the middle.

Upon the right hand of the house of Clousy marched the master of the Camp
Preaulx, who had slyded with his troops into the reeds, to pass over the
channel in a place known, and yet not without danger and the Captain Ferrand
with him: he took also with him the Captains Lomeau and Need into the same
reeds.

A little behind was the Baron Salignak with his regiment to give the scalado
to the said house.

Right against the house of Clouzie, four captains with their Soldiers
thosen out of the regiment of the Lord Granuile, did advance the Gabions upon
the bank of the channel, and behind their Gabions were in Rochel at the right
hand of the said Gabions, right against the meeting of the two channels: the
said Lord Granuile with thirty armed men did push forward the said bridge,
they were covered from the gunshot of the fort Clousy by the Captain Valley of
Rochel with a great number of targets of proof, and behind them (who did push
the bridge) marched the rest of the regiment with the troops of The, conducted
by captain Planch.

At the lift hand going toward Clousy (to occupy the enemy) all along the
channel marched the new and old gardes of the King of Navarre, conducted by
the Captains Port and Vignoles, and the Harquebuziers on horseback of the
Lord Peujas, who were al lighted of their horse with Captain Limalle.

The horsemen were behind the footmen, the troop of the Lord Peujas behind the
regiment of the Lord Granuile, and the companies of The, which followed the
bridge.

The main forces of the King of Navarre, commanded by the Prince of Soissons,
were a hundred paces and more behind, but a little more advanced upon the lift
hand.

The enemies seeing the Kings forces in that array, and that they had bowed
their knees on the ground to make their prayers to God before they went to the
battle, and calling to remembrance the prayers which were made at Coutras, did
fall into such a fear, as they began to cry, they pray, they will beat us as
they did at Coutras: and beginning to waver, on a sudden fled away in great
disorder.

Here is to be noted, that had it not been for the fault committed through
hastines in casting the bridge in a place where the channel was forked, whereas
it should have been cast below the meeting of two channels, they had been
followed with such violence, that they had been cut to pieces before they could
have come to Marans.

It is not to be forgotten, that the King of Navarre at the same hour caused
the regiments of his gardes of Charbonieres, and Soubran, conducted by the Lord
Mignonuile, Marshall of the camp, to take pains for to wade overthwart the
Marshes in the water to the knee, more then a League, and defeated a part of
the enemy, whom they met in their retyring.

The Fort of Clousy, seeing the disaray of their fellows, rendered immediately:
at discretion therein were fourscore men commanded by Captain Serre, who
were all saved; the enemies partly made their retire in great haste to Marans,
and partly fled another way.

In the town where it was thought that some resistance would have been made,
was such a maze, that there was found no body.

Many of the forces of the King of Navarre, not staying for the setting on of
the bridge, both a foot and horseback, cast themselves in the water.

The Lord Cluseaulx, who did dine at Marans whilst the King of Navarre did
force the passage, hearing of the flight of his men, as well with them which
had remained within the town, as with them who had retired from the guard of
the passage, with the Lord Tremblay, few of the company fled into the Castle,
because there was no other way nor place to flee to.

The first which entered into Marans were the gardes of the King of Navarre,
followed at hand with the rest of the army, as fast as they could pass over
at Clousy.

At the same instant, the enemies were besieged in the Castle, the quarters
parted to every regiment, and at evening every one was lodged upon the
Castle ditch. The King of Navarre followed them at hand with his maine forces,
and lodged that same night at Marans.

The same day were summoned all these forts following, fortified with Garrisons
of the enemy. The Fort Boysneuf, where commanded the Lieutenant of Captain
Serre, with thirty men with him, who yielded. Also the Fort Brune, wherein
were threescore men, commanded by Captain Camart, who yielded also: The Fort
Allowette, holden with twenty men, commanded by the Lieutenant of Captain
Roque, all yielded with their lives safe. There rested in all the Island that
day, being the six and twenty of June, to recover from the hand of the
enemy, but the Castle, the Forts Bastile and Paulee, situated upon the other
entries into the Island. The prudence of the K. of Navarre is not to be
forgotten, that before he assaulted the Island, he placed the Lord Trimouille,
with all his light horsemen, and the companies of the Lord Orges, Plassak, and
Arambure, within the town of Saint Ihan of Liuersay, in the high way from
Niort, to Marans, that the enemy might not receive succor through the
Bastile. The Lord Trimouille had made a Fort in two days, between Saint Ihan
of Liuersay and Bastile, to cut from them which were therein, all means to
escape away, and hope of succor.

The monday on the seven and twenty of June, the Captain and Soldiers of
the said Bastile, seeing that all the means to avoid, were cut off from them,
did yield, and went forth with like conditions as their fellows had done the
day before, being in number fourscore and ten, commanded by Captain Chapel.

The eight and twenty, the King of Navarre, with two canons, and two
Culuerines, began to approach, and in the midst of the day, put them in place
of battery. The Lord Clermont there did command: that night there were
certain motions of Parley.

The nine and twenty, about three a clock in the morning, when the besieged
saw that the King of Navarre went to work in good earnest, they Riuiere, to
require conditions of the King of Navarre. At length the composition was
concluded, that the Captains and Gentlemen should go forth with their horses
and corselets, and the soldiers with their swords, that the rest of their
armor should remain within the Castle. The master of the camp, the Lord
Tremblay, the Captains Maron and Toure should remain in the hands of the King
of Navarre, to deliver him the colors, to wit, eight Ensigns (for two
companies had none) and the Cornet.

The agreement was carefully kept, the King himself conducted them part of the
way, they were not iniuried so much as one word, although the Lord Cluseaulx
had great enemies.

The same day, Captain Roque rendered the Fort Paulee, with the same
conditions, that the Castle was yielded up: the Lord Lauerdine sending word
that he could not rescue them, for because the Lord Boulay was lodged on that
side.

The King of Navarre kept Cluseaulx prisoner, who was brought with great
solemnity into Rochel, where he was kept prisoner a long time, having lisence
(notwithstanding) to go where he would, under custody of certain Soldiers:
he was better used then many did expect: at length he was delivered, and among
other, upon this condition, never more to join himself to the League.

The King of Navarre also sends all the armor which there was taken, in
great stoare, with the colors to Rochel there were taken also: many fair
horses.

So in the space of four days, he recovered all the Isles and Forts of Maran,
and did rid all that quarter of the filthy sink of the Leaguers, where he did
show no less courtesy to his enemies, then valor and diligence in the
repressing of them.

It is said before, how that after the accursed and execrable rebellion, and
insolency of the Leaguers in Paris, they perceauing the foul and dangerous
error which they had committed, in missing of the Kings person, and that he
was now safe enough from falling into their hands again, which might redound
to their utter undoing, they sent three manner of spyalls to him, to view his
countenance, to sound the thoughts of his heart, by the way of sorrowing and
excusing the desperate fact attempted against his sacred person in Paris. It is
said also, how they sent a supplication unto him, therein faining a submission
full of snares, and unreasonable demaundes.

It is said also, how upon the rumor spread abroad throughout all the realm,
his faithful servants of all callinges and degrees moved with anger

Now again many of the Kings subjects of all qualityes and degrees do repair
a fresh unto the King, most instantly to require him not to suffer such a
damnable treason of the Guyzes and their confederats let go unpunished, but
that punishment be executed upon such offenders in such sort as is fit for the
greeuousnes of the offense: they do promise him again all aid and succor, if
he will resolve himself to seek the means of revenge, and let the heretics
alone for a time.

The King whom Gods justice did urge and pursue for the hardness of his heart, in
so obstinating himself against the Gospel and other offenses,

The Leaguers now understanding by their spials the pusillanimity of the King,
and his inclination to some composition and peace with them, though
disaduantagious, by his slender and fearful answer to their unreasonable
demands in their supplication, do now conceive a good hope, not only to amend
the former fault, but also to make themselves a way more plain and easier then
ever they had before, to perform shortly their enterprises. And as they have
had recourse always to the Q. Mother, by whose means they have found a
present remedy in all faults committed, and offenses given to the King: but
now yt at their request she had besotted him by her sorceries, she must make
an end of her good work begun. This accursed woman has been the dishonor of
womankinde, the subversion of the whole kingdom, the slaughter of the
nobility, the butcher of the commons, and the undoing of her own children.

The Leaguers then having such an intercessor, who under color of a motherly
counsel, will bring them nearer to execute their rage upon the Kings person,
and to usurp his estate, do send this old Medea to make a negotiation for
them, as much to their advantage as she can. Therefore that they may strip the
King clean out of authority, they do thrust in their demaundes, the articles
concluded at Nancy spoken of before. She must urge the Kings consent to these
articles following: for which intent she went to Nemours, a town in Gastinois.

In these demands they would feign make the King believe, how all that they
do is for the preservation of the popish religion, and that they desire
greatly a reunion of the Catholics, whereof he should be the head.

First, they do demand that all generally shall promise and swear, to employ
their persons, goods, and means, for the conservation and defense,

They shall swear also the rooting out of heresy, and do require provision
to be taken, that no heretic Prince, or suspected of heresy, or favorer of
heretics, may enjoy the Crown, whatsoever right he may pretend thereunto: and
that this may be confirmed by an oath of all men. Also that the king shall
swear to defend the Leaguers (who do call themselves Princes) against the
heretics and their favorers.

By this artcile they will exclude (if they may) all the Princes of the house
of Bourbon, whom they will easily find either heretics, or favorers Note.
of heretics.

Secondly, they demand, that it may please him to swear to the observation of
those demands, and that he will permit in their custody the towns and
Cities which are granted them, during six years: and that in all other towns
which shall join themselves to the Leaguers, nothing be innouated, and that
they may not be punished for any offense or rebellion committed.

Furthermore, they do demand that if during the six years, there should
happen any vocation of governors and Captains, in the said towns and
Cities, that then the Leaguers may name such as they think good, and that the
king shall stablish such at their request.

This is to dispossess the king of his holds, towns and cities, and therein to
place such as shall be at their devotion, whom they may trust. Note.


Thirdly, they do require the publishing of the council of Trent, and the
observing of the same, and that the King shall forsake his aliance which he
has with princes and nations, heretics, and that he shall give over the
protection of certain towns known to be the receptacle of heretics.

By these they mean, the Germans, the kings of Denmark and Scotland, Note.
the Queen of England, the cantons of Swissers, the towns of Geneua, Sedan,
and Iamets. that of one side he might be destitute of friends to defend him
against his enemies, and that the one of these Cities might be the more easily
subdued by the Duke of Sauoy, and the other two by the Duke of Lorreine.

Last of al, that the goods and lands of the heretics be sold, and to employ
the money to make war against the heretics, but specially to maintain one
army in Poytow, under the conduct of the Duke of Guyze, and the other in
Daulphine conducted by his brother the Duke de Maine.

The king knew very well (except he had been talpacoecior) yt these articles
were against the duty of faithful subjects: and that of the princes mentioned
in the said articles, there was but one, to wit, the Cardinal of Bourbon, and
that all the others being strangers, did handle him cunningly at

As for the nomination of governors and captains in the said towns, which
they would have to be reformed to them, to place therein such as they would
think good; he understood well, that in plain terms they meant to abridg yt
small store of authority which they had left him, and to make him their
inferior: He saw well enough, that the degraduatio^, and disheriting of the
lawful Princes from the succession of the crown, under the color of heresy,
or favoring of heretics, was but a mean to put the Crown upon their own
heads.

Also, that to break the aliances which he had with the foreign Princes and
nations whom they called heretics, was a thing no less unjust, than
pernicious to his estate, whom by such means, they wrapped into a heap of
new troubles, and that such a demand was arrogantly to command their King and
Sovereign.

To be short, the king knew very well, that in all these things they sought but
the easier way to their greatness, and the means to debase his authority, and
to hasten the fall of his estate. Yet as a man bereft of wit, destitute of
wisdom and courage, and bewitched with the pernicious and poisoned counsels
of Circe, his execrable and accursed mother, without considering any thing the
greatness of the offense of the leaguers, and the innocence of the party
condemned, he granted the Edict of reunion, patched by the hammering and
tinkering of his mother and the Leaguers, in the town of Nemours, where they
had assembled themselves, bearing date the one and twentieth of July.

This Edict was made according to the former demands and articles of Nancy,
spoken of before.

Here it may be asked, how the King knowing the secret thoughts and drif^s of
the Guizes and other Leaguers, by long experience and observation of their
behauiours, by the admonitions given him by men of all degrees both strangers
and subjects, by their attempts and actions so often times achieved, by their
unjust, pernicious, unreasonable, unseemly and irreuerent demands so
oftentimes proposed, and his faithful subjects urging him with earnest prayers
to seek the remedying and revenge of these injuries: why did he not hearken
unto them, and pursued them with strong hand, if they had refused to answer to
his justice; which thing to do Machiauell, whose philosophy he had hardly
studied by the counsel of his godles mother, and of some villainous scullions
Italians which were about her, he supposed that he could be revenged better by
craftiness and surprising of them, then by force. He watched for the occasions
how to handle them in such wise as he handled them of the reformed religion at
S. Bartholomew, and so with one banquet to have rid his hands of his enemies,
and recovered his authority, state and quietness. And so refusing the lawful
means by the which God gives salvation unto Kings, his own counsel turned
to his own shame, confusion and dishonor. Do ye therefore that which is
righteous, ye Kings and Judges of the earth, and kiss the son least ye
perish out of the way. The king therefore hoping to bestow a S. Bartholmews
breakfast upon them, was content to take any thing at their hands. This
agreement concluded, caused an exceeding great joy to all the conspirators, who
thought it to be no small cunning of theirs thus easily to have avoided the
deserved punishment of their mutiny and rebellion: for which cause they of
their confederacy do carry their heads higher then ever they did, their
courage does double, and heat kindle against them of the reformed religion
without comparison far more then before.

Thereupon two mighty Armies are appointed to be sent, the one into Guienne,
the other into Daulphine, compounded of the Kings and Leaguers forces,
dreadful and terrible not only to the reformed Churches of France, but also to
the Nations round about. The Duke of Sauoy (one of the conspiracy of the
League) mustered a mighty Army that should invade the Marquizat of Saluces,
to enter into Daulphine, to join his forces with the League. The Towns and
Cities great and small, according to the edict of reunion, do show themselves
ready and willing to bestow gold, silver, goods, favors, armours and lives to
further the affairs of the Leaguers. All these things were much, but they were
nothing to the great preparation of war, and the invincible Armado which was
not only in a readiness, but also sailing forward to the execution of this
conspiracy against the Church of God, they go to work by land and by water.
For this nauall Army builded in Spain, was thought sufficient to conquer many
Realms: the ships were of incomparable bigness, in number so many that they
covered the seas. The most excellent Carpenters, cunning men, and finest
workmen of all Europe, had spent their wits and seven or eight years in the
building and preparing of the said Army: The Artillery, powder, pellets,
munitions, tacklings, and other necessary things, for so dreadful an army,
was a heap of things incredible to believe.

All Italy, Venice, Sicil, Sardinia, Malta, and other Islands, subject or
confederated to the King of Spain, had brought to it their counsel, their
money, their ships, their Captains, their armor, their pylots, and all that
ever they could devise: so that Xerxes did never so much against Grecia, as
this Armado determined to do to England and to France, in passing by.

As for France, the Spanyard made his account, to be already vanquished and
subdued under his power, having already these mighty armies above said, and
the conspiracy of the League on his side. As for England, they thought they
should have a little to do in conquering it, as they had indeed, though they
had much a do on the narrow Seas, nigh the coast of England.

On the other side, the Duke of Parma had a mighty army in the Low Country,
wherewith at the same time, to invade the Countries of Holand and Zeland, and
others where they have the exercise of the reformed religion, so that they had
already swallowed in one morsel, by imagination all France, England,
Scotland, Zeland, and Holand: and for to make this great morsel go down
easily without choking, there was in the midst of France two armies, and
about France the Duke of Sauoy on the South, the Nauall army of Spain on the
West, and Parma on the North side.

The enemies of God made their full account, that there was no more hope to
outstand or ouerwaigh such heavy forces. They therefore breathing fire, blood,
and murder, do not only determine to reduce all that remained of the reformed
religion to fire and ashes, and to make hauock and waste of all things, but
also do promise themselves a beginning of an assured rest hereafter, and
infallible victories, and that this exployt being done, and this great morsel
swallowed, Germany, Denmark, Suisserland, and Geneua, other places would
follow, or else for fear of like handling would be reduced to the holy Church.

After this famous victory of the Leaguers was known through the realm, how
they had conquered the Kings heart and courage, the edict of the 21. of July
proclaimed and sworn in every town and City, where the crier durst venture;
Satan, the chiefest master and worker of all this game, stirred up false
Prophets in every place, to wit, the legions of Jesuits, Friars, Monks, and
Priests: these false Prophets ^an every where, a vision, a vision, I have seen
a vision; they bring into their pulpets, which have served them this long for
trumpets and drommes, to kindle sedition, rebellion and murder; they utter the
vision of their own hearts, bring forth diverse Prognostications and
Prophesies, for to animate these fiery courages of the Leaguers and Catholics,
reunited together; they do handle so their visions, that they do promise an
infallible good, and prosperous success. But specially they (by their spirits
of divination) show their great

The fear of these thunderclaps was great every where, the forces in number
and furniture were inequall: therefore in France, many not considering that God
may defend his people, as well with few as with many, and that he has Legions
of Angels to fight at his commandment, for the defense of his Elect, yielded
to the time, and revolted, made their abiuration, and followed the world.

The Duke of Guize was the Northen Star, by the which, all this Navigations was
guided, so that it was perceived, that neither all this preparation and stoare,
neither the Prophesies and visions of the rauing Prophets, could assure the
happy success, except the Duke of Guize might be in court, nigh the Kings
elbow. Therefore the Q. Mother she must be set to work, she with other
Leaguers, which were about the Kings person, tell what a great wise man the
Duke of Guize was, and that he could not be well without such a counselor,
having such great weighty things in hand. The King thought it was a dangerous
thing to have such a guest so nigh him, yet supposing that it would be the
nearest way to surprise him, and that at some occasion he might rid his hands
of that perilous burden, consented thereto.

All caueats and provisions which the providence of man could devise for his
safety, being provided and made sure, he purposes to depart out of Paris to
go to the court.

He took in his company the Q. Mother, and reigning with a great train of the
inhabitants of Paris: the Lords Byron and Neuers, who had been always with the
King (the one as a faithful servant to the King, the other as a secret
favorer of the League) went to meet the said Duke.

At his coming to the Kings presence, what welcomes, what complainings, what
excuses, what prayers, what promises, what greetings, and what dissimulations
there was between them, to wit, the King and Guize, every man of judgment may
consider.

The Duke of Guize caused his table of great master of France, to be
established, and good and assured means for the maintenance thereof; he
obtained also a patent of great Master of men of war in France (which is a
^imini^iue title of Constable) for an earnest, and in hope shortly to have all.

And whereas in the request presented to the King, it was demanded that he
should be the Kings General of that army, which should be sent into Guienne.
Now he does recant, and upon the push does refuse to take Loyre without a
broaken skin, which thing he loved not: the second cause was, that he would not
go far from the King, and from Paris there to be at hand, upon all occasions
to take opportunity to execute his enterprise.

In his room therefore the Duke of Neuers is appointed to conduct the army
into Guienne against the King of Navarre, he makes his excuse (fearing the
whip as the other did) of his indisposition, and offers to mainetaine one
hundred Gentlemen, so that he might be excused, which charge, notwithstanding
at length he accepted.

The wisest sort feared in general, that this wound could not be closed up and
healed, without some foul scarre remaining, or that he who had once presumed
to beat his Prince out of his imperial city, should not want audacity to
attempt further matters.

All these vprores being now pacifyed, and all these great preparations urged
with great courage, they of the reformed religion all ready proscript, all
things threatening death and desolation by land and by water, a parliament of
the States is appointed by the King to be holden at Bloys the 15. day of August
next following, there to determine upon the affairs of the land according to
the said edict of reunion, and not otherwise, and about the reformation of the
State: but specially for the disheneriting of the Princes of the blood, that
they should not succeed to the Crown. In this Parliament the King and the
Duke of Guyze had diverse and contrary meanings, and neither of them both did
intend to do the things above said, touching the affairs of the land, and
reformation of the State.

But the Kings purpose was, that now (having recovered as he thought part of
his authority) he might bridle his domestical enemy, to wit, the Duke of
Guyze, whose practices and attempts had been so evidently showed to the eye of
all men, against his person and estate, and there either to have had him
condemned and executed by the full assembly of the states, or else by
surprising to have dispatched him out of the way, as he at length performed.

The Dukes meaning was, either to exclude the King from all government, or else
to have condemned him by the authority of all the states, or if opportunity
might serve, to do him away by some violence, and after to have tried how to
bring his intent to pass.

Every one of them therefore having his contrary thoughts in his mind, yet they
in common do prepare all things for this assembly of the Parliament, they make
the overthrow of the King of Navarre, and the rasing of the Blockhouse of
Rochel (as they term it) very easy.

While they keep this great adoo, and replenish the world with cruel
threatenings, and are in hand both by land and by water, to advance the treasons
of the Leaguers, which cannot be done without the rooting out of the true
Religion. Therefore it is assaulted on the South side by the Dukes of Sauoy and
Main, with two mighty armies on the West, by the omnipotent Armado; on the
North, by all the forces of ye low Countries; in the middle of France, by the
Duke of Neuers with a mighty army: behold, God who holds the stearne of the
whole world does produce events all contrary unto those which men had promised
to themselves.

For in the mean time God does execute his dreadful judgments against the
invincible (as they did call them) but in deed barbarous and savage nation of
Spaniards, partly beating them out of the narrow Seas with a notable slaughter
and shame of them, by that nation which they had so deadly hated for the
Gospel, and so arrogantly despised: and partly God sent his messengers, the
wind, storm and tempest, with the rocks in their ways, that by shipwreck,
thirst, famine, and pestilence, and other calamities of the Sea, they might be
drowned in an everlasting oblivion, like Pharao, his horses and horsemen.

In August the Kings writtes are sent into all provinces and cities to

Here (Christian Reader) we may see Gods judgments, calling this great King
as it were by steps, to a miserable and shameful fall for his unthankfulness. He
has forsaken one part of his subjects, and that the best part, though not the
greatest in number, holds them for enemies, and will have none of their
counsel: and by the self same means has opened a door to weaken himself in
his Parliament, and committed his person into the hands of them that were
assembled to dispossess him out of his kingdom, either by murder or by
captiaitie, making the way plain before his enemies, to rule the matter as
they would without controulement.

Now we will leave the King, with all his courtand train, with his Leaguers,
to go (soft and fair for fear of sweating too much) to ^loys, there to take
order for their Processions, Massing* and other solemnities. And used by men of
that religion, and there to stay for the arriving of the deputies, while we do
see what things had happened in other places.

While (and after) the Edict of reunion was a casting in July, and the Navarre,
and with him them of the Religion.

The said king of Navarre of his part did make himself ready upon the
defensive, grounded upon all his reasons, propounded often times by his
declarations, and upon the grieves and injuries proffered unto him, and unto
them of the religion.

It is said before how the Lord Colombieres had brought certain companies out
of Normandy unto the King of Navarre, and in June before had seized upon the
town of Montagne. This was a town belonging to the Prince of Conde, which had
been miserably defaced in the former civil wars. The wall and the castle
being one of the strongest places in all that country, had been beaten down.
But the ruin of the town was not so great, but within few days it was
reasonably repaired, and made defensible, by the said Lord Colombieres, and
other Captains with him.

The companies of the said Lord Colombieres out of that town made daily long
roades and courses toward Nantes, and against other places holden by the
papists, whereby daily they greatly molested them.

After the Edict of reunion, Duke Mercure, governor of Britain, and others of
the country who did hold with the League, but specially they of Nants, who
could not away with such neighbors, gathered certain regiments of the
Leaguers, to make certain roades into the low Poytow, as well to let the
enterprises of the king of Navarre there, as to prepare the way to that army
which should follow shortly after, under the conduct of the Duke of Neuers, but
specially intending to lay the siege before Montagne, to get that place out of
the hand of them of the religion.

The Duke Mercure therefore with as great forces as he was able to make, went
in person to lay siege before the said Montagne, about the eight of August, and
lodged the regiment of Gersay at Saint George. And sending from thence to view
the town, a hot skirmish was begone against them of the town, in the
presence of the said Mercure, who stood in battle array with two hundred horses
on the side of Barrillery, so called, because there they make barrels, tubbes,
and such like stuff.

They within the town at the discovering of the enemy, issued so furiously,
and did so beat them back, that many men and horses remained slain upon the
place, among whom were some of the guards of Mercure, who seeing that it was so
hard for him to lodge his men of war in ye suburb of Saint Jamets, as he had
determined to do, sent them again to their lodgings at Saint George. As for
himself, in the evening he retired to Elison, having sent down the river
Loyre from Nantes, three double cannons pont Rosseau, which is a town situated
on the fall of the river Seuie into Loyre.

The King of Navarre aduertized of Mercures invasion into Poytow, gathered such
forces as he could, and upon some other occasions also, departed out of Rochel
the ninth of August, accompanied with a hundred horses only, and the
harquebusiers of his gardes: and taking his journey toward Loyre, went that day
to lodge at Lusson.

The Duke Mercure being lodged at Clisson, the tenth day of August understood
that the King of Navarre was gone forth out of Rochel, and upon the shadow of
his own fear he persuaded himself that it is to raise up the siege of
Montagne; so that having represented unto himself the accustomed diligence of
the King of Navarre in his exployts of war, he imagines to see him already:
whereupon he determined to retire before he had planted his siege, and returned
to Nantes the 11. of August, two days before the coming of the King of
Navarre: he left the regiment of Gersay to make the retire, and lodged the 12.
day at Mounieres, a town situated upon the river Seure.

The King of Navarre at his departure from Lusson, went to lodge at Bourneueau,
where the Lord Boulay with his company of armed men well appointed, and a
company of harquebusiers on horseback, commanded by Captain Need joined to
him.

From Bourneueau the King went to lodge at Essars, where he was advertised that
the Duke Mercure was departed and retired to Nantes, and that the regiment of
Gersay was lodged at Mounieres.

These news did cause him to dislodge the day following very early, least he
should lose the occasion to overtake that regiment: he went through the Town
of Montagne with much toil, and there took the garrison commanded by Luzerne
eldest son to the Lord Colombieres, and with extreme diligence in a little
space of time came to the river Seure, which he passed over speedily on foord:
there he found that the regiment was parted from Mounieres, purposing to retire
to Pilmil Suburb of Nantes.

The garrison of Montagne being forerunners to the said King, followed with
diligence, and ouertooke them in a way hollow and covered, very aduantagious
for the enemy, by reason of three little houses wherein they had put men to
flancke them. There the skirmish did continue about half an hour, until the
said King of Navarre had arrived with all his companies, at whose coming the
enemy was discouraged, began to faint and flee away in disaray, and there was
wholly overthrown.

The King of Navarre took to mercy as many as were taken prisoners to the
number of four hundred and fifty, and suffered none to be killed but such as
were slain in the battle: The master of the Camp Gersay, saved himself by
flight, by the means of a fair Ienet of Spain, yet hurt with Pilmil suburb
of Nantes.

The King (after giving of thanks upon that place where the skirmish was
fought, for that prosperous success and victory) made a light dinner under a
tree, and after retired to his lodging at S. Georges, where he soiourned the
whole day following, for the long days journey which he had made the day
before: notwithstanding, that day he went a hawking for Partridges, and in the
evening viewed the town of Montagne, to take order for the fortifications and
garrisons of the said town, and purposed to have laid the siege to the town
Clisson not far thence.

The King being yet at S. George, was strengthened with four regiments of
footmen, to wit, of Charbonieres, Sallignak, Preau, and the regiment of his
gardes, commanded by the Lord Querine: there also he received the light
horsemen of the Lord Trimouille, who had discomfited the regiment of Lestele,
and taken four Ensigns, which they presented unto the said King.

The self same day being aduertized of the danger wherein the Duke Espernon
stood within the Town of Engolesme, besieged there within the Castle by a
conspiracy of the Leaguers, caused him to give over his enterprise upon
Clisson, and the day following being the 15. of August, departed from Saint
George, purposing to make toward Engolesme, to succor the said Lord Espernon:
but hearing by the way, how the tumult there was pacified, went not so far as
that place.

It is said before, how that the Leaguers in their request presented unto the
King, made a great complaint against the Duke Espernon, charging him to have
intelligences with the King of Navarre, and them of the religion, to have been
the cause that their armies had heretofore small success, and that if he
should grow to greater authority, it were danger that in time he would deliver
the places of his government to the King of Navarre; that he is the only
cause, that the politic state is so corrupt, and out of frame, and therefore
the King must needs put him from about his person and favor.

This Lord Espernon of the ancient house of Valette, grew in great favor with
the King, through his faithful service, a man altogether sold to popery, yet a
lover of the Kings person, crown and state, a lover of the realm and peace of
the same, a hater of conspirators and perturbers of the quietness of the King
and his subjects, who never could be drawn to the conspiracies of the
Leaguers, neither by fair promises nor other means whatsoever, which thing
was the cause that the Leaguers hated him, as the only man about the Kings
person, who did hinder the execution ^f their enterprises: that man therefore
must not be about the King, nor be admitted

The King to give place to their hatred for a time, and to avoid the
inconveniences, which through ye malice of his enemies, might befall to such a
trusty servant, determined to send him out of their sight, and where he
thought that they should be least able to practice against him. And giving him
a very great power and commission in a most ample manner, to command in the
Provinces of Aniou, Toureyne, Poytow, Engomoyes, and Xainctonge, commanded him
to depart the Court, about the same time that the edict of reunion was made by
the Leaguers: who having soiourned a while in the Tower of Loches, situated in
Toureyne, upon the river Under, which falls into Loyre, between Tours and
Samure, to fortify and assure the said place to the Kings obedience, against
the practices of certain Gentlemen of the League, made against that place.
From thence he took his journey to Engolesme; where he understood that many
enterprises were a working by the League against the Kings service. There
commanded the Lord Tageus his kinseman, under the charge of the Lord Valette
his brother.

The said Lord Espernon arriving at Engolesme, accompanied with a great
number of the nobility, was honorably received by the Mayor and Aldermen of
the City, by the officers of justice and policy, with great numbers of
people, who went to meet him at the gates of the City; he was likewise
received by the Bishop and his Priests, at the door of Saint Peter's Church,
where they sung solemnly, a great te Deum laudamus, in the worship of him.

Not long after, the said Lord Espernon called together the Bishop and his
Priests, the Mayor and the Escheuins, the Kings officers and other chief
Citizens, to give them notice of the occasions of his coming, which was first
to preserve them all in the Catholic Roman religion, for the which, and for
the Kings service he would willingly adventure his life against all manner of
men. Exhorting them to advise what was requisite for their conservation, and
that they would propound the same unto him.

All answered with one consent, that they would dye under his authority in the
same resolution, and for to testify their wills the better, they would have
his authority from the King, printed, read, and published (as the manner is)
through all the town.

The said Lord having many companies both of horsemen and footmen, yet would he
innouate nothing, not so much as to change any part of the garrison of the
City: and to testify unto them more apparently of the confidence, which he
had in the promises and fidelity of them, he would not lodge in any stronger
place (nor more aduantagious for his preservation) but in the Castle, which is
called the Kings house: wherein he found his Cousin the Lord Tageus lodged, as
the governors heretofore had accustomed Tageus there. He went the same day
into the Citadell, wherein he commanded the Lord Bordes, with all the nobility
which accompanied him, and could even then have lodged there, if he had had any
diffidence of the inhabitants: for the keys were presented to him by the Lord
Bordes. That Fortress was sufficient to have bridled the inhabitants,
considering the strength and great store of Munitions of the said place, as
well in Ordinance as in other necessary things. But specially having a gate to
get out of the town, whereby may be let in as many men as one would. But the
said Lord in steed of mistrust kept an open house, as well for the nobility of
the country, as for the inhabitants of the city, without any respect of
persons, whereof a great number (but specially the Mayor of the town with his
conspiratours) sat ordinarily at his table, with great curtesy and welcome
showed unto them by the said L. Espernon.

He walked familiarly with them through the city and suburbs with a small
company of his, without any other care then to confer lovingly with them
about the necessary things for the preservation of their Cittye.

The Mayor had in his possession all the keys of the City, the inhabitants
made their accustomed watches, and by halfes, with two companies which were
under the commandment of the Lord Bordes, whereof the most part were
inhabitants of the City.

Upon request made unto him by the Mayor and Aldermen, concerning the
necessary fortifications for the safety and increasing of their City, the
said Lord promised to lend them to that effect such a sum of money as they
should think good. And to advance the work, the said Lord commanded the
Mayor, and the Lieutenant Nesmond to make the project, by the counsel of
Captain Ramel, son of Augustine, master of the Kings works.

In the mean while the said Lord caused the edict of reunion to be published
in the City, and according to the same did prepare to war against them of the
religion, to let them from gathering subsidies and tallages, and to repress
their courses: and furthermore, had made an enterprise against one of their
best places. And for a beginning of ye performance of these things, had
commanded his cousin the Lord Tageus to take with him all the companies of his
light horses, and the companyes of the Lords Sobelle, and Cadilan, with all the
footmen, and troops which he had brought with him.

And besides all this, for to win the hearts of the inhabitants, he caused
every day all sorts of public exercises of Romish popery to be done in all

For the war defensive and offensive against them of the religion, he
obmitted no means he had, no indsturie, nor diligence.

For his pastimes, he would go every day (without mistrust of any man) to the
Tenis court, situated in one of the furthest parts of the city. Every morning
he would get upon his horses himself, to exercise them in the sight of great
assembly of people, with a very small company of his men about him.

It is said how the King (to convey the Lord Espernon, his trusty and faithful
servant out of the ielousies and dangers of the Leaguers) ha^ sent him into
Guyenne, to keep such towns there as did waver, into his obedience.

The town of Engolesme was above all the towns of that Country inclyning to
the League, so disposed by many Gentlemen therabouts, who were leagued and
devoted to the Duke of Guyze. The Duke Espernon (as it is said) went thither to
make it sure to the kings obedience.

The news coming to the town of the determination of the said Duke, the
accomplices of the conspiracy of the League considering that neither to admit
him, nor to exclude him was a safe way for them, considering that the King
might recover the town at all times by the citadel, which was kept by the L.
Bordes, a faithful servant to his Prince, did immediately send one (who was ye
Majors brother to the court) to know by the Oracle of the Leaguers, what was to
be done in such a doubtful matter.

The Duke of Guyze with his counsel, to wit, his brother, the Cardinal, and
the Archbishop of Lions, did sit upon the death of the Duke of Espernon, they
did condemn him to die. They answered to their partakers, to admit him, and
bid him welcome: but to rid him out of the way, if it can be done by any
means, the revenge they need not to fear, for they are in good hope that the
master shall follow him shortly, and if not, yet they will find out some shift
to excuse the matter, and will find him guilty of his own death, else they
will so work, that the King shall have little leisure to think upon the
revenge. They writ also to their accomplices, gentlemen of the country, as to
Mere, Massilieres, Maqueuile, Boucheaulx, to the Baron Tonnerak, Caze, and
Fleurak. They caused also Vileroy the Kings Secretary, to write his letters to
the Lord Aubeterre, to repair to the Mayor of Engolesme with all his power, at
such time as they should have warning by the said Mayor: in the mean while
they expect the Oracle of the Leaguers, the Duke Espernon is lulled a sleep,
and cast into a dangerous security, by the Mayor and the rest of the
conspiratours, they make him believe that they love him as their own soul: by
the which dissimulation, he vnarmeth himself, sends his forces abroad

At length Souchet (long desired) comes from the court, gives the answer
that Espernon must die by all means possible, bids them to put aside all
fear of revenge for the causes before showed. Now then it must be executed out
of hand before the return of the Lord Tageus, with the Dukes forces, for then
shall they not be able to put in execution yt judgment, having any forces
about him: or else because he will go forth to war against the heretics,
according to his deliberation.

The tenth day of August the Lord Espernon very early got him on horsbacke to
go to his ordinary exercises, with few of the nobility with him. The mayor
with certain of the inhabitants of the city were all that morning with him.
The said Lord lighting down of his horse, embraced the Mayor, and with great
curtesy asked him whether hedelighted in horses. Thence the said Lord returned
to his lodging, and went into his closet to change his shirt, intending to go
devoutly to Mass in the Chapel of Saint Laurence, in the church of Saint
Cibert, where his Almoner had prepared all the tools ready to finish that
mystical play: this was about 7. a clock.

The Mayor on the other side with his accomplices (who were gone to see his
riding, only to spy what strength he had about him) went home, to put on his
armor, to charge his pistol, to take order about nine of the clock that the
toxin should be rung, and to appoint at the same time certain firebrands of
sedition to go about the streates, crying, that the Hugon^ts had seized upon
the Castle.

The Mayor also did craftily entice the Lord Bordes, governor of the Citadell
into his house, under color to discover him a certain enterprise against the
king, and when he had him in his house kept him as prisoner.

Between eight and nine a clock, the Lord Espernon being in his closet, and
knowing that the Abbot of Elbeue, and the Lord Mariuault, were in the next
wardrobe, staying there to accompany him to Mass, sends a Page to call them
to him into the Closet, which when they had done he ^hewed them a place in a
book sent him from Paris, full of defamations against the honor and
authority of the King, lamenting the unbridled license of this age: he
prays them also to sit by him, to understand out of his own mouth, his
resolution and platform of war against them of the religion, as soon as the
Lord Tageus could return from this exployte, whom he would leave there for
the preservation of the City.

Behold (Christian Reader) this noble man endued with good gifts, raised up to
high degree, sent out of the danger of his enemies, to keep the kings subjects
in peace and justice, unthankful of Gods good graces, do meditate how to
turn that power, wisdom, and graces received of

For as they concluded upon the resolution of this war, which he purposed
against the Children of God, the Abbot of Elbeu sitting next unto the door of
the closet, heard the sound of a pistol shot within the wardrobe, and some
crying, kill, kill. At this alarm the said Abbot ran first to the door nigh
the closet, where he found the Aulmoner of ye said Duke, who had rushed in, and
had shut up the door, and thought it had neither lock nor boult, but held the
said door with his back, very pale and frighted: The Abbot enquiring what it
was, speak softly said the Aulmoner, there be armed men which seek to kill my
Lord.

At the same instant, the said Lord Espernon, the Lord Mariuault, and the
Abbot, heard two other pistolls shot in the same wardrobe, with many voices,
crying, kill, kill, and coming to the said door, cried, yield my Lord, for
you are but a dead man.

The Abbot and Mariuault then counseled the said Espernon, to keep within the
closet where was a second door, very narrow and hard to get in. At the same
time, the Toxin began to ring in all Churches of the City, and they of the
faction ran into the streates, crying, that the Hugonets had surprised the
Castle, and willing all men to run to succor it, according to the
instructions given by the Mayor. These tokens being given, the people ran on
every side to their weapons, and went toward the Castle, they lodge themselves
in the house next to the Castle.

The Mayor that morning intending to bring to an end their conspiracy, had
persuaded them of his faction, but especially 40. or 50. of the vilest and most
desperate persons of all the City, that his brother in law Southct came from
the Court, and had brought with him an express commandment from the King,
both by letters and word of mouth, to seize upon the person of the said Lord
Espernon, dead or alive, and to assure the city: some of them he had appointed
to run through the city, and to give the alarm, as is before said: some should
seize upon the gates of the Castle, when he should have entered the said
Castle; and some should go with him to execute this murder. This vile
traitor then head of the conspiracy, entered first armed into the Castle,
through the great gate, having two men booted with him, which as he said were
Purseuants, whom he brought to speak with the Duke, and followed with ten men,
going up into the hall, and passing through it, saluted the Lord Couplieres,
who sat upon a table, and thence passing through the Lord Espernon his chamber,
went as far as the wardroabe, supposing there to find him, and there to
execute his damnable conspiracy, there he met with on Raphael Gyrolamy, a
Gentleman Florentine, Rouillard and Segnencio, Secretaries, and one Sorline,
the Aubine, one of the Kings Magistrates in the Court of Engolesme, who was
expressly come to advertise the Lord Espernon, that there was some practice
against him in the town, and there he stayed for his coming forth, to do
his message. The Mayor therefore entered as is said, first of all armed with a
Corselet, into the wardrobe, with a Pistol in his hand ready charged, and the
cock down, came to Sorline first, who set his hand to his sword, and did hurt
the Mayor a little on the head.

Another man (great and strong) with a Pistol set upon Raphael, who immediately
taking him by the collar, cast him down upon the ground, and with his sword
wounded him, as he did three more, as they have confessed after, and beat them
out of the chamber, crying still, my Lord is not here: but being wounded with a
Pistol, he fell down, and then they made an end of him with their swords. The
others who were in the wardrobe, saved themselves as they could. Sorline
running into the kitchen, gave the alarm to the cooks, who ran with their
broaches: but the conspirators being in the hall, and hearing the noise in the
kitchen, stopped the way out of yt kitche^ into the hall. In the mean time
while these things were doing within the wardrobe by the Mayor, his partakers
went about (as they had received instructions aforehand of the Mayor) to seize
upon the great gate of the Castle, for to bring in the people, who were
already in armor: but they were let by some Gentlemen, who were in the Court
of the Castle, staying there for the Lord Espernon his coming forth.

The first were the Lords Ambleuille, Beaurepayre, Sobelle, and others: in
defending of the said gate, the Lord Beaurepayre was slain with the stroke of
a Halbeard, the Provost Baretes likewise, and one of the gardes, the Lord
Clauery was hurt: certain Gentlemen entered into the said gate, before it was
shut up, as Captain Baron Artiges, the County Brune, brother in law to the
Duke Espernon, the Lords Goas, Mirane, Cost, Emars, and others.

They believed then that the Lord Espernon was dead, so that being astonished and
looked one upon another, they knew not what to do, nor in whom to trust,
until that the Lords Ambleuille, Myran, Sobelle, and Emars, acknowledging one
another, and giving hands with promise, to dye together, gathered as well
Gentlemen as Soldiers of the guard close together, and ran to the Chamber
door of the Lord Espernon, through the which the conspiratours would have gone
forth, to seize upon the tower of the Castle, but they were let by the
Gentlemen and gardes, who wounded the Mayor through the door, where of he fell
down, they shot also against the residue of the conspiratours, with these
threatenings, you shall dye traitors. Seguencio the Secretary, whom they
detayned prisoner, reported Espernon, the Abbot Elbeu, and the Lord Marinault,
who understanding the voice of Sobelle, went forth of the closet with Pistolls
and swords in hand.

The conspirators were enforced to save themselves in that Chamber nigh the
great tower, to ye which no man could go but by a pair of stairs so narrow,
that but one man alone might pass: there were none armed, neither the Lord
Espernon, nor any of his were at all; which thing caused them to stay their
going up.

At the same instant a maidseruant advertised the Lord Espernon, that the
Majors brother with a number of armed men, did enter into the castle through a
hole in the wall on the side of the Curtine. The said Lord Espernon ran
thither, who found already the Majors brother entered with another, which both
were slain there, and a guard was put at the place.

At the same time, the accomplices of the conspiracy, and among others the
foresaid Souchet, the Majors brother in law, who had come lately from the
Court, with some other gentlemen of the country, seeing that they could not
fire the first gate, where they found resistance (as is said before) ran to
another gate of the Castle with fire to burn it, preparing also gi^s to break
it up. But the Lord Espernon with fifteen of his men, whom he had gathered
together, ran also to the said gate, to defend and fortify it with earth,
stones, boords, and such like, leaving his guard to keep the door of the
chamber where the conspirators were locked up, the which endeavored themselves
to issue forth, but notwithstanding were repulsed by the said gardes and the
Lord Espernon himself, who having divided his gardes upon the entries into the
Castle, went too and fro as need required, and where he judged his presence
necessary; so that resorting to the foresaid door, he killed one of the said
conspiratours with his own hand, as he went about to issue forth. The
inhabitants in the mean time did bestow their shot freely upon the chambers
of the Castle, because they were so great and wide, and because the inhabitants
had seized upon the next houses, and among others, upon the house nearest to
the Castle, called the Queens house.

The diligence of the Lord Espernon, and other gentlemen which accompanied him
was such, that within two hours they assured themselves of the Castle: so that
it had been hard for the gentlemen and others who were within the Town, to
force it without Canon.

The labor bestowed in fighting, fortifying, and breaking the staiers of the
chambers, and in fiering the narrow staiers which went up the chamber

The L. Esperno^ desirous to make the gentlemen which were with him to drink,
there was found in all the house but four flagons of wine, which were brought
in that morning for his breakfast: there was no water at all, and very small
store of bread, for the inhabitants had seized upon the well which was in the
other court, and also the way to go to it; which thing did greatly trouble
them that were besieged, the space of two days and a half that they were
enclosed therein. But the discommoditie was little in comparison of the
constant resolution which they took, rather to dye then yield themselves unto
that sedicious multitude.

It is said before, how the Mayor before he began to execute his enterprise,
had by false surmises entised the Lord Bordes, governor of the Citadell, to
come to his house, making him believe that he would discover him some great
practice against the King; whom when he had in his hands he kept prisoner in
his house.

This thing did greatly amaze the Lord Espernon that he heard not the Citadell
play against the City: the cause was, that when the fray was begun at the
Castle, immediately men appointed by the Mayor, brought the said Bordes before
the Citadell, to cause the Lieutenant to surrender it, or else to stay him from
discharging the Ordinance against the town, which in case he should do it,
they threatened to kill the said Lord Bordes. The Lieutenant desirous to save
the life of the said Lord Bordes, promised to do their request, and so kept
promise with them. The Lord Espernon ignorant of all these things, was greatly
dismayed, fearing least the Citadell had been in the hands of the conspirators,
or else had favored them. The conspirators closed up in the high chamber of the
Castle, did affirm the same, and when they were summoned to render themselves,
they answered that it was for the said Lord Espernon and his to yield, and that
they should quickly see the Canon of the Citadell before the Castle.

There was an other mischaunce that happened. The Lady Espernon before the
co^motion began, was gone to Mass to the Dominican friars. When the alarm was
given, she went about to go forth to get the citadel over her head, believing
that they were Hugonets that had attempted against yt town; she was lead by ye
arms by 2. gentlemen to wit, Seguency (not the secretary, but an other of that
name) and Pial: she was arrested prisoner, and her two Gentlemen slain by
these two Catholics, within the Church door, not permitting the Priest to
make an end of his iuggling game. They took also many Gentlemen, among whom
were the Lords Curee, Mesme, Blere, and Captain Ramel, the Baron Coze, and
many others of all degrees, of the train of the said Lord Espernon.

The Lords Curee and Mesme, went about to get into the Castle, but Haultclerie
(a man of that country of great estimation) with much adoo saved their lives.

Captain Ramel fell into the same danger of the people, in going about to get
into the castle, by the Curtine of the town wall, but he saved himself by
taking the Bishops house.

In the midst of all these discommodities, the Lord Espernon sends a Lackie
to the Lord Tageus, who was at Xainctes with all his horsemen, to make haste to
succor him. The Lacky was let down the wall of the Park joining to the
Castle, but he was incontinently taken by the inhabitants. Notwithstanding the
Lord Tageus was aduertized of the commotion by two Gentlemen, who in a good
hour went forth of the town to go on to hunting, who hearing the Toxin, did
gallop unto the gate of the Citadell, where they caused immediately all the
bread and provision which was in the subburb to be brought in, and the self
same day at night came to Xainctes, to warn the Lord Tageus of that commotion.

The people in the mean while continued in their rage, assisted and conducted
by diverse gentlemen of the country, who were of the league, among whom was one
(brought up in the house of Guyze) Messeliere Makuole, and Boucheaulx, and
others, who two hours after the commotion summoned the Lord Espernon by a
drum to yield, and to deliver the place into their hands, promising him and
his life and baggage safe.

That proffer he disdayned, and gave them no other answer, but that he would
within few hours make them change their language. They threatened also the Lady
Espernon (if she would not persuade her husband to yield) to make her serve for
a gabion, or else to stabb her. She answered them, that if they would bring her
before the Castle, she would persuade him to the contrary: and that she did
hope one day to have reason of the insolences of the said Mere, who did
proffer her such speeches.

The Lord Espernon had but eight Harquebusiers of his guard, they never shot
without killing or hurting some one or other; so that there were killed by
them. 25. or thirty persons: but this was their evil luck, that they had no
powder with them but that which they found in their flasks. One of the
conspirators who was shut up in the Castle, with linen cloth cut in length,
and knotted in the ends in stead of a coarde, was let down into to the Castle
ditche, and aduertized the inhabitants, how that his fellows were ready almost
to be stifled with fire, or quelled with the fall of the house, which could not
be avoided, except they were very shortly rescued. That moved the Parents to
induce the other Mayor, named Bourgoyne, to go to the Castle to parley.

The Abbot Elbeu and the Lord Ambleuille spoke with him through a Espernon had
forgiven, and that easily he might be moved to pardon the people also which
had been abused. And that it they should go further in their enterprise, and
assault any more the Castle, the Lord Espernon would stay them all.
Furthermore, they offer themselves to make means for the people with the said
Lord Espernon.

They which were shut up being no more able to endure, yielded unto the Lord
Espernon upon his faith, which he kept to them inviolable. The Mayor at the
time of his yielding, was gaping for life, and within a while after dyed in the
castle of the wounds which he had received.

The Lord Espernon caused his prisoners to write to them of the town in what
danger they were of their lives, if they should any more assault the Castle.
Whereupon the inhabitants required the Mayor Bourgoyne to return to the Duke
Espernon in the behalf of them, that he would send the Abbot and the Lord
Ambleuille to them, to entreat of peace. The Lord Ambleuille would not forsake
the Duke Espernon. The Abbot preffered himself so that they would give
hostages. They of the town gave the Kings procurator, who entered into the
Castle by a ladder, by the which the Abbot came down into the town.

The Abbot at the first trenches, found Mere and Messeliere, two Gentlemen,
fir^ts of the sedition: accompanied with a multitude of people who would have
treated with him: but the Abbot would not, saying, that he would go to treat
with the seneschall in the house of the Lord Argence, who was an old
Gentleman, and of honor, who also had promised all friendship to the Lord
Espernon.

Being conducted thither, all the officers and chief of the City, with much
people, resorted to the place. The Abbot showed them the enormitie of their
of^ence, so to attempt against such an officer of the Crown, a good Catholic
and faithful servant to the King, that they had made themselves guilty of high
treason.

He showed them also the Majors treasons, whereof they had made themselves
rash ex^cutioners under a forged color of the Kings commandment. He spoke
unto the officers, the nobility, and people, to every one s^nerally, and before
all showing them their fault and their duty: and concluded that by such kind of
dealing they put themselves in great hazard of the Hugonets, their common
enemies. He so much affected, that they were divided among themselves, and
found in the end that the kings officers; the cheifest of the city, and the
most apparent of the nobility were not at all privy nor consenting in the
beginning to the Majors conspiracy, who had only assured himself of forty or
fifty the vple^^ sor^ for the execution Hugonets.

The common people (induced by Mere) showed themselves void of all capacity, of
reason, and intractable. Many speeches and reasonings passed in this
conference, the people fell to mutiny again, and bidding the Abbot to make
short, proffered him like conditions as before. The Abbot cut them short, and
assured them that the day following after noone, the Lord Espernon should give
them the law.

The seditious Leagued Mere, whom we have said to have been brought up in the
house of Guyze, the school of treasons and seditions, did heat the people by
an assured promise, which he made to them of an infallible succor of the Lord
of Aubeterre, who as he said was at hand: to whom also the Lord Vileroy, the
Kings secretary, had written to that effect.

The Abbot departing thence, went (not without pain and danger) to visit the
Lady Espernon, and commended her unto a company of gentlemen, who were
assembled there, and protested revenge against them, which should proffer her
injury.

That being done, he returned to the castle, having nether s^ene the L.
Bordes, nor any other of the gentlemen which were detayned prisoners in the
Town.

The morrow after being the twelfth day of August, the alarm was given in the
Town by the Drum and Toxin, and as well the gentlemen, the people, the
Leagued, and others who were not of the conspiracy, were enforced to take
armor to go to the breach, which they prepared and hoped to make in a weak
place of the Castle wall, defended neither with any window, nor otherwise
flanked. Some small opening being made, the people presented themselves, where
they were received: and there was flayne the Lord Fleurak, one of the Leaguers.

About three a clock in the morning, the people heard the trompets of the
light horsemen of the Lord Espernon, which made them believe that succou^ was
not far. This assuaged much their fury, and on the contrary encouraged much
the soldiers of the Citadell (which hitherto had done nothing) so that they
let flee many shot of Harquebuzes, and certain voleyes of Canon against the
City. The Lord Espernon having commanded them so to do from the top of the
high tower of the Castle.

At this new thundering from the Citadell, they of the Town began to waver,
and to draw on again to parley, and do desire that the Abbot would return,
and that they would harken to the propositions of the said Lord Espernon.

The Abbot calling to remembrance the danger past, makes some difficulty to
go forth again. But at length the Lord Espernon writes, and Argence.

As they were all ready there to sign the agreement, behold a new commotion of
the people, who will not compound: the reason was the arryuing into the town
of the Baron of Tonnerak, with diverse gentlemen of the League, also of captain
Caze Marshall of the lodgings of the L. Aubeterre, who do assure them, that the
said Lord of Aubeterre will come with succor to them the next day morning,
with three hundred horsemen, and five hundred footmen.

The Abbot by these occasions was enforced to get him to the castle again with
greater danger then at the first, by reason of the raging of this Leagued
people. For they brought him by force before the Citadell, to forbid the
Soldiers to discharge the ordinance against the town: which thing
notwithstanding in a while after they continued to do, because that the people
assaulted the castle continually upon a vain hope, incited by those leagued
gentlemen newly come.

The chiefest officers of the King, and Bourgeses of the City, having duly
considered in the Bishops house, the danger wherein their city stood, if so
many strangers on every side should come in, joined themselves with the
cheifest Gentlemen against the rest who were stubburne. They sent again 2. of
the chiefest Bourgeses to the Lord Espernon, to beseech him that it may please
him that the Lord Tageus his kinsman newly arrived in the Suburbs with his
companies, might sign and seal the agreement, to the which they added only,
that they who were detayned prisoners in the castle, should be comprised
therein and set at liberty, according to the faith which he had given them,
promising of their part to do the like to them, whom they did detayne, and all
that which had been taken in the houses should be restored.

The Lord Espernon granting unto them their demand, sent again the Abbot,
who went forth with them of the town to the Lord Tageus, to make him seal the
composition, which was done about four a clock in the evening.

Within a while after the trenches were broken, the people went away, the Lady
Espernon was conducted by the said Abbot into the castle, with all the
prisoners detayned in the town.

The Lord Bordes entered the Citadell, the conspiratours, and Majors fellows,
who were prisoners in the castle were set at liberty.

Mere with his accomplices went forth out of the town and retired into their
houses, under the conduct of the Lord Maumont captain of light horses.

The dead on both sides were quietly buried, and namely the Mayor, whose corpse
with the corpse of his brother, were freely delivered to their friends to be
buried.

When the agreement was concluded, it was nine and thirty hours that neither
the Lord Espernon nor any of his, had eat nor dronk. There was no more powder
for the shot: he had determined the night following to issue forth upon the
enemies for to seize upon the well, he also looked that night to be rescued by
his men: to be short, by the singular goodness of God he escaped a perilous
snare of the Leaguers and a marvelous great danger, for the which to avoid,
he showed himself both valiant and watchful, and if he would be thankful
to God for so great deliverance, and consider from whence, and for what cause
these blows came, he should do the part of a right noble man.

About the self same time that these things were done at Engol^sme against the
Duke Espernon, the Lord Autragues, governor of Orleans, sent to the King, to
protest obedience, with excuse that the things which he had done in favor of
the League, had been for none other cause, then for zeal of the Catholic
religion: but perceiving that the chief Leaguers passed further then he
thought, he wholly does renounce and detest y^ League, and upon that
protestation he was received in favor by the King.

Whilst the King, after he had sent his writtes to the Provinces, Towns, and
Cities, to make thoyse of their deputies, men of wisdom, discretion, and
lovers of peace, to send with speed to the States, preparing all things to
resort with a soft pace to Bloys, to the States.

It is said also, how the Leaguers perverted all things, suborned all the most
vile and accursed traitors, that could be picked out in all France.

It is said also, how least that execrable company might be spied or crossed,
they had obtained by the edict of reunion, that none of the reformed religion,
or suspected to favor the same, and that none of the Princes of the blood
should be admitted to that house, least they should be spyed when they
should go about to make process against their lawful King, and natural
Prince.

The King considering the shortness of the time, reiourned his estates, until
the beginning of October, following whatsoever other causes did move him so to
do. But toward the latter end of September, he and his mother accompanied with
the Duke of Guize, with all their train, arrived at Bloys.

The Princes of Monpensier, County, and Soyssons, did appear at Bloys: and for
because the Prince County had joined himself to the army of the Germans the
year before, his company was greatly suspected, and many of his friends, went
about to persuade him to send to the Pope for an absolution: but in that
following the counsel of his best friends and servants, he did it no^. The
Prince of Soyssons had already obtained a Bull Renuoy for his absolution to
the Legate of Venise, who was also at the States: he made great difficulties in
the matter, so that they of the assembly had once resolved to require the King,
not to suffer the said Prince to be admitted, but at length it was found good
to stay their suit for that time.

Whilst these things above said do pass so diversely in sundry places, the
great and mighty army appointed for Daulphine, under the leading of the Duke
d' Main, does march, and at length arrived in Liomoys, and there continued
long, daring not enter far into the Province of Daulphine, for fear of
scalding, but soiourned upon the borders between Liomoys, and Daulphine, as a
man that came only to see, whether he could make the heretics afraid, or not.

The King arrived at Bloys with all his train, makes ready all the
solemnities fit for that assembly, whilst the deputies and assigns of the
Provinces do make ready their instructions, and have to the place appointed.

The King having more trust in his subjects, then his subjects were to be
trusted of him, does expect honest, wise, and indifferent deputies, and such as
would seek only the good of the Common wealth. But the Duke of Guize had so
labored of long time, and so reduced the people, that there was almost no
city, town nor province in all France, but the accomplices of the Leaguers
(under color of zeal of religion) prevailed, in sending such as were
altogether factious and desirous of innouations, the Kings secret enemies, and
most false traitors to their king and country, hyding al their intended
treasons under the old gabardin of the Catholic religion.

These conspirators against God, their King and their Country, being come at
length from every part of the realm, the second day of October Savior, which
is in the court of the Castle unto the Temple, commonly called our Lady of
help in the Suburb Vienne, on the South side of the river Loyre.

There was in this procession great magnificencie and outward appearance of
devotion, but as little godliness and love as could be. The King, the Queens,
the Princes and Princesses, Lords and Ladies which were at the Court, and
generally all the people, as well strangers as inhabitants of that place, were
at it, there they offered unto their gods, which did stand gazing in their
temples, with great store of dissimulation and hippocrisie. They carried in
great pomp that Idol, which commonly they do call the corpus Domini, through
the streates, which were decked with tapistry, and other such things, as they
are accustomed to be done that day, which they call corpus Christi day.

In the said procession, the King with all the States, marched in this order
following. The foremost of all were the Frie^s, Monks, and Abbots, like a
swarm of Locusts: after them followed ye deputies of the third estates four
and four. They were followed of the nobility, and after them marched in
battle array, the deputies of the Clergy in long gowns, and square caps
only: next after them went the Archbishops, and Bishops with their rochets:
after the Bishops, went their God, otherwise called by the Prophet, Idolum
vastans, by some Corpus Domini, and by some Corpus Christi, and by some the
Sacrament of the Altar. It was the same God, by whom the King with all his
Lords and train did daily, and at every word swear by. That God was arrayed
in pure beaten Gold, and had been so beaten and turmoyled by the heretics,
these 27. years before, that he was gone so weak, that it could not go, but
was carried very demurely by the Bishop of Aix in Prouance, under a Canapie.
This Canapy could not go neither, no more then their God, but was carried by
four Knights of the holy Ghost: they sung continually so many gaudeamus, so
many salve fest a dies, and so many aleluia, and so many ora pro nobis, and so
many black sanctus, that it was too bad, and that with such melody, that a man
would have thought that all the Cuckoos of the spring, and all the Owls of
winter had met together, to try who could make the pretier noise.

The King followed that company, with the Queens and Princes, and other Lords
of the court. After they had walked their God through the streats to take air,
and to recreate him a little, having been kept so long in very straight and
close prison: at length in that order they came all to the Temple of our Lady
of help, where the Archbishop of Bourges iugled and charmed the Mass, played
with his God, as the Cat with the mouse, and at length eat him up. The Bishop
of Eureulx babled out a Sermon as well as he could: And that done, have with
you to good cheer.

This was such a painful journey to those ghostly fathers, but specially for
the Bishop of Aix, to carry all the way such a heavy fardell, that S.
Christopher was never more combred with his burden, than this pillar of the
holy Church was with his. They would do nothing all that week, but eat,
drink, sleep, and do worse, as these ghostly fathers can do that well.

The 9. day of October. the K. the Lords and deputies of ye three estats, were
housed together at the Friery of ye frantic francisca^ Friars. There they did
eat so much raw flesh, that the canibals of ye west Indies might have surfeted
with one half of that which was spent there. Blood they drank none, hoping
shortly to fill their bellies with the blood of Saints. Such as was the
beginning of this assembly, such was the end thereof,

As this was done to confirm the union and correspondence which was between
them, for performing of their enterprise: of which thing by the means of this
union every man conceived so good hope, that now they made no doubt but all
would go well.

This done, the K. delayed the proposition of the States to the sixteenth of
October, willing in the mean time the officers of the assembly in every order
to be chosen.

For the Priests in the absence of the Cardinal of Bourbon, and the Cardinal
of Guyze, the Archbishop of Bourges was chosen president. The County Brissak
and Mignade were chosen Presidents of the Nobility. The Provost of Paris was
for the third estate.

But the headlings of the League, had greater things in their brain than all
this: for they were day and night consulting how to make an end of all their
labors.

The sixteenth day of October all the deputies of the States being assembled in
the great Hall of the Castle, appointed to that use, their places taken
according to their order. The King followed, and accompanied with his court,
makes an Oration to the assembly, by a long and doubtful speech, painted with
diverse terms of sorrow: by the which he shows, that his mind carried a
remembrance of the injuries received by the Leaguers, from time to time, by
the which he co^playneth, his authority to have decayed, and unjustly to have
been debased.

And first proposes the things which ought to be done in that assembly, to
wit, the establishing of Popery, the rooting out of heresy, the setting of
good order in the government, the ease of his people, and restoring of his
authority, protesting that he is their lawful King, given to them of God, and
that he will not be, but that which he is, neither does he covet greater
authority or honor in this Realm than he ought to have.

He protests also of his great sorrow which he has felt in the miseries and
oppressions of his subjects, acknowledging the same to be procured by his and
their offenses in general.

Also he shows the care which he has had to take away the causes of the
said miseries, and how he has tried all the ways that ever he could d^uise,
and following the ancient manner of the Realm (accustomed in such a case) had
assembled his estates for that intent, but that he has been interrupted
always by new vprores, stirred up to hinder his good mind and purpose, and to
overthrow his good endeavors.

And also complayneth that to bring to pass these things, and to make his
labor in that behalf taken frustrate: they have perverted by false,

And last of all, he complayneth of the partialities and corruption of the
Deputies of provinces, exhorting them to assist his virtuous and royal
enterprises.

He protests of his zeal to popery, and good affection to Papists, which he
has testified by sundry benefytes most largely bestowed upon them, and by the
victoryes and conquests which he obtained against the heretics, being then but
a child, and that now being a man having more experience then ever he had, he
has also more will and courage, which he would have plainly showed in his
voyage to Guyen intended, to have been performed in his own person if the
League had not let him.

After these complaints and protestations, he gives the charge to the
assembly, that when they have conferred wisely and advisedly, about their
instrucions, they will specially show him the means how to reform and
repress swearing, and blasphemies, and corruptions, in bestowing
ecclesiastical livings; which he called simony, selling of offices, of
justice, which things he was about to reform, when the League rose up in
armor. Anno 1585.

He promises them, that hereafter he will make a better choice of men, in
providing them of dignities and offices.

He commends to them the careful provision for the advancement of learning,
crafts, and traffic, to seek for the means to cut off excess and waste, and
to pull down the excessive price of things.

He commends unto them the royal authority, and the ancient laws, for the
preservation of the same.

As for the fear which they have co^^eiued to fall hereafter, in the
government of an heretic Prince, as he has provided therefore already by his
Edict of preunion, so he pretends to make it in the next Session a
fundamental law of the Realm.

He wills them to provide for the ease of his subjects, for the reformation
of his revenues, tributes and treasury, so that consideration be had to the
entertaining of the royal dignity and public charges: promises for his part
to reform himself and his house, exhorts them to go faithfully about their
business.

And calling heaven and earth to witness, protests the faith of God and men,
that the fault shall not remain in him if the realm be not reformed, but in
them if they do abandon their lawful King in such an holy and laudable action.

Last of all, cites them to appear before the righteous Judge, who shall make
open their craft, hipocrisyes, and dissimulations, and punish their treachery
and unfaithfulness, in case they do not their duty in this matter.

The King having ended his ^peech, the Lord keeper of the Seals began, by the
Kings commandment, to open the matter, to be entreated

First, he exhorts the Priests to propound unto the people the word of God,
which says, he is living, full of efficacy, and more pearcing then a two edged
sword: and confirm the same in their hearts by virtuous life, showing that for
lack of doing these things, on their parts had issued out all the corruptions
and miseryes of the realm: but all these good speeches are aeren verberare,
laterem lauare, oleum and operam perdere.

Secondly, he directs his speech unto the nobility, showing them what their
duty was, how they should excel in all justice, goodness and godliness, and
specially to assist the king in obeying him in the execution of justice,
tantundem efficit.

He shows them the great and execrable swearing and blasphemies, to be much
used among them: wills them to follow the ancient manner of the nobility of
France, which was to swear in the word and faith of a gentleman, and that with
great reverence and circumspection: shows them the great mischiefs which do
proceed out of duels, fraies, or privy combats, abhorred in all ages of all
good christians, and that they should show themselves valiant in commanding
over their own affections.

Thirdly, he spoke unto the third estate, whereof the judges and ministers of
justice did hold the first room, and upon which all Monarchies, soueraignties
and powers are grounded and stablished. Shows the overthrow of the
distributive justice done by the delays, subtiltyes, disguysing of the truth,
and malicious interpretation of the law, which things commonly are done every
where, attributing all these faults partly unto particular coueteousnes of the
ministers of justice, partly to their ignorance and wicked life, partly to the
multiplicity of offices in the realm.

He shows the horrible faults committed in not observing the laws for the
punishment of swearers, blasphemers, players, unthrifts, usurers, unjust
purchassars, deceauers in selling, unclean persons, and such as do resort to
brothel houses, and such like vic^s. Wills them to consider the maintenance
of royal dignity, his charges and debtes: and last of all, to be careful to
preserve the Catholic religion.

The Priests, Nobility (for the most part) Deputies, Commissioners, and
Assigns of the Provinces appointed for that assembly, did harken to that
doubtful, yet wise and grave orations of the King, and Lord keeper, with a
merry countenance, as it seemed, but with a dissembling and treacherous heart. So
that they, who for his undoing and overthrow, were assembled and sworn, fed
him with fancies.

And first the Archbishop of Bourges does closly cover all the dissimulations
and traitrous thoughts of the Priests, with a low courtesy and Ulysses, and
Nestor: both he and the rest of his fellows do show themselves ready, not
only to kiss his foot, but also to run into his tail with their noses, if
it please him to give them leave gratia sit auribus.

He exhorts him to execute his charge, which (says he) is to persecute the
heretics, as he terms them, to establish popery, and with tooth and nail
to defend the holy Mother the church: (by holy Church, he means the swarms
of Masmonging Priests, and the legions of the Fryery and Monkery) which thing
if he does, he does not only promise him the long life of Argantonius and
Nestor, but also everlasting life: because belike the more blood of the Saints
he shall spill, (for that is to ^efend the church) the more he shall merit to
win heaven.

When the Archbishop had ended his flattering Oration, the Baron of Seuecy in
the name of the Nobility does awake the King of his sleep, blows the Trompet,
sounds the alarm, crying out upon heretics, set upon heretics, down with
heretics, strike, kill, murder, spoil, roo^ out heretics, restore the
church, ease the people, establish the realm in the first dignity and
brightness, proffereth to the King in that respect, and in the name of the
nobility, to expose all unto the last drop of their blood.

This being ended, the Provost of Paris, least he should seem to have neither
said nor done any thing, began in that kind of rhetoric which he was wont
to use among the seditious of Paris, when he sharpened them against the King,
at the last rebellion in May of the same year only, altering the name of
King, into the name of heretics. So that as there was that day many good words
cast away, without doing any good, so there was many cruel, bitter and
seditious words uttered in the Kings presence, to provoke him to cruelty and
slaughter, by it to lull him asleep, to cast him into security, to take away
from him all mistrust the more easily, and at some convenient to oppress him.

The 18. of October, the King came into the hall with the body of the States,
for the second session, where he began to say as follows.

Sirs, I have testified unto you, on Sunday last, the desire which I have
always to see, during my reign, all my faithful subjects reunited in the
true Catholic Romish religion, under that authority which it has pleased God
to give me over you: and having to the same effect made my edict of July last
past, that it might be holden for a fundamental law of this realm, to bind
both you and your posterity, to the intent that now the same may be confirmed
before me, as made by the common consent of you al, and that no man may pretend
ignorance of the nature and offspring of it, and that it may have the mark of a
fundamental law of the realm for ever; I will that this edict be now read
with a loud voice, and be known of all,

The King having ended his speech, commanded Ruze, one of his Secretaries of
estate, to read with a loud voice, the declaration which he had made the same
day, upon his edict of reunion.

Wherein he first shows his great and fervent desire, which he has had from
his youth, and the noble acts which he has done, for the rooting out of
heresy: also how he has used all gentle ways, to call the heretics to the
holy Church again.

But considering that all this would not serve, but only to make them more
obstinate, he does declare himself, to have made the edict of reunion, for an
irreuocable law of the realm, condemning already by this his declaration, all
such as will not swear nor obey the same, as guilty of high treason.

This declaration being read, then followed the edict of reunion by the same
Secretary, which being done, the Arshbishop of Bourges made a long exhortation
to the States, upon the solemn oath to be taken by the King, and required also
to be taken by his subjects, for the observing of the said edict.

This fair and learned sermon, about a naughty matter, and to cover their
dissembling heart.

First, did speak of the truth, and of lying, then showed the use of an oath,
the necessity, the form and qualities thereof.

Secondly, he speaks of the Church, which he says in some respect to be
visible, and in some respects invisible, and that it is gathered of diverse
nations and degrees of men, without acceptance and distinction of persons.

He says that it is called the Church of Rome, in none other sense, then that
it imbraceth the word of God, and true doctrine, which S. Peter there taught,
to the which all other Churches have united themselves, by a general and
universal consent: he says that the triumphant and militant Church, is but
one in effect. And that this Church is grounded only upon the stone, which is
Christ, the true foundation and head corner stone thereof, and that it has
sustained many assaults, which have not prevailed. He says also, that out of
that Church, there is nothing but death, and that he who will not hold the
same for his mother, cannot have God for his Father.

Out upon the heretic, ^^e upon foul heretics, so many words concerning Note.
the Church, so many heresies, or else they make great injury to the Hugonets,
whose death they do conspire here in this assembly, for holding I lictor,
colliga manus, caput obnubi^o, quadrupedem constringito, etc. Lo, the
omnipotent power that shauelings have, they can make heresy good doctrine, and
true doctrine heresy, when they list. These things being spoken by an
Archbishop, are no heresy: being spoken by another man, as Theodorus Beza, or
some other which they do not fancy, there will be picked out nineteen
heresies, a quarter and a half.

Thirdly, he shows what a great matter union is, but specially in the Church,
therefore he exhorts them, being of one faith, law, and belief, under one
Savior, in one and the same Church of one nation and tongue, to unite
themselves for the defense of the same holy Church.

Fourthly, he preuenteth by an objection, that whereof they may be charged,
saying, we (meaning the Priests) do not proclayme wa^re: no, no, (says he)
the Church does not thirst after blood, but we do desire them who are out of
the way, to return into the right way, and if they be obstinate, we do
desire that they may be cut off, as gangr^ned and putrified members.

See here godly Christian reader, what hypocrisy goes about to do: this
Bishop would feign see the Kings horses to swim in the blood of them Note.
of the reformed religion, and blows the trompet, gives the watch word to
the onset, under the color of reuniting the Catholics, yet he would not for
all the goods in the world, that men should think that it were done by his
approbation, consent and counsel, and therefore he says, that the holy Church
seeks not to spill blood, but that they that are in error may be converted
into the right way.

Now my Lord, shall I be so bold to speak one word to your Lordship: what
way will you follow to convert them from their error, as you say they are in?
my Lord Bishop will answer, that he will first show them their error, and
then teach them the certitude of his doctrine.

Then my good Lord (I pray you be not angry) why have you denied this way to
the King of Navarre, and to the reformed Churches of France, which only thing
they have desired?

When once you have followed that way, and have converted them of error, and
taught them a better way, if they show themselves obst^^at, cut them off as
rotten and gangrened members in deed.

But belike this is the method which you will follow against them, you will
draw a form of a^iuration, in the first part you will make them to abjure and
renounce that form of doctrine, which they say is grounded upon Gods word,
the infallable rule of verity; then you will lay down your fantasies and
traditions, flowing out of the dark illumination of your sic volo, sic iubeo.
I pray you (my good Lord) tell me whose voices be these?

But what if they will not take your sic volo, sic iubeo, for reasons which may
induce them to subscribe to your abiuration, and will not suffer themselves to
be cut off neither, being not conuincted of error, but stand to defend
themselves against an universal contumely, injury and violence? What will
you do?

My Lord Bishop hearing this news: what, will they neither believe us, neither
suffer themselves to be burned for our pleasures? Now all my Lords religion is
turned into madness; his zeal to rage; his authority to tyranny, and his
mildnes (that holy Church does not covet after blood) is turned to murder.

Then my Lord in his fury and in the trance of his heart he cries: Open the
Kings Arseuall, bring forth his Ordinance, gather together his men of arms
and footmen, and if need be the whole Realm, set upon them, kill them, slash
them, cut them, spoil them, murder them, and worse if you can. This is not to
war (quoth my Lord) no, no, holy Church thirsts not after blood.

But here is good play which I do offer you, seeing that you must needs to
war, there is in France many legions of devils of your hair, put on your
carnal armor, (for the spiritual armor you have lost long ago) let your
Myter serve you for an Helmet, your Rochets for Corslets, your Surplesses for
shirts of male, your Crosses for pikes, your Crosier staves for Lances, your
red roundaches which the Cardinals do wear upon their heads, for Targets;
your Holy water tassels for Clubbes; put on your Spectacles too, that you may
the better aim at your enemy; call upon all the he Saints and she Saints,
which the Popes have deified with thousands of Ora pro nobis; set you all in
battle array, be five against one, meet the heretics if you dare in y^ plain
open field. I advise you, though you be desperate enough, not to come within
their reach, least that with bastinadoes the pockes and the gowtes be wrong out
of your rotten boanes against your wills.

But to return to the purpose, he exhorts the States to unite themselves,
and to swear the foresaid edict: which speeches being ended, the King took
the word thus.

Sir, you have heard the contents of mine edict, and understand the quality of
the same, the greatness and worthiness of the oath which you be about now to
swear. And seeing that I perceive your just desires to agree with mine, I will
swear, and do swear before God in a good conscience, the observing of this
mine edict as long as God shall continue my life here,

Now by this, he in his own person and his subjects have sworn an immortal
war in his Realm, of which thing he commands an act to be made in
writing to serve for a perpetual remembrance of the fact. The act is such as
follows.

This day the 18. of October 1588. the King sitting at Bloys in the assembly
of his general states of his Realm, has sworn in his faith and word of a
King, to observe this present law in all that shall concern his Majesty.
Also the Lords, Cardinals of Bourbon, Vendosme, Princes of Soyssons and
Monpensier, Cardinals of Guize, Leuoncourt and Gundy, Dukes of Guize, Nemours,
Neuers and Retes, the Lord Keeper, and many other Lords, as well of his Counsel
as Commissioners of the three estates of his Realm, have sworn to keep and
entertain inviolable the said law, as well in their proper names, as in the
names of the Provinces which have sent them to the said assembly of the States.

This thing being done, the King testified the great desire which he had to
make an end of this assembly, and to provide for all his subjects upon their
just complaints and grieves: and for that end promised not to depart out of
Bloys, until the final end of the said estates: commanding likewise them of
that assembly, not to depart by any means: whereof they gave him most humble
thanks.

The assembly dismissed, the King, the Queens, Princes and Princesses,
Cardinals, Prelates, and other Lords, with all the deputies of the States went
to the Church S. Savior, there to sing te Deum, where they were always
accompanied with a general voice of the people, crying, God save the King;
showing an extreme joy and gladness for their own calamities and miseries
which they had sworn.

Now (good Christian Reader) consider well three things in this history, to see
Gods wrath, justice and mercy; the thing which they have done; the miseries
which have followed; and the gracious godnes of God in upholding the ruins and
miserable fall of that kingdom.

For first in this session, Gods wrath drawing them to work, to swear, and to
rejoice in their own dreadful destruction, they have degraded and disherited
the Princes of the most noble and ancientest family of the world, from that
inheritance and pre-eminence, which God, Nature, and Law had appointed unto
them: whose ancestors have governed that kingdom with justice and equity,
above thirteen hundred years: And France, within these threescore and ten
years, and the performance of this most unjust exheredation and degradation,
they have sworn to execute an oath more damnable than witchcraft, joining to
that injury the persecution of the true church of God. But O thou most
highest, raise up thy self, bruise them like a Potters vessel. What has
followed that execrable oath? First, the most wretched and infamous death of
the chiefest authors of this coniuring and witchcraft. Secondly, an universal
rebellion against him, who swear first and ministered the oath to others.

I am not a Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet, yet thus much I dare affirm,
grounded upon the nature of Gods justice, who says, that who shall do those
abominations shall die the death. That peace shall never be restored to France,
as long as there is one left alive of that damnable and accursed company, who
with that abomination have poluted the land, either in their mind have given
approbation unto that accursed execration and until the Lord has washed away
the polution of their execrable deed with their own blood.

Last of all, here we have to consider the Lords providence, in releeuing of
the afflicted States and tottering kingdoms, that he whom they had sworn
should not reign over them, him I say the Lord has set up, and annoyuted him
with the oil of grace and wisdom, and said that he shall reign over them,
that it may appear that his Scepter is of God. And whereas likewise they have
sworn the rooting out of Gods truth, the Lord will make it flourish under their
noses, and under the authority of him whom they have rejected.

Here also is another thing worthy to be noted, that the Lord in all ages, for
to restore peace, judgment, justice, and religion, in any decayed state, has
raised up Princes, endued with heroycall gifts and graces, called by the
ancients, Nemesis, and by the Prophet Psalm. 51. the principal spirit of force,
constancy, justice, wisdom, counsel, and godliness, by the which crooked
things are made straight, and all things reduced to their order. For as
fortitude in an hot and unwise nature is transformed into a barbarous cruelty
and rage, so the same being in a wise nature, governs the victory with mercy
and mild^nes, (...) ad benficentiam. The experience teaches us, that if God
had not given his principal spirit to this King now there reigning, to direct
the valiantnes of his courage and the prosperous success of his victories,
with clemency and mildenes, one fourth part of France by this day had been
reduced into a miserable wilderness.

But thou O great King, issued out of Noble race, gird thy loins with force
and might, go on still and follow the Lord, who goes before Valoys, and the
accursed snares of Sycophants, whom they have fostered and nourished in their
bosoms, by the blood of their subjects, and the fatnes of their people.

It is said before, how immediately after the making of ye edict of reunion,
Mercure out of Britayne, with certain companies invaded the low Poytow,
intending to lay the siege before Montagne, and how he was defeated and
overthrown by the King of Navarre: after which overthrow the said K. being
strengthened with new forces of the Lords Trimouille and Boulay, intended to
have rescued the Lord Espernon, who stood in great danger in Engolesme by a
conspiracy of the Leaguers: but understanding that the tumult there was
pacifyed, went to Rochel, where he appointed an assembly of the reformed
Churches of France, there to take advice by a general meeting, what they had
to do against the cruel (and never heard of) conspiracy of the King and the
Leaguers, who had sworn the utter subuertion and undoing of the King of
Navarre and reformed churches: he sends therefore in the month of September
his messengers into all Provinces of France, willing them to send their
commissioners and deputies to Rochel in November next.

The King of Navarre having done all necessary dispatches for that thing in ye
latter end of September, departed from Rochel, intending to lay the siege
before the castle of Beauuoyre, lying upon the Sea in the low Poytow, and
passing not far from Niort, some of his company advanced very nigh, upon
them that issued out of the town, not much further then their Suburbs. The Lord
Valette great provost of France, who always had followed the King of Navarre,
and a gentleman named Peray, set upon them and gave them a hot skirmish,
wherein the said Lord and gentleman were slain, fighting most valiantly.

The Lieutenant of the town being a most seditions Leaguer, with other of his
fellows, showed themselves no less then insole^t in committing great
indignities upon their dead bodies, whom they caused to be drawn through the
streets of Niort, by the common people.

From thence he took his journey toward the said Beauuoyre, as is said, a
Town and Castle upon the Sea, a place of great importance as well for the
situation as for the commodities thereof, because it holds the Isles about in
subjection: out of the which great revenues are received by reason of the salt
and other commodities. The King lodged his footmen in the Suburbs of Clisson.

There he received news, that certain regiments of footmen of the enemies had
passed Loyre at Saumure: which thing caused him to dislodge in great have, to
go to charge them, but the enemy being advertised thereof, repass^d the Loyre
before that he could come to them.

Therefore he took his way toward Nantes, and in the low Goleyn with all his
army. There the Lord Trimouille presented him the Captain Bonneueau, whom he
had discomfited and taken at Doway a walled town.

The said King went to lodge at Vretow, a little league from Pilmil Nantes, and
there passed his army upon the caulsies over the river Seure: the other part of
his army passed the said river by a Foord at Mounieres, and came to lodge at
Tousche Liuosiniere.

The morrow after, the fourth of October, he passed before the Castle of
Maschecow, which he viewed, the Marquis Belisle being within, did let fly a
shot of Culuerine.

Passing further with his companies of men of arms, his light horsemen and
Harquebuziers compassed the castle of Beauuoyre, wherein was in garrison a
company of footmen, who at the arriving of the King forsook the Town and
retired into the Castle. The Town being delivered to him, he left within the
town his Harquebusiers, and he with his troops went to lodge at Saint
Geruays, within half a league of Beauuoyre. There arrived unto him the Lords
Montluet and Plessis from Roch^l, with a fair company of nobility. After they
had embarked in the haven of Rochel, two canons, two culuerings, gabions, and
other munition of war, which they had conducted to Saint Gyles haven, distant
from Beauuoyre about seven leagues. But this furniture could not arrive at
Beauuoyre in fifteen days after the siege was begun, by reason of contrary
winds, and continual rain, with the discommodity of the ways, the country
being very moorish.

The soldiers were in the water to the mid leg, with other great
discommities: notwithstanding, they ceased not to make trenches unto the very
ditch, out of the which he drew great store of water: so that the platformes
being made, the Ordinance brought with much ado, being placed and leuelled, he
began the 21. of October to batter, and after 30. Canon shot, they who were
within seeing the forces prepared against them, did choose rather to prove the
clemency of the said King in yielding, then to stay a greater battery and the
extremity of an assault, which infallibly would be given them: therefore they
would parley and yield. The capitulation was such, that they should render
their Colors, should go forth with armor and baggage, but their match out.
They went forth about 53. persons, and were safely conducted to the Island
Bouing, whether they said they would retire.

The King of Navarre lost at that siege two Gentlemen, to wit, the Lord Drow,
one of his house, and one Villebeau, Captain of one of the companies of the
Lord Salignak.

The inhabitants of the Island Bouing had promised to the King of Navarre, (who
had used them very courteously) that they would suffer none

The Lord of Guize (though very busy at the States at Bloys) yet ceased not,
but as he was very busy to supplant the King at home, so was he very diligent
to provide for the affairs of war, and for to cross in this siege the King
of Navarre, if he could. He sent to the Duke Mercure the regiment of S. Paul,
the fairest and most dreadful of all the companies of the League.

The 22. of October and the morrow after the rendering of the Castle of
Beauuoyre, the inhabitants of the Island Bouing, against their promise, received
two of the fairest companies of the said regiment of S. Paul. But they had not
so soon entered into the Island, but that immediately they took such dreadful
fear, that without any shame they sent a Drum to the said king, to beseech
him to give them safe conduct to retire into a place of safety. They had some
reason so to do, for the fear of his sword put them in a fearful
apprehension. For he had so provided that they were at his mercy, having sent
his nauall army to a place called Collet, above Bourgneuf of The, which was
the place where of force they must needs pass by. But the accustomed
clemency of that Prince sustained and eased the fear of these two companies,
who trusted that he would be no less favorable to them, then he has
accustomably been unto others, who did submit themselves unto him. Whereof they
themselves (among many other examples) are and ought to be hereafter
witnesses: for although he might have cut them in pieces, yet of his good will
(leaving a mark of heroical humanity unto the posterity) he gave them their
lives and armor, with a pasport for their safe return, so that they should
retire the self same day.

He forgave also the Island men, who had falsified their faith, and had rendered
themselves worthy of sharp punishment. This clemency to them showed did so
touch them, that they have remained ever since most faithful, being otherwise
most devoted and addicted unto popery.

The said King being desirous to pass into the Island to see it, could not do
it for the contrary winds: he left there for governor the Lord Quergroy, a
Gentleman of Britayn, of great reputation, with a necessary Garrison.

And upon the aduertisements which he received of the great preparation, and
marching of the royal army, under the conduct of the Duke of Neuers, who
descended into Poytow, he departed thence the 24. of October with all his army,
taking his way to Montagne, where he left the regiment of the Lord Preau,
ordering all necessary things for the defense of that place, which as was
thought should be the first place, where to that army would lay siege, which
also he determined to rescue in convenient time: he divided his garrisons in
the places, which he judged necessary, and among the rest, he put Garrisons in
Mauleon, Ganache, Talmond, Fontenay,

That being done, he took his way to Rochel, to be at the assembly of all
France, which he had called thethere for diverse and notable considerations.
The deputies of all the Churches of all sorts and qualities, stayed sometime in
Rochel for him, where the said King being arrived, received them with great
contentation, and according to his natural facility and mildenes, to the great
rejoicing of all men, which hoped for much fruit of this assembly, for the
preservation of the realm, of the Kings authority (against whom the Leaguers,
under color of the States at Bloys, did work dangerous conspiracies) and for
the just defense of them of the religion, so long time, so cruelly entreated in
all parts of the realm.

The said King being certified of the coming of all the deputies of this
assembly, of all degrees and conditions, Lords, Nobles, Judges, Kings
officers, Majors, Aldermen, and other notable men of the Provinces, gave an
opening unto the said assembly, by the invocation of the name of God, the 14.
of November, in the town house of Rochel, assisted by the Lords of Turenne,
his Lieutenant general, in the province of Guienne. Trimouille, Colonel of the
light horses, and many other Lords, Barons, Vicounts, Gentlemen, and other his
counselers. The same day were called all the deputies for the assembly, and the
authority which every one had of the Provinces, for whom they were sent.

There was almost no Province in France, which had not sent their deputies, to
wit, deputies were sent out of Gascoyn, Amignak, Albret, and other places, from
beyond the river Garonne, out of the Provinces of Britayne, Anjou, Tourene,
Berry, Lodunoys, the I Will of France, Normandy, Orleans, Picardy, Champaigne, and
others beyond the river Loyre, out of the Province of high and low Languedock,
Daulphine, Rowergue, Mountalban, and out of the government of Terrides: there
were also out of the government of Xainctonge, on this side Charante, out of
all the Isles of Xainctonge, other deputed for Rochel, for the Provinces of
Limosin, Perigord, Agenoys, for the town of Bergerak: in particular, for the
Provinces of Poytow, and Engomoys, for the principality of Orange, and many
others, for the baily weeks, towns, and comunalties, with sufficient show of
their charges and commissions.

The 16. day of November, after public invocation of Gods name, the King of
Navarre accompanied, as is above said, represented to the whole assembly the
chiefest causes of their convocation; the great necessities which should move
every man to oppose himself to the enemies, whose intent was too apparent (for
they went even against the King and the whole estate) he showed that he had
hitherto, in so just and godly a cause, spared

He showed how the long continuance of war, and lisence of arms, had to his
great grief, bred and brought in many disorders, to the which he required
them, as well it might be, to provide both in respect of the glory of God, of
the King, of the realm, and in respect of all private men. Prayed them that
were of that assembly, to bring with them clean spirits, void of all
passion, endued with the love of the common wealth: which thing if they did,
he assured himself that God would bless their counsel, and would make them
to reap much fruit to his glory, and the deliverance of his children. He
represented unto them, the good and prosperous events, which might ensue upon
their firm and fast unity in a cause so just and holy as this, that presently
was in question, by establishing of all good order: toward the which^ause, he
exhorted all the assembly to continue as well affected as they had done before,
and to bring so much the more abundantly, as the novelties and late
alterations, happened by the malice of the enemies, did most evidently require.

Above all things, he willed them to provide for that which imported most of
all, the glory and service of God, the good order, policy, and Discipline of
the Church. And to avoid the provoking of Gods wrath, by swearing,
blasphemies, rapes, whordomes, robberies, forbidden games, and other disorders,
who had crept among many, by the unhappiness of war: the required that the laws
made, for repressing of such things, might be straightly enjoined, commanded
and observed by the Magistrates, without any dissimulation, support or respect
of persons: commanding also the Magistrates to assist every one in his
behalf, upon great pains, that the Discipline of the Church may have a due
authority and execution.

He wills them also, that the poor may be assisted, with certain ordinary
sums of money, which should be dedicated to the same effect, according to the
form of the books, that should be made for that intent, with the authority of
certain chief officers, magistrates, consuls, or commissioners appointed for
that purpose.

Also that charges and offices be given to men capeable, and sufficient for
the due execution of the same, to the ease, and contentation of every one: and
as for other orders, it should be ordained as the sessions, and propositions
should be made in order.

All the assembly gave most humble thanks to his Majesty, for the care

The Sessions, propositions, resolutions, and ordinances, were afterward made,
and continued in good order in the presence of the said king, upon the diverse
arguments which were there to be handled.

And first they entreated of the glory and service of God, next of justice, of
a good counsel, and good ordering of the same: then afterward of the mannaging
of the treasure, gifts, pasports, officers, order of war, commissions,
bootyes, prisoners of war, protections, ^taking of towns and places, of the
safety of husbandmen, and many other statutes, as every one of the deputies of
the Provinces was severally charged by their remembrances and instructions.

Many such things were there determined, until the dissolution of the said
assembly, which was made (the said King sitting accompanied as

Whilst these things did pass, and so contrary assemblies, did take Bloys
counsel and deliberation was taken to destroy the K. the Crown, the Realm,
the State, the true Church of God. In Rochel they went about to save the King,
to defend the Crown, to preserve the Realm, to uphold the state, to
maintain the true Religion.) the Duke of Sauoy after great preparations of
war made, the Duke de Maine being as then at Liomoys, and about the borders
of Daulphine, invaded the Marquiz at of Saluces, and by treason and
intelligences of the Captain, surprised Carmagnole, one of the Arseuals of
France: he took also Rauel and Chasteaudauphin, with some other holds.

These news brought to Bloys, did greatly trouble them who could France,
would not be either quickly, or easily put out.

This enterprise of the Duke of Sauoy, was by the practice and counsel of the
League, which was that the armies of these two Dukes (of Sauoy and Maine)
should respectively favor each other, each keeping his intent several to
himself. For the Leaguers and the Duke of Sauoy did agree in this: to wit, in
hating the true religion and the professors thereof, and in making against them
cruel war, to root them out, if they could do it.

But the particular thoughts of the party were kept incommunicable within the
heart of them, both of them reserving to themselves, the means to work their
affairs, according to the opportunity and occasion. And in this respect (as
it commonly falls out among them, who do aspire to any Soueraignetie) there
was neither society nor says between the Duke of Sauoy and the house of
Guyze, each of them envying his fellow in that which he wished for himself.

The Duke of Guize with his partakers, intended to reign and to stablish his
authority in France, and would not admit any fellow, neither the Duke of
Sauoy, nor any other.

The Duke of Sauoy on the other side, thought himself so well descended in
blood, that he might claim to have a good part, and thought it very convenient
for himself to enlarge his dominions, and that being Son to a Daughter of
France, he was nigh enough to possess all, and would have been very sorry to
have had any companyon, either of the house of Guyze, or any other whatsoever.

These diverse drifts did lurk close hidden in the hearts of both parts, being
helped and advanced mutually by the common pretense which they took on both
sides, to wit, the rooting out of the reformed religion, which termed heresy,
and to that end, in open words they agreed together, did help and aid each
other, reserving to the craftiest the beguyling of his fellow, or to the
strongest to prevail

Friar Sixtus Vicar, understanding of this invasion of the Duke of Sauoy,
fearing least the King should suppose that to have been some of Friar Sixtus
tricks, and upon a sudden desire of reuengement would have his peniworth upon
the County of Veuese and Auignon, which is a part of the de Mains which Saint
Peter purchased with his penie, that the Friars might live like kings after
him, to wash his hands, and to make the world believe that he saw nothing,
first began to chide and brawle with the Duke of Sauoy, and finds great
fault in him, reproving

The Duke of Sauoy playing falsehood in good fellowship, faineth, although
Sixtus had no finger in that pie, goes about to excuse the matter, and did
color this action specially with Friar Sixtus, saying, that he had done all
things for the advantage of the holy church of Rome, because he understood
that the K. had determined to put those places which he had taken, into the
hands of the Lord des Diguiers and other heretics: which thing would be very
dangerous both to him being nigh neighbor, as also in time very domageable to
the holy church, and the county of Veues.

Some of his counselors also did greatly mislyke his enterprise, foreseeing
that it would be in time as pernicious unto him, as it had been to his father
in times past, for not knowing the measure of his forces.

Whilst the King of Navarre did hold the assembly of the reformed Churches at
Rochel, as is above said, and that the Duke of Sauoy invaded the Marquesdome of
Saluce, the States did continue at Bloys with strange mistrust, which did
spring from hour to hour among the partakers.

The pretense of Religion did continually roll among the Leaguers and Leagued.
Their lives and state, said they, did hang on a rotten thread.

In December, two great alarums and pannick terrors were raised within the
castle of Bloys, who did put the whole court in armor, and made them stand
upon their guardes. The cause of the first was a quarrel, which arose between
the pages and lakeys, who did hold with the Bourbons, and them which did hold
with the League. The commotion and the fear was such, that the Duke of Guyze
took the alarm, ran into his chamber, shut up the door, with Cofers, and
other such like things as were at hand.

The second alarm was given by a soldier hurt, which saved himself in the
chamber of the Duke of Guyze, into the which he was pursued by some of the
Kings guardes, who went up with sword in hand, whereupon once again all the
court was in an uproar.

About the same time also there were great enmities and seeds of quarrels in
the court (beside the ulcer of ambition and desire to reign) between the Lord
of Guyze and many other Lords of the court, by reason of love: for as the Duke
of Guyze in the midst of those weighty matters which he went about to
compass, was greatly in love with a Lady of the court: there were some Lords
also who pretended the like affection to her, whether it were that they did so
of purpose to pick a quarrel or otherwise, but so it was, that there passions
of love were openly perceived.

The Duke of Guyze about the middle of December, did show himself a more
contemner of the Kings authority, then ever he had done before: for there was
seen after him in great security following his train, and lodged even in the
Kings house, a great number of ruffiens and malefactors, Engolesme against the
Lord Espernon, they were in such security under his wing, that no magistrate
durst say any thing to them.

The said Duke also had showed himself more saucy and malapert in his words
and behavior, then ever he did before. For the King having intercepted many
of his letters, by the which he did show in open terms the vilanous intent
which he had purposed in his heart, called his Nobles, willed them to swear to
him, that they would never consent nor practice any thing against his person:
he most arrogantly and contemptuously denied so to do, even in his presence,
saying, he will not do it, and if he did it, there was good laws to punish
him: spare him not, let him be punished; bold and arrogant speeches were
given daily by him, and his partakers.

The Duke of Guyze considering, that by these fresh injuries the King could not
be much provoked, calling to remembrance his former attempts, and that the
stroke which he had long before intended, was made known to the King, began to
enter a great fearful apprehension, that the King would not delay his revenge,
but will go about to prevent him. And now considering that all his partakers
had bent their eyes upon him, and expected some great atchieuement, which
should far exceed the former attempts, seeing also how the K. of Navarre by
the edict of reunion, sworn by the assembly of the States, was condemned and
disherited, and that there was nothing left in the way to hinder him of his
enterprise, and that he himself was now upon the last step of the stayrs,
either to be King, or first commander under the name of King of France, so
that nothing was wanting, but either quite to dispatch him, or else to take him
prisoner. He resolved himself therefore to hasten one of these two executions,
least perhaps he might be prevented, he undertook himself to do that feat,
and laid that burden upon his shoulder. And that such disorder might be done
orderly, he called the chiefest of the conspiracy to counsel.

The chiefest of this counsel and conspiracy were Friar Ladouik, cardinal his
brother, and Friar I. Archbishop of Lions, with few other, to whom he showed
in what state his matters stood, and that all things are brought to some good
effect, that nothing is obstant to obtain the thing so long, and so greatly
desired, but the person of the King: and that their counsels being come to
light, he was driven to such extremity, as that ^ither he or the King must
needs perish.

He propounded unto them therefore, whether the King was to be dispatched out
of hand, or else to be imprisoned till all things were confirmed, and
established for a new government.

They answer, that this matter is not to be delayed, but that the King

If he were kept in prison, it would seem cruel and strange to the common
people, and intolerable. That they of late (after the Kings fleeing from
Paris) had found and learned by experience, that pity prevails more then
favor.

But as soon as he should be dispatched, new devises should be practiced, new
counsels taken, and that every man would fall again rather to their private,
present, and sure commodities, then to attempt dangerous enterprises.

Grounded upon these reasons, the servants do determine upon the death of their
Lord, the anointed of the Lord, and a man reverenced of so many Nations, is
condemned to die by the bloody swords of them, who might have said, that
whatsoever they have besides their being, they have it of him and his
predecessors liberality, whose Grandfather came to beg to the door of his
ancestors. Rise up O Lord, defend thine Ordinance, and the powers which thou
have appointed.

The 24. day of December is appointed for that cruel execution: their desperate
parricide is sealed with an oath, so they depart.

The King ignorant of this sentence of condemnation given against him, yet
provoked both by the old and new injuries, proffered him daily by the Duke of
Guyze, did meditate how, and watched for the opportunity, as by one blow to rid
himself out of that danger and fear wherein he saw himself: and perceauing
well by the partialities and partaking of (in a manner) the whole assembly of
the States, and that contrary unto his expectation: (for he thought by the
consent of the States to have convicted, condemned, and executed both the Duke
and few of the chiefest of his partakers) he was in danger that which he
pretended would be wrought against him either directly, or indirectly by the
said estates, determined to follow an extraordinary way, and to prevent his
enemy, knowing the Proverb to be true, (...): and knowing the cause so to do
to be lawful, thought the course taken for the execution, would be diversely
judged: yet he thought to follow a just cause some what unlawful (necessity
enforcing him so to do) might be well interpreted in a man of his degree and
calling: he pronounces therefore sentence of death against the Duke of Guyze,
and few others.

Here Christian Reader, thou see the subject and servant to have condemned
and appointed to the slaughter his Lord and Prince, only through aspyring
unlawfully unto his Scepter and Throne. Here thou see the

Mark also Gods justice upon carnal men destitute of the right knowledge of
God, fellows in a manner and companions of one affection, of one mind, of one
consent, in persecuting the Son of God, in devouring the innocent, as if they
would eat bread: the Lord sent evil Angels among them to scatter them, their
counsels and power; the one is possessed with an unclean spirit of ambition;
the other (bewitched with a spirit of hatred against the truth of God) is made
secure and flacke to prevent the evil betunes, until he is enforced to
follow that course, which commonly men will condemn upon his companion, his
friend and familiar, who went into the Temples of their Gods to take sweet
counsel together. O the depth of Gods judgments, how deep and unsearchable be
they:

The Kings counsel and determination could not be kept so secret, the King
having so many Leaguers about him to smell his breath, but the 22 of December,
as the Duke of Guize had set down to dinner, he found under his napkin a
little bill, wherein was written that he should take heed, for they will play
a shrewd play with him. In the same bill he wrote with his own hand a mocking
answer thus. They dare not, and so cast it under the table.

The Leaguers neither could not keep their breath so warily, but that their
determination took flight abroad. For the same day the King received diverse
aduertisements of this perilous conspiracy, and determination of the Duke of
Guize against his person. But specially ye Duke de Main brother to the Duke of
Guize, sent Alphonse Corse expressedly to the K. to advertise him to take heed
of the Duke of Guize his brother: it was an easy thing (said he) to carry a
rope of Beads about his neck, but for certain he knew very well that his
brother had a shrewd enterprise in hand against him. He knew not when the
execution would be, but he knew very well that it would be shortly, and that he
was in doubt least this warning should come too late: and warned him in these
words, that his Majesty should beware of a furious and desperate mind.

The Duke Aumale likewise sent his wife to Bloys to the King, to advertise him
of the same danger and conspiracy against him, and that the conspirators were
upon the point of the execution.

Also one of the conspirators themselves moved in conscience, disclosed unto
him the whole conspiracy, the day appointed, the tokens and the names of the
conspirators, but in such a short time, that the King had scarce opportunity
and time to escape and prevent that imminent danger.

The King also had intercepted not long before many letters, wherein in plain
terms the Leaguers had uttered their determination.

The King having received so many messengers of death, and reduced to this
extremity, does perceive that he is beaten with his own rod. For calling to
remembrance the great injuries which he and his brethren had received of that
house even from their infancy, acknowledging now that all the former troubles
(as he confesses in a certain letter of his to the Lord Tageus) in his
Realm, have been by their practices and procurement: how that he has seen
all the evident tokens of their aspyring to his estate, their clayming of the
Crown by their feigned geuealogies, set forth in the sight of the world. He
remembers also the decay of his authority among all his subjects, to have
been their work, by the diffamatorie Libels dispersed abroad, with diverse
slanders and calumnies. He acknowledges the practicing of the deliberation of
Rome, about the rooting out or disheriting the royal blood in France in the
houses of Valoys and Bourbons, to set up the house of Lorreyne.

Among other things, he reckons the seditious preachers, as Jesuits, and
other unclean fowls of that color, hired by them of Guize, and Lorreyne, to
stir up sedition, and steal away the people from his obedience, thereby to
strengthen their parts. He calls to remembrance, the taking up of arms
against his will, in the year 1585. the raising up of the tumult in Paris
against his own person, the letters of Guize intercepted, wherein he
discovers his mind so deeply, that thereby he might see every vein and
hole in their brain and hearts: the saucie parts, and manifest attempts, which
both he, and his partakers had used toward him in his own presence, both in
words and behavior, the consideration also of these aduertisements from so
many parts, did cause great passions in his mind. But did not consider from
whence these blows did come, neither from whence his slacknes, in repressing
and punishing by time those offenses.

Specially, when remembering the favors that he and his predecessors had given
to that famely: but he above all, had more esteemed them, then the Princes of
his blood, had made him his fellow and companion, in all the exploytes done
against them of the reformed religion, whom he had favored with diverse great
dignities, pardoned him of so many grievous offenses, which he would not have
forgiven to his own brother: to be short, he loved and embraced him, as his
own soul: this incredible unthankfulness and treachery, did move him to great
indignation. But specially, what griefs and sorrows did this ^nhappy King
conceive in his heart, not only to (...) so unthankfully rewarded of them
whom he trusted most, but for that, he in the space of 20 years had seen so
many warnings given, both to his Brother Charles the ninth, and to himself, of
their aspiring and working, not only by the Princes of the blood, by the King
of Navarre, by France, but also by the Princes of foreign nations, and specially
by the Princes of Germany, who from time to time had proffered their services,
and their assistance unto him, for the repressing of their insolent
presumptuousnes.

And namely, when he considered how half a year before, when he was in a
manner dispossessed of his kingdom and Authority, after his flight from Paris,
how his faithful subjects, of all callings and degrees, resorted unto them,
both to show him the insufferable indignities, which he had received of that
house, and also to proffer him their service and assistance. When he called to
mind, how often and how faithfully, the King of Navarre had proffered him his
forces, and that in such sort, that if it had pleased him but to hold up his
hand only, and let him alone with them, he with his own forces and charges,
would set him at hearts ease from any danger or s^ur of the League. He I say,
as a man which is willingly, and wittingly lead to his fatal destruction and
fall, had never regarded nor considered all these things until now, when being
destitute of all means and deliberation, and scarce knowing whom to trust,
he is with too late repentance driven to shift for his own life, as well as
he may, which he sees is most certainly to be taken away, within four and
twenty hours, if he does not prevent the conspiratours.

The King in this agony and heavy sighs, not considering the causes of these
blows and terrors of death, full of sorrows and indignation, does determine
with himself as well as he can, to prevent the treasons of his domestical
enemies in this wise.

The keys of the Castle were brought every night unto the Duke of Guize, as
being great Master of the Kings house, but the said Duke of Guize the 22. of
December, the night before his death, provided not so wisely, but that the
keys fell into other men's hands, then them of his side. So the King took the
keys of his house in his custody, he also caused a rumor to be noysed
abroad, that the day following he will go on pilgrimage to the Church, called
our Lady of Clery, situated between Bloys and Orleans.

And according to his prudence, he provided that as well in the Castle, as in
the town, they of the League might not stir with any force against him; for
within the Castle, he doubled his gardes. In the town, he took order that
night, that the gardes of the town gates should not in any wise open the said
gates, until they should have express commandment from him to the contrary;
so both the Town, Castle, and keys thereof are made sure in that night; and
all this was done, unknown to the Duke of Guize.

The Lord grand Prior that night made a match to play at Tenis with Ianuile,
son to the Duke of Guize, to whom he gave his word, that the next day very
early, he would take him in his bed for that end. So the King having
dispatched many things, but specially provided to make all things sure which he
thought needful, to prevent the determination of the Duke of Guize, which was
upon the point of execution, retired into his closet, where he was all night,
to do many needful dispatches.

The same night, he wrote to the Duke of Neuers, who was in the army, at the
siege of Smache, he wrote to Lions, and to diverse other places, where he
thought it necessary, for the assuring of his affairs, and the preservation of
his person.

The same night, the Duke of Guize, Friar Lewis, the Cardinal his brother, and
the Archbishop of Lions, to take opportunity to commit their parricide,
concluded to sit in counsel the next morning early.

The 23. of December, the Duke of Guize, the Friar, Cardinal his brother, the
Archbishop of Lions, the Marshall Haultmont, and others, came to sit in
counsel, in a chamber nigh to the Kings chamber, being but a narow aley
between them.

The K. being in his closet with certain Lords and gentlemen, sent for 7. or
8. of those 45. Pensioners or gentlemen, yt were daily attendant upon him,
very early in ye morning, to whom he used some speeches about his affairs so
greatly importing him, and so nearely touching his person, and about the
assured advise and intelligences which he had received of the enterprise
against his person and State. They prostered most willingly their ready
service, to execute his commandment in such a just cause and defense.

Within a while after, the Duke of Guize being in the counsel chamber before
they began to sit, was called to come to the king. He saw at his first coming
the guards more carefully disposed than of custom, so that (as it happ^neth
oftentimes, yt upon the instant of great adventures the mind of every man is to
him as a Prophet of ye event, or a heavy presage of his mishappe) even as he
had judged of the enterprise of an other man, by calling to remembran^e of that
which he had in his own mind, and the stroke which he received by that which
he intended, he entered into a motion of extraordinary mistrust, and so far that
his countenance changing at that calling, his heart waxed cold, as though he
had been ready to fall into a swound: whereupon he sent to the L. Pre (one of
them who did wait in the K. chamber) to ask some raysins, which were brought
him.

Before his going out of the counsel chamber, he sent a page to his chamber to
fetch him a handkercher: his secretary had bound fast in one of the corners
thereof a small bill written, containing a warning to get him out, or else he
was dead. The handkercher was brought, but it was not delivered, for it was
intercepted, with the remembrance when the page came up again with it.

The Duke of Guyze being about to go unto the king, when he went

He had been persuaded long before, that the Lord Loignak had undertaken to
kill him, so that of all other he hated him most, and mistrusted him greatly,
and entering into the kings chamber, he saw the same Lord Loignak sitting upon
a coffer, having his arms a cross, and supposing that he stayed there to set
upon him (for he showed that he was touched with a violent apprehension of
mistrust) although the said L. Loignak did not stir: yet the Lord Guize
notwithstanding did set upon him, and setting his hand to his sword did draw it
half, for he had his cloak (as commonly he was wont to have) in scar^e wise,
and under the cloak his sword, which was the cause that he could not draw it
clean out of the sheath, before that some of them who were there, seeing him
to enterprise such a violent fray at the Kings chamber door, prevented, and
killed him there.

Behold thou ungracious man, thou have hidden all thy conspiracies under a
cloak of religion, and so have profaned a profane religion; say then (...).

Thou unthankful slave of ambition, have thou thought to murder thy natural
prince, ordained of God to command thee: Say then, or if thou will not, I
will, (...).

It could not be done without some rumor, which was heard out of the counsel
chamber: whereupon the Cardinal his brother entered into mistrust, and
conceauing a great fear, made haste to get out: but he met one of the skottish
guardes who had charge to arrest him.

He took that arrest very strange, and made show to resist: but seeing the
rumor and danger, he ceased from his resistaunce and yielded.

The Archbishop of Lions at this alarm, went forth furiously, and would know
more, and as he said, would succor the Duke of Guyze, but he was arrested by
some of the guardes, and his fury was so cooled, that from a woolfe, he was
turned into the form of a lamb, yet retayning still wooluish conditions: so
these two Friars (the devils ghostly fathers) remained both prisoners.

The graund Pryor was gone very early to awake the Lord Ianuile, to to play the
match which they had made the day before, and found him in his bed: and after
he had made himself quickly ready (but whether it were that he saw the graund
Pryor followed incontinently with some of the guardes, or some other matter)
he began suddenly to mistrust, and went about to slip into a door of his
chamber, and to make some resistance, seeking to get forth with his sword in
hand against some of the guarde: but considering the danger he yielded him
self to the said guard.

At the same instant one Pellicart, secretary unto the Duke of Guyze was taken,
with all his papers and writings, by the which many secret counsels of the said
Guize were discovered to the King, with the names of the chiefest of the
League, as well of the princes and Nobles, as of the priests and towns.

The king of the Friars, to wit, the Cardinal of Bourbon, who was at bed, was
desired by a captain of the guarde to rise, and so was his person made sure.

The Marquess d' Albeuf likewise, and many other of the partakers of the Lord
of Guize were taken, and put in places of safety.

That day the king made a fair hand, for he caught a number of cruel beasts
and unclean fowls, as Woolues, Foxes, swine, wild Boars, Apes, and such like.

But the loosing of some of them afterward, was the cause of his undoing and
death. For either through fear of the Popes excommunication, or to assuage the
displeasure of his subjects, or some other cause ^lse, he did set at liberty
the Archbishop of Lions, which was one of the chiefest counselors, deuisers,
and procurers of his death.

These exployts being done at Bloys, a gentleman was speedely sent into Poytow
to the Lord of Neuers, with commandment to seize upon the Lord Chastre
governor of Berry, who was greatly suspected, by reason of his great
familiarity with the Lord of Guize. But the laid Lord Chastre was aduertized
by his friends of all that which happened at Bloys, before the gentleman (sent
by the King) arrived at the camp: whereupon he went to the Duke of Neu^rs,
saying, that he was aduertized how the Duke of Guyze had been put to death,
which thing made him believe, he had enterprized somewhat against the king. He
said that he had been always servant to the Duke of Guize, for his
particular; but that if he had enterprized against the king, that he was never
made privy to it. And forasmuch as the love which the said Duke of Guize had
borne unto him, might happily make him to be suspected by the king, he yielded
himself willingly into the hands of the said Duke of Neuers for to justify
his actions.

Afterward the Gentleman went from the king to the said Duke of Neuers, who
informed him of all that which is above said, and within a while after the Lord
Chastre went to the king.

The King had some speeches with the said Lord Chastre of all that had passed
touching the particular of him: the Lord Chastre of long continuance, which he
would forget, and upon the promise which the said Chastre made, to remain
his faithful servant, commanded him to make Orleans, against them of the
League: which thing the said Lord Chastre promised to do.

A little while after the death of the Guize, the King went to see the Queen
his mother, and showed her what was done that morning, whereof at the first she
was greatly moved: yet remembering the just occasions which the said Duke of
Guize had given him to seek revenge, she prayed God that it might be well
done: and willed the King to advertise the Popes Legate, that which was done.
For a while after, the King sent the Cardinal Gundy, to show to the said
Legate, the attempt of the Duke of Guize, against his person and estate; which
thing had enforced him to do that execution: he showed that in it, he had
followd the Popes his masters counsel, who advised him so to do, if by no
other means he could avoid such enterprises. Where it is said, that the King
does aleage to the Popes Legate, his masters counsel and consent, the matter
goes as the common report gooth.

It is most certain, that Friar Sixtus, and his Chaplines, with his
predecessors before him had been, and were then the chiefest authors, setters
on, and maintainers of the League in France, and that by all means, so that it
were not with money, (for to meddle with the purses of these ghostly fathers is
sacrilege, and to tirannize the holy Church) did favor, foster, and further
all the felouies, trecheries, and treasons of the Duke of Guize. The King
having a perfect knowledge of these their doings, yet by policy he obtained
Friar Sixtus, and his Priests, both his consent and hands, to justify his
actions, which he intended to bring to pass upon the persons of the Duke of
Guize, and others his adherents: if the Pope, after the fact; if Soltan
Solomon, out of the capital of Rome, would thunder his vain boults, not
excommunication, but of proscription, which this Antichrist most arrogantly do
vsurp upon Princes.

He wrote therefore to Friar Sixtus, that he had a number of rebels of all
degrees, as well of the nobility as of others, who had conspired against his
life and state, whether that he might make such a slaughter of them, by
surprise, as he made at Saint Bartholmew, in the year 1571. and kill them by
all means possible, seeing that he could not follow against them any
extraordinary course. Friar Sixtus and his harpies about him, supposing that
the King by rebels, understood the King of Navarre, and others of the nobles
with him, and of other degrees, and that he had so fetched in his head, whereby
he hoped to draw them into his snare, were as ready to further him to that
exployte, as the King was ready to do it. Friar Sixtus answered in his name,
and of his Ianissaries, that he might destroy them by all means possible: for
in extraordinary dangers, extraordinary course might be taken. This is that
which he al^ageth to the Legate, touching the Popes counsel and consent.

The Legate upon this news, was wonderfully amazed, for beside that, he feared
his own skin, he had also assured all Italy of clean contrary events, then
those which he saw to have fallen out.

The same day, the Legate was prayed to make intercession with the King, for the
Cardinal of Guize; which thing he promised to do. Men cannot by any means
prolong the time of their end: many have thought that the saving of the life
of the Cardinal of Guize, might have been easily obtained. But as a haughty
courage, which thinks to be nigh to some great and extraordinary prosperous
fortune, cannot easily quiet himself, when he sees himself debased, and
carried away far from his expectation. So this man fallen from so high, and
moved with his domestical losses, could not quiet himself, but by hot words
he threatened, to perform more the^ ever his brother intended, whose chiefest
setter on he was. This his raging mind, wrapped him in the self same
punishment with his Brother, being found and judged culpable of the self same
crime of treason.

Here mark Christian reader, a notable example of Gods justice: for the King
would easily have pardoned him, and spared his life, but Gods justice bringing
him to judgment, forsook him in the perturbation of his heart, to provoke his
Sovereign King, whom he had offended in the highest degree, against his
will, to make him drink of the cup of Gods wrath.

So that the King seeing his threatenings, which discovered plainly the damnable
thoughts of his heart, caused him the same day to be strangled, as it is
reported, with a tippet of silk, which he was wont to wear about his neck, to
put a difference between him and the common sort of traitors: for they are
strangled with ropes of hemp, but this traiterens Friar was choked with a
holy tippet of silk, in the self same place where he was arested prisoner.
These executions being done upon the conspiratours, the King went to go to
Mass into the temple of Saint Savior, which is in the court of the Castle.
There the Popes Legate did walk and talk long with the King, sometime smiling
in the sight of a great number of people, which did mark it. Among whom, many
seeing the joyful countenance of the Legate, thought that he was not greatly
sorry for that which had passed there that morning, although that his great
familiarity with the house of Guize, would have given occasion to expect of him
the contrary. But all that was but to make fair weather, which the King
fearing himself, upon the heat of the Kings revenge, to have sustained the
same punishment with his companions, which he had no less deserved then they
had.

Now we have to speak somewhat of the conspirators, who were of five sorts. In
the evening, all things were as quiet at Bloys, as they had been Guize.

Brissak and others, to mollify the Kings displeasure, which they supposed by
the guiltines of their consciences, the King to have conceived of them, that in
time they might escape out of his claws, made an oration gratulatory for his
good success, in escaping that conspiracy, but specially did clawe him in that
place, where he did most itch, to wit, exhorted him to continue the war
against them of the reformed religion, using great outrageous words and
inuectiues, leaving them no hope of merry.

This oration was followed of many such others, not for love to the K. but for
three special causes. First, that with such holy water the King being blinded,
they might fly out of his hand. Secondly, that by setting the King against the
King of Navarre, and the heretics (as they termed them) he should have his
forces scattered, and his person being the weaker by it, they might at some
opportunity surprise him. Thirdly, they feared least he would upon this
occasion join the King of Navarre, and so to have been able to take revenge
upon all the sort of the conspiratours: therefore they thought good to blow the
coals to let all reconsiliation.

The same day the King sent to the assembly of the states, to let them
understand that it was his pleasure, that the states should continue with a
full determination to follow their reasonable counsels in all things.

The 24. of December, the King dispatched diverse messengers into diverse
Provinces with these instructions following.

The first troubles raised up by the Lord of Guyze in this realm, in the year
1585. have showed sufficiently an other meaning in him, the^ the zeal of the
Catholic Religion, wherewith he has covered his actions, to abuse them, who
are more ready to embrace novelties, then wise to consider the events.

For having covered his entents with the cloak of the catholic religion, and
the rooting out of heresy, all his exploits have been executed in the catholic
towns, and in the best, which he could seize upon, to lay down a steadfast
foundation of the drifts long before notoriously forecast for the ^surpation of
the crown.

The King shows that by the means of the rising of the said Duke, he was
enforced to let him have the best part of his forces and means, whereby he
has not been able to oppose himself to them of the religion, as he was
willing to do: whereby heresy (says he) has taken deeper root in the Realm
then ever it had before.

He shows, that while his forces were occupied against the heretics in
Guyen, Prouance, and Daulphine, he and his partakers have practiced to withdraw
all that ever they could from his obedience.

He says also, that notwithstanding the seditious seazing of Paris by the^ of
the League, yet he was desirous to forget all offenses passed: and besides,

He aduertiseth them, that the ambition of the said Duke of Guyze, was grown
to that contempt of his estate, that he would no more depend of any other: and
that in stead of thanks, to acknowledge these favors, he had used them to
his further enterprises.

He never ceased to practice the towns which were left under his obedience to
his faction, so that the Magistrates could hold no longer the inhabitants in
their duty, nor from stirring sedition one against another.

Many men conuict^d of capital crimes, were so vpholden by his authority, that
it was not possible for the Magistrate to do justice upon them.

He and his did brave, threaten, and put in fear, them which would remain
servants unto their King, to make them to forsake him, that so he might the
more easily oppress him.

The Duke of Guyze by his partakers, had practiced the Provinces by his
factions to render his authority, hateful to his Subjects, suborning them to
make uncivil requests, that in obtaining them, they might debase his
authority, and in refusing them (which he will persuade the King to do) he
might make him hateful to his subjects.

The King had used all the prudence that ever he could devise, until he
perceived himself to be fallen into the contempt of his subjects, which was a
way to perform the blow long before hand intended.

Besides, he shows, how he has had diverse aduertisements even by the next
unto the Duke of Guyze to beware of him, by whom he was in danger to loose both
his life and crown.

He notifyeth to them, that considering the evil could not be avoided, but by
the death of the author: he was enforced to save himself by slaying the said
Duke of Guyze, the 23. of December.

To prevent therefore all false reports, he was willing to let them
understand the truth of the matter, that all occasion of tumult (which might
arise by false reports) might be taken away.

He certifyeth his Subjects that he intends to follow the war, for the
extirpation of heresy, and the mayntaining of the Romish religion.

He says also that he declares to them, that he will have his subjects
eased as much as shall be possible, and that he has sent word unto the
deputies assembled in the Town of Bloys, that he would have the states ended
with all liberty.

He warns them also, that he will have no partialities, leagues,
associations, nor intelligences among his subjects, and that they shall not
hereafter acknowledge any other then him, who is their King ordained of

He certifyeth them also, that he will suffer no longer the contempt of his
authority, but will chastize them who shall offend in that behalf.

These informations were sent by the King into the Provinces to the governors
and Magistrates, to give notice of the same to the people, least by false
rumors, they should have been stirred up to rebellion by the Leaguers, who were
dispersed in all parts of the realm. But particularly he writes to the Lord
Tageus his governor in Xainctonge and Engolesme, willing him to execute sharp
punishment upon them, who shall stir up any sedition.

Within few days after these things so passed at Bloys, the Q Mother dyed, who
there had fallen sick upon the first assembling of the states: she had lived
a long age (and too long for France, if it had been Gods will that it should
have been otherwise) for she has been the cheifest worker of all the great
miseryes, and lamentable alterations which have happened in France: having
bewitched with her Sorceryes (as an other Circe her country woman) her own
Children, and many Princes and Nobles of France, whom she transformed not in
outward form, but in conditions and qualityes of Tigers, Wolves, Foxes, Swine,
and all manner of cruel beasts, and unclean fowls, even a number transformed
into the nature of unclean spirits and devils. She never ceased from her
enchantments, until by Gods just judgment she had destroyed her own
children, house and family. To be short, she was a woman of a base birth and
ability, bold to work all iniquity and unrighteousness.

Now we have to descrybe the conspiratours, and how they shifted for
themselves.

The three greatest domestical enemies that ever France or any King had in his
bosom, were the Duke of Guize, the Cardinal his brother, and the Q Mother,
they three are smitten down by the finger of God, as if it had been with a
thunderboult.

The second sort of the conspirators (most dangerous and cruel beasts) were in
hold, as the Cardinal of Bourbon, the Marquis Albeuf, the Guizes son, and
Friar Archbishop of Lions, as is before said, and more the King might have
caught: and if the King had been a careful revenger of Gods law, and had
feared God more then man, they had drunk of the dregs of Gods justice as
their fellows did.

The third sort of conspirators were in the Kings sight, and within the Town,
as Chastre, Brissak, Boysdaulphin, and others, to whom he forgave the due
punishment: and they did speak him fair for a while, until they saw an
occasion to work him mischief, as the sequel did verify.

The fourth sort of the traitors were, some in the Town, and many in the
Suburbs, there lurking until the Duke of Guize would have given Germayne
suburb on Bartholmew day in the year 1572. as these fellows departed out of
Bloys without boats or other furniture.

These most damnable traitors carrying abroad the rumors of the Duke of
Guize, with amplification, and with deprauing of the Kings fact, did begin and
advance the rebellion, which answered afterward against the King.

The fifth sort was of them, who the day before took it to be a point of
honor whereupon to challenge to the combat, if any man had called them Royals:
now they on a sudden did hate outwardly worse then murder to be called
Guiziens: of this sort were the most part of the Priests and Commons there
assembled at the States, who by little and little slyding away one after
another, caused through the most part of those Provinces which had rooted out
the Gospel from among the^, an universal rebellion.

The King forgetting his calling, to wit, to be a public revenger of Gods
law, and executer of his justice, who commands him that his eye shall not
take pity upon such abominable contemners of Gods ordinance and justice, whose
Image his person represented, fearing men more then GOD, and under the color
of clemency consented to their crimes, and through impunitie approved their
misdeedes; God a righteous Judge turned this his pusillanimitie to a snare and
a block of offense, by the which he wrought his own overthrow and miserable
end.

Now leaving the events which followed this tragedy played at Bloys, we will
fetch other matters and exploits which were done in other places, that variety
may not only delight the Christian Reader, but also stir him up to fear,
tremble, and reverence Gods judgments. For not only at Bloys he powered
mighty streams of his wrath upon the wicked, but also in other places the
Lord at the same time fed his enemies with shame, clothed them with dishonor,
and rewarded them with confusion, and in all places delivered his Saints.

It is said before, how at the making and concluding of the edict of reunion in
July last, it was agreed that two mighty Armies should be mustered and made up
with as much readiness as it could be done: the one should be conducted by the
Duke of Guize into Guienne; and the other under the leading of the Duke de
Main into Daulphine, there to root out them of the religion.

But yet the Duke of Guize advised by his counsel, to wit, the Cardinal his
brother, and the Bishop of Lions, altered his purpose for three causes.

First, the cause of religion which he pretended, was not the mark that he
shot at, neither did he greatly care which of the two went backward or forward.

Secondly, he perceived how he went to cast himself into the hazard of war,
which is uncertain, but specially against such a Captain who hitherto had
remained invincible, and knew with few how to overcome great multitudes and
mighty forces, whom he feared as the slave does dread his Lord, whom he has
grievously offended. Therefore he thought good not to hazard that way, but to
reserve himself to a better opportunity, which would be offered him ere long.

The third cause was, that if he should absent himself far from Paris it
might be that the King would enterprise it there upon, and carry it away from
him. Also, if he should absent himself from the Court, he were not able easily
to bring to pass his intent, nor give the blow which he had in mind long
before.

Therefore another is to be sent, yet it must not be any suspected person. As
for the Princes they are partial in this cause, and being of great authority
of themselves, are not to be armed with power, for else they may mar the play.

The Marshals Byron and Haultmont are good noble men, good French men and
valiant, they are Royals, and therefore we will have none of them. For it were
not good to arm them with such forces: for if we say they should in the mean
time execute our enterprise, whilst they had such an army they might mar
all, and begin a new tragedy upon the players of the former.

Therefore such a General must needs be appointed, as may flatter with both
sides, and that will turn to the strongest part, and if he should be lost in
the battle it makes no matter who that should be. The Duke of Neuers, of
Nation an Italian, an Atheist by religion, a Spanyard by faction; a Leaguer and
a Royal both, by policy and dissimulation; in Nobility nouus homo. For here
is to be noted, that in Italy there is no ancient Nobility remaining, except
it be the Vrsins and Colomuae, and some of the Patrilij in Venice. For all the
rest (perhaps some few excepted) are families raised up within these few
hundred years, out of Colliers, as the Medicis, Porters and Chimney sweepers,
during the universal rebellion of Italy against the Emperors, under the
factions of Guelpses and Gibelius: and the Popes bastards also are the stocks
of many families, which now are accounted of the chiefest Nobility there, as
the houses of Parma, Vrbines, etc.

This Duke of Neuers hanging about the skirts of the Q. Mother, married the
only heirs of the noble and ancient family of Neuers, whose father Dreulx,
being of the house of Gonzages, never heard of before these eight score years.

The noble Princes of the royal blood, the ancient Nobility of France are no
men, but set behind the door; they may not lead the kings armies, not for
lack of sufficiency: Why then: Because they are suspected by the League, to be
true to their king, good lovers of their country, and too natural to their
kings subjects and fellow Citizens.

Whilst therefore the States do continue at Bloys and Rochel, the Kings army
in November taking their journey into Poytow, with great preparation, intending
as well to recover the places occupied by them of the Religion, as also to beat
the king of Navarre; in which doing not only they should make an end of the
war by rooting out utterly them of the Religion, but also should recover the
loss of the honor of the army, which a month before had been buried at
Coutras by the King of Navarre.

This army was great and strong, consisting of Frenchmen, Swissers, and
Italians, having a great number of armed men. And as it marched forward, so
still it increased. For light horses and Noble men, with other qualities out of
all parts, out of the cities and communalties of the Provinces near about, as
well of the one as of the other side of the Loyre, did voluntarylie join
themselves to it. And among others out of the low Poytow, were the Lords of
Roches, Beatault of Bourneueau, Boucherie, and Saint Andre, with their
companies.

The Duke of Neuers, as is said before, was general, assisted with the Lord
Chastre and Sagonne, two notable traitors Leaguers, and Lauerdine, loyal and
faithful to his Prince, with other Lords and Captains, Ordinance, munition,
and all kind of preparation of war was great. The greatest part of this
army as well of the heads and commanders, as of the Nobility and others
which did obey, were Leaguers and leagued, who thought that they could never
work mischief enough.

It is an incredible thing to hear the mischieues, hauock, and oppression
which this army did where it passed through, but specially to them of the
reformed religion, who were found before them, both in their houses and abroad:
the people, men and women, even in diverse places the very cattle did fly
before this army, as before a thundering tempest, even as a flock of sheep
before a heard of woolues, savage beasts, or monsters never seen before.

Sultan Soliman, Siech, Selymogly, did never carry greater cruelty, sauagenes,
barbarousnes and terror, into Austrich and Slireland, when he came down with
three hundred thousand men to the siege of Vienne, than did this r^bble of
turkish brood, monstrous Cyclops, God-contemners' and Gyancs, into their own
natural country, yet do not I speak of all

Rochel, and other towns of safety, round about were quickly replenished of
exiled people out of Poytow, Britain, Touraine, Landomoys, and other places
nigh the soiourning of this army: Even many Catholics fled into the towns
of the reformed religion, abhorring, accursing, and detesting those misbegotten
monsters.

The first place where this flood spewed out of the Dragons mouth to have
drowned the woman which was in travail, I mean this army was stayed, was
before Mauleon, which is a small town, feeble, and of no strength at all.
There is in the same a Castle, which is of no better defense than the town.

The king of Navarre (as it is said) after the taking of Beauuoyre, lest within
the same town, the Lord Viliers Charlemaigne for governor, with a certain
number of Soldiers, not for to obstinate themselves upon that naughty place
(which was not able to resist a far lesser than a royal army) but for to
keep the field, and for to refresh himself. The army descending from Turenne
took way to Mauleon, about the 13, of November.

The forerunners of the army showed themselves: the garrison there would not
dislodge for them, but made a show as though they would hold the place. But
forces arriving more and more unlooked for, at length the Ordinance was brought
before the place. The Lord Viliers seeing that, determined to capitulate by the
means of the Lord Lauerdine, the captain, and one Croix were appointed to
conclude the capitulation.

The Lord Miraumont Sargeant mayor of the battle, was sent for hostage to
Mauleon for safety. From Mauleon went forth also for hostage Captain Laudebrix.

The agreement was made and concluded with small advantage to them who were
besieged within the town: for the Lords Brigneulx, and Chastiagueray did draw
nigh the walls of the Town, which were already forsaken by the garrison, and
not defended: and after they had pulled down few stones by surprising, and
contrary unto the agreement, entered into the town, did kill and wound all them
whom they found both of the garrison, and also of their own side;
notwithstanding the resistance and reproof which the said Lord Miraumont could
do, for to let such a treacherous unfaithfulness unworthy of men of war.

The passion of these leagued Soldiers was showed so disordered and barbarous,
that they compelled the said Lord Miraumont to save himself into the castle,
with the remainant of the garrison which had escaped, for many had been most
vilanously slain after they had yielded their armor, some did save themselves
by flight, casting themselves over the wall; other were hurt; some taken and
spoiled of all that ever they had, contrary to the

The Lords Chastre and Lauerdine, advertised of this disorder, hasted thither,
and caused (although very late) the killing to cease, and conducted the rest of
them who had escaped, beyond the river Seure, toward Fonteney.

After this exploit done, the army marched straight way toward the Town and
Castle of Montagne, at the solicitation of them of Nantes, and Nobility of
Aniou, and low Poytow, who were not of the religion, who altogether received by
it many discommodities: the most part of Gentlemen having retired, some to
Nantes and some to Angers: and they all desired to have that thorn out of
their heel. Some were yet remaining in Poytow under the protections of the
King of Navarre, waiting for the occasion to stir at the coming of that army.

This town and castle of Montagne pertained to the Prince of Conde, which by
the outrages of some of the country and neighbors had been surprised, and the
walls so beaten down, that there was no hope left that any war could be
made there. Notwithstanding, the Lord Colombieres whom we have said to have
brought certain companies unto the King of Navarre out of Normandy, with his
youngest son called Lucerne, and some companies with them had seized upon it:
the town was very little repaired of the former ruin and decay, which was
great; the castle had been better relieved, trenched and made commodious. The
Lord Colombieres commanded there; the King of Navarre had sent thither beside
to strengthen the said town the Lord Preau, with four companies of his
regiment at the approaching of that army: for his two other companies had been
sent to Ganache, and other places.

All that could be in that place of footmen was about three hundred, and
besides, there might be about fifty Harquebuziers on horseback.

There was in that place reasonable store of victuals for the time that they
were minded to defend it, as well in wine (whereof there was above four
hundred pipes) as in corn, meal, salt, beef, and other necessary munitions
for man's life.

About the 25. of November, the Lord Miramont Sargeant mayor of the army,
accompanied with the Harquebusiers on horsback of the army, lighted at the
Barillery, where afterward the Lord Neuers lodged, and from thence went with
his company to view the place, and to make his approches.

Captain Beauuoys, and Beuf, leaders of the company of the Lord Colombieres
went out with a certain number of soldiers to receive them. The skirmish
endured very hot a good hour and a half, and there were slain of the side of
the enemies Brichanteau, son to the Lord Bigueulx, and many others, for whom
there was great moan made in the army.

Go now truce-breaker Brigueulx, and learn yet once to break the public
Mauleon.

Captain Beuf, who issued forth out of the town, was shot with a pellet in
the thigh. After this skirmish ended, every man retired, and the enemy went to
lodge at the Barrillery. The two days following, passed away in light
skirmishes.

The 29. the army made approches on the side of the heath Buor. Then the Lord
Preau issued out, so there was a fierce skirmish, in the which were laid on
the ground a great many of the enemies, but none of the town that ever came to
knowledge. The enemies who had begun their trench^s, were compelled by the
said skirmishes to give over their work for that time.

After that about eight days past, before that the Ordinance could arrive, for
the continual rain, floodes and foul ways, which were the beginning of the
s^ourge of that army of savage robbers.

The eighth of December the Cannon arrived, and there passed three days before
it was occupied.

But the eleventh of December, the Duke of Neuers saluted the town with
certain volies of twelve pieces of ordinance, and at the same i^stant summoned
them to render the town. Whether the Lord Colombieres had been already
labored and won by some friends, whom he might have had in the army or
otherwise, so it fell out, that upon the summons he showed unto the garrison,
what small appearance there was to obstinate that place against an army, and
amplifiyng the great discommodities and inconveniences which might ensue,
concluded to render the place, adding as some afterward have reported, certain
discontentments which he said he had received, which did discourage him in the
performance of that service, to which the occasions and many other reasons did
bind him.

The Lord Preau on the other side, said, that the place might be reasonably
defended, That he was servant to the king of Navarre, to whom he had promised
to keep faithfully that place, so long as the skill of war would permit him,
and that his credit did restrain him from consen^ing to the rendering thereof.

Out of this diversity of affections the division began, which afterward was
the cause of the so sudden loss of the place.

The Lord Colombieres had on his side ye Harquebusiers on horseback, which had
followed him, and were there in garrison. The Lord Preau had on his side his
sour companies, some voluntary gentlemen and strangers: between them both
were labored by each party: of the inhabitants there were few or none.

^^t after long reasoning, Colombieres the governor carried it away, knowing
very well yt the enemy was not ignorant of that division, and sent to the camp,
Captain Courbe his lieftenant, to offer agreement to the Neuers, who took
great pleasure in this occasion. For the soiourne of 15. days before that
plate, in so foul weather, in so great scarsitie of victuals as was in that
army, was a second wound of his dissipation.

The term of this agreement was so short, that the king of Navarre being upon
the point to succor them, was compelled to break his enterprise, although it
was agreed that the king of Navarre should have been aduertized of it.

The conditions of the agreement, were that the colors should be rendered, the
soldiers should go forth with their match out, and the gentlemen with their
furniture, that they should all be conducted by a Herault and a trompet, as
far as Saint Albine, with condition that they should retire within three
days.

The L. Colombieres conducted all the Garrison about half a league, and then
he asked if yt there were any in the companies that would follow him: but
almost all refused. Captain Courbe with six or seven more, as well of his
household servants as others, followed him. So he taking his leave, and induced
either with coffeehouse, or with some other affection, he joined himself to
that army.

The rest of the troops were safely conducted nigh as far as Lussen and Saint
Gemmes, and were left there upon the conditions abouesaid, by the Herault and
Trompet. But the Lord Sagonne, Colonel of the light horsemen, did so cut the
time prefixed (that desirous as it was supposed to revenge the death of some
friend of his in that army, who had been slain before in that place) surprised
those companies who were at S. Albine, and charged them so hardly, that scarce
they had time to get into a church, and to shut themselves therein. They were
without munition of necessary things, so that they were compelled to render
themselves yet once again having little resisted. This composition was not
like the first, for they had only their lives: they were unarmed and ryfled,
and some few were slain. With a speedy retire they might have avoided that
injury.

Montagne so surrendered; the town of Ganache was greatly threatened. The
Marquess of Belisle, who made his abode at Maschecow, desired greatly to be
dicharged of such neighbors. And besides, this place was very fit for him, if
by the means of that army he could have gotten it. This place pertained to
the Lady of Landimoys, of the house of Rohan, who had retired to Nantes,
obaying the kings Edict concerning the alteration of religion.

The King of Navarre had given the government of this place, to the L. Plessis
Get, the which diverse times, but specially a few days before the siege, had
been greatly labored by the said Lady, and also by the Marquess of Belisle,
with fair and large promises, to yield the place into their hands, to whom he
would never hearken, but determined to keep it faithfully.

The town of Ganache, being distant from Montagne but seven leagues, the Lord
Plessis fore seeing the siege, dispatched withal diligence to the King of
Navarre (who was at Rochel) the Lord Sabloniere and Iesserant, to let him
understand the small commodities that they had, to hold that place against a
royal army. That notwithstanding the said Lord Plessis, with the rest of the
Captains with him, had determined to do him good service, so that he would
furnish them with means.

At these news, the King dispatched the Baron Vignoles, with all his
companies, to strengthen that place. He sent also by sea, two Captains of the
regiment of his gardes, under the conduct of the Lords Aubiguy, and Robiniere,
who embarked themselves part at Rochel, with powder, pikes, and other munition
of war, part at Esande. But the contrary winds caused them to cast anchor at
the Island of The, where they stayed eight days for wind: during which time,
many being sea sick were found wanting, so that at the imbarking again, in
stead of two hundred, were found fewer in number.

The Lord Plessis in the mean time labored hard in the places where was most
need, and caused the victuals, as well for men as for horses, to be brought in
out of the vilages round about.

The L. Ruffigny arrived there, with 50. Harquebusiers on horseback, by the
commandment of the said King, in staying ye succor which came by sea.

Ganache is compounded of a town and Castle, situated in the borders of
Poytow and Britayn, yet holding more of Poytow, it is distant from the sea
three leagues, with an open prospect on that side: of the side of Montagne, and
Maschecow, it is woody and covered. There is a great poole, which compasses a
great part of the town, upon the Castle side, which with diverse brooks,
waters the great meadows about it, that makes the ways to the town moorish
and foul, but specially in winter. The said poole does compass almost two
parts of the town, to wit, from the suburb Saint Leonard, to the suburb of
Saint Thomas, which is all the side of the Castle. The town is compassed with
an indifferent good ditch, cut out of a rock; the wall is ancient, flancked
with small towers, and made with loope holes, after the old fashion; it was
found better to resist the cannon, then it was thought it would be, specially
on the side where it was battered, the which for being too feeble and naked,
(having but an old gate) the Lord Plessis had fortified and covered with a
spur, as soon as he had the government of that place, which did him good
service during the siege.

He made two bulwarks more on the other side of the town, toward th^suburb
Saint Thomas, the one to cover a tower of the Castle, made after the form of
a horseshoo, the other nigh unto the causie, which does keep the issue of the
poole: ten days before the siege, which was the fourth of Maschecow, without
the which, the enemy even the first night of the siege, might have lodged hard
to the wall, that place being not flanked with any thing.

The work began to go forward, after the succor arrived by the sea, with the
munitions of war, of whom a part was sent to Beauuoyre, by the commandment
of the King of Navarre, to wit, they which were of the regiment of Valirant,
who had embarked themselves with them, who were sent to Ganache.

The Baron Vignoles, a Gentleman of Gascoyne, entered into Ganache, as also the
Lord Saint George, by the King of Navarre his commandment, with his company
of 50. Harquebusiers on horseback. There was then none of all the forts of
sufficient defense, upon which occasion, they divided ye quarters, as well for
the defense, as for to labor about the fortifications, every one in his
quarter, with such diligence as necessity required.

The Baron Vignoles, with his captains Piue, and Solas, took on him the
keeping of the fort of the causy, right against a broaken chapel of Saint
Thomas suburbs. This fort was commanded by a little hill, covered with
fruitful trees, and also by the suburb, for which cause they covered
themselves with barricadoes and Gabions.

The two companies of the Kings gardes, which were commanded by the Lords
Aubiguy and Robiniere, undertook the keeping of the fort of the tower, which
we have said to have the form of a horseshooe.

The Lord Ruffigny with his company, undertook to keep the fort of the
suburb Saint Leonard, which was the best, having the ditches full of water of
the height of 9. foot.

Captain Beauregard, who commanded over the company of the Harquebusiers on
horseback, of the ordinary garrison: undertook to make a fort at one of the
corners of the town, but it was a work of long time, and served but a little,
and cost much to keep, and was not begone, but in hope that Montagne, which was
already besieged, would debate longer then it did, notwithstanding, they
labored about it continually: and whereas the Captain Beauregard had not
above 18. Harquebusiers of his own, half of the company of the Lord Saint
George was given him. The two captains of the two companies of footmen,
ordained for the ordinary gar ion, did draw the lots to whom should remain
the fort which was begun at the gate; so it fell to the lot of Captain
Ferriere, who labored so hard, that even in ten days during the siege, it was
made defensible, and served to good effect.

The other company of the garrison, under the commandment of the Lord
Forestiere, a noble man of Britain, was appointed for the guard of the Castle,
and the Dove house which was in the garden.

The charges so divided, every man does labor; some do pull down

The Lord Plessis advertised of the surrendering of Montagne, sent forth his
forerunners to scour the country: they reported the 14. day of December that
part of the army was already lodged at Lege. The morrow was discovered a
great troop of horsemen, who appeared above the mils of Porrieres to view the
Town.

The Lord Perrine, Lieutenant of the company of the light horses of the
Governor, (who had retired before to his own house, supposing there to pass
part of the winter) returned into the Town about three days before the siege,
and went out with four or five light horses to view them.

The 16. day of December again very early he went out on horseback, but he had
not passed above half a mile when he found the forerunners of the enemy,
whereof he advertised the Governor. About 11. of the clock there marched a
great number of horsemen, conducted by ye Lord Sagonne, followed of many
regiments of Chastiagueray, Brigueulx, Leslele, and ohers, who in have advanced
to get the Suburb of S. Leonard.

These troops discovered by the L. Perrine, he turned face to them to hold
them play, and to give time to them of the Town to prepare to receive them:
which thing could not be done so timely, but that when the bell began to ring
for the alarm, the enemy was at the entering of the Suburb.

The L. Ruffigny went to meet them with sword in hand, and resolutely followed
by the Lord Vignoles and Maretes, sons to the Lord Sabboniere, and some other
Soldiers of their companies with them approached nigh them. But the L.
Ruffigny, for not having had leisure totake his Corslet, entering into a house
where he saw the enemies lodge, received a pellet in his stomach, whereof
(being carried thence) two hours after he dyed.

This his death was occasion that the Suburbs were lost unto the Chapel sooner
then otherwise it had been. Captain Iahn and fifteen Soldiers (besides them
who were wounded) of the enemies side were slain, as well within the said house
as in the Suburbs, as afterward some of the enemies reported.

For to rescue them who did fight, came the Baron Vignoles, with Captain
Forestiere, and 40. Soldiers harquebusiers, who defended all the day that
which rested of the Suburb between the Chapel and ye town. There was
wounded Captain Mote, Standard bearer of the Lord Vignoles, with a pellet in
the highest part of the thigh, whereof he dyed few days after. There was
before the town gate beyond an old hollow way, certain houses somewhat
ruinous. The Lord S. George (the alarm being given) went to lodge within the
same ruinous houses, assisted as well of his own, as of some armed men of the
company of the Governor, to Maschecow. They of the town lost a soldier, and
the Lord Coulee was there wounded.

The night following, the regiment of Brigneulx and Chastiagueray, who had
gotten the Suburb of S. Leonard, lodged in the houses nigh to the Chapel
which were pulled down. Notwithstanding, they could not set up any
Barricadoes, by reason of the continual shot which did rain out of the Forts
and Curtine; so that they could not get out of ye houses.

All the days following, to wit, from the 16. unto the 29. of December, passed
away in continual skirmishes, as the enemy made his approaches for to lodge,
but specially at the coming of the regiments of the County of Beaupre, who
went about to lodge at the Planches: for there commonly began the skirmishes,
which never ended but commonly by the death of some of commandment of the side
of the enemy.

Like skirmishes were daily fought on the side of the Poole, against another
regiment which was lodged at Guinefole, where certain Gascoynes of the garrison
came to hand blows with the enemy. All these skirmishes were so favorable to
them of the Town, that beside the first day they lost not one man, only some
were hurt; so that the enemy could not (during all these skirmishes) get any
advantage upon them, not so much as the hedges within four hundred paces of
the Curtine and Forts. Even ten days after they were besieged, they issued
forth and pulled down certain houses in the sight of the enemy, and burned
others, and among them a house called Escraziere, from whence the enemy who
had lodged therein, was driven out with loss of certain men. The horsemen
also did issue forth, and took so great number of prisoners, that they were
enforced to send back a great many of them that were most unprofitable: they
kept a great number to work at the fortifications; others of greater calling
were put to their ransom.

The Lord Chastre, accompanied with ten or twelve hundred horses, passed at the
Planches to the place where the Lord of Neuers was; and seeing certain
horsemen who were issued out of the Town when he would have gone to view, and
advanced somewhat for that purpose, his horse fell in a ditch, and had not
been the diligence of them of his company in succouring of him, and that he
was covered with a great number of harquebusiers which followed those horsemen,
he had been taken by them of the Town.

As things did so pass there, the Lord Plessis sent diverse times to the King
for to advertise him of the state of the affairs, and by the same messengers

Whilst these skirmishes and blows were given at Ganache the artillery was
brought from Montagne, and took the way of Maschecow for to avoid the foulnes
of the other way: they were whole fifteen days before they could convey the
said ordinance, although they of the Country did show themselves so desirous
and ready to conduct the said ordinance, that they omitted nothing of all their
means, industry and labor: but specially the Lord Belisle, for the desire
which he had to possess that place. There was of that artillery twelve pieces
of Ordinance vz. six canons of battery, four great Culuerins, and two of a
meaner sort.

This Ordinance being arrived the 21. of December about noone, the Duke of
Neuers set his army in battle array, and saluted the town with a voley of all
these pieces, from the top of a little hill nigh the place of execution about
five hundred paces from the town.

That being done, he sent an Herault of arms to sommon the Lord Plessis, to
surrender him the town as unto the Kings lieutenant.

The Lord Plessis, by the advice of all the captains, answered, that he and all
his fellows were most humble and faithful servants and subjects to his
majesty: but that he did not acknowledge in all Guienne any other lieutenant
general for the King, but only the King of Navarre, to whom (and to none
other, if it were not by his express commandment) he would surrender that
place.

The Herald was yet sent twice from the Baron Paluan, and the Lord Villeneufue
of Anjou, for to find the means to speak to the Lord Plessis, who knowing the
importance of such parley, flatly refused it.

At the self same time that the army did so muster in battle array in the
sight of all men, a soldier Wallon of the companies of Picardie, with his
sword in hand drawn, began to run overthwart a great meadow right to the Fort
of Captain Beauregard, crying viue Navarre: the Duke of Guyze is dead, and
Niort is taken: that voice was so high, that it was heard of both sides; they
let fly at him diverse shot, but not one did hit him, but only in his hat. They
of the town were fully advertised by him of the state of the army, and of the
strange events which had happened at Bloys. They understood also of the exploit
which the King of Navarre had donein igh Poytow since the siege. All these
news brought not only great joy to them of the town, but also increased their
courage.

The Duke of Neuers having received answer of the besieged, caused his
Ordinance to be planted in certain ruinous houses on the one side of
Maschecow, defended with certain Gabions, which caused them besieged to think
that they should be battered of that side, where they also began to crench
themselves with great labor and diligence.

But now we will leave the siege of Ganache, whilst the Duke of Neuers does
prepare his battery, to make a breach, and makes himself ready Navarre has
performed in high Poytow.

It is said before, how the King of Navarre after the taking of Beauuoyre, set
garrisons in the towns of Poytow, to keep the country about, and to make
head against that army which was coming with great preparations, might, fury,
and threatenings: which thing being done, heretired to Rochel, to gather all
his power, and to provide all necessary things, either to cross, or to give
battle to that army if occasion might serve.

And whilst these blows and skirmishes above said, did so pass at the siege
of Ganache, and such strange and so unlooked for events did fall out at Bloys,
the Lord Saint Gelays had long before hand curiously sought out the means to
enterprise upon the town of Niort, as well to do service to them, whose part
he followed (the inhabitants having been always of the chiefest of the League,
and great enemies to them of the reformed religion) as also for the injuries
which they of the said Town proffered unto him, and to his houses thereabouts,
doing unto him all the wrongs that ever they could devise.

The King of Navarre arrived from Rochel into Poytow, understood as well by the
said Lord Saint Gelays, and by others of the enterprise upon the said town of
Niort, but the execution thereof was oftentimes delayed: at length the said King
having with a type judgment wayed all the circumstances, and seen the
facility of the means to compass that enterprise, at length ended his
counsel, with resolution to try speedily the execution thereof: and for that
purpose departed from Rochel to Saint Ihan d'Angely under other colors, about
the 21. of December.

The 24. of December, the Lord Saint Gelays departed from Rachel, accompanied
with the Lord Ranques, with ten horsemen of his train only, and arrived at
Saint Iahn about nine a clock in the night.

The 26. of December, arrived at S. Iahn early (at the first opening of the
gates) a Post from Bloys riding with two Horses, who said that voluntarily he
had departed from Bloys, to bring news to the King of Navarre, touching the
death of the Duke of Guyze.

These news did not stay the execution of the enterprise, so that the said
King having given order to the men of war which should be at the execution,
and appointed them who should conduct them, to wit, the Lords Parabiere,
Hara^bure, Preau, and others, the Lord S. Gelays and Ranques, with twelve
horsemen only departed from S. Iahn, and making toward Villeneufue within a
league from Saint Iahn, met about 40. Harquebuziers on horse back of the
regiment of the King of Navarre his guards, who were conducted by the Lord des
Listres: with this troop the said Gelays and Ranques went the way that goes
to the left hand of the Forest.

Thence (being yet day) the Lord Ranques accompanied with ten or twelve
Harquebusiers, left the Lord Saint Gelays, and went the way to Foys: he was far
gone on his way when he met with ten or twelve horsemen of the enemies, who
were thought to be Albaneses: he charged them, and one was flaine, the rest
saved themselves in the forest of Chizai.

In the mean time while the Lord Saint Gelays, with the rest of his troop
went the cross way nigh to the town Saint Plausiue, where the Lords
Parabiere, Harambure, and Preau, with others who followed him to the number of
350. men, with six mules, carrying the ladders and other necessary things
which met ye said Lord S. Gelays: there they stayed awhile for the rest of the
troop, all assembled together, which might be in number between three and
four hundred men Harquebuziers, and three or four score armed men.

All this company took their way toward Niort, with as much silence as could
be, to the gate Saint Gelays.

The Lord Ranques separated himself, as is said before, to scour the
country, the way which goes to Saint Jhans gate of Niort, to see that no man
might go into the town, to give advertisement of the things which were done
abroad. There were left behind all the companies, two servants of the Lord
Saint Gelays, who went on foot, they followed their master the way of County,
to Niort. A country man was sent to Niort, by the Lord Ferriere, Lieutenant of
the company of the Lord Malicorne, who then was in his house at County. This
country man did carry letters from the said Lord Ferriere, to the governor or
to the Lieutenant of Niort (a man Leagued turbulent, and at whose beck all the
inhabitants did tremble) with advertisement, that already he had warned them
twice to take heed, for although the report went, that the Hugonets were going
to Coignak, it was fained, for certainly they had returned back, and went
straightly to them. And that he feared least his men had been taken, seeing
that he had not received since any news, which thing caused him to send to
them the third time that country man, to advertise them carefully to take
heed. These servants of the Lord Saint Gelays, asked the country man whether
he goes: He answers to Niort: and we also say they, but we fear it will be
too late to come thither in time, for it was sun setting: care not for that
says the country man, for I can get in and if it were midnight, for I bring
letters to the Lord Malicorne. The servants hearing that, and perceauing that
the country man had the letters within a ball of earth, which he carried in
his hand, forced him, took his letters from him, and lead him with them, and
meeting the Lord Ranques at the rendesvous, Gelays, Parabiere, and others when
they came. This had been enough to put them out of heart: but in vain does
the guard of the city watch, when God will surprise it, there is neither
safety nor counsel against his power.

The insolency of the inhabitants of Niort against the King of Navarre, and
them of the religion, was come to a full measure. For notwithstanding the great
doubt, least they of the town had been advertised of their enterprise, at the
instant request of some, they determined to go through.

The troops had already lighted a great half league off in the valey, nigh
Vouilay, and had left their horses made fast, with certain servants to keep
them: they caused the Mules which carried the ladders, and other necessary
things, to go through the fields unto a quarrie of stone nigh the town, and
distant only from the wall a bow shoot: there were the ladders unloaded and
distributed to them that should occupy them. There were prepared the petar shy
two Gentlemen, named Vilesan and Gentil, who being very industrious in such
things, should use them, which were brought within a stones cast of the wall,
and the ladders also, and all in the high way that leads from Chicay, to the
gate Saint Gelays: all this stir passed without any perceauing of them within
the town.

The Moon was not down, nor went not down four hours after, which
increased greatly the fear of them who did enterprise, least they should be
discovered, yet they determined to abide patiently in silence, both the great
and extreme cold, and also the going down of the Moon, at whose shining,
many lying upon the frosen hard ground, did sleep (being weary of their long
journey) more sweet then if they had been in their beds. In the mean
while, the Lords Ranques, Valieres, Gentil, and others went to view the ditch,
and the place where the ladders should be set up, and the gates where the
Petars should be applied. When they had viewed all, and saw that nothing did
stir in the town, and had made their report, they began to let down the
ladders into the dry ditch, by an easy path, and also to set the Petars to
their places. The first company ofskaling ladders, was conducted by the Lords
Ranques, Valieres, Ionquieres and others, guided by a Soldier named Reuaudiere.

At the second companyes of ladders, were the Lords Preau, Arambure, and des
Listres, followed by the men which they had in their companies.

The Lord Saint Gelays and Parabiere went to the gate of Saint Gelays, where
the Petars should play.

The scalado was set up at the wall of the town, distant from the said gate
of Saint Gelays about thirty or forty paces.

They who carried the Ladders were not so soon descended into the ditch, but
the Sentinel which was upon the wall (far from the place

He which commanded the guard of the town (which was upon the gate of Saint
Gelays) came forth and asked the Sentinel: who is there: The Sentinel answered,
I heard some noise, but it is nothing. There happened then a great darkness (as
commonly does after the going down of the Moon) which did favor greatly them
which were without, to steal away from the eyes of the Sentinel: for without
any knowledge of the said Sentinel the Ladders were placed safely. It had been
concluded between them that were to give the assault, that they should enter
as many as they could by the scalado, and tha^ the Petars should not play
^vntil an extremity: so that surprise was begun by the scalado. The Ladders
then lincked one within another (for they were made with such an art) were
applied to the wall of ten foot in height, distant one from the other three or
four paces.

The Lords Ionquieres and Sousonbre being upon the wall, followed with five and
twenty or thirty next unto the Sentinel, cast the sais Sentinel over the
wall, and as the remnant went up the walls, the said Ionquieres, Sousonbre,
with the Lords des Listres and Preau, and about fifty with them set upon the
guard, where were seven or eight poor laboring men, for the rich men of the
town were asleep in their beds: for as they afterward reported, many of them
had passed the most part of the night in playing and dansing, to whom no harm
was done, considering the silence which they kept.

A soldier of them which were entered, apprehending the great danger of such a
small number in such a mighty and populous Town, cried to set fire to the
Petars: so that which was set at the gate of S. Gelays, shot and gave the
alarume to the inhabitants, it did open the gate with the shot.

The other also was fired and brake the drawn bridge, and opened the gate. The
Lord S. Gelays and Parabiere, with many other Gentlemen and Soldiers armed
entered thereby.

They who entered by the scalado di^ slide close (although few in number) a long
streate, and went to the market place, where some of the inhabitants running
out of their houses, made show of some resistance, and there was hurt the Lord
Harambure. At the same instant came to the^ the Lord Parabicre with his train,
they cried to the inhabitants to put lights at the windows, and in the
streats, who hearing Viue Navarre, and supposing that it was a surprise, were
affrayde, and obeyed the^, for they durst ^ot disobey being in a maze.

The other part of them which had got up by the ladders, found resistance in a
corner of the streate nigh the hospital. For a certain man of the town,
na^med prince receiver of the tallages, rising early to write letters Poy^iers,
at the alarm given went out of his house with a broad Target in his left hand,
and his sword in his right hand. But he forgot to set the scarf of his Target
about his neck, which turned to him displeasure. For having resorted to the
Lieftenaunt of the town, who was accompanied with some of the inhabitan^s and
soldiers of the governors guarde, they with all this company set furiously
upon them who had entered, and did advance into the town, and did drive them
back. But the said Prince, weary with the weight of his Target, either for
that he was hurt or otherwise, gave it over: So that this being done, the rest
began to waver. The Liefetenant was hurt, and as dispairing of his life, put
himself into the hands of some gentlemen, with promise of great ransonie, and
thereupon he was hidden, that it could not be known where he was, until after
his death.

The rest of the people which took weapons, did assemble together in the
streate of the town house: they let flee certain shot, but without effect,
for incontinently they lost courage, as it falls out ordinarily in such
sudden surprises, specially where the warnings are neglected, as had been
done by this Liefetenant of Niort, disdaynfully few days before.

Some cast themselves over the walls, whereof some were slain; others were let
down with cords; many retired into the Castle: others did hide themselves: so
that these few companyes of the King of Navarre in less space than three
quarters of an hour entered, vanquished, and remained masters of the place,
without any loss more than of five men. There was slain of the inhabitants of
the town, between five and twenty and thirty, and yet the greatest part of
them for going indiscreetly to the place of the alarm with lincks and torches,
which served for level to the Soldiers in the dark to shoot at them.

When the day began to appear, the soldiers wandered about for the spoil
which was made in the houses, but so that it was done without any murder, or
rauishing of woman or maid. And so much as was done, happened because it was
impossible for the leaders wholly to repress it: For it was a town leagued full
of the^ yt had their hands yet defiled with the blood of them of the religion,
whom they had every way cruelly handled, and were rich by the spoil of their
goods, of such as had deserved the just indignation of the King of Navarre,
against whom they had behaved themselves no less rashly than presumptuously.
To be short, it was a town surprised by them, in whose affections they had
kindied the firebrand of teuenge, if the conqueter would have used it: Yet all
was done with as much moderatenes, as the circumstance of the action, of the
place, and of the persons with whom they had to do could permit.

The richest sort, and of the greatest calling, enemies to the resormed
Religion, were quist, in redeeming their lives and goods by a small sum

The leaders dispatched incontinently a messenger to Saint Iahn, to the King of
Navarre, to let him understand the news of that execution. About nine a clock
in the morning, the Lord Malicorne who was in the Castle, was sommoned to
yield himself and the place, at the discretion of the King of Navarre. There
was no means for him to yield, for all the Ordinance was in the town:
Hostages were given on both sides, two Gentlemen, to wit, Despaue and Rousiere,
went forth of the Castle for the Lord Malicorne, and the Lord Pont of Corle,
with two soldiers of the guards of the King of Navarre entered into the
Castle, to let the disorder that might rise there.

The seven and twentieth day, the King of Navarre arrived there with a certain
number of horsemen, he received at his coming the said Lord Malicorne very
courteously, to whom he permitted to carry out of the Castle all that was
his, and granted to the Lady Malicorne to enjoy the Abbey of Saint Ligaire.

The eight and twentieth, after yt the Lord Malicorne had departed out of Niort,
the Liefetenant was found dead in a poor house at the gate of Saint Gelays,
where he died of the wounds which he had received in the conflict, his body
was brought out to be hanged on a Gibbet before the Castle.

The K. of Navarre (notwithstanding) granted it easily to his friends to be
buried, although be had deserved some notable mark of dishonor, even after
his death; for he had lived very seditiously, and had sworn to the League, one
of the first, he had cruelly defiled his hands with the blood of many innocent
persons, under the color that they were of the religion. And not long before
had committed an act, no less odious and cruel, than felonious: for he had
caused the dead body of the great Provost of France, to be drawn through the
streates of the town, after he had been slain in the fight, nigh the walls
of the town, and that a little before his surprise, as is before said.

There was one Iamart, of the richest sort of the town taken, who being upon
the point to be put to his ransom, and to be delivered as the other inhabitants
then were, was accused even by many of the romish religion, and of the town,
to have been a man of wicked life, who had committed many things punishable by
the laws. He was convicted to have been one of the chiefest doers in the
sedition of the League, and had vnworthley, and outragiously spoken against the
principal Princes of the blood, his process was made according to the crimes
committed by him. This was the only man, who was iudicially executed at the
surprise.

There were found in that town five great pieces of battery, carrying half a
foot and an ynch in the mouth, two very long Culuerins, which the Lieutenant
abouesayd had caused to be cast (as he said in dirision) to salute the King of
Navarre, when he should approach the walls of Niort. There were found also two
mean culuerins: the five canons were made ready a new by workmen, specially
called from Paris for that purpose, for to be brought to the army of the Duke
of Neuers, for the siege of Fonteney, which was intended after the winning of
Ganache.

This town was full of rich men and riches, by reason of the spoil of them of
the reformed religion, of all the country round about.

There was sufficient quantity of corn, to maintain an army of twenty
thousand men for the space of two years. There was also sound twenty thousand
weight of powder, besides a marvelous quantity which every man had in
particular. This is a rule of Gods justice, he that spoyleth, shall be spoiled,
he that wastes shall be wasted.

The King of Navarre gave the government of that place, and of the country,
to the Lord Saint Gelays: the Lord Parabiere was appointed to dwell in the
Castle.

To conclude this book with the year (Christian reader) thou may see with
thine eye, ye judgments of God executed upon his enemies generally for their
Idolatry, superstition, and atheism. But specially upon Henry the third, for
obstinacy, in refusing (through the hardness of his heart) to hear the Lord
Christ speaking unto him, and warning him to be wise, and fear the Lord with
reverence, in refusing the counsel of wise and noble Princes Senators, noble
men, and faithful friends, and following always the unjust and wicked counsels
of his mother, of flatterers, and sicophants, but specially of his domestical
enemies, by whose counsels and persuasions he lost his authority, credit,
reputation, kingdom and life, as shall be said in the book next following.

Thou have seen also, how the Lord out of the heavens, from the habitation of
his seat, has derided and laughed to scorn the pride, arrogancy, and
contemptuous presumptiousnes of the King of Spain, has extended his mighty
army upon him and his servants, as he did upon Pharao King of Aegipt, and
clothed him with dishonor, as with a garment, and made him ridiculous, and
contemptible in the sight of the Princes, people, and nations of the world.

We have seen also, how that the Lord, to punish the parricides, murderers
of the saints, atheism, and execrable life of the Duke of Guize, of his
brethren, father, and uncles, turned him to a spirit of ambition, to work all
treasons, treacheries, villainies, commotions, seditions, and rebellions against
his natural King, Prince, benefactor and country, covering all these
execrable enormities, under the cloak of Catholic religion, and Gods glory,
by the which he has wrought his own, his children, house, Elizabeth of
England, nurce of Gods Church, the joy of Gods people, has decked her head
with a Crown of glory, has clothed her with honor, has established her
seat with justice and godliness, has made her the terror of al enemies of
Christ, and the beauty of Europ.

The same Gods (providence and merciful kindenes) has also preserved Henry of
Bourbon King of Navarre, and now of France, from the commotions of the people,
and whereas his enemies have set upon him by land, by sea, by force, by
policy, poison, and all other means which the angel of darkness has been
able to teach them, to swallow him alone alive; behold the Lord, not only
has established him in his own hereditarie kingdom, but also by the means
of his enemies (though against their wills) has made him a way to place him in
that throane of Majesty, which appartained unto him by that succession, which
God had ordained in that kingdom, being one of the most famous kingdoms of
Europ, and has made him a victorious conqueror of the wicked, and the
restorer of that afflicted state.

But also in this book, we have seen how the Lord, in whose sight is precious
the death of his saints, before the coming of those miseries, the Lord has
taken unto himself the most noble, virtuous, and godly Princes, the Princes of
Conde and Boillon, and many other noble men, least they should see evil days,
whose names are written in the book of the righteous.

We have seen also, how the Lord has turned the most wicked and damnable
oath taken, not at the states, but rather conspiracy of Bloys, to an borrible
confusion, and dissipation of the wicked: for after that the wicked have gone
continually to wrack and confusion, and never prevailed in any action, but in
wrapping themselves into miserable treasons, rebellions and commotions,
replenishing their streates, with murder and blood.

The end of the fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK.
THis new year brings forth new events and strange, full of confusions,
the kings death, and an alteration in the succession of the Crown of France,
as it shall appear. We have left the royal Army under the conduct of the
Duke of Neuers, weakened with hunger, cold, and hard lodging, amazed with the
strange accidents happened at Bloys, before the town of Ganache, there
preparing all things for the battery. Also we have showed what exploytes the
King of Navarre did in the mean while. Now we will return from Niort in high
Poytow to Ganache, to see what would be done there.

The first day of January 1589. passed away with light skirmishes, but without
any great effect.

The second day, they within the town perceived that the enemy was remoouing
the Ordinance from the place where it was first pitched, and yet they could not
know upon which side of the Town they intended to place it, until the morrow
being the third day of January, when it was seen at the Chapel Saint Leonard
covered with gabions, and planted within two hundred paces of the wall. They
perceived also another battery in preparing on the side of the Poole in a
field toward Guinefole, so that the batteries did cross one another.

The Winter this year was so extreme during this siege, that the ice did
carry every where: which thing caused great discommoditie to them which were
besieged, the earth being so hard, that when they began to trench themselves
within, (which was at the arriving of the Canon) they could not in an hour
open a foot of earth, although that they had made pickaxes and tools for that
purpose. But this also did greatly increase their labor, for at the arriving
of the Canon they had saluted the Town on the side of Maschecow, and being
lodged within the ruins of certain houses there, had planted gabions, which
caused them of the town to believe that they should be battered on that side,
where they also had begun their trenches with much and unprofitable labor. For
as it is said, the ordinance was removed to another place, now having lost all
their former labor, they are set to work night and day at the trenches, and
when they went out of the watch, without rest or sleep they must work at the
trenches:

The same, to wit, the third day a certain Corporal was sent by them of the
Town, to see whether there was any means to enterprise upon that artillery,
but he was slain with a pellet in the breast.

About noone the enemy shot certain voleyes of Ordinance against a gate of
the Castle which opens into the garden, where they saw by the moving of the
earth, that Pyouers were at work.

The fourth day, they within the town at the breaking of the day, perceiving
the preparations for the battery, found themselves hardly distressed, for that
they had no trenches against the batteries, and that it was almost impossible
to make any for hardness of the ground, by reason of the frost, and yet they
labored hard about it day and night in that sort as is aforesaid. Whilst the
Governor and the Captains were assembled to take advice what was expedient to
be done, one of the company proposed, that it were good to send a Drommer to
play with his Dromme toward the broaken Chapel, under color of making
exchange of prisoners, and in the mean time to delay the battery of the
enemy. This was concluded, but afterward it was revoked, by reason of the
disadvantage which might ensue, least the enemy upon that occasion should
think, that they fearing the trench did seek occasion of parley.

Then the two batteries began, the one did beat the Fort of Beauregard, and
that which was made above an old gate, as is said asore: the other battery did
beat at the other said Fort which was under the gate. That which was made out
of the old wall resisted the fury of the ordinance far better then it was
thought it would: for from half an hour after Sun rising until Sun
setting, it never ceased to thunder without any intermission, so that there was
let fly that day above eight hundred canon shot.

The night being so near, they who were besieged saw no appearance that the
assault would be given, and had not prepared themselves to receive the enemy
that day, considering that the breaches were flanked with two fortes, which
were first to be forced: notwithstanding all the French footmen and Swissers
were seen a far off in battle array about noone, which was the cause that
they divided speedily the small number of men which they had to keep the
Fortes: but specially the two Fortes which flanked the breaches on both sides.
They provided also a certain number to keep the breaches if the enemy should
proffer the assault.

They were not above two hundred and threescore persons which were of ability
to defend the breaches, for the rest were either sick or hurt, or else occupied
to keep the five Fortes which were without.

The Governor took upon him to keep the breach which was at the left hand,
with a hole to pass to the Fortes if they were assaulted, being

The Baron Vignoles was appointed to keep the breach, which was above the
gate, with five armed men, and fifteen Harquebuziers: and for as much as that
number was not sufficient, the Governor appointed the Lord Perrine to assist
them with five armed men more.

When the breaches began to be reasonable, every one having sixteen long paces
breadth, the whole army being in battle array, the enemy began to stir, and
marching with a swift pace, stouping low, they set on both sides of the Fortes
which were aside of the breaches.

The enemy sustained the first onset, wherewith these two Fortes received them
and passed throug, halthough that many remained upon the places, saluted by
them of the Fortes with shot, and with the force of the pikes, yet in a little
space they were masters of the two fortes.

They might have defended the said fortes longer, but two causes did let them,
the one was the small number of the defendants, the other was the death of the
Lord Marestes youngest son to the Lord Sabloniere, and brother to the Lord
Vignoles, who after the death of the Lord Ruffigny, commanded over his company
and one of the fortes which had befollen him: his was slain with the shot of a
Culuerin. This his death did greatly have the forsaking of that fort: his
brother the Lord Vignoles made great moan for him.

The Fortes being won, it was high time for them which kept the breaches to
bestirre and defend themselves: and as they were assaulted furiously by the
enemies, so they received them coragiously. There was all manner of defense
used, shot, pikes, pomgarnads, fiery hoopes, stones, and all other manner of
defense were thrown upon the enemy.

Many of the enemies having the night favorable, retired under the shadow
thereof, they who did obstinate themselves either were wounded, or else remained
dead in the place: in this assault happened a thing worthy to be noted. The
Baron Vignoles had a friend in the army named Poysson, a man of charge in that
service. This man was greatly careful for the preservation of the said Baron,
and desirous to save him, prayed a Captain of the regiment of Chastiagueray
(whose Standerd bearer was very sick) to give him his ensign for that day
only, determined to enter one of the first to save his friend, the said Baron
Vignoles: the Captain delivered him his ensign according to his request.
Poysson at the assault given, was one of the first which went up to the same
breach, which the said Baron Vignoles kept, intending to have saved him, but
the said Poysson being not known by his friend Vignoles, was received by two
Harquebuze shot, which did bear him down to the ground, so that he was carried
away.

The heat of the fight dured a long hour, and after that time the enemies
began to faint, but on the contrary their courage was doubled that

There was great disorder in the retire of the enemy, for most part of them
did cast away their weapons, and lost them in the ditch, and in the fortes
which they forsook. Many were drowned in the ditch, casting them selves down
from the fortes upon the ice, which (by reason of that) brake under them.

The ditches were incontinently lighted with a number of torches and linkes out
of the Town and Fortes, for it was very dark.

The besieged in the town spoiled the dead that evening, some went out of the
Forts unto the brook, which does separat the town from the suburb to get
armor. Notwithstanding, a point of humanity was showed toward the enemy worthy
to be remembered, for they did not hurt so much as to take any thing from the
enemies, who were left hurt upon the breaches, and in the ditches, but rather
they were had into the town, their wounds dressed, and courteously used, even
to the day that the town was surrendered.

This victory is the more memorable, because about fifty men defended the
breaches against such a multitude: for all the regiments of the Swissers also
assaulted the same, in witness thereof many of them remained in the ditch.

It is also to be noted, that during the assault, when they within the town
had set fire into a pomgarnad for to cast it into the ditch, it fell again
between the legs of the Governor, and did burst without doing any hurt.

Upon this prosperous issue of that assault, the Lord Plessis governor, called
all the Captayns and Gentlemen to render thanks to God for his gracious favor
showed unto them.

On the side of the Town the Lord Perrine was killed with a shot in the head,
whereof he dyed within a while after. Captain Forest, and the Lord of Saint
Cosmio were hurt in both arms.

Of the enemies side there were found the fifth day of January above fifty dead
within the ditch, besides them who were drowned, and many which dyed afterward
in the side of the Town: i^ is certain that there were found missing in that
day of the army above three hundred, and that one Captain only had lost above
six score.

Beside them whith were wounded in great number, was the Lord Brigneulx master
of the camp, this man lost his Son at Montagne; now he has a blow; let him
learn then, not treacherously to vyolate the right of Nations, as he did at
Mauleon.

The night after the assault was bestowed in fortifiyng and continuing the
trenches.

This day was bestowed of the enemy in the burying of the dead. The same day
in the evening, a drum of the enemy brought letters to the Lord Plessis,
governor of the place, from the Lord Palneau. When he had received them, he
assembled all the counsel to open the said letters in their presence.

The letters in substance did import, that the said L. Palneau had great desire
to speak with him about a thing which would bring him much contentation, which
he said he could not write. In the same letters he prayed the Lord Plessis to
give him means and safe conduct to speak with him.

All the Captains gave their advise, that he could not refuse that parley,
because that the Lord Palneau, second son to the Earl of Carauas, was a
faithful servant to the King, and great friend to the house of Bourbon, and
deadly enemy to the League, and that by him they might also understand news
of the King of Navarre, whereof they were in great care.

The 6* day of January, the Lord Palneau accompanied with the Captain Grange,
who was of the regiment of County Gra^pre, went to the fort of the tower of
the Castle, made after the form of a horseshooe.

During this parley, they began the battery with two pieces at the break of
the day: about noone they increased with three pieces more, and continued till
night. There were bestowed that day above eight score Cannon shot. There were
two soldiers slain, whereof the one was named Bourg, of the company of the
Lord. Vignoles: there was great m^ane made for that man for his great valor,
for he was a rare pattern of godliness and virtue.

The Lord Plessis going forth to that parley, accompanied with the Lord
Ayomont, upon return, reported to the counsel, that the Lord Palneau had
notified unto the^, that the Duke of Neuers had determined not to vnbit nor to
depart from that siege before he had salued his honor, and to that end he
would spare no friend, no means, nor authority. That his stay there in that
siege did hinder the affairs of the king of Navarre more than they did think.

That the King did besiege Orleans, by the citadell, where was the Marshal
Haumont, and that the king would use the forces of the King of Navarre against
the leagued.

To be short, the Lord Plessis, and all others which had assisted him, had
gotten honor enough in the defense of such a naughty place, and that there was
no more means to stand obstinate in defense of the said place, the said L. of
Neuers being sufficiently informed of the necessities, wherein they were as
well of men who were greatly weary, as of victuals.

That if they would hearken to render that place into his hands, he offered
unto the governor and gentlemen, arms, horses and baggage, and to the
soldiers, arms and baggage, and for the safe conduct, the County Granpre, the
Baron Poluan and Bastenay, Captain of an hundred light horses, should conduct
them safely whither soever they would go.

He gave them beside, eight days space to aduertize the King of Navarre, of
the capitulation, and in case that the said King should not give any succor
within the said eight days by any means, he in his person, or his Lieftenant,
the said L. Plessis and his should surrender him the place, and they to enjoy
the benefit of the agreement.

There were many gaings and commings upon this proposition, and at length the
affairs being propounded to the counsel, they did stick much upon the
voluntary proffers of the Duke of Neuers, to give eight days to aduertize the
King of Navarre: which made them believe that the said king was neither ready
to help them, nor had sufficient power so to do, which notwithstanding was
the only hope of them that were besieged, who otherwise could not withstand if
they should be pressed.

All things being well considered, they determined to hearken to so
aduantagious proffers, with hope thereby to make the K. of Navarre privy to
their affairs, and for that intent to send Captain Robiniere with a
passeporte, that was concluded and sealed on both sides the sixth day at night.

The seventh day the truce was agreed, and hostages were given on both parts,
and all acts of hostility ceased.

The same day the Lord Robiniere departed with a trompet of the D. of Neuers to
go to the King of Navarre. The governor in the mean while was greatly
careful, to take heed that no man should go forth to visit or frequent with
them of the army, and also that none of the enemies should enter into the
town. To prevent all inconveniences, he made a diligent watch both day and
night upon the breaches, so that he himself took his meals, and did lie
thereon, notwithstanding the hardness of the winter.

The eleventh day of January, the Lord Robiniere returned from the king of of
Navarre, and brought with him the Lord Rinuile to the Lord of Neuers, who after
he returned to the king of Navarre, obtained leave to enter into the town with
the Lord Robiniere.

By them, they within the town were informed, how the king of Navarre had
marched forward very nigh, intending to succor them, and to venture a battle
for that end, but that he fell sick with a dangerous disease; which had hindered
the execution of his enterprise.

They reported also how that the said King of Navarre had sent the Chastilion,
Rochefocault, Trimouille, and Plassak, with the greatest parts of his army,
to try how they might enterprise upon the enemy: but considering that nothing
could be attempted without great disadvantage, they were feign to return
back. For the Lord of Neuers had lodged and trenched himself in so
aduantagious a place, that the town could not sail but fall into his hands,
except it were rescued by the winning of a battle, which thing the time
pref^xed could not permit, being already almost expired.

Notwithstanding, the twelfth day at night the Lords Chastilion, Plassak, and
Trimouille, went to view the army so nigh that in the dark night some shot of
Ordinance was given out for a token of the alarm toward the Porrieres.

The Duke of Neuers upon this alarm, feared greatly, least the Lord Plessis
seeing that help nigh, would have received some succors within the town,
interpreting the terms of the agreement to his advantage. But the said Lord
Plessis would have done nothing of dangerous consequence, much less against
his promise.

The 14. of January, the Lord of Neuers perceived that they within the town,
went faithfully to work, for every man disposed himself to depart: also he
used much courtesy toward the^ who were besieged, providing carts for them,
whereof they had need to carry as well their bagage, as the^ which were
wounded, and caused them to issue forth out of the sight of ye army, least
they should be molested by any man. The said Lord of Neuers was in his own at
their coming forth with a small company, he commanded their matches to be
kindled, saluting very courteously every man. There were some soldiers hurt,
whom they could not carry away, he commanded them to stay, with assurance to
be dressed, and otherwise courteously used.

All the companies were safely conducted unto the Abbey Brilleybant, the
companies of the King of Navarre being lodged at Palneau, half a league
thence, to whom they joined themselves easily: the regiment of the C^unty of
Beaupre was left there in Garrison.

So then the said Duke of Neuers having received the town of Ganache, as is
above said, on a sudden that great and furious army was broaken to pieces, as
smitten with the finger of God. Many there dyed, many were hurt: they of the
League living in great mistrust, either did dissemble their actions, or retired
to such places of safety, as they thought most fit: the artillery returned
into the places from whence it was taken. The Lord of Neuers went to Bloys;
withal the rest of the army as remained with him, whereof a part was sent to
the Marshall Haulmont, who in the Citadell fought with the inhabitants of
Orleans: within a few days after, the Lord of Neuers went from the court, to
his house of Neuers.

So all the low Poytow, which had been terribly threatened with that Bloys
upon the person of the Duke of Guize, was as an horrible thunderclap, not only
unto the leagued, which were in the army of the L. of Neuers, of whom the most
part did consist, and to others who were in multitudes in most parts of the
realm, but also unto all others of that confederacy which were out of the
realm. For the news fleeing as far as Lorreyne, the forces of the Duke of
Lorreyne, which had blocked Iamets in ye sovereignty of Boillon, ever since the
month of April before, were so amazed by the unexpected loss, and surprise
of that support, that they taking suddenly bag and bagage, as men frighted
out of their wits, brake the siege, and retired away: so that God there
delivered his Church after a long and dangerous trial, which shall induce the
posterity, to fear and admire the just judgments of God, who within a
moment, and by events, not forseene by man's wisdom, does turn vpside down
the counsels of the wicked, to the joyful deliverance and comfort of his
saints. Righteous O Lord are thy judgments, all thy ways are righteousness and
truth.

The army of the King of Navarre returned to Niort and Fontenay.

It is said before, how after the surprising of Niort, the King of Navarre
repaired to the said town, the 27. of December, and soiourning there a while,
there he gathered the greatest part of his forces, and about the 6. day of
January, in this year 1589. the said King departed, with such forces as he
had from Niort, toward the town of Ganach, intending to succor them, who were
besieged therein, or else to fight with the Duke of Neuers, if he would have
let him. But God who governed all things, with an unsearchable wisdom,
disappointed that enterprise by that dangerous sickness, which fell upon him.

The cold was very extreme, and as he is a most laborious Prince, after he had
been long on horseback all armed, a great cold came upon him, so that he was
enforced to light down of his horse, and go on foot with a swift pace and
violent motion to get him some heat: and a little after he had eaten, a
strange extraordinary cold took him, with a great fever.

About the 9. day of January it was incontinently perceived that it was a
pleuresie. This happened at a little village called S. Pere: there he was
enforced to stay, without any means to transport him to any other place, (by
reason of the sharpnes of the sickness) but to a little Castle nigh that
village, where being, the sickness did so increase that many doubted of his
life. He also resolved himself constantly to abide the good will of GOD,
ready willingly to end his life (if Gods will was such): the thing that only
grieved him (as that good King Ezechias) was the need which the Church of God
might have of his presence in France, (if he should fall) and also the want of
his fidelity in that kingdom, if in the midst of so many great troubles and
confusions he should be taken out of this world. Notwithstanding,

He sent to all the Churches round about to make prayers and supplications for
him, which was done with much feruencie and sorrow.

The news of his dangerous disease were brought to Rochel in the evening
being the 13. day of January. The congregation was called speedily with the
ringing of the bell to repair to the Temples. This was about seven of the
clock at night, (an hour not used to such meetings) the necessity
notwithstanding requiring the same. The people advertised of the cause, ran
with such multitudes to the places of prayers, so that the like was never seen
in that town. All manner of men indifferently, even children and apprentises
forsook the houses to repair to the Temples; the multitude was such, that
many being not able to go in, went home again heavy and sad, answering by
their private prayers to those that were made in public, with much lamentation
and tears. For all men knew well the greatness of the affliction throughout
all France generally, if God at that time (so troublesome and confused) had
taken out of this life that first Prince of the blood, whom he had endued wi^h
so many graces. The said extraordinary prayers were continued for the space of
many days, until that the recovering of his health was certainly known.

The rumor of his death was spread into diverse places of the Realm, even at
the Kings Court, for the which reports all good and true men did greatly
mourn. The great contentation which the leagued received thereof dured not
long; for the King received news shortly after of his recovery.

It is said before, how that after the execution done upon the person of the
Duke of Guize, the King sent into the Provinces to advertise the Governors,
Magistrates and people, of the just causes and necessity that enforced him to
do that execution. And interrupting the continuance of the events which
followed that execution, we descended into the low Poytow, there to see what
exployts the great royal army (conducted by the Duke of Neuers) had done
there, and also what the King of Navarre did all that while. Now having seen
that army to have made shipwreck and vanished out of sight, we will leave the
King of Navarre being in bed sick of a dangerous pleurisy, expecting health
of the Lord which gives salvation unto Kings, and to restore him to his health
and strength, and will come to the matter again, and consider the horrible
accidents which followed the death of the Duke of Guize, and of the bounsing
Priest the Cardinal

After this execution done upon the bouldest authors of the conspiracy, and
the rest of the heads of the same being in hold, there was great hope that the
burning fire of all civil dissentions should be on a sudden quenched, the
flaming torches of tumults being put out. But the news of the said execution
of the Duke of Guyze being brought into all parts of the Realm, by them that
fled without boots and spurs out of the suburbs of Bloys: the report came
also to the Duke de Main, being then with an army in Liomoys, he taking with
him such as would follow him, went out of the Country for two causes. First,
fearing (upon these news) the neighborhood of them of Daulphine, Vienoys,
and Viuarets, who might have doubled their courage upon that occasion, being
there most of the reformed religion.

Secondly, that because of the death of his brother (the hope for the which he
and his brother the Duke of Guyze did greatly envy and malice one an other)
with mutual ha^red, does now proffer it self unto him, without any manifest
competitour.

This Duke de Main therefore now swallowing down the crown of France in one
morsel by imagination, with as many as would follow him, made have into
Burgondie, and Champaigne, and there made sure to himself in those Provinces
as many places as he could, preparing all things to war against the King.

Here it might be thought strange, how the Duke de Main does so cruelly move
war and rebellion against the King, seeing that it was he himself and his
cousin, the Duke d'Aumale, who gave advertisement to the King of the conspiracy,
and intent of his brother the Duke of Guyze, as is aforesaid.

The question is easily resolved: there is no faith nor fidelity among them,
who do aspire to the same one kingdom, there is no society, be it never so
sworn and holy. These three, to wit, the Duke of Guyze, Main, and Aumale,
did affect the Kingdom: but because the Duke of Guyze was more favored of the
partakers then the other two, he was carried theretoo, as if it were upon the
shoulders by all the partakers, who attaining unto it, would have established
the same to himself and to his Son already in man's estate, and to his
posterity.

The Dukes of Main and Aumale (no doubt) did love more the Duke of Guyze, and
would have had the Crown rather upon his head, then where it was: yet
according to the rules of the Divinity of Sorboun, that charity begins at it
self, they would have worn the Crown of France every one upon his own
head, rather then that any other should have had the occupying of it howsoever
great and dear friend he might have been. This emulation about the
affectation of the Crown, was the de Main, and Aumale, each of the^ in
respect of himself discovered the conspiracy to the King, to the end that he
being made away, they might march a plain way in the same steps which he had
traced before them, reserving to the craftiest or mightiest hereafter to
oppress his cosine: for it is not to be thought that there would have been
more union and love between the Dukes of Main and Aumale, being but cosins,
then there was between the Dukes of Gnyze and Main, being brothers.

Thus we see what ambition did work in these new men by affectation of that
roall dignity, which does not touch them at all, and without any likelihood
ever to approach near unto, namely rebellion against their Sovereign and
benefactor, and parricide among brethren, one to prevent another.

The news of the death of Guyze being brought into the Provinces, the most
part of Towns and Cities from the river of Loyre, West, North and East, being
already surprised aforehand, and seduced from the Kings obedience by the
Leaguers, upon the rumor of that execution were so greatly moved (the Duke of
Guyze being accounted the only pillar of Popish religion, by the persuasion
which the Catholics had conceived of him) that they began every where to
waver, and kindle to a manifest rebellion, by the setting on of the Leaguers,
who were the greatest part in number every where. They did greatly by their
inuectiues make heinous and odious that execution upon the persons of Guyze,
and the Romish Priest his brother, tearming it the Massacre committed at Bloys.

And thus the just judgment of God, justly taking vengeance for so many
murders, shedding of innocent blood, and innumerable villainies committed upon
the saints of God, and for stopping their ears at the clear and loud voice
of the Son of God, who so lovingly has called them by his word and promises,
by his threatenings and plagues ofpestilence, famine and war, gave them over
to a reprobat sense, with a senceles rage to fall to commit such cruelties
among themselves, that no enemy would or could have desired or devised greater;
their towns and citiesbeeing every where replenished with massacres, robberies,
banishments and proscriptions, not committed against them of the religion, but
even of popish Catholics against popish Catholics, of Idolaters against
Idolaters, of murderers against murderers: so the Lord has sent evil Angels
among them.

Paris the capital city of the kingdom, as they more hoped upon the Duke
of Guyze then any other did, so they show themselves most offended. There were
firebrands which kindled the sedition to the uttermost, to wit, the Duchesses
of Guyze and Nemours, who with their outcries and lamentations did animate the
people to a raging madness. Thereunto also added

Other Cities followed the example of Paris, as Orleans, Roen, Anieus,
Abeuille, Reymes, and Tholose, whereby the conspiracy and setting on of the
Bishop of the place, in most cruel manner they took the first president of the
court of Parliament, there hanged him upon a Gibet, and afterward dragged his
dead body about the streets, being one of the most zealous romish Catholics
which then could live in this world; the only cause was that he would not
allow their rebellion.

The King understanding the great sturres, perilous flames of rebellion, in
most part of the towns and cities of his realm, supposing by impunity, which
he calls clemency and gentleness, to quench that fire, which was already too
far kindled, writes his declarations, emporting an oblivion of all injuries to
be published in all his Parliaments, and other courts in Provinces.

First, he shows how oftentimes he has borne with the perturbers of his
realm, not only in forgiving them their offenses, whom he might have justly
punished, but also by winning them by all favors possible to be showed, only
thereby, seeking the preservation of the peace of his subjects, and of the
Catholic religion, until that he was certainly informed, that they had
conspired against his person, life, and estate, so far as he was enforced to
make that execution extraordinarily.

Secondly, he shows, that although many had been of that conspiracy, whom he
might have justly punished, yet for the love which he bears unto all
Catholics, he has stayed the punishment upon the two chiefest authors of the
evil.

Thirdly, he protests that he will have the edict of reunion observed in all
points, burying all the former offenses in perpetual forgetfulness, commands
his judges and officers in all his courts, to make no inquisition of the
former offenses, willing all men to live in peace under his obedience, and if
not, he charge his officers to make exemplary justice of the offenders.

The King having assembled his estates, as is said before, supposing by their
help and assistance, to have repressed the outrageous attempts of the house of
Guize, saw himself in the midst of them, compassed with a company of
mortal enemies to his person, life, and state. Whereupon destitute of
authority, counsel and help, through pusillanimity, was feign to spare the
lives of them who were in his power, and of others whom he might easily have
apprehended, who had their hands as deeply in the trespass, as the chief
authors themselves. This was the work of the Lord, to bring him to the
consideration of his great errors, in refusing so often Navarre, and other
Princes, both within and without the realm, his loving and faithful friends.

The more therefore he goes about with impunity, of most grievous offenses,
which in his declaration, he terms clemency, to bring that people of Paris
(seduced from his obedience) to their duty, ye more that miserable people
condemned of God, and in his wrath, appointed to hauock and thra^dome, for
multiplying rebellion, murders, and confusions upon their former murders
Idolatries, and abominations, does rage, and like mad dogs, as out of their
wits, do run headlong, to work the full measure of their desperate
rebellions, accounting the Kings clemency, cowardlines (which they might have
called pusillanimitie in deed) as though he feared, either to have them his
enemies, or else to loose them from being his subjects.

Therefore having committed grievous crimes all manner of ways, even with
greedines, at length having concluded to withdraw themselves from their
sovereigns obedience, the chiefest players in this tragedy of rebellion, to
color their diuilish passions, with the authority of Gods law, as though they
would have asked Gods will out of his own mouth, adressed them themselves to
the faculty of Theology, there commonly called the College of Sorboune. For
that purpose they sent one Urban, one of the Magistrates of Paris, to the said
Sorboune, having framed in manner of supplication two questions, to be resolved
by them.

First, an populus regni Galliae possit solui and liberari a sacramento
fidelitatis and obedientiae Henrico tertio praestito.

Whether the people of France, may not be discharged and setfree from the oath
of allegiance and obedience made unto Henry the third.

Secondly, an tuta conscientia possit, idem populus armari, vniri and pecnnias
colligere, and contribuere ad defensionem, and conseruationem Religionis
Catholicae, and Romanae, in hoc regno aduersus nefaria conscilia, and conatus
praedicti regis, and quorum libet aliorum illi adherentium, and contra publica
fidei violationem ab eo Blaesis factum in praeiuditium praedictae religionis
Catholicae, and edicti sanctae vnionis, and naturalis libertatis conuo^ationis
trium ordium huius regni.

Whether the people may with a safe conscience take arm^s unto themselves, and
make collections and contributions, for the defense and preservation of the
Catholic Romish religion, against the heinous practizes and attempts of the
aforesaid king, and all other his adherents, and against the breach of public
faith, committed by him at Bloys, in the prejudice of the aforesaid Catholic
religion, and of the edict of holy union, and of the natural liberty of the
assembly of the three Estates of the

The seventh day these priests of Apollo, after a general procession of all
the orders of the said faculty, and a Mass of the holy Ghost (adsit
reuerentia auribus) sung in the said college of Sorboune, at the request of
the Provost, Escheuins, Consuls, and Catholic citizens of the City of Paris:
the masters of the said faculty assembled to the number of threescore and
ten, having debated these questions (as they say) by the holy scripture, but
specially by the Cannons and decrees of the Popes, al with one consent (either
extremely wicked, or else most pernitiously ignorant, or both) rendered this
oracle out of the bewitching hell of Apollo: to wit, The people of France may
do all things which are propounded in the questions against their lawful king
and his adherents: only they required that this their oracle of rebellion,
might be sent to Rome, there to be sealed by the pope, and be burned with the
mark of the spirit of devils, and bear the Image and print of Antichrist.

The eight of January, the said Urban came to know the answer of the oracle,
which he brought to the counsel of the city, and after they had perused it,
taking it for an answer of Vrim and Thumim, and a voice of God, by whose
authority they were put at liberty to do what they would, with armed hand
brought it to the Senate of Paris, which was the second Majesty of France, and
with drawn swords required of the same to approve the said oracle.

The Senate flatly denied such a wicked, unnatural, and devilish act to be
lawful and worthy of the ancient loyalty of France, requiring to take some
deliberation upon it; and whilst they satte upon it, the mutinous rebels
(impacient of delay) brake open the gates of the Palace, and seazing upon the
whole bench, casting them into prisons: so now the Senate being carried away in
a triumph, all reverence of Magistracy being trodden down, the Temple of
justice is poluted, forsaken, and usurped by robbers.

The ninth day of January, the seditious do in have choose a new counsel, to
the number of seven and forty (who should administer the State in stead of the
kings prime counsel) of the most vilest and factious persons in the city, as
Rowland Compan, the villainous and incestious Picheuard, Louchard, Rue Clerk,
Oliver Seuault, and others of such like sorts, men neither of ability,
authority, wisdom nor counsel, but only because they had sold themselves
to the League, to work all manner of villainy, and showed themselves bitter
enemies unto the King.

This new Senate of conspiratours, firebrands of Hell, to replenish the City
with confusion and mischief, considering ^^at to preserve an unity among their
company of robbers, they must needs have a head, and rather then they should
have none, they will make one of an old block:

To take some of the Princes of the blood, they knew well them to be wise
enough from leaving their lawful vocations, to become heads and leaders of
thieves, murderers, and traitors.

Therefore they concluded to continue the rebellion in the house and family
where the conspiracy (the mother of this rebellion) sprang out, was nourished
and entertained these 40. or 50. years continually.

The Duke de Main was thought to be most fit, as one who in so vile an
enterprise should succeed his brother, considering that he was brought up and
nourished in the same schole, learned the same books, and had proceeded in the
same degrees as his brother had done, was well acquaynted with such matters
from his infancy, will, and ambition, boiling in him as hot as ever it did in
his brother; after his brothers death, not much inferior in favors of
partakers to his brother, though not equal in haugtines of mind.

He therefore by the earnest suit and solicitation of his agent and partakers,
is made the head of the rebellion, and invested in his absence of that proud
and new title of Lieutenant General of that state and Crown of France, which
is a Periphrase of this word King.

The Duke de Main now being made manipulus furum, must play the King: for he
does assemble all the Captains of the sedition, as namely the aforesaid
counsel newly established with the Dukes Aumale, and Nemours, with other
seditious persons, few in number, nothing in countenance nor authority, to hold
the States of the Realm as they did term them: assembled of the Princes,
Nobillity, and Commons, when as there was not one Prince, nor any communalty,
but few seditious persons.

The Dukes Aumale, and Nemours, and Cheualier, Aumale, were made governors of
Paris, to lead the seditious people to do such outrages, and robberies, as
never were done yet in any town or City in this world.

These three Captains of robbers and murderers, daily went to the houses of
them which were known to be the Kings friends, deprived them of their
authorities, if they had any, put them in Prisons, ransacked their goods,
lodged their robbers (whom they called garrisons) in their houses, whereof many
by a wise and provident mind, foreseeing the horrible tempest and thunderclaps
which would fall from heaven, upon that sink of traitors, fled out of their
houses, carrying their lives for a pray.

The Lady of Monpensier, sister to the Duke de Main, the Ladies of Main,
Aumale, (...) Nemours, being then in Paris, caused a book of the rich men to
be given them, so that there was no day but they sent some of these Captayns to
raunsake and carry away the goods of some rich

After many robberies and murders committed in Paris, the seditious people
were lead by their Captayns unto the Loure the royal house, where they
committed such outrages upon the goods mouable which did partayne to the King,
that the posterity will scarce believe it. They violated the seal of France,
the sacred instruments of Sovereign justice, brake it to pieces, and trampled
it under foot: they did break and dragged in the streets, in a most spiteful
sort, the arms of France, Valoys, and Bourbons.

The tenth day, whilst these things were doing at Paris, the King caused an
express commandment to be published at Bloys, that all the partakers of the
house of Guyze, should depart and retire to their houses with pardon of their
offenses, so that they would remain faithful servants unto him.

He sent Cotteblanch, Provost of Paris, and the president Neuilly to Paris, to
see whether they could reduce that seduced people to their duty: the Lords
Vilaguier, and D'Abin did the like, but neither of them could do any good.

About the fifteenth day, these strange alterations being done in Paris, under
color of the authority of the States there called, and holden by few seditious
persons, letters were sent from they said assembly of rebels there unto all
cities of their confederacy, to go forward in the like outrages and fury as
they had done. And first to autorise their seditious proceedings with great and
honorable tytles, they call their letters a declaration of the Princes
Catholics, united with the three estates of France, touching the Massacre
committed upon the persons of the Duke of Guyze, and the Cardinal his brother.

First, they do warn their fellows to beware of any manner of instructions
given unto them by the King himself, or any others, containing any excuse of
the execution committed at Bloys upon the Duke and Cardinal his brother.

Secondly, they do advertise them that they have as yet of that brood, the
Dukes de Main, Aumale, Mercure, and Nemours, and that the Duke de Main has a
great army in readiness to defend them.

Thirdly, they go about to clear the Duke of Guize of the crime of treason,
saying, that it is but calumnies of heretics, denised against that house the
space of 25. years.

So, with them to spy from time to time, the traiterous attempts and Note.
secrecies of the house of Guize, is heresy, and a work of heretics.

Fourthly, they accuse the King of violating the public faith, and profaning
their corpus Domini, as they term it, upon the which he had sworn the edict
of reunion.

But in deed the King swore the edict, and not to suffer himself to be
murdered by the Duke of Guize. Note.


At length they do aggrauate the death of the Cardinal of Guize, and the
imprisonment of the Cardinal of Bourbon, and Archbishop of Lions, and exhort
their companies to unite themselves and to follow their example.

In the first page of this letter was this mark, in the other side the Image
of the Duke of Guize.



Now we will leave these confusions of Rebels, assembled under the color and
name of the States of France, to proceed further, to fill the measure of their
trespass, and will go to see what the King does at Bloys, and elsewhere.

Immediately after the death of Guize, the King thought good to make Orleans
sure of his side. The Citadell in the midst of all these tumults and
rebellions of Cities, was and did hold for the King. And the Lord Antragues
(who a little before had given over the League) did all that ever he could do
to hold the City in the Kings obedience. But the inhabitants being seduced
before hand by the Leaguers, partakers of the Duke de Main, encouraged by the
conduct of Captain Breton, and others, who did promise to the inhabitants
ready succor from the Duke de Main, took weapons, and by the confidence
which they had in their riches and strength of their walls, did openly revolt.

It is commonly said, that the City of Orleans is the Citadel of France, as
well for the commodious situation of the same upon the river Loyre, as for the
fortifications thereof. These reasons among others, caused the King to try by
gracious and fair means, to bring them back to their duty. But reason not
preuayling, (with a people carried away with passion, and seduced by the lovers
of alteration from the obedience of their King) he was compelled to try by
force the mean of the Citadell. He therefore sends the Marshall Haumont with
forces as well of footmen as of horsemen, with him he sends part of his
gardes and the Swissers.

The inhabitants on their side go about by all means possible to rid
themselves of the Citadell as of a heavy burden, they do besiege it within
the town side, do trench themselves, and cover themselves with horsemen and
platformes, do undermine it to blow up that Fort, (which nothing else but
only one of the gates commonly called Porte-bamere) they make issues out and
even upon the Swissers with some success, they do thunder and raze that Fort
with shot of Ordinance on the inside thereof. They of the Kings side do what
they can, there is a great number slain on both sides. The Lord Antragues
promises (notwithstanding) to the King to keep (during the space of a month)
the out side: (although it were but Poytow at the siege of Ganache, under the
conduct of the Lord of Neuers. The inhabitants made two Mines under the
Citadell, but they were vented by them within.

About the 17. of January, there went forth out of Paris three thousand men,
well furnished, but young soldiers, and not trained up in war, to go to
succor Orleans; but they were discomfited by the Lord Montigny, and other
Gentlemen, who charged them between Estampes and Orleans: many of them were
slain, the remnant were turned home naked.

The Duke d'Mayne about the last day of January, sending some supply of
succor to Orleans, stayed so their estate, which did seem to hang a side,
that they took courage, partly by ruins, partly with shot of ordinance, and
other means so wrought, that they of the Kings side were enforced to give over
the ruins that rested of that, which was called the citadell. By these means,
Orleans remained hardened at the devotion of the League.

So (good Christian reader) thou see how the right of God and man is turned
vpside down: their popish religion, which they would seem so much to honor,
reverence, and defend, they have most wickedly profaned, using it for a
covering of their rebellion: thou see how the reverence of all sovereign
power and authority, is blotted out of the minds of them, the respect of all
laws trodden underfoot, the sanctuary of justice violated and poluted: thou
see here a damnable and devilish anarchie, the seeds and foundation of a
barbarous and intolerable servitude, laid down in France by the Duke d'Mayne
and his partakers, in a manner in like sort as Mahomet began his rebellion
against the empire of the Romans. Therefore ye O Noble Princes, and Nobles of
all the Kingdoms of Europe, all men who are the lovers of virtue and ciuility,
desirous to resign to the posterity, good laws, christian liberty and
discipline: up, make have to run upon these accursed enemies of all
mankind; put out by time that fire which does threaten all authorities and
powers of an horrible cumbustion.

Now there remains but three things for the League to bring to pass, to set
up and dedicate their Idol which they have made, to wit, the Duke d'Mayne, and
to finish that piece of work, which his brother the Duke of Guize had brought
almost to an end, if he had not been ouerthrown by the way.

They follow on their accustomed course and method, used by them these 14. or
15. years, to wit, to seduce the people more and more, to make the King
hateful to his subjects, that he may be forsaken of all men if it be
possible, and to render the King of Navarre, abhorted of all men, in Navarre
may be excluded from his right of succession.

The first point to perform, was left to the assembly of the pretended states,
as it shall appear hereafter: the other two pieces of work were committed to
the Jesuits, Friars, and other of like sort: de bacchandi and
calomniandiperitissimis, for their dignity runs most of all upon these two
common places.

Whether the King (considering the great necessities which he should have of
money, to maintain a dangerous and long war against the rebels and traitors)
had sent his co^missions unto his threasurors, and receauers of his impost, to
continue the receiving and gathering of tallages and impost, as they had done
the year before, or else that the rebels in Paris, usurping the name of the
three estates of France, had forged such a thing, I am uncertain. But so it
is, that if they did not devise, yet they did use his action, to steal away
the hearts of the people from his obedience, and thereby to make their part
stronger, to a^ure the Kings subjects to join hand with them in their
rebellion. For immediately after the Duke d' Main came to Paris, they set
forth a declaration, bearing the name of the Princes Cities and commonalties
united, with the three estates of the realm, where in deed there was not one
Prince, only the Dukes d' Main, Aumale, Nemours, and certain other seditious
persons of Paris, Anious, Roen, Orleans, and Abeuile, with their general
counsel, which consisted of seven and forty persons most vile; and for their
wickedness, picked out of the sink of that rebellion, whereof we have spoken
before.

First, they do still hide their damnable rebellion, under the old ragged
gaberdine of defending the popish religion: and because the poor people had
been of long time oppressed with diverse payments, and greatly impouerished by
long continuance of war; unto the defense of popery, they join this
plausible snare, to wit, to ease the people of the former accustomed payments.

Secondly, usurping the royal authority, they forbid all manner of officers
to gather any payments, money, tole, impost, or tallage for the King, but to
pay unto their officers the tallages, according unto the rate of the year 1576.

Thirdly, they command, that in case they have paid the said somms unto
their commissioners, and the Kings officers should come to demand the said
sommes, or should go about to compel them to pay the same sommes, they to
apprehend them, and to bring them unto the next prisons, and there process to
be made as upon public extortioners.

Last of all, they command all officers, and receauers of the Kings demaynes,

It is said before, that after the Oracle given out by the faculty of
Theology, in the college of Sorboun, the seditious brought it to the Senate
of Paris, to be allowed, inregistred, and published, who upon the refusing of
such a disloyal treachery, were all brought to prison, and there as
malefactors detayned. Now upon the Dukes coming to Paris, they were called,
and offered either to remain still in prison, or else to do two things: First
to allow and approve the resolution of Sorboune: Secondly, to swear to the new
union, which was a confederacy of the rebels.

This Senate, in ol^e time so famous and honorable, for fear of this dangerous
conspiratie of the Leaguers, and rage of the people, against their alegeance
and loyalty, do fall to this composition, with the general counsel of the
city above said, and the pretended states, to wit, the Senate shall join with
the rebels, and swear with them to persecute their King by all means,
without any respect of person or dignity, for the execution done by him upon
the persons of the Duke of Guize, and the Cardinal his brother, the 23. and
24. of December, which they do term with an odious name of massacre. This
excerable rebellion now has gotten credit, by that so famous and reverent
Senate, the second Majesty of France, in old time so renowned.

The 30. day of January, all the chambers of the Senate, with all the officers
appertaining to that court, to the number of 326. gathered together, in the
presence of the Duke d' Main; the general counsel above said, and the
pretended states did swear, and subscribe, some with their own blood (as
Catelina in ol^e time, in like case) that form of union, which they had
concluded the day before, whereof the sum follows.

First, they do swear and promise to God, to his mother, to the Angels, to all the he saints and she saints of Paradise, to employ their lives, their goods,
and all their means to the defense of the Catholic religion, and do protest,
that all that which they do in this union, is for the setting forth of Gods
glory, and for the defense of the holy Church.

Secondly, they swear to defend the city of Paris, with the state there
established, and also other cities of their association, which then were, or
might be hereafter.

Thirdly, they swear to defend the Princes, to wit, the Dukes d' Main and
Aumale, (for so they love well to be called) the Priests, Lords, and
Gentlemen, united with them, both in their persons and goods, with the liberty
of the states of the realm.

Last of all, they swear to pursue by all means possible them that have
violated the public faith, broken the union, franchizes and liberties of the
Guize, and the Cardinal his brother, without any respect of persons, dignity
or prerogative whatsoever, and also al them who shall favor and assist the
King by any means, with promise never to forsake one another.

As this rebellious people did rage in the Senate house, in the counsel of the
city, and in their pretended states; so the people are set at liberty to
commit al outrages and violences; the poorer sort are against the rich, the
vile person against the honorable, the wicked against the virtuous, the
ignorant and blind against the learned: to be short, there is nothing but an
infernal horror.

The Jesuits, Friars, and other unclean fowls of like feathers, do rage no
less in the places and charges appointed unto them, to wit, in railing most
villanously against the King, and slandering the King of Navarre, and them of
the reformed religion, for the causes above said, making their pulpets the
trompets of murder, treason, and rebellion: for beside that, they did inuaigh
against the King in all manner of vile terms, and interpreting all his
actions maliciously to the worst: they also forbad the people, upon pains of
spiritual and bodily punishment (for if they did, it was a capital crime) to
pray for the King.

Also the inhabitants of the city of Rhemes in Champaigne published an
infamous libell, coming forth out of the Jesuits forge, bearing this title. A
grievous lamentation of the inhabitants of the city of Rehmes, upon the death
of the Cardinal, Archbishop of Rehmes, peer of France, and what may he not be
if they would. That libell was sawced with infamous in^ectiues, unworthy and
outrageous speeches against the king, by their language: the authors thereof
did testify sufficiently their consent in the rebellion of other towns and
cities. And seeing that the priests, Jesuits and Friars, did say such a mass
at the funeral of their Bishop, it was no marvel if the ignorant people who
believed them, answered Amen.

And for as much as among those rebellious countries and cities, there were
none of the reformed religion, upon whom they might spew their gall, they
called their own Priests, Parsons, Vicars and Curates, for to subscribe unto
their rebellion, charging them upon pain of death, not to pray (in their
massing) for the King. But such as kept an upright heart to their Prince, and
would not conient to their prohibition, but in their prayers or otherwise did
wish well to the King, were executed as male factors: and great favor was
showed them, upon great entreaty of friends, if they might escape with
deprivation of their livings, or imprisonment, and carry away their lives for a
pray. And by such injuries showed unto their own priests, they placed such as
were fit to serve their

The third task appointed to the Friars and Jesuits, was to render the King
of Navarre and them of his part, execrable in the ears of all men, that by the
consent and general misliking of all men (if it were possible) he might be
excluded from his right of succession. The occasion was thus.

The 26. of December, the King of Navarre had surprised the town of Niort in
Poytow, of the taking it, and of the said Kings gracious goodness and clemency
showed unto the inhabitants his deadly enemies, which had committed great
outrages upon them of the reformed Religion, against his own person, against
the Princes of the blood, and of late against the Lord Valette, an officer of
the Crown of France, as it is sufficiently spoken of before.

These writers of lies (to testify to the world whose Children they are) did
set forth such ridiculous falsehoods, and execrable calumnies, and that with as
much assurance, as they tell us of their lies and lying miracles, which they
did work with their holywater among the sauadge people of Giapane, whether
they be sure that no man will send to enquire about the truth of the matter,
with so bold and impudent faces they did auerre most manifest lies, which out
of any part of France might be disprooued within four days.

The sham^les pamphlet went abroad with this inscription: The execrable
cruelties committed by the heretics against the Catholics of the town of
Niort in Poytow.

The fable says, that they of the religon would never have taken that town,
without the intelligences of the politics (that is to say, of them which
favor the king) which were within the said town.

It is said in the Pamphlet, that the Kings officers of Justice were slain,
that the Mayor and the Aldermen of the town were hanged.

That many were hanged, only for that they would not deny their religion:
also, that all the Priests and Monks were hanged for company.

Also a Priest was opened alive before his fellows (by terror to make him
deny God) and his noble parts were pulled out, but they remained as constant
as rocks for all those cruelties, and valiantly suffered martyrdom.

That there were innocent persons killed in such great number through the
town, even between two or three hundred persons, so that the streets flowed
with blood and dead bodies.

That the heretics (as the fable says) took a woman which reproved them of
their cruelties, whom they would have enforced to deny the Mass;

All this lying lybell is easily confuted, even by the inhabitants themselves,
by the Magistrates, by the Priests, who there do live in liberty of their
Religion, and by all the people, who will testify that there was no such thing,
nor otherwise then is recited in the discourse of the surprise of their town,
but will testify of the Christian mildnes, clemency, and moderatnes of the King
of Navarre and surprisers, to have been far greater then ever they could have
expected, or had deserved at his hands.

But this gross kind of lying was spread abroad to hasten the rebellion of the
Cities, and to render the people untamed and hard hearted, against true and
dutiful obedience whatsoever might fall hereafter: as if to fall into the
hands of the King of Navarre, and of them of the Religion, were to fall among
savage beasts, mad Tigers and cruel Lions.

The King considering that the more he endeavored himself to win the rebels
by gentleness, clemency, and promising of impunity; the more hardened, obstiuate,
insolent and bold they became.

Seeing that he must be driven by force to chastise their rebellions, first he
proceeds against them by order of law. And for as much as the Dukes de Main,
Aumale, and Cheualier Aumale, he as if it were subroged in the places of the
Duke of Guyze and the Cardinal his brother: the King does first and chiefly
proceed iudicially against them three by proscription, as attaynted of
fellonie, rebellion, and high treason.

First, the King does show himself to be a King ordained and given of God,
having received of God that sword and power which he had not by usurpation, but
by lawful and natural right of succession.

Secondly, he does show the great benefits, which he and the Kings his
predecessors had bestowed upon them, and namely, that he has spared their
lives (whom he might justly have punished for their diverse attemptes,
fellonies, and disobedience) for the love which he had unto them and their
house.

He shows also, how he had since this their last rebellion, sent unto them
diverse of his faithful servants with letters, and even Heralds of arms, to
let them understand his good will and readiness to put up all injuries and
offenses, and to receive them to his favor. But that in stead of humbling
themselves, and of accepting his gracious favor, they became more insolent:
which they have showed in surprising his towns, fortresses, and in rebelling
against him, his Officers and Magistrates, covering their treasons under the
name of Catholic religion.

Therefore he does declare the said Dukes de Main and Aumale, to Paris,
Orleans, Anjous, Roen, Abeuile, and others, declaring them convicted of
felony, rebellion, and treason in the highest degree, willing all his officers
to proceed against them, and against al them that do, or shall assist them by
any means, and against their posterity, as against such as they be declared,
if they do not return under his obedience by the 14. day of march next
following.

The King intending by these thunderclaps to call them to their duty,
purposing yet to have forgotten all offenses, for the love which he had to
popish religion, common to the rebels with him, and for hatred of the reformed
religion, gave them (as is aforesaid) a certain day prefixed, by the which
time if they did not return to their duty, he determined to chastise them by
force: and therefore the sixth day of February, he sent forth his commissions
to all Nobles, Gentlemen, and Captains, to prepare themselves with all
furniture necessary, to repair to him the 12. of March following. Neither is
the sentence of the King an idle threatening, but is (as if it were) a
condemnation of Gods law, pronounced by the sovereign Magistrate, whose
punishments God has partly executed, and partly has reserved to execute
hereafter in the fulness of time.

About the middle of February, the King understanding what had passed in Paris,
how the rebels had enforced the Senate to swear an union against him, his life,
person and estate, did transport the exercise of justice, and of all his
courts, and chambers of Parliament from Paris: and also all other courts of
justice in the aforesaid towns of Orleans, Aujous, Abeuile, Roen, and others,
to his city of Tours upon Loyre, deprauing the said traiterous cities of al
offices, dignities, charges, and privileges, commanding al his Judges,
Counselors, and officers of al his courts in the said cities, to repair to
the city of Tours upon Loyre by the fifteenth of April next following, there
to execute their charges, upon pain of deprivation of their wages and offices:
forbids also, that no appearance be given by any officer unto any suter, and
also no parties to appear in any other place save in Tours only before his
Judges there, upon pain to be declared rebels.

It is said before, how we have left the King of Navarre sick in bed of a
dangerous pleuresie, whilst the League have nigh filled the measure of their
execrable treasons and rebellion. Now the Lord reserving that noble Prince, if
not to restablish the flourishing estate of that Realm, yet he has

Whilst the King does so thunder the threatenings of Gods law, and the claps
of his justice against those Rebels, forsaken and rejected of God (as is before
said); the King of Navarre perceiving the King to be in distress, persecuted
and dispossessed out of his Towns and Cities, even out of his own houses by
his enemies abroad, and to live in great mistrust of his domestical enemies,
who did daily eat bread at his own table; did greatly lament his case,
keeps himself quiet beyond Loyre, cease from all acts of hostility and
exployts of war, least he should increase his affliction and heaviness. And
desirous greatly to make a proof of his fidelity toward the King, and to
cross the actions of the leagued rebels, proffereth peace to the King, and
watches diligently that his enemies might not set foot in any place where he
had means to make sure for the kings service, as for the ease of them of the
religion. So that after the taking of Niort, (as is before said) in the latter
end of January the inhabitants of S. Meixant and Maillezay, two Towns nigh
neighbors of Niort, yielded themselves unto him. The Lord Aubiguy was
appointed Governor of that Island.

About the 14. of February, the King of Navarre having recouerd his perfect
health and strength, with part of his forces took the field marching toward
the river of Loyre. The inhabitants of Lodune, Lisle, Bouchard, Mirabean,
Chastelerault, Vinonne, and other places and Castles of the country of Turenne
and Poytow, offered to open the gates of their towns unto him, and also
proffered unto him their services. He received them very courteously, and
without innovation of any thing; he suffered them of the Romish religion to
live with all liberty with their ordinary exercises: only he commanded them
of the reformed religion, with the exercise of the same, there to be
established, commanding them of both religions to live in amity and peace.

About the same time many Towns and places in diverse parts of the Realm
(which before did seem to be at the devotion of the Leaguers) were made sure
for the Kings service, as well in Bourgondy as in other Provinces, and among
others, the Town and Castle of Sancerre in Berry was seized for the King. That
Town had been greatly defaced in the former wars: for the walls of the
Town had been rased by the Lord Chastre, Governor of Berry, who did put a
Captain within the Castle for the keeping of the same, and to bridle the
inhabitants there who were all of the religion. But after the death of the Duke
of Guize, the Lord of Requien of the house of Montigny, Captain of the Kings
gardes, seized both upon the Town and Castle, (the which Town notwithstanding
it was without walls, yet being situated on high and in a strong place by
nature) he undertook to fortify the same, by the help of them of the
religion, who did so resort thither from every where daily, that the said Lord
Requien waxed strong there (as he is a valiant man) employed himself with
them of the religion, to make war against the rebelled Leaguers for the Kings
service.

About the 23. of February, the King of Navarre being at Chastelerault, took
occasion to seize upon the Castle and the Town of Argenton in Berry by the
means which follow. That place does pertain to the Lord* Monpensier, but it
was granted to the Lady Dwager of Monpensier, sister to the last Duke of
Guize, by her contract of marriage, having that honor showed her, to have
married the Duke of Monpensier, Prince of the blood, and father to this Duke
yet living.

In the beginning of this last war of the League, the castle of Argenton
strong and well furnished, was made sure for the League, the town remained at
liberty as being not strong, and commanded by the Castle. But after the
death of the Duke of Guize, the garrison of the Castle was increased double,
intending thereby to assure the town: also the garrison understanding of the
taking of Chastelerault, (which is not far of) by the King of Navarre,
fearing that which afterward happened unto them, they sent to the Duke d'Mayne
for succor, who sent certain Captains with their companies from Orleans.
They of the town refusing the association of the rebellion of the Leaguers,
and willing to remain faithful to the King, do advertise him of all their
estate and good will toward him, do require succor of him, as well against
them of the Castle as others, which did approach to seize upon their town. The
dispatch could not be in so short space, but that in the mean time, they of
the town and of the Castle fell at variance upon the matter, each party
trusting in the succor which they hoped for.

The King of Navarre advertised of all this, and of the succor sent, they there
by the Leaguers nigh advanced, with certain troops of horsemen, Orleans,
sending before some of his gardes, who entered on a sudden into the town, to
the great amaze of the garrison of the Castle. At the ariuing of the gardes of
the king of Navarre, there was a hot skirmish, and some were killed on both
sides: few of the King of Navarre his gardes, but many more of the garrison; but
when the Leaguers of the Castle saw the companies of the King of Navarre,
first they were amazed, and shortly after, conceauing a great terror yielded
the place.

After that the King of Navarre had taken possession of that place, he
appointed the Lord Beaupre governor there, where he established the exercise
of the reformed religion with liberty and safety, in stead of the romish
religion, as in other places.

The King of Navarre returned to Chastelerault, where considering how the King
was in great danger, both abroad and at home, how he had evil counsel given
him, pitying his estate, and considering that he could not be moved, neither
to make, nor to accept of his service for his defense: considering also that
the Leagued rebels waxed strong, and the King weak, he puts forth a
protestation, bearing date the fourth of March; wherein he shows, that
notwithstanding his affairs, and estate of them of the reformed religion was
never stronger, who within three years, has borne the fury of ten mighty
armies, whereof some had been beaten to cloutes, the others have been scattered
as dust in the air; he doubts not, but the same God will strengthen him
with the same force, and will defend always hereafter his just cause and
innocence: yet he does proffer them, that if the King will hearken unto
peace, he was never so willing to embrace it. Furthermore, he proffereth
himself to hear reason, and to be taught by a conference and a counsel,
promising that if he be convicted by the word of God to be in any error, he
will revoke it, and bring all them of the reformed religion to do the like.
But to bring him out of that religion, wherein he has been borne and brought
up, even from his cradell; with the dint of the sword, he warns them, that
therein they have taken a contrary course, by which they will never prevail.

Last, he does adjure all the states by the name of God, by the ashes of
their ancestors, by the love of their native country, to counsel the King to
this ordinary course, or else to devise some better if they can, by the which
they may stop the subversion of their country.

About this time came the excommunication rolling from the capital, and
thundering, like unto a (...), of the old Comedy, pronounced against the King,
for the execution done at Bloys, upon the persons of the Duke of Guize, the
Popes champion, and the Cardinal the said Popes Chapline, and the imprisonment
of the Cardinal of Bourbon, Lions, shot out of the belly of Friar Sixtus, at
the suit of rebels. With the stink of this (...) of Friar Sixtus, came forth
out of the bottomless pit of hell a number of Jesuits and Friars, and such
misbegotten monsters, to rail, to accurse, and defame their lawful and
natural King and Prince ordained of God, without any remorse of conscience.

Many of the Leaguers, who after the death of their Captain had hanged down
their heads, had retired to such places as they thought sure far them: some
other who had forsaken their faith, their promise, and oath given to the
League, now considering four accidents which had happened, and seen to favor
the affairs of the rebels, do rebel a new, do forsake their King, whom God,
nature, thankfulness, and nobility commanded to dye at his feet.

First, the unseasonable lenity, or rather pusillanimitie of the King, who had
stated the execution of justice for such notorious and heinous treasons
committed, not against him, but against GOD in his person, whom God had
consecrated to that high dignity, upon the heads only of Guize and the
Cardinal his brother, and in the imprisonment of six of the chiefest, without
proceeding any further.

Secondly, Friar Sixtus his excommunication, by the which they supposed (though
not in conscience but in passion only) themselves to be set at liberty to do
whatsoever without any grudge of conscience.

Thirdly, the beating away of the kings garrisons and forces out of the citadell
of Orleans by the Duke de Maine, therein supposing in a manner (for so is the
blindness of man's passion) to have conquered all France.

Lastly, the evil counsel of leagued dissemblers and dissembling traitors,
whom they knew to be about the Kings person in great number, waiting for
opportunity to deliver him prisoner to his enemies, or else to dispatch him
out of his life with one blow; knowing that by their counsels, his forces
diminished, his cities and strong holds were surprised, his enemies waxed
strong. But specially they feared greatly the plays and tricks which they had
taught Charles the ninth his brother and him, which they had played many times
with them of the religion, they I say feared at length to be snared in the
like springes. Therefore all these things well considered, they begin every
where to strike the alarm, and prepare themselves to the battle, against God,
their King, their country, their li^erties, and the graves of their fathers.

So that the Lords Brissak, Chastre, and Boysdauphin, to whom a little before
the king had forgiven great treasons, who a little before had promised with an
oath, obedience to the king, who did show a semblant of great joy, for the
execution done at Bloys, they privily do steal away and breaking their faith,
promise and allegeaunce to their king, revolted again

Brissak went to Angers, where he thought to cause that City to rebel against
the king: for some of the city of Angers, had hitherto dissembled their
affection and good wills, whch they had to the league and rebellion, as well
because they had the king at Bloys and Tours, who looked to them nearly and
narrowly, as for not having the means to execute their enterprise. But now at
the reuolcing of Brissak, they made him head of their enterprise, for to seize
upon the Castle (one of the strongest places in all France). And for to bring
their counsel to a good pass with speed, fearing least by delay they might
be preuanted by the king, being so nigh them; therefore they follow a short
course: for first they try what corruption may do. They do promise to the
Lord Pichery, governor of the Castle, an hundred thousand crowns, and to
entertain four thousand footmen, so that he would keep it for the league.

The Lord Pichery (as a faith full servant to his Prince) refused all those
proffers: whereupon the Lord Brissak with the rest of the rebels within the
town did assault the Castle, and fortified themselves by all means, with
trenches and barricadoes upon the ditch of the said Castle.

Whereupon the Lord Pichery advertised the King of the state of his affairs
and attempts of the Lord Brissak, and inhabitants of the town.

The King sent the Marshall Haumont with the regiment of Picardy, and part of
his guardes, who were admitted into the Castle by the Lord Pichery, who opened
unto them the great bridge of the said Castle.

As Soon as the Marshall Haumont entered into the Castle, although the rebels
were in far greater number, yet the skirmish began: then was it time for the
enemy to pack away in have, many of the rebels were slain. There they were
taken prisoners to the Kings use so many as yielded one hundred throusand
crowns for ransom. Some were executed in the town, and chiefly some Jesuits
and Friars, who had been the firebrands to kindle the combustion, and the
trompets of the rebellion.

The Lord Brissak (head of the rebellion) there saved himself by flight with
few of his company, and seazing upon the towns of Man's, Alencon, and Faleze,
caused the inhabitants there to rebel against the King.

About the same time (the Duke Mercure desirous to get the favor of the towns
and people, to assure better the duchy of Britain to himself) took upon him
the name of protector of the Romish Church in that province of Britanie, by the
help of the Bishops, and other rabble of that sinagogue, who prescribed
certain forms unto the Jesuits and Friars, whereby in their sermons, to
bring the people to that devotion.

Although Christian Reader, thou may easily perceive by the whole course of
this his history, how from time to time the house of Guyze, who were not so
much by nature as to be admitted into the society of the Nobility of France,
at the first made a fair wether, after that preferred them Valoys toward them,
they had obtained that, they have practiced to steal away the hearts of
subjects from their natural Prince, and at length have enterprized upon his
life. And when by a singular providence, God had delivered the King out of
their snares and claws, and see they are not able to deprive him of his life,
they do deprive him of his Crown ad dignity. First by the judgment of
Sorboune. Secondly, by the assotiatiation with they have sworn to present him
to death by all means possible. Thirdly, by taking away from him the name of
King, though not in plain terms, yet by paraphrase: as when one takes upon
him to be the protector of the Crown of France, y^ other protector of the
Church, and give the same to themselves, which proper^y is and has been the
office of the king of France. For the Kings in France have had always that
honor (as due unto them by right) to be Protectors of the Crown, Dignity,
State, Kingdom, Church and people of their dominions, and never yielded that
title to any man, neither durst ever any man usurp that title, until this
year 1589. by these two companions, to wit, the Dukes de Main and Mercure.

But it may be objected, that the same title has been given and taken to the
King of Navarre, as protector of the reformed churchs of France, and therefore
they do that which the heretics have taught them.

To this it may be answered, that the case is not alike, for the reformed
churches were forsaken of the King without any cause, at the solicitation of
flatterrs, sycophantes, and clawba^kes, who to bring the King to that confusion
that he is come unto, did hold his kingdom into troubles and civil wars,
by little and little to entrench upon his authority, and at length to tread him
down under feet. That part therefore of the Kings subjects, which was the
best, though not the greater in number, being wrongfully put from the Kings
protection, and assaulted every where, have recourse, not to a stranger, nor
strange blood, the first Peer and Prince of France, who after the King has
most interest to the Crown, him they have requested to protect them under the
Kings authority, against the violences of them, who did so counsel the King to
forsake the protection of his people.

But these companyons, what has moved them to usurp these tytles: The King
did never forsake the Crown, nor the Romish Church in godliues that way, in
zeal, in integrity, and austericy of life, in wisdom, prudence and
fortitude, to defend the romish Church: he has passed all the Kings of all
ages, he has bestowed his forces, has spent his goods, has ventered his life
diverse times, has made shipwreck of his honor for the defense of the Romish
Church. What need therefore had that church of

Whilst these things did so pass at Angers, the city of Nantes upon Loyre
began to hault, by the secret practices and treacheries of the seditious
Leaguers, who were within the city. But when the news came of the taking of
Angers, and of the execution done upon some seditious Jesuits, and other
Friars, the rebels at Nantes took the alarm in this wise: for the Ladies
Martignes, and Mercure, wife to the Duke of Mercure, governor of Britayne,
took occasion thereupon to hasten the rebellion: for being advertised that
many of the cheifest officers of justice in that city, as also other good
Citizens faithful to the King, seeing the practices which were wrought in their
city by the Leaguers, did dissuade their fellow citizens to give ear to
such seditious persons, and advised them rather to remain faithful unto the
King, then to draw upon themselves the Kings wrath with a cruel and mortal
war.

For to break the good purpose and intents of these men, and to chastise them
for their too great fidelity to their King: These Ladies sent for two Captains
of the town, well known for their seditious practices and great affection to
the traitors; they showed unto these two Captains their passions, with great
amplifications of the things past at Angers.

They began by many inuectiues and spiteful speeches against the K. to show
how the King had put to death a great number of Priests and Friars, who were
taken at the winning of Angers, how he had taken the chalices and relickes, and
wholly became an heretic: then with much lying they fell to talk of them whom
they would have to be taken prisoners in the city, charging them that they
sought to bring into their cittye the K. of Navarre, with all his troops, with
determination to have the city ransacked, to take away their goods, lives,
and religion, and that therefore it was needful they raise the people to
rebellion out of hand, to seize upon them which were faithful to the King,
and make the city sure for the League.

The chiefest Captain appointed for this execution, was one Gassion a
Gascoine, brought up in the house of Martignes, and greatly affected to the
League.

An order before that time was, that the said Gassion for one half year
commanded in the castle, and the Lord Crambok, who was faithful to the King,
the other half year; this man no authority then at all. The counsel of these
two accursed women was quickly executed by the said Gassion, having for that
time the rule of the castle. The people upon these furmises were armed, the
streats were fortify to with Baricadoes.

The first execution of this rebellion, was the apprehending of four score of
the most notable men and richest families in all the City; and among Miron the
Kings threasurer in Britain, the Lord Bourin a great Lawier, and one Doctor
Rogues Dean of the faculty of Physic, and many other faithful servants of
the King, who were put in straight prison in the Castle, their houses were
spoiled and goods rifled.

The City being thus made sure for the League by the Rebels, the country
about was not free from that tempest; light horses are sent into places most
suspected; many gentlemen are taken prisoners abroad, without respect of age,
quality or religion: such as did escape with the loss of their goods, thought
to have sped well.

In like manner, the City of Rhemes, head City of the low Britain, (which
had behaved themselves modeslie enough hitherto) might greatly have favored
and advanced the treasons of the Duke Mercure, if he could have got it to his
devotion. But for that purpose, first it was needful to have the help of the
Bishop of the place, named Emare Hannekin, son to a citizen of Paris; for the
stage play could not be well seazoned with mirth, except a Priest might play
the devils part. Sir Hannekin therefore bestirreth himself all that ever he can
to bring his treason to pass; but his credit being there yet under age and
small account, he takes the Bishop of Dole of the noble of Espinay, to
countenance the play, being also assisted by a citizen named Botelier, who was
much beholding to the said Sir Hannekin, because he was such a loving ghostly
father to his wife: he had also some other citizens, and some of the court of
Parliament there, men of faction, who secretly set their shoulders to that
work. All this blessed company, by the counsel of these two sedicious
Priests, deuisers of rebellion against their natural and lawful Prince, do
raise up the people in arms, giving to understand (though most falsely) that
the Lord Huuanday, Lieutenant general for the K. in that country, the Lord
Moubarot governor of the Town, and the Lord Asserake who accompanied them,
would have oppressed the liberty of the Town, and brought in garrisons to
sack it. Upon this false rumor spread abroad by those two lying Priests,
the people armed did seize upon the Market place, and fortified the streates
with Barricadoes.

The Duke Mercure (who then was a petie King at Nantes) advertised of these
things so passing at Rhemes, and desirous to enlarge his newly swallowed up
kingdom of little Britain, does gather forces as great as he can, and fayning
to go to Vaunes to the States of the country, takes his way to Rhedon, and
turned up short to Rhemes, where he arriving was receaue^ with great joy of
the^ of the League, he put garrisons within the tower of the Fuller, within the
gate of S. George, and in the white gate.

It was time then for the Lords Huuanday, Montbarot, and Asserak, to keep
themselves close within their houses, being sought out for no less Montbarot
had seized upon the tower of the gate Mordelese: he was summoned by the Duke
Mercure to yield the said tower into his hands, which thing he refused to do,
saying that there he was placed for the King and for his service. Upon this
refusal the Canon was brought before the Tower, and many houses pierced, to
make it ready to the battery. There was no appearance to sustain a battery,
much less to hope for any succor: which things being considered, the Lord
Montbarot agreed and yielded the place with honorable conditions both for
himself and his fellows.

By these means Mercure remained master of the place, whereof he changed the
whole estate and government, placing therein men at his devotion: there he
caused a Jesuit most bitterly, seditiously, and unworthy to inueygh and rail
against the King: he dispatched a Captain Spaniard named John with his company
to scour ye country, he did execrable oppressions, robbing and sacking all
indifferently, he took many gentlmens houses, which he robbed, and many men
whom he cruelly entreated, and put to great raunsoms, sparing neither Nobles
nor others of the romish religion, for that only they were faithful to the
King.

This exploit done, Mercure gathered as great forces of men of war as he
could, and from thence took his journey toward Fongeres in the low Britayne, a
town which he had gone about long before to seduce, and had the chief^st of
the inhabitants at his devotion, they received him very willingly: and having
the town he agreed with the Captain of the castle, who sold him the place
with all the moveable goods and furniture therein belonging to his master the
Marquess Roche, for the sum of fifteen thousand crowns which he received.

In April the Lord Bordage and other Gentlemen of the religion, accompanied
Vitre, belonging to the young Lord Laual: which thing when Merceur (who was then
at Fongers) understood, he sent a Gentleman of Britain named Tailowet, with
certain companies of men of war, and the commons of the country, whom he
raised up in arms to the number of six thousands: they besieged Vitre the
space of five weeks, but the place was valiantly defended by the said
Gentlemen and their small company.

During this siege in the month of May, they of Roen (having received
Charroniere, whom Merceur at his departing to Fongeres, had left there
governor: they took also the Spanish Moore, to wit, Captain John, and many
other of that faction and behavior, if the Lord Merceur had been there, it
had been an easy thing to

Whilst these things were a doing on both sides, the Lord Morlak entered into
the Castle Iosselin, the strongest place of all Britain, for the Kings
service. The Lord Saint Lauuers, a Captain of the Leaguers, with certain
companies, enterprised to surprise the Town, and so to kill Morlak therein,
choosing for the execution of his purpose, the day which they call holy Friday,
a day of great devotion among the Papists, least of al suspected, and so to
have taken it when they should have been busy about their ceremonies and
enchauntings: so he surprised the town, but not the Lord Morlak, who did hold
the Castle.

Whilst these broils did so pass in Britayn, in other places also (as if it
were at a day appo^nted) the traitorous Leaguers took Molins in Borbonnoys,
situated upon the river Allier, which rising out of the Mountains of Anuergne,
falls into Loyre at the town Charity. That place was well defended by the
Lord Rostayn: but being set on when the Garrison was absent, for lack of men the
town was carried away to the Leaguers.

About the self same time, the faction of the League in the city of Bourdeaux
showed themselves, and attempted to surprise the town against the King. They
had conspired an accursed practice, both against the Marshall Matignon (the
Kings governor there) and also against the town, and good inhabitants, who
were known to be faithful to the King: their intent was to stab the said
Marshall Matignon, to s^aze upon the city and Castles, and to kill all them
that should not be of their side. The traitors had made a great preparation of
ships at Browage, had stayed many ships which were bound to Newland for
fishing, to favor the enterprise upon Bourdeaux.

Upon Easter even, therebels there upon the watch word, rose up in arms, part
of them did seize upon the gate of Saint Iulien; and part of them had encamped
themselves at another side without the city.

The Magistrates of the city seeing this commotion, with strong hand went
toward them, who had stayed upon the gate Saint Iulien, the rebels did resist
the Magistrates, and beat them back. The Marshall Matignon taking part of the
Garrisons out of the Castells, with the assistance of the inhabitants, faithful
to the King, does march with some forces a foot through the streates of the
town, toward the gate that they had seized upon. The rebels seeing this power
coming against them, without any fight began to faint, and in a while after to
run away, and shift for themselves, yet could they not so speedily avoid, but
there was five slain upon the place, and many of that conspiracy were
apprehended. There were two executed, one a captain of the city, and the
other was of the ga^des of the Marshal, who declared the whole conspiracy, and
accused a great number, and of the chiefest of the city. They who had remained
within the town, Browage, and shortly after the King sent eight hundred
Launce-knights, there to be in Garrison to keep the rest in their duty.

Whilst these rebellions were a working in Britayne, and other places and
Provinces of the realm, the King understanding the greatest part of his realm
to be revolted from his obedience, and how a great many Noblemen and Gentlemen
whom he has forgiven at Bloys, and let escape unpunished, abusing his lenity,
or rather accounting it (as it was in truth) pusillanimitie, had turned again
to his enemies, began to fall in great mistrust, and to despair both of
himself and of his estate. The Leaguers who were about his person, to increase
this his amaze, advertised him (though falsely for the most part) that the
Spaniard, the Princes, and States of Italy, the Dukes of Sauoy and Lorreyne,
had sworn the reuengement of the death of the Duke of Guize. Also they
persuaded him, that he was not in safety at Bloys, and therefore advised him to
retire to Tours: this counsel they gave him, not for any care which they had
of his safety, although that God turned it to the best, but for that they
thought to have more assistance there, to perform their wicked intent purposed
against him, that city being great and populous, and where were many of the
chiefest Leagued, who had promised their help to the traitors.

They told him also how the King of Navarre with great power approached, and
was already at Saumour to pass over Loyre for to invade the Realm.

The king not knowing what to do, nor whom to trust, and perceiving the^ that
were at Bloys for the most part to be his secret enemies, and to have
intellige^ces with the rebels, in the latter end of March departed from Bloys,
and removed to Tours, being well assured, that at al extremities he should have
the King of Navarre (whose fidelity and valor he knew well, howsoever the
Leaguers of his counsel did terrify him of his forces) there nigh at hand and
ready to succor him, although that so oftentimes he had been deaffe at his
most reasonable counsels.

The king being at Tours, the first thing which he did was in the beginning of
April, there he deprived the Duke Mercure of his government, of lands,
dignities, offices and prerogatives to him granted by him, for his treasons
committed against his Majesty in his government.

In the beginning of April the king being at Tours, and perceiving the great
dangers which compassed him about on every side, having many Biron and Hautmont
and others, and considering more deeply the reasonable and modest protestation
of the K. of Navarre, who in his great prosperity (yet of late craves for
peace) desires to be taught proffereth his service to the king, wills them
to devise some good ways to remedy the horrible confusions which do ouerflow
France, began to hearken to some good and moderate counsel, as to take some
truces with the said king of Navarre, and to use his counsel and forces for
his just and lawful defense.

In the month of March following, after the taking of the Citadel of Orleans
by the rebels, and the ennouatious which they had made in Paris, in the
changing of the State, and treading down under foot the kings royal
authority: The Dukes of Main and Aumale began to show such ielousies and
suspicions, which ambition did work in their hearts, as it did before in the
two brethren, to wit, the Dukes of Guize and Maine. For the Duke de Main was
carried to the usurpation of the Monarchy after his brothers death, as if it
were upon the shoulders o. rebels, and would have had been sorry, if his cousin
(the Duke de Aumale) should have had either the whole or else any part thereof
in superiority, but rather desirous that he should depend of his
commandments, and therefore did hold him short, with secret practizes and
factions.

The Duke d' Aumale would have been glad to have had all to himself rather
than his cousin, and if not all, yet he thought to get as good part in the cake
as he might; but the factious were not so favorable unto him as to the other.
Fearing therefore some Guizien trick (such as he was well acquainted with) to
be played against him by the help of the mutinous Parisiens, he puts on a
good countenance, and after infinite sackings, riflings, and manifold
robberyes committed upon the rich Marchaunts and others in Paris (for in those
days all rich men were either royalls or heretics) he departed out of the
City into Picardy, where he thought his part might be stronger, and he
might be in greater safety.

Mercure on the other side, for his part, was content if he might make sure
unto himself the Duchy of Britain, supposing that the throat of his
ambition was not so wide as that he might swallow down the whole kingdom and
Crown of France, yet between them 3. the glorious name of the League, and holy
union, holy Church, and holy Catholic Religion did roll among them, and were
patched by the Friars and Jesuits, for an old gaberdine to hide under all
their treacheries against the king, and robberies against his subjects. All
these things did fly abroad under the authority of the new great general
Protector of the Crown of France, to wit, the Duke de Main, to whom that
title was given by conspirators assembled at Paris, under the name of States,
as it is before said.

All these three did well agree together in resisting the kings authority, and
oppressing the kings subjects every where, every man reserving to himself his
own thoughts: yet would they not be kept so secret, but that their enuies,
ielousies and enimities, sometime would flame out, so that they could be
evidently spied by other men.

The Duke d'Aumale absented himself from Paris, and in the I Will of France,
Picardie, Brie, Tartenoys, and Vermandoys, went about to do his business as
well as he could, and his part as strong as strong might be, made with those
great sums of money which for his share he had made of the spoil of the rich
men of Paris. The City of Paris is one of the greatest Cities in the world,
but doubtless the greatest in Europe. It is divided into three parts. The one
and the greatest part lies in Belgik, on the banck of the river Seyne, in a
low, fair and plain situation: That part is called the town. Among other
edifices on the lower end by the river nigh Newgate, is the kings house called
the Loure, and right over against it on the other side of the street, is the
ancient house called L'hostel de Bourbon: about a mile and a half upon the
same side of the river is the town house, called by a temple nigh to it, Saint
Iahn en Grieve. There is a long street from the pont anchange directly to Saint
Denis ward, called Saint Martins streat; which deuideth that part of the
City well nigh through the midst.

The other part lying in the celtick: on the south side of the river is the
University, lesser than the former part, it is full of Monkeries, Fri^ries,
and Nunneryes, of all feathers and colors under the heavens. So that a man
coming out of a strange country, and seeing so great diversity of fantasies,
would think himself to wander into a country of monsters, or a City of mad
men: but if he consider well he shall find himself in the midst of Sodom,
so clean is their conversation. Beside these infernal Locusts, there is a
great number of colleges and houses of learning, for the which cause it is
called the University, wherein are chiefly two colldges, to wit, Sorboune and
Navarre: Sorboune is a college where Divines and students of Divinity chiefly
have allowance: and beside, it is an association of Divines whersoeuer they
have taken degrees; it is more famous than Navarre by reason of their
ignorance, but Navarre is greater in living and multitude of students.

This University was founded, (or rather reformed I fear me from better to
worse) by Charles the great, by the help of his schoolmaster, one Alboinus an
Englishman, sometime scholar of the learned Beda, who as it seems changed
the former order of study, and fashioned them to the form of doctrine laid
down by the learned S. Augustine. This Aristotle to bear sway in the Divinity
schools, and to fit in the chair of Moses. The Bishop of Paris called
Lombard, went about to amend the fault, and to have pulled him down out of
that sacred chair, propounding to the students a book of common places (such
as it was) called commonly Magister sententiarum. Then came the begging Friars
with their wallets full of stones, and among them Scotus, and Thomas Aquinus,
they laid down a form of their dreams and questions, they turn the bread of
life into stones wholly. There came after them worse then these, and more
ignorant: these harpyes defile both the word of God, and this book of
sentences (though not pure before) with unnecessary questions and unlearned
gloses: to be short, as many writing Friars, so many Alcorans they conceive and
bring forth: they did revoke the study of Divines from Gods word, and the
reading of the learned antiquity, whose monuments they buried in dust in their
libraries, to the descanting of Scotus, Thomas, and the book of Sentenices with
their corrupted dreams, pro and contra. After that, these frogs (rising out of
the infernal gulfebeing) stricken with giddines, as they of Sodom at the doors
of Lot by the angel of the Lord, were divided among themselves, and to show
that they were no more of Christ's people, took other names, and would be
called by the names of their master, some Scotists, some Thomists, some
Simmonists: but rather they should be called by their qualities, Soccist,
Momists, and Foolists.

This palpable darkness of Aegipt was had in admiration, as the only wisdom
of the world, fed and entertained by these seducing Friars and Monks, until
the wasting of that noble, and in old time famous Greece, by Amorith the
prince of the Turks. For then many learned men being the keepers of pure
learning, flying from that barbarous and cruel tyranny, repaired some into
Italy, some into Germany, some into France, who were entertained by the
liberality of Princes, and common wealths, by whose exile we were delivered
from ye dark bondage of ignorance, which the legions of Friars had brought
into the world.

About the same time, the most noble art of Printing was revealed of God unto
a noble man of Germany, whose name shall be blessed for ever in the generation
of the righteous, wi^h facility to perform the work which he had determined.

Francis of Valoys, first of that name (a prince whose fame no age to come

The third part of that City, is an Island between the Town and the
University, called commonly the City; that Island is of the form of an Egg.
It is beautified with three special things: first, the palace of judgment,
which heretofore had been a Sanctuary of justice. Secondly, a most sumptuous
and rich Hospital, the like whereof is not in the world. Thirdly, the Temple
of our Lady, much like unto Diana of Ephesus Temple, the Bishops seat, and a
sink of Idolatry.

The Suburbs be of a wonderful greatness, and may be compared with a great
and sumptuous City.

As this is great and large, so is it populous to admiration, surpassing the
report which may be made thereof. The most sort of the inhabitants is a rascal
people of all sorts of handicrafts, and of servile nature. The people generally
is of small stature, swartie of complexion, of countenance like Spaniards or
Italians, few like one to another, as it is commonly seen among them that are
a mingled sink of diverse Nations, not like Frenchmen; they are crafty and
deceitful, great bablers and pratlers; suspicious, mutinous and factious;
cruel, cowardly and effeminate, lewd of life and behavior, desperately
supersticious and idolatrous, foolish and sottish so generally, that through
all France they are prouerbially and reproachfully called badins de Paris, that
is, a malapert sot of Paris; of nicenes and purposed folly, disguising and
corrupting their tongue and going.

The Duke de Main perceiving the King almost destitute and forsaken of his
subjects, compassed about with enemies, at home with domestical foes, in the
City with unfaithful subjects, abroad in the field with sedicious and
rebellious robbers; thought to have a fit opportunity to oppress the King.
Therefore in a great heat he does gather and muster a great and mighty army
of the basest sort of this people, but specially of such as were desperate and
had nothing to lose, and had conceived good hope to do well their business with
gain and advantage, caused the City to provide for them: they were lodged in
the suburbs and small Towns about Paris.

The Duke having this great army, does from week to week, from day to day so
delay his journey, representing to himself continually the valian^nes,
victories, faithfulness and celeritie of the King of Navarre, who was not a
days journey from Tours, who would not suffer the King to be oppressed, nor
easily surprised. These mutinous and rebellious companies Paris and about did
cry out and complain with great discontented minds, both of these
oppressions, and also of the scar^enes of victuals which did grow in the
City, by reason of the long soiourning of that army about Paris.

To pacify therefore the uproar, about the middle of April he did venture to
go forth, and takes the field, making great boast that now within few days
he trusted to reduce all France to the obeisance of the League; and the least
of his promises was, that he would bring the King to that pass that the most
mutinous fellows in Paris desired to have him. Takes order for the safety of
the City: and whereas in the alteration of the state of Paris done in January
last, they had made eighteen Colonels and Captains of so many wards as the
City was divided into: every Colonel should have twelve hundred horsemen and
footmen to walk about the City and to the Boys of Vicennes, least that Castle
should be surprised by the enemies: the Lord of Mayneuille being left governor
of the City with a strong garrison beside, to see well that in the absence of
the great Protector of the Crown of France, the malcontent people of Paris
should not enterprise against him, and exclude him from their City, if at any
time for fear of the King of Navarre he should run away.

So the Duke de Main brings this holy and invincible army (for so it was
commonly called) into Beausse, where was some good store of victuals, which
above all things his holy army desired. So that as well to ease the country
about Paris, as to have his wicked intent, he brings his army as far as
Vendosme, wherein he entered by the help of them who were of his confederacy.
There he took the Kings great counsel prisoners, so that none could escape
but one; he seized also upon many other weak Towns in that champian country,
where he stayed very long doubtful of mind what to do, whether he should go
nearer to Tours or go back. To go further, he feared the King of Navarre
being so nigh a neighbor: to go back, shame (his great bragges and promises
made to the rebels of Paris) would not suffer him. Concluded therefore to stay
in Beausse, where lodging and victuals for the taking were to be had without
money, living in hope, and watching still for some convenient occasion to
execute his damnable purpose upon the Kings person, by the intelligences which
he had with the Leaguers of the Court, and of the City of Tours.

During his soiourne in Beausse, he made the like bragges and promises to the
Nobility and people, as he had done in Paris. The Wallons which were in his
army considering that nothing was done, and lacking money, determined to
retire home: but with much ado were stayed, upon promise that great forces
were expected from the Duke Aumale out of Picardie, and that shortly they would
go about their business handsomely like

In the latter end of April, the Leaguers of Poytiers began to stir against the
King, and to make that great and large City sure for the League, and holy
v^ion: upon the news thereof the king sent the greatest part of such forces as
he had to rescue that piece which was of great importance. The Leaguers
advertised the Duke de Main (who was about Vendosme) of the state of the
affairs, and how the King was left destitute of the greatest part of his
forces, now employed about the revolt of Poitiers, how that he might come
easily (and without finding any resistance) to lodge in the Suburbs of Tours,
or the Abbey of Marmonstier near by: and that they would so provide within the
city, that by the help of his friends the King might be dispatched, or
delivered into his hands alive.

The Duke de Main upon these intelligences, sets order for the safe keeping
of Vendosme, and marched toward Chasteaurenault, the town and Ca^tell he
battered: he lays also the siege before Saint Oine, nigh Amboyse, where the
County Brienne was appointed by the King for the keeping of that place,
intending the night following by stealth to have resorted to Tours, to execute
ye enterprise of the Leaguers (which were in the court, and the City) upon
the Kings person. And that he might be sure to work safely, he had sent into
Picardy to the Duke of Aumale his cousin, praying him to send him such forces
out of Picardy as he might, putting him in hope by some new supply of succor,
to bring to pass the thing which they had most desired: but the town of
Gaulis, which by the means of the Lord of Thore, was reduced to the Kings
obedience, hindered that this new supply could nether be so great, as was
expected, nor could come in any time to do him service. Of these forces of
Picardy, it shall be spoken hereafter: but for this time we will leave this
great Duke to batter Chasteaurenault, and Saint Oine, and will show what was
done in other places at the same time.

The King considering that the enemy with a puissant army was on his arms, and
stayed for nothing but to know what assistance he might have of the Leaguers,
of the court and of the city to work his feat: knowing also the infidelity
of his subjects and servants both in the court and in the city, and on every
side, and almost dispossessed of his Crown and Kingdom, is enforced for the
safety of his person, to cast himself into the arms of his mortal enemy (as
he was made believe by the Sycophants, who always had been most in eredit with
him) but in very deed, his most profitable and necessary friend, if long before
he had used him. Truce therefore at length is concluded between the two Kings:
and among other things it was agreed that the King of Navarre should have the
Pont de Sell, a Town upon the river of Loyre, between Saumour and Nantes,
tight against Angers, for the safety of his passage. But some difficulty being
made at the surrendering of the said Pont de Sell, by the Captain: the King
granted him the town of Saumour upon Loyre. The said town was received for
the King of Navarre, by the Lord Plessis Marlin, to whom the said King gave the
government thereof.

But now before we proceed further to show the accidents which happened after
this unexpected reconsiliation of these two Kings, we will search out what
has happened in other countries.

After the death of the Guyze, the Duke de Main sent into the Provinces, but
specially into Normandy, to persuade the people that the Country men might
arm themselves without any leave or consent of the Nobility, who were not of
their side, for the defense of the Catholic religion, and their liberty, he
hired specially in Normany the priests, monks, Friars, Jesuits, and such rabble
of woolues with sums of money, in their Sermons to stir the people to rise
against their Soueraygne, and to take counsel against the nobility.

The means or arguments (which these Atheists both for money will rise against
God his ordinance, and set the world in an uproar, to pollute the earth with
blood) were these. The King (said they) with great veh^mency and amplifications
has murdered the Cardinal of Guyze, imprisoned the Primat of Lions, and
having touched two of the Lords anointed, and laid hands upon two chief.
Pillars and rulers of holy Church, over whom neither he, nor any of his had
any power or jurisdiction against faith and promise, and having violated the
public faith at the States at Bloys, the King was no more child of the
Church, was excommunicat, banished out of the Church, and cast out of the
communion of Catholics: and therefore the people were not bound to obey him
any more, but that it was lawful to persecute him by all means possible, as
the holy faculty of Theology had also of late determined; but rather that it
was lawful to murder and to destroy the King, and persecute them by all means
possible that will not league themselves and bear arms against the King. They
daily preached also that the King was a protector of heritikes, and had
intelligences with them, and that he sought nothing more then to stablish
heresy in his kingdom.

And for as much as examples do both move and encourage to do, or discouraging
from doing, they encourage the simple and ignorant; first declared themselves
enemies to the King, renounced his obedience, gave forth vilanous, unworthy and
traitorous speeches of him, so as nothing more vile may be named and spoken.
These were the devout prayers of such despisers of God and all godliness in
their Pulpits, to the which the People said Amen.

But after the truce was taken between the two Kings, then they had a

By these execrable, outrageous, and seditious inue ctiues of these damnable
Jesuits and Friars, hired to sound the trompet of rebellion in a manner
throughout all France, but specially from the river of Loyre, north, west, and
east, and among other Provinces, Normandy was so infected with their poisoned
and detestable rebellions, that there was not so much as a Uillage to be
found, where there was not some of all qualities dronken with their cup of
abominations.

It is said before, how the King had pardoned Brissak, Boysdaulphine, and
Chastre, with many others, who within a while abusing the Kings facility, and
ascribing their impunity to the Kings pu^^llanimity, fled and revolted to the
League again. After this revolt, Brissak and Boysdaulphine went to Angers (as
it is said) and procured that great City to rebel: but after the reducing of
the said Cittye to the Kings obedience by the Marshal Haumont, the said Brissak
and Boysdaulphin fled, and in their flight caused by the means of their
partakers the City of Man's (which was already wavering) to rebel against the
King. To these 2. manipuli furum resorted the Lords la Mot, Serrant, Touchet,
Angeruile and Normandiere, who by their treacherous solicita^ion procured
almost all the towns of Normandy to rebel and to open their gates to them, as
Roan, which was revolted long before, Luseulx, Falaize, Newhauen, Seas, Bayeux,
Argenton, and afterward Alcencon: all these opened their gates to the rebels,
who afterward a most in a little space consumed them. There remained Caen,
Constances, and few other towns in base Normandy in the kings obedience, by
the good and provident counsel of the Lord de la Veaue, Beuuron, the Presidents
Aulbiguy, and Lizeres, and some other loyal and Noble men.

We see how the cities of Normandy for the most part, at the solicitatio^ of
Brissak, Boysdaulphine and others, whose names shall be known hereafter, and
by the preaching of the furious and frantic Jesuits and Friars, are brought
from the Kings obedience, to a damnable rebellion. The country men also and
pesants, were induced by the self same means to rebellion, under color of
the defending the Catholic religion, and hope of liberty.

There is in high Normandy, a certain place called la Chapelle Gantier:
thereupon the persuasions of the desperate Jesuits and Friars to country men,
were stirred up to rebellion, both against the King and the Nobility, and
began to commit horrible excess and cruelties: by reason of this beginning,
all the rebels in Normandy were called Gantiers: these Sees, and a great number
of bedlem Friars, furious Jesuits, Parsons, and among others, the Parson of
Vimonstier, the most pestiferous, desperate, and seditious firebrand of all
Normandy.

About the 19. the King understanding of this rebellion in Normandy, and
foreseeing the mischief which might ensue, if this evil were not in time
remedyed, thought good with all speed, to send the Prince Montpensier,
general Lieutenant for his Majesty into that Province, to reduce them into
the true way of their duty and obedience: and commanded the Lord Saint Cire,
one of his counselers, and Master of the requests of his house, to accompany
and assist him.

The King to bring this seduced people in the right way of just obedience, gave
charge to the said Prince, to offer pardon and impunity unto the rebels, in
case they would live quietly and peaceably under his government. Secondly,
he discharged them of the third part of all taxes due unto him, hoping to have
a better opportunity, and more happy season would come when he might gratify
them in some greater matter.

Thirdly, he gave a form of an oath to the said Prince, to command all men
to live peaceably under his Gracious government, and to forsake all Leaguers,
and associations whatsoever: and in case they would refuse either to return
under his protection, or else to take that oath, he gave him authority to
chastise them with strong hand, as traitors and rebels.

About the 30. the said Prince departed from Tours, accompanied with the Lords
of Backeuile and Archant, and came to Luce, where he understood that
Boysdaulphin, and la Mot, Serrant, and other rebels, had surprised the town of
Man's, and purposed to meet with him to stop his way.

The 31. day, this noble Prince of the house of Bourbon, passed hard by the
nose of the enemies, and came as far as Alencon, where he found the
inhabitants amazed, for the surprising of the town of Man's by the enemy, whom
the rebels also had enueigled to enter into their rebellon, and confirmed them
in their obedience and duty toward his Majesty. There this noble Prince,
with great devotion and solemnity kept his Easter: and having taken order for
the safety of the town, appointed the Lord Reuty governor of the said
place, with two companies of shot on horseback, to keep the town and Castle;
and to make roades in the villages about, to repulse the rebels when they
should come to forage, and constrain the inhabitants to pay them taxes, and
other tributes due to the King.

The 4. day, the Prince understanding that the city of Sees, were minded to
join to the rebels, and had refused to take the oath, according to the
prescribed form of the King, purposed to pass that way, and sent word
Bakqueuile and Archand, and their troops passed through without any stay. The
said Prince showed unto the Bishop and the inhabitants, that he came from the
King, to offer pardon unto the rebels, and that the King meant to deal
favorably with his subjects, to make account of them, according to their duty
and obedience toward him, to chastise the rebels and obstinat. The inhabitants
protested (though with fained lips) of their loyalty, affection and
obedience toward his Majesty.

The departing from Sees, met with the Lords de Hallot, and Creueceur his
brother, with a good and honorable tronpe of nobility, to whom they proffered
with many protections faithfully to serve the King, as long as breath was in
their bodies.

The 5. of April, the Prince departed from Escouche, had intelligences that
the Lords Touschet, Angeruile, Normandiere, Captains of the rebels, with many
La^nciers, and a good number of footmen, have come forth out of Falaize, and
marched on to stop the Princes way, and went as far as a village called
Perrefit, distant two miles from Falaize, where they being met by the Lords
Bakqueuile, Archand, and Creueceur, were so charged, that they stood little to
the fight: for the Prince (leading the maine Battle beginning to appear,
they fled and left behind them) Touschet, Angeruile, and Normandiere, their
chiefest leaders who were taken prisoners, and brought before the Duke, who
were redeliuered into the hands of those that had taken them, till such time as
he should call for them again. All the companies of these rebels were hewn
in pieces, the Prince lost not one man, there was none hurt of his side but
only the Lord Chammont in the head, and in a short space after cecouered.

That same day, the Prince Montpencier came to Falaize, where the enemies made
a show, as though they would have set open the gates for him, intending some
surprise against him. The Prince having no Ordinance to force the^, took his
way to Caen, where he entered about ye seventh day of April; all the faithful
Citizens welcomming him with these salutations often reiterated, God save the
King, and my Lord the D. Montpencier; and in token of an unfeigned joy, they
kept that day holy day. The Lord Beuuron accompanied him to his lodging, which
was the house of the president Aubigny: thither came the L. Verune to do
reverence to the Prince, who received him courteously, and highly commended him
for his loyal service to the King, in keeping the town within his obedience.

The said Prince soiourned in Caen about ten days to set all things in
Thorigny, and after him the Lord Longannay, with a great troop of Gentlemen,
who were courteously received and embraced, with great thanks for their good
affection toward his Majesty, promising to advertise the King of their
duetifull service, and to requi^e it in particular, as occasion would serve.

About the 15. of April, the Prince Montpencier having done al things that were
there to be done, and gathered such forces as he might: and by the advice of
the Lord Saint Cere, he concluded to war upon the rebels, and to make them to
leave that which they hold so fast in the country, and because they had the
chiefest towns, he resolved to carry a long some pieces of artillery, to force
them if possible he might. Therefore he sent away before Monsieur de Hallot,
Batreuile, Archand, with the regiment of Monsieur Tracy, the companies of the
Captains Saint Denis, Maillot, Radier, Chauuaine, Daulphin, Roqueuile, Glaize,
and other voluntary Captains to attempt upon Falaize.

The Sunday, to wit, the 16. of April, he like a good Catholic, caused a
procession to be made, and a sermon, and a certain form of prayers to be
daily said for the safegarde of the King, and the good success of his affairs
against the rebels.

The 17. the Prince having appointed officers over his treasure, money,
victual, and artillery, departed with two Canons, and one bastard Culuerine,
hoping at the least to draw the enemy to the field, ariuing at Falaize: he
lodged at the Abbey Saint Iahn. On the other side, the ringleaders of the
rebels, as Brissak, the Lords of long Champ, the Barons of Eschaufour and
Tubeuf, assembled the flower of their rebel forces, within the town of
Falaize.

The 18. of April, they laid their Artillery to batter, and having beaten
down three towers, they sent a Sergeant and ten Soldiers to view the breach:
but seeing that they would have enticed them to enter into the town, to have
intrapped them, and considering that the wall was yet too deep, the Prince
sounded the retraite.

And understanding that the rebels had taken from about Aigle, Orbeck, Sees,
Argenton, Vimonstier, and other places near thereabout, a company of more then
six thousand Gantiers, well appointed for Muskets and Harquebuses as might be
among these peasants, they intermingled some seven or eight hundred good
Soldiers, such as they could come by; some also of the Nobility of the weaker
sort: to these companies of rebellious robbers, resorted a great number of
Priests, Ca^ons, Monks, Friars, Jesuits, and such stinking poisoned vermin:
the Lord Brissak accompanied with the Barons of Eschaufour, the Lords Vieupont,
Roqueuual, Beaulieu, and Annay, and other Captains received them, and Falaize:
to them repaired the Baron Vernier with his forces from Damfront. The Lord
Pierrecourt also came with such forces, as he could make out of Ponteau de
mer, and Ange, and Houfleur, supposing to have enclosed the Prince, between
the Town of Falaize and these great forces, and so to have surprised him and
his power.

The Prince having intelligences of the enterprise provided for them, removed
his artillery from the trenches, and sent away his cannon to Courcy, and with
the Culuerine resolved to encounter the enemy in the plain field.

The enemies had lodged in three several villages, not far distant a sunder
between Argenton and Falayze, to wit, Pierrefit, villiers and Commeaux: The
Prince Montpencier appointed the County of Thoriguy and Longaunay, and the Lord
Vickes the elder brother, to lodge between the said villages and Argenton,
there to stay them if they should seem to recoyle back.

He sent also the Lords of Bakqueuile, Archand, and Benuron, with their
companies, to enuiron them on the other side.

The 20. day ye prince himself, aided with the L. Hallot, and Creueceure his
brother with the whole army, and being on the top of a hill, commanded the
Lords of Emery and Surene, Marshalls of the field, to advance the infantry
which was on the left hand, with the Culuerine, which they did: these footmen
were lead by the Lords of Saint Denis, Maillot, Radier, Roqueuile, Chauuayn,
Daulphine, Glayze and others, all so well resolute to encounter with that
rabble of rebels, that they made no delay, but skitmished straight with a hot
on set on both sides: but as soon as the culuerin had begun to play in their
faces, they began to be amazed, and Brissak himself caused his Cornet to
turn bridle, and retired from the danger with a number of horsemen as hardy as
himself. The rebels notwithstanding stood to the fight, but when the Culuerine
roared once again, and they s^w the Lord Vaumart, one of their chiefest
leaders with fifteen others carried away with the shot, they began to quauer.
Then the prince commanded a fresh charge: he marching foremost of all his
companies, which was given so hot and fierce, that all the rebels were put to
the chase, to yield, and to fall down before them, whom God had armed with
authority and force, to revenge that most damnable rebellion. This first
encounter was upon two thousand, who were lodged at Pierrefit; they were all
slain or taken prisoners, few only excepted.

The prince having assembl^d his troops again, immediately set upon the third
village named Viliers, where were another company of rebels conducted by the
Baron Tubeuf: they were all put to the sword, Tubeuf, and a few others who
were taken prisoners.

And because the night drew near apace, the Prince thought good with all
speed to assault the other companies of rebels who were at Commeaux, who were
about a thousand or twelve hundred men, conducted by the Lord Beaulieu.

This company had trenched and fortified themselves, and therefore the most
part of the^ were ye cannons, priests, monks, friars, and Jesuits, of the
City of Sees, and many persons of the country round about, who would show
some proof of their valor, and how they could fight better with a Caliuer
then with their Portisse: but at length it was found that they had more skill
in iugling a Mass and making of Gods, then in handling their weapons: among
them was the Parson of Vimonstier, a desperate and sedicious Priest. The Lord
Beaulieu was their captain, who at the first onset the said Lord Beaulieu was
taken among the first in the forcing of the Fort, who being carried away by the
Captain Chauuayne before the Prince, said, that there were within that Fort at
the least seven hundred well armed and appointed.

The Prince understanding that, commanded the Lords Bakqueuile and Archand to
get into the Fort, and for that purpose he left them the Culuering, and went
that night to Escouche, where he arrived about eleven of the clock in the
night. And as soon as he was gone, the rebels of Comeaux understanding how
their fellows had sped, yielded, with their lives only saved, who were
immediately disarmed and brought to Escouche to the Prince.

There the Duke soiourned all the next day being the 21. of April, to take the
view of the prisoners, who were in great number of all qualities of persons.

The same day the Lords Hallot, Bakqueuile, Beuil, Bellefontayn, and Archand,
went abroad with their companies, to see if they could meet with any ranging
Rebels, where they mist not much to have taken the Baron Vernier.

The said Baron and Brissake with the rest of their accomplices, retired in great
speed to Argenton, fearing to be as kindly hit on the hips, as their fellows
had been.

The 22. day the Prince leaving the Lords of Harcourt, of Saint Mary, Venoix
and Sassay at Escouche, went to Courcy, where he understood that the Lord
Pierrecourt was lodged with some Launciers not far of, he mounted straight on
horseback and went to find them out, but he had dislodged a little before
they came to the place.

Here (Christian Reader) mark the presence of God in the assisting of a good
cause, and handled by persons of lawful calling.

First, thou see how the King heretofore in the wars against the K. Navarre
had not prospered, but all things have fallen to his own charges, dishonor
and shame, because he persecuted him without a cause, and such persons were put
in trust of his affairs, and advanced themselves forward, intending under that
color to supplant their master. Now, when the King has a just cause in hand,
and put men in trust that are lawfully called, bearing a true and unfeigned
heart to the King, kingdom, Crown and Country, such as be the Princes of
his blood, and other of the true Nobility of France, the Lord also is of his
side and fights for him, makes him victorious, and restores to him his
authority by steps, as it shall appear hereafter.

Secondly, here is a notable thing happened, which never did happen unto any
Captain that ever I have read, save unto that noble Athenian Conon, that a
Captain had obtained three noble victories in one day, but unto this noble
Prince of ancient and noble raze.

Thus the Prince Montpencier by these victories, gave a taste unto the rebels of
the cup of their treasons, and so did drive them into Towns and Holds, that
afterward it was rare to see any rebels abroad, except it were when they had
need privily to steal out to robb their nigh neighbors of their goods.
Having done this exployt, he purposed to bring the artillery from Courcy, and
return to the City of Caen, intending shortly after to be in the field
again, and to carry by it until he had subdued the country to the Kings
obedience again.

By a pertinent digression I have showed what noble and profitable exployts the
Prince Montpencier has done in Normandy against the Rebels, now we will
return to continuance of the narration interrupted.

It is said before, how the King seeing himself in extreme danger, made
truces with the King of Navarre, and delivered him the Town of Saumour, for
his safe passage and repassage over the river of Loyre, which he committed to
the Lord of Plessis Marline.

Few days being expired, after the delivering of the town of Saumour, the King
of Navarre went thither to the great contentation and rejoicing of all the
inhabitants, and of all the Nobility round about well affected to the Kings
service, and good of the realm. Liberty was given by the K. of Navarre to all
the inhabitants concerning religion indifferently, as he had done in other
places.

The King of Navarre having ordered all things at Saumour, about the 17. day of
April went forth and besieged the Castle of Brissak (the Lord thereof being
a traitor, and a rebellious Leaguer) and took it by composition.

The 18. the King of Navarre passed all his Forces beyond the river of Loyre
over the bridge of Saumour, and within few days joined with other forces which
stayed for him, gathered out of Normandy, Main, Anjou, Perch, Beausse, and
other countries being between Loyre, and Seyne, intending shortly to see face
to face the army of the rebels, conducted by the Duke de Main.

Thus the King of Navarre, greatly iniuried and offended so often, and at the
request, and for the pleasure of the Duke of Guyze assaulted, now comes to
rescue out of danger captivity and death, him that had persecuted him so long
with all the forces of a mighty kingdom, he comes (I say) with a chosen
army, not only great in number, but also in valor: so that every common
soldier might have supplied the room of an Officer.

Go on O great King, put on the armor of God, and follow his calling, this day
thou have obtained a greater and more famous victory, then at the day of
Coutras, in ouercomming the desire of reuengement, which upon diverse occasions
might have risen by the frailty of man's nature.

The 21* the King of Navarre having passed over the river Loyre, and joined
with his forces, gathered out of the Countries abouesayd, sets forth a
declaration, showing the causes of this passage.

First, he shows that he is called to enter into this action by God, by
nature, by the law, and by the just approbation of his Prince, which causes do
move him to determine to employ his life, his means and power, for the
reestablishing of ye Kings authority, restoring of the realm, and for the
defense of good Subjects within the same decayed, and oppressed by the treasons
of the Leaguers, under the color of godliness and justice.

Secondly, he protests to hold for enemies only them, who have declared
themselves enemies of the realm by their rebellion, and outrageous insolences
committed against the sovereign magistrate and justice: promising
notwithstanding to receive to mercy them, which (deceived by the enticements of
the rebels, or fear) rather then by their own malice have associat themselves
to the said rebels.

Denounces therefore to all Provinces, Cities, Commonalties, Churchmen, Nobles,
Magistrates, Captains, Soldiers, Borgeses, Citizens, and all other of any
degree whatsoever, to retire speedily from the society of those traitors and
rebels, and to return under the obedience of their natural and lawful Prince
and King: but specially wills the Church men (whereof some have rendered
themselves instruments of the former treacheries and rebellions) to love peace,
and to keep themselves within their bounds, returning and abiding under the
obedience of their King.

Thirdly, he protests that this his passing the river of Loyre (by the
commandment of the King) is for their defense, and therefore takes all the
Kings faithful subjects under his protection, but specially the Church men,
forbidding upon pain of death all his Captains and soldiers not

Fourthly, he turns his speech to the foresaid persons, admonishing them to
consider the horrible evils which have already and shall rise out of that
damnable rebellion. To the Clergy he speaks, to consider how godliness is
every where choked in the midst of those tumults, the name of God blasphemed,
and religion despised.

The Noble men he prays to consider how their order must needs fall, with the
ruin of the King, Crown, and Estate.

The Magistrates he warns to represent before their eyes what execrable
violating of justice will follow, by the examples of the Parliaments of Paris
and Toulouse, carried away Prisoners as in a triumph by rascals, and vilanous
persons.

The commons he aduertiseth to think how they are eased by these tumultes,
where their goods are exposed to the pray of the vilest sort, their traffike
interrupted, their husbandry altogether turned into wast, and desolation.

Last of all, he exhorts all men to endeavor themselves to bring what they
can to remedy these evils, which ye rebels have procured to the realm, which
cannot be done without a good peace, neither can that be obtained, but by the
returning under the Kings obedience, restoring his royal authority, and
reestablishing of justice: he assures himself that God who gives salvation
unto Kings, will assist him in this enterprise and just cause.

Auuergne is a Province in France, full of hills and mountains, wherein there
be three Cities, situated in form of a triangle, and not distant far one
from another, to wit, Rion, Clermont, and Monferrant: the Kings long before had
established at Rion, beside other courts, a sovereign court of his treasurers,
and receauers. This City had received the League, and had committed rebellion
against him, in shaking off the yoke of obedience. Therefore the King about the
24. of April, seeing their obstinacy in their rebellion, do revoke from the
said Town of Rion all his courts, and does transport the same to the City of
Clermont, commanding all his officers of al his courts in that city, to
repair to the said Clermont, and there to execute their charge.

About the same time also the King does adiudge all the goods of the Dukes of
Main, Aumale, and of the Cheualier Aumale, and of the voluntary inhabitants of
the cities of Paris, Roen, Amiens, Abeuile, Rhemes, Orleans, Chartres, Man's,
Lions, Toulouse, to be forfaited to his crown for their treasons and
perseverance in the same, above the time prefixed unto them, which was the 15.
day of March last past, and ordained commissioners

The King of Navarre in the mean time scoureth the country, and prepares
himself to receive the Kings commandment: and understanding that the Duke de
Main was lodged at Vendosme, and Montoyre, the 28. of April he determined to
surprise some of the enemies, and about four a clock in the morning, taking
eight hundred horsemen, and one thousand shot on horsbacke, went to bait at
Chaulx in Anjou, ten long leagues from Saumour: departing thence, and having
already gone forward three leagues, he received news how the Duke of Main had
brought his forces to Chasteaurenault, and had sent part of them to besiege the
County of Brienne, who was at Saint Oyne, nigh Amboyse.

The King hearing of the siege of Chasteaurenault, and Saint Oyne, by the
enemy, having him so nigh neighbor: and fearing that he would come to lodge in
the Suburbs of Tours, being in danger to be delivered into the hands of them,
by the intelligences which they had wi^h the leagued of his Court, and of the
City: he did dispatch diverse Posts both to Saumour, and also to other places
to the King of Navarre. And about three leagues from Chaulx toward Vendosme,
he was aduertyzed by three Posts, that the King sent for him: whereupon the
said King of Navarre turned bridle, and came that night to lodge at Maille upon
Loyre, within two leagues of Tours, after he had been 24. hours on horsbacke,
and immediately sent word of his coming to the King. The King understanding of
his being so nigh him, did greatly rejoice, knowing that the enemy neither
would nor durst enterprise any thing whilst he was so nigh his person.

The enemy sent certain companies in the evening with a great brauade, and
took a Suburb of Tours, where they defloured a Maid, who had fled into the
Church before the high alter, and in the arms of a Priest: but hearing that
the King of Navarre was at hand (without any leisure to take breath) they
retired presently.

The King of Navarre rested himself and his troops the next day, but the 30.
of April (being the Lords day) in the morning, the said King of Navarre
judging that it were necessary for them both to see one another, thereuppon to
take some certain resolution of their affairs, being also requested by the
King (although his counsel had diverse opinions of that interuiew) he sent to
the King by the Lord of Mignouuile, that he was gone to set all his troops in
battle array at the Pont la Mot, a quarterr of a league from Tours, and
thatif it should please his Majesty to come to the Suburbs, he would kiss his
Majesty's hands, and would receive his commaundeme^ts to execute the^ according
to the necessity of the affayrs.

After the said King of Navarre, with all his troops had stayed about two
hours, the Marshall Hautmont came to him from the King, to pray Pless^s les
Tours, where the King with all the court stayed for him. That thing he
immediately determined to do, leaving of all suspicions, and despising the
counsel of many, who would have him to differ that interuiewe until another
time: considering also, that there was no appearance of danger, he passed over
the river at the bridge of Saint Saphorine, and went to meet the King,
accompanied with the Marshall Hautmont, and many of his nobility, and his
gardes, leaving the rest of his forces to stay for him at the passage.

He found the King staying for him, in the alley of the Park of Plessis: there
was so great throng, as well of Courtiers as of the inhabitants of the City,
who ran thither from every where, that the two Kings stayed the space of half
a quarter of an hour, stretching their arms one toward another, before they
could touch one another: so great was the preace; for the place (though very
spacious) would not receive the multitude, so that the trees were loaded with
men to behold that blessed meeting. The embrasings, the salutations, were
reiterated diverse times of both Kings, with a show of mutual joy and
contentation.

The rejoicing of all the Court, and of the people was incredible: for all men
did cry by the space of half an hour, God save the King, a voice that had
not been hard either at Tours, or in any place else where the King had been in
more then four months before. Another acclamation followed the first; God
save the Kings, God save the King, and the King of Navarre: all men praised
God, and blessed that happy and long desired reconsiliation.

The two Kings parting then^e, entered into counsel, where they were the space
of two hours: and after the counsel, they took their horses and road
together, accompanied with the Court unto Saint Anne, which is half the way to
the Suburb called Roches, the streates were so full of people, that it was hard
for them to pass: all the way sounded with acclamatio^s and voice of joy, for
the hope which every one had conceived, that these two Kings being so united,
would overcome their enemies, and restablish the state of the kingdom, and
would end the miseries which had vexed France so long.

The said King of Navarre, departed from the King at Saint Anne, repassed
Loyre, where his troops stayed for him, and lodged at the Suburbs of Saint
Saphorin, nigh the bridges end.

The morrow after, being the first day of May, about six a clock in the
Navarre entered into the town, to go to salute the King. All that morning was
employed in counsel, until ten a clock, that the King would go to Mass;
where he was accompanied by the said King of Navarre unto the Church door:
from thence he went to salute Condy and County, staying for the Kings return
from Mass. Afterward the said King of Navarre, as long as he made his aboade
there, oftentimes visited the King, and took counsel together for the common
benefit of the realm.

The same day, the said King of Navarre obtained of the King, for them of Sedan
ten thousand Crowns for to help them in their affairs, with letters written
unto the Duke of Lorreyne, commanding him to make war no longer upon Sedan,
declaring that they were under his protection.

Whilst these things were a doing at Tours, the Duke d' Main did batter
Chasteaurenault; but understanding of the interuiew of the two Kings, at the
self same hour of the interuiew he brake the siege, and in haste retired to
Vendosme. The King as is before said, stood in great danger, to be either
murdered or else delivered to the enemy, by the intelligence which the Duke d'
Main had with some traitors which were of his counsel in the Court and in
the City. Now by this blessed reconsiliation, here is a great change to be
seen on a sudden; for by this, the King is put out of fear, lives out of
danger of the rebels, is fortified by ariuall of this mighty Prince and army
unlooked for; the hearts of all good subjects are herewith encouraged, and the
conspiratours are terrified: for the Duke of Main being at Vendosme, and in
the territory there abouts, with a mighty army of traitors, had committed such
insolences upon the people of their own League and union, that the country
was replenished with outcries, curses, and imprecations. Fear therefore of the
King of Navarre, and of some insurrection of the people of the country,
constrained him first to place part of his army in garrisons, in the towns of
Beausse, Anjou, Main, and Perch, to make hauock of all that he left behind,
and afterward to return to Paris.

The Duke d' Main having so divided his army, with one part of the same,
gives to himself many alarm in that retire to Paris.

It is said before, how about the beginning of April, the King considering the
reasonable proffers of the King of Navarre, who in his great prosperity, and
when he might have enlarged his authority far and wide throughout al France,
proffered peace and aid unto the King, to his great disadvantage: at length
necessity enforced the said King to conclude a truce with the King of Navarre
for a whole year, beginning at the 3. day of April 1589. and ending the same
day of the same month, in the year 1590. inclusiuely.

The conditions of the said truce were agre^d upon, and promised to be
observed by the two Kings, the 26. of April.

First, in publication of the same truce, the King with a long discourse does
protest of his consiancy in the Catholic religion, and opposes the

On the contrary, shows how his enemies have taken the pretense of religion,
and discharging the people of sundry exactions, to make associations to
strengthen themselves, to replenish the realm with tumults and confusions:
whereby they have given opportunity to the heretics, to abolish the Catholic
religion, and to enlarge theirs, and they themselves have by sundry cruelties
and extortions, oppressed his subjects of the Catholic religion: he
complains that the Leaguers having attempted against his person, and
proclaimed an open war against him and his authority, who through their
injuries, have enforced him to call the King of Navarre to his natural and
lawful defense, against their rebellions and treasons.

Secondly, he declares how the King of Navarre, acknowledging his duty toward
his Majesty, and pitying the miserable state of the realm, subverted and
brought to a lamentable confusion by the Leaguers, has instantly required
peace of him. Whereupon by the advice of the Princes of the blood, officers of
the Crown, and Lords of his Counsel, he has concluded a truce; and ceasing
from all hostility throughout the whole tralme, therein comprehending the
County of Venisse, and state of Auignon, belonging to the Pope, the said truce
to begin the third day of April, and to continue a whole year.

The conditions of the said truce are as follows.

First, that the King of Navarre shall not, during the time of the said truce,
employ his forces within, nor without the realm, but for his service, and at
his commandment and direction.

Secondly, that wheresoever the King of Navarre shall come, he shall alter,
change, nor innouat, nor interrupt the exercise of the romish religion, nor
show any displeasure to the Priests, nor to the places of their devotions.

Thirdly, that whatsoever place, Town, City, Castle or Fortress, he shall
take by any mean whatsoever, immediately deliver the same to the Kings pleasure.

Last of all, the King grants to them of the reformed religion, the liberty
of their consciences wheresoever, within his dominions, and the exercise of the
same in places were it was exercised at the time of the concluding of this
truce: also that they all shall enjoy their goods wheresoever, so that likewise
they shall suffer the Catholics to enjoy the freedom of their religion and
goods, in places which are in their power.

This was proclaimed and recorded in Parliament the thirty day of April at
Tours the day of their interuiewe.

About the same time in like manner, the king of Navarre did set forth a
declaration of the causes of these truces: wherein first he does protest, that
in all these civil wars, he has armed himself and his friends against his
will, nature and necessity en^orcing him so to do, and shows that his war
of the League began under a pretense and shadow of religion, but in very deed
is found a war of estate. Protests that his great desire has been always
to do some good and acceptable service to the king. Complayneth of the malice
of his enemies, disguised and colored with favorable pretenses to overthrow
the State. Commends the king, who at length has with a good judgment
discerned his innocence from their malice, through so great and thick mist of
colors and calomnies of his enemies.

Secondly, he shows that the Leaguers making the world believe to war
against the reformed religion, whom they do call heretics, never went to
seek them out where they were, but abusing of the kings authority and power,
which they had ^^il in hand, and to that end have by the said forces, surprised
the towns and fortresses which were furthest and least suspected of religion.

Thirdly, he shows that they have not used their preachers and Iesitites to
convert the pretended heretics as they should have done, but in all places
where they have borne the sway, have made them serve for trompets of sedition
and firebrands, to sound the alarm, and to set the whole Realm on a fire, and
miserable combustion, to raise the subjects against their prince, to seduce
them from the obedience of their magistrates, to dispose them to tumults,
alteration and noueities, whereby they have procured an horrible deformity in
the Realm, a general and incredible rebellion, by the which they have
banished all piety and justice out of all Cities and places which are under
their tyranny.

Fourthly, he shows the causes of this their reconsiliation and interuiew, to
have been no respect of religion at all: But that he for his part pitying the
miserable state whereunto the enemies had reduced the realm, when he might have
used the public calamities of the said state for to do well and assure his
affairs, forgiving all injuries and discurtesies received unto the realm,
has offered to the king his life, and means to assist him to restablish his
authority: which proffers the king of his clementie and goodness accepted. And
upon that acceptance (that he might the better have means to do him good
service) the said King bath conciuded a general truce throughout all his
Dominions for a whole year, including therein the County of Venisse and state
of Auignon.

Last of all, he charge and commands all them of his side and religion,

And as the King of his gracious goodness had given liberty to them of the
reformed religion, to enjoy the freedom of their consciences and goods, he
wills also the like liberty to be given to the Catholics, who are in the
Provinces, Towns or Cities, holden by them of the reformed religion, so long
as this truce shall endure.

Among all other Provinces, which through rebellion had forsaken the Kings
obedience, Picardy and the I Will of France had waded most deeply in that
rebellion, having generally revolted, Calis and Boloigne excepted. In the I Will
of France there is a small Town named Seulis, in the way beweene Champaigne
and Paris, that Town also had rebelled and joined to the union of the League,
a Town of no strength, neither in fortifications nor situation.

About the beginning of April, the Lord Thore of the house of Mommorency, went
up and down in the Town of Seulis, conferring with the good and faithful
inhabitants of the said Town, who with his good and grave reasons reduced them
to the Kings obedience.

About the beginning of May, the said Lord Thore within the space of three
days, made a choice and muster of able men out of the villages of Mommorency,
so that as well of his companies as of the inhabitants of the Town, he made a
sufficient number of resolute men to the number of two thousand, able to stand
against any forces that should seek to assault the Town, furnishing the same
abundantly with victual and munition, and all necessary things for the
keeping and defense thereof. This he did, not that the place was of any such
strength, but reposing his trust in God, who is a defender of a just cause, and
in the courage and faithfulness of the inhabitants and soldiers there. The
Parisiens amazed to see the s^daine reducing of the said Town to the Kings
obedience, did all their diligence to put out that fire kindled so near them.

The Lord of Mayneuile (whom we have said the Duke de Main had left governor
of Paris) in great have with a company of Parisiens well armed, came to besiege
the said Town of Seulis. The Duke d'Aumale with a brave company of horsemen
and a sort of footmen, arrived incontinently there after the Lord Mayneuile;
so that on a sudden they besieged the Town, being at the dash to the number
of four thousand men.

The fourth day, the Parisiens and other partakers and fellows of the union,
came posting from many places, being well horsed and furnished, and found
themselves that day before that Town to the number of six thousand men.

The fifth day they sent to Paris for Ordinance, whereof three were sent

In the alteration which was made in the City in January last, they had
appointed a Captain for every ward of the City, which be eighteen, which by
turns should have out of his ward twelve hundred men, to march to the Boys of
Vicennes nigh Paris, to keep that Castle from surprising by the Kings friends.
Captain Aubret his regiment was appointed that day to that charge, to wit, to
conduct the Ordinance, to whom was added the company of Captain Compan; they
(leaving for that day the keeping of the Castle Vicennes, their baggage,
apparel, and provision of victual, which was gone before through the gate S.
Anthony) went through S. Martins gate, where the Ordinance was gone before,
under the charge of one Brigard, Procurator of the Towne-house. They ar^iued
with these three p^eces at Seulis the sixth day of May in the evening. At their
arriving they saluted the Town with a peale of that Ordinance.

At the noise thereof, they of the Town on a sudden came to the Town walls,
and offered to make as great a breach in the wall as they would demand, and so
to ease them from taking so much pains as to use the Canon shot.

The Duke d'Aumale presently sent to summon them to yield unto composition:
they within promised to make an answer the morrow following.

Upon this answer, a Post of the Town went to Paris to bring them good news,
which increased greatly by the way, as the manner is: there the report went
that Seulis had proffered threescore thousand Crowns, some multiplied that to
one hundred thousand, for their rau^some.

The 7. day, they of the Town gave their answer both by portraiture and by
mouth: for they all night had portrayed on a cloth the Dukes de Mayn and
Aumale hanged on gibbets, and the Duchess Montpensier kneeling at the feet
of them with her head all uncovered, weeping and wailing and tearing her hair,
which they caused to be set on the morrow (being the 7. of May) to be spread
upon the walls, the people crying with vile and reproachful speeches, that the
same was the portraiture of the composition that they demanded.

Upon the sight of this picture, and words spoken out of the wall: they sent
again to Paris for more Ordinance, to beat the Town to dust, for they had
sworn so to do.

The Parisiens made excuse, that they lacked Bullets, and such Pieces as they
demanded.

The cause of this excuse was not lack of will to do so much mischief as the
other intended to have done: but for fear of the ielousies between the Duke
de Main and Aumale: for the Duke Aumale had been greatly, Paris, which he
denied to do. The Parisiens therefore fearing that Aumale having such forces
as he had at Seulis, and expected daily from the Lord Balagny, and having
store of Ordinance and munition, either might turn all these forces against
them, or keep them short from having any victuals out of Picardie, or to make
a third faction, and to strive with the Duke de Main about the state, and so
weaken their party, to expose them to be a pray for the King.

The Duke d' Aumale, seeing that there was little succor to be expected from
Paris, sent to Peronne, where he had six pieces of Ordinance, and out of
Anjous one, which were conducted to Seulis by ye Lord Balagny, governor of
Cambray.

About the 13. day of May they of Seulis made a sally out of the Town with a
hundred horsemen, whereat they that besieged the town were so amassed, that
they thought best to flee: so the Parisiens casting away their armor, fled, and
hid themselves in bushes on every side.

Of these hundred horsemen, fifty returned into the town, and the other
fifty kept the field, for to aid any that might come to succor them.

About the 15. of May, the Lord Balagny with his companies of Wallons,
Cambresines and Picardines, came and joined to the D. Aumale, with six pieces
of Ordinance, which he had taken at Peronne and Anjous, as is aforesaid.

The 12. day of May, they began to batter Seulis, with ten pieces of battery,
and within a while having made a great breach, the enemy confusedly gave the
assault, who was repulsed with some loss.

The same day about noone, word came to the enemy that the Duke of Longueuille,
accompanied with the Lords of Humieres, Bonniuet, la Now, Giury, Mesuiller,
and Tour, and other nobles of Picardy were at hand to the number of a thousand
horsemen, and three thousand footmen to rescue the town of Seulis.

Whereupon the Lord Balagny pitched in camp the best power of his men, and
being then accompanied with the Lords of Mainuile, of Saisseual, Mezieres, and
Congy, with others, approached somewhat near to the Duke of Longueuille, in
good hope to discomfit him. The horsemen of Cambray, and the Wallons also first
charged the footmen of the Duke of Longueuille. The said footmen departed
themselves in the middle, and gave room for the ordinance to shoot: which at
the first volye made a great flaughter of the Cambresines and Wallons, who
lyking not that play, recyred back with greater have then they went to it: but
afterward they came all to a set battle, fought stoutly on both sides, and
with great courage: but the Ordinance of the Duke of Longueuille made still so
great spoite of the enemy, that conceauing a great dread they began to waver,
d' Aumale, nor the Lord Balagny by any persuasions encourage them, nor bring
them to good order again: so the confusion and terror increasing, the whole
army which besieged the town, fled away presently.

The Duke of Longueuille his power, with the power which was in the Town,
issuing forth, did so follow the chase, that with handy blows they killed as
many as they could overtake. There remained slain of the rebels upon the place
between fifteen hundred and two thousand, as many were slain in the chase,
besides them who were slain in the Villages by the country people. All the
Ordinance and munition of war, bag and baggage was left behind. The Duke d'
Aumale had a blow which did him no good, the Lord Balagny had an other which
did him no great hurt: hoth of them fled to Paris in lesser company then when
they went to Seulis.

The Duke d' Aumale the 19. of May went out of Paris, fearing there to be
welome, and mistrusting the snares of de Main, mutiny and factions of the
Parisiens, he retired to Saint Denis.

Balagny remained in Paris, faining there that he would take order for the
gathering of the Soldiers, breathing out cruel threatening what he would do,
and promising to the Parisiens, that a new supply of Wallons would come out of
the low Country: he cheareth the people of Paris, who were smitten with the
dread of Jericho. The self same day, the rebels of Rion in Auuergne, had an
overthrow no less then this, but the particularityes are not known unto me
for lack of instructions.

We have inserted by digression the judgments which God has executed upon the
rebels, before Seulis. First, how they were convicted of treason and felony
upon the walls of Seulis, and there their cheifest Captains hanged. Neither
was that a play of boys, but the work of God, which by that fearful picture
would have admonished both the headlings and underlings of that rebellion, of
their offense, of his judgments executed upon rebels in all ages, and put
them in remembrance of their duty.

Secondly, we have seen a blow given of God) unto such unfaithful Traitors,
despisers of Gods Ordinance) in earnest of heavier plagues, if through
repentance they do not return to their dutiful obedience.

Now we will return to show the effects of the meeting, and interuiew of the
two Kings at Tours the 30. of April.

It is said, how the Duke de Main took a fright as soon as he heard of this
interuiew, returned to Vendosme, where soiorning a few days, he ordered his
army, placed part of them in garrisons in diverse towns and holds, as is said.

It is said also, how he had sent to the Duke Aumale, to send him some supply
of horsemen out of Picardy, that he might be the better able to give the blow
so long intended.

The King of Navarre taking for some days counsel with the King, about the
public affairs, made some light roads in the Country about which was
leagued, expecting to have al his forces in a readiness to do some exploit. At
length the said King of Navarre understanding how that the Duke de Main fled
with part of his army: about the thirteenth day of May followed him so near
upon the heels, that he put all straglers which were left behind to the
sword, and did so scour the country of Beausse, that not one of the enemies
durst show themselves abroad out of their holds.

Whilst the King expected certain regiments of Suissers, and other forces,
which did daily prepare to come to hi^, the King of Navarre soiorning in
Beausse, about Boysgency, had sent the Lord Lorges to scour the country
toward Chasteaudune and Bonaual, and retired to his house of Lorges nigh
Marchesnoyre.

The Duke d' Aumale had sent the Lord Saueinze with some companies of Picardy,
but specially the Lords of Brosses, with six or seven score gentlemen, all the
choice of the Nobility in Picardy, that were favoring that side, and soiorned
at Chartres.

This Saueinze took with him his companies of Picardy, and Arcleinuile: for
the Duke de Main governor at Chartres, accompanied with fifty horses,
intending to have surprised the Lord Lorges, Arcleinuile went before to view
the country, and to know who stirred in the fields.

The 18. of May, the King of Navarre sent the Lord Chastilion, accompani^d with
the Lords Fouqueroles, Charboniere, Harambure, Money, Resny, Saint Sere,
Fresillon, and Chambalame, and other gentlemen to make war with two hundred
horsemen, and as many harquebuziers, and by Boysgency understood that these
troops of Picary, sent by the Duke d' Aumale, came that way to have met the
Lord Lorg^s: the Lord Chastilion therefore with his companies directed his way
toward Bonaual, and took with him the Lord Fonquerantes, with twenty of his
gentlemen for scoute, they met Arcleinuile with fifty horses with him. The Lord
Chastilion makes toward him to charge him, and so used the matter that they
killed six men of the enemy. Arcleinuile having no great lyking of that play,
retired and gave the alarm to the rest of the troops, a quarter of a mile
coming orderly under the leading of Saueinze: he had 30. Harquebuziers of the
Lord Forceuille, and many other Gentlemen of name, making in all the number of
six hundred men.

The Lord Chastilion changed his pace with a trot, for to entertain them.
Charboniere and Harambure, with their companies of light horsemen were on his
left wing on the other side.

Saueuze setting forth before his Harquebuziers, set his company of Launciers
in ranks, and comes a great pace without breaking rank

The Lord Chastilion casts about a little to stay for his Harquebuziers, he
deuideth his horsemen into two companies, and having placed his footmen, goes
to the skirmish.

Saueuze comes forth very bravely and courageously, galloping for thirty
paces, his Harquebuziers on horseback gave the onset near enough.

The Lord Chastilion his footmen received them, who after the first
Harquebuziers were discharged, even during the fight rushed in among the
horsemen, killed many horses with their swords: of the Lord Chastilion his men
were slain one that had been of the King of Navarre his guardes, and two
soldiers of the garrison of Boysgency and no more.

Saueuze, who on a sudden had bent him self against the light horsemen,
charged so furiously the Lord Chastilion, that the first ranks were broken,
which he unhorsed and laid along, and eight or ten of his gentlemen incurred
the like misfortune, among whom was the Lord Money, Rosny, Saint Sere, Freslon,
Chamberlan, and among them three were hurt with Lances and twenty or thirty of
their horses slain. The Brosses set upon the rereward of the Lord Chastilion
which were greatly distressed.

At length the Lord Chastilion, and others that were overthrown, recovered
themselves, and fell a fighting with their swords on foot, and he advanced so
far that he was hurt in the face.

In the mean while the Lords Harambure, Charboniere, and Fonquerules with
their companies, set upon Saueuze and his troops so furiously, that they
entered and brake a ray, put the enemies to flight in such sort, that they could
not gather together again. There were slain some of their Captayns, all the
gentlemen of Picardy, and above threescore in the flight, so that there were
above two hundred of the enemies slain: but specially all the Harquebuziers,
two cornets were taken, and the bearers slain, forty Gentlemen were taken, and
among them Saueuze and Forceuile: Many of account were hurt. The Lord
Chastilion lost but three men, as is aforesaid: this execution was done nigh
Bonaual about four a clock in the after noone.

Here (Christian Reader) may we see the great goodness and mercy of God, which
calls sinners and transgressors to repentance, sending them messengers and
tokens of his wrath, and denouncing them assured destruction: for first at
Seulis the Lord represented unto the heads of the league. the greatness of their
trespass by the painted punishment deserved.

Secondly, the Lord prospered the Kings armies with three noble victoryes in
two days, in the sig^t in a manner and hearing of three great and mighty
rebeiled citiyes, to wit, at Seulis, nigh Paris, and at Rions in Auuergne,
Bonaual, not far from Orleans. Furthermore the Lord has executed yet most
terrible judgments since, because they despised these gracious war^^^gs, by
consuming them with a long and continual disease, as if it were with a
phisike, carrying with them the worm of the conscience, oppress^d with famine,
pestilence, sword, and with intolerable bondage under the Leaguers.

The King of Navarre after this overthrow of Saueinze and his companies nigh
Bonaual, about the 22. of May being at Boysgency upon Loyre veneath Orleans
five leagues, writes a loving letter to the rebels of Orleans, to prove what
reason and fair offers might do with them, wherein he shows to them.

First, that he has foreseen and forewarned France of the evils which this
last civil Wars would bring, and protests of the dislyking of it at all
times. And although his protestations and warnings have been little regarded,
notwithstanding the injuries which he has received, yet will he not fail in
his duty toward his country, but will seek the means to cure her disease, or
die wi^h it both in general, and particular.

Secondly, advises them to consider the causes of their rebellion to be in
themselves, and not in other men: for it cannot be for any religion, or any
violence, or necessity which has enforced them thereunto; but a wicked and
rash mind, which makes them pretend a fear of some evil that may come
hereafter: and so doing they make themselves unfortunate, and cast themselves
in a miserable state. And in preventing a fault that may be hereafter, they
do commit a manifest and heinous crime: in going about to stop an evil, which
they do imagine to see a far of, they do procure to themselves innumerable
evils: to assure a liberty to their children, which no man will hinder, they
do throw themselves into a present bondage: To make sure (as they say) their
state and goods, they yield themselves to be spoiled and robbed.

Put them in remembrance of the calamities which will accompany their
rebellion and their obstinacy in the same, as that they do draw a cruel
war to their gates, whereby they shall be continually in fear and alarume;
by it they shall have need continually of an army to guard them; by it they
shall see their houses, their fields, their vines set on a fire, their wives
and children spoiled, their traffic stopped, their husbandry wasted: and all
this they are like to suffer for going about to revenge another man's naughty
quarrel, and for to make their backs to be footsteps for other men to get up
unto the scaffold of their ambition: which if it does fall (as it cannot stand)
it will quail, stiffle and undo them.

Thirdly, admonishes them to call to remembrance the fidelity and loyalty
Charles the 7. whom they defended against England and the most part of France,
which had conspired against him, and exhorts them also to remember their oath
naturally given, to keep their fidelity, loyalty and duty inviolable to
their naturally Prince.

Last of all, he assures them of the Kings clemency and gracious favor, and
proffereth them his means to further the same, if they will return under his
obedience.

Afterward the King of Navarre scoured all the country of Beausse, having
enforced the rebels to keep in their Holds.

At length the King having received certain regiments of Swissers, and
encouraged with these good beginnings against the rebels, (knowing the God of
battles to be of his side) in the latter end of June gatheres all his forces
together, and came in person to his Camp* Help comes to him from all parts
of the Realm, his army increases daily in number, fame and power. The state
of the King thus suddenly, many Cities begin to entreat upon peace.

Thus the King having recovered part of his authority, and in good hope to
recover the whole, and more then ever he had, by refusing the counsel of
strangers, and following the good, wise, sage, and discreet counsel of the
Princes of his blood, and other his noble and faithful counselors, subjects
and friends; he marches directly toward Paris to begin the punishment, where
this unthankfulness, treachery and rebellion had begun. He takes Pontoys, S.
Clow, seazeth upon Poissy, S. Germayne, Charanton, and other Towns round
about Paris. Meloune and Corbeil he had fortified and holden ever since the
beginning of the rebellion.

The Princes of Germany and Italy sent Ambassadors unto him, do wish him
well, do proffer him money and men to repress that barbarous

For the King leading his power nigh Paris, to compass it round about, and
having all the Towns about, begins so to distress it, that either none or
small store of victuals could be brought into the City.

The conspirators begin to tremble at this new and sudden change: therefore
the heads of the traitors seeing themselves so hardly beset, do enter into
counsel to determine upon the extremity of their affairs. One among the
rest declared the danger wherein they lived; he showed that the minds of the
Nobility were mutable and inconstant, fawning always on Fortunes side. He
showed also that the fearful Cities could not be kept faithful unto them,
and that upon the sight of any imminent

Also he discoursed how the Clergy were covetous, and never gave but very
little of their own to their Kings, and therefore there was small hope that
they would give to them who might but entreat for it. And thus stood their case
at home.

From abroad (said he) less hope was to be looked for: for the Spanyard was
old and careful for the quietness of his own family, unto whom it was more
security that France should be troubled, then usurped by any other then
himself.

The Italian Princes are circumspect and wise.

The Germans are covetous and misers.

The Pope is subtle, crafty and inconstant, greedy for his own gain, and
turning with every blast of fortune: therefore he concluded, that there was
none other remedy remaining for them but to dye or run away, except one
thing could be brought to pass, to wit, the death of the King, which (if they
would avoid their assured undoing) was to be labored by all means possible,
and that there was no other remedy for redress of their distressed estate.

In this counsel sat the Duke de Main (as a King in hope) Aumale, Nemours,
the treacherous Bishop of Lions, whom the King a little before had pardoned and
set at liberty, the Lords Rosne, Boysdaulphin, Brissak, Sagonne, the 47.
chosen for the counsel of the City, as above said, the seventeen Colonels
appointed over the eighteen wards of the City.

All this blessed company having heard the discourse above said, and seeing
with their eyes vengeance to be at the door, concluded the condemnation and
execution of the King speedily to be dispatched and murdered, but the means
are found very difficult to bring such a famous act to pass. Now therefore
they must search out some way to bring such a bold and dangerous enterprise to
possibility: he that shall happily undertake that feate, ought to be willing,
bold, sturdie and quick handed, and a man so qualified, that without any
suspicion may have a speedy and sure access to the Kings person. Many offered
themselves to be the executioners of that vilanous act. But it was considered
that they could not pass through so many gards and doors without suspicion,
which if they should be taken, by torments they would be made coufesse the
matter, and that would be a ca^eat to him to look more diligently to himself,
which would bring the matter to impossibility.

Many are solicited thereunto by great and fair promises, and lacked no good
will, but only courage. But aduising themselves of the Kings more then
supersticious heart, concluded to make choice of some saucie desperate wretch,
who covered with the cloak of hypocrisy, might pearce through all the gardes
of the Kings house without any suspicion or examination.

To spy out such a one as would undertake to atchieue such a desperate
parricide, was committed specially to one Pichnard an incestuous and most
vilanous person. This Pichnard therefore to give some good grace to this
tragedy, brought in a Friar to play the devils part, and such a one as might
at all times assure himself of free access. And for as much as among all
other sects of idolatrous Friars, the Dominicans were most welcome to the King,
he made his choice of one of that order for the determined execution, as shall
hereafter be declared.

But we will by a digression show the holiness of that order of Dominican
Friars and others, that it may appear that it is not new nor contrary unto
Frierie and Monkerie to be hold, ready and strong to commit all vilanie.

All about one time out of the bottomless pit of hell (by a just judgment of
God to revenge the unthankfulness and idolatries of the world, and to fill the
measure of iniquity of the spiritual Sodom by Antichrist) there issued two
frogs with lying spirits to seduce utterly the world, to wit, Francis in
Italy, and Dominick in Spain, two misbegotten monsters in all respects one
like to another, save only in their hair and king of francie.

These two seducers like in hypocrisy, ignorance, superstition, idolatry and
rage, were possessed with diverse spirits of francie. For Francis was a
frantic sot, ignorance it self, made only to make the world laugh with his
follies, and yet by his follies (such was that accursed age) he gat himself a
great fame and reputation of holiness, and drew after him an infinite number
of disciples of the like humor to his.

Dominick in Spain was of a hotter francie, so that it may be said of him as
of Caligula, vrceus conflatus ex luto and sanguine, immanitate oppletus. For
his own Friars do write of him, that whilst he was in his mothers womb, she
dreamed that she was delivered of a Dog that held a burning Torch, wherewith
he kindled a fire in the world and set it to combustion. What this mad Dog
did in France, the horible murders which he caused to be committed upon the
Albigeoys, who (after the cruel conflicts of the Waldenses with Antichrist)
had restored the Gospel in Guien, Gascoyne and Languedock, but specially in
the territory of the City Alby, as also the raging follies which was
committed at Toulouse were incredible to report, except his own disciples had
written them in his legend.

His disciples after him have showed no less fury and rage in diverse
respects, but specially upon the most noble Emperor Henry the 7. of the noble
house of Bauierne, who did poison him with the powder of beaten Diamonds
mingled in his challice, when they did minister to him such a communion as they
had devised of their own. For that cause only that the good Emperor wished,
and had some speeches about the reforming of the

But the accursed rage of the Inquisition (which does consist most of Dominican
Friars) has so far surpassed all the tyrants that ever were, that O ye
Busiris, Perillus, Phalaris, Nero, Caligula, Domitian, Heliogabalus, and thou
unnatural house of Otheman, and ye that are famous for any notorious
wickedness, rejoice, for your infamy is justified by the raging cruelty of these
Atheistes, Sorcerers, Negromancers, Idolaters, Enchaunters and Parricides, the
accursed Dominican Friars, and the whole rabble of Friery and Monkery, against
the Church and Christian Princes.

I leave off the hipocrisy, enchauntments and sorceries, which these companions
played at Berna and Orleans: no marvel therefore if we hear never a
pleasant tale, but of the deeds of Friars: we never laugh but at their
follies; we never wonder but at their impudency; we are never astonished but at
their fury; we never tremble but at their rage; we never see a merry play, but
a Friar plays the Devils part. Pichnard therefore considering all things, as
is aforesaid, thought good to pick out such a one as was brought up in Dominiks
school, well practiced and exercised in the affaiers of their order.
Whereupon he solicited one James Clement, another S. Dominicke in all
respects, in ignorance exceeding, so that he knew no more then his Portiforia,
such a one as for his lewdnes, and for being taken often times in stews and
whorehouses, had been by the order of their discipline diversely punished.

This Friar James was in great favor before with the lady Montpencier, sister
to the late Duke of Guyze, being her confessor, not for any good quallity in
him, but because he was a lusty sturdy ghostly father among Ladies of her
religion, and could give her such good counsel as could please her well.

Pichnard perceived this companion to be a fit instrument to execute their
damnable and deuilish sentence, made motion of the matter to him. The Friar,
although very desirous of the Kings death, yet willing that it should be done
rather by another then by himself, feared to thrust himself into that assured
danger of a present death, was unwilling to hear any more of that.

Friar James is called in. There were the Dukes de Main, Aumale, Nemours, the
Lords Rosne, Sagonne, Brissak, Boysdaulphin, Villeroy, and such good
Catholics, and to fill the mess there was Pagarola, Friar Sixtus his
Chaplain, a very loving Priest, and one that can write very loving letters to
the Curtisans of Rome, to give them such spiritual counsel as he can skill.
They had (poor silly Friar) James Clement under benedicite: there they showed
to this accursed parricide what a good deed he Henry the third, who was become
an heretic, and that with one blow he might procure peace to the whole
realm, and a blessed quietness to the holy Church.

They showed unto him, how his order had done many times such good service to
holy Church, as in ridding away the Emperor Henry the 7. who intended to
persecute holy Church.

They let him understand, how among all other order of Friars, his had deserved
the greatest praise in spilling daily the blood of heretics as water in the
towns, and cities of Spain, and Jtaly, and all for the honor of God and
exaltation of holy Church. But this pinch would be the noblest act that ever
was done by any man: the rememberance thereof should remain for ever, and his
name should be made immortal thereby, and if he should die, he should dye a
glorious Martyr, as Thomas Becket did in England.

Afterwad he was brought to the Ladies, catholic and chaste women, the
Duchesses of Montpencier, Guyze, Aumale, Nemours, Foyeuse, the mother and the
holy Virgin the Lady Saint Beufue, who as a special favor had bestowed the
pockes of late upon the Duke de Main, and beside diverse of the principal
leaguers in the time of her Virginity. This Lady is of such holiness, that she
is neither a maid, nor wife, nor widow: in this company were Thais, Lais and
Bacchis of Corinthus, all holy Catholic women. They began to shriue the Friar,
if they were men, or if they could be so transformed into men, that they might
have access to the tirant, they could find in their hearts to stabbe him: that
is a special point of honor which they do proffer him to do such a famous
deed. It is hereditarie to his order to exalt the Church, and to deliver it,
he is a man endued with strength, they have been his good Ladies, they have
favored him greatly and pleasured him in any thing that ever he requested.
What, will he not do so much at their request: they must die all, and all the
city of Paris; what a good deed it is to save the lives of Princesses,
Ladies, good Citizens, devout Priests and religious men of so many innocents,
whose death the tirant had sworn, with the razing of the city. If he
refuses to do that good deed, they think him not to be that man that they
took him for.

They showed him how easy it was to perform it: for there were many Leaguers,
and their partakers in his counsel, in his court, in his chamber, in his
camp, in his gardes, who would assist him: and if any danger should stir,
they would defend him and rescue him, and that none would be so hardy, as to
proffer him a blow: for else Friar Pagarola would foam like a boar and
thunder like a devil against them.

What and if it should happen, that he should die for holy Church, then he
should be happy to deserve the name of Martyr, and that his brother Friar
Sixtus would make him a Sain^t.

But if he return safe (as he shall no doubt) God forbid else) he shall be
well rewarded in money, he shall have a Bishopric for his pains: Friar
Paugarola will procure Friar Sixtus to make him a Cardinal, for a Friar will
do for a Friar, and who knows not that by these means he may be made Pope,
after Friar Sixtus is weary of his room.

To be short, if he will not do it, he shall see with his eyes his good
Ladies, all his order, all the good Catholics of the whole city of Paris put
to the sword, the city razed (for the tirant has sworn both he shall die
himself an assured death ere it be long) the holy Mass, the holy Saints,
Images and relikes, the Churches shall all be destroyed, and the heretics
shall have all things: all these mischiefs cannot be avoided but by his death.

By these persuasions, the accursed Friar (otherwise ready enough to all
mischief) is induced to commit one of the most villainous parts which ever was
committed in France. So Satan having possessed his heart, the Friar persuades
himself, that an Angel has appeared unto him, and commanded him to kill the
King: he opened this to another Friar which was greatly esteemed in Paris, by
reason of a good opinion of great holiness which the people had of him. The
other Friar does encourage him, promises him, that by doing such a holy deed,
he shall deliver the Church, and set the whole realm at quiet, banish war,
and restore a most assured and perpetual peace, as Judith did deliver Betulia
by the death of Holofern^s.

Behold (Christian reader) the King condemned to dye, the executioner to commit
the parricide sought out by Pichenard, persuaded by the heads of the League,
and some Ladies belonging to them, deluded by Satan, confirmed in this
delusion by another Friar as good as himself, with assured promise of a most
sure and constant peace. Friar Clement desires to know how he may do it
surely and safely.

The Leaguers therefore enter into deliberation about three things, to wit, the
access to the Kings person, the stroke and secrecy. As for the first point to
convey him to the Kings person, they considered his coat, which for the
reverence and love which the King did bear to it, would prepare him the way.

Secondly, whereas the rebels in seazing upon Paris after the death of the Duke
of Guize, had taken the Senate prisoner, and did as yet hold a great many
prisoners, and among other the first President of the Senate named the
President Harlay. They had also in like sort many of the chiefest Citizens for
bearing good will to the King, or because they were rich, (as is aforesaid)
whom they detayned in like manner prisoners. The said Lord President and some
of the said Citizens, procured to write letters James Clement. They taught him
also a lesson containing matters of importance, with commandment that they
should not be disclosed unto any man but unto the King only, and that in
secret.

As for the stroke, it must needs be deadly too; for else it would but
increase their misery, and such a blow could not be given but by a secret
weapon that might be hidden easily about him: for otherwise if it could be
perceived, it would make the King more wary hereafter and careful of
himself. But what could be more fit then a knife, which might be easily
conveyed in the Friars sleeue, and whose noise might not detect the treachery.
But yet there was another mischance to be prevented, for the wou^d of a knife
might light upon such a place as could not be deadly, they find the means to
work surely, that if he cannot kill him out of hand, yet that at length it may
be his death.

Therefore Friar Paugarola (Friar Sixtus his Chaplain) must bless the knife
with some poulderdoribus of Rome, which such men as he is do commonly carry in
store for great holiness among other holy relics of Rome, having greater force
the^ their Agnus dei, or any other agios: others they have to work miracles,
and such as the master Friar in Rome does use to give in a drench to his
friends, when he is weary of their company to make them give room.

But because such weighty matters cannot be kept so close very long, but will
vent out: therefore least the smoke of this execrable intended parricide
should flee over the walls of Paris, and so by giving intelligences, their
heinous unnatural and hellish treason and murder might be prevented, it was
diligently provided that no man should go out of Paris before the exployt were
done. Therefore the gates were shut up and carefully kept, and all the issues
at the Suburbs end straightly and narrowly watched, that no man could go to
tell tales out of the school.

Now the Friar has on his hypocritical coat, his letters in his hand, his
lesson in his head, his poisoned knife in his sleeue, order is taken that no
intelligences may be given, the way is made plain before this devilish
murderer, even as far as to the Kings gate, the doors are made open to him
by these means, the execution is to be performed speedily, least delay should
disappoynt his enterprise. This murderer accompanied with the other Friar, who
had confirmed him in his revelation or illusion, wherewith Satan had deluded
him: (as is aforesaid) the 21. of July, which by the new heaven of the Popes
making, is the first of August, out of Paris taking his way to S. Clow, which
is a Town upon Seyne beneath Paris two small leagues, and coming to the
Camp, he told them whom he met first, that he had letters from the first
President and certain other Parisiens well affected to the king, which
contained matters of great importance,

The King being scarce ready, and advertised of this accursed Friars coming,
commanded that he should attend, and that speedily he should be admitted to
his speech: the Friar did attend with his letter in his hand, which he said was
from the first president detained prisoner.

The King being made ready, and at such an hour as he was wont to enter into
his oratory, and when it was not lawful not for the Princes of the blood to
have access unto him, caused that savage murderer to be called to him.

The Friar came before the King with a bold countenance, the King looking
merrily upon him, said these words; amice ad quid venisti? The Friar making a
low and humble reverence, even to the ground, gave the King the letter, which
he said came from the first president of Paris: which letters when the King had
read, asked the Friar what news he brought from Paris: the Friar answered
that he had matters of great importance to declare unto him. Whereupon the
King commanded two Gentlemen, who waited and served him at his vprising, to
go forth out of the chamber, and sat down in a chair, to hear what the
Friar would say.

The Friar drew nigh to the King, and falling upon his knees, began to tell a
tale: the King stouping somewhat low, to hear what the Friar was about to say,
gave more attendance to his words than to his fingers. The Friar drawing softly
his knife out of his sleeue, stabbed the King there with in the lower part of
the belly, and made have to get away.

The King amazed at the sudden and unexpected stroke, cried out, and laying
hand upon a dagger that lay nere him, stroke the Friar, who partly for the
blow, and partly for fear, fell presently down. Upon this noise, the Lords
came running into the Kings chamber, and after many wounds slew that cursed
Friar.

Some do report that the King commanded that he should not be flaine, but
taken up and examined, which declared who set him on, and the authors names of
so vile treachery: the wound was presently dressed, and as the report went,
seven stitches made in it: at length the wound being dressed, he was laid on
his bed, and slept a little upon his pain and grief.

After his sleep, he made his prayers unto God, and with a loud voice, made
a confession of his faith, and of the feeling which he had of his redemption,
adding there unto this fervent prayer.

IF it be to thy glory O God, and the commodity of thy people, grant me, I
most humbly desire, first pardon of my sins, and then some longer days of
life. But if it be otherwise, I thank thee most highly O Father, that thou
do bar me hence forth from the thraledome of sin, whereby we most
oftentimes procure thy wrath against us, and therefore I am ready, most
willingly to come where thou call me.

The King having made an end of his prayers, sends for his brother the King
of Navarre, and for the chiefest Lords of his court, governors and captains,
but specially for the heads of the strangers, to the intent that if it were
Gods will that he should dye, they might know his last will.

First, speaking to the King of Navarre, commended unto him the charge of his
Realm, the government of his subjects, the laws of France.

Often times he repeated words, whereby he charged the said King of Navarre,
to have a special care to keep Christ's flock in unity and concord, and to
preserve the godly and ancient institutions of the realm, requested him that
by all means he would pacify the matter of religion in France, and not to
alter any thing therein, but by the advice of a general or natural counsel
lawfully called: which things the King of Navarre promised to do.

To the rest of Princes, Lords and Noblemen he signified, that the lawful
succession of the royal state of France, fell not to any other then to the
person of Bourbon, and declared at that time the King of Navarre first
successor: he prayed and exhorted the whole company to acknowledge him, and to
be faithful unto him, willed them also to protest in his presence, all with
one voice the acknowledging of him, and to promise true obedience unto him, as
to the true, lawful and natural heir of the Crown: willed them also to
cause the like promise and acknowledgement to be made in the Camp, by all true
and faithful Captains and Soldiers, that could not be present at that
assembly, consisting as well of Frenchmen as strangers. In all these speeches
he showed himself of a good cheer, which caused all men to hope that he
stood in no danger of death.

The said King sent presently letters to all Provinces and Cities, to advertise
them how things had passed at S. Clow, and of his will and last Testament,
requiring all his faithful Subjects to protest the fulfilling thereof.

The second day toward the evening, there appeared in the King accidents,
prognosticating an assured danger, not so much through the nature of the wound,
as through the poisoned contagiousnes of the weapon wherewith the wound was
made; so that all remedies being used by the Physicians and Chirurgions, to
prevent the danger, and nothing prevailing, the King called again to him the
King of Navarre, and other Princes and

The King of Navarre, with the rest of the Princes and Nobility departing very
sorrowful and dismayed, the King called for his Confessor, to whose ear he
confessed his sins, and having craved pardon for his offenses, said, that he
had a sensible feeling that they were forgeuen him through Christ. The
Mediator desired to communicate of his sacred body, and that all might hear
that he had received freely of God the forgeuenes of sins, in like casehe not
only forgave the conspiratours, but also the very murderer and procurers of
the murder: so the poison prevailing and scattering it self through, did
infect the noble parts, whereby the night following the 22. of July he yielded
his soul unto God.

Here Christian Reader thou may see with the eye notable examples both of
Gods justice and mercy, showed upon this noble King of a noble kingdom,
issued out of noble Kings.

First, how this King having obstinatly persecuted the Gospel, partly for
hatred, partly at the pleasure and solicitation of Priests, and Friars, and
other sycophants, and clawbackes, who were continually about him, and set him
on still, that under the color of catholic Church, and rooting out of
heresy, they might weaken him, spoil him of his authority, of his Kingdom,
and at length of his life. For they never gave over, nor left him at rest
until they had snatehed his forces out of his hand, and kept his armies
always in their hands, or of their friends and partakers, then by calumnies,
slanders, libels, seditious preachings had procured the contempt and hatred of
his subieets against him. Moreover upon opportunity they seized upon his Towns
and fortresses, expelled him out of his own house, seat, city, of his
kingdom, and of his realm, condemned him twice to die: and at last executed
that condemnation with hipocrisy and treachery, which thing they could not
bring to pass by force.

Who did all these unnatural injuries unto their natural King: They whom he
had so far favored, as to expose his goods, his state, his credit, his honor
and his life, for the defense of their iuglings, filthy pleasures, pride,
ambition and atheism, to wit, of the Priests, Monks, Friars, and Guyzes, in
whose love, fidelity, and force he trusted more then in God. But behold with
trembling the judgments of the Lord, which are all righteous and pure. This
King had not harkened unto Gods wisdom which-cryed

This second judgment of God is also to be considered with fear and
trembling. The famous Gaspar Coligny Admiral of France, with a great number of
the chiefest Nobility of the Realm, were most unjustly and cruelly murdered
in the year 1572. the 24. of August. This King being then King Charles the 9.
his brother and Duke of Anjou, who issued out of noble raze, not regarding his
degree, debased himself so far as to become the chiefest Captain of an
accursed sedition, and procurer of such a murder as hated both of God and man,
the fame thereof shall be execrable and stinking in the ears of men for ever.
And after the murder most cruel indignities were showed upon the dead bodies
of the said Admiral and his fellows, who after were carried to be hanged at
the place where men executed for exemplarie justice are hanged in chains,
called Mon^faucon, which lies right against the place where the King was
murdered on the North side of the river Seyne: so that even as Pompey after
the poluting of the Temple of Jerusalem, did never prosper; but after many
calamities suffered, came to Alexandria, where in the haven, as a man should
say, in the sight of the Temple, he was villanously murdered by them whom he
trusted. Even so this King after that murder (thereby having poluted the
Temple of justice) never prospered, and from the Lord delivered into the hands
of vile and base men whom he trusted, was brought to receive the punishment for
that murder, nigh to that place where they had executed the uttermost point of
infamy, upon the bodies of the said Admiral and other noble men.

Thirdly, whereas S. Peter in his second Epistle and second Chapter, does
forwarne the Saints both of false Prophets and errors which they shall bring
forth with them, among others makes mention that they shall not only
contemn, but also shall speak evil of authorities. Behold, thou (Christian
reader) have seen in the former books of this history, all the prankes which
this holy League has played for the space of these twelve years, all the
horrible villainies, poysonings and murders by them committed, and having in
their mouths nothing else but holy League, holy Union, holy Church, holy
Catholic faith, even holy murders, and all that is profane, wicked and
damnable is holy with them, so that it be for holy Church: God through justice
and mercy in this perverse age and dangerous times, when men will not discern
the truth from lying by the word, but by their affection, according to the
doctrine of S. Paul, 1. Tim. 4. has marked by these their abominations, as
with a hot burning iron,

Herein also is noted the mercifulnes of God, who will loose none of his
children. This king dyed not presently of that wound, but God prolonged his
life, both to give him time of repentance, and to lay the foundation of the
restablishing of that afflicted estate.

For first, as concerning his repentance, it does appear that he entered
deeply into he consideration of his sins, and by that foundation of faith
which remained in him, confessed in the symbol touching the death of Christ,
the forgiveness of sins through him, made him as if it were forget the most
part of the idolatrous fantasies and tromperies, in the which he had been
brought up and delighted all the days of his life, and necessity and feeling
of his sins enforced him to repose himself on the only sacrifice of the
Son of God. So the Lord knows who are his.

Herein also appears evidently the mercifulnes of God, who works all things
to the best and comfort of his children. For when as the Rebels and murderers
supposed, that by the Kings death they might easily make an alteration of the
state, and transfer the Crown upon the head of the Duke de Main, and so
disappoynt the Princes of Bourbon of their right of succession, the Lord turned
al their counsels vpside down. For the Lord moved the King lying on his death
bed, when he was in perfect memory, and farthest (as the manner in such a
case) from all manner of affection and parciality, to pronounce his sentence
and decree, or rather supplying the person of God, to proclayme the King of
Navarre, right heir and successor of the crown, and by the invocation of the
glorious name of GOD, b^und the Princes, peers, Nobles, Captains and
Soldiers, to yield him dutiful obedience: so that God himself, has been
the judge of his cause, giving sentence on his side, by him whom he appointed
his officer in that behalf. It will stand.

Thus much of the unworthy death of so great a King, in whom ended the issue of
the noble house of Engolesme, according unto the fatal period of great, Noble
and mighty families which is (...), wherein we have to note the whole family
excepted only Francis the first, as Henry the second, Francis the second,
Charles the ninth, Francis Duke of Aniou, and this last King Henry the third
(...) per sanguinem ruit, and have died of an untimely or violent death,
because they were polluted with that accursed woman Catherine Medicis, Pope
Clement his sisters brothers daughter.

And so making an end of the Epitasis of this vnnaturalltragedie played by
leaguers, we will make an end likewise of this 6. Book.

Here ends the 6. Book.
THE SEVENTH BOOK.
NOw we will follow the Catastrophe and last act: which although it be full of
Calamities, yet it is like to be ended with a joyful and happy success.

The King being dead, great heaviness and sorrow seized upon men of all
degrees, the Camp was full of sorrow and lamentation: the wise saw this to be
new seeds of a world of evils, which will work the utter subversion of France.

On the other side, great rejoicing was seen among the rebels and traitors,
authors and procurers of the murder, their joy they showed diverse ways, but
specially with contumelies and sarcasmes, demanding one of another, whether
the Friars knife was sharp enough or not.

The rebels in Paris certified of the assured death of the King, and supposing
that the army had been greatly dismayed, replenished with tears and
lamentation, conceived a good hope to do some great and notable exploit: and
imagining that it were easy in this mourning of all men to defeat the Kings
forces: all that night the Duke de Main did muster and prepare a mighty army,
and early in the morning issuing out of the Suburbs, was so received by the
Kings forces, that he was enforced to retire within the City with blows and
dishonor.

That morning, being the third of August (but by the right calender the 23. of
July) the King of Navarre, who was appointed the Kings General lieutenant by
the King, after that he had received the wound, assembled the Princes, Lords,
Nobility and Captains to deliberat how to remedy those great evils, and to put
out that combustion which the rebels had kindled in all parts of the realm.

First, there was a capitulation made and concluded between theKing and the
said Princes and Nobles, Lords, gentlemen and soldiers, that

This order being concluded, and the observation thereof promised by the King,
all his Princes, Nobles, Lords, Gentlemen and Captains, promised upon their
oaths all duetifull fidelity and obedience unto the K. and to assist him with
their lives, goods and means, as well in the defense of his royal authority
against all traitors, rebels and Leaguers, which go about to usurp the state;
as in the execution of the exemplary punishment upon them, who have procured or
committed that heinous disloyalty, felony and treason upon the Kings person
last deceased, and all others who shall be known consenting, knowing, or
accessarie to the same.

This order being taken as the readiest and most expedient to unite the
subjects with the King, being promised and sworn, the King of Navarre was
saluted, declared, proclaimed, and crowned King of France and Navarre, by the
name of King Henry the 4. And whereas in this history he had been discerned
from the King of France, by the title of King of Navarre; now in the course of
this history following, he shall be simply named King, without any other
addition or title.

This noble King being proclaimed King, is crowned and put in the possession of
the Crown of France, due unto him by right, not with triffling, childish, and
Monkish ceremonies, with holy oil, holy water, holy toys, and holy trashes;
but after the ancient manner of the Emperors of the Romans, in the Camp by
the whole army, Princes, Peers, Nobles and Captains of the kingdom.

Here (Christian Reader) is to be noted Gods most gracious favor toward
France, and providence toward this great King: for except the Lord had prepared
this heroical Prince to restablish this decayed state, which was cast down
headlong into such a depth of miseries by the Leaguers, as in man's judgment it
was impossible that it could ever have been united again, but rather reduced
into a lamentable desolation. But the Lord in his mercy beholding from heaven
his holy habitation, with his lightfull

Again, we may with admiration, celebrate the providence of God, that clean
contrary unto the expectation of all men, the Lord has given him to France,
for her good. For first, the Leaguers in the beginning of their insurrection,
made him a party. Then they used for the space of four years, all the power
of France to oppress him: when force would not serve, they procured poysoners,
to try what might be done that way. But that taking no place, they degraded
and debarred him from his right of succession, by a fundamental law of the
realm, which they sweared, sealed and decreed, that it should be unchangeable,
and should remain for ever: they made him hateful, and abhorred of the common
people throughout all France. After they had missed of their purpose intended
against the King* they so urged their attempts, that the King was enforced to
yield himself into the King of Navarre his hands for his safety: at length
they murdered the King. Then I will ask them what have you gotten by it? They
answered that they have gotten the Crown, either part or the whole. Why?
Because there is no successor.

Demand. What are the Bourbons then.

Answer. They are excluded by a fundamental law of the realm, sworn by the
union at Bloys.

Them. What says God to that.

Ans. Behold the Lord says, that he will have the King of Navarre head of
the house of Bourbon to succeed, because it is his right, for it is not
reason, that a confederacy of conspirators should make a law contrary unto
the fundamental law of the realm, confirmed by the consent and custom of so
many nations, by the space of twelve hundred years, not contrary unto Gods
word.

Them. But where does God speak it.

Ans. By the mouth of a Sovereign Magistrate, ordained by him, to be the
interpreter of all judicial laws.

Therefore behold the means which the rebels have sought, to exclude the King
of Navarre from his right of succession, the Lord has used to the stablishing
of the said King, and has united the Princes, Peers, and chiefest Lords,
Gentlemen, Captains and Soldiers of the realm, to assist, place and defend
him in that room; so the arm of flesh shall not prevail against the power
of God, and the hand of the Lord shall be upon him.

The Prince Montpencier, governor, and General for the King in Normandy,
then being at Audely, a town upon the river of Seyne, above Pont de Carche,
caused all his army to take that oath, exhorting them to defend constantly the
Kings will, according to their oath.

About the 26. day of July, there was an assembly holden at Caen in Normandy,
of the court of Parliament (whereto the late deceased King had transported the
said court from the City of Roen, after the rebellion thereof) of the
Nobility and Gentlemen of the country, and of the body of the town and
University, and of the Citizens and inhabitants of the said town: where the
Lord Lizores, Lord President of the said court, did sit as head of the said
meeting, in whose presence, the said President having declared the heinous
deed, committed upon the person of the King late deceased, and showed the
equity of the Kings testament and last will, on his own behalf protested
perfect loyalty to the King, right and lawful successor of the Crown of
France, and after the publication of the Kings, and of ye Prince Montpencier
his letters, all uniformly with one consent, did swear their acknowledgement
and fidelity, unto the lawful successor of the Crown of France, and to
maintain al things contained in the will of Henry d'Valoys, lately deceased.

The like declarations and promises were made, and oaths of fidelity and
loyalty taken, publicly in many towns and cities in France, even on the North
side of Loyre, to the same effect.

The rebels understanding in Paris, what the late deceased King had done, and
how the King of Navarre was proclaimed King of France, contrary to their
expectation, and that they were worse hampered now then before, like to have
him to be their master, whom they had refused and disdained, thought good to
try what might be done by treachery, upon the person of the King.

And because that a Friars coat could not beguile this King, as it did the
other, by reason of the little acquaintance and credit which he gives them,
they suborned a murderer, who under the color of a Gentleman, should shoot
him through with a Piece: but the Lord watching for his anointed, brought the
murderer to confusion.

All things falling out so confusedly in France by the death of the last King,
and the news thereof fleeing abroad into foreign countries, replenished men's
hearts with admiration of Gods secret judgments with a maze, indignation and
fear.

The King taking counsel what was best to be done in these extremities, for to
save the remnant of the realm from utter subuertion, did resolve upon these
three points which will follow this miserable murder.

First, the King considering how his enemies long time aforehand had

Secondly, he knew that in the Camp, under the banner of his predecessor, and
also in his counsel were many devoted and sworn to the League, whom he durst
not trust, and knowing that they would not do him faithful service no more then
they did to his predecessor, he determined to license them to depart so many
as would, and to live peaceably in their houses under his obedience: whereupon
many disbanded themselves, and retired some home, and some to the enemy.

Last of all, the K. foreseeing that the heads of the League upon this
prosperous exploit done upon the person of the King lately murdered, will
double their rage, and with great forces (which they could quickly set up in
such a mighty and populous city) would set upon him, and with multitude might
greatly distress him, determined to send part of his forces into Picardy,
under the conduct of the duke of Longueuile, and the Lord la Noue, there to
minister play to the enemy, and with the greatest part of his army to retire
into Normandy, there to gather greater forces: and if need should require, to
be nigh and ready upon the coast, there to receive supply of forces from the
mighty Princess the Queen of England, which might be done upon short
warning, considering the small distance which is from Coast to Coast.

As for the Swissers and other Germans, who served the King his predecessor,
he sent their Heads and Captains unto their Princes and Signories, to
understand their pleasure, whether they would call their men home, or give them
leave to serve him. The said Germans and Swissers (according to the Kings will
and promise made unto him) proffered unto him their faithful service.

Thus the present estate and sum of affairs being managed, he retired into
Normandy, having not with him above eight thousand men of all sorts, and
stayed there a while beholding what the enemy would enterprise.

Now we will leave the King about the Sea coast in Normandy, where we have
brought him with eight thousand men of all sorts, and will go to see what is
done in other places, what preparations the Leaguers do: and after we will
pass over the Alps, to see how does Friar Sixtus, and what jolly divinity is
with him and his Chaplains.

About the 31. of July, which to the Papists is the 21. of August, the D. of
Lorreine thought good to blow the fire of rebellion to make it burn Langres a
noble City in that part of Bourgondy, which commonly is called Bassigny: the
citizens had ever remained faithful to the King, and could never be brought
to associat themselves to the League, smelling the breath of the Lorreins, as
nigh Neighbors to Nancie. This noble City the Duke of Lorreine desired
greatly to be of the association of the rebellion, knowing the importance of
that place, by reason of the strong situation thereof, to make much for the
affairs of the rebellion.

First, he shows his sorrow for the Kings death to be so great, that he
cannot keep himself from weeping. This weeping and tears are to be supposed
to proceed from joy, he himself being one of the procurers of the murder.

Secondly, he fayneth a great fear, least the Gospel (which he calls
heresy, entering into their City) should break the neck of Popery, and so rid
their City of that deceitful guest, which by all means possible he would
have courteously entertained.

Thirdly, he exhorts them to admit none of the Kings favorers within their
walls, and in so doing promises them all aid and favor.

The noble City of Langres, after courteous thanks given him for an answer the
third of August, does first protest of their zeal, goodwill and constancy in
the Catholic faith.

Secondly, does protest of their great sorrow conceived for the death of their
late King of blessed memory, proffering themselves, their lives, their goods,
and whatsoever is dear unto them for the just and due reuengement of that most
vilanous and execrable deed.

Last of all, does protest of their dutiful obedience to their King, promising
all assistance, with all their means todefend him, and nobility joined with
him, both in the defense of the Crown and State, and also in pursuing the
authors of that murder, until that a sufficient reuengement be taken of them.

The Citizens of the Noble City of Langres, perceauing by these letters of the
Duke of Lorreine, that further matters might be attempted to procure a
rebellion within their City, to prevent all that might happen the third day of
August, and in their Popish calender. The twelfth, they assembled all the
Magistrates, Officers, Citizens, and Inhabitants of their City in the
Towne-house, after ripe consideration of the evils procured by the Leaguers and
rebels, and of their duties, of their lawful obedience, did all with accord
and mind promise and swear.

First, the keeping of the Catholic faith.

Secondly, they do swear never to admit any confederacy, society, faction or
conspiracy, neither with the Lorreyne, nor any other foreign, nor within the
Realm, without the express commandment of their King.

Thirdly, do acknowledge Henry of Bourbon the 4. to be their lawful King and
natural heir, and successor to the Crown of France, and swear never to
depart from his obedience, but to obey him, and to defend him and the
fundamental laws of the right succession of the Crown, proffering all their
lives, goods and means to preserve his person, his state, Crown and kingdom,
and not to admit any sedition or conspiracy against him.

Last of all, do swear to assist him with all their power and means to
revenge the unworthy death of Henry de Valoys lately deceased. Many other
Towns on the North side of Loyre, as in Gastinoys, Hurepoys, Auxerroys,
Bourgundie, Bassigny and Champaigne, being wavering, encouraged with the
example of the noble City of Langres, did resolve themselves in rejecting the
entising persuasions of Rebels, to remain in the Kings obedience, and took
the like oath voluntarily as the said City of Langres had done.

As the Rebels in the rest of Towns and Cities, took occasion by the
proclayming of the King, to stir the people to their society of union, that
is, to rebellion, crying still the Catholic, the Catholic religion, heresy,
heresy, heretics, heretics: so in like manner the heads of the rebellion do
prepare all the forces that ever they can: for the Duke of Lorreyne gathered a
great power of horsemen and footmen, which he sent to the Duke de Main to
Paris, conducted by his eldest son the Marquess du Pont. The Duke de Main
also sent to the Duke of Parma for succor, supposing that with the great
forces which he was able to make within Paris, the succor which was expected
from Lorreyne, and some companies of horsemen of Wallons and Germans, he would
easily make an end of the war. The Duke of Parma therefore sent lusty
companies of horsemen and Wallons, under the conduct of the Duke of Brounswicke
and County Egmond, who did arrive about the beginning of September.

Now let us leap over the Alps to see Friar Sixtus, and pray to God that the
pockes may never depart from him, nor from that holy sea, seeing that his
predecessor Julius the great warrior, being either the first or one of the
first in all Italy, which was infected with it (if Ihuigo does not lie) and of
a special grace and Apostolical favor, left it to all the legions of Friars
and Massemongers, for a token of their honest and chaste life.

The Rebels having committed that savage murder upon the person of their
Sovereign King and Prince, whom God commanded them to obey, serve and
reverence, and such as in Catholicisme did surpass the best Catholic in the
world: and to be short, with one blow having executed the secret counsel of
Rome, for the rooting out the raze of Valoys, and put out the Lamp of France,
(as for the Bourbons they had made their account to have destroyed them all ere
now) they sent in post to Rome to congratulate Friar Sixtus for their good
success, and also to have his Frierlike Rome, as is aforesaid. In this message
(as it appeared in Friar Sixtus oration) they had certified him, how
miraculously the Friar went out of Paris in great danger to be searched out,
and afterward miraculously passed through the Camp of the heretics, and
through the Kings gardes, not perceived of any man, (but as if the devil
should convey him invisible in a cloud) until he came into the Kings
presence: so that no man had no power to examine him, nor to ask him Domine
quo vadis?

The news of this exploit so happily brought to pass, arriving at Rome,
filled the City with Gaudeamus, the Churches with Te Deum, and the court of
Rome with Curtizans.

Thereuppon, that Friar Sixtus may fill the measure of iniquity, and that he
may leave a testimony to the world to be known whose Vicar he is, he called
together all his Chaplains into the Consistory, and tells them the happiest
news that ever came to Rome, since the day that it was taken and ransaked by
Charles of Bourbon, to wit, that Henry the third K. of France, was slain by
the hands of a Friar: and that he may give some ground to his oration,
flourished with Monkish eloquence he takes a text out of A bacuck. I have
wrought a work in your days, and no man would believe it though it be told
them.

Upon these words the lewd lying Friar takes upon him to make the articles
of our Faith, as tou^^ing the incarnation and resurrection of Christ, and the
execrable parricide of this accursed murdering Friar to be equally miraculous,
and wrought by the will, counsel, finger and power of God, and by the
inspiration of the self same Spirit which guyded the Prophets and Apostles,
and wrought in them the measure of all wisdom, righteousness and holiness,
conducted this Friar through all the difficulties of the way, and directed him
and his hand in committing such a damnable Par^icide. The Lord reprove the
lying spirit of blasphemy.

Thus may we see the hellish divinity which Friar Sixtus (which sitting in his
Consistory in his Pontificalibus cannot err) spueth out by the inspiration of
Satan.

This impudent Friar, the other day being Son to a Swineheard, and lying in
Ouens for lack of better lodging, though he be neither Prophet (a
spudevp-prophet let him be) nor the son of a Prophet, yet tells to his
Chaplayns, that he prophesied to the red-cap Priests, called the Caroinals
Joyeuse, Leuencourt and Paris, how the King should be the last of his name, and
should die an unfortunate and violent death. By this prophecy every man may
see how deeply this murdering Friar Sixtus had his fingers in the conspiracy
of the Kings death.

Thirdly, because the King would not yield himself to be slain by the
Leaguers, according to the secret counsel of Rome. Also by reason that he
suffered the execrable murderer to be slain, and willed the King of Navarre,
and the Princes with him to make exemplary justice upon the authors and
accessaries of his death. Friar Swineheard, (otherwise Sixtus) swears by his
cornerd cap, that as when it is upon his head, there lies under it the four
quarters of a false Friar: so the King shall have no Mass of Requiem of him,
but shall souse, burn and broile in purgatory until he be as cold as a Frogge.

So Friar Sixtus having taken so great pains for the holy Church, as he did
that day, his belly began to call him to another work. And all the red cap
Priests making their abashio upon their knees, began to whistle with his
mouth, and with his two forfingers and his thumb, hunting flies over their
heads, blessed them, voto milesorum nemo vestrum frugi esto, get you to dinner,
edite bibite, cras moriemini.

Not long after, at the solicitation of the rebels, who had promised (in case
Friar Clement should be slain in such good service to the holy Church) to
make him a Saint. Friar Sixtus (for why should not a Friar do for a Friar,
even a greater thing then that) made him a holy martyr, who suffered for the
Catholic faith, and Deum tutelarem of the City of Paris. Then his Image was
set up in every Church, Massing, sensing, offering, kissing, kneeling, and
ducking, is daily done to the Idol: there was never so much a do about the
Idol of Molok, there was never so much crying about the Altar of Baal, as
there is ora pro nobis about this new Saint: there was never so many flies
about Beelzebub, as there is Idolaters in Paris about this new Idol.

Now before we do enter into the narration of King Henry the fourth, we will
represent an image of the miserable confusions which are in the realm, by a
comparison.

Henry the fourth, Emperor of the Romans by the mothers side, was of the
royal blood of France* a man of great wisdom and integrity. The holy Empire
was set on a fire of sedition, by the Bishops, Priests and Monks, by the
procurement of the Popes which then lived: seditious rebellions, and commotions
were raised up by the Shauelings throughout all Germany, about the bestowing
of Bishoprikes and Benefices.

First, they stirred up Saxony: after Suobland they set up an usurper, to wit,
Radolph, but to his great harm. Then they set up his own Son against him,
to wit, Henry the fifth.

Last of all, the Bishops, Priests and Monks, by treason oppressed him: this
noble Emperor could never be overcome by force, but had always the victory
against the Shauelings and their partakers: his age was blinded with gross
ignorance, and a vain fear of the Popes vain

Henry of Bourbon the fourth, all one in name, in number, in virtue, and force,
and prosperous success is all one, with that noble Emperor, issued out (if we
should well consider the histories) of the same famely as the other was by the
mothers side, his Kingdom is all set on a fire of rebellion: the Priests and
Friars have blown and kindled it, religion is pretended, but in very deed,
ambition is the procurer of all these evils. This age is not so blind, if
they would, but men are more malicious, they use now the old rusty sword of the
Popes excommunication, as they did then, not that they do pass for it, but to
serve their own turn, to be the trumpet of all rebellion: he has sustained
the fury of the Priests and Friars, and of their partakers for the space of
these 14. years, and had never any foil, but has had always the victory on
his side.

The Emperor Henry the fourth, was oppressed by the treasons of popelings:
this I hope will beware of such Chaplains; Popery then did prevail, but now
the Gospel shall flourish, mauger all the religions of idolatrous Friars, and
all the route of Antichrist.

We have left the King on the sea coast of Normandy, there to view the
preparations and attempts of the Leaguers: where understanding that the
Leaguers did insult, by the good success which they had, in executing their
traitorous felony upon the Kings person, and that they had prepared a mighty
army of such rablement of rebels, as Paris could afoord them, and had received
certain swart Rut^ers, under the conduct of the Duke of Brunswick. He was
advertised also, that the Duke of Lorreyne had sent his son the Marquis
d'Pont, with certain companies of Horsemen: and that they had received
certain Wallons out of the Low Country, conducted by the County Egmond. The
King I say, advertised of these things, sent from Deep to the Queen of
England for some succor, who (as her Majesty never fails to help them who
are unjustly distressed) sent him forces, according to his request. All the
Kings forces at Deep, were not about nine thousand men, before the Englishmen
arrived to him.

The Duke d'Mayne having a mighty army of five and twenty thousand men, set
forth out of Paris about the beginning of September, giving forth, that he
went to a certain victory, and vaunting that he would bring to Paris the King
dead or a live, or else he would drive him into the Sea, approached toward
Deep. But the God of battles, turned as easily with few as with multitude, all
these bragges to vanity and shame.

For the King hearing that the enemy approached very fast, encamped himself at
Arques, about two miles from the town of Deep, by the prudent counsel of the
Marshall of Byron. The King viewing the place, judged Arques as a Canon can
shoot, so that all the army for a need, might be covered therewith out of
all danger.

Upon the same trenches, he caused four pieces of ordinance to be placed,
right against a great plain, where he supposed the enemy would come to fight,
whether also he might come without any danger: the kings companies were
quartered in the Villag^s round about.

Whilst these things are a doing at Arques, the enemy approached more and
more very fast, and on the 15. of September, lodged his vauntgarde, within
three miles of Deep.

The King that morning, perceived that they intended to spoil the subburb
Paulet, before he enterprised upon any thing at Arques. Therefore with speed,
he fortified the said Suburb, but specially the milles which steed most open to
the enemy.

This thing being done, the King determined as nere as could be, and with
small company, to view how the enemy was lodged, and perceauing by occasion of
some that they were too forward, commanded five or six of his company to give
them the charge, in the which seven of the enemy remained upon the place:
which thing being done, the king returned to lodge at Arques.

The 16. before day, many issued out of Deep, who made hot skirmishes upon the
enemy, where the Lord Chastilion commanding over the footmen, showed himself
a most skillful warrior. The King had placed certain horsemen between his
footmen and the enemy, to repress the Leaguers of the Soldiers, least
rashly they might have bred some confusion. The skirmish was such, that the
Harquebusiers did never discharge a bullet that day in vain.

That day the King permitted certain English gentlemen to skirmish with the
enemy, who employed themselves so valiantly, and with such a noble courage,
that in less then the turning of one hand they overthrew, slew, or took
prisoners all that encountered them.

The same day, about 25. of the enemies had passed the brook, which did run
between the Kings army and the enemy, and were already in the meadow to have
assaulted a Village named Boteille, where the Kings Cornet was lodged: great
troops of horsemen came down the hill, to pass in like manner the brook to
have assisted them: but there came out of the Village six gentlemen well armed
to meet the enemy, among whom were the Lords Saint Mark and Slurbe, with two
Harquebuziers on foot, charged the enemy so hard, that they were feign to
retire with swift flight, fear and sorrowful countenance.

All this day there continued hot skirmishes at the milles, which are at the
end of the Suburb named Paulet, and whereas the King advanced

The same day the King sent the company of the Prince County, conducted by the
Lord Armilie his Lieftenant to the Marshall Biron, who was at Arques, which
immediately commanded them to go and spy the lodgings of the enemy, who did
lie in a Village called Martinglize, where were the Dukes Aumale, Nemours, and
the Lord Sagonne: this company of light horses coming to the place, and
forgetting to bring word to the said Lord Biron of that which they had seen,
ran so fiercely upon the enemy, that they killed above an hundred and fifty,
and among them the Marquis of Meneiay, they took many Captains and other
prisoners, and overthrew their rampires and Barricadoes being still on
horseback. The rest being four regiments of footmen fled with great terror,
Aumale, Nemours and Sagonne, showing to these companies the way to flee, and
striving among themselves who should flee ye swiftest. The Lord Armilie was
dangerously wounded through the body with a sword. The King from Diepe
understanding the skirmish, made have thither with three hundred horses: but
the enemy was already chased before he came.

The 17. of September the King caused a Canon to be discharged against the
enemy on the side of Arques, whilst the Lord Chastilion did valiantly
skirmish with the enemy at the end of the Suburb Paulet, where he slew many
of the enemies, and took many prisoners, without the loss of any one man,
save only few of his were wounded.

Another company of the Kings Camp at the same time went to view another
Village on another side, where they surprised the enemies, slew thirty of
them, and put the rest to flight.

During these skirmishes, a great number of Gentlemen and Soldiers came to the
King, and of their own voluntary motion and goodwill, yielded themselves and
their service. They were part of the troops of the Lord Rabempre, who a little
before was taken by the enemy at Gournay, a Town situated in Beauuoysin,
between the Cities of Beauuoys and Roen, who had followed the enemies for
their safeguard.

The enemy trusting in his great multitude, determined to pass over the
little river which ran between them and the King: and having made certain
bridges of wood to be cast over, the 19. day of September about five of the
clock in the morning, the enemy marched from Martinglize in battle array, well
ordered, strong and thick. Their footmen well placed at their wings, their
faces set toward Arques, and the quarter of the Swissers

The Lord Billing with two thousand shot was appointed to give the onset. The
Duke de Main stood behind with great strength in battle array,

The King had watched all night before on horseback, to give order in every
place, which he did so diligently and circumspectly, that the enemy could do
him no hurt, without great disadvantage and loss to themselves.

But in the morning having seen the order of their battle array, incontinently
he sent forth his light horsemen, and the company of the Prince County, lead
by the Lord Montater: he sent also his Cornet, wherein were the Lords graund
Prior, the great Squier, the County Rochefocault, and the County of Rossie
his brother, with the County of Rochefort, with diverse Gentlemen who were
nearest to his person: all them he set about his footmen, dividing the Swissers
into two parts. The enemies were 25. thousand, and he had not above nine
thousand and that to the uttermost.

With this small number the King (knowing that God would consider justice of
the cause, and was able to vanquish as well with few as with a great number)
having earnestly desired Gods aid in his private prayers, commanded public
prayers: which being ended, marched against his enemies with such resolved and
princelike courage, that at the first encounter, as it were with one blow, the
enemy left upon the place five hundred men, beside a number of prisoners and
wounded soldiers: but the rest fled with great fear and disorder.

In the same meeting the enemy lost, as is above said, at the first encounter
five hundred men, among whom were the chiefest Sague, Colonel of the light
horsemen: the Lord S. Vidal chief Marshall of the Ordinance, the Lord S.
Andrew, brother to the County of Saulx, the Lord Vienuille, eldest son to
the Marshall Vienel, who were carried to Roen and there buried, with many more
of great account.

The County Billing Marshall of the Camp, Temblecourt, the County of
Lorreyne, who had the first regiment, and the Lord Sauelak, with diverse other
Captains were taken prisoners.

Of the Kings side dyed but 26. among whom were the County Rossie, brother to
the Lord Rochefocault, and also the Lord Bakqueuile, whose virtues were
commendable among all men, for whom the King was greatly grieved.

There was among the enemies, one Lord Sagonne, a proud man, greatly boasting
of his valiantnes, who with feeling, escaped from the slaughter at Seulis, the
Lord Graund Prior provoked him to fight, who joining together, the said Lord
Graund Prior gave him such a blow, that in retyring and lighting down of his
horse, he fell down and brake his neck.

Thus the enemy having retired with shame and loss, the King commanded all
his forces to refresh themselves, which thing being done, d' Main: in the
mean while, they fed the Kings Soldiers with fair words, to delay the time,
till their troops of horsemen should draw near, to assist them, desiring
very much to see the King.

The King having no liking of them, commanded his forces to march down the
meadows from them, and whilst these villainous dissembling traitors passed
toward the Suissers, as though in deed they would yield themselves to the
King, seeing no more the kings horsemen before them, and their horsemen
approaching still, then they seized upon the County Rochefort, and began to
set upon the Kings troops with all their might, whilst fifteen hundred
horsemen came marching a long the meadows to assist them.

The enemies by these means, being three thousand, and the Kings forces
there, being not above three hundred Horsemen, put this small company in
great fear, and began to retire toward the Swissers.

The Swissers never shronk for all that multitude, but stood still firmly,
showing such a manly countenance, that the enemy suspected the retire of the
Kings horsemen, to have been a policy to draw them into the danger of the
Swissers.

At the same instant that the treason was discovered, the Lord Chastilion
brought out of Deep five hundred Caliuers. Thus all these troops were divided
into two parts: the Harquebusiers of the Kings side were so fitly placed, that
the enemy durst not venture to set upon them. The Canons in the mean time
played upon them, and killed many.

The King in this extremity, and sudden discovering of this unlooked treason,
having ordered all things, set upon the enemies, and showed himself both King,
Captain and Soldier, and by his princely courage, did encourage all men to
play their parts valiantly. The King received a shot in his boete, and his
horse being hurt, accompanied with the Marshall Byron, fought on foot, until
he was revenged of his enemies.

The enemy retired with shame and loss, leaving their dead on the place, and
hid himself at Martinglize. The King remained on the field, and commanded
certain pieces of Ordinance to be discharged against Martinglize: which thing
being done, he gave thanks to God, with earnest prayers for his gracious
goodness, succor and presence, in defending them and his just cause. This being
done, he greatly commended the good and faithful service of the Swissers, in
presence of their Captains, and drunk to them for their valiant exploytes
done that day.

The 23. of September, the Lord Staphord, Ambassador for the most Noble Queen
of England, arrived at Diepe, bringing both money and munition, but he saw
not the King, until the next day following. About midnight following, the same
day the King perceived that the enemy had changed his opinion, and that he
would raise up his army.

The 24. of September very early in the morning the enemy raised up his Camp,
without any sound of Drum or Trompet in the sight of the King and of his
army. This their remoouing was done with such great fear, and so cowardly,
that they left their wounded in the Villages behind them, and without giving
warning to their Sentinels to retire and save themselves: they left their
victual and munition of war in the way as they went. They took their
journey as though they went to the town of Hew, and at length they turned to
Saint Vax, Quinqueuile, and Bures, and camped themselves on the other side of
Diepe, entrenching themselves in the nearest Villages, Ianuile, Boutiles and
Apeuile.

The King who was on the other side of the hill in battle array, seeing their
departing to be like a fearful flight, while he received the Lord Ambassador
of England, sent certain companies to puriue them, who also took many
prisoners ofthem.

These Prisoners being demanded the cause of the sudden retire, answered
diversely: for some said, it was by reason of the coming of the English ships,
which lately arrived, wherein they doubted great aid to be sent to the King.
But some gave another answer, to wit, that upon the death of those Noble men
who had been slain, great strife had grown among them, for placing other in
their room: some allowing one, and some choosing another: so that it seems
that these two causes troubled the enemy.

The King seeing the enemy encamped in another side, caused his battle to be
pitched in the plain of Arques, and afterward in the evening brought his army
into Diepe, and the Suburbs of the same, and all night caused great and large
Trenches to be made in a place called the hill of Cats: and by the Morning the
Trenches being strong, he placed part of Chastilion, with thirteen Ensigns
of Swissers: upon the Fort of the side of Januile he pitched two double
Canons, which did greatly endomage the enemy, because they were all on an
heap, and their horsemen could not retire into their quarter without the
danger of the Canon: so that it never shot in vain.

The King sent the Regiment of the Lord Guard, into the Castle of Arques.

The first day of October, the enemy planted six pieces of Ordinance upon the
top of the hill by Ianuile, and shot five or six voleies of shot into

The Lord Staphord Ambassador of England, had presented a Canonier to the King,
who being very skillful, with a shot killed the master Gunner, and dismounted
two pieces of the enemies Ordinance, which caused them to remove their Canon:
during this time the Kings troops daily did set upon them, and drew them from
their Trenches with blows and deadly wounds, who being weary of that
continual play, the fourth day of October they brake their Rampires and
Gabions, and upon intelligences of the coming of the Prince of Soisson, the
Duke of Longueuile, and Marshall Aumont retired with shame and loss of men,
and in the Kings sight raised their camp, and dislodged on a sudden, taking
their journey toward Picardie, and in the way showed all crueltyes that could
be.

The King seeing the sudden and unexpected departure of the Enemy, supposed
that he went to fight against the power which was broughtto him by the said
Prince of Soissons, Duke of Longueuile, and Marshall Aumont, before they should
join with him: which thing he mistrusted the more, because the enemies shifted
into three several places, and never frarre from him. But the King knowing
that these helps were come within seven or eight leagues, took between three
or four hundred horsemen to go to meet with them about the sixth day of
October, leaving the Marshall Biron in Diepe, with all the rest of the army.
The same day he took the town and Castle Samache in the sight of the enemy.

The 8. day, he took the town of Hew, giving great occasions to the Duke
d'Mayne to fight.

Whilst these things were passing at Diepe, and sometime before there was a
meeting of the deputies of the Dukes d'Mayne and Parma, in the town of Aras,
where the Duke d'Mayne bound himself to the Spaniards, to deliver all the
towns of Picardie into their han^s, so that they would come to aid him: but
the Spaniards would not stir out of their places, before he had performed
what he was bound to do.

The Duke d'Mayne therefore, to color his cowardlines, shameful flight and
disgrace received at Diepe, and for that he durst never hazard the battle: he
bruted abroad, that he went into Picardie, to take possession of the towns of
that Province, to pledge them to the Spaniards: and so having passed the river
of Some, he took away with him, all hope from the King to come to any battle.

The King knowing well the nature of the French men, who though sometime in
their heat and natural hastines they do fall to sedition, yet are impatient
of a strange government, assured himself that they would never admit the
government of that nation, whom they of all most hated, neither would they
yield unto the Flemmings whom they hated also, for the natural injuries which
they do proffer one to another in time of war, as it falls out commonly
among Borderers. Therefore he stayed yet a while in Diepe, as well for the
affairs of Normandy, where he left the Prince Montpencier for Governor, as
for to receive four thousand Englishmen sent unto him by the renowned Queen
of England.

And the 21. of October he departed from Deep, and with small iourneyes
coasted the enemy between the two Rivers of Seyne and Some, until he came
to Meulan, a Town situated a little above Pontoys distant from Paris ten
leagues, and there upon that bridge passing on the South side of Seyne, with
all speed went to Paris for two causes. First, for to draw him to fight: for
although he would not venture a battle for the winning of Deep,
(notwithstanding he had so promised to his partakers) yet the King was in good
hope that he would fight for Paris. The other cause was to withdraw him from
Picardy, where he had taken the town of Fere, and some other small Towns, the
most part of the Nobility and Gentlemen of the country being with the King.

About the 28. of October, the King lodged his army a mile from Paris in the
villages about. The morrow after, the king in his own person went all about
to view the Trenches along the Suburbs.

The last day of October, the king having prepared all things by the advice of
the Princes, Marshals and expert Captains, determined to assault the said
Suburbs the next morning by break of the day in three sundry places, and to
that purpose divided his forces into three several companies.

In the one were the four thousand Englishmen, under the government of the
Lord Willoughby their General, with two regiments of Frenchmen, and one
regiment of Swissers, with the Marshall Byron, and the Baron Byron his son,
the Lord Guittry, and diverse other Noblemen, who had commandment to assault
the Suburbs S. Victor and S. Marcel.

The second troop was of four Regiments of Frenchmen, two Regiments of
Swissers, and four companies of adventurers with the Marshall Aumont,
accompanied with the Lord great Esquire, and the Lord Rieulx Marshall of the
field, with a great number of Nobles and Gentlemen, who had charge to assault
the Suburbs of Saint James, and Saint Michael.

The third company with ten Regiments of French men, and one Regiment of
Launceknights conducted by the Lords de la Noue and Chastilion, should assault
the Subutbs Saint German, Bucy and Nille.

Every troop had a good number of Gentlemen well armed to assist the footmen,
if any great resistance should be made. The King also commanded two Canons and
two Culuerins to be planted in the rereward of every troop.

He separated also all his horsemen in three companies, he himself commanded
over the first, the Prince of Soissons over the second, and the Duke of
Longueuile over the third, each of them appointed to strengthen the companies
which were set to assault the Suburbs, thus divided as is aforesaid.

The first day of November by break of the day, being a very thick mist, in
this order the Suburbs were assaulted, and so shaken by the Kings power, that
in less then an hour they were all taken with the loss of fifteen hundred
men of the enemy. There were also fourteen Ensigns taken, and thirteen
pieces of Ordinance. The chase was followed with such a fury, that the Kings
men mingled among the enemies followed even within the gates of the City, and
if the Kings Ordinance had come, as it was appointed, the Gates had been
beaten down before they could any way have fortifyed them.

So the King came into the Suburbs of Saint James, about seven or eight a
Clock in the Morning, the people crying in the Streets with a loud voice,
Viue le Roy, with more show of joy then of any fear at al.

About a hundred and fifty Harquebuziers of the enemies took for their
defense ye Abbey of Saint Germayn, making a show as though they would hold it
perforce, which thing they might well have done, by reason of the strength
thereof: but about midnight being charged to render the place, they gave it
over. Then was the King master of all the Suburbs, which do lie on the side of
the University, which are as big as the City of London within the walls.

The King being master of the Suburbs, in the space of two hours (save the
Abbey as is above said) took such good order that none started from his
company for any pillage, until the Quarters were appointed unto the Soldiers
where they should have their pray. That day was employed about entrenching
before the Gates of the City, and watch and ward set in convenient places.

About midnight following the said 1. of October, the King was advertised de
Main came into the City of Paris with his Forces, whereof the King was
exceeding glad for two causes: first because the enemy was new retired from
Picardy. Secondly, because that he was in good hope that he would be drawn
to a battle for the defense of that City, by which means he should not be
enforced to execute his justice against the walls of the City, and his own
subjects, who were greatly seduced by the bad persuasions of the enemy.

The second day of October the King stayed all the day to see what the enemy
durst attempt, and whether he would venture to come forth to fight, but seeing
they showed no feeling of their losses received the day before.

The third day, the King determined to yield them the Suburbs, to see whether
that would provoke and encourage them to attempt any thing. Therefore leaving
the Suburbs set himself in battle array, staying in the field from eight
until a eleven a clock, and seeing that no man appeared, he marched thence
quite for two causes.

First, for very compassion which he had of an infinite number of people
seduced from their duty and obedience, supposing that time and this peril
which came to their doors, would make them wiser, and call their duties to
remembrance. But if not, that it was the just and heavy judgment of God, who
hardneth their hearts as he did the Egyptians in old time, that he might
revenge the idolatryes, whoredoms, contempt and hatred of his Gospel, and the
blood of his Saints, which they had powered in their Streets like water, and
that such a great City (when their iniquity and rebellion had come to a full
measure) might be assaulted at any other time.

Secondly, he thought good to reduce into his obedience the Countries which did
lie between the rivers Loyre and Seyne, which their enemies had seduced for
two causes, that he might have a sure way for munition and victuals out of
those countries which are very fruitful.

Secondly, to procure a safety unto the countries, which are under his
obedience, but specially to the City of Tours, which by his predecessor was
made the seat of the Realm, and was in a manner all compassed (but specially
on the North side) with towns, castles and holds, rebelled and furnished with
garrisons of rebels.

The Duke de Main playing the night Crow, fearing the day light, arrived in
the night at Paris, neither proffered any issue nor skirmish unto the King, nor
showed any token of his being there, no more then if they had been fallen on a
sudden into a lethargy.

The King being retired from Paris, the said Duke fell to a saffer and more
profitable kind of war: for his money being spent in erecting so many
Trophies in Normandy with that mighty Army, as he did after he had received so
many stripes and bastonadoes, as he said, that he will no

And as it is said commonly, that the man who desires to kill his dog, makes
himself believe that he is mad: so this valiant Duke, to pick a quarrel,
does easily make himself and the Parisiens believe that they had procured the
King to come to Paris, and that which the King had done by valor, was done by
winking of them, and was enterprised upon intelligences which they had with
him, and that if he had not come with speed they would have delivered the
city to the King. No man could deny this, for there was within the city
witnesses, who were returned from Picardy, to the number of twenty thousand,
who had the Fortresses of the City in their hands; all these would bear
witness against them. And who will not believe such a multitude of witnesses:
But yet if it had not been so, their goods were sufficient witnesses of the
crimes above said: so that whosoever was rich or so accounted, was sufficiently
convicted to have practiced against the association and holy union. Whosoever
had goods was quickly convicted to be an heretic and betrayer of the Catholic
religion. Therefore hot skirmishes were within the City, deadly war is
proclaimed against the Coffers, Closets and Counting houses of rich men. Rich
Merchants are sent for, pulled out of their houses with their wives and
children, their goods taken to ye holy use of the holy League, they are made
fast to a pair of gallows and there hanged: for the very zeal and devotion
which the Leaguers have to their Catholic faith, and holy mother the Church,
they did throw into the water the wives and children of many rich citizens,
least they should claim any part of their goods. All parts of the City were
full fo horrible executions, weeping, mourning and heavy lamentation.

The King did never show the hundred part of that extremity unto his enemies,
as the heads of the League did unto their friends, whom they should have
defended from being executed by others. So that the heads of the traitors
having obtained a profitable and gaynfull victory against the Counting houses
and Coffers of their friends: and having that which they most desired, do rest
themselves, take their case after so many skirmishes fought in Normandy, but
specially in Paris: for now they have money to spend.

The King being at the Village Liuars under Mount berry, remained there a whole
day to try whether the enemies (having rested and refreshed themselves three
days in Paris) would have gathered stomach and pursued him. But understanding
of their kind of war and victories which they had against the Coffers of the
citizens of Paris, he determined to leave those wicked rebels to destroy one
another, and to take the Town Estampes upon this occasion.

The Lord Clermont of Lodeshe in Languedocke, had thrust himself into the said
Town with fifty or threescore Gentlemen, through the assurance which the Duke
de Main had given them, and confirmed the same by many of his letters, which
were intercepted, that he would come to relieve them with his army. The King
by these letters knowing that the Duke de Main stood bound upon his faith and
honor to rescue Estampes, with all his army the fifth of November having sent
part of his forces to compass the said town, which was done the same day
early, he followed and arrived at Estampes with the rest of his army when it
was dark night, and at his coming he won the Suburbs, which the enemies had
made show to have defended. The same night also the Town was taken, the
Soldiers retyring into the Castle.

The sixth day of November the Castle was environed, approaches made, and two
Culuerines placed in battery. The stout Soldiers with the Lord Clermont, who
did look so bigg first, seeing that the army which should rescue them did not
appear, and that they had no news of it, demanded parley, and yielded
themselves the same day, with condition that eight of them should remain
prisoners, until such time as they should give eight others (who were named to
them) to be delivered.

After that agreement, the King did show that favor to the Lord Clermont, and
unto five others, that should have remained prisoners, to send them away upon
their oaths: so there departed out of the Castle, about forty Gentlemen, and
two hundred Soldiers, who were safely conducted half the way to Paris.

The King considering that poor Town of Estampes, to have been taken three
times in four months, and thought it had been necessary for him, to have kept
a good Garrison in it: yet notwithstanding, being of his own nature, as easy
to be overcome with ^lemency, as he is inuinsible to his enemies, by force was
centent to take no other assurance of the town, then the oath of the
inhabitants, wherein he reposed his trust. And that the Castle should not be
a mean of their rigorus usage, hereafter he determined to raze it, and to
commit the keeping of the Town to the townsmen, only persuading himself,
that they comparing the usage which they have at his hands, and of his enemies
together, it will be the surest Garrison to keep them in obedience.

About the eight of November, the King remaining yet there, arrived a Gentleman
from the Queen Dowager to the King, bringing a request, which she presented
unto the King, veseeching him to do her justice, for the det^stable murder
committed upon the person of the late King her Husband: the King deferred the
answer until such time, as he sat in counsel.

The ninth day of November, the Gentleman was called before the King and his
counsel, who after he had delivered his message, the request was read aloud in
the presence of all the Princes, Marshals of France, and other Lords and
Gentlemen, who were then in great number about the King: by the which request,
besides the desiring of the King, she did adjure, not only the Princes and
Nobility of France, but also all Christian Princes, to be assisters in this
cause.

The King making answer, himself declared, that he highly commended her
vehemence in following this suit, and sent the said supplication unto his court
of Parliament, transported to Tours, commanding his general attorney, with
the attorney of the said Lady; to make information against the offenders, to
the end the matter might be determined afterward in his presence, in manner
and form convenient. And for his own part, he would not cease to prosecute
the matter, but vowed in presence of all the company, to employ his travails
and arms, until such time as he had dove the justice that God had appointed
him to do. So that as the pitiful terms of the request of the said Lady,
had filled the eyes of all with tears, so the princelike answer of the King,
had quickly dried them up, and replenished their hearts with just indignation,
and burn^ng desire of revenge. At that time, all with a loud voice, renewed the
oath of not laying down arms, until such time as they had revenged the
hateful death of the late King their master.

The King seeing that there was no hope to bring the enemy to a battle, but
by extreme necessity, sent back the Duke of Longeuile, and the Lord la Noue,
with such forces as they had brought out of Picardie, to refresh themselves in
that Province: he did the like also, by the Lord of Gyury, who met him with a
good troop at his departure from Paris, and sent him again into the Country
of Brie.

The King with the rest of his army, determined to make a voyage to the river
of Loyre, in the mean time, whilst his strange forces that were coming,
would be further in their way.

Therefore the tenth of November he departed from Estampes, and marched
through the Country of Beausse, and being advertised that the town of
Ianuile, stopped all the passages, he desired to win it in passing by the way.

The 11. of November, the King arriving, the Captain that was within it, made
a show as though he would defend it: but when he saw the Canon approach, he
yielded it up, and departing with two hundred Harquebusiers, the King entered
therein, and there stayed the day after. They of the Town received no
displeasure, nor discommodity, no more then if they never had rejected his
obedience.

The King leaving a good Garrison in the Castle, which is a good Chasteaudunne,
where as soon as he was arrived, he sent to sommon the Town of Vendosme,
which was his ancient patrimony, and the ancient title of his predecessors,
and because that thereby they were his double subjects, they were the more
culpable in taking his enemies part: yet the King having more care to keep
them from further offending, then to punish them for their double treasons, he
stayed three days at Chausteaudunne, to give them time to advise themselves.

Whilst the King lodged at Chasteaudune, the Captains of the Suissers
arrived, who were sent immediately after the death of the late King, by their
C^lonels of the four Regiments, to know the pleasure of their superiors,
whether they should continue in service, or ask leave to return home.

The said messengers reported unto the King, that they had express charge
from their Seignories, to give his Majesty to understand, that they not only
do command the Colonels and Captains of the said regiments, to continue in
doing his Majesty good and faithful service: but also that they did offer him
all such other succor, as they shall be able to make, and as he shall need,
holding from that hour the same ali^unce and good friendship, confirmed with
his Majesty, as they have had with his predecessors.

The Lord Malbenehard, some days before, understanding of the kings coming
into Beausse, had called unto him certain Gentlemen being his friends, and
with them had four hundred Soldiers in Garrison there beside the inhabitants,
which came to eight hundred able men, and knowing that there he should be
besieged, whilst the King was yet at Chausteaudune, desired to parley with the
Lord Richlieu, great provost of France, with whom he was familiarly
acquainted: and when the said Provost came to him, he desired of him, that
without yielding of the place the army might retire.

The 16. of November, the King departed from Chausteaudune, having sent part of
his army before, who the same day environed the Town of Vendosme.

The same day, the King arriving at M^lay, before he lighted, went to view the
town and castle, which are both of a good reasonable strength. The Town is
compassed with a great ditch, well watered, and a strong wall well flanked, and
in many places rampered within: the Castle is much stronger, being situated
upon an hill, environed with a deep ditch toward the field, and it is of a
great height over the town, it is defended with a strong wall, with many
Towers. The same day, the King caused the Suburbs to be won, and parted the
Lords, Marshalls of Byron and Aumont, the one of the one side of the river
Loyre, the other on the other side, and having well considered of the form of
the siege, he determined

The Town of Vendosme being besieged, the Lord Malbeuehard sent again for the
Lord Richlieu, who had no wiser answer then the first: wherein appeared, that
God would make him feel the recompense of his deserts, not permitting him to
help himself with resolution, but GOD left him in the dampe of his rebellious
conscience, as a man troubled with giddines of the head, not knowing what he
did.

The seauenteene and eighteen days, the King bestowed in viewing where he
should place his battery, putting all things in readiness, and being present at
the works all day long, and part of the night. And the night following, the
eighteenth day, he passed in a manner, in conducting and placing the ordinance
to the battery.

The 19. of November at the dawning of the day, he began to beat two towers of
the Castle, and to take away the defenses of the breach which he purposed to
make, and after the bestowing of six score Canon shot, having made a hole in
one of the said towers, where only 2. men could pass in front, certain
Soldiers were commanded to see if they could lodge in the said tower: they
gate up, and in a fury entered the retrenchment, and being followed by some,
conducted by the Baron of Biron and others, and others by the Lord Chastilion:
they made those within so dismayed, that after they had offered to fight, they
fled, and abandoning the Castle, ran into the town, where they were followed
so nearly, that part of the Kings soldiers entered confusedly with them, and
made themselves within less then half an hour masters both of the town and
castle.

The said Malbeuehard and his soldiers being retired into an house, did yield
incontinently unto the Baron of Biron, none otherwise, then at the Kings mercy.

In this assault there was none of the Kings side slain, and very few of the
town. All the inhabitants were pardoned, save the Lord Benehard and a
seditious Franciscan Friar (whom the Inhabitants accused to have been the
Author of the mischiefs happened among them) they two were executed, he gave
the town to the pillage, causing the Churches carefully to be kept.

The 20. day he commanded all his army to depart out of the Town, permitting
no man any longer to be pillaged or raunsomed. He restored the
ecclesiastical persons unto their several charges, much more peaceably then
they were, when the town was in the occupying of the League.

The King being at Vendosme, finding himself so near Tours, purposed to make
a journey thither, to determine with the Lords of his Parliament Biron.

The 21. of November he departed from Melay by Vendosme, and arrived at Tours
the same day two hours within night, where he was attended with so great joy
and gladness of all the people of the City, that such store of lights there was
prepared in the Streets at his arrival, that it was as light as the noone day.

That night the Prince, Cardinal of Vendosme, came to the King to do him
reverence, who received entertainment and countenance agreeable unto his
neerenes of blood with the King.

The 22. of November all the chambers of the Parliament came personally to
salute and acknowledge the King the first president, making the relation with
such substance and eloquence as caused a great contentation to the King.

After them came the Mayor and Iurats of the City, who were most eurteously
accepted by the King.

Last of all came the ecclesiastical persons of the Town, all with great show
of joy and hope of an happy and quiet government: therein they were confirmed
by the answers which they received of the King in most excellent terms and
Princelike eloquence.

The same day the Ambassador also of the state of Venice had audience, where
first he presented the letters of the seignory unto the King, and afterward
declared the joy they had of his happy succession unto the Crown, beseeching
him to accept the offer of the friendship of the said feignory unto his
Majesty, and to promise and assure them of his, and to maintain the good
intercourse between his crown and the said signorie: whereunto the King
answered to their contentation.

The King was determined to have stayed at Tours but one day, but the people
were so desirous to see him, that he was feign to stay there four days.

During which time of his aboade there, the terror of his arms, the love of
his clemency, which he showed wheresoever he came, the opinion of his justice,
and the admiration of his wisdom and modesty did so move the people, that
the Towns of Lauerdine, Chasteaudeloyre, Montouert, situated upon the river
Loyre, and Montrichard situated upon the river Chere in Toureyne, voluntarily
yielded themselves. So the 25. of November the King departed from Tours, and
with one journey went unto his army at Chasteaudeloyre, ten leagues of.

The King having great desire to besiege the Town of Man's, from Chandeloir,
sent to the Lord Farges to compass the said Town, and to common it. The
Lord Boysdaulphin, which commanded in it for the League, made answer as though
he had been resolved to bury himself therein, and all those that were with
him, rather then to depart out of it: Boysdaulphin went out of the town, to
burn a great part of the Suburb named la Consture: but the Lord Farges
coming upon him with his troops, reseued a great part of the said Suburb
from burning.

The 28. of November the King departing from Chasteaudeloyre, the second day
arrived at Iuray Leuesine, distant from Man's one League.

The 30. of November the Baron of Biron, and the Lord Chastilion arrived with
the greatest part of the French infantry, by whom the same night the trenches
which the enemy had made in the Suburbs was won in some twenty foot high, and
might easily have attended the Canon, after that it was supposed that they were
easier to be dealt withal then it was looked for, considering the high lofty
speeches of Boysdaulphine, Captain of the Rebels.

The 29. of November the King came and lodged in the Suburbs, which are fair,
and in a manner more commodious to lodge in then the Town. The same day the
King caused all the rest of the Suburbs to be won, except the Suburb Saint
Jahn, situated on the other side of the river Sarthre, which was won the day
after. The said Boysdaulphin had burned more then half, but specially that
part which was next the bridge being the fairest houses: so that their valor
appeared in nothing else but only in burning the houses and goods of their
own friends.

The King bestowed three days and nights traveling himself almost the whole
night in making Gabions and other preparatiues necessary for the battery, and
to see the pieces brought to their places.

All things being in a readiness, the second of December the King began
Boysdaulphin perceauing that within three hours he should have had an assault
given him, and (his heart failing) not willing to abide it (for he was a man
experienced not in feats of arms, but only in feats of sedition among a
mutinous company of robbers, as it did appear in his dealing in Paris.) After
few voleys of Canon shot, his high words were turned to vanity, he demanded
parley, and in fine by two a clock in the after noone the said Town of Man's
was y^elded unto the K. which without great ^are of the King had been sacked
by the Soldiers, but he caused the gates to be kept shut, and to take away all
occasion of annoyance to the City, he would not lodge in it himself, but kept
in the suburbs where he was first lodged.

There was within the Town more then two hundred gentlemen, and twenty
ensigns of footmen, who du^ing the time of parley did publicly scolde and
outragiously revile one another. For the gentlemen said, that the Soldiers
would not fight; the Soldiers said that against their wills

Whilst the King battered Man's, Brissak another busy Captain of rebellious
robbers heard the thundering of the Cannon, being at la Forte Bernhard with
two regiments, who were coming to succor the town of Man's, being put in
great fear gave to himself the alarm and fled back again twelve leagues,
and in retiring, fell unawares into the Rutters quarter that served the King,
who took from him thirty or forty horses and chariots without the loss of
any man.

The King restored into the Town the Bishop and the Lord Larges his brother,
to his office of Governor there, as he had been before, and pardoned the
inhabitants, who came as well Ecclesiastical as other to give him thanks,
with protestation of fidelity and true obedience.

The King abode there after the taking of it five days, during the which time
the greatest part of Gentlemen who were in the Town of Man, and had bin
seduced by the League, and by them induced to this rebellion, put themselves
into the Kings service.

About the second day of December, the Castles of Beaumont and Touuoy yielded
unto the King: and about the same time in the country of Laual, the Towns of
Sabliee, Laual, Chasteaugontier, towns of importance, and many other of lesser
name were brought under the Kings obedience.

About the 9. of December, the King sent his army to Alencon, under the
conduct of the Marshall Byron and the Baron his son Marshall of the Camp,
whilst he himself made a voyage into the country of Laual, to the intent by
his presence to comfort the Nobility and people of that country, who were
newly redeemed from the slavery of the Rebels and reduced to his obedience:
but specially to cause the Prince D'ombes to repair unto him out of Britain
that he might see him. So taking his journey the eight of December, arrived at
Laual the ninth day. There as well the Ecclesiastical as Cannons, and other
sorts of popish priests with their ornaments, wherewith they had accustomed to
go to procession, met him a great way out of the town, and having by the mouth
of one made their submission and protestation of their fidelity and obedience,
they accompanied the King marching before him until he entered into the town,
singing with great melody all the way along, Viue le Roy.

There came out likewise the Magistrates of the said Town to meet him, and
the people saluted him as he passed through the streets with this viue le Roy.
The King abode there ten days, and in the mean time the Prince D'ombes arrived
with a great company of Nobility out of Britain, who was most courteously
received of the King.

In his way from the Man to Laual, certain of his company departed from him,
and took in their way Chasteaubriault in Anjou, and brought with them the
Captain to the King being at Laual, with many other prisoners.

The King having spent certain days with the Prince D'ombes, and taken order
for the affairs of that Province, sent him again to his charge of Britain,
and dispatched the Marshall Aumont to gather his strange forces together: so
that the 20. of December the King departing from Laual went to Mayennelafahes,
where he was very well received, assured himself of the Castle: and
withoutleauing any other garrisons in the Town, passing through a most foul
country, arrived at Alencon the 23. of December.

Now the Marshall Byron departing from the Town of Man with the army the
ninth of December, could not reach to Alencon, until the 15. day of the same
month, by reason of the foul way which hindered the carriage of the
Ordinance: but having sent the Lord Artray certain days before, he had
compassed the Town, and at his first coming took the Suburbs, and drew them
of the Town to composition.

Captain Lago Governor of the Town, retired into the Castle with four
hundred and fifty Soldiers, making show as though he would defend it. The
place was very strong, environed with water and strong walls, well flanked and
good towers.

The Marshall of Byron being entered the town, kept so good order in it, that
it was not seen that it had bin besieged, the shops being kept open that day
as if it had bin in time of peace: and presently caused the artillery to be
brought before the Castle, and shot at the defenses, found means to take away
their water.

The 23. of December the King being arrived at Alencon, and viewing what was
done at the siege of the said Castle, said that the siege would not be long.

The same day the King caused the said Lago, who was within the Castle, to be
advertised that he was come, and to be sommoned: at which news he began to
be astonished, and the morrow after he required parley, and the same day
yielded the place with promise of safety of lives, arms and baggage.

The King having provided for the assurance of the place, left there for
Governor the Lord Artrey with a good garrison in the town and castle, and
departing herehence, the 27. of December went and lodged at Sees, where the
Bishop and his Priests, with the Magistrates of the City, came

The 28. of December the King departed from thence to Argenton, which is a good
town in Normandy, wherein is a Castle of good strength. There was in the same
Castle three Ensigns of footmen, whom the Lord Brissak had left there, who
with Captain Picart and his regiment were come from Paris to Man, and had
promised to show himself at all the sieges which the King would take in hand,
and he would empeach him from the taking of any town in the countries of Main
and base Normandy. But this great warrior was as old in courage as he was
hot in words: for he never showed his face at any siege.

The inhabitants of the town of Argenton having determined to yield to the
King, came forth and met him, most humbly desiring his Majesty to receive
them to his favor: which thing he did willingly.

The Soldiers seeing that, retired into the Castle, beseeching the K. to
suffer them to depart with their lives and baggage: which thing the K. granted
unto them.

The 29. of December, the garrison of Damfront understanding that he had
sommoned the town, and that the inhabitants had determined to acknowledge and
admit the King, entered in consultation what they should do, and being divided
into contrary factions, put themselves in arms one against another. It
happened that they who would submit themselves to the King, although they were
not half so many in number as the other, were encouraged and assisted of God;
for the justice of the cause had the victory. The Baron of Verny Governor of
the Castle was slain, and certain other: whereupon as well they of the Castle
as of the Town sent to the King to crave his favor and clemency, which they
obtained.

The 30. of December the King sent to the town, to be assured of both parts,
which thing was done without force or violence.

The Lord, Brissak, and his companions rebels being beaten away out of all
towns of Anjou, Main and Perch, had put himself with the regiment of
Captain Picart, into Falaize, a Town situated between Argenton and Caen:
where is a Castle very strong, and esteemed to be the best place of base
Normandy, the Castle of Caen only excepted. Thither Brissak had entised many
Gentlemen and Soldiers of the Country, men of his own humor, whose heart
did boil with rebellion and treachery, and also the remnant of the Gantiers,
who had escaped the slaughter done upon them before, by the Prince Montpencier:
vaunting that they would repair the honor of their companions, who had
yielded and lost all other towns, and that at this place all the spoil which
the King had gotten, should be surrendered.

The night following, the 30. of December the King sent the Baron of Byron to
enuiron it, with certain troops of men of war, who came thither the morning
following so happily, that he found the Lord Brissak, coming out of the
Town, purposing to have burned the Town of Gybray, which is as if it were a
Subb^b of Falaize. The said Lord Brissak perceauing the troops of the Baron
of Byron, returned back into the Town in have, and with great terror, so that
by the coming of the said Byron, the Town of Gybray was kept from burning,
seized upon, and the enemies there enforced to r^tyre into Falaize.

The 31. of December the King arrived, and went presently, accompanied with the
Marshall Byron, to view the Town and Castle, which are both strong. The Town
is compassed with a great poole, whose water cannot be drawn away: the wall is
good, and flancked with good Towers, and hard to approach for the battery of
the Ordinance. The castle is much stronger fortified with great and strong
towers, and very good walls, with a dongeon, separated and compassed with great
and deep ditches. Besides this, the Lord Brissak was within, well accompanied
with Gentlemen, Captains and Soldiers, and made a great show that he would
defend that place effectually, with intent to get honor.

The first day of Ianua^^e, the King sent to sommon the Town, to the which the
Lord Brissak made answer, with a great bragging of resolution, that he had
vowed unto God, never to speak of any composition for that Town.

Upon this answer, the King caused with great diligence and expedition, gabions
to be made, baggs to be filled with earth, and al things necessary for the
battery to be done: which thing was so dil gently followed, that the third day
of January all was in a readiness, and had begone to batter that day, but he
stayed for three Canons, which the Prince Montpencier did bring to him out of
the Castle of Caen, which arrived at the si^ge that same day.

That some day the Prince Montpencier came to the King, having with him, about
twelve or fifteen hundred Sou^diours, a good troop of Gentlemen of the
Country, and certain companies of men of a^ms, with the three Canons
aforesaid. They which were within the Town, did never all these four days
sally out, but with great braggings, showed a resolut mind, supposing
therewith to fear away the King.

The King having put all things in a readiness for the battery determined to
make one work of two: for knowing that the Castle being won, the Town could
not hold out long he concluded to place three batteries, whereof two from
sundry parts should batter at one breath of the Castle The third being placed
upon a rock, should scour certain ways along

Therefore the fifth day of January, at eight of the clock in the morning, his
Ordinance began to beat two great towers, which flanked from the one to the
other, whereof the one served for a defense to the breach, which he supposed to
make.

And after the bestowing of four hundred Canon shot, the top of one Tower
being fallen, and a hole being made in the other Tower that defended the
creach, the King caused it to be battered speedily, for there needed but the
beating of a little piece of a Wall. This done, the King commanded certain
companies of Soldiers to go and view if they could lodge in the said Tower:
at whose commandment, certain of them entering the hole which was made
through, went into the Castle, and finding no resistance, called their
fellows, who entering one after another, in a shortspace they became Masters of
the Castle and Town.

They within, being sore dismayed, without any fight retired into the d^ngeon,
out of the which they sent three Gentlemen, to beseech the King to receive them
upon any composition.

The King answered, that he would not receive them, but at his pleasure, and
that they should prove his clemency, without binding him else unto any
condition.

The sixth of January, the King suffered the Lord Brissak to come and submit
himself unto him, and being overcome with pity, which he had upon the young
Gentlem^n, granted their ^iues, in choosing fifteen of the best sort of them,
whom he would keep prisoners as warlike enemies, and fifteen more, such as
he should think good, should be at his Majesty's disposition. Thus God did
so beat down these proud and insolent rebels, roaring and breathing a little
before, nothing but fire and blood, that none of them did proffer, or seemed to
make head otherwise then by words.

The Town being taken by assault, could not be preserved from pillaging and
sackaging, that there might be a difference between them that fled to the
Kings clemency, and those who obstinatly did prove the force of his army, the
one being wholly desolat, the other rejoicing in a full quietness and perfect
peace.

The 15. whom the King took for warlike Enemies were put to their ransom; the
town was given to the Soldiers: of the other fifteen, who were at the Kings
disposition, the Lord Brissak (as consenting and accessory to the Kings death)
was condemned to die. But whereas after the Kings death and when the towns of
Picardie did revolt, the rebels had taken the Duchess of Longeuille, mother to
the Duke now living prisoner, for abhorring their rebellion, and detained her
in captivity in the City of Amiens. Lo^gueuille greatly desirous to deliver
his mother, begged the said Brissak to set his mother at liberty and in place
of safety by exchange with the said Brissak, which thing the king granted,
supposing that it would not be long before he would come again into his hands,
to receive the reward of his rebellion and parracide.

Hitherto Christian Reader thou have seen into what miserable and woeful state
the whole Realm was thrown in by the Leaguers, by their Friars, Monks, and
desperate Jesuits, and by their venomous seditions and ungodly sermons preached
to the people, to stir them to all manner of damnable license. And how that
kingdom sunk and drowned in a most confused rebellion was left by the king
Henry the third, and last of the noble family of Valoys, and delivered to
Henry the 4. now king of France and Navarre, named, declared and inthronised by
his predecessor, approved, accepted, and proclaimed lawful and natural heir
and king of ye crown of France, after the manner of the Emperors of the
Romans, by the Princes, Nobility, Officers of the Crown, not among few
Priests, Bishops, and Monks, with a trash of ceremonies, but in the middle of
an army, by ye Marshals, Colonels, captains and Soldiers acknowledged, and
obedience sworn unto by the best and soundest part of the realm, towns, cities,
Commonalties and people, as well ecclesiastical as temporal, resisted only
by few rebels and robbers, who having surprised some Towns and Cities, do
exercise an intolerable (and more then Turkish) tyranny over the Citizens
otherwise well disposed.

Thou have seen also, how God has guided his hands to battle, and his
fingers to fight, has blessed his arms before, and now in the beginning of
his reign with prosperous success of victories, and reduced Towns, Cities
and whole Provinces, seduced by the Leaguers, to their duetifull obedience, and
has so restored to them, which will be quiet under his government, peace,
justice and judgment, that they may say, that the Lord after a long continual
stormy tempest, has given them as a calm weather to restore in that afflicted
state saturnia regna, wherein godliness and justice ought to reign.

Now before we make an end of this year, and this seventh book together, we
will lay down other exploits of war done in other parts of France, but
specially in the Province of Daulphine: and having no ample informations nor
observation of time and other circumstances necessary to the perspicuity of the
history, we will put down only the events bare and naked as it were private
memories, in such sort as they were sent to the noble Princess of Orange out
of her sovereignty of Orange by some of her seruant^ there, desirous only to
aduertize her excellency simply of the accidents which had passed there.

It said before how the Guizes (head of the League) took for party the king of
Navarre, and with him the professors of the reformed religion as Espernon and
Valete his brother, who with their faithful service and wise counsel were
stumbling blocks in the way of the said Guizes and Leaguers, disappointing
them of their purposes. The L. Valete being in Prouance and Daulphine, and
understanding of the execution done at Bloys upon the persons of the Duke of
Guyze, and the Cardinal his brother, by a prudent wisdom foresaw how some
new tumults would rise thereupon, and how the king would turn his forces
against the Leaguers, and upon that occasion would reconcile the king of
Navarre to him, and use his service, and of them of the reformed Religion.

And thereupon, to avoid all inconveniences which might ensue this strange and
unexpected accident: thought good to make peace with the Lord des Diguieres, a
noble man of great valor, who had constantly and valiantly defended the cause
of the religion, and brought many Towns, Cities and Fortresses, from the
tyranny and slavery of the Leaguers, to the Kings obedience. And when after the
death of the Duke of Guize, many Towns and holds had rebelled, partly induced
by the out^ries of ye Leaguers, and partly surprised by them, but specially in
Prouance.

Peace upon these occasions was made between them, that their forces being
joined together, they might the better be able to prevent the traitorous
attempts, and resist the practizes of the said Leaguers. After which
agreement, the said Lords des Diguieres and Valete came together, and
oftentimes sat in counsel, to take advise for the safe keeping of the country
of Daulphine and Prouance in the Kings obedience, they together entered Valence,
Romans, Tullet, and other places.

After these two Noble men by this new reconsiliation had been some days
together, they determined to separate themselves and their forces: the Lord des
Diguieres remained in Daulphine, and the Lord Valette went with his forces into
Prouance, there to stop the attempts of the Rebels.

After the separation of these two Noble men, the Lord des Diguieres first
laid the siege before the fortress of Auxonne, right against Montlimart,
which had been surprised by the Rebels, and took it by assault the fifth day of
January, the Captain of the said Fort and all his men were put to the sword.

Shortly after the taking of Auxonne, the Lord Eschambault, who had constantly
defended the reformed religion in Viuaretes, joined his forces with the Lord
des Diguieres, which thing before he could not well do. From Auxonne the Lord
des Diguieres, strengthened with the forces of the Lord Eschambault, laid the
siege before the Hold of Colonseles in the county of Griguan, which he took
by assault. The Governor of that Hold

The said Lord des Diguieres departing from Colonseles, took his way straight
to the County of Veyascin, and as soon as he was entered the country, the Holds
of Bauuyes, Taussie, le Bousch^l, Racheringes and Rochegardes yielded unto him,
never expecting the Canon. These Forts being surrendered, he went to lay the
siege before Camaret, a place well fortified, distant from Orange about two
miles. The said town yielded at the sight of the Canon with safety of lives,
as well of Soldiers as inhabitants. From Camaret he went to the siege of
Vacquiras: he took also by composition Aubiguan, where he rested the whole
army to refresh his Soldiers ten days. Thither came the Deputies of the
country to demand a truce.

From Aubiguan the Lord des Diguieres went to besiege an Hold called Cayranne,
which was taken by assault, the governor thereof being an Italian was hanged
in the worship of Nuestra donna de Loretta, and all his Soldiers for company
with him, or else put to the sword.

After this execution done, the Governors of all places and Towns
thereaboutes, as Rakesell, S. Romans, Villedieu, Boysson, Mirebel, Paymerat, S.
Romanet and others, came to him and offered him their keys.

From Cayranne the Lord des Diguieres went forth to besiege Molans, a place
well fortified, where are Castles very strong. There he bestowed three hundred
shot of canon, and at length a breach being made the assault was given, and
after two hundred and fifty men of the enemies had been stayne the Town was
taken. The Lord of the said place had his life saved, in paying ten thousand
Crowns for his ransom, and besides his house sacked.

There was during the time that these affairs did so pass in Daulphine, a
certain meeting of Deputies of Grenoble, and other Towns and Cities of that
Province, making suite for to have a truce for four years: upon whose suite
the Lord des Diguieres drew near to Grenoble, and lodged his army thereabout
in the Country: but he himself went to Nions. There the Deputies me^, and
requested to have truces and ceasing from war during the space of four
years. But when as they could not agree upon the conditions, the Lord des
Diguieres appointed another meeting at Bogency within two miles of Grenoble,
and at length a truce was concluded between them about the latter end of
March, which was signed, sealed and confirmed with great solemnity in the
Suburbs of Grenoble.

It was agreed that the principality of Orange should be comprised in it, and
that they of the League, who were returned to the Kings obedience, should pay
to the Lord des Diguieres, for the intertainement of his companies, eyghteene
thousand Crowns, and the one half of all tolles, Daulphine.

Also that the Fort of Bogencie, and diverse other holds kept by the Leaguers,
should be beaten down, and rased to the geound. This truce was proclaimed in
Grenoble on Easter day.

About the same time, there was an assembly of the Province of Languedock,
holden in Nismes and Lunel, about the like truce.

It is said before, how the Lord des Diguieres and la Valete, had joined
themselves in amity for the Kings service, and how the Lord Valete after having
soiorned with the said des Diguieres, to take counsel ^og^ther about the Kings
affairs in Daulphine and Prouance: the Lord Valete with his forces went into
his government of Prouance, where finding that Country full of confusions and
factions, by the means of the Court of Parliament at Aix, and the Lord of
Vins, which not only were rebels, but also had solicited the Country to the
like rebellion; the said Lord Velete had caused an assembly of the states of
Prouance, to be holden after his arriving there: and being very strong, and
having the greatest part of the holds in the Country, they agreed in the
said assembly, to make war against the said court of Parliament and Lord of
Vins, and for that purpose the States there delivered him ten thousand Crowns.

The Lord Monbrune joined himself with the Lord Valete, and surprised some
strong places in that Province.

The King had called the Lord Mommorency from the government of Languedock,
and had given that charge to the Lord Ioyeuse, but at length the King
perceauing, that the said Ioyeuse by the persuasions of his mother, inclined to
the rebellion of the Leaguers, he took that government again from him, and
restored the Lord Mommorencie to that charge, with commandment to remove the
Parl^ament of Tholouze to the City of Narbonne, because that Tholouze had
rebelled against the King as is aforesaid.

The City of Narbonne, understanding of the restablishment of the Lord
Mommorencie by the King, shut up their gates against Ioyeuse, and sent for the
said Mommorency, being then in Auignon, proffering to receive him, saeing that
it was the kings pleasure to have restablished him in that government. The
said Mommorency departed from Orange the 28. of March to Narbonne ward.

The Towns of Languedock, which were in the power of them of the Religion,
refused to have his authority published among them, without the express
commandment of the King of Navarre.

The Lord des Diguieres having concluded a truce as is aforesaid, in Daulphine,
and set that Province in some good stay, with his camp marched toward
Prouance, to join with the Lord Valete, to reduce that country to the Kings
obedience.

It is said before, how the King during the deep winter, did great exploytes,
with prosperous success, in subduing the Countries of Beausse, Anjou,
Toureyne, Main, Lauall, Perch, and most part of Normandy, in reducing them
to their duty of aleageance, restored them peace, justice and judgment,
utterly subverted and trodden under foot by the Leagu^rs, and how having
continued few days at the siege of Falaize, took it by assault.

Now we will return again to few matters, which were done in the end of this
year. It is said how the Duke de Maine after the Kings departure from Paris,
gave himself to fight with the Coffers and counting houses of the Parisiens.
But for recreation sake also he put on the armor of Venus to fight with the
Curtizans of Paris, so that being molten in all filthy pleasures, the Lady
Saint Beufue, or some other such Uirgin did so dress him, that his name
shortly after was written in the Chirurgians hall, among them that had the
pockes: and lying in Paris about two months with his army about the City,
without doing any thing for the advancement of the holy Union, only that it
might appear that he was a King of Friars, he was first anointed King of
Friars by the Chirurgians of Paris, with that holy Oil and extreme unction,
wherewith the Popes Priests, Monks, Friars and Jesuits are oftentimes
anointed, and after that crowned with such a crown, as the Friars themselves
are crowned with: and about the time that he had somewhat recovered his
strength, and teeth began to be somewhat fast in his head, and his drabbling
had left him, Friar Sixtus (who somewhat before the Kings death had called home
his Legate, who was a Uenetian Bishop of Brixia, for that he was thought in Rome
to favor very much the kings affairs) understanding the kings affairs to
have better success then he would wish or had expected, sent a new Legate into
France to comfort, assist and further the affairs of the Rebels: he sent I say
Friar Henrique, Cardinal Caietan his brother, Canuillo Caietan, Patriark of
Alexandria, when he can have it, Friar Philip Siga Bishop of Placentia, Friar
Francis Pauigarola Bishop of Aste, Hieronimo Moceuigo Bishop of Ceueda,
Laurence Bauchet Judge de Rota, and Secretary of this Legacy, all whelps of
one litter, and by one ye may know all the rest, who were sent in company with
their train to rid Rome of so many Caterpillars. These routes of filthy Friars
with their Mouchachos arrived in Paris about the middle of December, with loads
of such blessings and holy relics of Rome, as the Mules of Friar Campegius
did overthrow and scatter in Cheapside, when he came into England about the
diuorsement of King Henry the eight, and Queen Catharine Spain his first wife.

This Friar Henrique called the heads of the League to counsel, keeps a
stir with them, chid them, that they were lurking in taking their pleasures,
without doing any thing for holy Church and holy union: but now they must go
about their business handsomely, wherefore comprehends the whole affairs in
four principal points, whereof three of them he would perform himself.

And first after the manner of Friars, which is always in their Sermons to
remember their convent to begin with the Devil, he proclaimed a Iubile
through all France, to prove yet whether he might with that old patched net
of robbery, called indulgences, fish any money, to help his master (who had
sent him to fish) to maintain in their bravery the holy Mochachos and
Curtizans in Rome.

During the time of this Iubile, which began at the feast of the nativity of
Christ, Friar Henrique do replenish the minds of the Parisiens with
superstitions, the streates of Paris with processions, the Churches with
sottish Idolaters, his belly with the best meat he could get, and his purse
with as much money as he could.

This Fisher with his ragged net was not so much superstitiously received in
Paris, as he was despised and laughed to scorue even by the Catholics generally
through all France, maruelling that this Saint Peter fisher had no better
tools to go about his business: and so as the Proverb is, seldom do speed
the fowler, never the fisher: for beside what he did in Paris, in any where
else he get not a poor penny to bless himself.

Secondly, he goes about to weaken the King: for he wrote letters to the
Cardinals, Bishops, and Nobility of the Catholic religion, wherewith he warned
them of the great danger of their souls, in following, ayding, and assisting a
King heretic, showing them the great harm which this schism would do in
time to the Catholic Church: by which word he meant the Legioss of Locustes,
of Priests, Monks, Friars and Jesuits. He wrote this, supposing that his
bare letter would have caused the Catholics by heaps, to forsake the Kings
defense, and to join with the rebels.

This letter of Friar Henryque had three diverse effects: for first some Bishops
thought good to repair to the King, to see whether they could make him a
Catholic: to whom the King answered, as he had once before answered a
Cardinal, that he was able sooner to make a Cardinal a Hugonet, then a
Cardinal would make him a Catholic.

Others, as the Cardinals of Vendosme and Leuoncourt, with diverse other Bishops
were of opinion, that it was most expedient to call a national counsel,
according to the which the king had promised to reform himself. But unto this
Friar Henrique the Legate would not harken by any means, fearing both the light
and the pinch.

The nobility answered, that they did hold him for the true heir and successor
of the Crown, whom they would establish in the full possession thereof: and when
the king had pacifyed the Realm, they will think on that matter.

The third thing was to encourage the rebels to set upon the king two manner of
ways, by counsel and money.

First, he showed unto them, that it was shame for them, that while the king
and heretics had made great conquests, they had done nothing but lurk and
take their pleasures. That Friar Sixtus, his Masters pleasure was, to set upon
the king with all their forces, before he were strengthened and confirmed in
the kingdom, the longer they should delay and linger, the harder it would be
for them to prevail against him. Now they ought to beat the iron while it is
hot, and follow the matter while the rebellion is universal, the number of
partakers great, the hearts of them animated, while there is great store of
money gotten out of the coffers of the inhabitants of Paris, out of the
confiscations and pro^criptions of the Royalls, they had received great store
of the Catholic K. of Spain, and he had also charge from Fire Sixtus to
deliver to them fifty thousand Ducats. On the contrary, he showed unto them
how the King was destitute of men and means, there were a great number against
few, their furniture and munition was far passing that of the King, they had
the country favorable, and enemy unto him. They were strong, ^usty, and rested
long, but the K. with his forces was weary, weather beaten and weak, by
reason of his long toyling and moyling all the deep of winter. They had Friar
Sixtus blessings, but the king had the accurle: therefore he concluded, that
they should make no difficulty of the victory, it was too sure on their side,
and in a manner, if GOD himself would fight for him (for the Friars former
speeches emported but little less) he could not prevail. He showed also, that
there were already in the way, forces out of Flanders coming to them, by the
procurement of Bernardino Mendoza, and Friar Cardinal Damnj, the King
therefore was to be set on, before he had any leisure to employ forten Princes
to assist him: and to show the great good affection which Friar Sixtus had to
this work of mercy, he had sent them fifty thousand Ducats.

The Duke d' Main, with the heads of the League, received this holy money,
with as great devotion as the Iubile and pardons, or rather greater. And if
Friar Sixtus had sent all Saint Peter's treasures, it had been yet more devoutly
accepted, and spent as merrily in Paris, inter bonas socias, as in Rome, but
they were content to receive that in hoping for more.

Now we see the state of the Leaguers and rebels very strong and rich: for
they had set and gathered an excessive impost, and sum of money upon Paris:
they had made above a million of Gold, of the robbing and confiscations and
ransoms of the Royalls in the City. They had received three hundred thousand
crowns of the Spaniard. They received fifty thousand Crowns from Rome: now
they are very lusty, they deck themselves all with gold and jewels: and
persuaded by Friar Henryque, they prepare themselves to go forth out of Paris,
soon after the holy days, and to go to seek the King, until they had found
a mishap.

Here ends the 7. Book.
THE EIGHT BOOK.
WE have seen what the Legacy of Friar Henrique has done in Paris, how he
has heated the Paris.

Kind Henry the third, intending to besiege Paris, sent Captain Saint Martin,
with a strong Garrison, to seize upon and keep the Castle Vicennes nigh Paris,
which the rebels had forsaken after their loss at Seulis, from whence he did
so molest the Parisiens with continual roades and courses, that no man could
venture that way.

The Duke d' Main, to pluck that thorn out of the heel of the Parisiens, and
to set them at liberty, that way had practiced by all means, the said Captain
to render the place, and to join himself with the Leaguers, which he would
never do: therefore about the beginning of January, after they had made their
This is a dronken ba^quet upon Twelf tide, as wassellis in England.
Roy boy in Paris, he went forth to besiege that Castle, and battered it with
four pieces of Ordinance. The said Saint Martin, seeing that the King was
far of, and he not able to defend the place, yielded it, with condition for
him and his to go forth with bag and bagage, and to be suffered safely to
repair to Seulis, which was performed.

It is said also, how the said King Henry the third, in his way to the siege of
Paris, had taken Pontoyse, and set a strong garrison there, to intercept all
manner of victuals, provisions, or merchandise, which were carried up by the
river Seyne to Paris, which did greatly annoy and distress the City.

The Duke d'Mayne having taken Vicennes, mustered all his forces, and found
them all lusty, and more glistering with gold, then valiant in courage, and
found his forces to arise to three thousand horses, and thirteen thousand
footmen, with whom, whilst his succor of Flanders should draw near, about
the latter end of January he lead his forces against Pontoyse, which he
besieged, in hope to ease the Parisians of that heavy burden, and when he had
battered the same, they within considering that they were not able to defend
it, yielded the place upon the same conditions, that the Leaguers had yielded
it to the King not long before, to wit, with their armies, whereof part went to
the King, to continue in the Kings service, and part joined with the Leaguers.

The Duke d'Mayne having taken Pontoyse, more full of money and hope, then
courage, determined to descend into Normandy. And in his journey, with his
great army was stayed at Meulan, a Town situated upon Seyne between Mante and
Pontoyse, distant from Paris ten leagues, and from Homfleur where the king was,
thirty leagues. There he boasted and threatened that he would go to make the
king to raise the siege, or else fetch him out of Homfleur: but he protracted
so the time, that the king had time both to seize upon the said Town of
Homfleur, and to rest and refresh his army there some days.

The causes of the Dukes delay were two: First, the mistrust of his cause,
which did still abate his courage, which otherwise was never great: Secondly,
for that he expected great forces out of Flanders, who were already coming
unto him, under the conduct of the County Egmond, and the Lord la Mote
governor of Graueling.

Whereupon he took occasion to excuse the baseness of his heart, who durst
never see the king face to face, except they were three to one, or very nigh:
yet to ease his stomach, he casts forth these vain, boastings and
threatenings above said, but he durst not come nigh the king, before he had
joined with this new supply, for fear of the bastonado.

The king on the other side, having taken the Town of Homfleur, and rested
there his forces for certain days, said nothing, but about the midst of
February, took his journey to high Normandy, to cause the Duke to raise the
siege from before Meulan, and having travailed threescore miles in the deep of
winter, proffered battle to the enemy.

But the Dukes heart failing him, and having advertisement that the forces of
the Low Country were entered into France, after that he had Meulan diverse
days, he went to meet the Flemmings and to muster them.

The Duke de Main received in Picardie between four and five thousand
Wallons, conducted by the Lord Mot Governor of Graueling, and a little after
arrived the horsemen, conducted by the County Egmond, with thirteen companies
of soldiers taken out of the garrisons of Fl^nders: three companies of Lances
of Spaniards, conducted by Don Iuan Moreo, Don Pedro Moreo his brother, Don
Iuan de Cordoua, and a great company of Harquebusiers on horseback, led by
Captain Colin, rising all to two thousand men all old Soldiers.

The Duke being flided away, and the King seeing the opportunity of battle
gone with him, determined to do his business and to take Dreux, guarded by
Captain Falande with a strong garrison, that if he had it in his obedience, he
might ouerlooke and bridle the City of Chartres, until that conveniently he
might have opportunity to enterprise upon it.

The King in going to the siege of Dreux took Noueyncourt, and being at Dreux,
and the breach being ready to give the assault, the King understood that the
Duke was returning toward Seyne, for to pass over the bridge at the Town of
Nante, which then did hold for the Leaguers, full of confidence and trust in
that proud and mighty army which consisted of three and twenty thousand men
of all sorts. The King considered well that the Dukes forces were but borrowed,
and that now out of hand he must hazard, or else his companies in a small time
would disband themselves and retire home, and that with delaying with him he
might dissipate his forces. He knew well also that they who do proffer
injury, are commonly more desperate then they who do withstand it. He weighed
well his small number in comparison of the great multitude, and that there were
forces coming to him out of Champaigne, as good as these which his enemy had
received out of the Low Country, which he might in protracting the time
receive shortly. He saw well that the country was favorable to the enemy;
which reasons might have persuaded a great warrior, by policy to have
weakened the enemy, as Fabius did Hannibal.

But the King had more sufficient and substanciall reasons, which did bid him
to encounter the enemy, as the assured confidence whereby he reposed himself
in Gods goodness and protection, and casted himself in his arms; the equity
of his cause, his lawful vocation against mutinous traitors and parricides: so
that each of these reasons was stronger to him then so many hundred thousand
men: which made him to conclude, that considering these causes God could and
would dissipate his enemies, notwithstanding their great forces, as well with
few as with many. Being also confirmed by the experience which he had at
Arques, and in the Suburbs of Paris.

In the mean time while the King was at Dreux, the Duke de Main Many, and
marched toward Dammartin, which was but four miles off.

The King upon the reasons aforesaid, resolute to encounter with few that huge
multitude, on a sudden from before the breach raised up the siege from Dreux,
and departed the second day of March: the besieged with great

The same day the King went back the way that he was come, and lodged in the
Town of Noueyncourt, to cut the passage to the enemy of a little river which
runs by. As Soon as he came thither, he caused warning to be given, that on
the next morning every man should be in a readiness.

The night following that day, the King set in order the manner of the
battle, which in the morning early the third day of March, he showed to the
Prince Montpensier, to the Marshals Biron and Aumont, to the Baron Biron
Marshall of the field, and to other Princes and Captains of the army, who with
one voice having considered of it according to the skill of war, they
approved, and would change nothing of it.

That day he gave charge to the Baron of Biron, to set every man in his place
and order, and did choose that morning the Lord Vieques sargeant Mayor of the
battle, who was one of the ancient masters of the footmen in France.

This thing being done, the King willing to begin this great work with
prayer, with great vehemence and confidence he made his prayers unto God in
the hearing of all men: wherein he called God to witness, that he knew the
purpose of his heart, and well understood whether it were for desire of glory,
or for ambition, or for desire of blood, or longing for revenge, which made him
resolute to this battle, that he was his judge and witness unreprovable,
that nothing moved him thereto, but the tender love that he did bear to his
poor people, whose peaceable and quiet estate he esteemed more then the
safety of his own life: he besought God so to direct his will as he should
best see to be good for the benefit of Christendom. And as for himself he
prayed God to save and help him, as he knew to be good and profitable to the
weal and quiet of the state, and not otherwise.

This prayer eloquent in words, but more passing pure and devout in sense, did
so ravish all those that were nigh, that every man after his example did the
like. And after that, all that after noone was seen in Noneyncourt the
Churches full of Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and Soldiers of all Nations
hearing Mass, communicating and playing the good Catholics.

The court of Parliament at Tours being advertised of the things which were
like to pass between the King and his enemies, commanded general
processions and prayers to be made the third and fourth of March, for the King
and for his good and prosperous success. Like commandment was sent unto the
reformed Churches about to do the like in their congregations, though not in
the like form: so that at Tours the Catholics did almost nothing else these
two days men women and children, but pray after their manner.

This devotion being done at the Camp, the whole army did show such
countenances, as though every man had received a several answer^ of God,
concerning the happy success which each of them should obtain.

The King had caused sommons to be given to the Town of Saint Andrew, being
from Noueincourt eight miles in the way going to Jury, where he supposed the
enemy and his army had been lodged.

The Kings companies came to a great plain nigh the town Saint Andrew. About
the same plain there are certain villages, and a little wood called la hay de
Pres, that is the meadows border, or hedge. There the King with the Marshals
Biron, Aumont, and the Baron of Biro^ marshal of the field, began to set the
battle in order, following the plot agreed upon before.

The King having tried in battles and skirmishes before, that it is more
advantage to make horsemen fight in squadrons then in rings, specially his that
have no lances, divided all his horsemen in seven squadrons, and all the
footmen placed at the flanks of the said squadrons, and every squadron had a
company of forlorn footmen.

The front of the battle was in a right line, bending somewhat at the 2. ends.

The first Squadron on the left side was that of the Marshall Aumont,
consisting of three hundred good horsemen, having on his two sides 12.
regiments of French footmen.

The second, was the squadron of the Prince Montpensier consisting of three
hundred Horses, and on his left hand four or five hundred Lanceknights, and on
the right hand a regiment of Swissers, every company of the strangers forces
being lyned with footmen.

The third Squadron was of light horsemen divided into two companies, the one,
whereof the great Prior Colonel was the Leader, and the other company of the
light horsemen was conducted by the Lord Gyurye, Marshall of the field of the
said light horses, he was able to make four hundred horses. These two
companies of light horses were placed a little

The fourth squadron was that of the Baron of Biron, which might be of two
hundred and fifty horses, and in the same rank and order at the left hand
toward the Prince Montpensier was a company of light Horsemen.

The fifth squadron was the Kings, which made five ranks, and in every rank
six score horses: he had on the left side two regiments of Swissers, of the
Canton of Glaris, and of the Grisons, and on his right hand a great Battailon
of two other regiments of Swissers, the one of the Cantons of Solethurne, and
the other of the Colonel Balthazare, which amount in the whole eighteen
ensigns.

The Battailon on the right hand had the regiment of Brigueulx, and on the left
wing the regiments of Vignoles and S. John.

The sixth Squadron was of the Marshall Byron, who had two hundred and fifty
good horses, with two regiments of French footmen.

The seventh Squadron was of the Rutters, who had joined with them French
footmen like as other companies had.

Things were so ordered by the King, and Lord Marshalls and Baron of Byron
plied the matter so, that in less then an hour all was so fitly disposed,
that it could not be devised better. And while the King did thus set in order
his battle, the night before and that morning there arrived unto him six
hundred horses unlooked for, to wit, the companyes of the Prince County both
horsemen and footmen, there came also the Lord Guiche great master of the
Ordinance, and the Lord Plessis Morney with their companies, to whom upon
deliberation was granted place in the Kings Squadron.

The same day also while the King stayed in battle array, came companies from
the garrisons of Deep and Arques, and other companies and Lords out of
Normandy, to the number of two hundred horse and more, who were placed some
under the government of the Prince Montpencier, some with the King, and some
with the Baron Byron.

In the mean time the King sent light horsemen for Spies on the left side of
the battle, supposing that the enemy did lie at Jury, which is a great town,
having a bridge over the river Eure, thinking there to set upon the enemy.
But when they had scarce passed half a mile, they understood that the enemy
was aware of the matter more then they thought, and that the enemy had passed
the river Eure, and that they began to show themselves in battle array.

The enemy had passed that river, not thinking to have the Kings army so nigh.
But the king hearing of their going to Verneuille, thought to meet them there:
and arriving thither, found that the enemy had sent his

When these news came to the Camp, there was an exceeding joy among all men
of all degrees. Between the two armies there was a Village, in the plain
which was holden by the enemy, which the King made straight way yield to him:
but for all this occasion given the enemy did not stir. But the King seeing
that it was nigh Sun setting, and having not yet descryed the manner of the
lodging of their Camp, and considering they might be at some advantage, was
advised not to march for that time any further: whereupon there he stayed his
army for that night. All that day the two armies were in sight one of the
other. There were only some odd skirmishes between them, in the which
prisoners were taken, who reported that the number of the enemy was greater
then they were aware off, and that they were given to understand, that the
Kings companyes were come thither rather for a fashion, then minding to bid
battle.

The night drew on, which caused the army to encampe there where they were set
in battle array.

It is reported that the night following the third day two armies were seen in
the Sky, and the lesser number put the greater to flight.

The King would not depart from the army, before he had knowledge of the
enemies lodging, and had set all his watches in order. The Noble men lodged in
the villages about the plain, which the enemies thought to have surprised that
day: the king was the last at field, and two hours in the night lodged at
Foucraynuille, which is a Village at the left hand of the same plain, and
there having a little refreshed himself, sent word to his men, every one to be
in a readiness against the morning: and after he had rested himself about two
hours on a pallet, observing the ancient precept by Homer, given to the
Princes, (...), very early he sent to enquire for news of the enemies: news
came that the enemy seemed to have repassed the river Eure: he sent the
second time, then word came, that undoubtedly they had not repassed Eure, but
that they lay in the Villages about Eure, some what further then they were
supposed to be. These news cheered the king, who desired greatly to come to
hand with the enemy.

Day light being come, the Princes and Lords Marshalls came to the king, and
set their men in battle array. The king b^gan in the presence of his household
servants and other present, to make a most fervent and devout prayer to God,
committing his life, and the lives of his faithful subjects and servants, and
the defense of his cause unto him who is the mighty God of battles. The
Princes and Lords Catholics, went to hear Mass, and their devotions done,
went to refresh themselves. The

All the kings companies hearing that they should join in battle that day
with the enemies, did exceedingly rejoice, and by nine a clock the king came
into the field, and upon warning given by two Canon shot, by ten a clock all
the companies were in order in their places.

The placing of the Duke d' Main his battle, was much like to the kings: the
Duke d' Main with his Cornet, which might be of two hundred and fifty
horses, was in the midst of two Squadrons of Lances, of them that were come
out of Flanders, which might be of twelve or thirteen hundred horse.

The Duke of Nemours with his Squadron of two hundred and fifty horse for his
safety, set himself in the middle of these Squadrons of lances.

The Knight d'Aumale likewise thrust himself into that company, thinking
himself there to be safe, so that there was in that huge company about
eighteen hundred horsemen marching in a front. On the sides ^t this great huge
company, were two regiments of Swissers, lined with French foot men.

There were two other Squadrons of Lances, the one of light horsemen, French,
Italians and Albaneses on the right hand: the other on the left side of Wallons
and Spaniards: in the middle between both were French-footemen and
Lance-knights.

The two wings were two great companies of Rutters, which might be on the
right wing seven hundred horse, and on the left side five hundred, they had on
their left wing two Culuerins and two bastard Culuerins.

The king perceauing that the enemy would not come forward, went toward them,
and having marched about a hundred and fifty paces, got the advantage of the
sun and wind, and perceived that his enemies were in number more then they
thought: for the king perceived that they were five thousand horsemen, and
eighteen thousand footmen.

The rebels were glistering with gold, which they had gotten out of the coffers
of the Citizens of Paris, Rhemes, and other towns by violence and robery, and
out of the king of Spain his coffers, and also out of Saint Peter's treasure.

The kings army was glistering with iron and steel, there were in the kings
army to be seen a terrible sight, of two thousand Gentlemen in complet armor
from top to toe, burning in affection to do their king

The King was in the front of his Squadron, with a great bunch of white
feathers on his Helmet, and another bunch on his horses forehead.

The Princes, Earls, and knights of the holy Ghost, and other principal
Lords, and Gentlemen of the chiefest houses in France, were in the fore rank.

The king exhorted all his company with great modesty, with their humble
prayers, to commit themselves unto God, and to show example to others, began to
conceive a fervent prayer: which done, the king walked up and down, willing
them to do the like, and encouraging them like valiant men, to stand to the
defense of a just cause.

As soon as he was come to his place, the Lord Mariuault brought him news,
that certain companies of Picardie, under the conduct of the Lords Humiers and
Mouoy, with other Lords and Gentlemen, to the number of two hundred horse, were
within two miles of him.

But the king fully resolved to give battle with that power which he had,
would not delay any longer, but sent commandment to the Lord Guiche, to cause
him to shoot with the Ordinance: which thing he did straight ways, whereby
the enemies received great hurt: for the king had discharged nine Canon shot,
with great effect, before the enemy could begin.

After three or four voleyes of shot had passed on both sides, the 1. Onset.
Squadron of their old light horsemen compounded of French men, Italians, and
Albaneses, consisting of five or six hundred horses, came to give the charge
to the Marshall Aumont, carrying with them the Lanceknights who were on their
side.

But the Marshall Aumont willing to begin, set upon the enemy so hardly, that
he enforced them to scatter, and to flee with great confusion and fear, whom
he chased to a little wood on the back side, where the said Lord Marshall
stayed, attending the Kings coming as he had in charge.

During this chase, the company of Rutters on the right hand of the 2. Onset.
battle of the enemies, marched to have seized upon the artillery, but they
were met with light horsemen, who made them quickly retire.

Then the Squadron of Lances, Wallons and Flemmings, marched 3. Onset.
on to have charged with a fresh charge, the said light horsemen fighting with
the Rutters: but the Baron Byron showed himself in the field, and gave the
onset on the reregard, because he could not set on the forefront, there in the
conflict he was hurt in the arm, and in the face, but at length

The Lord Montpencier seeing a great army of seven hundred Spanish Launciers,
and three hundred Harquebusiers on horseback, with corselets and murrions, with
three great standards that were under the government of the County Egmond,
advanced toward them, and gave them such a charge, as that (albeit he was
unhorsed) yet quickly getting up again, brake their array, put them to flight,
and aboade there Master of the field. There was a frantic Franciscan Friar of
Biscay, called Friar Matthew de Aguirre, who run up and down with his GOD,
(whom they call Crucifix) in his hand, (all his wit was in his Crucifixes
head) and encouraging the rebels, and running against the Hugonets, as though
he would have frighted them, and wrought some miracle with his Idol, or played
the bulbegger in a cloister, but a shot of Ordinance did beat him down and
his God, so that there he ended his frantic fit.

At the self same time, the great Squadron of the Duke d'Mayne came marching
to the battailion, having on the left wing four hundred 4. Onset.
Harquebusiers on horseback, who gave a volley of shot within five and twenty
paces of the Kings Squadron: the same volley being ended, the head of the
enemies Squadron set on the Kings Squadron. The King received the enemy with
such a constancy and courage, that after a quarter of an hour of hard figh^ing
(having before played the part of a king and great Captain, in commanding and
ordering of things) now he plays the part of a lusty and brave Soldier. So
that in such a great and furious assault, he behaved himself so valiantly, that
he brake and put in disaray that terrible Forest of Lances, and at length
after he had put them to fl^ght with great confusion and terror, he followed
the victory, and being lost in the chase, caused a great heaviness in his army,
until that within a while they spyed him, coming all berayed with the blood of
his enemies, without any hurt received.

And as the king was returning from the chase to his company, with fifteen or
sixteen horses, he was set on by two battailions of Swissers enemies, and
three companies of Wallons, and certain other who did wear redd crosses. The
king did set upon them with his small number, took away their Cornets, and
killed those that carried and guarded them.

When the King had come to his place again, the whole army in token of
thanksgiving to God for his safe return, ^aluted him with this acclamation,
God save the King.

Two thousand horsemen in all, of Princes, noble men and gentlemen, did defeat
all this huge army of five thousand horsemen and eight thousand footmen, the
rest of the Kings forces never s^irring from their places.

Thus the Horsemen being scattered, there remained yet Swissers, Lanceknights,
and French footmen.

The Launceknights and French footmen were charged, and about two thousand and
four hundred remained on the place, as it were in a moment. The rest were
taken prisoners, and some of them fled into the woods, whereof a great number
wandering abroad were slain by the Pesants.

The Swissers notwithstanding they had lost their Horsemen, which were at their
wings part being slain, and part fled, set a good countenance on the matter.

The King once was minded to set the French companies on them to disaray them,
and had sent the Baron Biron to that effect: but calling to mind the ancient
aliance between that nation and the crown of France, called him back again
with his companies, and offered them grace and mercy: so much he did to those
companies of Frenchmen, who were with them, who refused not his gracious
favor, but coming and passing by him, rendered unto his Majesty their
Colonels, Captains, Soldiers and Ensigns.

The King staying to pardon the Swissers, gave the enemy leisure to avoid by
flight. And whilst he stayed to do this Princelike act, judging that he was
not called to that high degree of Majesty, ad interitum: but ad beneficentiam
generis humani. The Marshall Aumont with a great company which he had assembled
from the pursuit, in like manner the grand Prior, and the Marshall Biron, who
by reason of his great experience (for that he had been at so many storms of
battails and skirmishes) with his horsemen and companies of French footmen, was
reserved to the last on^et, if need had been relied themselves to the King.

The companies also of the Lord Humiers, Money, and other gentlemen of Picardy,
came in the middle of the battle, and after the victory came to the King.

The Duke de Maine seeing that the mishap which he wished to others fell upon
him, took his way with great terror toward Jury, leaving behind his
ordinance, bag and baggage, and as many beside as could not run away so
swiftly as he did, the great kill* Devils Don Pedro Moreo, and Don Iuan de
Cordoua, two Spanish Moors, with such as could follow them ran after him.
Great companies of the enemy had gotten before, some followed after: and as
fear made them have to press over the bridge of Jury to run a second course
toward Mante, it is reported that he killed some with his own hand to make him
a way over, least he should be the hindermost: and when he had passed over he
caused the bridge to be broken, leaving his friends to shift for themselves,
and by that occasion many through fear being out of their wits, cast
themselves into the river,

The Duke de Main having passed Iurye and broken the bridge, took his way to
Mante, there to pass over the bridge, and to retire to Pontoise. The
inhabitants once had determined not to let him in: whereupon some do report,
that being before Mante, he swore with great oaths that he had discomfited
the Kings forces, and had killed the King with his own hand: but when they
would not be moved therewith, knowing the contrary, he began to entreat them,
showing them the danger wherein he was; they moved with his prayers to
compassion of his estate, let him in, with condition that his retinue should
pass by ten and ten that night over the Bridge.

The Duke of Nemours, Bassampierre, the Vicount Tauaine, Rosne, and many others
fled to Dreux, and the day after to Chartres: many who could not follow them
went astray, and knowing not whither they went, were taken prisoners.

The King having played the great Captain and lusty Soldier in getting the
victory, now shows himself a right General of an army in pursuing the said
victory: for which well to do, he deuideth his forces as follows.

The grand Prior with a great company he sent to chase the enemy on the left
hand toward Eureux. The Baron of Biron, and with him the residue of horsemen,
who were gathered together, and the companies which were arrived out of
Picardie at the instant of the battle, he sent at the right hand toward Dreux.

The King himself accompanied with the Princes County and Montpensier, the
Marshals of Aumont, and Trimouille, with a great company of other Lords and
Captayns of the same army, followed on the victory, and continued the chase
five hours.

The King understanding how the Duke de Main had entered into Mante, took up
his lodging at Rosnye, two miles from Mante, where he was as meanly lodged as
the enemy.

Many were slain in the pursuit, many were taken prisoners.

The King with two thousand horses killed above two thousand horsemen, and many
of them Commanders: fifteen hundred and above were drowned at the river Jury
in the flight. The most part of the footmen were cut off in pieces, few ran
away who were either slain in the chase, or by the people of the country, and
above 4. hundred of the enemies were taken prisoners. The Swissers and the
Frenchmen joined with them, yielded Boysdaul phine taken prisoner by the King.
The great Ensign of the General of the Spaniards and Flemmings, the Colonel
Cornets of the Rutters were taken, above threescore Ensigns of footmen, as
Flemmings, French men and Launce-knights, and four and twenty of the Swiffers
that yielded themselves: all these ^ame into the Kings hands.

Among them that were slain were chiefest of all the County Egmond, the Duke
Brunswicke, Captain Colin a Spanyard, the Lord Chastaigueray, and many others.

Of prisoners taken were the Earl Austfrist, who was with the Rutters: many
Lords, Spaniards, Italians, Frenchmen and Flemmings. Of Frenchmen, the Lord
Boysdaulphine, Cigoigne, who bare the white Cornet of the Duke de Main. This
is the third time that this Rebel had fallen into the Kings hands within four
months, and had always found favor at his hands.

There were also prisoners, Mesdauid, Fouteyne, Martil, Lechant, Lodon,
Huguesan, Falandre, Tenisay, Chasteliere, Descuueaux, with many others.

Of the Kings side were slain the Lords Clermont, Antragues, and one of the
Captains of the Kings gards, who deceased nigh the Kings person. The Lord
Tischombert who had borne great charges in war, and now would needs serve as
a soldier in the Kings Cornet. The Lord of Longauluay in Normandy of
fourscore years of age, the Lord of Creuay Cornet bearer to the Prince
Montpencier, the Lord Vienne Lieftenant to the Lord Benuron, the Lords of
Manuille, Fequers, Valoys, and twenty Gentlemen more at the most.

There were hurt the Marquess of Neste, the Earl of Choysy, the Lord d'O, the
Earl Lude, the Lords Montluet, Lauergne and Rosny, and about twenty Gentlemen
more without any danger of death.

The King going to chase the enemy, and having divided his companies (as is
aforesaid) left the Marshall Byron with the rest of his forces to conduct them
and follow after him.

Here (good Christian Reader) thou have to note certain fatal periods of
things, to wit, the circumstances of the persons, time and place in the
execution of Gods justice upon his enemies.

The 23. day of December 1559. Claude Duke of Guize, and Charles Cardinal of
Lorreyne his brother, in the reign of Francis the second, procured Annas du
Borg, one of the chiefest Senators of the Court of Parliament Paris, to be
burned for the Gospel at Saint Ihan in Greues in Paris.

The 23. of December (as their Calender is now, which was the day of the
nativity of Henry of Bourbon which now reigns) in the year 1588. the last
Duke and Cardinal of Guize were slain at Bloys, when they had concluded to
murder the King the next morning following that day.

The fourth day of March 1561. Claude of Guize, father to this last, took
arms against the edict of January, and committed the cruel murder of Vassie,
by the which breach of the peace were civil wars raised up in France, and
ever since have been entertained and nourished by his posterity: which war
was his undoing.

The same day of the same month in the year 1585. the last Duke of Guize,
son to the said Claude, took arms against the King, which was the beginning
of these last civil wars of the League, by the which they have procured
their own undoing and of many others.

The same day of the month, the Duke de Main, brother to the said last Duke
of Guize, and heir of the Captainship of the rebellion, made a shipwreck of
all his forces at Saint Andrews plain, without hope ever to recover the like
forces.

Claude Duke of Guyze, in December, in the year 1561. fought the first battle
that was given in all these civil Wars with Lewis of Bourbon, Prince of
Condie, Prince of famous and blessed memory, in the plain of Dreux, with an
vncertaiue issue, but in equal losses, so that to this day, it is vniudged who
had ye victory: but well known that the Duke of Guyze had the greatest loss.

The Duke de Maine fought against Henry of Bourbon, the fourth of that name,
now King of France and Navarre, at the plain of Saint Andrew, next adjoining
to the other, and the places not distant passing a mile a sunder, with a
reparable loss.

The Lord Rendan a rebellious Leaguer in Auuergne, with such power as he could
make in the said country, but specially in the Towns of Rions and Brion,
rebelled, and holden in the same rebellion by the Jesuits, besieged Isoire, a
great and populous town in the said Auuergne, because it continued in the
Kings obedience.

The Lords Chasseran, and Rochemayne, willing to do some honorable service to
the King, and good to their country, gathered such power as they could of the
Kings subjects to rescue the said town of Isoire, from falling into the
hands of the rebels, and with a mean power, trusting in GOD the defender of
his Ordinance, and wayghing the right of the cause, marched toward Isoire.

The said Lord Rendan, understanding of their approach, raised up the Chasseran
and Rochemayne, and at the same day and time of the battle at Saint Andrews
plain, meeting in a plain field not far from Jsoire, tried the quarrel by
the sword.

There the said Rendan was overthrown, and above fourscore Gentlemen of his
were slain on the place, all his footmen cut to pieces, the artillery, bag
and bagage, with many prisoners taken: so the Town of Isoyre was delivered
from the danger of the enemy, retained and confirmed in the Kings dutiful
obedience.

It is said, how after the victory the King divided his army into four parts,
three of them were appointed their quarters to follow the chase, and the
Marshall Biron to follow after the King with the residue of the army.

The King having taken this order, followed after the Duke de Main: but
finding the bridge broaken, was feign to go three miles about, to pass the
river afoord, and in that way he found many straglers, whom he took prisoners,
which was a good turn for them, or else they had been slain by others: he
came so fast after the Duke d' Main that he did miss him but a little: but
understanding how he was received in Mant, the king lodged that night at Rosni
(as is said) very simple.

The fifth day the Duke d'Mayne very early, fearing to be besieged there,
retired from Mante to Pontoyse, where he soiourned few days, to take some sure
order for the safety of the Town, and after went to Saint Denis.

The same day the King sent to sommon the Town of Mante, which delivered the
keys of their town to his Majesty, received and acknowledged him their king
and prince, and continued there until the twenty day of March to refresh his
army, wearied with so many labors and hardness of winter, to take counsel of
the course which he was to take hereafter, and to expect certain munition of
war, which was coming to him from Diepe.

The City of Paris first author of this war, had conceived an assured
confidence of all prosperous success, by the vain bragges which the Duke
d'Mayne did cast forth, before he went out with the army. The Friars and
Jesuits increased this vain confidence in their pulpets, by assuring them,
either of a certain victory, or else of recoyling of the King as far as
beyond Loyre: so that every day they looked for the King dead or alive, and all
his spoils to be brought for a spectacle, and to be sold and bought among
them, or else to hear of his flight as far as the river of Loyre.

This great confidence made them to live very secure and careless in providing
for the City: besides that they rested much upon the great multitude which is
within the said City, there being great bablers and boasters Epimenides
speaks of the Cretayns, a liar, evil beast, and slothful belly)

The towns also which then did hold round about their City, as Pontoyse,
beneath upon the same river, Charonton, Meaux, Laguye, Corbeil, Melun,
Montereau, above upon the river, persuaded them that the King whatsoever might
happen neither durst come near them, neither was able to let the carriage of
the victuals to their city, which was the cause that they lived from hand to
mouth, and had provided no more then in time of the greatest peace that can be.
But after the rumor of the overthrow of the Leaguers came to Paris, all the
City was replenished with terror: many of the Citizens came to the King to
plead their innocence, but specially two of the chiefest of the city, to wit,
Belieure, who was one of the Kings lately deceased Secretaries of estate, and
Brulart President of the Court of Parliament in Paris.

These two men had been wavering a great while, not faithful to their old
master King Henry the third, who had preferred them, neither did greatly trust
the Leaguers, and yet lived in some suspicion of this King now raygning. But
when they heard of the Kings good success, contrary to their expectation, like
good Mariners they turned their saile^ to the wind, came to the King to make
their excuse and submission, and both of them were received courteously of the
King. The King said unto Belieure, that he had thought him to be an honest man,
until he fell to the Q Mother, and joined to the company of Vileroy: but
Brulard was received with greater favor, whom the King has employed since in
great affayrs, as to be his Ambassador to the Cantons of Swisserland.

In this consternation, the Parisiens who had lived in great security began to
open their eyes, and see the danger whereto the great bragges of the Duke de
Main, the promises of the Friars and Jesuits, and their vain hope had cast
them, and did threaten them at their doors, and caused them to be divided
into diverse opinions: for some who were of a hot nature, would have a new
muster to be made in the City, and on a sudden, before he had suplyed the
room of them which were dead in the battle, to set upon him: but this course
was thought rash and dangerous for many eauses. Other gave a wiser counsel, if
it could have been followed, to wit, to try his elemency, and that upon
reasonable conditions, there was no doubt, but they should find favor and
peace: and for the proof thereof, alleged his gentle disposition far from all
cruelty, and desire of revenging which he has always showed in all his
actions.

Some were of a contrary opinion, and gave counsel to take order for the
provision and fortifications and policy of the city, they showed that by the
multitude and other means which they had they were able to give

Whilst this variance was among them, the Duke de Main came to Saint Denis to
view the countenance of the Parisiens, fear and shame warning him not to come
into Paris. None or few of the inhabitants of Paris went to salute him, but
they only who had sent him to the butchery in the plain of Saint Andrew, to
wit, Friar Henrico Caietano, Friar Sixtus his Nuncio, the blind Captain
Bernardino Mendoza the Spanish Moore, Ambassador of Spain there, and the
incestuous Friar Bishop of Lions, with few more to comfort him, and to go
forward in his begun rebellion. Therefore it was thought good to remedy the
affayrs as well as they could devise, that the said Duke de Main and the
Comendador Moreo who was then in Paris, should go with all speed into
Picardie to stay the remnant of the forces of Flanders, which were going home
through Picardie, after they had lost their guide the County Egmond, and that
there the Duke de Main should gather such new forces as he could: the
Comendador Moreo should go to the Duke of Parma to bring him ye goodnewes of
the victory of the County Egmond and his company: but specially great care
should be had, least Paris and Saint Denis should in any case yield to the
King.

In the mean time Friar Henrico and Bernardino would take order to pacify the
strife and diversity of opinions.

They returning to Paris, scattered few Pistolets of Spain, and Ducados
Italianos among the Friars and Jesuits, to teach them Frierlike Rhetorike.
These rauing Prophets, and among them one Peter Crestin (such a one as was of
my remembrance magister nostor de cornibus, or magister noster Olyuer Maillard)
stepped up: they fret, they fume, they foam like Boars, they rail, they revile,
there is nothing holy before them: they show how the King is an heretik, a
relapse, son of an heretic father and mother, they look every day for a new
excommunication from Rome, he is out of the bosom of holy Church, incapable of
the Crown of France, no obedience is due unto him: they descant upon the
praise of his gentle nature, how it is but feigned, and if he were once
established, he would show such cruelty upon holy Church, as he did upon
Borgoyn, Gessey, and few other Friars, he would root out the Catholic
religion, and plant here sie. It were far better to die all, then to admit such
an heretic over them: if they die in this quarrel, they go straight way to
heaven, they are blessed Martirs, they shall be Saints, as Friar James Clement
was of late: these Paris Friar Paniguerola, Bishop of Aste, and in have, and
Vileroy to busy him, and to dilay the siege, which they supposed the K. would
have layedd presently, with speeches of truces or peace, that they might
fortify themselves in the mean space.

The King would have no speeches with such companions, but yet of his
accustomed clemency, sent Paniguerola to the Marshall Biron to see what he had
to say, and what wisdom he had brought with him out of Italy.

After many salutations and popish blessings, the Friar did wonder much to see
(said he) that so great company of Catholics could find in their hearts to
follow after an heretical King.

The Marshall Byron answered the saucie impudent and malapert Friar, that it
would not be safe for him nor good for his master to meddle with the Kings
affairs: we (said the Lord Byron) hold the King for the true and natural
heir of the Crown of France. That the King maintained their laws and
liberties inviolable, and had none for enemies but few strangers, thrust
forward by ambition, who under ye pretense of religion sought to overthrow all
good laws, to lay down the foundation of their tyranny, to give entrance to
the Spanish King, and for religion to bring in all Atheism.

The Friar protested that his master was free from meddling in any such
enterprises. But his doings, his practices, his ministering of money to the
Rebels, his conversation and familiarity with Bernardine Mendoza, was so
auerred to the foolish Friars face, that he was proved a lying false flattering
Friar.

Thereupon master Friar (his stomach being not yet satisfied) would have a
saucie Frierlike fling against the King, and demanded the Marshall Byron, how
they being professors of the Catholic religion, made so light account of his
masters holiness and purposes, to carry arms against the Catholics their
brethren.

The Lord Byron answered, that they carried arms against rebels and traitors,
and told him again, that it were very wisely done for him and his master to
look somewhat nearer to his own estate. For if he so encroached and meddled
with them, they would quickly excommunicate him. And that there were diverse
Bishops in France as good Catholics as his master, who would be glad to be
made Patriaches in their several Provinces, Paniguerola was found to be so
great a Clark, that he could answer little or nothing. But at length to
conclude the talk, he showed the sum of his Embassage, to wit, he desired a
good peace to be concluded, and some pains to be taken to bring the King to be
a Catholic. But he showed not his intent which was to delay the siege of
Paris, if the king had intended to besiege it out of hand.

The other Ambassador, to wit Vileroy, was sent by the King to the Lord
Plessis Morney, a noble man of great wisdom and profound learning, who
handled the said Vileroy very plainly and roughly, reproaching unto him his
unfaithful and treacherous service to his old master Henry the third. And when
he had denied these things wherewith he was charged, the Lord Beaulieu both
condemned his fair flattering words and promises which he brought now full of
dissimulation, and verified his old traiterous practices against his old
master: it was thought that justice should have been executed upon him for his
treasons, according to the Kings edicts.

The King having soiourned at Mante few days, took his way to Vernon, which
lies between Mante and Pont de larche, which also yielded unto him. From
Vernon the Gentlemen of Normandy, to the number of fifteen hundred horses,
retired to their home about the eight of March. The Lord Chartres governor of
Deep, returned to Deep sick, in whose absence certain Leaguers (inhabitants
there) went about to have seized upon the town for the League, who being
detected and prevented at his return, were exiled out of the Town to the
number of six score, among whom were many of the richest sort of all the town.

About the same time that the King soiourned at Vernon, the Duke of Longueuile,
and the Lord of Tinteuille arrived to the King with eight thousand Rutters.

The King having seized on Vernon and Mante, and stopped the traffic of that
river with the City of Paris on that side, and provided for the safety of the
said Towns, concluded in his counsel to besiege Paris, the principallest
City of the Realm, where it was considered that the City being populous and
great, would easily be won by famine, which would eschew slaughter both of
his own Soldiers and Citizens, whom he would by all gentle means bring to
their duty of obedience: and therefore it was thought good to stop the
passages of the rivers Oyse, Marne, and Seyne above Paris. For in stopping Oyse
the Town of Pontoyse also should be distressed. Therefore the King deuideth
his army as follows. The Duke of Longueuile should have part of his army to
besiege Beaumont upon Oyse. He sent the Marshall Byron with another part of the
army to scour the river Marne, where he took Cressie, a town situated in
Brie between Meaulx and Corbeil, where a Parisien named Peter was Captain,
for whose ransom was proffered eight hundred Crowns: but the King for some
special causes commanded him to be hanged, and five and twenty of the
chiefest of the town with him.

The said Marshall Byron immediately after the taking of Cressie, laid the
siege before Lagnye upon the river Marne right against Corbeil. The Citizens
required space of time to send unto the King, which was yet in Normandy, to
crave his gracious mercy, which they obtained.

The King about the 21. of March having received certain munitions from Deep,
and taken order for the safety of Normandy, with part of his army coasted
between the rivers of Seyne and Eure, and took the towns of Possie and S.
Germain, and the Pont S. Clow, and marched toward Corbeil, to seize upon the
river of Seyne on that side.

It is said before how the Leaguers had compacted with the King of Spain, upon
some conditions of receiving a certain sum of money, to have delivered the
City of Marsels, a great and strong City in Prouance, upon the Mediterran
Sea: but being disappoynted of his purpose, as is said in the first Book, that
City continued faithful unto the King, until the Duke of Guize his death.

The King of Spain had corrupted aforehand the chief governor of the City,
by giving him pay, to the sum of fifty Crowns a day, he had also drawn to
his faction, three score of the chiefest Citizens, paying to some forty
crowns, some more, and some less a day. Thus the hearts of a great number of
Citizens being disposed, the death of the Duke of Guize was bruted even to the
coast of the Mediterrane Sea. The governor and his accomplices hearing of that,
began to ^nuaigh and bring the City to a wau^ring and inconstancy of wills and
counsels: some would have the Town to yield to the League, and some would
not: so the City remained as neuter, hanging neither to Spain nor to France.

In the mean time, the Lord Valete as is said, having made peace with the Lord
Diguieres, and considering the wavering of that City, had prepared a navy of
Galeys on the Sea before the said City, to control such Ships or other
vessels, as might come or go that way to benefit the said Town, whom he
mol^sted as Leaguers.

The governor and the rest of malcontents, hired by the King of Spain
practiced, that the said King of Spain, and the Duke of Sauoy, should send
Galleys thither, in show to cleanse the Seas: but in deed to bring with them
three thousand men, that should upon a luddaine be landed there at the time
appointed, and should seize upon the City, to the King of Spaynes use. At the
time appointed, came the Galeys and Soldiers and took land. The second
magistrate of the city being a faithful

This magistrate dnderstanding of these things already, well accompanied with
townsmen, commanded the dromme to sound the alarm, and with great courage
charged upon the Spaniards, whom they slew in great number, he took many of
them, and the governor of the City prisoner with them, and such of his
accomplices as were with them: so the City was yet once preserved from the
Turkish bondage of the Spaniards. Even as the sheep straying from their
shepherds, run into the Wolves danger; so towns and Cities, even whole
Provinces, with drawing themselves from the obedience of their Lords, are daily
in danger to be made a pray to their enemies.

It is said how the Duke d'Mayne, after his flight from Saint Andrews plain,
went to Saint Denis, to see what entertainment the Parisiens would show him:
and after he with few had concluded to hold Paris, and Saint Denis specially,
fast from the Kings power, and so he and the Spanish Moore, Commendator Moreo
went into Picardie, and thence to Bruxels to the Duke of Parma.

The Duke d'Mayne soiorned at P^ronne, a town in Picardie, situated upon the
river Sonie, between Amiens and Saint Quintine, to gather such forces as he
could, he craved aid from al parts, but they are as slowly to come to him, as
he is earnest to enuite them. Balagny Governor of Cambray, did promise him
fifteen hundred horses out of Picardie. There the Duke d'Mayne seeing that al
things went contrary, yet to ease his stomach, he makes great braggs, how that
he will make again an army of thirty thousand men.

These great bragges did proceed of the vain hope which they had already
conceived of the King of Spain: for while these things above said were a
doing by the King, about the 20. of March they sent four Ambassadors into
Spain: first from the Duke d'Mayne, and another from the Duke of Lorreyne, the
third from the Duke Merceur, and the last in the name of the whole body of the
League. They arrived at Vadolit, in the latter end of April.

The sum of their Embassage was to beg, and not much neither, but three
Milions of Gold, and thirty thousand men, upon that condition France, if he
could get it, yet promising their furtherance. So after much capping and
crouching, begging and craving, chopping and changing, what money they
obtained, it is not certain, but it is reported that they were promised one
Milion, and that they had thirty thousand Crowns, which they took, in hope
that more would come, and an army out of the Low Countries of Flanders.

The King of Spain was willing to hearken to these Ambassadors for three
causes, ambition, fear, and desire of revenging.

First, by the proffer of this Embassage, he was put in some hope, that
considering the great power of these three Dukes, and the great power of the
League, that is of the Towns, Cities, and commons rebelled, he might perhaps
speed better then he looked for. And if he should not speed in the whole, yet
he might in part thereof.

The second cause was fear, which caused him with all his means to keep the
King from growing mighty: for considering his great valor, and the injuries
which both his predecessors and he had received at the Spaniards hands, would
in time call them to remembrance, and seek the means to recover his own.

The third cause was desire of revenge, supposing that in working him
mischief, he might be revenged of the loss, reproach and dishonor of his
Spaniards and Flemmings, who had remained to dung the plain of S. Andrew: by
reason of these particular affections, and not for any love which he had to
the Leaguers or Leagued, he wrote to the Duke of Parma, to pass in person with
such Forces as he had and could spare in the low Countries, to succor the
rebels in France.

In the mean while that the King soiorned at Mante, the Parisiens being
hardened by the Deuillish and seditious Sermons of the Friars and Jesuits, as
the Egyptians were by the enchauntmentes of Iamnes and Iambres: they elected
for governor of their city the Duke of Nemours, by whose conduct they began to
fortify their walls: men, women and Children, night and day, they pulled down
many houses in the Suburbs, they received into the City three thousand Germans,
whom they placed part of them in the Arsenall, and others in watch and ward in
the most needful places of the city. They gathered corn and wine into the
City so much as the could.

They fortified also Saint Denis, Corbeil, Melun, Montereau fault yonne and
Sennes.

The King passing in the sight of the City of Paris, laid the siege before
Corbeil, which shortly after yielded: the King stopped the river of Seine with a
chain of Iron, so that no boats being never so little could pass by.

From Corbeil the King went to lay the siege before Montereau, which is a great
town situated upon the fall of the river Yonne into Seine, which

From Montereau the King returned to Melune, a strong town upon Seine: this
town part of it lies upon the South bank of Seine, and part is in an Island
within the said river, there the Rebels had placed a strong garrison: but the
Citizens and Soldiers perceauing that they would be forced, and that there was
no hope of succor, yielded the place, and put themselves in the Kings service.

The King having placed a strong garrison there, wentbacke again to Sens,
compassed it, does plant six pieces of Ordinance against the wall, sent a
T^ompeter to the City to sommon them to render the place, promising them all
good and gracious favor.

The Governor called the Lord Chambalon, determined not to receive him, except
first he would become a good Catholic. Whereupon the K. began to batter the
town in two several places, gave two assaults, where he was repulsed, being
within the town one thousand and eight hundred Soldiers, besides the Citizens
and Inhabitants, who were able to make two thousand Soldiers more. The king
therefore thought good to leave of that enterprise, and to follow the course
taken, to wit, the siege of Paris, raised therefore the siege, and marched
toward Paris.

The 25. of April the king laid the siege against Charanton, a town situated
upon the fall of Marne into Seine, in the sight of the City of Paris. There was
in a Tower ten soldiers of Paris, which did obstinat themselves in the defense
of the same, whom he forced and caused their Governor to be hanged.

Having seized upon Charanton, the king does present himself before the City,
about the 28. of April, took the Villages about, began to lay down the form
of the siege, where he determined to send part of his forces on the South side
of the City, therewith to compass that side. And with the other part to
besiege the North side, and the Town of S. Denis all at once: there he makes
all things ready, makes his approches, sits still without proffering any
force, but only does stop the entering in of victuals, hoping that scarcenes
and need would have mollifyed their hearts, and the present danger of the very
famine which did threaten them would have moved them to some moderat counsel.

Now we will leave the king before this siege, harkening what the
determination of the Parisiens is, and go to see what is done in other places.

About the beginning of May, there was in the noble and loyal City of Renes
in Britain a sauey sot, prating Friar, who in the pulpit to stir up sedition
in the city, took it for a point of divinity, and an ornament of Fryerlike
Rhetorike to call the king heretic: but the Court of Parliament there so
gagged him with a cord about his neck, that when he had preached

About the self same time, the Lord Rieux defeated the Duke of Lorreyn nigh
M^tes, and took away all his artillery.

It is said before, how the King sent the Duke of Longueuille with part of the
army to scour and stop the river Oyse, who accompanied with the L. la Noue
took Beaumont, which was governed by the Lord Pierrencourt: there the Duke of
Longueuille caused the chiefest men of the Town to be hanged.

Paris being besieged by the king, as is said, the people do harden their
hearts more and more, being persuaded by the Friars and Jesuits, and by them
whom that sottish and Idolatrous people had in admiration, to wit, the Popes
Legate, the Spanish Ambassador, the Bishops of Paris, Lions, Glasco, Placentia,
Aste, Rhemes, Sanlis: there were the Duchesses de Nemours, Main, Montpensier.

The Provost, Escheuins, and other officers, they partly encourage, partly do
terrify the people, do yet once again gather a great sum of money upon the
inhabitants: they do cast great store of artillery, and prepare all things to
withstand the siege.

They made a search of all the grain and provision of victuals which were
within the City. They made also a reckoning of the people, which did amou^t to
two hundred thousand persons: the corn came to that quantity as would suffice
the city for a whole month, allowing a pound of bread to every one a day, and
besides forty thousand bushels of Oats. They appointed one Anthony L'amy, a
rich Merchant of the City, to have the charge of the market, and to appoint
Bakers in every quarter of the City, to whom he delivered the corn at four
Crowns the bushel, and not above, and after that rate they should sell the
pound of bread at half a Spanish royal.

This order being taken, they went about to assure themselves of the will of the
Citizens, for fear that any sedition should arise by reason of the scarsenes,
which undoubtedly they saw would ensue. They gathered all the chiefest
Citizens and Captains in the halles of their quarters, and there they were
made swear never to consent to receive any heretical King. They were sworn
also to detect and reveal any man whom they knew to dissent from this their
union and oath.

This last part of the oath taken, replenished the city with proscriptions,
confiscations, banishments, cruel torments, executions, funerals and
lamentations: for a great many were murdered, many iudicially executed, many
emprisoned, many saved them by flight: but all lost their goods and

And that they might molest the King with sallies, they hired the Lord Vitry,
Captain of one hundred and fifty horses, with the sum of two thousand
Ducats, which the Ambassador of Spain did pay.

Thus having set a Military policy in the City, touching the strength of the
City and the sinews thereof, they sometime would set their heads out of the
gates to see what weather was about: but fearing some shewer of blows, they
ran in again.

The King having distressed Paris already twenty days, or very nigh, and
looking that upon some reasonable condition they would have sought means of
peace: and seeing them contrary to his expectation hardened, and waxed more
obstinate and malicious, with part of his forces set upon the Suburbs of S.
Martin, which he took without any great resistance. From that day until the
beginning of June, the time passed away without any great exployts, but only
certain light skirmishes. For the king would not show any extreme force,
having a care of them, hoping still that famine would have moved them to
hearken to reason, and to remember their duties. In the mean time the King
caused the pieces of artillery, wherewith the Duke of Longueuille had battered
Beaumont upon Oyse, to be brought to Paris, which being arrived, the King
battered the walls with thirteen pieces of double Canon.

The Duke of Nemours had in the mean time cast great store of Ordinance,
whereof he caused threescore and five pieces to be set upon the walls.

About the 13. of June there came forth out of Paris a strange kind of men of
war, which were never seen in the field before* Quintus Curtius in the life
of Alexander (if I remember well) reported of such a kind of strange warriors.
For when Alexander came into India with his victorious army, they perceived on
the top of a mountain an army of men, as they thought with pikes and long
staves: whereupon that terrible army of Macedonians sounded the alarm.
Alexander sent horsemen to view the enemy: when they came near they
perceived an army of Apes, which had imitated the army of the Macedonians,
whom they had spyed out of the trees and mountains. All the courage of the
Macedonians was turned to laughter.

So the Bishop of Sanlis would play the like part, he made himself a Captain,
his Soldiers were the Cartusien Friars, the reformed Bernardines and barefoote
Friars: the Cartusiens are of the diet of the Otter, for they eat nothing but
fish, their cowle is like unto the bag wherewith the Apothecaries do strain
their wine hippocras: and by reason of their phlegmatic feeding, they are all
rotten, and leapers before they come to half of their age, they do crawle with
lice, and taken with that sickness, Hydrokephalia, that is a madness procured by
rotten phlegm enflamed. The reformed Bernardines are of the diet of the ass,
which feeds upon grass and thistles, for they eat nothing but herbs sod or
raw, which thing does cause them to have dry and skiruy bodies, and that
diseaze which is called (...), but with all to have asses wits: they go all in
black, hereby they do represent to the world their melancholik humor.

The bare foot Friars do show what humor does trouble their brain,
imitating the frantic mad men, which have delight to go bare foot winter and
summer: for we account that man mad that will go bare foot, when he may have
shoes to put on.

All these rakehels armed themselves under their lousie rags, do march in
battle array through the City, mumbling their portuses, and when they had
given a sight of their prowess unto the Citizens, they would also go to see
what weather was out of the Town: and when they had marched a while, the Kings
gardes in the Suburbs took the alarm, supposing to have to deal with men;
but when they had the sight of this legion, and perceauing that they were apes
imitating men, they turned their fury to ^aughter, hooping and shooting:
whereupon the apes returned with great speed into the City, and this was the
end of this skirmish. They had for an ensign a Crucifixe, and our Lady carried
before them to play the bulbegger.

About this time bread began to be scarce in Paris. whereupon the masters of
the City fearing the increasing of famine, sought out all the poor within the
City, who came to thirty thousand, and determined to have turned them forth
out of the City to take their fortune. But some of the counsel of the City,
thought that it could not stand with the greatness and honor of the City, and
therefore were stayed in, which thing did greatly hasten the famine, which
shortly after followed.

In the midst of June the famine being very great, there was little or
nothing to eat, the Soldiers had no pay, neither was there money to pay
them, the Citiz^ns refused any more to contribute, aleaging the great and huge
sommes of money which they had disboursed: and for fear of some sedition in
the City, Friar Henrico Caietano, Friar Goundj Bishop of Paris, and the blind
Captain Bernardino Mendoza, consented to rob all the Gods which were in the
Temples of Paris, they take the golden cups of their Gods, and all the
shrines of gold and silver, which Demetrius his prentizes had made to Diana,
to Venus, to Belona, and to many Devils of hell: they turn their relics and
old rotten bones of old Friars, old dogs and horses, (which they had made the
people worship, for the bones of Apostles, Martyrs, and other Saints of God)
out of their coats of gold and silver, and make good money to pay the rebels
to war against their natural and lawful King, contrary to Gods Don
Bernardino, does promise to bestow every day in alms six score Crowns: Friar
Henrico Caietano, said he would do the like: but that devotion waxed as could
as the weather was hot, according to the Aphorism of Hypocrates: ventres hyeme
calidiores estate frigidiores.

The King knowing well of the great extremity, wherewith the City was
distressed, pittyed them, and willed them to take some pity of their
distressed estate, promised them mercy and favor: but the Friars Henrico
Caietano and Goundi, answered contrary to the meaning of the poor people, that
they had determined to die all, rather then to admit an heretical King.

Upon this answer of the Parisiens, in the latter end of June, many noble men
and gentlemen began to mutter in the Kings army, what great imminent danger,
was hanging over France; the ruin of the nobility, the decay of so great and
noble a City as Paris was: and the desolation of the whole realm, which evils
the King could redress, in making himself a Catholic. Of this faction,
tending to some enterprise, was chiefest the prince of Soisson, and went so
far as to speak openly, that they will serve no longer under an heretical
King.

The King aduertized of this muttering, called his nobles and Captains, showed
them what he was, what his right and cause was. And whereas they willed him to
become a Catholic, he put the^ out of doubt, that for to purchase many
Kingdoms, as great as the realm of France was, he would never so little
depart from his religion, which he knew was grounded upon the infallible
truth of God.

As for their service, he made no great account, knowing that it was God who
was his strength, force, and defender of his cause, willed them to depart from
his army when they would, and that he had rather have their room as their
company: he knew that GOD would give him the means and power in time to
repress his enemies: he knew that GOD would raise him friends enough to assist
him.

It is said before, how the King all in one work did besiege S. Denis, which
is a town walled within four miles of Paris. In this Town in an Abbey where
the burials and monuments of the kings were: this town was so gretaly
distressed, that they had neither bread nor munition to defend themselves, they
had consumed all their provision, Horses, Asses, Dogs, Cattes, Rattes, Mice,
Herbs, Roots, and whatsoever the belly could advise them: Even to have tried
to make bread with flower of Oats, husk and all, and dust of old rotten
posts, some tried straw grownd to dust.

The said town therefore considering how the famine within, and the sword
without did threaten them, proffered parley, and at length concluded to deliver
the town to the King, with lives reserved unto all manner of men, the soldiers
and all manner of men to retire with all things which they would carry away:
who of his great clemency gave them Horses and Carts for their carriage.

The same day the King entered into Saint Denis with great rejoicing of all men,
who had proved his gracious favor and clemency.

And being settled in his lodging, he spyed in the chamber of presence three
men walking in the habit of gentlemen, whom he knew not, but he suspected that
they were there for no good. They upon that suspicion were apprehended, and
examined by certain noble men appointed by the King: upon a sudden they
faultered in their answers, and changing their countenance were sent to
prison: but afterward being narrowly examined, they confessed that two of them
were Friars of Saint Francis order, and the third to be a Priest, and they
three were of the 24. who had co^spired, vowed and sworn the kings death. They
were hanged without any scraping of the holy greasing which they had of their
Bishop. These murderers left a president what trust princes may have in the
rabble of Friars, Monks and shaueling Priests.

About the same time the Lord Rubempre, governor for the King in Tourreyne,
gave an overthrow to the Lord Chastre in the Country of Berrye.

About the beginning of July, the Lord Viques a most cruel Leaguer, had
besieged Pontarson a town in base Britain, holding for the King against the
Leaguers, and after three assaults, in the which he was repulsed, he heard that
the county of Thorigni was coming with great forces to raise the siege:
whereupon he retired to S. Michaels mount, and wrote letters unto the Duke
Merceur, who was then at Nantes for succor, fearing least he should be forced
in the said mount Saint Michaell.

He that carried the letters came with the said letters to the Earl of
Thorigny, who having perused the letters, sent the copy of the same to the
Prince Dombes, who was between Saint Mal^ and Vitre, and forthwith sent the
Messenger to the Duke Merceur with his letters: who after he had seen them,
sent by and by an answer to the said Lord Viques, praying him to be strong,
and that within three days he would come to his aid with three thousand men
to rescue him from the Earl Thorigny, and to oppress him, seeing that the
said Earl could not have help from the Prince.

The Messenger came again to the said Earl, and showed him the answer of
Merceur: the copy thereof was sent immediately to the Prince, the resolution
was so taken between them, that the Prince caused all the horsemen to march
speedily, and to get between the said Merceur and Nantes, and the Earl of
Thorigny marched toward the said Merceur.

The Duke perceauing that he was compassed between two armies, ventured to
fight with the Prince Dombes, and whilst they were a fighting, the Earl came
upon him on the other side: he was so beaten between them, that he lost
seventeen Ensigns, and twelve hundred of his company were slain on the
place: he saved himself by flight into the Castle Josselin, one of the
strongest places in all France.

When the Lord Viques understood of this overthrow, he yielded, and in the
conclusion he gave his Daughter in marriage to the younger brother of the Lord
Montgomery, who was kept prisoner by him. He was permitted to keep Saint
Michaell for his safety.

About the same time the strong Town of Dinan in base Normandy hearing of the
said overthrow of Merceur, did beat out of their town their governor, brother
of the Duke Merceur, killed many of his Soldiers, and among them the chiefest
of his Captayns named Iahn, and so yielded unto the King.

About this time also the inhabitants of Kilbeuf in Normandy took a galley of
the Duke Aumale laden with his goods, as it was going up to Roan.

In this month of July, the Franciscan Friars of Sanlis must needs play a
Fryerlike part: they were greatly desirous to betray the town, and to deliver
the same into the Leaguers hands: which for to bring to pass, they caused
many Captains of the rebels to come thither, apparrelled like Country men,
having each of them a basket full of Cheries upon their shoulders, as though
they were market-folkes to sell Cheries.

These Cherie mongers were received by the said Friars into their Fryery house,
where they had gathered together great provision of armor. But this thing
being suspected by some good Citizens, they notifyed it to the King.
Whereupon many were taken, and of the Friars, Masse-mongers, Chery-mongers and
treason-mongers of the Town were hanged, to the number of seven score, and so
the play was ended.

We have left the King at Saint Denis, whilst we went to see what was done
in other places of the realm: now we will come to the siege of Paris, and
first speak of the state of the City.

There the famine had so prevailed in the beginning of July, that it far passed
the famous famine of Saguntum. Then began they to denounce war against all the
lean horses and skiruy iades, against the asses, cats and dogs: these things
were more dayntie unto them then the daynties of Sibaris little bread, and that
of Oats with husk and all was very scant, it was for Princes and great
Ladies, and that a small quantity every day.

In this extremity Friar Henrico Caietano had sold and wasted all his Sorboun
were enforced to devour their own brothers flesh.

There were four sorts of men who went about to remedy this extremity, each
one following their course.

Some of the best sort and stoutest stomach pitying themselves and their
fellow Citizens, whom they saw perish by heaps for the pleasure of few rebels;
by the advice of one Renard Attorney in the Court of Parliament, took counsel
how to deliver the City into the Kings hands, of whose clemency and gracious
favor toward the poor distressed people, they assured themselves. But being
discovered, some fled to the King, who were graciously of him received: some
were taken prisoners, and the said Renard with some others were executed, but
the goods of all were forfayted to the heads of the League.

The second was the Duke de Main, who fearing greatly the loss of Paris,
being abroad where he made shift for good cheer, though it were at other men's
charge, as the saying is: Qui satur est pleno laudat ieiunia ventre. He writes
letters to the inhabitants of Paris, commending them for their great
constancy, promises them succor and great provision of victuals within a
certain time prefixed in the letter, willing them to be patient yet, and not
to go about any making of peace with the King.

The Friars and Jesuits took the copies of these letters, read them in their
pulpets, and served them for text to discourse upon, and to make brave and
lusty sermous.

The third was the blind Captain Bernardine, who taught the delicate Parisiens
the diet of his country, to wit, to take Oats ground, meal husk and all,
and therewith to make a kind of pap, such as the country men in Spain do
use for their ordinary diet, and as they do in France for the fatting of
their hogs, and here in England the Hunters do for their hounds: and that
slubber sauce to be sold to them that had money by a measure, which was
followed as long as Oats did last.

The fourth was the Priests, who would also feed their minds with idolatrous
fantasies, as their bodies were fed sparingly with spanish slubber wash: and
first to begin, they persuaded them to vow to Nostra donna di Loretta, a lamp
and a ship of pure silver of the weight of three hundred marks, which should
be sent by some of the chiefest of the City.

The second id^latrous fantasy wherewith they deluded that besotted people,
was, that they made them run to and fro in procession bare footed and bare
legged from Church to Church, from Idol to Idol, carrying Ora pro nobis.

The third was a Pageant which they played in this wise: they had made upon
the great Altar of their Churches a grave like a monument, there they buried
their God, (who be like was dead with famine) and let him lie for the space of
8. days, and in the same space the Churches were full night and day with
Candles, smoke, idolatries and starued people. Who had required these things
at your hands? It is submitting themselves unto Gods ordinance, that would
quickly remedy this distress, and not these idolatries.

The Oats being spent, the famine prevailed more and more, the harvest time
also was come. The King did wink at many sallies which they did, to steal
away some sheaues of corn, hoping by that means to intercept some of the
heads of the rebellion: so there were daily skirmishes about the harvest, and
they also carried away with them somewhat, which (although dearly bought) did
relieve somewhat the extremity of their hunger.

Whilst these sallies were adoing, about the fifteen day of July the Lord
Chastilion arrived unto the King with one thousand horsemen and two thousand
footmen Gascoynes.

The King perceauing the wilful obstinacy of that people, or rather the hard
bondage that they were in under few rebels, set all his forces in order, and
set upon all the Suburbs of Paris all at once, which seized upon without any
loss the 18. of July, supposing that his neighborhead would cause them enter
in consideration of their miseries and dangers.

This narrow siege, debarring them wholly from the fields, made the famine yet
to prevail more: so that now in few days, the people dyed by heaps in the
houses within, and in the streates without. Now the common people wishes for
peace, and imputes all their miseries unto blind Bernardine, many did threaten
openly in the streates, that it were a good deed to hang that Spanish Moore,
and all his company of Sarrazins brood.

Blind Bernardine hearing of these news, wished himself to have been in
Spain a dancing naked with the Sarrazen Moors of Spain: yet to pacify the
people, he did bestow of his Spanish potage made of Oats, upon them so much
as he could spare, for he was fallen to his old diet of Spain, and withal
he gave them old starued horses which were like to dye, for to kill and to
e^te, yet all this poor liberality which then was great, consi^ering the time,
could not pacify the people: for as the Prou^rb is* Ventur non habet aures.
Therefore many took counsel together in the night, to have seized upon a
gate, and to have let in the Kings forces, but this counsel being detected,
this enterprise could not be effected.

The morrow after being the 19. day of July, a great multitude assembled

The 27. of July, they assembled themselves again into the palace with strong
hand, and required of the Pseudesenat, either bread or peace: and whereas a
Merchant of the City named Goys, did reprove them, by them he was hurt, so that
within few days he yielded his rebellious soul: the matter tending to
sedition, the Duke of Aumale came to the palace, shut up the doors, and took
some prisoners, whereof two of them were hanged.

Then the mutiny of the people increasing, they went to the Bishops house,
willing him to go about the matter, that they might have either bread or
peace: whereupon some of the counselers of the Pseudosenat, pitying their
own, and the misery of the people, with the Bishop of Lions, the Duke of
Nemours, and others of the chiefest of the rebellion entered in counsel,
whether they ought to admit the King upon reasonable conditions, specially
having their autonomy. The matter being discoursed, and some altogether
inclining to peace, withstanding that counsel, the Duke of Nemours, governor
of the city, said in great anger, that he had rather see the City consumed then
lost: meaning that if it were yielded unto the King, he esteemed it lost, and
going forth in great anger, would not be present any longer in such
deliberation: notwithstanding, they agreed all to send Ambassadors to the King,
to entreat of an universal peace. The messengers were the Bishops of Paris
and Lions, and certain others deputed for the City, who went to the King,
lodged them in Saint Antonies Abbey nigh the City, whom he received more
courteously then they thought he would have done.

They propounded to the King two things, an universal peace, and that he
should become a Catholic, and so the City of Paris would set open their gates,
acknowledge and Crown him King of France.

The King answered that he would receive them to mercy, without binding
himself to any thing: it appertained unto Kings to pardon his subjects, but
not to subjects to prescribe peace, and to divide pears with their King, as
for his religion he commanded them not to move any talk thereof, for he
was resolved in his faith, which he did not mean to change, and willed them
with this resolution to return to Paris.

The Duke d'Mayne understanding that the Kings forces were lodged at the gates
of Paris, and that the City within was full of vprores of the people, perishing
for hunger: perceauing also the long delays of the Parma, and fearing greatly
that the City would fall into the Kings hands, one way or another, he sent
Vileroy to the King, and writes a letter to the Parisiens, to send the Bishops
of Paris and Lions, to show how desirous they were to make peace.

The King gave them license to come in his presence, and also to repair to the
Duke d'Mayne with this answer, that he had not any delight in their misery and
undoing. The intent of this Embassage, was but to delay the time, least the K.
should force the City while he posted to Bruxels, there to solicit the Duke of
Parma. For he wrote a letter unto the Parisiens by a secretary of the Bishop,
by the which he willed them to hold out, and to make no peace, for there was a
rescue coming, great forces, and great store of victuals.

Now we will leave the King in the Suburbs, and walk to Bruxels in Brabant, to
see how the Leaguers affairs do speed there.

It is said before how the Leaguers sent four Ambassadors into Spain at one
clap, and there the causes were showed, which moved the King of Spain to
hearken unto their petition, and how he sent to the Duke of Parma to go into
France, with such power as he could conveniently make, to relieve and rescue
Paris. Now we will show the intent which the King of Spain kept,
uncommunicable to himself.

The King of Spain having placed the Duke of Parma, as regent in the Low
Countries, and perceauing that he being settled in the Country, and having
purchased friends and partakers there, began to suspect him, as that he should
not be able to have him out, without some wrangling and wrestling, (...) that
the Duke would keep that country in recompense of the Kingdom of Portingal,
whereof he thought himself unjustly defrauded.

This suspicion made the King oftentimes to play the Physician with the Duke,
and to minister him spanish physic, before he was sick, as boles, pills and
potions. But the said Duke being skillful in Italian Physic, provided such
counter physic, that by boles, pills and potions, he prevented the druggs of
Spain.

The Spanish King therefore seeing that his Physic would not work, took
occasion by this Embassage, to rid his hands of him, either by some blow yt he
might receive, or else by prevention: therefore he commanded him to take such
regiments of Wallons and Italians, as he knew well to favor the said Duke, and
such Lords as had any amity with him, to go with all speed to aid the
Leaguers: yt by these means the Spaniards remaining in the country while
another governor should be sent, might seize upon the holds and forts of the
land, and so to shut him out, and exclude him from that government, to be sent
into Italy, from whence he came, there to be a petty Duke, and to busy his
head about the providing of a Galey, Italy.

But the Duke of Parma having learned this Latin in his youth, fraude^ fraud
fullere laus est, thought good to obey his masters commandment, though little
to his advantage: for beside his commission he purposed to take with him the
two regiments of Spaniards, that were appointed to remain in the Country, and
to have shut him out of the doors.

The Duke of Parma had been long sick of the purre, the pockes, the murre,
the cough and the glaunders, and yet his teeth were scarce fast in his head.
And being most resolved en his journey, then seemed he coldest and most
uncertain.

The Spaniards having already (through a brain sike imagination) conquered
France, did urge the journey: the Dukes friends did excuse the delay by his
weakness. There was daily quarrels between Spaniards and Italians: some
Spaniardes were so bold to call him Viliago tradidore.

The Duke did dilay his journey to terrify the Duke de Main, and to drive him
of necessity to come in his own person to beg his help.

The Duke de Main (as is before said) having taken some order to stay the
Kings power from forcing the city of Paris, posted to Bruxels in Brabant,
there the Duke of Parma entertained him as a gentleman would entertain a
lackay. There the D. de Main before he might be admitted to come in the
presence of that great Potentate, was put to learn so many Italian abassios,
so many duckinges and Spanish ceremonies, by crouching to every rascal
Spaniard, that at length when h^ had learned well to make a leg af^^r the
Italian or Spanish manner, he was let into basiare las manos.

There he urged and prayed very devoutly for speedy help, she wing the
extremity that Paris stood in if it were not with speed relieved, farewell all
the League, Leaguers, and Leagued, and Catholic faith.

Upon this extremity, the Duke of Parma (who had all things in a readiness)
sent the D. de Main before him, to put such forces in a readiness, as he could
make up against his coming, that entering on the frontiers, they might join
their forces together.

The Duke de Main returned into France, put all the Leaguers in great hope of
good success, revived ye hungry Parisiens with fair words, sent to the Duke de
Aumale and Vidsame d' Amiens, who were gone into Picardy to rely such forces
there as they could, and to repair into Champaigne to him.

Now having brought the Duke de Main from Bruxeles into Champaigne again,
there we will leave him to prepare for the coming of the Duke of Parma, and
return to the siege of Paris.

Now in the latter end of Iulye, the famine did so prevail in the City of
Paris, and increased more and more daily, that they dyed by heaps every where
sinking down in the Streets stark dead.

They who were able to buy oaten bread were allowed no more but six ounces a
day.

By the end of July, they had eaten in the City above two thousand horses, and
eight hundred Asses, or Moyles: great war was denounced in the City against
Dogs, Whelps, Catte^, Kitlings, Rats, Mice, and other such thing^s which the
belly could devise.

There was no wine in the City, nor grain to brue bear. They who had money
did drink Tisen made with water and liquorice, which was to be sold in wine
Tauerns in stead of Wine.

They who had no money did drink with the Cow out of the river Sein, which for
the space of thirty years they had defiled and colored red with the blood of
the Saints, and now of late with the blood of the royals.

In the beginning of August, they sought all herbs and weeds which

A bushel of wheat was sold for 70. crowns and more.

Blind Bernardine Ambassador of Spain, one of the chiefest workers of all
these mischiefs, happened to tell in a company how he had heard say, that in a
certain fort of the Turk besieged by ye Persians, in like case they did grind
bones of dead men, and made bread thereof. Some who heard this tale told, took
that for a counsel, took bones (whereof is great store in Paris, specially in
the Churchyard of the Innocents) ground them, and made bread of that kind of
stuff.

Some did take the small dust of worm eaten posts mingled with a small deal of
Oaten meal, wherewith they made bread.

From the latter end of July, until the time that the King raised the siege,
this miserable people did shift with that kind of poor fare.

About the 29. of July the asses of Sorboun, Monks, Friars and Jesuits,
considering now that ass flesh could not be had any more, or that they had no
money to buy any, and also that it would not be had neither upon credit, nor
for begging. Considering also that the 50. thousand ducats which the Pope had
sent (which they thought to have had either wholly or in part) was bestowed
upon men and Soldiers, not upon Asses, and that they had no part thereof:
and seeing that contrary to promise they were out of (...) to receive any, but
rather that they were like to die for hunger, and were alrea^^ starued* they
fell into a ^elting chafe, and in that anger wrote unto Friar Sixtus a letter,
wherein they reproach unto him the great good turns, which the Vickars of Rome
had received of their ancestors, whereof he showed himself very unthankful.

They quarrel with him how they having encouraged the people in their Sermons
(to withstand their King, and to set the realm in a combustion) to the
catholic faith, upon promises of his aid and succor, but now when they have
need nothing is performed: the people do take them (as they may well) for
abusers, and the Pope for a cogging Friar, a deceauer, a giver of good morrows
and fair words.

They say, when they have showed their need and greefs unto his Nuncio, they
had fair words, how the Pope is very wise, knows well what he has to do,
he will do his promise when he sees his time.

Master Friar Sixtus and his Nuncio, you do not understand well Note.
perhaps the nature of Sorboun: they have a rage in the belly, which will not
be assuaged by words, I think no people in this world is so troubled with that
sickness as these be, but specially now when Ass flesh fails them.

They accuse Friar Sixtus that he plays Jack of both sides, he holds with
the hounde and runs with the hare: he holds with the Catholics, and
secretly favors the King, that they prove by two Arguments. First by the
good entertainment which was given to the Lord Luxenbourg, who first with
dissimulation was excluded, and afterward used very friendly.

The second argument is, that Friar Sixtus had been greatly desired by the
holy union, and also had promised to pronounce excommunication against the King
and the Royals, which he would never do. They pray him instantly to send forth
that excommunication, and let them alone with that.

And whereas these Magistrinostri dare not beg openly, yet they say that
letters have been written from Italy, by many great men, to be but folly to
expect any money from Rome. The reason I can give you, for they have little
enough to serve their turn.

At length they fall out with him openly, with this prayer, that God so help
him as he does help them.

But to return to the purpose, the staruing and eating of such unclean
things, did bring generally to all the disease (...) and a dropsy, so that
between the famine and these diseases, there was most commonly two hundred and
more in a morning, found dead at the doors of the rich, where they came to get
somewhat, and were not able to depart from thence, beside numbers which did dye
every where by heaps.

All the music that was in the streates was mourning, weeping, lamentations,
and weak voices of begging people, and none able to relieve them. The pomp of
the City was turned into funerals, leanenes, pitiful sights, and evident
tokens of Gods wrath powered upon a people, which lead by seducers, have
resisted Gods power and Ordinance.

The state of that people being so lamentable: Friar Henrico, Friar Sixtus
Nuncio (who was come himself to six ounces of ^aten bread, and half a pound
of ass flesh if he could get it) supposing to be in antro Trophoni, where the
Poets do feign the people to live by shadows, went abut to relieve this
people with idolatrous fa^tasies, to wit, with pardons and indulgences:
whereupon processions do run (but softly) up and down, they set their Idol
which their Priests did make with five words, in his grave again, which they
made for him upon the great altar, to see whether they might awake him out of
his swound with smoke, or candels, or thumping on the breast, or with weak
misericordia, or a faintie ora pronobis:

The Friars and Jesuits would sometime step up in the puspit: there they did
look like their woody and smoaky Idols, which are by heaps in their temples,
differing nothing from them but in apparel and spea^h. They had lacked their
bread of chapter, and vinum capitulare so long, that they could no more rumble
and thunder their sermons, beat and shake their pulpets, but with a mourning
voice, prayed them whom they had cast headlong into that heap of miser^es to
be patient; if they dye, they shall be made confessors; within ten days they
shall have victuals and succor enough. But when they heard for a truth of the
Duke of Parma his marching, there they did with their weak voices extol him,
as the only Captain of the world, the deliverer of France, and of the holy
Church. What was he not:

Thus this miserable people, kept down by the tyrrany of the Leaguers, hardened
by seditious sermons of starued Friars and Jesuits, fed with vanities of the
Popes Nuncio, blinded with ignorance and Idolatry of ignorant and Idolatrous
leaders, was not suffered to go fo^th, and to submit themselves to their King
(to whom nothing was more dear then their preservation) neither could they be
provided. But the tirranous rebels having yet somewhat to keep soul and body
together, had delight to behold with their cruel eyes, that wretched people to
pyne away by hunger.

The famine goes worse one day then another, in so much, that if the King had
continued his siege any time longer, that desperate rabble of rebellious
Idolaters, would have done as the Saguntines and Lampsarcens which destroyed
themselves.

In the beginning of August the rebels did issue forth, conducted by the Duke
of Nemours, to charge the Kings forces: but they were so received by the Kings
Captains, that they who returned home, said they would do so no more.

The King perceauing that the message of Vileroy, was nothing else but to
delude him, and understanding that the Duke d'Mayne was gone into Brabant, to
have the Duke of Parma his journey, placed thirteen pieces of Ordinance to
batter the gate of S. German, on the south side of the City. But hearing that
for a certainty, the Duke of Parma was ready to march with fifteen thousand
men, Spaniards, Italians, Wallons, and Flemmings, all of the old bands and
garrisons of the Country, he thought good not to give any assault: but knowing
that they were extremely distressed with famine, thought to urge them with the
same more narrowly then ever he did, and so to enforce them to come to some
reasonable composition, and so to reserve his nobility and brave Soldiers, to
the enemies coming.

The famine did so prevail, that nothing being left to eat, but themselves,
they began to fall to man's flesh. Pedro Corneio a Spanyard, who was in that
siege, does report that one of the Pseudopresidents there, told him for a
truth, which he knew very well, that there were of his knowledge two and
twenty Children eaten in that siege.

The King understanding of the greatness of the famine, the wil^ull obstinacy of
that damned people, who will rather perish like the heathenish Saguntines, then
to try his clemen^y and favor, whom they knew to be therewith endued, more
then ever had been any King in France before him: hearing also of this savage
and barbarous act of (...), by some that fled unto him out of the City, was
greatly moved: so that lifting up his hands to Heaven before his nobility,
protested unto the Lord, as Titus did in like case at the siege of Jerusalem,
that he was not guilty of those abominations, which were there committed,
neither of the blood of them that so desperately perished. That he was their
lawful King, ordained of God to govern them, that he had proffered unto them
(contrary to their deserts) mercy: that he might have forced them; but to spare
their blood, he had delayed it to his great hinderance, hoping that need would
have caused them to consider their duty. But contrary unto duty and nature,
they had obstinated themselves, and committed more abominations, then any City
ever did among the heathens. This good King, his eyes full of tears, retired
into his Chamber, full of compassion, admiration and love of justice.

Compassion was not in him only, as it was in Scipio, at the burning of
Carthage, an affection proceeding of a mild nature, but a true Christian
mercy, by the which he did feel the griefs even of his mortal enemies, and
therefore gave certain passeports unto many, to have daily out of his camp a
certain alowance of victuals, and liberty to his soldiers, to sell some
victuals unto the besieged for necessary things, as shoes, hose, apparel,
and other such things, which did somewhat relieve them, and stopped the
barbarous eating one another.

The admirations of this strange hardness of heart of that people, brought

The King considering his office and charge annexed and inseparably joined to
his Crown, to minister justice, that is, to punish the offenders and
transgressors, and that there began the rebellion, there was by the consent of
most wrought the death of the King, and that by the rejoicing and approbation
of the said death, they had rendered themselves accessarie and guilty of the
same, even their walls, houses, temples, all whatsoever they had. Therefore he
considering correlatiuely his office and their offense, could not give over the
siege: and seeing that they refused lawful try all by their rebellion, he
would follow that which in such a case God has ordained, that is, force,
violence and war: yet he determined to try (fashioning himself after Gods
Image, who is long suffering) whether they might be provoked to take pity upon
their afflicted estate.

Here we will leave the King for a time, and will pass into other places to
see what preparations of war be made. We have said how the Duke de Main
returned from Bruxels (where he was royally received as a poor simple lackie
(as is said) into Champaigne: thence he sent to the Duke Aumale, and the
Vidasme d'Amiens into Picardie, to gather such forces as they could, and to
repair unto him with as much speed as they might to join with the Duke of
Parma, who was coming with great forces.

Whereupon, about the midst of August, the Lord Iumeges understanding that
the said Duke Aumale and Vidasme had gathered forces, and were going toward the
Duke de Main to join with the Spaniards coming out of the Low Country, met
with them nigh Amiens, discomfited them, and slew three thousand of them, as
the common report is, among whom was the Vidasme of Amiens. The Duke Aumale by
flight saved himself within Amiens.

The Duke of Parma in the mean time commanded the two regiments of Spaniards,
appointed by the King of Spain to keep home, and to do their feate as they
should understand when the opportunity should serve to march forward before
him. For although (leaving the country unprovided of sufficient forces) the
States would take occasion to do their business, and to surprise places: yet
according to the proverb, he consented

The Spaniards were very unwilling to go to that journey: but he put them in
hope of doing some great and weighty exployts, which were not for every man to
know, and which could not be effected without their counsel and help, making
them believe that they were the only Soldiers of the world. At length the
Spaniards as a restie horse which strives with the rider, and goes backward
before he will take his way forward.

Upon their departure, he sent forth every where to show his journey into
France; he sets forth a description of his army, how many thousand
footmen, how many thousand horsemen, how many Princes, Dukes and Earls; what
Caesar's and Alexanders there was in that army. And when all came to all, there
were three which are by him called Princes, even such as he is himself, such
as may be a Knight here in England, which do hold some small Dukedomes of small
towns in Italy either of ye Pope, or else of King Philip, such as are holden in
flauerie, as the Bassas by the Turk, to wit, the Princes (for so he terms
them) of Ascoly, Castle Bertran, and Symay, two Princes as obscure, as the name
of their principalities. There were ye Marquess of Renty, the Earl
Berlamount. There were also Dons of Spain, as Sanctio Layeua, Iuan Baptista,
Tasis, Alonso Idiaques, Antonio de Zuniga, Pedro Gaetano, and Capechuca Romano.
All these Dons were such as might be twenty groates in the books of Subsidy:
so great noble men they were, men that could have showed great prowess upon
the naked Iudiens. To be short, there were three great Lords, Pride, Vanity
and Folly, who were masters of the Camp. There were also few Carrowssers out
of Flanders, Henault and Brabant: he gave them terrible names, as Amutinados,
that is, angry men, Mansferidos, and other such I wot not what, as would make
the poor heathnish women in Italy and Spain cross their foreheads, thinking
to hear some names of devils.

He sets forth his furniture, his stable, his pages, the couerings of his
coffers and moyles, and why not the belles of his moyles. But a great oversight
was committed by him that made no mention of his Curtizans; that was not for
lack of good will, but now his age does great injury to his memory. O man
too much pride has put thee out of thy wits, or else has blown thy wisdom
into thy cap.

When he entered into France, he began to enquire how many days marching
there was to Roch^l; for he would take it by the way. Man look well to the
would of thy cap. He imagined that the king at the first hearing of his coming
would have run away, and he would have pursued him as far as the playns of
Bourdeaux, where he would have fought with him, and sent his head in a charger
to his master, as Herod did of John Baptist.

The Friars and Jesuits lacked no monkish Rhetoric to increase, nor wind to
blow up these bladders. Wheresoever he passed there he left tokens of his
progeny, to wit, tokens of the most vilanous ^^lthines and most barbarous
cruelty that ever was used by any wild people, except it were by the Popes
adulterous brood.

But whilst these things were a doing, there fell out such a chance, as almost
marred all. Friar Sixtus a little before he went to render a count of the
treasons and murders, which he had caused (to his power) to be committed,
fearing by the threatening of the Lord Luxembourg (who was sent to Rome by the
Catholic nobility, to do a message in their name) least the King would seek
for reuengement of the presumptuous injuries received at his hands, sent a
flattering mandamus, by the which he discharges the King from
excommunication, and willed all his subjects, nobles, and others to obey him,
and pray for him, whose subversion he himself desired.

Here Christian reader, thou may see what piety, justice or godliness is in
this sink of lewd Friars: for advantage this Friar Sixtus was the chiefest
instrument and countenance of the Leaguers, to raise up that most cruel war,
and confused rebellion that ever was heard of ^n any realm, by his
excommunication, by his advise, practices, counsel and money. Now when he
sees the whip in the Kings hands, fearing to be handled as his country men
did handle their flaues, or as one of the Kings predecessors handled Boniface
the eight, whom he hanged at his own window in the City Perugia: now he sent
his Curriero with his mandamus with his prayers, he comes as the Demoni^cles
came unto Christ.

Let therefore Christian Princes, take heed not to trust these false
dissembling Friars, who do carry two faces under a hoode: for there is nothing
so wicked, but for advantage they dare do: there is nothing so vile, but for
advantage they will debase themselves thereto. But Friar Sixtus his mandamus,
his Curriero, his commandment was as much regarded of the Catholics and
Leaguers, as of them of the reformed religion: for the Leaguers will follow
their devotions, that is, their rebellion, though all the Popes that have been
ever since the devil laid down the foundation of that seat, should say nay,
and therefore they took that mandamus abusiue for assentamur.

The Catholic Nobles who were with the King, took that for a thing which is
neither here nor there, which could neither hinder nor further the cause,
wishing that Friar Sixtus would sit at home, and make some new almanac, or
some new calender, because yet we lack one or two to furnish the table, and
that by his Apostolical authority, he would command the Sun, not to go
any more out of the way, but to keep ^is course: as some of his predecessors
was so bold, as to command the

They of the reformed religion laughed at the impudency and variablenes of the
Friars wit, who had breath both to warm his fingers, and to cool his potage.

The K. did make account of all this Frierlike flattering, rather to redound to
his hindrance and dishonor, then to any futtherance of his cause: for he
knows well, that the praiets of I^olaters would not be accepted of God, and
that all the godly minded, would without the Popes bidding, make their humble
prayers and supplications to God for him, not only in France, but in all
Christendom. Neither will he accept that obedience which is done by the Popes
c^^maundement rather, then in consideration of Gods ordinance. And to receive
any goodness of him, or depend of him, the King does know well, that every
good gift comes from above, even from the father of ligh^s, and that he is
his abundant reward. But the Pope is equus Seianus, unto as many as do meddle
with him.

Whilst the Duke of Parma marched toward France, the Duke de Main returned
home to gather forces, as is said before: some were cut off by the ways, as
Aumale, and the Vidasme of Amiens: but certain forces he receaned of Balagny
governor of Cambray, and the Lord Saint Paul, with whom he made toward Paris.

The King understanding of this, went from his army with a troop of horsemen
without any baggage, and marched 17. Leagues without bayte, to meet with the
said Duke de Main to bid him welcome out of Brabant: but the K. came too short
by an hour. For the Duke de Maine used with long experience to flee away from
the Kings presence, had saved himself in the town of Laon in Champaygne: but
the King seeing that he had escaped out of the net, he returned to his army.

Shortly after the D. de Main having gathered all his forces, came to Meaux in
Brie: and to ease his stomach giving out that he came to give battle to the
King, whereupon the King departing again went almost to Meaux: but seeing that
the Duke had enclosed himself between the rivers of Marne, and that which
comes from Crecy, the King returned to his army once more.

In the latter end of August, the Duke of Parma, that great Soltan Solymon,
Mussulman, Siech, with his dronken Belerbeyes, Bassas and Ianissaries entered
into France. The Duke de Main, to requite his curtesy showed him at Bruxels,
sent the Lord Saint Paul (who the other day was a lackay, and afterward
household servant to the Lord Beauuayes Nangy, then he rose a step higher, to
wit, he was made one of the bawdes of the Duke de Main, and now one of the
chiefest of the League.

When the Duke of Parma came to Meaux upon Marne, about the 27. de Main, for
his so basely receiving of him in the land: then he began to look with a sower
Italian brow, and as the saying is, Front caperata: neither would he go
further, except he had an absolute power to command over all the forces, as
well French as Suanish: which thing when he had obtained, he began to esteem
less the Duke de Main and his Captains, then the Duke de Main had esteemed
him in sending a lackay in a Noble man's apparel to receive him.

Now the Duke of Parma being on Cockhorse, begins to triumph and disdain
all: he altered the Duke de Main his resolution, and the course of this
voyage: yet necessity which has no law, made the Duke de Main to take all
these Italian insolences and pranks in good part: and need (which makes the
old woman trot) enforced him to put in ure all the reuerences and ceremonies
which he learned at Bruxels among the Spaniars, wherein he had profited very
well for his time.

The Duke of Parma in taking his journey, being troubled with the humor that
Monarcho his country man (who was here in England, the gasing and pastime of
children in London) was troubled with, had imagination in his conceit, that by
that time he should enter France, the King would be fled from Paris half the
way out of France. But when he came to Meaux, whilst they played these merry
parts between them, he heard that the K. was still at the ^iege of Paris:
whereat he maruailed greatly, musing why the King should stay there: and
perceauing that the King stood not in any fear, they eased their hearts and
covered their dread by publishing abroad every where how they will give battle
to the King, of him and all his there is not a breakefast. And thereupon in
great earnest he called for the Cards, and thinking himself far wiser then the
Duke de Main, who now was but a poor Soldier under him: and having appointed
to lodge at Chelles, began to march forth out ^^ Meaux, to take his lodging
where the King had appointed.

The King having intelligences of the Duke of Parma his marching out of Meaux
the 30. of August, raised his army from before Paris, leaving ye city and the
Suburbs at liberty. The King with part of his army went before, with
commandment to the rest to follow after. Pedro Corneio a Spaniard, who was in
the City during that siege, reports, that if the King had stayed two days
more, it was impossible for that City to have holden any longer, but that the
gates had been opened to him.

The Paristens seeing, that when they had come to an extreme period of danger
(which in truth had been an easy and an inestimable benefit to have fallen
into the Kings hands) were filled with great joy. The Duke de Nemours, Friar
Henrico, Friar Sixtus his Nuncio, blind Bernardino and all other rabble of
Rebels went in procession to the great church called Lady, with a great number
of people, drawing their dry and starued bodies after them with much adoo, and
there they song merrily te Deum laudamus.

The last wheat that had been sold there was sold above two hundred Crowns,
and within three days after it was there for four or five Crowns.

The Duke of Parma at his first marching from Meaux, having passed the brook,
which runs by the Town of Clay, lodged at the Castle Fresme.

The King departed from the Village Chaliot, near to Paris, and appointed a
general meeting of his whole army in the plain of Boundie, making his
reckoning the next day to have battle. Therefore he mustered his army there
all that day, and there he stayed two days expecting the enemies coming: but
hearing no news of the enemy all that time, he resolved to draw near to
them, and for that intent sent the Lords Lauerdine and Chastilion to seize
upon Chelles, where he intended to lodge.

The said Lords there arrived, found the enemies Harbingers, who had begun to
take lodgings, whom they put to flight.

The King coming after them, deseried some 7. or eight hundred horses of the
enemy, whom he charged so violently with far lesser number that he
conducted, beating them even unto their lodgings.

The Duke of Parma understanding that his Harbingers had been beaten out of
Chelles, and that the King lodged there, did double his fear, and disappointed
of his lodging, would needs go (accompanied with the D. de Main) to view the
plain where the King stood in battle array: but perceauing the King coming
with a good troup directly toward them, was contented for that time to take no
nearer sight.

The fifth day the Duke of Parma placed his army enclosed between two brooks,
and on the one side upon one of the brooks, there is a wood and a Castle
called Brow, and a little above the Castle a hill. All that day the King stood
in battle array in the plain by Chelles.

The Kings power of ten thousand foot Frenchmen, four thousand Swissers, four
thousand horsemen, whereof three thousand were gentlemen of the chiefest
families of Nobility in all France, eight hundred Rutters. In that army were
six Princes, two Marshals of France, and a great number of noble men and
Captains, who were able to lead as great an army as that was.

About 11. a clock that day the Duke of Parma with the Duke de Maine went up
on the top of the hill to view the army, and the situation of the plain, which
when he had descried he gave a deep sigh, and fell into a chilling cold, and
after in a pelting Italian chafe (after the manner of Italy, and the custume of
his predecessors the Popes of Rome) swore and blasphemed God most horribly, and
reproched unto the Duke de Main, that

This great Caesar that heretofore would kill the Devil, hethertoo had covered
the fear which did lurk in his heart, with swearings, blasphemings, braggings
and boastings, now not able to keep it any longer hidden, does lay it open:
for he makes have to his camp, bids his men to lay down their weapons,
and to take in hand pickaxes, shouels and mattocks. The Macedonians were never
so busy in building Alexandria, as these men were in trenching themselves in
their Moore, for fear to be set on by the King.

The King continued three days more, in showing himself in battle array upon
the said plain, and provoked them continually by skirmishes, always some
remaining behind upon the place, or carried away prisoners.

The 6. day the King assaulted them, and did beat them from one of the
brooks, the wood and the Castle, and drive them all into the moore, where
they in great have (as is aforesaid) had entrenched themselves very strongly.

Some prisoners being demanded wherefore the Duke of Parma would not make a
way through the Kings camp to go to Paris, and hazard the lot of the
battle. They answered, that after they had descryed the Kings power, they had
lost all stomach to fight.

The Duke d'Mayne had left behind him the Town of Lagny, which is upon the
river of Marne, right against Corbeil, which he thought could work him some
displeasure, he therefore did send the seventh day of September, certain
companies of Spaniards and Italians with ordinance, to take the said Lagny,
which was but a weak Town. The Captain named Laphin, otherwise determined to
leave the Town as not defensible, when he saw the enemies approach with such
disorder as they did, took another resolution, to wit, to defend it, to hold
them play: the enemies passing over the river, upon a bridge made with boats,
began to batter it with nine pieces of artillery, the breach was made before
the King had any notice thereof, by reason of the great wind which was
contrary, and a great thick mist: yet as soon as the King had any knowledge
thereof, he sent succor to have rescued the Town: but the enemy giving the
assault before the Kings forces could come, and being few against many, the
enemy carried it away, which being entered into the Town, omitted no barbarous
cruelty and villainy, which that Sarrasenicall savage nation could devise, there
were between two and three hundred Soldiers within the Town, governed by
the Lord Laphin, who defended that Leonidas with his Lacoues at Thermopylas.

The King took that loss very sorrowfully, and supposing that this beginning
would have cheered and fleshed the enemy, commanded the skirmish to be given
ho^ter then ever before. But as the Wool^e pursued and hunted, having gotten
his den over his head, will rather dye there then to get him forth, and try
the matter with the hunter: so these savage ravening monsters, could not be
drawn out of their moore.

The King perceauing that nothing would encourage these fearful warriors,
departed out of the camp with a good company of horsemen with ladders, and
marched toward Paris, and caused certain companies to draw nere the walls,
between the gates of Saint James and Saint Marcel, which being detected, the
alarm was given in the City, the Kings Soldiers did hide themselves in the
darkness of the night, being a great mist withal. The Parisiens returned every
one home: the Jesuits, who are the most desperate and warlike of all the
legions of the locustes of the kingdom of Antichrist, watched all the night
upon the wall, fearing some surprise, and about four a clock in the morning,
the Kings Soldiers lying in the town ditch, began to scale the wall: the
Jesuits fearing to be researched, first for their horrible treasons do sound
the alarm, and do keep of the Kings men from leaping upon the wall as well
as they can, whilst company do run to help. The inhabitants do cast fagots
kindled into the ditch, by which means the Kings Soldiers being discovered,
did sound the retire, gave over the enterprise, and so the King returned no
more to Paris.

Here Christian reader, thou shall note in this City, the notorious sins of the
inhabitants, the judgments of God showed upon them, and what is yet to come.
This City has been first of all the bulwark and strong hold of all Idolatry,
and heathenish superstitions, which they have increased of mere malicious
wickedness, and as it were to spite the Gospel, whose voice had been heard,
and had knocked at their g^tes many years. They raised the alarm at the sound
thereof, they have murdered the Saints in the streates, they have shed their
blood upon the earth like water, their bodies they have drawn by heaps, and
given them to be meat for the beasts of the field, and the fowls of the
air, they have searched them out as it were with a lantern, that they might
root out the knowledge of God from the earth, they have made the gospel of
life a hissing, a by word, a nodding of the head, and a song of despite and
contempt among them. Therefore the Lord has given them to a reprobate mind,
to commit among themselves all the abominations of the heathens, and has sold
Spain and Italy the vermin of Iesuit^s, whom Sachan did burst out as vltimum
(...), by whose desperate rage, specially these sinful people have been blinded
and seduced to the vt^ermost. They have kindled and maintained to the uttermost
of their power, war against them of the reformed religion. They were the first
in all France, to show the fruit of their hellish Idolatry, that have rebelled
against the King, who was of their own religion, and as great and devout a
Catholic, as any was in the world: they stirred up and invited to their
reb^llion all other Cities of France, by their example, letters and
Ambassadors, and at length they have shortened his life, by an heinous
parricide, by the which they have made their walls, their houses, their temples
and themselves guilty of the damnable crime of treason, hated both of GOD and
man.

Now let us see the fearful judgments of God showed upon them: the Lord has
executed his justice upon that defiled City, defiled I say, with the blood of
the innocents at all times, by punishing them with his scourges of pestilence
and dearth. But after they had defiled their hands with the Kings blood, the
anointed of the Lord, who represented before their eyes the image of God: the
Lord struck them with the giddines of Sodom, and the darkness of Aegipt, and
sent evil Angels among them, to vex them with disquietnes, with guilty
consciences, with vprores and seditions.

And now when the Lord during the siege, had sent them mercy and favor, even
to their gates, by the band of his messenger and Lieutenant, Henry of Bourbon,
now reigning Prince of great and famous renown. They as men senseles fallen
into a letargy, and out of their wits, would hearken to nothing, but to the
voice of sedition, of commotion, of blood and murder, being delivered into the
bond^ge of ^raitors and tyrants. And when the Lord had broaken the staff of
bread among them, with greater rigor then in any place, which ever was heard
of, they did not turn unto the Lord, who had given them bread, wine, oil,
flax, as Osea speaks, but multiplied their idols, and worshipped diu^ls, as
James Clement the parricide and others even with greedines. They did rather
choose to eat the flesh of their sons and daughters, which by the laws of
that realm is a capital crime, and to be r^uenged with fire, then to accept
grace and favor at the hands of their King, whom law, nature and God had
given unto them.

Now let us consider, what by all reasons (grounded upon the stedfastnes of
Gods threatenings) is like to ensue: tha^ God may power down the Parma from
approaching to it, but to that end to hamper his enemies yet more in wicked
desires, and to deliver them into the hands of barbarous tyrants, as (it fell
out after) more heavy and intolerable unto them, then the extremity of the
famine it self, that God might take vengeance of that sink of accursed
idolatrous rebels: first by a long calamity, like unto a consuming and pining
disease. And to give space unto them there, whom he knew to be his, to go
out of that Babylon, and cage of all abominations and unclean fowls, that in
great wrath, that blasphemous and rebellious City may be swallowed down in
destruction. It is said before, how the King having missed to take Paris by
Escalade, gave it over, perceauing that God had a further and a heavier
judgment to execute upon that City, then he was determined to show, if it had
come into his hands: and therefore resting himself upon Gods good will, which
will turn all things to the good and comfort of them that be his, returned to
his army, which had removed from Chelles to Boundy. The enemies
(notwithstanding the King Camp had removed) remained still in their mire,
fearing still to be drawn where they were not resolved to go.

The Nobility, who upon the news and rumor of the battle, had resorted unto
the King without any provision of necessary things, and by the obstinacy of
the enemies, perceauing that they were not determined to come to handy blows,
brged their departure.

The King in like manner being out of hope to come to hand with the enemy,
otherwise then leisure might afoord, from Boundy took up his lodging to go to
Gonesse.

The 12. day of September at Gonesse the King assembled the Princes, officers
of the Crown, and the expert and valiant Captains of the Army, which
altogether made a noble and famous counsel. There he discoursed how it was
plain that the Prince of Parma cannot, or dared not fight. But that there was
some hope that by coasting him still, he might be hereafter had at advantage.
To return to Paris, he showed that he had not purposed, and was not willing to
take it by force.

And whereas the enemy would not war after his manner, he thought convenient
to apply himself unto his. And since he would not have the honor to fight with
so many honorable personages, as were assembled for that purpose, it would be
expedient to distress him with other discommodities, as want of victuals and
surprises.

He showed also, that in furnishing the Towns round about Paris with

Also that a mean power was sufficient to coast the enemy, and to be at his
heels whatsoever he would attempt, and that the rest of the forces might
return to the Provinces whence they came, which would be a great relief for
them, and by relieuing themselves, might have opportunity still to get
somewhat.

Lastly, by these means in bridling the enemy from doing any exployt, when
forces of strangers should chance to enter into the Realm, they might easily
assemble together again thus refreshed, and be twice as strong as they are now.

These things being propounded by the King, he required their good advise and
faithful counsel: which things being debated by that noble counsel, at length
were approved by the consent of all and followed. And first the King did begin
with the Town of S. Denis, which after great suit of diverse noble men, it fell
to the lot of the Lord Lauerdine, who thankfully accepted it.

The King also provided garrisons to fortify the Towns of Melune, Corbeil,
Sanlis, Meulan, Mante, and sundry others which did hold Paris distressed on
every side.

The King sent the Prince County into Toureyne, Anjou and Main.

He sent the Prince Montpensier into Normandy.

The Duke of Longueuille into Picardie.

The Duke of Neuers into Champaigne.

The Marshall Aumont into Bourgondie. Every one having sufficient forces to
keep their Provinces in peace. The King himself with a company of eight
thousand, and the Marshall Byron crossing the country lying between Marne and
Oyse, determined neither to go far from the enemy, neither to spend his
time in idleness: and therefore went to lay the siege before the town of
Cl^rmont in Beauuoysin, where he stayed about ten days, which he took partly
by assault, and partly by composition.

The Duke of Parma durst never come forth out of the mire where he had
wallowed himself about 14. days, until he heard the King was very nigh
twenty leagues from him.

At length hearing the King to be far enough, and that he had passed the
riner Oyse, towsing bunselfe out of the dyrt, took his way to Paris in have,
as one that is carried with a fearful imagination.

At that time as many noble men who had repaired to the King, upon the rumor
of a battle which should have been fought out between the King and the Duke
of Parma, were returning to their home: among others the Lord Guiche, Ragny and
Ciper returning into Normandy, met with the Vicount Tauanes with five hundred
horses near to Meulay, whom

The King being at the siege of Clermont, the Duke of Parma was received in
Paris with great joy and triumph. For they supposed to have received some of
the petie Idols of the Heathens, called Dij tutelares. To be short, he was
welcome, but his victuals which he brought with him yet better.

Having soiourned there few days, the pride and vilanie of the Spaniards was
so rife, that no man was any longer master of his house, wife, children and
goods, all was exposed to the appetite and lust of few Gotes and Sarrazins,
confusedly heaped in Spain, as into the sink of all Europe.

The trial of few days gave the Parisiens a proof of their folly, who had
rejected a lawful King, and had admitted most savage monsters to oppress them
with barbarous tyranny. In these extremities they being not able to rid their
hands of them, if by any means they might be shifted off, requested the said
Duke of Parma that he would open the river for the traffic, without the
which thing that mighty City could not be provided of necessaries, wishing
that their neighbors might be combred with them rather then they themselves.

The Duke of Parma to please the people, made them believe that out of hand he
would go to take the Towns situated on the upper part of the river, then he
would go to rescue Clermont, then will he take all the Towns between Paris
and Roan.

At length with much adoo he undertook to assault Corbeil, as next neighbor.
This is a small town seven leagues from Paris upon the selfsame river that
Paris is, famous only in Paris by reason of the great abundance of Peaches
which grow in their vineyards, which they sent to the markets of Paris:
otherwise it is nothing, neither in greatness nor in strength, by nature nor by
art.

This great Tamberlaine made such a preparation with boastings and swearings
alo modo Italiano, that Solomon the great Turk kept never such adoo about the
siege of Vienna, as this does about poor Corbeil He draws thither 22.
pieces of Ordinance; he bestows fifteen days in making his approaches, in
placing his Ordinance, planting his battery, and at length the fifteen day of
the siege, a great breach being made the assault was given. The besieged did
welcome him so courteously, that many remained there among them longer then they
had wished.

They within the town were not commanded to obstinate themselves in the
defense of such a naughty place; but to linger the enemy for a time, that in
trying what great kunning and discipline of war this new God had brought out
of Brabant, he might weary himself in doing nothing.

After this slaughter of Spaniards and Wallons, and the repulse and foil given
to a great multitude by few upon the walls of Corbeil: this D. having learned
from his infancy to swear o^ his grandfather Pedro Aloysio, or else his
great grand-^ire Friar Paulo Farnesio (in despito del Dio) he began to make
greater preparations th^n before.

Within few days after, they gave the second assault, which was as dear
bought by the Spaniard as the first, so that most of them said that they would
no more come to such a feast.

After these two wellcommings the Duke of Parma rested himself until the
fifteenth day of the first assault given: and in the mean while he was not
idle, for he erected an Arsenall, wherein he kept a number of workmen, that
labored night and day: they were not suffered to go forth nor to speak with
any man. The Duke de Main could not know what great mysteries were wrought
there. Many did expect shortly to see miracles, many did fear, least by some
new magic, not only Corbeil, but also the country about, would be
transported beyond Perow, or Gyapan: but beware ye shall see wonders. Nascitur
ridiculus mus. For there comes forth few boats covered with earth and turfe
to transport a few Soldiers over the water. This was received of many with as
much laughter, as the mouse which came forth out of the Mountains belly.

The 30. day of the siege, when this great Sultan had ended his wonders at the
break of the day, he began to beat the walls again with 22. pieces of
artillery, until almost night.

The inhabitants considering their case, how the most of them were maimed and
weary, few in number, and the enemy strong in armor, strength of body, and
multitude, seeing the breach made wide and large, desirous to save the remnant,
their wives and Children: and waighing the danger wherein they stoud, seeing
they were one hundred of the enemies against one of theirs, came upon the
walls of their Town to parley with the Prince, there they offered to the said
Prince to yield up the said town, conditionally that he would grant them
their lives with bag and baggage.

The Duke of Parma, by occasion of their humble submission, waxed the more
presumptuous and cruel, contrary unto all heroical Princelike natures, which
are sooner overcome by submission then with force, spewed out of his
blasphemous mouth two or three oaths of Italy, that he would put them every
man, woman and child to the sword. The reason that moved him to ^^^cute this
cruel answer upon them, was, that whereas he first supposed that they would
have yielded at his whistling (for such conceits his Italian arrogance had bred
in his mind) they had so resisted him, and slain a great number of his best
and most approved Soldiers in three several assaults, by which means as he
had greatly empaired his reputation, there he would make utterly shipwreck of
the rest, by making himself

The inhabitants hearing the sentence of death pronounced against them, and
perceauing yt nothing would persuade him to save their lives, neither of their
wives and children, resolved themselves and went so fiercely to the fourth and
last skirmish, that they determined to be revenged of the enemies to the
uttermost: the assault was sharp and cruel which continued 2. hours together.
In the said assault the French men Leaguers made the first point.

The inhabitants being most of them maimed and few in number, defended the
breach valiantly, and made a foul slaughter of the enemies. The Spaniards
seeing the great butcherie made of them by the towns men, recoiled, and let the
French Leaguers atchiue the winning of the breach.

The inhabitants being few, and weary, maimed and out of breath, overcome by
the multitude of sound, lusty and fresh, were enforced to gene over the
defense of the wall, and sought to save themselves.

The French Leaguers from the breach went to the gates, opened them to let the
Spaniards enter in.

The Spaniards and Wallons entering into the gates, least it should be said
that they had done nothing, did measure to the French Leaguers with the self
same measure full and pressed down which they had measured to the inhabitants.
Between them therefore began a new skirmish, the Spaniards killed the French
men, and the French men the Spaniards, and the Wallons against them both.

Now when the Spaniards had showed to the Leaguers what they could do, to wit,
to kill them by whom they were called for help, when the fray began to be
pacifyed. Then did they agree among themselves to set all together upon the
poor unarmed multitude, whom they murdered without respect of age or persons.

Here is to be observed (Christian Reader) the just judgment of God, France,
Picardie, Normandy, Britain and Champaigne, to be short, all the Provinces
between the British sea, and Loyre, most obstinatly, maliciously and wilfully
sold themselves to commit all that was evil in the sight of the Lord, as to
withstand and persecute the truth of God, to root out the Gospel by an
immortal war and hatred implacable: behold in all these wars begun and
continued by the League in a manner all the spoils, hauocks, ransackinges and
slaughters has been committed in the Popish countries, and by Papists
against and upon Papists, and among others, in this place were Leaguers against
Leaguers, Papist against Papist, Atheist against Atheist; so that this evil is
not come nigh Gods people, but they have and do behold the confusion and
butcheries of Idolaters a far of. And why? Because him that loves iniquity,
the Lord does hate, and upon the wicked he raineth snares: fire, brimstone,
and stormy tempest

The execution being done upon the inhabitants, there they committed what ever
Gotes, Sarrasines, Atheists, and rebels, mingled and associat together could
devise, when God has delivered them to Satan, to fulfill the works of
darkness. The execrable cruelties and villainies there committed, shall be
buried in everlasting silence, for lack of words to express them.

The Town being taken by assault, and the people destroyed, the Duke of Parma
made his entry into that Village, with his Italian sower look, and frowning
brow, as though he had been some Paulus Aemilius, some Marcellus, or Scipio
Aphricanus, who had triumphed of all France. These noble Romans, whose names
do yield a sweet savor of princelike virtues, do differ from this, because
there was nothing in them, which is in him, and there is nothing in him which
was in them, like only in the shape and form of man.

The news of the taking of Corbeil* flying to Paris, caused such a joy, that
Rome never did so rejoice for the burning of Carthage, as these poor sotts did
for the taking of this obscure Village of Corbeil. They made an end of burning
that small store of wood as remained to them, in making of bonfires.

The Macedonians did never wonder at their great valor, for to have subdued
Asia, as far as the river Ganges, as the Soldiers did triumph at the taking
of the cottage of Corbeil.

Then began the Parisiens to conceive great hope, and proclayme liberty: the
Captain began in his conceit, to dream of conquest, and the Soldier to cry
victory, and all as the ancient saying is, (...).

The Parisiens to make him partaker of their joy, must needs inuit him: they
dressed his lodging, and served him with the best stuff and furniture of the
Kings of France, which they had riffled out of the Kings house, in the
beginning of the rebellion.

The Ladies Montpencier, Guize, d'Mayne, Aumale, and such, did welcome him so
kindly, as his great Grandfather Friar Paul Pharnese, was never better
welcome in the stews of Rome.

This feasting ended, he returned to Corbeil, there he began to enquire for all
the ingeniours that could be heard of, he will build forts and bulwarks, he
would fortify that Town so, that if the Giants of old time should put Osson
upon Pelias, and Pelias and Osson upon Olympus, yet would they labor in vain,
so strong and impregnable the Village of Corbeil should be: to be short, he
would make it the chiefest key of France, not to enter in, but to get out the
nerest way to the Arbre de Guize, by crossing Brie and Champaigne, when he
should see his time to run away.

Whilst these fortifications were a doing, this poor Duke sat daily d'Mayne
to know what he did, then to know the mysteries of Ceres.

The great matters put in deliberation in that counsel, were the mending of an
error, which he had committed before he departed from Bruxels: for there he
took counsel how to enter into France, but not how he might go forth. Now
therefore (as his sudden departing did evidently show) he took counsel how
to get out, and considered well the old saying, facilis descensus Auerni, sed
reuocare gradum hoc opus hic labor est.

As the Parisiens prayed him to go forward in his good enterprises, to open
the river for the traffik, he fed them with these great morsels of words, that
he would go to besiege Melun, Montereau, Prouins, and other small Towns
situated above Paris upon the river, and after he will go down to take
Poissy, Meulan, Mante, Vernon, Pontdelarche, etc. all these things were but one
breakefast, or at the most a days work: let him alone for his throat is so
wide, that he will swallow all these towns in one morsel: for he is
Pantagruels son, who was Gargante Pharneses Son.

During these three weeks, that he spent in consulting more about his flight
out of France, and safe return to his home, then about the fortifying of
Corbeil, the garrison of Melun did daily issue forth, upon such of his forces
as were at Colbeil, under the conduct of the Lord Gyury, and for that space did
almost live upon nothing else, but upon such booties, victuals and spoils,
which they took daily from the Spaniards, whom they daily killed or took
prisoners.

The Duke of Parma seeing that he had no means to repress the onsets of the
Lord Gyury, retired six leagues from such trouble some neighbors. At length
after the Duke of Parma had made his aboade in Paris and thereabouts, towar^
the latter end of October, the cold having cooled his war, came again to his
right wits, from which too great opinion of himself, and of his forces, and
too great contempt of others his betters, had transported him. And perceived by
the experience which he had at Corbeil, and with the Garrison of M^lun, that
having thousands of Towns in France to win by conquest, he needed after the
taking of every one, to make a new army, which was more then his master would
allow him or could do, not if he should arm all his apes of the East Indies:
beside that to perform it, he needed to have the life of Metuselah Therefore
he concluded with such poor weather beaten and women beaten Soldiers, as had
escaped from the breaches of Corbeil, to retire into Brabant, where was fairer
weather, least he should hereafter be compelled to buy repentance dearer then
he was able to pay for.

This great Cham of Tartaria had behaved himself, both in Paris and else
where, as at Lagny, Corbeil, and other places, so insolently a lo modo
Jtaliano, or Hispaniolo, that the Leaguers themselves accursed the time, that
ever they sent for such a guest, feeling by experience, that he had entered
into France, not in presidium, but in exitium, as a scourge of Gods wrath. So
that all the Frenchmen rebels, who had accompanied him with the Duke d'Mayne,
all in a manner retired home, as loathing his company, and abhorring his
doings.

He seeing himself destitute of forces (for his chiefest forces and best
Soldiers he had lost already, both at the siege of Corbeil, and in other
skirmishes) and that the leaguers had forsaken him, retired home and left him
in the briers, he thought to be high time for him to look to his affairs. And
in the latter end of October, taking his leave from the Parisiens, and
commending them to the merciful keeping of our blessed Lady, who dwells
there in the great tempell, and to the good old great S. Christopher, door
keeper of the said tempell, marched homeward through Brie.

But before his departing, fearing that he would be pursued by the King, he
went about to beguile him with dissimulations, for he procured the Duke d'Mayne
to send Vileroy to the King, to move a parley about the renewing of some treaty
of truces, that in the shadow of the same, he might slide home without any
Sun burning, using the policy of the fish, called Sepia, which powers out
his ynke in the water, that in the darkness thereof, he may avoid from the
sight of the fisher.

About the fourth day of November, the King understanding of the Duke of Parma
his retire out of Paris, supposing that it was to return home, departed from
Escouis in Normandy, with few light horsemen with him, and certain
Harquebusiers on horseback, leaving the rest of the army under the conduct of
the Marshall Byron, to employ it where he should think most expedient. About
the sixth of November, arrived at Compiegne, a Town in Picardie, situated upon
the mieeting of the rivers Oyse and Ayne, where immediately after his arrival,
he sent to the nobility of Picardy, to inuit them, to come and assist him, to
reconduct the Duke Parma, according to the honor and papal nobility of his
house, who had deserved that favor at his hand, if not for any service done,
yet for the small hurt that he had received by him.

The Duke of Parma departed from Paris, and soiorned for some days in Brie,
about Chaust heaut herij, there in that fat soil to refresh his Soulours,
hungerbitten and weak: to prove whether he might procure any of the Leaguers
(upon the misliking of seeking parley with the King) to forsake the Duke
d'Mayne, and to make him their Sovereign general, whereunto by secret
practices he solicited a great number. But specially d'Mayne, that he would
rely his forces to keep him safe, caring little what might become, either of
the Duke d'Mayne or of the Leaguers, so that he might get out of this lurch
that he saw himself in. This fear was the chiefest cause of his long
soiourne in Brie.

But whilst he was careful of his safe return into Brabant, the King had
appointed the Lord Gyury (a man of great valor and policy) to make choice of
some sufficient number of his best and most approved soldiers, and to march
toward Corbeil, there to seek opportunity to revenge the cruel injury done
to his subjects, by the Spaniards and Wallons, whereof part to the number of one
thousand were left there in garrison.

The occasion of recovering Corbeil was thus. The manner of Wallons and
Spaniards and popish nations beyond the Seas, is to drink and quaffe very
largely the tenth day of November, in the worship of that good Bishop S.
Martin, who gave half of his cloak to the devil, when he was through
poverty enforced to beg. But it is most like that they do keep that riot
more in the worship of the devil who begged, then of that good man, who in his
life time knew very well, that it is not the custom of the Church of God to
worship the Saints, neither with drunkenness, nor by any other means else.

The Lord Gyury knowing that dronken fashion of them very well, took that
opportunity to do his feate. For he delayed the time to approach the Town
until he supposed them to be so crammed with good cheer and wine, that it
was time for them to go to sleep. Then about midnight when that Spanish
garrison were vino somneque sepulti, he placed his pieces of Ordinance, and on
a sudden battered the same breach which the D. of Parma had made, which was not
yet fully repaired. The breach being quickly opened, the assault was given. The
Spaniards and Wallons half drunk and half a sleep, ran as desperate
persons to the walls, and made a very forcible resistance, which continued all
that night until nigh seven a clock in the morning.

The Duke of Parma heard the battering of Corbeil, and fearing least his
Troph^e should be marred, sent presently a power of Spaniards to succor them:
but coming too late, were enforced to cast away their weapons, as Demost henes
did, that they might fight another time.

The 11. day between six and seven of the clock in the morning, the Town
was thoroughly taken by the Kings forces, and reduced to his obedieuce, who
entered by the same breach which the Duke of Parma had done and entered before.
There were found slain two hundred Wallons, three Aumale, brother to the Duke
of Aumale, (one of the greatest cutthrotes of all the Leaguers) was found dead.
The cause of his being at that banquet, was, that he was appointed to provide
victuals for Paris.

Four hundred were taken prisoners. There were taken also four brazen pieces,
and two Canons ready charged. There were taken many spanish Ensigns which were
made new, and newly displayed upon the wall in token of victory and in spite
of the King.

There were taken also two hundred fat Oxen, and four hundred sheep, some
killed, and some dressed, and some alive, which the Knight Aumale had provided
for Paris.

This exployt being achieved, the Lord Gyury with all his companies with
fervent prayers gave thanks to God, acknowledging this deliverance and happy
success to have been the work of his right hand and power.

The news of the retaking of Corbeil, caused diverse and contrary motions in
diverse persons: the King receiving the news thereof, did admyre Gods justice,
which every where thundreth the claps of his displeasure upon them who do
resist his ordinance, and more and more conceived hope that the Lord would
perform the work which he has begun: first, in clothing his enemies with
shame and dishonor as with a garment: and secondly in him to restore that
afflicted estate.

The Parisiens and the Duke de Main were replenished with rage and fear
together: for they feared least by the taking of Corbeil, and the retire of the
Duke of Parma, the shambles of horses, asses and dogs should be opened again.
The Asses of Sorboun began to fear their skin, least for want of four
footed Asses, they should be assaulted and brought to the shambles. Therefore
they ran to the said Duke of Parma, they adjured and coniured him by the name
of God, yea by Gog and Magog, and Beelzebub, to return to the recovering of
Corbeil.

But the Duke of Parma remembering the price that he paid for the said
Corbeil, would no more of that play, specially knowing that he which did
possess it was a man resolute of courage, valor and industry. Yet to please
them, he fed them daily (until he should receive supply of forces to guard
him) with fat morsels of words, to wit, that he would take Chasteautherij and
Compeigne, and in the mean while he walked in Brie and Champaigne, in like
sor^ as the Hords of savage Tartarians do remove from place to place to grase
up the countries: so did this great Crimme, save that his cruelties and
villainies which he used there, are yet unknown to the Tartarians.

Whilst he does raunge, ransacke and riffle that country, some of the Kings
Captains took the town of Lagny, another Trophee or monument of the Duke of
Parma his cruelty, which thing both increased his France.

Now we will leave this omnipotent Cham with his hords of Tartarians to devour
that country, whose coming the unnatural inhabitants had procured to
maintain a most damnable rebellion and contempt of lawful power, and we will
see what the king had done soiourning in Compeigne, about fifteen or sixteen
days.

The King soiourned in Compeigne for these causes following. First to espy
what the Duke of Parma would attempt: for after the taking of Corbeil, he
looked daily that he would have returned back to recover it: for which cause
the said King had sent for his forces to be in a readiness at a days warning,
intending upon such occasion to try the quarrel with a days work. Secondly,
to expect the Nobility of Picardie, whom he had invited to reconduct home the
Duke of Parma, as is said.

Thirdly, that by his neighbourhead he might repress him from attempting upon
any places, which were under his obedience.

Fourthly, he stayed in Compeigne without interrupting the soiorning of the
Duke of Parma in Brie, to give leisure to the rebellions Provinces to prove
what difference there is betwixt the mild, good, just, and fatherlike
government of a virtuous and lawful Prince, and the cruel bondage, of
heathenish savage, and barbarous tyrants.

The said King during his abode there, among other deliberations concluded to
pursue the said Duke of Parma in his retire grounded upon justice, to wit, a
will and desire to punish him who had offended, as far as God should give him
power and lawful means to do it: for as much as the D. of Parma being not
provoked with injury or unjust dealing, had not only against the law of nature
maintained and assisted the rebels in his realm, enemies to all just and
lawful superiority, but also had committed horrible murders and crueltyes
contra ius supplicum, innumerable whoredoms, Sodomitries (hereditarie to the
papal house of Pharneses) and all manner of vilanies upon his faithful
Subjects, and also the necessary defense of his estate and safety of the
places, which in that country were under his obedience.

Upon this just resolution, the twentieth of November the King with his forces
departed from Coeuures in Picardie, having with him of the Nobility of that
country about five hundred horses beside his own forces, and began to march
directly against the said Duke of Parma.

It is said how the Duke of Parma departed from Paris, and made their ab^ad in
Brie: the causes also of that soiorning there have been opened, what events
also have happened during that time.

Now the said Duke perceauing that all his practices (in seeking to supplant
his friend) would not frame, understanding of the Kings preparations, for to
accompany him into his country, and that the King was all de Main had made
more speed to send him the succor promised, wished also that he might be quit
in ceasing the clampering noise of his Moiles belles: and in the mean time
about the 23. day of November he removed to the town of Phismes upon Voisle,
there within a wall he determined to expect the coming of the Duke de Main,
who was coming with speed.

The King in this retire of Parma to Phismes arrived and met a certain company
of Spanish footmen, whom he put all to the sword without the loss of any of
his men. The Duke de Maine with his forces repairing to Parma seeing all this
exploit, and durst never rescue them: that exploit done, the King went to take
his lodging in the Town Feres in Tartenoys.

The 25. of November the Duke of Parma accompanied with the Duke de Maine,
departed from Phismes, and took his way to Pontauers, which is a town
situated upon the river Esne, where he had determined to lodge the night
following.

The King having about eight hundred Launciers, and so many Harquebusiers on
horseback, sent the Baron of Biron with fifteen light horses to view the
enemy. In the mean time the King took 25. horses, and kept to the right hand
by a wood, seeking to judge by sight the enemies marching. But the Baron of
Biron brought news that the enemy was departed from a Village named Bazoges
and marched toward Pontauers. The King immediately with all his forces following
the enemy entered into the said Village, where he found few Farmers and
husoandmen armed and ready to fight in his Majesty's behalf, of whom the King
learned more particular news concerning the enemy.

The Kings Captains, but specially the Baron of Biron still pursued them, and
meeting with straglers paid them their wages for their coming so far, and
gave many onsets when occasion served, always to the enemies costs.

The 27 the King sent the Lords Fronterack, Chicot and Dauers, on the top of
Saint Martins hill to view if the enemy had put any ambushes at the hills
foot, but they saw them in the open plain marching apace toward Pontauers:
the way being without ambushes, the King sent the Baron of Biron with a troop
of horsemen, and he with an other company followed after, commanding the Lord
la Now to send him ten out of every company, and to rest the remnant.

The King made five small squadrons of fifty horses in every one of al these
companies. There was a hot alarm given in the enemies camp, and gave a dozen
onsets on the enemies. But whilst these things were a doing, the Biron charged
them, and slew twelve or thirteen of them, but his horse was killed, whereby
he was put in great danger, if he had not been rescued by the King. This fray
being begun, there was a great alarm given in the enemies camp, which began
to march toward the King. But he considering that it was better to hazard few
common soldiers the^ the Nobility, caused the companies on horseback of the
Captains, Saint Denis and Saint Foelix to light, and to charge the enemy:
there was a hot skirmish begun.

The K. in the mean time retired with his nobillity to a Village called
Longauall: thither also the Harquebuziers retired after they had fought a long
space, and in the retire Captain Saint Foelix was slain with a shot, the
Soldiers retired so leasutely that they did draw the dead corpse with them by
the legs.

When the King had passed Longauall toward Pontarsie, the Harquebuziers of the
enemy came to the wall, and in a brauing fury s^rooke with their swoords upon
the gates of the town: but being saluted with the Harquebuziers within with
shot through loope holes, and seeing many of their fellows fall upon the
place, they retired and sound the means by the guiding of a man of that Town to
seize upon an other gate, and entered about six of them. Captain Bonmouoyr
set upon them and killed two of them: the other retired.

The Harquebuziers took their horses, forsook that town, and followed after
the King, who was before to take his lodging about Pontarsy, situated upon the
river Esne beneath Pontauers, and the enemy presently entered the said Town of
Longauall. Part of the Enemies followed after the King, and seeing a Wood
between the said Longaual and Pontarsie, stayed there, mistrusting some
ambushes: but at length passing through they met with the Baron of Byron, who
charged them so roughly with a small company of horsemen, that he laid down
upon the ground thirty of them.

The King commanded Captain Langemis to light and set a fresh on them, who
killed a great number of them, and then retired into the town of Pontarsie.

The enemy went not to Pontauers that night, but encamped in the plain field
with great fear of an alarm, understanding that the Duke of Neuers with five
hundred horses out of Champaigne, and the Lords Gyury out of Corbeil, and
Parabelle out of Melun with good and Iustie companies Brabant in a whole
skin, there to prove whether they had forgotten the art of Carrowsing, the
chiefest trade of that country.

The 28. day in the morning, thirty harquebusiers of the enemies having lost
their way, went into the Town of Longaual, enquiring for the Duke of Parmas
quarter, whom the inhabitants disarmed, and throwing them under the bridge
drowned them.

The same day came to the King the said Duke of Neuers, and Lords Gyury and
Parabelle with eight hundred horses all well appointed.

The 29. day the King went out of Pontarsie with one thousand horses, intending
to give his enemies a fresh charge, and to carry away the Rereward: but their
Ordinance being stuck fast in the mire, the whole army remained all that day
in battle array in that place where their Ordinance was, and there also
encamped themselves all the night following; so that nothing could be
enterprised upon them.

The 30. day of November the King determined to did the enemy fare, well with
a fight of horsemen: the Duke of Parma with a good will would have spared that
courtesy, and be glad to get out of the Realm without so much adoo.

In the morning very early the said Duke marched toward Marle, a town nigh the
head spring of the river Oyse, from thence to get Larbre de Guize, and so to
leave the realm of France.

The King commanded all his horsemen to be in a readiness, and directly to march
toward Cressie with all furniture, yet without baggage or carriage. And being
first of all arrived at the rendes vous, unwilling to ouerslip any opportunity
to see his enemy that day, which he thought should be the day of their
separation, sent the Lord Baron of Byron to march before, and he himself to
follow him within the distance of a hundred paces only with forty
gentlemen. The Lord Longaual followed the King with fifty horses and the rest
of the Cornet. As they had marched a good space, there appeared at the side of
a Wood about six score horses under the leading of Colonel Baste, who came in
have to charge the Baron of Byron: the said Baron gave so resolute a charge
that he made them to retire to their maine battle: and when the enemy had
joined with their fellows, they came again to give a fresh charge, in the
which the said Baron of Byron his horse was killed, and he in great danger to
be slain: but the King did gather them quickly that were scattered, and with
them caused the rest of his troops to come forward: which being in battle
array, and joined with them that had bin gathered out of the skirmish, gave such
a fearful charge, that all the rereward of the enemy thought upon nothing
but upon the means how to save themselves, leaving their

The first day of December, the D. of Parma entered the dominions of the low
country. He had never so much need of his Nurce about him with clowts, as he
had during the space of these last five days of November: most of his
companies accompanied him home as well as they could: part of them remained
with the Duke de Main, until that tempest was over past.

The first day of December, the Lords of Neuers, Giury and Parabel, who were
come fresh and strong to the King, departed from the Castle of Nisy, and
pursued the enemy, marching toward the Larbre de Guize: but what exployts were
done that day we have nothing to speak off, for lack of instructions.

During this retraite, the Duke of Parma was so distressed, that he was very
greatly disappoynted of his lodgings. As he took no compassion at Corbeil of
them which suppliant fell before his knees: so pitied he no more his own
Soldiers, who could not make so good speed in running away as he could do,
but left them to ye mercy of the Peasants of the country, with whom they
found no more favor then with their master.

Of fourteen or fifteen thousand men which he brought into France, there
returned not home above eight thousand, and they were in a manner in as great
misery as their fellows, who returned into Spain from the conquest of
England in the year 1588.

The first day of December the King went to Saint Quintins, situated upon the
river of Oyse, where he was royally received with great rejoicing and comfort
of all men. And when the King had stayed there a few days, he heard that the
Lord Humiers, with other noble men of Picardie, had taken the town of Corbey,
situated upon the river Some, and in the middle way between Amiens, Peronne
and Dourlan, three great towns in Picardie, which have continued in their
rebellion.

During the time that the King soiou^ned in Picardie, and pursued the Duke of
Parma, the Marshall Byron took five strong Towns and above twenty Castles in
Normandy and Beauuoy^in, wherein the Rebels had laid strong garrisons.

By these narrations (Christian reader) thou may see what the rebels
(enemies both of God and man) having drawn upon their own heads a stormy
wind of tempest, least they should not have calamities enough, according to
the measure of their offense, they sent for the Duke of Parma to deliver them,
who coming into the land, gave them an egg and devoured the Hen, and where
they were beaten by themselves with scourges, now this deliverer did bruise them
with bars of iron.

It pleased God (in whose hands the hearts of Kings and Princes are) to turn
the Kings will from hindering the said Duke of Parma from doing all that he
durst or could do: that God might give the King to understand what therehence
he had hereafter to fear, as long as he plays the parts of a right King,
and that he is his abundant reward.

Secondly, that it might evidently appear, that as the said Duke of Parma was
not able to do good to his partakers, so came he not but to be a scourge of
Gods wrath unto them.

For he came to raise the siege from before Paris; if that had not been done by
dutiful submission, the City might have been relieved, justice and judgment
(which are more then cent^plex murus to a City) had been established: they
might have had their own Autonomie, to wi^, their Religion and Franchises in
peace, security and liberty. Their commerce and traffike (by which the
greatness of that City is entertained and nourished) had been opened: to be
short, it would have flourished more then ever it did, but the coming of the
Duke of Parma disappointed them of all these benefits.

The Duke of Parma brought a little store of victuals: but he and his consumed
not only that within a few days, but also all other provisions which could be
made for the City: so the inhabitants were hungerbitten still, and with
sorrowful eyes they saw others to intercept that which should have been their
sustenance. So that (if it were not for the Kings goodness, which by winking,
and forbearing some store of victuals to go to their market) they would have
been enforced in few days to open their shambles of horse flesh and dogs
flesh.

He came to deliver them (as they thought) from cruel hands: but what could
Busyris have done to his enemies, that this man did not to his friends? to
their wines and children?

To be short, now he is returne^ home with shame, dishonor, hunger, nakedness,
feeblenes and stripes, and they remain in a worse case then ever they were
before: for before they lived in hope of him, now they know that he neither may
nor will do them good, but has lingered their miseries, and heap of evils,
that they may perish as with a sharp and consuming sickness.

Last of all, that al men may learn by seeing the punishment of rebellion, to
submit themselves unto the powers ordained of God, as unto his ministers for
the good of the just and the punishment of the wicked and unjust, and that they
may discern between a sawfull power and (...).

It is said before how after the death of the Duke of Guyze, the Lords
Diguieres and Valete, upon a good judgment entered in league of amity, for the
Kings service, and after that separated themselves, and within a short space
scoured the Leaguers for the most part out of Daulphinee Grenoble upon Easter
day.

It is said how the Lord Valete went into Prouance, and gathering the states
of the country by a common consent, they concluded to war against the Senate
of Aix, who were the ringleaders of the rebellion, and had intelligences with
the Duke of Sauoy.

The Lord Diguieres having put the country of Daulphine in a good stay, went
into Prouance to the Lord Valete, making war against the rebellious
parliament there, and the Duke of Sauoy. The rumors went abroad that they had
lost a field, and were sent into their country with store of Bastinadoes: but
for lack of instructions I affirm nothing.

The Lord Diguieres being in Prouance with the Lord Valete, had diverse letters
from the King, but specially in the latter end of May, commanding him to war
against the Duke of Sauoy. But the said country of Prouance being assaulted
by the Leaguers of Sauoy, Lionnoys and Daulphine, he thought good yet to employ
the months of June and July with the Lord Valete, for the establishing of the
affairs of the said Prouance: wherein they had so good a success, that the
enemy in token of that cowardnesse, which their rebellion does breed in their
hearts, abandoned the towns and Castells of Peruis, Pumichet, Valansele,
Montignak, Soluiers, Pignauers and Lorgis: some were brought to the kings
obedience by force, and some by composition.

In July during the soiourning of the Lord Diguieres in Prouance; there was in
Daulphine one captain Cazete, who with intelligences which he had with the
Duke of Sauoy, would have sold him the towns of Briancon and Essiles in
Piemont, yet pertaining to the Dolphinate.

These two towns were kept by the Neutrals, that is to say, by them who would
admit neither the K. nor the Leaguers. The said Cazete had received commission
from the Duke of Sauoy, to leauie soldiers to that intent, in expecting the
arrival of four and twenty companies of Spaniards, to bring his enterprise
the more easy to pass.

The inhabitants of the valleies perceauing well, that if this traiterous
captain should prevail, great war and miserable desolations of their
country would ensue: therefore the chiefest of those valleys making
acquainted the Lord Diguieres of their purpose, determined to rid the said
Cazete out of the way, and did work so, that the fifteenth day of July his
house was blown up and he slain.

This traitor being made out of the way, the inhabitants of the valleis seat
word to the Lord Diguieres, that they would send their deputies to Ambrun, to
treat with him.

Upon the receipt of this message, the Lord Diguieres (considering the greatness
of the affairs, and that it was very expedient for the king to Briancon and
Essiles in possession, to have pass and repasse into Piemont when need should
be) departed out of Prouance, and in have marched toward Ambrun, where the
deputies of the valeys did meet him. And among other things, showed the
treasons of Cazete, by the papers which they had found in his house.

After that they bound themselves by oath to be faithful to the King, they
promised also to do their endeavor to confirm the people into his Majesty's
service and obedience: this was done about the fourth of August.

Immediately after this meeting, the Lord Diguieres being aduertized of the
wavering which the death of the said Cazete, and voluntary yielding of the
valeys, did cause in the town of Briancon, which was Neutrall, knowing also
that those who did favor the kings side in the town, began to be encouraged,
caused four Canons to be drawn and brought to that place, and after a breach
made, the enemy did parley, and came to that issue, that Clauison (appointed
there governor by the Duke de Main) surrendered the town and Castle the
tenth day of August.

Whilst the Lord Diguieres did these exployts in Daulphine, Martinengo, one of
the Duke of Sauoys great warriors, did besiege Saint Maximine in Prouance: for
which cause the L. Valete did daily solicit the said Diguieres to assist him
in the rescuing of the said Saint Maximine.

The Lord Diguieres considering the safety of Saint Maximine, to make much for
the preservation of Prouance, when as he had gone to Montgeneure, to take
Essiles, upon intelligences which he had with the governor thereof, and
seeing that there was neither certainty in all that, neither was he
sufficiently provided to force the place, was contented for that time to take
the oaths only of the commonaltie, who showed them selves greatly
affectionated unto the kings service.

These affayrs being done in Daulphine, he took his way into Prouance, and
lodged nigh Barcelona* Barcelona is a town in Piemont, in the county of Nice*
Salines an old Spanish Captain being chief Colonel of the light horsemen of
Piemont, was governor thereof under the D. of Sauoy: the said Salines
immediately after the coming of Diguieres; went forth out of Barcelona, and
assaulted the quarter where the company of footmen of Boyset, and twelve
lances of the Lord Brickmault were lodged. These companies of Boyset and
Brickmault did receive him so valiantly, that by the help of other companies
which upon the noise they heard, came running thither, that the said Salines
left behind six score dead laid upon the ground, and thirty Spaniards taken
prisoners, and he saved himself with six men only into the town, from
whence he came the fifteenth of August.

In that skirmish was hurt and taken Voluant, who two years before had sold
the strong Town and Castle of Carmaniole unto the deceased D. of Sauoy, after
the death of the Marshall Bellegard.

The sixteenth day the said Lord Diguieres took by composition the Castle of
Rosoles in Piemont, which partained unto the Duke. There was two companies of
footmen in garrison, who were permitted to depart with armor, leaving their
Colors behind.

After this exploit, the said Diguieres continuing his way, about the 22. of
August came into Prouance, he was not so soon entered the country, that
Martinengo who besieged Saint Maximine, hearing of it, removed the siege:
which thing the Lord Diguieres hearing, brought three Canons before the Castle
of Barles the 23. of August, and the 31. of the same Month took it at his
discretion.

Some time before the Lord Diguieres had fortifyed a Church called Saint Paul,
with flanks and ditches about, distant four or five leagues from Ambrun:
during the time that the Lord Diguieres soiorned at the siege which he had
laid before Barl^s, the Duke of Sauoy accompanied with three thousand footmen,
and four hundred light horsemen, came to besiege and batter with three Canon
the said Church Saint Paul, which the 31. of August he took by composition,
the same day that Barles was taken, the garri^on thereof going away with their
armor, colors and drum in battle array.

The same day, the Lord Diguieres aduertized of the siege of Saint Paul,
marched in all have to succor it, with intent also to offer a battle to the
D. and using a marvelous celerity, he lodged in Varret the third of September.
The Duke understanding of this so sudden and unlooked for arrival of the Lord
Diguieres, fell into such a dismay and fear, that he retired that night from
the mountain Larche, and marched all that night with links, being followed
the next day with his forces.

The fourth day the Lord Diguieres commanded some of his companies to follow
after the enemy, who did slay many of the rereward of the Duke, and took one
Don Pedro Vegieres a Spaniard of the guard of the Duke: he himself with the
rest marched toward S. Paul, resolutely determined to assault Saint Paul with
handie blows for lack of Canon, and having blown up one of the gates and a
breach made took it by assault, which continued three hours, and caused two
hundred Soldiers, that were within it, to be put to the sword, taking none
prisoner but Captain Strata governor of the place, and his Ensign named
Hercules Couero of Milan: of the Kings side was killed only Captain
Bouloneuue, and few Soldiers hurt, he caused the place to be rased hard to the
ground.

The said fort remained not four whole days in the Duke of Sauoy his power.

At the same time that the Duke did batter Saint Paul, which was in the end of
August, he sent his forces of Sauoy and Piemont, being four thousand footmen
and three hundred horsemen into the valey of Essiles to spoil the Country of
Brianconoys, to batter Guylestre, and over run Ambrunoys.

The Lord Diguieres understanding of this, having rased Saint Paul, presently
the fifth of September took his journey toward Briancon, and being informed
that the enemy was lodged in Chaumont, made preparation to force the passage
Selt, kept and fortifyed by the inhabitants of the valeies, sent thither the
Lord Morges his Nephew, with his company of fifty horsemen, and two ensigns
of footmen, who arriving at Selt the 19. day of September at the same instant
that they were in skirmish, he lighted with his men, and setting them in
battle array, did so both encourage his men and charge the enemy (assaulting
the fort and bulworks in sundry places with fifteen hundred footmen, and one
hundred and fourscore men of arms) that the said enemy was not only
repulsed, but also beaten with the loss of six score men lying upon the
ground.

The thirteenth day of September the Lord Diguieres after he had rased Saint
Paul, marching toward Essiles over the difficult Mountains, arrived at Douley
three leagues from Essiles, where news was brought him that the Duke (having
sent part of his forces to the Lord Sons) was gone to Nice. These news made
the said Lord Diguieres judge that the said Sons being now strengthened with
a new supply of men, would adventure to hazard the battle. And the more to
provoke him to it, determined to batter Essiles, and with four Canons which
he brought from Ambrun, over the high and (as it seems) inaccessible
Mountains began the battery, and withal showed himself every day before
Chamoys, where the said Sons was. But displeased with ye importunacy of the
said Diguieres, left Chamoys, and retired to Suze, accompanied with fifteen
hundred Harquebuziers, and five Cornets of Horsemen.

The 26. day of September the Lord Diguieres followed the enemy, and found
them at Ialasse half a league from Zuze, whom in the entering of the plain,
having but eight score horsemen, he assaulted so furiously, that beside some
footmen, he laid dead down to the ground four hundred Launciers on the
place: among whom were Clapot the elder, the Lords Montaignes and Valuernes,
17. Captains or chief officers slain or taken. Among the prisoners was
Clapot the younger wounded, and died two days after. There were also taken
prisoners Labras, Lieutenant of the Marquess Taforts, the Governor of
Bres^he, Captain Trisolts, de la Riuiere and S. Lorens. Sons also was
thought to be either slain or taken: but about midnight he came alone before
the gates of Zuze.

The 27. of September the Lord Diguieres received supply of forces, as well of
the inhabitants of the Towns of Briancon and Pons, as of the Savior, which
caused him to alter his purpose concerning Essiles, which began already to
parley, and caused him to continue the siege of the said Essiles unto the end
of the same month.

Possonnes, the Duke de Main his governor there, considering the state of the
Duke of Sauoy his affairs, seeing the Canon planted, and the Lord Diguieres
fortified with new supplies, all the commonaltie bent against him, and being
without any hope of aid or relief, the 30. of September yielded the Town of
Essiles by composition, that his Soldiers should freely depart with bag and
baggage. So by these means the passages into Piemont do remain in the Kings
power, and the country of Daulphine is limited with his old limits long
before fortified by the French Kings during the wars of Italy.

Sons (general of the Duke of Sauoy) had provoked the Lord Morges his
nephewe, to fight fifty against fifty on horseback, and appointed the place:
which thing the Lord Diguieres understanding, conducted the said Morges unto
the place, where the said Morges remained with his forces ready to accept the
offer from nine a clock in the morning, until three a clock in the evening,
and at length came a Trompetter with a letter from the said Sons carrying an
excuse.

The Lord Diguieres in attending the coming of ye enemy, had espied a passage
near Iallon, where the enemy had entrenched himself, and there lodged eight
companies under the conduct of Captain Venust: and perceauing that there was
no more hope of Sons coming to the combat appointed; he determined to spend
the rest of that day in doing some exployt, and to assault the said companyes,
who did lie upon the hanging of the mountain between Suze and Noualize: and
having found means to place one hundred Musketters, who battered the enemy
upon the side of their fort, the trenches of the enemy were forced, and
fourscore of them slain: among whom were Captains Venust, Gassard and
Charband: Captain Vilars with some other was taken prisoners, and four
companies of Senton (master of the Camp) were so scattered, that they came
never

This being done, the Lord Diguieres returned again to Essiles, and sent back
the four Canons to Ambrun, and caused two great pieces to be drawn from Gap
to Barcelona, a place situated in the County of Nice, and pertaining to the
Duke of Sauoy, he sent his forces before to besiege the said Barcelona: and
when he came himself about the eleauenth day of October, and had made a
breach, the same day the enemy did parley, and yielded themselves with safety
of their lives, leaving behind them their armor, colors, horses and baggage:
the Captains were permitted to depart

The 13. day the governor called Coreloere departed with three soldiers with
him, and as many of citizens and country men who repaired to their houses
under the Kings safeguard.

The 14. day the Lord Diguieres laid battery before the Castle of Metans,
which he slenderly battered the 15. day, only to view the enemies countenance.
But they being greatly afraid, the next night did steal away, and so saved
themselves, except thirty of them, who were intercepted by the watch.

In this way of Piemont, the Lord Diguieres had never above three hundred
horses and twelve hundred shot, and found no greater enemy then the
inaccessible height of the mountains, where over he was forced to pass the
Canon, but chiefly in his journey to Barcelona.

The City of Grenoble in the land of Daulphine, notwithstanding the truces and
good entertaynment from time to time received of the Lord Diguieres, had been
seduced after the King last deceased, and did hold still after for the League,
though not with such desperate madness and insolency as many others had done.

Now the L. Diguieres having well repressed the madness* and chastized the
rashness and folly of the D. of Sauoy, and having in a manner subdued and
pacified that country, forsook the Duke of Sauoy, and determined to scour as
much as he could, all the remnant and rags of rebellion out of that province:
which thing to bring to pass, he thought good to begin at the head, to wit,
the City of Grenoble, and as by the event which followed, it seemed that he
did besiege and distress that City: which thing caused the inhabitants to
consider that the Lord Diguieres had in a manner all the land of Daulphine at
commandment: His power was increased, and returned out of Piemont with few
victories of many: they weighed also how they were out of hope of any succor,
as well from the Duke de Main as from the Duke of Sauoy: who being taught by
the schoolmaster of fools, which is experience, would not have hereafter
great lust to return in haste into Daulphine. These circumstances caused them
well to consider the danger wherein they stood, which thing moved them to make
a motion of peace, by the which they were reduced to the dutiful obedience of
their lawful Sovereign. This peace was concluded in the suburbs of Saint
Laurence by Grenoble, the two and twentieth of December, between the Lord des
Diguieres, one of the kings privy counsel and of estate, captain of a
hundred men at arms of his Ordinances, and general of the army levied for
the kings service in the land of Daulphine

First, that the exercize of the Romish Religion, shall remain free both
within the town and suburbs thereof, as hitherto it has been, and that the
Clergy in all the province shall enjoy the full possession of their goods in
any place in the province under the kings protection.

Secondly, that the free exercize of the reformed Religion, may be publicly
celebrated within Trescloistre suburbs of the said city, without any let,
trouble or molestation.

Thirdly, that all dwellers in the same town that will continue therein, shall
personally protest and acknowledge Henry the fourth, king of France and
Navarre for their Sovereign, and shall yield to him the oath of fidelity in
like cases requisite, in the hands of the Lord Saint Andrew, president of the
court of Parliament, and Chastelard, counselor in the same court, in the
presence of the Lords of Blemew and Calignon: and upon the same oath taken,
the said inhabitants shall be maintained and restored in the full and
peaceable enjoying of their goods, offices, privileges and franchizes.

Fourthly, if any man of whatsoever calling or condition soever it be, shall
be unwilling to take the said oath, and shall be desirous thereupon to depart
else where, he shall be safely conducted to any place that they will go, and
may enjoy their goods, offices and dignities, either by sale, or by receiving
their annual fruits or stipend thereof at their choice, provided always that
they enterprise nothing against the Kings service.

Fifthly, that the custody and government of the said town shall be referred
to the Kings good pleasure, who shall be requested to provide it of such a
governor, and so sufficient garrison as he shall think meet for his service,
and the preservation of the town.

Item, that in the mean time as the Lord Arbucy, hitherto governor of the
said town, upon some considerations, cannot as yet resolve to take that oath,
that the said place shall remain in governance of the Lord Rochegiron, and
that the Lord Arbucy shall have three months respit to resolve upon the same
oath: which thing if he does, the King shall be requested to grant him
again the government of the same town.

Sixthly, that generally all the inhabitants of whatsoever calling or degree
they be, shall stand discharged and acquitted of all leuying of the kings
impost or coins, bearing of arms, treaties and practizes, even with
Forreiners, or any other acts of hostility, and that the Lord Diguieres has
undertaken, within two months to deliver unto them sufficient prouisoes for
the same from the King.

Seventhly, that the memory of all the offenses past in all these troubles,
Diguieres, with all other gentlemen of his party do promise, that by
themselves and by their means, such matters shall never be revived, and that
it shall not be lawful to call such things to remembrance, and that it shall
be forbidden to argue or quarrel about it, that all the kings subjects may live
together in peace, like brethren, friends, and fellow citizens.

Eighthly, that for a more perfect union of the hearts of the Kings subjects,
the Lords of the court of Parliament, who by the Kings commandment had
retired, and are yet resident at Rouan, or elsewhere, shall return with
convenient speed to Grenoble, there to follow and continue their charges.

Last of all, that within two months, there shall be summoned a general
assembly of the states, after the manner accustomed, for the hasting of the
means to discharge and relieve the people, and establish the common body of
the country.

Now Christian reader, I beseech thee to consider, both the evident and
sencible mercy and justice of God, and the difference which is between the
vessels of glory and of wrath: for this honorable L. des Diguieres in all the
wars of Daulphine, ever since the rising of ye execrable League, has never
showed any point of cruelty upon his enemies, in which there might appear any
small token of particular anger, or appetite of revenge: but always has
showed good and gracious entertainme^t, even unto the very enemies, in whom he
has marked some simple dealing, and had not used any ^normities or proud
insole^cies. If he has showed sometime some extremity, yet did he never so much
as he might have justly done, and has known in such, always some notable
injuries, which he with a just and prudent wisdom has thought to have deserved
some sharp punishment. To be short, it may be said of him, In consilijs
sapiens and prouidus, in aci^ fortis, in pace and foederibus, iustus fidus and
constans. Therefore the Lord has guided his arms, has made him victorious in
all conflicts and meetings, and has endued him with such strength of the
body, as beyond all expectation, to have surmounted the inaccessible Alps,
and at length has not only suppressed and rooted out the natural rebels of
the country, out of Daulphine and Prouance, their confederates of Spain,
Italy and Piemont, but with an incredible felicity, has restored the
afflicted state of that country, and established peace, judgment and justice.

On the other side, whereas it is the duty of Christian Princes, not to ravish
other men's kingdoms, to enuade their lands and principalities, to rob,
spoil and murder their borderers and neighbors: but to govern their Dominions
in peace, with piety, justice and discipline, to live friendly with their
Neighbors, but specially to relieve other Estates afflicted, to assist Princes
neighbors, when through disobedience and rebellion

But it fell so otherwise with France: for when through the sins of the
people, and evil counsel of Henry the third, the Kingdom was so torn with
dissentions and rebellions, that it seemed as in a shipwreck the pieces did
fly abroad, exposed to every man that could catch and hold. First the King of
Spain (who had been this day a Muscleman, and not a Catholic, if it had not
been for the kings of France) with his Gold thought to have all.

Secondly, the Duke of Sauoy (who whithout the goodness of the Valoys, had been
a pety and a poor Duke) made his reckoning to go away with the Provinces of
Daulphin and Prouance, bordering upon him, for his part.

Thirdly, the Duke de Main (who without the gracious favor of the Valoys, had
layn obscure in the Mountains of Lorrein, there a digging for brass in the
cauerns thereof) made his accampt of some scambling among the other, as to have
carried away all that bordereth to Lorreyn: d' Aumale made his reckoning of
Picardie, and Merccur of Britayn.

Last of all, Friar Sixtus, and after him Friar Gregory the fourteenth thought
by these means to maintain their tyranny in that Realm. All these I say
were so far from doing the duties of Christian Princes and Pastors of the
Church, in assisting the right owner of the Crown, and in preserving that
Realm, as one of the chiefest members and ornament of Europe, that even as the
Edomites in the sacking of Jerusalem crieddowne with it, down with it even to
the ground: so have they not in words but in kindling and nourishing the flame
of rebellion, and assaulting by all means the said Realm, have increased the
plagues and multiplied the sorrows of that aflicted state.

Therefore behold the Lord has accursed their arms, and as for the Duke of
Sauoy his own hand has weakened him, so that he durst never come to see the
said Lord Diguieres in the face one way, but he is gone out of the field seven
ways. He did never in all these wars any thing with valor, but by treachery
and treasons, as the taking of Carmagnole, and his practices in Prouance do
testify: thousands of his most approved and skillful Soldiers and Captains
have been killed by few, not only in their invasions attempted in Daulphine and
Prouance, but also at home, where the said Lord Diguieres has forced their
strong holds, has put them to the sword, and cast their carcases on their
mountains to be meat for the beasts of the field, and fowls of the air. See
therefore how contrary licours do flow out of contrary vessels, and how the
Lord protecteth the virtuous and just, according to his promise, and clotheth
the wicked with calamity, shame and dishonor, as with a Cloud.

Here ends the eight Book.
THE NINTH BOOK.
I Have declared in the former book those events which happened in the year
1590. and how the King conducted very courteously the Duke of Parma, if he would
have taken it so, and how the said King retired to Saint Quintin in the
beginning of December 1590. but what course he took, nor what coast he
followed I have nothing to speak of for lack of instructions, except we may
gather some thing by the events.

It seems therefore, that the King after he had soiorned some days in
Picardie, he returned to his army which he had leftin Normandy, where he
took advise concerning the city of Chartres, great, mighty, strong and rich,
situated in the country of Beausse. This is that City whereunto K. Henry the
third soiorned for a time after he was put to flight from Paris in May 1588.
This City is ancient and famous for the ancient superstition of the Druides,
and in our days for the renowned Idol of our Lady of Chartres: that City
has been therefore both with the Pagans, and with the Romanists a seat of most
damnable Idolatry, and of late one of them which rebelled first of all against
Henry the third after the death of the Duke of Guyze, and had continued still
in the same rebellion.

In the beginning of January therefore the King having prepared all things,
determined to wrest this City out of the tyrannous bondage of Leaguers, and to
enforce the same to return to their duty.

And for lack of instructions of all the notable exploits done in that siege,
we have to show two things.

First, of a stratagem used by the King: and secondly of the yielding of the
same.

This town of Chartres is very strong both by art and nature, yet was it not
very well provided of Soldiers besides the Citizens and Townsmen.

After that the King, acompanied with his own forces and the Marshal Biron,
having lain long time about the said Chartres, came to his camp, he perceived
that it would be very difficult to obtain the same by force: therefore he
advised himself to prove what might be done by stratagem. And about the
fourteenth of February he separated himself from the Marshall Biron, and
faining to give over that siege, marched toward Dreux, giving out that he
would go to besiege the same, and went but three miles from the said Chartres.

The Marshall Biron in like manner seemed the next day (which was the fifteenth
of the said month) to raise up the siege, and to follow the King, as though
he dispaired to do any good there.

They of Chartres with such forces as they had, seeing that, resolved
themselves to make a sally, and to set upon the rereward of the Marshall Biron,
as he was marching toward Dreux: upon this determination they issued out of
the town, and roughly charged the Marshals hinder troops.

The Marshall first seemed to make head against them, but soon after began to
retire himself, giving place to the enemies.

The enemies followed him amayne continually skirmishing, until they came
about two miles from the Town.

In the mean time the King lying in ambush, when he saw his time got between
the Town and the men thereof that followed the Marshall of Biron, and so
courageously charged them behind: and the Marshall turning his face toward
them again, that in less then an hour that they fought he slew them all,
except thirty cuirasses which hardly escaped.

The King following the victory, entered presently one of the Suburbs of
Chartres. The townsmen seeing this, began to make a motion of peace with him,
and offered to deliver him the town, and fifty thousand crowns, upon
condition that he would remove his forces, and place no garrison therein:
which the King refused to do, and thereupon prepared to batter the town in
two places, having resolved not to leave it until he were master of it.

For lack of instructions we omit here many particularities and exployts
valiantly performed at that siege. During the which siege, the inhabitants
(enforced by ye rebellious Leaguers which were many) showed themselves very
malicious and obstinate against him, refusing to acknowledge him for their
Sovereign, with threatenings and breathing out most vnreuerent and unnatural
speeches against him.

The King in that siege having made diverse times many breaches, gave assaults
upon them, which they endured with great losses, until they saw their walls
wonderously battered and beaten down to the plain ground. Then offered they
diverse times to yield up upon certain conditions. But the King answered, that
it was for him to give them law, and for them to receive it at his hands.

The King did delay the sharpnes of war, hoping through consideration of the
extreme danger, to bring them to reason and duty. But when that would not
prevail, about the 16. day of April there was a great and terrible assault
given, which the inhabitants notwithstanding sustained, but very hardly and
with great loss.

The wisest and best sort of the inhabitants, considering that it was in vain
to with stand the King, and that in few such feasts all their citizens might
be spent, and yet the King nevertheless would enjoy the City by force, which
would redound to their extreme perrill, agreed to yield themselves to his
gracious clemency.

There was a great number of Leaguers within the City, who understanding of
this resolution, showed themselves greatly offended at it, threatening the rest
that they would make them repent that ever they went about such matter.

The rest of the citizens seeing this discontentation of the Leaguers,
consented that the said Leaguers who were so obstinately bent and so hot in the
cause, at the next assault should defend the breach. So the eight day a new
assault being given so hot, that a great number of them were there thoroughly
cooled, and the rest glad to retire and give over, and with the rest without
any further disputation did submit themselves, perceauing now that the League
did nothing else but seek the ruin and destruction of the country, and that
in vain they did resist him whom God had said should reign over them.
Therefore they agreed to send to his majesty, offering to acknowledge him
their only King and Sovereign, and to crave pardon for their disobedience and
unnatural rebellion, yielding themselves and their City to his accustomed
gracious mercy.

The King granted their petition, and having seized upon the City by such as
were appointed by his majesty, with his Princes and Nobles prepared to enter
the town.

The ninth day of April the citizens considering with thankful minds the
Kings great and gracious favor, who might have had conquered them by force,
and by law of arms justly taken away from them their lands and goods, and for
their rebellion put them to the sword; they I say prepared themselves in their
degrees to attend his Majesty's coming. First the whole Clergy went before
in their attire and order: next unto them the Magistrates with their robes, and
after them the Citizens followed every man according to his place, and all
falling down upon their knees before the King, did acknowledge him their
Sovereign with this acclamation: God save Henry of Bourbon our merciful and
gracious King, long may he live the noble King of France, with great reverence
and submission craving pardon, and showing themselves sorrowful for their
rebellion and offenses committed against his majesty.

The King considering their repentance and submission, pardoned them with
loving, gracious and comfortable words: whereupon were the keys of their city
delivered him, who received them with amiable countenance. These things being
done, the Citizens marching before, the Magistrates after, and the Clergy
following them, conducted the King and his Princes Henry of Bourbon King of
France and Navarre.

It is said before, how the Lord Diguieres had pacified Daulphine, has
assaulted the Duke of Sauoy abroad and at home.

The Duke of Sauoy seeing himself hardly matched, advised how to molest the
said Lord Diguieres, sent to his good master the King of Spain to be
revenged: therefore they took this advise, to send four hundred light horses
of Naples, with some of the best of the old garrisons there, into Piemont,
which by reason of the swiftnes of their horses, should molest the land of
Daulphine with daily courses, roades and invasions.

These four hundred Neapolitanes having taken counsel how to enter the land
of Daulphine with a swift pace, had not determined with what pace they should
get out. They therefore ran as swift as their horses could go as far as
the fort Bow, where the Lord Diguieres meeting stayed them so, that they are
not like to go ever to Naples again, to tell news unto their Curtizans of
their light horses being there all slain, only a few excepted.

There it appeared to them, that the best war is not in Italy, nor the best
soldier of Naples, and that there is a great difference between the soldier
trained up in Military Discipline, and daily employed to great and weighty
affairs, and him who under the name of soldier is moulten in filthy
pleasures in the Stews of Curtizans, as these were. There appeared also how
the horse is but a vain thing to save a man in an unjust cause, and that they
were but robbers who came to spoil and molest them that had never proffered
them wrong. This exployt was done about the beginning of March, as I can
conjecture.

The Lord Digueres having cut short those insolent Italians, determined to
pursue some forces which were retiring out of Daulphine into Sauoy again,
whom he followed so short, that he entered the city of Chamberie,
Metropolitan of Sauoy. This is a great City, famous for the strange Idolatry
used in the same: There is an old filthy ragge, some gowtie clowt of some
gowtie Friar, they have made the world believe (such is the spirit of Idolatry
in them that know not God, and such is the spirit of Avarice in them that
apply religions to gain) that it was the shroud wherein Christ was buried,
therefore certain times of the year, there was a resort of inf^nite
m^ltitudes of people, of diverse countries and nations, which came to worship
that holy ragge, and pray holy (...) ora pro nobis.

The Lord Diguieres having taken the same, sacked and spoiled it: but having
not forces sufficient to munit and keep it, left it, and returned

Whilst the Lord Diguieres was in Sauoy, the Duke of Nemours, governor of
Lions, descended from Lions with his forces into Daulphine, desirous to have
surprised some towns in that Province, in the absence of the Lord Diguieres.
But the said Diguieres in returning home from Sauoy met him, and so charged
him, that after he had slain most of his horsemen, put him to flight, and
followed him so hard, that the inhabitants of the City clean burned the
suburb called Guiltiere, being very fair, great and rich, fearing least the
said Lord Diguieres would have entrenched himself in the said Suburb.

Whilst these things did so pass in Daulphine, there happened in Prouance,
that certain great practizes were discovered to the loss of the author, as the
old saying is, (...).

The Lord Dampuis, Lieftenant to the Duke of Sauoy in Prouance, being resident
at Aix the Metropolitan City there, had wrought a treason to surprise the
City of Tarascon, situated upon the ^iuer Rosne, by the means of certain
Dominican Friars and thirty or forty of the inhabitants of the town, to
whom he had made many fair and large promises.

The bargain being made, the means and time must be sought out, which were in
this wise; about midnight the black devils Friars should rise to sing their
holy mattens and black santus, and should give the watch word with three
strokes of the bell: whereupon the traiterous Citizens should seize upon one of
the gates, and the L. Dampuis should have come to the gate with five hundred
Cuirasses, and 5. hundred Harquebusieres, who should have entered by the means
of the traitors who were within.

This counsel could not be kept so close, but it came to the ears of the
Lady of Oruano, and one captain Corses, by whose diligence and good order
used, the treazon was disappointed in the manner as follows.

The governor having intelligences of their intent, and whole platform,
caused the Friars and their accomplices ^he night before to be taken and laid in
sundry prisons: the night appointed to work the feate being come, an ambush of
certain soldiers of his companies was set out of the town in a convenient
place: the said governor also had appointed a company as well of his
soldiers as of the faithful citizens to stand in silence within the gate of
the City, until the watch word agreed between the Friars and the enemies,
should be given with three strokes of the bell.

All things being in a readiness, and the time come to work, the Lord Dampuis
came unto the gate with his companies according to promise, harkening to hear
the watch word, and to be admitted into the City by the accomplices.

Well the three strokes of the bell were heard, the ambush began immediately
Dampuis taken prisoner, and so wounded, that two days after he died of the
wounds: so the Town was preserved from sacking, and the people from murder
and bondage, and both the town and People reserved to their kings service:
this was done about the end of March.

About the self same time the County of Carces had wrought another such
practice also against the Town of Tolon, by the treason of the chiefest
Consul and other Towns men, which was in like manner discovered, and the
conspiratours apprehended and chastised.

We have said before, how the Senate of Aix in Prouance were rebels, who not
only had committed treason, but also solicited others to the like offense. The
said City had admitted the Duke of Sauoy for their Sovereign, who had put in
garrisons to keep them in subjection, and about the beginning of this year
began also to build a citadel in the City: whereupon the people fell to a
mutiny, refused to receive any more garrisons in his be hoof.

The City of Marseilles is an ancient Colonie of the Greckes named Phocoei,
who forsook their country, when Cyrus king of the Persians did war and subdue
Asia the lesser, that city had been commended in the time of the Romans, by
reason of learning and good discipline which flourished there. It is a City
governed by their own Magistrates, as Rochel is under the protection and
obedience of the kings of France, and has continued very long in their
sidelity, until now a days degenerating greatly from their ancient virtue,
they have showed great inconstancy in their duty of sidelity upon these
occasions.

The king of Spayn has been greatly jealous of that City, and has used all
the means possible to reduce that Town under his obedience, since that he
dreamed of some possibility to invade France, supposing that it would have been
a fit Port, as a gate for him to pass and repasse, to go in and out of France
upon all occasions at pleasure. To be short, to make it an Arsenall to subdue
all those Southernly Provinces lying upon the Mediterran Seas. Therefore at
the beginning of the League this city was one of the pledges that should have
been delivered him by the Leaguers: which practices have been put to execution
twice all ready, but through the watchful diligence of some faithful
Citizens have been disappoynted of their purpose.

The King of Spayn notwithstanding the great charges, which he sustained by
giving great p^nsions unto some Captayns and Inhabitants there, to favor his
proceedings, seeing himself still disappoynted, yet Sauoy their neighbor for
their Protector, supposing by these means in time the faction of the League
prevailing there, to make himself master of that place.

The Citizens corrupted with Spanish money, and otherwise greatly addicted to
Popish vanity and superstition, to continue this Spanish liberality among them,
and to please thus far the king of Spain at his request, accepted the Duke
of Sauoy for Protector of their City: and in sign that they were Leaguers,
advanced the Standerd of the holy League, and set it upon their walls, which
is an Idol, which they called the Crucifix, in that state they continued nigh
a year.

But now understanding the cogging and double dealing of the said D. at Aix, in
intending and attempting there to build a Citadell, and how both the nobillity
of the Country had forsaken him, and the people resisted his attempts, pulled
down the Standerd of the League, and erected the arms of France, publishing
that they would hold for the King of France.

We have left the King with his Princes at Chartres there to take possession
of that great, rich and flourishing City, and have walked through part of
Piemont, Daulphine and Prouance.

Now let us return to Chartres, there to know what the King does, and show
also the prosperous success which have followed the taking of this City of
Chartres.

The City of Chartres being in the Kings power, the Parisiens conceived a
great amazement and terror, knowing very well that this exploit would be a
scourge unto them.

For as in the ancient time Alexandria and Sicilia were the Nurces of Rome, so
the country of Beausse and this City of Chartres were the chiefest prouiders
for the City of Paris. Now therefore the carriage of any kind of victuals and
provisions being stopped both above and beneath the river, from the North side
and the South, and finding themselves destitute of victuals, money, and all
other warlike provisions for their strength and succor, they fall to their
old custom: that is, to demand bread of their Idols: therefore the Bishop of
Placentia, their Friar Gregory the thirteenth his Legate, after the return home
of Friar Henrico Caietano, Sponte insanientes instigat, set them on to running
and gadding about the streets, to carry their Idols with or a pro nobis, there
is mourning, weeping and be^ayling, there is stridor dentium, horror
^empiternus and regnum tenebrarum. Yet the Friars and I^suits do comfort them
with seditious sermons, and bitter words as well as they can: but venture non
habet aures.

During the Kings soiourne at the siege of Chartres, the Duke de Maine with
such power as he could make, went and laid the siege before Chasteauthierij,
situated upon the river Marne. The governor which was within, s^nt word to the
King that he would hold it against the enemy a whole month.

The King having taken order of the safe keeping of the City, about the
twelfth day of April removed his army from Chartres to Aulneaw and Macheuile,
which towns were reduced to his obedience.

About the fifteenth day, the army removed to Dourdan, which town immediately
his army entered by force, where was found great store of victuals gathered,
with intent to be conueighed to Paris.

The sixteenth day, the castle a very strong place, was assaulted and taken.
So by this expedition Paris is disappoynted of victuals and provision, and
distressed nearer and nearer.

The same day the King separated himself from his army, and leaving the same
to the leading of the Marshall Biron, with a great troup of horsemen took his
journey toward Chasteauthierij, purposing to raise the siege, and to see his
face, whom he had not seen many years before, and to crave more acquaintance.

The Duke de Main ashamed and afeard to show his face, for the guiltines of
rebellion and parricide, procured, had no great liking of that acquaintance,
neither durst be so bold to stay there, and contrary unto the, promise of the
captain of the place and the Kings expectation, the Castle being r^ndred to
the said de Maine, he fled as fast as his horse could carry him to the City of
Reames.

The King hearing not only of the hasty retire of the Duke de Maine from
Chasteauthierij, but also that he had divided his army into sundry parts; and
that they should continue in that sort for a certain time, determined to stay
at Sanlis, there to view the countenance of the enemy, and in the mean while
to take the towns of Dowserie and Claye where the enemies kept garrison: which
thing was speedily done. In this pursuit the king also took the town of
Tremblay by Mountfort, which is now a great hinderance fo the enemy by reason
of the passage.

The one and twentieth day of April, while the King pursued the enemies, the
Duke Espernon, and the Lords d'Ho and Vicres understanding of a great number of
boats as great as lighters, laden with corn, money, and other provision of
war, going from Chasteauthierij down the river of Marne to victual Paris, set
forward with great diligence to overtake them: which having done, with great
speed were sunk in the midst of the river, to the number of fifteen of the
greatest sort, with all the provision that was therein, few small boats of the
lesser sort escaped toward Meaulx.

The same day the King understanding of some companies of the enemies, who were
lodged in certain villages between la Fere and Chasteauthierij, being the
greatest part of the forces of the enemies, departed early from Senlis to
Crespij, a town in Valoys.

But for all the Kings secret and sudden departure, yet by that time he had
passed five miles, he understood that his coming upon conjecture being blazed
among the enemies, they had fled and passed beyond the river Marne, with great
amaze and terror: this is according to the saying of the wise, that says: that
the Kings countenance scatters the wicked.

The 22. of April, the King from Crespij where he was returned, took his way
to Chauny, intending to take the Castles of Manican and Genlis: and for the
better effecting of his purpose, he caused two great Canons of Ordinance to be
brought from Compiegne. But they who were in Manican Castle did not attend but
left the place, and fled before he arrived there.

The 24. of April, the King caused the said Ordinance and more which was
brought from S. Quintins, to be brought before Genlis: but at the sight of the
Ordinance the said Castle of Genlis yielded unto the King.

About the same time, two regiments of garrisons of the Leaguers were repayring
to the Duke de Main, whereof the Kings garrison of Saint Goubin having
intelligence, issued forth upon them and put many to the sword.

The Duke de Main had received seven companies of Germans, being nine
Ensigns, who most wickedly as Mercenaries and slaves to their own
covetousness, had for money consented to defend one of the most notable
Rebellions that ever had been, hated of God, and detested of all good Princes
of the world.

Them the Duke de Main in the division of his army, as is above said, had
placed in certain Villages between the rivers of Marne and Oyse, intending to
place them in Meaulx and Soyssons: and as they marched they came to Coussie,
where they supposed to be received: but the gates of the town being kept fast
against them, and hearing a rumor of the Kings coming, such a sudden fear
fell upon them, that they fiercely ran into the Forest, hoping thereby to
save themselves.

The garrison of S. Goubin hearing of this amaze of the enemy, sent fifcie men
on horseback, conducted only by a Sargeant, went forth, and taking about
fourscore peasants of the country with them, marched into the Forest.

This small company was greatly encouraged, by hearing of the arrival of the
King from Genlis, and pursued after these companies, and charged them so
roughly, terrifying them with this voice; Viue le roy. Immediately the enemy
supposing the King to have been there indeed, in great la Fere. Their Colonel
was slain, and all the Ensigns taken save two only.

About 29. of April, the Lord Humiers knowing that the company of horsemen of
Mountcaure had assembled in a Village not far from Corbeil, departed out of
the said Town of Corbeil to charge them. As he went about that exployt, he met
by chance the company of horsemen of Dourlay, whom he charged in that
skirmish: most part of the enemies were slain, part were taken prisoners, and
few by flight saved themselves.

The company of Mountcaure were in ye village playing some at cards, some at
^ice, some drinking, and some sleeping, guarded negligently with a small watch:
the Lord Humiers having done this exploit, ceased not to prosecute his former
enterprise upon the said Mountcaure his companies, who marching forward and
coming to the village where they were, set upon them unlooked for, like a
sudden tempest which should fall suddenly from heaven, whom finding busied (as
is aforesaid) easily discomfited them, killed them, and took them without any
resistance.

The King having in a little space eased that part of Picardie, which bordreth
upon Brie, of the insuries of the rebels, beaten the enemies which executed
intolerable oppressions, between the rivers of Oyse and Marne, as is said,
was advertised that the enemy was in fi^ld in Britain: his Majesty took his
journey thetherward with a small company, and had there that success which
follows.

The Lord Tremblay did command in a town in Britain, named Monconter, where
is a castle of reasonable strength, wherein he had set a garrison, and departed
thence to go to do some exploit fifteen leagues off about the beginning of
May.

The enemy aduertized of the absence of the said L. Tremblay, took the said
Monconter, but they of the castle held out, attending the succor which was
com^ing from diverse parts unto them.

The L. Tremblay having speedy intelligence of that which was past in
Monconter, took his journey with 50 light horsemen, resolved with that small
company to enter into the Castle with ladders, which he performed. And after
out of the said Castle he made diverse issues upon the enemies in the Town
with terrible slaughter of them.

Many of the nobility of Britain being then at Renes, understanding of the
stir of Monconter in the absence of the Prince D'ombes, who was a little
before ridden forth about eighteen miles from the said Renes, Monconter,
intending either to rescue the said town out of the enemies hand, or else to
let their further enterprises: their forces came to two hundred footmen well
furnished: these companies bring in all three hundred and fifty men came about
two furlougs from the said town of Monconter, there to stay for other
companies, who came from other places for the same purpose.

Whilst these preparations were a making, the Lord Saint Laurence, Marshall of
the army of the rebels under Merceur, had entered into Monconter with three
hundred horsemen well appointed, and one thousand Harquebuziers, intending to
fortife that town against the King.

But in the mean while, the King in proper person with six score horses only
had marched so far as Londiak, intending to search out the enemy.

The Lord Saint Laurence advertised of the Kings coming, considering that
there was mustering round about, knowing in his conscience the Kings just cause
and wisdom, and mistrusting the quarrel of his side, conceived a great
terror, and perceived to have cast himself so deeply into the Mire, that if
policy does not pluck him out, he is like there to stick fast a good while.
Therefore considering the small company which was about the King, determined to
assault him with many: and for to bring to pass this his intent, supposing the
better to depart from Monconter in time, then to enjoy it a while to his great
damage: he departed from Monconter about 11. a clock in the evening with two
hundred and fifty horsemen, and six hundred Harquebuziers, and traveling all
night came to Londiak by six a clock in the morning, being the twelft day of
May.

The King being at Londiak, and understanding of the enemies coming, delayed
no time, but went immediately to the field to receive the said enemy. The
enemy perceauing the K. to have determined to bid him battle, and to be
already in the field, left part of his footmen to force the trenches and
barricadoes of Londiak: and this being done, the enemy brought his horsemen
and part of his footmen into the field to encounter the King, there he divided
his companies into two troops, in the one there was fifty horsemen, and in the
other two hundred. The King had but six score horsemen, whom he divided
likewise into two troops, in the one thirty, and in the other ^ourescore and
ten horsemen. The King having set few footmen in battle array, called with a
fervent prayer upon the name of the GOD of armies, and cheered up his
soldiers, encouraging them to show themselves men, in defending such a just
cause as they had in hand, which being done both armies joined, and the enemy
having made a very small resistance, was strooken with a sudden terror, as
if it were Londiak, to a town holden by their favorers, where these horsemen
saved themselves. There were fifty horsemen slain, as many more taken
prisoners, many footmen slain on the place, and many both horsemen and footmen
wounded. The rest of the footmen saved themselves by flight into the woods
which were near at hand, and there hid themselves. Lo how there is neither
strength nor counsel against the Lord: Lo how the wicked is snared in his
own counsel.

The news of this foil being blazed abroad throughout the enemies troops, came
also to Monconter, by means whereof there rose such a sudaine fear among
them, that immediately they retired from the said Monconter with all possible
speed, leaving the town free from any strength of the enemy.

The Lord Tremblay being in the Castle, and molesting the enemies daily by
sallies and slaughters of them as is said, seeing how wonderfully God had
terrified that rebellious route, went forth of the Castle with his forces,
followed them, and immediately charged them so roughly, that they were all
slain and taken prisoners, by means whereof he got both bag and baggage
from the enemy: So was that accursed company (enemies of mankind) utterly
rooted out.

It is said before how the Lord D'ombes had gone from Renes into hase Britain
to a Town called Quinpercorenten, and in departing out of the said Town to
return to Renes, the garrisons of the enemies in towns about holden by them,
charged upon the said Prince, but were so received by him, that there was
slain of the enemies side three Captayns of name and of great estimation among
the Rebels, seven gentlemen of great account were taken prisoners, all the
rest in the pursuit were put to the sword.

Here thou may see (Christian Reader) that all these blows, slaughters and
overthrows every where received, cannot make these damned rebels consider the
wrongfulnes of the cause, which so obstinatly against all laws of nations,
against nature and against God they do defend.

As the rebels have been beaten even with a rod of iron by the Lords hand in
his wrath both in Picardie and Britayn: so now have we to consider an other
example of Gods justice executed upon rebels in the Country of Caux in
Normandy.

In this Month of May, victuals being dear wares in the City of Roan, one
regiment appertayning to the Duke of Lorreine, and the other to the Lord de la
Lownde departed out of Roan, and planted themselves in a Cinqcens, determining
there to abide, and to surprise such victuals for their maintenance as they
could come by, until the next harvest should provide more plenteously, there
they fortifyed themselves with Trenches and Barricadoes: this place is distant
9 Leagues from Diepe. They fearing to be molested from Diepe, had placed a
troop of horsemen in a wood distant two leagues from the place which they had
fortifyed, being fully in the high way from Diepe, supposing if any forces
should come from Diepe upon them, they might retire back to give intelligence
unto the said Regiments, or else by making resistance should give leisure to
prepare themselves, and to procure a fresh supply from Roan, to back them if
occasion should serve.

The Lord Chartres commander of Malta, governor for the King in Diepe, and
Sir Roger Williams an English gentleman of great valor and experience in
military affairs, who lately came thither, having received intelligence of
that fortification of Cinqcens, and intent of the enemy, resolved speedily to
depart from Diepe in the evening the 19. day of May, and travailing all night
came to the wood early in the next morning, having with them four hundred
French men and three hundred Englishmen. There they found a troup of horsemen
to stop their passage, upon whom they made a very fierce assault. But they that
came from Diepe gave such a hot charge upon them, that all those horsemen were
so slain, that none of them escaped any way. Thus they leaving the dead bodies
of the horsemen in the wood, and taking some of their horses, the Governor and
Sir Roger Williams passed a long to Cinqcens, and being come thither before
noone, they discryed the enemy with their Ensigns displayed within the Fort.

The Governor of Deep perceauing their fortification so strong, alleged that
it was impossible to enter it, and therefore went about to persuade Sir Roger
to go back again, considering that the enemy was two to their one.

Sir Roger answered, that it were a great dishonor for him so to do, and
determined to set upon them with his own three hundred men, though it should
cost both him and them their lives: and with this resolution advanced his
Colors, marching toward the enemy, intended (by the assistance of God to
enter upon them, or else to lose his life in that place.

The Lord Chartres seeing that most honorable resolution of Sir Roger, was
wonderfully encouraged to the enterprise: and thereupon protested to take part
also in the said attempt with his four hundred Soldiers, whatsoever should
chance: and thereupon displayed his Ensign, and together with Sir Roger vowed
(by Gods assistance) to enter the Barricadoes and to charge the enemy.

The said Lord upon this resolution cheered up his Soldiers, and willed

Sir Roger in like sort, like a true Christian Knight, encouraged his
Soldiers, showing unto them, that although few of their side have to deal
with a great multitude skillful, stout, hardy, and trained up in Martial
Discipline: yet considering yt their cause is but an execrable rebellion
against their Sovereign, they are but a multitude of traitors, opposing
themselves to Gods ordinance, therefore condemned of God to a shameful death,
both here and in the world to come. He assured them that God will assist them
in the execution of his sentence pronounced against them: he alleged the
common experience in all ages and Nations: he concluded that the God of
battles will so fight for them, that their eyes shall have their desire upon
them, as upon enemies of God, of man, society and nature. He assures them,
that in putting their confidence in GOD, not one hair of their heads shall
fall: which when he had finished to speak, he prays unto the Lord with
great confidence. And when he had ended prayer, he made them to promise each
unto other to die every man rather then they would fly one foot.

These things being done, they marched forward with great courage, displayed
their Ensigns, struck up their Drums, and with their Trompets sounded
defiance, and with this resolution full of confidence, these valiant English
Soldiers gave a fierce charge upon the enemy, and assaulted them in such
sort, as if they had not travailed all night. This fight continued two hours
space, the English men still hartening the Frenchmen. At length they entered the
Barricadoes of the enemy. Sir Roger being one of the foremost fought hand to
hand with the chiefest governors of the enemies. The governor of Deep on
another side entering, did valiantly behave himself: at length the enemy began
to recoyle back, and being all enclosed within their Barricadoes, as a flock
of sheep in a Sheepcot, were all put to the sword by the English and
Frenchmen, suffering none to escape alive.

Having obtained this wonderful victory, upon their knees in the same place,
gave thanks unto GOD which had subdued their enemies under foot, and with
singing of Psalms gave the praise unto the highest.

All that the Governor and Sir Roger Williams lost, were not above eleauen
men, and few wounded, but not very grievously.

This exployt being so prosperously done, the Generals took order not to stay
there at any hand, but speedily to return to Deep, least some new fresh
supply should come from Roan upon them, or by casting about should meet them
in the midway homeward. They gave order also that the Soldiers should leave
the spoil behind them, to the end they might not ouercharge themselves with
carriage.

The Soldiers obeying the counsel of their Commander, took nothing but that
which was light and easy of carriage. Thus safely they returned to Deep. The
enemy as it was supposed came with a great power to meet them in the midst
of the high way: but they had passed four hours before, and so the enemy
disappoynted of his purpose returned back.

We have showed before how the King having had a prosperous success in
chastising the Rebels in Picardie, went in person into Britain, where
likewise God prospered his ways.

Whilst the King was in Britain, his army soiourned for a time at Vernon,
waiting to surprise the town of Louiers, situated upon the river Eure between
Pont de larche and Eureux. The particularities of this surprise could I never
hear, but such as the King himself did write unto the Prince County,
Governor for his Majesty in Anjou, Vendomoys, Toureyne, Poytow, Berry and
Limosin.

The sixth day of June, ten of the Kings men possessed themselves with one of
the gates of the town, and as it is reported by others in this manner.

There was a certain Corporal in that City, who was in great credit with the
governor of that town called Fonteyne Martel. This Corporal considering the
great wrong which the Rebels did to the King, and desirous to do to his
Majesty some service of import, practiced that there should be at several
times by six at once, a number of footmen and horsemen sent into the Wood hard
adjoining to the town, and in the mean time having won to himself four or
five Soldiers of his own company, his time came of his watch.

About noone day the said governor being at dinner, and according to his sign
given there came certain horsemen of the Kings, which he espying went
presently to the governor who had the keys lying on the table by him, and
said he marueiled that they sat so long at dinner, showing that there were some
friends come unto him. The governor commanded the said Corporal to take the
key and let them enter, which he did.

The King had caused the Baron of Byron to come near with his forces, who
soon also entered therein.

Fonteyne Martel had one hundred Cuirasses in that town, beside the
inhabitants, who obstinatly made a strong resistance to the King, which was
cause of a terrible fight.

The King himself made one of the gates of the City to yield to him, whereto
most part of the men of war and the inhabitants withdrew themselves to resist,
yet at length the Town was taken. There the Bishop of Eureux, and Fonteyne
Martel the governor of the place, were taken

There was found great quantity of Corn, Wine and Bacon, beside other
munitions, and as the report is, four thousand fat Oxen in the meadows. That
town was so fortified, that it might be called one of the Forts of France.
There the King lost about eighteen or twenty men, among whom were five
Captains.

At the selfsame time that this exployt was done at Louiers, the Lord sent
prosperous success to the Kings affairs in other countries.

The Vicount de la Guerche, a most wicked rebel in Limosin, had greatly
troubled the Kings peace in that country, and about the beginning of June had
besieged Belak, (a town in Lymosin, famous in that country, for making a
kind of rough cloth like unto Irish rugge) with two Canons, one Culuerine and
a bastard piece of Ordinance.

The Prince County being come into Poytow with an army for the Kings service,
to purge that country beyond Loyre, of the oppression and tyranny of some
remnants of rebels which were spoiling that country, and being aduertized of
the said siege of Belak, marched directly thither to raise the siege, or to bid
battle to the said Vicount, if he durst stay his coming.

The fifth day of June, having marched a great days journey, as far as Lusack,
was given to understand, that the said Vicount had withdrawn his siege, and
with his horsemen had betaken himself to Chauigny, a town in Toureine,
leaving his Canon and footmen at Montmorillon. The Prince seeing that he had
missed the said Vicount, determined to besiege the town of Montmorillon, which
the same day he caused to be summoned, but they within being not willing to
give any answer, the Prince commanded to give certain volleys of Canon: after
which he caused them to be summoned again, but they still continued i^ their
resolution to keep aloof.

The sixth day of June at five a clock in the morning, his excellency changed
the battery, which continued very furious till ten a clock in the forenoone, at
which time a breach being made, the Prince commanded to give the assault,
which was done very courageously on al sides of the town, and continued the
space of three long hours together. But in the end, the Princes forces seized
upon the high town, and compelled the enemy to retire into the low town, which
is separated from the high by the river Under, which flows through the
midst of it, where they hid themselves within a Chapel, from whence they
greatly endomaged and molested the Princes Soldiers who were in the high
town: which thing when the Prince perceived, he commanded six or seven
vo^leys of the Canon ^^ be discharged against the gate of the Chapel, which
being immediately broken, the enemy was compelled to forsake it, whom the
Princes power Montmorillon. There was slain in the town more than five
hundred foo^men, and three score Cuirasses, two masters of the field, and all
the captains slain, wounded or taken prisoners. The Prince caused many of
these rebels to be hanged, to requite that which the Leaguers had done not
long before at Saint Sauin.

There were in that town four Canons taken from the enemy, and good store of
other munition, seven Ensigns also were taken there.

The Prince lost in that exployt but one soldier of his guardes, and a
Gentleman named S. Martin. The Marshall of men at arms was hurt with an
Harquebush shot, and very few Soldiers beside wounded.

The town of Montmorillon being taken the seventh day, the towns of
Chauigny, Saint Sauin, and Blank en Berry were voluntarily yielded to the Kings
pleasure, also the Castells Bourg, Archambault, Plaisance, Belarbre, Auailles,
Belawne, Angles and Bisse, did voluntaryly submit themselves to the Kings
obedience.

Having laid down the prosperous exployts done in Lymosin and Toureyne, by the
noble Prince County, we will also represent to the reader the attempts and
unlucky successes of the rebels of Britain.

The great and famous Queen of England, among other prince like virtues of a
true Christian Princess, desirous to restablish the afflicted state of France,
sent unto the King a new supply of forces to assist him in repressing of the
rebellion of Britain, under the conduct of that noble and valiant Captain Sir
John Norris Knight, General of her Majesty's forces there.

The rumor of english forces flying in Britain, had caused noblemen and
Gentlemen about five hundred in number, with their wives and children, and all
their chiefest and most precious wealth, to retire into the City of S.
Guingcamp, strong by Nature and Art.

There were within that city besides the said nobility, three hundred good
french Soldiers, with a great number of the inhabitants, able men and
experienced.

The renowned Prince D'ombees, general of the Kings forces in Britain,
accompanied with (to the terror of the rebels) the honorable Sir John Norris,
determined to lay siege before Guingcamp, there to take all these vn^aithfull,
unnatural and bastard* Frenchmen, there heaped as if it were in a cubbe.

They arrived before the town the third day of June, and about three a clock
in the after noone the said valiant Norris having obtained to give the first
assau^t, after certain companies of French men had refused it, did so press
the enemy for the space of three hours until the night did seperat them,
that after that day, they determined not to come any more to

The enemies within defended themselves most valiantly, yet feeling so many
wounds as they had, and seeing so many dead of theirs as they saw, determined
the night following to talk of composition the next day.

In this assault, Sir John Norris lost nine worthy soldiers, three valiane
Captains, to wit, Denis, Herne, and Wolf, and about forty soldiers hurt.

The fourth day of June in the morning the Lord Norris gave a fresh assault,
with that courage, that when the enemies had sustained it with much a do less
then half an hour, the remembrance of the loss past put them in fear of that
which was present before their eyes, fearing to repent too late, they made a
token of parley, determined to yield themselves if they might find any
reasonable composition.

The General making sign to his people, willingly harkened unto them, and
promised to use them well if they would freely yield themselves. That seemed
unto them somewhat hard, therefore they couenauted that the city should not be
sacked, and that the soldiers within should depart with their weapons and
other furniture, and that they would be content to pay any reasonable sum of
money.

The assault being stayed, and the agreement concluded upon the promise of the
said General: the nobility most willingly, and of their own accord did yield
themselves, and swore obedience to the King, promising to withdraw themselves
presently every man to his own house, and to be ready to serve the King in any
his business, and paid fifteen thousand crowns, and the City 25. thousand,
which was far less then they did think they should have paid.

The soldiers were permitted freely to depart according to the agreement, and
the gates of the City joyfully were set open.

The General did not suffer any kind of injuries to be done to any manner of
persons. All these things being dove, he caused thanks to be given to God for
his gracious and favorable protection.

After the taking of Guingcampe, the purpose of the Prince was to have
assaulted the town of Morlaix, to the end to reduce it, and the base Britayne,
withal to the Kings obedience.

But Merceur, Captain of thieves, robbers and rebels, understanding the loss
of the town of Guingcamp, and of the reuolting of so many noble men and
gentlemen as had sworn to obey and serve the King, fell in a pelting Lorreine
chafe, and swore by Saint Francis holy briech that he would be revenged, and
presently removed from Pontignie, where he joined with four thousand
Spaniards, under the leading of Don Iuan de Lagula, whom he has sent for upon
the rumor of the loss of the said Guyngcamp, Morlaix by the way to Corlay.

The Prince understanding of that, and discovering the enemies forces to be of
seven hundred horses, four thousand Spaniards, and two thousand Harquebusiers
French, considered how dangerous a thing it was to engage his army before a
town, until he were master of the field, the enemy being far stronger, and
favored of the country, who on a sudden might be assisted with a multitude
of Pesants, long before armed and addicted to him: considering all these
difficulties, the said prince made a stay about the town of Guingcamp, as well
to repair the fortifications of the said town, as to attend the bringing of
two Canons, and two Culuerines, drawn from Breast to Lagnon, with certain
powder and munitions brought from England to Pinpoll, to the end that these
things being in place of safety, the said Prince might sollow the better his
other enterprises.

The seventh of June the Duke Merceur arrived at Corlay, distant three Leagues
from Guingcamp.

There is a Castle belonging to the Lady Guimeney, sister to Boysdaulphine
Lieftenaunt to the Duke Merceur, they feigned as though the said Castle did
hold for the King, intending thereby to have drawn the Prince to some
disadvantage, for the eight day the Castle rendered without the sight of the
Canon, and the governor remained with the enemy.

From thence the Duke sent a trompeter to the Prince, about certain prisoners
taken at Corlay, who signified to the said Prince, that he had charge from
the Duke to entreat him to appoint some day and place for the battle.

The Prince did greatly rejoice to hear these news, and would not return
answer by the mouth of a Trompetter which might be disanowed, but by his
writing signed with his own hand, in the which the said Prince (least the Duke
should allege any matter, either to delay or avoid the battle) does refer
to him the choice of the place for the encounter: so that it might be able to
receive both armies.

The Duke Merceur removed from Corlay the eighth of June, and came to Saint
Giles, two small leagues from Chasteau Laudran.

The same day also the Prince departed from Guingcamp about three a clock in
the morning and lodged that night at Chasteau Laudran, where the Duke Merceur
his Trompetter met him, and delivered an answer to the said Prince from
Merceur, signed with his own hand, wherein this malapert companion having
altogether trodden under foot all reverence of superiority shows the cause of
his rebellion to be both to withstand the Prince (called with lawful
vocation) and an heretical King, for the defense Corlay and Guingcamp.

The Prince to provoke this cowardly Captain through impaciency or otherwise
to battle, shows the causes of his coming into Britayne, to be to punish
him and his accomplices for their traitorous rebellion against the King, and for
the opprobrious imputations and terms which he gives to the King and to him,
he says, that therein he lies: this was the ninth day.

Merceur having received this provocation, fell to swear, fume and brag, that
he within three days would give the Prince battle. And on the ninth day of
June being Wednesday dislodged, and that day encamped himself at a Village
called Quelnec, a league and a half from Chasteau Laudran, situated at the
foot of a hill, which by deep ditches, hedges and enclosures bordereth upon a
little Heath of two miles compass.

The Prince having discovered the enemy mounted on horseback, and goes to
make choice of the place for the battle, and finds about three quarters of a
mile from the said Quelenec a large plain skirted with copses with a little
hill, and the ground raised with ditches aduantagious to the enemies, who by
three large passages might enter into the same heath.

The tenth of June, the enemy within a quarter of a league of the Heath,
shows his whole army in order of battle, upon the top of an hill.

The Prince on the other side, put his troops in order within the heath, and by
the advice of Sir Ihon Norris disposes the same in three battails, whereof the
English footmen made two, and the Launceknights the third: that day was spent
in light skirmishes, wherein the Princes men followed the enemy even into the
maine of their army.

The eleventh day the enemy drew his army to the foot of the hill, and
placed his artillery upon the side of the heath, in a place of such advantage,
as commanded the whole heath, and bordreth all the hedges with shot.

By that time the enemy had done all these things, the Princes army marched
into the heath in order of battle, and presently sent two hundred footmen to
view the enemies countenance, whom they charged, put them from their hedges
and barricadoes, and slew diverse of them.

Upon the retraite of these two hundred men, the Duke put forth five hundred
Frenchmen, and three hundred Spaniards, to repossesse the places, whom he
followed with the great of his army.

The Prince perceiving this, and remaining on the heath with the L. Hunaulday,
commanding the auangard, having his regiment of horse on the right hand, and
General Norris, the Lords of Poigny, Pruneaux, Mommartin and Bastenay, gave
order to put forth three hundred footmen, commanded by Captains Anthony
Wingfield and Murton, and Anthony Sherly.

The Prince also commanded to be drawn out of the battaillon of the
Launce-knights, one hundred men shot and pikes, and one hundred and fifty shot
lead by the Baron Molak, backed with forty light horse, conducted by the Lord
Tremblay, appointed to force ye enemy from the place which they had taken. All
these set valiantly upon the enemy, whom they enforced to flee, many were
slain, and the rest saved themselves within the defense of their artillery,
where the whole strength of the Spaniards with the rest of the army was placed.

During this skirmish, there was a great number of shot placed under the
hedges, which having means to do hurt, stood quiet as though they had
fallen asleep, or else had been placed there only to keep the hedges, least
the Prince should come to cut them down and carry them away.

In this skirmish, don Roderigo chief marshall of the Spaniards, and a Spanish
captain, two hundred French Soldiers, and threescore Spaniards were slain.

The Lord Tremblay took the Lord Guebrian, Colonel of the foot men of the
enemy.

This charge did so amazethe enemy, that the Princes men were suffered to
disarme the dead, and to lead away prisoners within ten paces of their canon,
and retired at their ^ase without any proffering to follow* Long, Lieftenaunt
to Captain Dolphin, received in his body five Harquebuses shot: the English
men behaved themselves valiantly in that charge, the residue of that day they
spent in light skirmishes.

The twelfth day the enemy made a great show to come forth to battle, but at
last sent out some number of shot to skirmish, against whom Anthony Sherley
with fifteen horse and few footmen made head, and speedely put them to
flight, and followed them to their Barricadoes, where master Kemp a Gentleman
of that Cornet was slain, Anthony Sherleys horse was shot in the head, and
Charles Blunt his horse was killed under him with the Canon, and he himself
somewhat wounded.

The thirteenth day the enemy offered some light skirmishes, but seeing that
he could get nothing by it he refused to bitte.

The fourteen day the Prince expected the battle, as undertaken by don Iuan
de Lagula, general of the Spaniards, in the worship of Saint John, whose day
it was with them. But fearing that bonfires would be made to their cost and
charges, they gave quite over the game, prepared the same night to dislodge,
and the next day following repassed the hill: for having spent al their
victuals, they must go forth to rob for more.

The Prince stayed six days upon the Heath, and in the mean while the enemy
durst never presume to draw his army into the Heath.

The sixteenth day the Lord la Now with the troop of the County Mongomery,
and the County Chombourg, came unto Chasteau Laudran, whose arrival gives
hope of good success in the Kings affairs.

They yt have written the history of wild beasts, which does recite that there
is a wild beast in Asia named Pardalis, it yields such a savor that the
Woolfe has a great delight to follow a far off, but if it chance that this
Pardalis does look back, immediately the Woolfe retyreth and flies away.

So the Noble Princes of Bourbon do yield sweet savor of piety, virtue and
valiantnes: Merceur follows them a far off, but if they turn their face
he runeth away, as it has appeared in the things which heretofore he has
attempted in Poytow.

There is a town in Picardy situated upon the river Oyse, called Noyon,
commended (if there were none other cause) for being the place of the nativity
unto that man of God John Calvin of blessed memory, whose name is written in
the book of life, and shall yield a sweet savor to the true Church of God to
the worlds end, whatsoever Satan does rage against the name of this servant
of God.

This town was seduced long before from the Kings obedience by the Leaguers,
and through rebellion was possessed by the Kings enemies. The King therefore
after the taking of Louiers, thought expedient to remove his army from
Vernon, and to draw Eastward, that doing still some profitable exployt, he
might expect and receive the forces that came to him out of Germany: and
considering that the said town of Noyon did lie between S. Quintin, Compeigne
and Corbey, which were long before under his obedience, thought good there to
stay for the approaching of the Germans: and during the month of July, having
reduced the said town to great distress, made his account shortly to be Lord
of it.

The Vicount Tauanes (head of the rebellion in the City of Roan, and most
hatefullest enemy of any that the King had) enterprised to relieve the said
town of Noyon, and for that intent in the beginning of August in the night
season departed from Roan, accompanied with four hundred horse, and five
hundred footmen, with good hope either to succor the said town, or else by
surprise greatly to hinder the King.

But the King having intelligences of his coming, met him about two or three
leagues from Noyon, (as I have heard reported) where his power was discomfited,
slain and taken prisoners, and he himself after being wounded in the assault
was also taken prisoner. So the Lord knows bow, where and when to stay his
enemies.

The news of this sorrowful success of the Leaguers flying abroad, caused
the Duke Aumale to assemble as great forces as he could make in the town of
Han, which is situated upon the river Some between Saint Quintin and Peronne,
undertaking either to amend the fault committed by Tauanes, or else to release
the town of Noyon, accompanied with the Lord Largue and Lawney with all their
forces, joined all with the light horsemen, the seventh of August charged upon
the quarter of the Kings light horse, where they were stoutly received: and
after more then twelve charges given, the Kings companies (yet very like to
have the victory of their enemies) began to retire: at which retire, that
valiant man at arms the Lord Baron of Byron having twelve of his own men did
approach, and the Kings forces supposing he had brought a supply of fresh
Soldiers, so soon as they heard him named, took a wonderful courage, and
seeing him in the midst of them, gave a fresh charge upon the enemy with
such force, that they did drive the enemy even into the gates of Han. To whom
there was also coming a new succor and fresh supply of men, who perceauing
the evil success of the rest, retired in again: so that some of the Kings
forces followed them even into their Barriars.

In these so many charges given, there were a number of armed men slain on the
enemies side, and among them diverse of commandment. In the number of the dead
were found Don Francisco de Gueuara, the best Captain of light Horsemen which
the King of Spain had in the low Countries, also his lieutenant was slain
outright, with diverse other of great account.

The Lord Longchamp (one of the best Captains of the rebels) was taken
prisoner, with more then four score men at arms of account, and lost above
fifteen hundred of their best horses.

The King lost in this skirmish about twelve horse of his light horsemen, and
among a few which were slain the Marshall of the light horsemen, whose death
was greatly bewailed, being accounted a man of great valor.

The same day the Duke de Main arrived at the said town of Han, with all his
troops of horsemen which he could gather, which thing made the King think that
he would go about either to raise or to interrupt the siege, or attempt some
thing.

In the mean time he lost no opportunity about this siege: for the same day
that this exploit was done, to wit, the seventh of August, the Canon began to
beat a church that stands in the midst of the Suburbs, which together with
a great ditch did strongly defend the same.

The said Church being battered from the morning to three a clock in

The said Church being taken, and consequently the Suburb (in a manner as
strong as the town) gave occasion both to them that had retired into

For the Governor (called the Lord Vile) considering how the Town was
slenderly furnished of all things, but specially of men of arms, and that the
most part of them had been slain in the assaults given to the City, and how
the King was strong and not like to be enforced to depart before he had the
upper hand over the said Town. And understanding that the Duke de Main was
come to Han with Forces, in hope to relieve the said distressed town, and that
the Lord Rosne, who led the Duke de Main his army toward Lorreine, was
returning back to Laon in Champaygne, he delayed the time of composition to
see what succor they would give.

But at length, seeing no relief coming, and the King urging the town, the
said Lord Vile concluded an agreement with the King in this manner following.

The Lord Vile (as well for himself as for the Gentlemen, Soldiers and
inhabitants of Noyon) has promised to yield the said town upon monday next
following, being the eighteenth of August, together with all the munition for
war, artillery and victuals, which at this present was therein,
conditionally if sometime of the day the Duke de Main do not give him a
battle, or by force put not within the town one thousand soldiers, or by
some means do not raise the siege. Also that the said Ville, Gentlemen and
Captains shall depart with armor, horses and baggage, and the Soldiers with
their weapons and horse. And that the inhabitants shall be received into the
Kings favor, and entreated as good subjects, in rendering him their duetifull
obedience: but specially and namely that the Lord of Ville his mother may
freely remain there and enjoy her goods, in performing the submission of
loyal fidelity as other subjects.

Item, that if any of the inhabitants be desirous to depart, they shall safely
pass among the men of war.

Item, that the Lord Ville shall be permitted to send the Lord of Brouly to the
Duke de Main, to advertise him of the condition of this capitulation, and that
the King shall safely conduct him to that effect.

And for the accomplishing of the premises, the said Lord Ville has promised
to send hostages to the King, the Lord Rieulx, the Abbot of Genlis, with four
of the town, such as the King shall choose, whom the King does promise to
deliver upon the performance of the said conditions.

The King also does grant to send two Captains into the town to keep and
see during the time, from laboring to the contrary.

It had pleased the most famous and renowned Queen of England, Essex, whom the
King leaving his power before Noyan, went to meet at Gysors in Normandy, whom
he received in most courteous sort, accepting most thankful her most
excellent Majesty's gracious favor, and the said Earl his good and ready
will, for hazarding himself in such a dangerous journey for his service.

After the death of Friar Sixtus, which was hastened by the Spanish faction
with a little slubber sauce, was elected a new Vicar of Rome, of the house of
Sfondraty, if I remember well, and is as much to say as burst belly, naming
himself Gregory the 14.

This Friar Gregory being set on horseback, will ride (as the proverb is)
until he break his neck. First in January he sent a Legate into France,
against whom the King proceeded as against an enemy of the public peace of
his subjects, and in March last the said Friar Gregory pronounced a Bull
against the King, his Princes, Nobles, subjects and realm. Then not long after
it is reported that he sent certain forces, mustered out of the Stews of Rome,
to the Duke of Sauoy to invade Prouance, conducted by some bastard of his: and
that Superstition, Folly, injury and wrong might go together, he must conjure
and charm the Standard of holy Church (as all the sort of such idolatrous
Antichrists have bin Coniurers, poysoners, and Sorcerers many years together).
To play this Comedy, he sits disguised in his Pontificalibus, the Standard
of holy Church holden before him, he hisseth, he blows, he mumbleth, he
crosses, he charmeth, he stinketh: but behold, he that did hold it (rather by
some presage and token of the fall of that idolatrous rabble, than by
negligence) let the Standard fall upon the braynesicke Friar Gregory's head,
which not only did beat down his triple Crown from of his head, but also
gave a knock upon his foolish pate. All these companies shortly after were
cut to pieces, and the charmed Standard taken by the Lord des Diguieres, as is
reported.

Friar Gregory not content with all these injurious prouocations, sent one M.
Marcilius Laudrianus, by name an Italian, by surname a Britain, but by
sawcines and desperatnes a Jesuit, under the name of his Nuncio, to publish a
certain infamous libell, full of impiety heresy and sedition, under a Mask
of religion in form of Bulls, against the King, his Princes, Nobles and
subieces, but specially against the French popish Church, which this saucy
companion enterprized to publish at Pont de Larche in Normandy* whereupon the
K. finding himself sore ini^ried at the hands of this tyrannous usurper,
commanded his courts of Parliament to proceed by law against these injuries,
and so the Kings general attorney in his court of Parliament, holden at Caen
in Normandy,

The court of Parliament therefore, al Chambers assembled, the third day of
August did proceed against Friar Gregory his person, his usurped tyranny, his
Nuncio and his Bulls.

First, they do declare the said Friar Gregory, an enemy unto the peace of
Christianity, a troubler of the Catholic Roman* Religion, enemy to the King
and Estate of France, a conspiratour and associate with the rebels within the
realm, and accessory to the death of the late deceased King most traitorously
murdered, a firebrand of sedition, and stirrer up of wars, and procurer of
murders.

Secondly, they do condemn his usurped power upon the state and Church of
France, to be usurped, abusiue and wrongful, contrary to Gods word, holy
decrees and liberties of the French Church, commanding all Primates,
Archbishops, Bishops, Colleges, Couents, Chapters, Communalties, bodies of
Cities, Curats, Parsons and serving Priests, not to acknowledge any superiority
or power of the same Friar Gregory, nor to render him any obeisance, neither
to assist or favor any excommunications, publications or readings of any
thing that should proceed from him.

The court also does forbid, not to pursue or receive of him, or any other
whatsoever quality or condition they be, his accomplices and adherents, any
collations, confirmations, or provisions for benefices, graces, dispensations,
or other expeditions, nor to answer, bear, or cause to be borne by way of
banque or otherwise, any gold or silver to ye court of Rome, neither to pay any
thing or render obeisance to the Archbishops, Bishops, his adherents, who have
put in execution any of the pretended diffamatory libell, in form of
excommunication or interdiction, in pain of confiscation of body and goods,
as infringers and perturbers of the public peace.

The court does command the Ecclesiastical persons, by virtue of the Kings
letters directed unto them, that they shall not suffer the liberty of the
French Church to be in any sort diminished: but being assisted by their K.
(their sovereign Justice) to oppose themselves against all the Popes
enterprises.

Thirdly, the court does declare the foresaid Marcilius Ladrianus, Friar
Gregory his Nuncio, acommon enemy of al men, a kindler of hatred and a sower of
sedition, commanding the said pretended Nuncio to be pursued, taken and
apprehended, alive or dead, and to be delivered to justice, if it be possible,
to receive the punishment according to the greatness of his offense. But if he
cannot be apprehended, within three day ^to be summoned by the voice of the
public Crier in the town of Pont de Larche, that

The order of the courts of France is, that after a man is summoned at 3.
several times, if he does not appear, he is condemned as convicted, and then
executed in picture.

Last of al, the Court does declare Friar Gregory his excommunication and
Bulls, infamous libels full of impiety, heresy, deceit and slanders, and
condemns the same to betorne and burned publikly in the place of execution,
by the public executioner of justice, forbidding all men to receive, allow,
read, favor or conceal the said infamous libell, upon pain to be
attainted, and convicted of high treason: and commands also all manner of
persons quickly to reveal to the court, if they should know any such to be
kept secretly on the pains aforesaid.

This sentence of the Popes banishment, and of all his tyr^nnie out of France,
was pronounced the third day of August at Caen in Normandy.

The self same proceedinges were used in all Courts of the Realm, whereupon
ensued the burning of the said Bulls in diverse and sundry places of the
Realm, but diversely, but every where in as infamous manner as could be. It was
burned at Tours in this manner.

The Magistrates and the common people of Tours being assembled before the
Palace gate, there a pillar was crected a little distant from the foot thereof,
there was a fire made by the common Hangman of the town, then did he take the
Bull and hanged it on the top of the Pillar, which being done, he kindled
another fire at the very foot of the Pillar, which by degrees crept up until
it took hold of the Bull, which presently was consumed with fire, to the great
joy of all the beholders.

Now Master Friar, I ween you be one of them that did drop out of the horses
belly of Troy, but I will think rather that you dropped out of an Asses
belly, because you have an Asses head.

Did not a little before your Standard reprove you to your face, and told you
what would follow your saucines: and to put you in consideration of your folly
gave you a souse upon the pate: And you being of Asses brood, will go about
to get Bulls, and lo, your Bulls be turned into gydie Calves. You never read
(for reading belongs not to your occupation, but scortari crebro, crebro
conuiuarier) that it was written in the horse of Troy, sero sapiunt Phryges,
but it shall be hereafter in Asino Romano, scriptum erit sero sapiunt
Romanenses. You knew not when you were well, now have with you to Auignon.

The town of Noyan being surrendered, according to the agreement between the
King and the governor of the said town, the King went to receive the right
honorable Lord Earl of Essex (as is said) in the town of Gisors, and from
thence returned into Champaigne, to ioyn with the Germans, France, leaving the
Marshall Byron, to reconduct his army into Normandy. During the siege of
Noyan, the Lord of Pierrefont had been taken prisoner, and had promised upon
his deliverance, to surrender the Castle Pierrefont, a place situated upon a
rock, and inaccessable almost on every side. The said Lord of Pierrefont being
a desperate Leaguer, had rather break his faith with dishonor, then to fulfill
his promise with honor: whereupon the Marshall Byron laid the siege before
the said Castle, and battered it with nine skore shot of Ordinance, wherewith
he made but a very small hole: the stuff wherewith the said Castle is
builded, being of such quality, as resisted the shot, even to admiration,
which caused the said Marshall Byron to break off his enterprise, and march
toward Normandy, who joined with the English forces, conducted by the right
Honorable Lord, the Earl of Essex, the ninth of September, and the twenty one
of the said month, laid the siege before the town of Gourney.

It is said before in the seventh book, how after the cruel death of King
Henry the third, and last of the raze of Valoys, the authors of that murder,
under the conduct of the Duke d'Mayne, with great bragges and confidence, went
with a mighty army into Normandy, hoping to oppress the King, who with a
small power had retired to Diepe, for the causes there alleged.

It is said also, how the Duke d'Mayne in that journey, took the said town of
Gourney, and the Lord Rubempre which his company therein. This Town is
distant from Roan ten Leagues, from Gisors five, from Beauuoys six, and by
estimation somewhat bigger then Diepe.

The Leaguers had fortified it with fortifications, munition of war, and
strong garrisons, for Leagued Gentlemen of the Country, to the number of four
skore, and such power as they thought good to entertain, had settled
themselves therein, and from thence issuing daily, made courses to the gates of
Mante, Vernon, Pont de larche, and Gisors, spoiling and wasting all that was in
their way, and taking prisoners such as travailed on the high way to Diepe.

This town being besieged, the enemy put on a stout countenance at the first,
and being summoned to surrender the said town, they answered that they had
received it of the Duke d'Mayne, and for him they intended to keep it, neither
would they render it, but to him only.

This answer being given, the English forces entrenched themselves within a
stones cast of the gate, and in making and keeping the said Trenches, they had
six men hurt, and one killed. The enemies attempted diverse times to put men
into the town, but they were in such sort looked to by the English men, that
they durst never approach.

The 25. day of September at night, the Marshall Byron planted nine

First, that all Soldiers should depart without bagage and armor, with a
white rod in their hands. But the Lord Earl of Essex, excepted the Queens
Majesty's subjects: therein was found none but one Irish man, who was executed.

The second was, that the Governor, Captains, Lieutenants and Gentlemen of
quality, should remain to his mercy. It was thought that the Governor and
some Captains should be executed.

The third was, that the Citizens should have their lives, but their goods
rested at the Kings pleasure.

The fourth is, that they should receive such garrisons as should be thought
good. The taking of this town is a great ease to the Country, and preparation
for the siege of Roan.

About the 28. the army took his way toward Caudebeck, a small town, situated
upon a rock, on the banck of Seyne, between Roan and Newhauen, entending to
clear all the coast round about Newhauen, of all filth of rebellion.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin, for Thomas Woodcock, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the black Bear. 1591.


