THE HISTORY OF PHILIP DE Commines Knight, Lord of Argenton.

Jmprinted at London by Ar. Hatfield, for I. Norton. 1596

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY VERY GOOD LORD, THE LORD Burghley, Lord Treasurer of
England, Knight of the honorable order of the garter, and Master of her
Majesty's Court of Wards and Liueries.
IT is now, R. Honorable, thirty years since I presented to your L. and the
late Earl of Leicester my Lord and Master, the history of COMMINES rudely
translated into our vulgar tongue, the which of later times at the request of
the late Lord Chauncellor sir Christopher Hatton, I perused anew, and enlarged
with such notes and pedegrees as seemed necessary, as well for explanation as
(in some few places) for correction of the history. Since his death, certain
gentlemen to whose hands the book happened to come, took so great pleasure
and delight therein, that they determined to put it to the press, supposing it
a great dishonor to our nation, that so worthy an history being extant in all
languages almost in Christendom, should be suppressed in ours. Notwithstanding
their resolution, they forbear of courtesy to put in execution till their
purpose should be made known to me. And albeit that I alleged many reasons
why in my conceit books of this nature, treating of Princes secrets were unfit
to be published to the vulgar sort, the rather because the Author in some
places seems to be of that opinion himself: yet none of my reasons could
prevail, but they continued in their former determination: adding thereunto,
that others besides my self had taken pains in this history, and though I of
peeuishnes would suppress my labors, yet they would not suppress theirs. So
that would I nould I to the press the book must go, being already warranted
by public authority thereunto. I seeing the matter advanced thus far,
thought it no time to draw back any longer, but in the end took the burden
upon my self, doubting if I had done otherwise, both the blemishing of the
history, wherein I may boldly say, that I have more traveled than any man
that has entermedled therewith; and also that the work should be presented to
some patron that had no interest therein. Wherefore having again examined it,
and freed it from some faults that me thought fit to be reformed: I have
presumed to publish it under the protection of your Lorships honorable name, to
whom of right it appertains in many respects. First, because the author
thereof was a noble man, one of your own cote, the wisest, and the best
acquainted with all matters of state of any man in his time. Whereunto I add,
that he continued a Counselor successively to so many French Kings, that he
was reputed one of the ancientest Counselors in Christendom at his death:
wherein your Lordships fortune is not only correspondent, but has also
surmounted his. Secondarily, your Lordship has the aisne title to it, and
lastly the right of suruiuor casts it upon you by course of common law.
Wherefore all these circumstances well considered (my particular duties also
notforgotten) I thought it a kind of sacrilege to suffer your Lordship to be
robbed of your right. May it therefore please you to receive this historic into
your honorable protection as your own, as well in regard of the Author, being
a man of such condition as above is rehearsed; as also of the work, treating
of that subject wherewith your Lordship at this day is better acquainted than
any man living: and lastly, in respect of your own title thereunto. Which no
whit doubting but that your Lordship will most willingly vouchsafe to do,
beseeching the Almighty long to preserve you to the great stay of this
flourishing estate, most humbly I take my leave this first of November 1596.

Your L. most humble and obedient to command Thomas Danett.

The life of Philip de Commines knight, Lord of Argenton, gathered out of
diverse good authors, together with a brief answer on his behalf to certain
accusations, wherewith IACOBVS MEYERVS a Flemming in his Annals of Flaunders,
charge very unjustly both Commines history and his life.
PHILIP DE COMMINES author of this present history, was borne at Commines a
town in Flaunders, being a gentleman of a very ancient house, and joined by
blood and alliance to the best of that nation. His surname was Clytus, his
father and uncle had been both of them under D. Philip of Burgundy chief
governors, of Flaunders called by Meyer, Summi pretores Flandriae; and to them
he gives this title: Domini Ruscurii, Buscurii and VVatenenses: whereby
appears of how great Nobility and goodly revenues Commines was, not only
in Flaunders, but also in Haynault. In his youth, namely, from the nineteenth
year of his age, and the year of our Lord 1464. till the 27. of his age, and
the year 1472. he served Charles Duke of Burgundy, and afterward Lewis the
eleventh of that name King of France, who employed him in his weightiest and
secretest affairs. He was of tall stature, fair complexion, and goodly
personage. The French tongue he spoke perfectly and eloquently, the Italian,
Duche, and Spanish reasonably well. He had read over very diligently all
histories written in French, especially of the Romans, and bare them all in
memory. He much acquainted himself with strangers, thereby to increase his
knowledge. He had great regard to the spending of his time, and abhorred all
idleness. He was of an excellent, yea an incredible memory: for he often
indicted at one time to four Secretaries, several letters of weighty affairs
appertaining to the state, with as great facility and readiness, as if he had
had but one matter in hand. A virtue so rare that I have not read the like of
any but of Julius Caesar and him. Nothing more grieved him, than that in his
youth he was not trained up in the Latin tongue, which his misfortune he often
bewailed. After he was entered into the service of King Lewis, he was highly in
his favor, and during his reign bare great sway in the realm. The said King
also greatly advanced him: for he made him first one of his privy chamber, then
of his privy Counsel, Seneschall of Poictu, and Lord of Argenton. He married
being of good years a gentlewoman of the house of Montsoreau upon the borders
of Aniou, named Helena. But after King Lewis his death, he fell into great
troubles: for because he was a stranger, many envied his prosperity, so far
forth that at the length his enemies caused him to be imprisoned in the castle
of Loches in the Duchy of Berry, (a place appointed only for those that are
attached of high treason) where he was very extremely handled, as himself in
his history reports. Notwithstanding his wife by earnest and continual
suit, in the end obtained so much favor, that he was removed thence and
brought to Paris: where when he had remained a certain space, he was led to
the parliament house to be arraigned. He had many enemies and those mighty, and
of so great authority at that time in France, that for fear of them no
Counselor durst plead his cause: wherefore necessity enforcing him to defend
him self, he pleaded there by the space of two hours, being very attentively
heard by the whole audience, and in the end so acquit himself, that by the
Judges sentence he was discharged. Among other things he rehearsed at the bar
how sundry troublesome and dangerous voiages he had sustained for the King
and the common wealth. How highly King Lewis both had favored him, and for his
faithful service rewarded him: for his own part, he said that he never had
done any thing couetouslie, ambitiouslie, nor cruelly: and further, that if he
had sought only to advance and enrich himself, he might have had as goodly
possessions as any man in France. He was prisoner in almost three years. The
next year after his delivery he had a daughter borne named Jane, which
married with Rene Earl of Pantabria descended of the Dukes of Britain, by
whom among diverse other children she had issue John late Duke of Estampes,
Lieutenant of Britain, Knight of the French Kings order, and Lord of diverse
goodly Seniories. But to return to Commines, in prosperity he gave for his
posie this sentence: He that will not labor let him not eat: but in
adversity this, I sailed into the deep of the sea, and a sudden tempest
overwhelmed me. He died the threescore and fourth year of his age, the year
of our Lord 1509. the 17. day of October, in his own house of Argenton in the
country of Poictu, from whence his body was conueighed to Paris, and there
lies buried in the Augustine Friars. I was here purposed to have stayed my
pen, and further not to have spoken either of Commines history or his life,
had I not called to mind diverse accusations of Iacobus Meyerus, who in sundry
places of his Annals of Flanders inueigheth very bitterly as well against
Commines life as his history, whose accusations I am forced to lay open to
the judgment of the world, to the end it may appear whether they be grounded
upon just proof. Notwithstanding before I enter into the examination of them,
thus much in the commendation of Commines history I cannot pass over in
silence, that two of the greatest and woorthiest Princes that reigned in Europe
these hundred years; namely, the Emperor Charles the fifth, and Francis the
first King of France, made so great account of this history, that the Emperor
carried it continually about with him, as Alexander did the works of Homer, no
less esteeming it than he did them, and the King was as much displeased with
the printing and publishing thereof, as was the same Alexander in times past
for the setting forth of Aristotle's works called Acroamatica, as rehearses
Gellius: so desirous was he to have reserved to himself and a few of his own
subjects the great treasures of wisdom hidden in this small volume. But let
us now hear what Meyer obiecteth against this history. In the 17. book of
his Annals of Flaunders writing of the battle fought at Saintron between
Charles Duke of Burgundy and the Liegeois, he has these words, Pugna commissa
caeduntur magno numero and profligantur, ad nouem millia cecidisse tradit qui
interfuit Philippus Cominius. Sed Brabantiae scriptor and quidam scriptor
Flandriae (quibus plus habeo fidei) tria tantum millia occubuisse memorant. For
answer heereunto, if this place be indifferently weighed it shall appear to
be wholly grounded upon malice and no color of reason, much less just proof:
First, because Meyer prefers the credit of these obscure Annalistes that
write but upon report, before the credit of him that was an eye witness, and
that no way could advantage himself by reporting a lie. Secondarily, sir
Oliver de la March, who lived also in that time and was Steward of the Duke of
Burgundies house, writes that a great number of these Liegeois were slain at
this battle, and also at the siege of Saintron, but that their friends and
kinsfolks trussed up their dead bodies in vessels full of lime; partly to the
end the discomfiture might appear the less, and partly that they might be
buried among their ancestors, in the which feate (says he) the Liegeois
showed a wonderful audacitie and courage: whereby it should seem a great
number to have been thus trussed up, by means whereof the dead appeered the
fewer, and were reported accordingly, which deceived diverse, and happily these
Annalists of Brabant and Flaunders. The like practice we read of in diverse
authors, and of the like writes Meyer also himself. Lastly, the Annals of
Burgundy agree with Commines, and report the number as he does, so that this
answer I hope shall suffice for this point. Again, in the same book fol. 364.
Meyer writes thus, Loquitur Cominius de nobili quadam foemina attrebatensis
ditionis proditrice patriae, cuius aedere non vult nomen, falsus in hoc vt in
caeteris historicus. Sure if it were an undoubted truth that a Lady of Artois
could not send the King such advertisement as Commines reports that she did:
or if Meyer were Pythagoras that ipse dixit might pass for proof, the credit
of Commines should happily hang in balance: but if you read the place in his
history, the very circumstances will induce any indifferent man to think,
that which is there written of this Lady to be no lie. Again fol. 366. Meyer
has these words, Hic est Cominius ille transfuga, gente Flandrus, qui multa de
Carolo and Lodouico prouinciali lingua been scripsit, sed quaedam etiam
scripsit plane mendaciter, multaque dicenda infideliter reticuit. This is so
general and uncertain a charge that answer in truth it deserves none:
notwithstanding, I refer to the judgment of those that shall read this
history, whether Commines conceal his Masters faults therein or not (for that
is Meyers meaning in this place.) True it is that he utters them not in such
railing barbarous terms as Meyer very unseemly uses of so great a Prince as
King Lewis was, and is offended with Commines for not doing the like, a thing
which becomes Meyer himself very ill, and would have become Commines much
worse. But our author as he concealeth not his masters faults, but lays them
open enough to the understanding of the wise and attentive Reader: so
delivers he them, so sparingly, and under such terms as truth being uttered,
the Kings honor be no further impeached, than very necessity does enforce; a
matter very commendable in a gentleman writing of a Prince, a servant of his
Master, and a subject of his Sovereign. Lastly, Meyer fol. 365. has these
words, refert Cominius exercitum Caroliadeo fuisse extenuatum, vt exhibere
illum Anglis non auderet, sed hoc falsum est. But you must believe Meyer upon
his word, other disproofe of Commines report he can bring none, neither
grounded upon any circumstance, nor produced out of any good author that writ
of those times. But on the contrary side for the confirmation of that which
Commines writes in this place, first La March reports that the bloody
flux entered into the Dukes camp lying before Nuz, which it is very like
consumed many, and impaired the health of many more. With him also agree the
Annals of Burgundy, which report that the Duke lost 15000. men before Nuz:
which being well considered, and this withal, that the siege endured a whole
year, and yet in the end the Duke forced to depart frustrate of his purpose,
whereby his soldiers had not only their bodies tired, but also their minds
discouraged: I suppose no man of sound judgment will think that the Dukes
army could be otherwise than in very poor estate. Now that you have heard
all that Meyer has or can object against the credit of this history (which
also how substancially he has proved I leave to the judgment of the wise and
indifferent reader to consider:) it is good reason you should also hear what
opinion other authors have both of Commines and of his history, and how
honorable testimony in their writings they give to them both. Annals
Burgundiae lib. 3. pa. 930. speaking of Commines testify thus of him. He was
one of the wisest gentlemen of his time, and the best acquainted with all
matters of state, as appears by his history: whereof the Emperor Charles
made so great account, that he never slept before he had read certain chapters
thereof, for the finishing of his days work. Which sure this noble and sage
Emperor would never have done, if Commines had been a reporter of lies,
especially of the said Emperors own great grandfather, whose life and death
are so amply in this history treated of. Paulus Aemilius gives such credit
to Commines, that all that he writes in the history of France of the reign of
Lewis the 11. is only an abridgment of him, and wholly taken out of his
writings. Ferron in his supply to Paulus Aemilius history makes in many
places very honorable mention of Commines, highly commending him both for his
great wisdom and virtue and sincerity in his history. Lodouico Guicciardini
no French man, but an Italian, in his description of the low Countries fol.
220. calls Commines a writer worthy of great commendation. And fol. 310.
and 311. thus he writes. Of the Noble house of Commines was Philip de Commines
Lord of Argenton, who wrote the history of his own time very sincerely, he
was a noble personage, of great enterprise, and of him diverse authors make
honorable mention. Here we have the true testimony of sundry worthy
writers (for to vouche all were too tedious) on Commines behalf, which joined
with the approbation of the noble Emperor Charles the fifth, are sufficient, as
I suppose, to maintain his credit against the venomous darts of Meyers
sclanderous accusations. Now as touching Commines life, the only thing that
Meyer blames therein, is his departure from the Duke of Burgundies service:
for the which he inueigheth no less bitterly against his person, than before
he did against his history, for fol. 355. where he makes mention of the Duke
of Burgundies cruelty used at the castle of Nesle, which he took by assault
the year 1472. he has these words. Crudelis hic visus Corolus and animo
turbato, crediturque quosdam ex familiaribus parum habuisse fideles, ex quibus
hand dubie er at Philippus ille Cominius or tu Flandrus, Dominus Ruscurii, qui
hoc anno transfugit adregem, quisivir fuisset probus and integer, nequaquam
deserto Dominc suo, deserta and abiurata patria ad talem transisset tyrannum,
aliosque ad idem faciendum solicitasset, quantiscunque muneribus inuitatus.
Again fol. 366. thus he says, Causam cur transfugerit aliisque nonnullis
author fuerit idem faciendi non lego, cum autem Cominius in suis scriptis
causam suae defectionis reticeat, non dubium puto quin ob faedum aliquod
patratum scelus more proditorum aufugerit. Whereunto somewhat to answer in
Commines behalf, I say that what cause moved him to leave the Duke as we
certainly know not, so is it not like that he departed from him for any
heinous offense, because he was never charged with any, neither is Meyer able
to produce any one testimony (as even himself in this place is forced to
confess) that he forsook the Duke in any treacherous sort, neither is he able
to prove that he solicited any to leave the Dukes service during the Dukes
life, though without all proof most unjustly he charge him therewith. For if
Commines had departed with the betraying of towns and castles to the enemy as
de Cords did; if for attempting to destroy the Dukes person, as Baldwine the
Dukes base brother, and the Earl of Estampes his cousin did; if for both, as
the Earl of Campobasso did, his offense could no more have been concealed,
than the others above mentioned was. Wherefore as Meyer reasons that because
Commines no where in his writings utters the cause of his departure, it is
like he departed for some heinous offense: so one the other side with much more
reason it may be answered, that because neither Meyer nor any other
Historiographer in their writings utter the cause of his departure; like it is
that he departed for no heinous offense, but only for his own advancement or
safety or both, without seeking by traitorous practices to harm the Duke, as
the above named with diverse others did. But let us now examine what by all
presumption was the cause of his departure from the Duke: and secondarily,
whether his departure from one Master to another being in hostility be
excusable: which two points being thoroughly discussed, it shall plainly appear
to the world, whether he be justly to be charged with any evil dealing, for
leaving the Duke of Burgundy his first Master, and under whose dominion he was
borne. As touching the first point, I am of opinion that Commines by his
departure from the Duke of Burgundy, sought both his own advancement and his
safety, the former whereof he had just cause to hope for at King Lewis his
hands, as a thing well deserved, at the Kings being at Peronne, where Commines
wisdom and great credit with the Duke of Burgundy (as say the Annals of
Burgundy) stood the King in so good stead, that by his only means he was
restored to his realm, liberty and life, which otherwise had been in great
danger, as by the course of this history most plainly does appear. Wherefore
Commines could not but assure himself of great advancement at King Lewis his
hands, as well because of the Kings great liberality, as also for his own
desert: neither did his hope fail him, as the sequel well declared. On the
other side at the Dukes hands no great advancement was to be looked for, both
because the quality of his service to the Duke and the King was not alike, and
so consequently the desert unlike; and also because the Dukes liberality was
inferior to the Kings, his attempts so impouerishing him, that he had not to be
liberal of as the King had. Whereunto I add, that he made no such account of
his servants as the King did, but attributed all his good success to his own
brain, whereby their service was the less esteemed and the worse rewarded,
or rather not at all esteemed nor rewarded: for he never used any man's counsel
but his own, so that wise men lost but their time with him. Yea Meyer himself
reports him to be Durum, asperum and ingratum, a quo milites malign admodum
stipendia accipiebant, raro blande and liberaliter appellarentur, quanquam
multis in locis extremis periculis se obiectarent, plurimumque algoris, inediae
and aestus sustinerent. If then the Duke were of this disposition toward his
soldiers, and so evil rewarded them whose help he daily and howerly used:
what reward could any wise man look for at his hands, whose advice he seldom
asked and never followed? Further, the Duke was of nature very choleric and
ready to offer his servants injury, as for example, to the Earl of Campobasso
he gave a blow, which in the end cost him his life, and whether any such
outrage offered to our Author caused or furthered his departure we know not:
but that advancement (which was to be looked for at the Kings hands, and not
to be hoped for at the Dukes) was one cause, is already, as I suppose,
sufficiently proved. The second cause of Commines departure from the Duke in
mine opinion was safety; for the Duke, as Commines himself reports, forced
not to venture his servants into any danger were it never so great, which all
men (especially despairing of reward of their service) will seek to avoid:
for as our Author himself says in one place of his history, most men by
service seek to advance themselves, but all men will have an eye to save
themselves. Further, Commines being a very wise man foresawe the Dukes attempts
to be such, as would in the end overthrow both himself, his subjects, and his
dominions, wherefore he thought it best to dislodge in time and to save one.
These in mine opinion were the principal causes of his departure from the
Duke, which being honest and reasonable, and his departure likewise void of al
treason and treacherous practices against the Duke: I see no reason why for his
departure he should not rather be commended than condemned. The last point that
we have to consider is, whether he being the Dukes subject might leave his
Master and depart to the King, were the causes of his departure never so
reasonable and honest. Whereunto I answer, that Commines was not absolutely the
Dukes subject: for Flaunders was held in sovereignty of the crown of France,
and both the Earl and all the people sworn to bear no arms against the King
of France, and diverse examples too long to rehearse, are to be read in the
histories of diverse Earls of Flaunders that have been arrested, imprisoned,
and together with their people fined for breach of this oath. Wherefore seeing
our author was a Flemming borne, and Flaunders held in Sovereignty of the King
of France, and the Duke of Burgundy in-hostilitie with the King of France,
contrary to the oath he either took or ought to have taken; and further
violating diverse, naie I may say all those points whereunto by his allegiance
he was bound to the French King: I see no reason why Commines might not, or
rather ought not to leave an inferior rebellious Lord, and cleave to his
soueraign Prince and King, to whom he ought a soueraign duty both by
allegiance and oath. And if after his revolt, he gave any advice to the
furtherance of the Kings affairs, he did therein in mine opinion the duty of
a faithful servant and true subject. Thus much I have been forced to speak
in defense both of Commines life, and history, whereof as the former appears
to have been both honest and virtuous as well by the reasons above alleged,
as also by the notable discourses wherewith he farceth his history, which
breath nothing but virtue and sincerity: so is the latter confirmed by the
consent of diverse good histories, and approved by the judgment of the noblest
Princes that Europe bred these many hundred years, as I trust is sufficiently
declared. Wherefore our authors credit stands upright, as well for good
conversation of life, as sincere report in history, both the which Meyer no
less falsely slandereth, than he does in other places of his Annals the noble
races of the Kings of England and France, which ignorantly or maliciously he
reports to be more vile and base than any honest ear can endure to hear.
Thus having I trust sufficiently defended the credit of this worthy writer, I
will here abruptly for avoiding of tediousnes stay my pen.

A Table declaring the contents of all the Chapters contained in this history.
The preface of the Author to the Archbishop of Vienna in France. page 1 Chap.
1 The occasion of the wars between Lewis the eleventh, and the Earl of
Charolois Duke of Burgundy. page 2 Chap. 2 How the Earl of Charolois and
diverse noble men of France levied an army against King Lewis, under color of
the weal public. page 6 Chap. 4 How the Earl of Charolois encamped near to
Montl'hery, and of the battle fought there between the King of France and
him. page 10 Chap. 4 Of the danger the Earl of Charolois was in, and how he
was rescued. page 15 Chap. 5 How the Duke of Berry the Kings brother, and the
Duke of Britain joined with the Earl of Charolois against the King. page 19
Chap. 6 How the Earl of Charolois and his confederates with their whole army,
passed the river of Seine upon a bridge of botes, how John Duke of Calabria
joined with them, and how they all encamped before Paris. page 22 Chap. 7 A
discourse upon ambitious hunting after offices and estates, by the example of
the English men. page 25 Chap. 8 How King Lewis entered into Paris, while the
Princes of France practiced with the citizens. page 27 Chap. 9 How the Earl
of Charolois artillery and the Kings artillery shot the one against the other
near to Charenton, and how the Earl of Charolois caused another bridge to be
built upon botes over the river of Seine. page 29 Chap. 10 A discourse upon
certain vices and virtues of King Lewis the 11. page 32 Chap. 11 How the
Burgundians lying near to Paris, and looking for the battle, supposed great
thistles to have been lances held upright. page 34 Chap. 12 How the King and
the Earl of Charolois met together to treat of peace. page 36 Chap. 13 How the
town of Roane by practice was put into the Duke of Bourbons hands, for the
Duke of Berry, and how the treaty of Conflans was fully concluded. page 38
Chap. 14 How the treaty of peace was concluded between the King and the Earl
of Charolois and his confederates. page 40 Chap. 15 How by the division that
happened between the Dukes of Britain and Normandy, the King recovered the said
Duchy which he had given his brother. page 42 Chap. 16 How the new Duke of
Normandy returned into Britain in very poor estate, and utterly discouraged,
because he had failed in his enterprise. page 43
The second Book.
Chap. 1 Of the wars between the Burgundians and Liegeois, and how the town
of Dinand was taken, sacked and rased. page 45 Chap. 2 How the Liegeois brake
the peace with the Duke of Burgundy then Earl of Charalois, and how he
discomfited them in battle. page 48 Chap. 3 How some of the Citizens of Liege
agreeing to yield their town and others refusing so to do, the Lord of
Hymbercourt found means to enter into it for the Duke of Burgundy. page 52
Chap. 4 How the Duke of Burgundy made his entry into the town of Liege, and
how the citizens of Gaunt where he had been evil entreated before, humbled
themselves unto him. page 55 Chap. 5 How the King seeing what had happened to
the Liegeois, made war in Britain upon the Duke of Burgundies confederats, and
how they two met and communed together at Peronne. page 57 Chap. 6 A discourse
wherein is declared how greatly learning especially in histories profits
Princes and Noble men. page 60 Chap. 7 How and for what cause the King was
stayed and held prisoner in the castle of Peronne by the D. of Burgundies
commandment. page 62 Chap. 8 A discourse wherein is showed, that an enteruiew
between two great Princes for treaty of their affairs, hurts more than
profits. page 64 Chap. 9 How the King to deliver himself out of the castle
of Peronne, renounced his league with the Liegeois. page 67 Chap. 10 How the
King accompanied the Duke of Burgundy, making war upon the Liegeois, who
before were his confederates. page 69 Chap. 11 How the King arrived in person
with the Duke of Burgundy, before the city of Liege. page 71 Chap. 12 How the
Liegeois made a desperate salie upon the Duke of Burgundies men, where he and
the King were in great danger. page 73 Chap. 13 How the city of Liege was
assaulted, taken, and spoiled, and the Churches also page 75 Chap. 14 How King
Lewis returned into France with the Duke of Burgundies consent, and how the
Duke proceeded in destroying the countries of Liege and Franchmont. page 77
Chap. 15 How the K. by subtle means persuaded the Lord Charles his brother to
take the Duchy of Guienne for Brie and Champaigne, to the Duke of Burgundies
coffeehouse. page 80
The third Book.
Chap. 1 How the King took occasion to make war anew upon the Duke of
Burgundy, and how he sent a Purseuant of the Parliament of Gaunt to sommon him
to appear at Paris. page 82 Chap. 2 How the towns of Saint Quintin and Amiens
were yielded to the King: and for what causes the Constable nourished the war
between the K. and the Duke of Burgundy. page 84 Chap. 3 How the Duke of
Burgundy took Piquigni, and afterward found means to make truce with the King
for a year to the Constables grief. page 86 Chap. 4 Of the wars among the
Princes of England during these troubles between King Lewis and Charles Duke
of Burgundy. page 89 Chap. 5 How by King Lewis his aid, the Earl of Warwick
chased King Edward out of England, to the Duke of Burgundies great grief, who
received him into his countries. page 92 Chap. 6 How the Earl of Warwick
took out of prison King Henry of England. page 96 Chap. 7 How king Edward
returned into England, where he slew in battle first the Earl of Warwick,
and then the Prince of Wales. page 99 Chap. 8 How the wars revived between
king Lewis and Charles D. of Burgundy, by the solicitation of the Dukes of
Guienne and Britain. page 101 Chap. 9 How the final peace treated of between
the Duke of Burgundy and the king brake off because of the Duke of Guiennes
death, and how these two great Princes sought to deceive each other. page 105
Chap. 10 How the Duke of Burgundy seeing that he could not take Beaunais,
before the which he had laid his siege, went to Roan. page 108 Chap. 11 How the
king made peace with the Duke of Britain, and truce with the Duke of Burgundy,
and how the Earl of Saint Paul escaped for that time a conspiracy that these
two Princes made against him. page 110 Chap. 12 A discourse very fit for this
place, of the wisdom of the king and the Constable, with good aduertisements
to such as are in credit with Princes. page 114
The fourth Book.
Chap. 1 How the Duke of Burgundy being seized of the Duchy of Gueldres,
sought to encroch further upon the Almaines, and how he laid his siege before
Nuz. page 116 Chap. 2 How the town of Nuz was succored by the Emperor and the
Almaines against the Duke of Burgundy, and of other enemies that the king
procured the Duke. page 120 Chap. 3 How the king wan from the Duke of Burgundy
the castle of Tronquey, the towns of Montdidier, Roye, and Corby, and how he
sought to persuade the Emperor Frederic to seiz upon all that the said Duke
held of the Empire. page 122 Chap. 4 How the Constable began to be had in
suspicion again, as well of the king as of the Duke of Burgundy. page 124
Chap. 5 How the Duke of Burgundy levied his siege before Nuz by composition,
and how the king of England his confederate sent to defy king Lewis. page 126
Chap. 6 Of the trouble the Constable was in, and how he sent letters of credit
to the king of England and the Duke of Burgundy, which after were in part cause
of his death. page 129 Chap. 7 How the king clothed a poor servant in a cote
armor with a scutchin, and sent him to speak with the king of England in his
camp, where he received a very good answer. page 131 Chap. 8 How truce for
nine years was treated of between the kings of France and England,
notwithstanding all the lets and impediments that the Constable and the Duke of
Burgundy made. page 133 Chap. 9 How the king feasted the English men in Amiens,
and how there was a place assigned for the enteruiew of the two kings. page 136
Chap. 10 How the two kings met and swear the treaty before concluded, and how
some supposed that the holy Ghost came down upon the king of Englands pauilion
in the likeness of a white pigeon. page 140 Chap. 11 How the Constable after the
truce made with the English men, sought to excuse himself to the king: and how
truce was also concluded for nine years between the king and the Duke of
Burgundy. page 143 Chap. 12 How the Constables death was fully concluded and
sworn between the king and the Duke of Burgundy, and how he went into the
Dukes dominions, where by his commandment he was stayed and delivered to the
king, and after put to death. page 147 Chap. 13 A discourse of the fault the
Duke of Burgundy committed in delivering the Constable to the king contrary to
his safe conduct, and what ensued thereof. page 150
The fifth Book.
Chap. 1 How the Duke of Burgundy making war upon the Swissers, was overthrown
at the straights of the mountains near to Granson. page 153 Chap. 2 How after
the overthrow of Granson, the Duke of Milan, king Rene of Sicilie, the Duchess
of Sauoy, and others, departed from their league with the Duke of Burgundy.
page 156 Chap. 3 How the Swissers vanquished the D. of Burgundy in battle
near to the town of Morat. page 159 Chap. 4 How after the battle of Morat
the Duke of Burgundy took the Duchess of Sauoy, and how she was delivered and
sent home into her country by the kings means. page 161 Chap. 5 How the D. of
Burgundy lived as it were solitary the space of certain weeks, during the
which time the D. of Lorraine recovered his town of Nancy. page 163 Chap. 6 Of
the Earl of Campobaches great treasons, and how he kept the D. of Burgundy
from hearing a gentleman that would have revealed them to him before he was put
to death, and how the said D. made no account of the aduertisements the king
gave him. page 166 Chap. 7 How the Duke of Lorraine being accompanied with good
force of Almains, came to the town of Saint Nicholas during the siege of
Nancy, and how the king of Portugale who was in France came to see the Duke of
Burgundy during the said siege. page 169 Chap. 8 How the D. of Burgundy
refusing the good counsel of diverse of his men, was discomfited and slain in
the battle fought between him and the D. of Lorraine, near to Nancy. page
171 Chap. 9 A discourse upon certain virtues of the D. of Burgundy, and of
the time his house flourished in prosperity. page 173 Chap. 10 How the king was
advertised of the Duke of Burgundies last overthrow, and how he governed his
affairs after the said Dukes death. page 175 Chap. 11 How the king after the
Duke of Burgundies death seized into his hands the town of Abbeuille, and of
the answer they of Arras gave him. page 177 Chap. 12 A discourse not
appertaining to the principal matters of the great joy the king was in to see
himself delivered of so many enemies, and of the error he committed touching
the reducing of these countries of Burgundy to his obedience. page 178 Chap. 13
How Han, Bohain, Saint Quintin and Perronne were yielded to the king, and how
he sent Master Oliver his barber to practice with them of Gaunt. page 179 Chap.
14 How Master Oliver the kings barber failing to execute his enterprise at
Gaunt, found means to put the kings forces into Tournay. page 182 Chap. 15 Of
the ambassadors the Lady of Burgundy daughter to the late Duke Charles sent to
the king, and how by means of Monseur de Cords the city of Arras, the towns
of Hedin and Bollein, and the town of Arras it self, were yielded to the
king. page 184 Chap. 16 How the citizens of Gaunt having usurped authority over
their Princess after her fathers death, came in embassage to the king, as from
the three estates of their country. page 187 Chap. 17 How they of Gaunt after
their ambassadors return, put to death the Chauncellor Hugonet, and the Lord
of Himbercourt against their Princesses will, and how they and other Flemmings
were discomfited before Tournay, and their general the Duke of Gueldres
slain. page 190 Chap. 18 A discourse upon this point that wars and divisions
are permitted of God for the chastisement ^^ Princes and evil people, with
diverse good reasons and examples for the instruction of Princes, w^^^^ happened
in the Authors time. (...)
The sixth Book.
Chap. 1 How the Duchy of Burgundy was yielded to the King. page 205 Chap. 2
How the king entertained the English men after the death of Charles Duke of
Burgundy, to the end they should not hinder his conquest of the said Dukes
dominions. page 206 Chap. 3 How the marriage between the Lady of Burgundy and
Maximilian Duke of Austrich, afterward Emperor, was concluded and accomplished.
page 209 Chap. 4 How king Lewis by the conduct of Charles of Amboise his
lieutenant, recovered diverse towns in Burgundy, which the Prince of Orange had
caused to revolt from him. page 214 Chap. 5 How Monseur d'Argenton during these
wars of the conquest of Burgundy, was sent to Florence, and how he received
homage of the Duke of Milan in the kings name for the Duchy of Genua. page 217
Chap. 6 Of Monseur d'Argentons return out of Italy into France, and of the
battle of Guinegate. page 219 Chap. 7 How king Lewis being visited with
sickness, lost his wits, and lay speechless, sometime recovering, and eft
soones falling into his disease again: and how he behaved himself in the
castle of Plessis les Tours. page 222 Chap. 8 How the king caused the holy man
of Calabria to come to Tours, thinking that he could heal him: and what
strange things the said king did to maintain his authority during his
sickness. page 226 Chap. 9 How the marriage between the Daulphine and the Lady
Margaret of Flaunders was concluded, and how she was brought into France:
whereupon Edward king of England died for sorrow. page 228 Chap. 10 How the
king behaved himself toward his neighbors and subjects during the time of his
sickness, and how diverse things were sent him from diverse places for the
recovery of his health. page 231 Chap. 11 How king Lewis the 11. caused
Charles the Daulphin his son to come to him a little before his death, and of
the commandments and precepts he gave both him and certain others. page 232
Chap. 12 A comparison between the sorrows and troubles that king Lewis
suffered, and those he caused diverse others to suffer, with a rehearsal of all
that he did, and all that was done to him til his death. page 234 Chap. 13 A
discourse upon the misery of man's life, by the examples of those Princes that
lived in the authors time, and first of king Lewis. page 238 The conclusion of
the Author. page 243 A supply of the history of Philip de Commines from the
death of king Lewis the eleventh, till the beginning of the wars of Naples, to
wit, from 1483. till 1493. of all the which time Commines writes nothing. page
247 Chap. 1 Of king Charles his coming to the crown, of the death of Oliver
king Lewis his Barber and others, and of the reuoking of king Lewis his
superfluous gifts. ibid. Chap. 2 Of the assembly of the states held at Tours,
of the Duke of Orleans pursuit for the regencie, of the madwar raised by him,
and of his departure into Britain. page 248 Chap. 3 Of the troubles that
happened in Britain between the Duke and his nobles, and of Peter Landois
death. page 250 Chap. 4 Of the war the king made in Britain, and of the Earl
of Dunois embassage to the king for peace. page 252 Chap. 5 Of the battle of
Saint Albin, wherein the Duke of Orleans was taken prisoner, of the treaty of
peace between the king and the Duke of Britain, and of the said Duke of
Britains death. page 255 Chap. 6 Of the kings marriage with the Lady Anne of
Britain, whereby Britain was united to the crown of France. page 258 Chap.
7 Of the troubles in England, and how the king of England passed the sea and
besieged Bolloin, and of the peace between the king and him, and of the
surprising of Arras and Saint Omers by the king of Romans men. page 259 Chap.
8 Of the restitution of the countries of Roussillon and Parpignan to the king
of Spain, of the Emperor Fredericks death, of the peace between the king of
Romans and the king, and of the Duke of Orleans delivery out of prison. page
262
The seventh Book.
The Progloue of the Author, containing that which he minds to treat of in
this history following. page 265 How Rene D. of Lorraine came into France to
demand the Duchy of Bar, and the Earldom of Prouence which king Charles
held, and how he failed to enter into the realm of Naples, whereunto he
pretented title as the king did, and what right both of them had thereunto.
page 266 Chap. 2 How the Prince of Salerne in the realm of Naples came into
France, and how Lodouic Sforce surnamed the Moore and he, sought to persuade
the king to make war upon the king of Naples, and for what cause. page 268
Chap. 3 How king Charles the 8 made peace with the king of Romans and the
Archduke of Austriche, restoring to them the Lady Margaret of Flaunders, before
he made his voyage to Naples. page 274 Chap. 4 How the king sent to the
Venetians to practice with them before he enterpised his voyage to Naples, and
of the preparation that was made for the said voyage. page 275 Chap. 5 How king
Charles departed from Vienna in Daulphin to conquer the realm of Naples in
person, and what his navy upon the sea did under the leading of the D. of
Orleans. page 278 Chap. 6 How the king remaining yet in Ast, resolved to pass
forth toward Naples at the earnest suit of Lodouic Sforce. How Philip de
Commines was sent ambassador to Venice: of the D. of Milans death; after whose
decease the said Lodouic seized upon the Duchy, to the prejudice of a son the
said D. left behind him. page 281 Chap. 7 How Peter of Medicis yielded four
of the Florentines strongest places to the king, and how the king restored Pisa
being one of them to their ancient liberty. page 284 Chap. 8 How the king
departed from Pisa to Florence, and of the flight and ruin of Peter de Medices.
page 287 Chap. 9 How the king entered into Florence, and through what other
towns he passed till he came to Rome. page 289 Chap. 10 How the king sent the
Cardinal Petriad Vincula to Ostie; what the Pope did at Rome in the mean
time, and how the king entered into Rome maugre all his enemies. page 291 Chap.
11 How king Alfonse caused his son Ferrand to be crowned king, and then fled
himself into Sicilie: with a discourse of the evil life that his father the
old Ferrand and he had lead. page 295 Chap. 12 How the young Ferrand after he
was crowned king of Naples, went and encamped at Saint Germain to resist the
kings coming, and of the treaty that K. Charles made with the Pope at Rome.
page 297 Chap. 13 How the King departed from Rome toward Naples, what happened
in the mean time in diverse parts of the said realm: and through what places
he passed till he came to Naples. page 299 Chap. 14 How King Charles was
crowned King of Naples, of the faults he committed in the defense of the
realm, and how an enterprise attempted on his behalf against the Turk was
discovered by the Venetians. page 301 Chap. 15 A discourse somewhat out of the
course of the history, wherein Philip de Commines Author of this present work,
treats amply of the estate and government of the Seniorie of Venice, and of
those things that he saw there, and were done there during the time of his
embassage to the said Seniorie for the King. page 304
The eight Book.
Chap. 1 Of the order and provision the King left in the realm of Naples at
his return into France. page 314 Chap. 2 How the king departed from Naples,
and passed again through Rome, whereupon the Pope fled to Oruiette: of the
communication the king had with Monseur d'Argenton, at his return from Venice:
how he took advise whether he should restore the Florentines places to them or
not: and of the sermons worthy of memory of friar Ierom of Florence. page
316 Chap. 3 How the King retained in his hands the town of Pisa, and certain
other of the Florentines places: and how in the mean time the Duke of Orleans
entered on the other side into Nouarre, a town of the Duchy of Milan. page 319
Chap. 4 How King Charles passed diverse dangerous straights in the mountains
between Pisa and Seriaue: how the town of Pontreme was burned by his
Almaines, and how the Duke of Orleans behaved himself in the mean time at
Nouarre. page 321 Chap. 5 How the kings great artillery passed the mounts
Appenines by the Almaines help, of the danger the Marshall of Gie was in with
his vaward and how the King arrived at Fornoue. page 324 Chap. 6 Of the battle
of Fornoue, wherein the enemies of France were put to flight, and how the
Earl of Petillane, who the same day brake the Kings prison, relied them
together again. page 329 Chap. 7 How the Lord of Argenton went himself alone
to parle with the enemies when he saw that those that were appointed to go with
him would not go: and how the King returned safe and sound with his army to the
town of Ast. page 336 Chap. 8 How the king sent ships to the sea to succor
the castles of Naples, and why the said castles could not be succored. page
341 Chap. 9 Of the great famine and misery the D. of Orleans and his men were
in at Nouarre: of the Marchioness of Montferrats death, and likewise of
Monseur de Vendosmes: and how after long deliberation the king inclined to
peace, to save those that were besieged. page 343 Chap. 10 How the D. of
Orleans and his company were delivered by composition out of their great
misery in Nouarre where they were besieged: and of the Swissers arrival that
came to succor the king and the said D. of Orleans. page 349 Chap. 11 How the
peace was concluded between the king and the D. of Orleans on the one side,
and the enemies on the other: and of the conditions and articles thereof. page
351 Chap. 12 How the king sent the Lord of Argenton to Venice with certain
conditions of peace which they refused: and of the D. of Milans false dealings.
page 353 Chap. 13 How the king after his return into France forgot those that
he left behind him in the realm of Naples: and how the Daulphin died, whose
death the king and Queen much lamented. page 356 Chap. 14 How the king was
advertised of the loss of the castle of Naples: and how the Florentines
places were sold to diverse men: of the treaty of Atelle in Pouille, to the
great damage of the French and of the death of king Ferrand of Naples. page
358 Chap. 15 How certain practises-entertained by diverse noble men of Italy on
the kings behalf, as well for the conquest of Naples, as of the Duchy of
Milan, failed for lack of sending thither: and how an other enterprise against
Genua sped evil also. page 362 Chap. 16 Of certain controversies between
king Charles and Ferrand king of Castile, and of the ambassadors that were sent
too and fro to pacify them. page 366 Chap. 17 A discourse of the misfortunes
that happened to the house of Castile, in the Lord of Argentons time. page 370
Chap. 18 Of the sumptuous buildings K. Charles began a little before his death,
of the great desire he had to reform the church himself, to diminish his
revenues, and to redress the processes of the law: and how he died suddenly in
this good mind in his castle of Amboise. page 373 Chap. 19 How the holy man
friar Hierom was burned at Florence by the procurement of the pope, and of
diverse Florentines and Venetians his enemies. page 375 Chap. 20 Of the
obsequies and funerals of king Charles the 8. and of the coronation of king
Lewis the 12. his successor, with the genealogies of the kings of France
continuing to the said Lewis. page 377 The pedigree of Charles D. of Burgundy.
page 379 How Elizabeth wife to king Edward the fourth was niece to the
Constable of France. page 380 How Brabant, Lambourg, Luxembourg and Namurs,
etc. came to Charles D. of Burgundy. 381. page 382 How Margaret of Flaunders
was heir of Flaunders, etc. page 383 How Arthois and the county of Burgundy
descended to the said Lady Margaret etc. page 384 How the King of Portugale was
cousin germaue to the D. of Burgundy. page 385 How the D. of Cleues was the Lady
of Burgundies nearest kinsman by his mother. page 386 How King Henry the 7. was
right heir of the house of Lancaster. page 387 The title the D. of Lorraine
had to the realm of Sicilie, etc. page 388 Why the Venetians had no right to
the realm of Naples. page 390 The house of Medices. page 391 How Lewis D. of
Orleans pretended title to the Duchy of Milan. page 392 The pedigree of
Hercules D. of Ferrara. page 394 The pedigree of Francis Marquis of Mantua.
page 395 How Ferdinand King of Arragon had more right to the realm of Naples
than the Kings of the house of Arragon that possessed it. page 396


FINIS.
THE PREFACE OF THE AVTHOR TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF VIENNA in France.
TO satisfy your request so often moved unto me (right reverend father in
God) I send you here a memorial as agreeable to truth, as I can possibly call
to mind, of all the acts and doings that I have been privy unto, of king
Lewis the eleventh our master and benefactor, and a prince worthy of
perpetual memory. Of his youth I can say nothing but by his own report. But
from the time I entered into his service, till the hour of his death whereat I
was present, I was more continually resident with him than any man of my estate
that served him, being ever either of his privy chamber, or employed in his
weighty affairs. I found in him as in all other princes that I have known or
served both good and bad. For men they are as we be, and perfection is proper
to God only. But sure that prince whose virtues and good parts surmount his
vices, deserves great commendation, the rather because commonly noble
personages are more prone to al kind of wantonness than other men: partly for
that in their childhood they are brought up without due chastisement and
correction, and partly because when they are grown to man's estate, each man
seeks to seed their humors and sooth them in all they say or do. But for mine
own part because I love not to flatter nor misreport the truth, somewhat may
happily be found in this history not tending altogether to the kings praise,
but I trust the readers will weigh the reasons above alleged. Sure thus much I
dare boldly say in his commendation, that in mine opinion he was the prince in
his age (all things considered) least subject to vice. Yet have I known and
been conversant with as many great princes, both spiritual and temporal as
any man in France of my time, as well the princes of this realm, as those
also that have lived in Britain, Flaunders, Almayne, England, Spain,
Portugal, and Italy. Diverse others also whom I have not seen: yet have I
known, partly by conference with their ambassadors, and partly by their
letters and instructions which are means sufficient to inform men of their
natures and inclinations. Notwithstanding I mind not by setting forth his
commendation in this work, to detract from the honor and good renown of
others, but send you, penned in haste all that I could call to mind, trusting
that you have required it of me to turn it into some work that you purpose to
publish in Latin (to the perfection of which tongue you have atteined) whereby
may appear both the woorthines of the prince I now write of, and also the
excellency of your own wit. Farther sir, if I happen to fail in any point,
you have my L. of Bouchage, and others who are better able to inform you of
these affairs than my self, and to couch their words in much eloquenter
language. Although to say the truth considering how honorably the king
entertained me, how great familiarity it pleased him to use toward me, and
how liberally he bestowed upon me, never intermitting one of the three till the
hour of his death, no man has iuster cause to remember those times then my
self, whereunto I also add the losses I have sustained, and dangers I have
been in sithence his decease, which are sufficient I think, to put me in mind
of the great benefits I received at his hands during his life. Notwithstanding
that I know it to be a matter of course that after the death of great and
mighty princes, great alterations ensue to the loss of some, and gain of
others: for riches and honors follow not always their expectation that hunt
after them. To conclude sir, the better to inform you of the time sithence I
entered into the kings familiarity (which is your desire) I am forced first to
rehearse what happened before I came to his service, and so orderly to proceed
from the time I became his servant, till the hour of his death.

The occasion of the wars between Lewis the 11. and the Earl of Charolois
afterward Duke of Burgundy. Chapter 1.
AFter I was past my childehood and able to ride 1 I was presented at Lisle to
Charles then Earl of Charolois, and after his fathers death D. of Burgundy,
who received me into his service the year 1464. About three days after my
coming thither, arrived at the said town of Lisle, the Earl of Eu, the
Chauncellor of France named Moruillier, and the Archbishop of Narbonne 2 sent
thither in embassage from the king, who in presence of D. Philip of Burgundy,
his son the Earl of Charolois, and their whole council in open court had
their audience. Moruilliers speech was very bitter, for he charged the Earl of
Charolois there present, that at his late being in Holland he had caused a
little French ship of war of Diepe to be arrested, and therein a bastard of
Rubempre, whom also he had imprisoned, charging him that he was come thither to
take him prisoner, and causing this brute every where to be published 3
(especially at Bruges whither strangers of all nations resort) by a knight of
Burgundy named sir Oliver de la March, 4 wherefore the King finding himself
wrongfully burdened heerewith (as he said) 5 required D. Philip to send this
sir Oliver de la March prisoner to Paris, there to be punished according as
the case required. Whereunto D. Philip answered that the said sir Oliver was
steward of his house, borne in the County of Burgundy, 6 and in no respect
subject to the crown of France. Notwithstanding if it could be duly proved
that he had said or done any thing prejudicial to the Kings honor, he would see
him punished according as the fault should deserve. And as touching the bastard
of Rubempre, he said that true it was that he was apprehended for great causes
of suspicion given, and strange behauior used by him and his men about the
town of Lahaye 7 in Holland, where at that present his son the Earl of
Charolois remained, adding that if the said Earl were suspicious he took it
not of him, for he was never so, but of his mother who had been the most ielous
Lady that ever lived. But notwithstanding quoth he, that I my self never were
suspicious: yet if I had bin in my sons place at the same time, that this
bastard of Rubempre haunted those coasts: I would sure have caused him to be
apprehended as my son did. Lastly, he promised that if this bastard were not
guilty of this fact, to wait a purpose to have taken his son (as common
report said he was) he would forthwith deliver him out of prison, and send
him to the King according to his ambassadors demands? The D. answer ended:
Moruillier began again, charging with great and heinous offenses, Frances D.
of Britain, and alleging that at the Earl of Charolois late being at Tours
(whither he went to visit the king) the said D. and he had given their faith
each to other in writing to become brethren in arms, which writings he said
were enterchangeablie delivered by the hands of master Tanneguy du Chastel, who
since has been governor of Roussillon, and borne some swaie in this realm:
This fact Moruillier aggrauated in such sort, that nothing he omitted in
setting forth this offense that might tend to the disgrace and dishonor of a
Prince. Whereunto the Earl of Charolois made offer eftsoons to answer, being
maruellously out of patience to hear such reproachful speeches used of his
friend and confederate. But Moruillier ever cut him off saying: My Lord of
Charolois, I am not come of embassage to you but to my L. your Father. The said
Earl besought his father diverse times to give him leave to answer, who in the
end said thus unto him: I have answered for thee as me thinks, the father
should answer for the son, notwithstanding if thou have so great desire to
speak, bethink thy self to day, and to morrow speak and spare not. Then
Moruillier to his former speech added, that he could not imagine what had
moved the Earl to enter into this league with the D. of Britain, unless it
were because of a pension 8 the King had once given him, together with the
government of Normandy, and afterward again taken from him.

The next day in presence of the self same audience, the Earl of Charolois
kneeling upon a veluetcushion, directed his speech to his father, and began
with this bastard of Rubempre, affirming the causes of his imprisonment to be
just and lawful, as the course of his arraignment should well declare.
Notwithstanding I think nothing was ever proved against him, though I
confess the presumptions to have been great. Five years after I my self saw
him delivered out of prison. This point thus answered, the Earl began to
discharge the D. of Britain and himself, saying, that true it was that the D.
and he were entered into league and amity, and had sworn themselves brethren in
arms, but that this league tended in no respect to the prejudice of the King
or his realm, but rather to the service and defense thereof, if need should
so require. Lastly, as touching the pension taken from him, he answered, that
he never received but one quarters benefit thereof, to the value of nine
thousand francks 9, and that for his part he never made suit neither for it,
nor the government of Normandy: for so long as he enioied the favor and good
will of his father, he should not need to crave of any man. I think verily,
had it not been for the reverence he bare to his said father who was there
present, and to whom he addressed his speech, that he would have used much
bitterer terms. In the end D. Philip very wisely and humbly besought the King
lightly not to conceive an evil opinion of him or his son, but to continue
his favor toward them. Then the banquet was brought in, and the ambassadors
took their leave both of the father and the son. But after the Earl of Eu,
and the Chauncellor had taken their leave of the Earl of Charolois, who stood
a good way from his father, he said thus to the Archbishop of Narbonne that
passed forth the last of the ambassadors: Remember my most humble duty to the
King, and tell him he has made his Chauncellor to use me very homely here,
but before a years end he shall repent it: which message the Archbishop did to
the King at his return into France as hereafter you shall perceive.

These Moruilliers words above rehearsed, caused the Earl of Charolois hatred
against the King to take deep root, the seeds whereof were before sown by
the Kings late redeeming of the towns situate upon the river of Sum 10,
namely Amiens, Abbeuille, Saint Quintin, and the rest which king Charles the 7.
had engaged by the treaty of Arras to his father. D. Philip of Burgundy to
have and to hold to him and to his heirs males, till they were redeemed for
four hundred thousand crowns 11: How these matters passed, I know not
perfectly, but true it is that in the D. old age he was so governed by the
Lords of Croy and Chimay, being brethren, and others of their house, that he
agreed to take again his money and restore the said territories to the King,
greatly to the Earl his sons discontentation: for besides that they were the
frontier towns of their dominions, they lost in them a number of able men for
the wars. The Earl of Charolois charged the house of Croy with this fact, so
far forth that after extreme age was grown upon his father (whereunto he
even then approached) he banished all the said house out of his dominions, and
confiscated all their lands, estates and offices.

The Notes.
1 Commines when he came to the Earl of Charolois service was 19. years of
age.

2 Charles Earl of Eu, Peter of Moruillier, and John de Harcour bishop of
Narbonne were the ambassadors here mentioned, they arrived at List the 5. of
November, Annals Burgundiae.

3 Whether the king meant to have taken the Earl of Charolois prisoner by this
Rubempre, read Annal. Burgund. lib. 3. page 880. and Meyer lib. 16. fol. 334.
who flatly charge him with it.

4 Sir Oliver de la March here named vvrote a Cronicle of these times.

5 The cause why the King sent Rubempre into Holland was not (as he said) to
take the Earl of Charolois, but the Vicechauncellor of Britain named in
Meyer, Johannes Rociuilla, and by our author in the 3. Chapter of this first
book Rouuille, whom the Duke of Britain had sent into England to make a
league betvveene the realm of England and him, and because the King supposed
this Vicechauncellor would visit the Earl of Charolois in his return: he
sent this Rubempre into Holland to take him and bring him into France. Annal.
Burgund. Meyer.

6 For the better understanding of the Dukes answer, I am forced to pass the
bounds of a note. Wherefore it is to be understood that in the declination of
the Roman Empire, the Burgundians anno 408. being chased out of Almaine,
where they inhabited, the countries now subject to the Palsgraue of the
Rhyne, invaded France, and conquered the countries, now known by the names
of the County and Duchy of Burgundy, together with Sauoy, Daulphine,
Province, and the greatest part of Svvitzerland, and anno 414. chose them a
king named Gondiachus, with whom (after diverse battles fought with
changeable fortune) Aetius the Emperor, Honorius his lieutenant in France, at
the length made peace. And Gondiachus remained King of Burgundy, and aided the
Romans against Attila. Soon after failed the male line of Gondiachus, and,
by the marriage of Clotilde daughter to Chilperic, Gondiachus his son, with
Clodoneus King of France: Burgundy fell to Clotarius son to the said
Clotilde and Clodoneus, and so continued in the house of France till the year
843. when the sons of the Emperor Lodouicus Pius warring together, Burgundy
was divided into Burgundiam Transiuranam, and Cisiuranam. Transiurana
containing Sauoy, Daulphine Province and Lyonnois, remained to Lotharius the
Emperor, with the title of King of Burgundy. Cisiurana containing the County
and Duchy of Burgundy, was also dismembered, for that part now known by
the name of the County of Burgundy, fell also to Lotharius share: but that
part now known by the name of the Duchy of Burgundy, was together with
the Realm of France yielded to Carolus Caluus: But after the death of the
Emperor Lotharius, his two sons Lodouicus and Lotharius made another
partition of their part of Burgundy: for the realm of Austrasia with the
County of Burgundy fell to Lotharius, after whose death his uncle Carolus
Caluus King of France ambitiously through violence conquered also that part of
Burgundy, and joined it to the crown of France, so that the said Carolus
Caluus possessed all Burgundy Cisiurana, that is, both the County and Duchy
of Burgundy. Loduicus the other son of the Emperor Lotharius possessed with
the Empire all Burgundy Transiurana, together with the title of King of
Burgundy, and left behind him one only daughter named Hermingarde, married to
Boson brother to Richilde, Carolus Caluus his wife, in respect of which
marriage the said Caluus gave to Boson all Burgundy Cisiurana, which he the
said Caluus then held: And thus had Boson all the realm of Burgundy, viz.
Transiurana in the right of his wife, and Cisiurana, by his brother in laws
gift. Farther the said Caluus being both Emperor and King of France, created
the above named Boson King of Burgundy anno 879. to whom succeeded Lodouicus
his son, from whom Ralph King of France (son to Richard that first
entitled himself Duke of Burgundy) wan the greatest part of Burgundy
Cisiurana. To this Lewis succeeded his son Ralph King of Burgundy, who not
being able to defend his realm gave it to the Emperor Conradus 2. who
notwithstanding obtained the least part thereof: for as touching Transiurana,
Beralde Duke of Saxe had before this gift won from King Ralph Sauoy and a
great piece of Switzerland, Daulphine, Lyonnois, and Poruince, Guigue le gras
the first Daulphine, had likewise conquered. And as touching Cisiurana by
treaty made between the Emperor Conradus 2. and Henry King of France, only
the County remained to the Empire, and the Duchy to the crown of France.
This I have written, because some hold opinion that the County of Burgundy
ought also to be held of the crown of France, whereas in deed rather the
Duchy with all Transiurana (the greatest part whereof the French King at this
day possesses) ought to be held of the Empire, from whom the said French Kings
have pulled so many provinces, that now (as one properly speaks) the Eagle
has lost so many feathers, that hardly he can fly.

7 Lahaie in our author and in Annal. Burgund. where Rubempre should have taken
the Earl of Charolois, is named in Meyer Gorkem.

8 The pension the Earl of Charalois had of the King with the government of
Normandy was 36000. franks, Annal. Burgund. La March, Meyer.

9 A frank is two shillings and six pence sterling, after eight souse to an
English shilling, so that the carles pension after that rate amounted to four
thousand five hundred pound sterling.

10 The towns and territories upon the river of Sum engaged to Duke Philip
by the treaty of Arras, which was in the year 1435. are named in the articles
of the said treaty rehearsed in Annal. Burgund. page 760. and 761. and in the
first book of La March, and in the 16. book of Meyer and others.

11 They were engaged as our author and Annal. Burgund. write for 400000.
crowns, but Meyer says 450000. but they were redeemed for 400000. anno 1463.
La March, Meyer. Annal. Burgund.

How the Earl of Charolois and diverse noble men of France levied an army
against king Lewis, under color of the weal public. Chap. 2.
Soon after the abouenamed Ambassadors departure, John Duke of Bourbon that
last died, arrived at the town of Lisle, pretending that he came to visit his
uncle Duke Philip of Burgundy, who above all houses loved especially this
house of Bourbon, and no marvel: for this Duke of Bourbons mother was Duke
Philips sister. She had lived a widow many years, and soiourned there at that
time with her brother, both her self and diverse of her children, to wit, three
daughters and one son, notwithstanding this was not indeed the cause of the
Duke of Bourbons arrival, but his coming was to persuade the Duke of
Burgundy to suffer an army to be levied in his dominions, assuring him that
all the Princes of France would do the like: meaning thereby to give the King
to understand how evil and unjust government he used in his realm, and
purposing to make themselves so strong, that they might constrain him by force
to redress this inconvenience, if prayers could not prevail. This war was
afterward called THE WEAL PVBLIQVE, because the authors thereof used the
common wealth for color of their enterprise. The said good Duke Philip (for so
is he surnamed since his death) agreed that an army should be levied in his
dominions, but the bottom of the enterprise was never discovered to him: for he
thought not that the matter should have come to hand strokes as after it did.
Immediately began the musters through all the Dukes dominions, and the Earl of
Saint Paul afterward Constable of France, accompanied with the Marshall of
Burgundy, being of the house of Neuf-chastell, repaired to Cambray (where D.
Philip then lay) to the Earl of Charolois, who immediately after their arrival
assembled his fathers Council, and a great number of his subjects in the
Bishops palace at Cambray, where he proclaimed all the house of Croy traitors
to his father and him. And notwithstanding that the Earl of S. Paul alleged,
that by this proclamation he should be greatly indamaged, because long before
this, he had given his daughter in marriage 1 to the L. of Croies son: yet was
the said house of Croy (all that notwithstanding) forced to abandon the Dukes
dominions 2, where they lost great riches. With the which doing, Duke Philip
was much discontented, especially because his chief chamberlain (afterward
Lord of Chimay) a young man well disposed, and nephew to the Lord of Croy, was
forced for fear of his life, to depart without leave taken of his master,
being advertised that if he did otherwise he should either be slain or
apprehended: but the Dukes old age caused him to bear this matter more
patiently than otherwise he would. All this trouble happened in his house because
of the restitution of the territories above mentioned, situate upon the river
of Sum, which the Duke had restored to King Lewis for the sum of 400000.
crowns, by the persuasion of this house of Croy, as the Earl of Charolois
laid to their charge.

The said Earl after he had pacified his father, and reconciled himself to
him the best that might be, put his whole force incontinent into the field,
being accompanied with the Earl of S. Paul, the principal governor of his
affairs, and he that had the greatest charge in his army, for he had under
him by the Earl of Charolois commandment 300. men of arms, and 4000.
archers, besides a number of valiant knights and esquires of Artois, Haynalt,
and Flaunders. Like bands and as great were also under the leading of the L. of
Rauastin the D. of Cleues brother, and the L. Anthony bastard of Burgundy,
other captains for brevity I pass over, but above all the rest, two knights
there were especially, in great credit with the Earl of Charolois, the one
named the L. of Hault-bordin an ancient knight, bastard brother to the Earl of
S. Paul, the other the L. of Contay. They had both been trained up in the long
wars between France and England, at the same time that Henry the 5. of that
name King of England, reigned in France, being confederate with this Duke
Philip of Burgundy. They were two valiant and wise knights, and had the
principal charge of the whole army of young gentlemen: there were a number,
but one especially very famous, called master Philip of Lalain, issued of a
race that has ever been so valiant and courageous, that they have in manner all
died in the wars in their princes service. The Earls force was great: for his
men of arms were to the number of 1400. but evil armed, and untrained,
because of the long peace these Princes of Burgundy had lived in. For since
the treaty of Arras by the space of 36. years and more, they never had war
that endured nor almost taste of war, save a few broils against the city of
Gaunt, which were soon pacified. Notwithstanding his men of arms were well
mounted, and well accompanied, for few or none should you have seen without
five or six great horses of his retinue. 3 The archers 4 were eight or nine
thousand, and when they mustred they were more unwilling to depart then to give
their names, but the ablest were chosen and the rest dismissed 5.

The subjects of this house of Burgundy lived then in great prosperity,
partly because of their long peace, and partly because of their Princes
goodness, who levied but few subsidies upon them, so that these Seniors seemed
comparable to the land of promise in those days: for they flowed in wealth,
and had continued in great quietness the space of 23. years, to wit, till the
beginning of these wars now mentioned, which till this day endure vnended:
their expenses in apparel both of men and women were great and superfluous 6,
their feasts and banquets more sumptuous and prodigal than in any country
that ever I saw, their bathes and other pastimes with women wanton and
dissolute, yea somewhat too shameless, I meame of women of low estate. To be
short, the subjects of this house, thought at that time, no Prince able to
withstand them, at the least none too mighty for them, but at this present, I
know no country in the world in so great misery and desolation as theirs, and
I doubt me the sins they committed in their prosperity, cause them now to
suffer this adversity, because they acknowledged not all these gifts and
benefits to proceed from God who disposes and bestows them as to his
heavenly wisdom seems best.

The Earls army thus furnished even in a moment, of all things necessary,
marched forward, 7 the whole force being on horseback, save those that conveyed
the artillery, which was mighty and strong for that time, and the straglers
appointed for the carriage, the which was so great, that the Earls own carriage
enclosed the greatest part of his camp: he marched first toward Noyon, and
besieged a little castle called Nesle, which was soon taken, notwithstanding
the resistance made by the garrison that was within it. The Marshall Ioachin
(one of the four Marshals of France) issuing out of Peronne coasted
continually along by the Earls camp, but could not endamage him, for his
force was so small, that when the Earl drew near to Paris he retired thither.
All the way as the Earl passed he made no war, but what his men took they paid
for: wherefore the towns upon the river of Sum and all other towns that he
passed by, received his men in small troops, and sold them for their money
whatsoever they would buy, as men resting in suspense whether the king or the
princes should have the upper hand 8. So far marched the Earl that he came to
S. Dennis near to Paris, where all the Lords of the realm had promised to
meet him but none came, notwithstanding that the Vicechauncellor of Britain,
the D. and Ambassadorresident in the Earls camp, forged news of their
coming from time to time, at his own pleasure upon certain blanks that he
had, signed with his masters hand: he was a Norman borne, and a very wise and
sufficient man, and so it behooued him to be, for the whole camp murmured
against him. The Earl of Charolois showed himself before Paris 9, where was a
hot skirmish, hard at the town gates, but to the Citizens disadvantage. Men of
war within the town were none, save only the Marshall Ioachin with his
company, and the Lord of Nantoillet, afterward Lord great Master, who did the
King as good service in these wars as ever did subject King of France at his
need, and yet in the end was evil recompensed, rather by his enemies malice,
than the Kings fault, though neither of both are clearly to be excused. The
poor people of the city were in so great fear the day of the skirmish, that
they cried often (as I was afterward credibly informed) that we were entered
the town, but without cause. Notwithstanding the L. of Hault-bourdin above
mentioned (who had been brought up in the town, when it was nothing so strong
as now it is) gave advise to assault it, and the soldiers desired nothing more,
contemning the towns men because the skirmishes were hard at their gates, yet
the contrary opinion took place, whereupon the Earl retired to S. Denis. The
next day in the morning he debated with his Council whether he should go to
meet with the Dukes of Berry and Britain or not, who were at hand as the
Vicechauncellor of Britain said, showing also their letters testifying the
same, but he had forged them upon his blanks, and other news knew he none. In
the end the Earl resolved to pass the river of Seine, notwithstanding that
the most part of his Council gave advise to return home, seeing the rest of
the confederates had broken day, alleging it to be sufficient to have passed
the rivers of Sum and Marne, and more than needed to pass this river of
Seine. Some also put forth great doubts, because we had no places on our back
to retire into if we should be distressed. But all this notwithstanding the
Earl passed the river and encamped at Pont S. Clou 10, wherefore the whole
army murmured much against the Earl of S. Paul and this Vicechauncellor, who
were the principal perswaders of him thereunto. The next day after his
arrival there, he received letters from a Lady of this land written with her
own hand, wherein she advertised him that the King was departed out of
Bourbonnois, and came down with all speed to fight with him.

I must here declare the occasion of the Kings voyage into Bourbonnois, which
was this: So soon as he understood that all the princes of his realm had
conspired against him (at the least against his government) he determined to
prevent them, and before they were assembled, to invade the D. of Bourbon, who
was the first that openly discovered himself to be of the confederacy 11: and
because his country was weak he hoped soon to subdue it, as in deed diverse
places he took, and would easily have taken all, had not succors come thither
out of Burgundy under the leading of the L. Coulches, the Marquess of
Rottelin, the L. of Montague, and others, with whom Master William of
Rochefort Chauncellor of France (a man at this day of great estimation) was
also in arms. This force was levied in Burgundy by the solicitation of the
Earl of Beauieu, and the Gardinall of Bourbon, 12 brethren to D. John of
Bourbon, and by them received into Molines. Aid came also of another side to
the D. of Bourbon, under the leading of the D. of Nemours, the Earl of
Armignac, and the L. of Albert, being accompanied with a great band of
soldiers, some of the which were good men of arms of their countries, who
lately had forsaken the Kings pay, and put themselus into their service. But
the greatest part of their men were utterly unfurnished of all things, and
forced for lack of pay to live upon the poor people. The King notwithstanding
these their great forces gave themynough to do: wherefore in the end they fell
to treat of peace, especially the D. of Nemours, who solemnly promised and
swear to take part with him, and yet did afterward the contrary: whereupon the
King conceived so great displeasure against him, that afterward he could never
brook him, as eftsoons he has told me. To be short, the King perceiving that
he could not atchieue his enterprise in Bourbonnois so speedily as at the first
he hoped, and fearing if the Earl of Charolois forces which approached near to
Paris, and the forces of the Duke of Berry his own brother, and of the D. of
Britain which were coming out of Britain, should join together: that the
Parisians would receive them into their town, because they all pretended the
common wealth for color of their enterprise: and knowing also that as the
town of Paris did, so all the other towns in his realm would follow; for
these causes I say, he resolved with all speed possible to put himself into
Paris, meaning to keep these two great armies asunder: but his purpose was not
to fight, as he has himself diverse times told me in communing of these
affairs,

The Notes.
1. The Earl of S. Paul had betrothed his daughter to the L. of Croys son,
but seeing the Earl of Charalois hatred against the said Croy, he would have
broken off the marriage again, but Croy in whose house the said daughter
remained, contrary to her fathers will made up the match, for the which cause
the Earl of S. Paul hated the said Croy to the death, Annal. Burgund.

2. The Earl of Charolois besides this matter here alleged charged John L.
of Croy, that he had called him great devil, threatened him, and sought to
poison him. Meyer.

3. Every French man of arms is allowed three men to accompany him in the
wars, one to bear his headpeece, called in Latin Ferentarius, and two archers.
La March. but the Burgundians had here some 5. some 6.

4 These archers were bow-men mounted on horseback, as harquebusiers on
horseback are now.

5 He that makes such offer of himself, secketh pray not service, wherefore
this rejecting of so many, was done according to the rules of the art of war.

6 Of the excess of this house of Burgundy, Annal. Burgund. write thus, lib.
3. pa. 917. and 918. All fashions of apparel were grown in use among the
subjects of this house of Burgundy, and those so indecent and dissolute, that
none could be more. The Ladies and gentle women ware upon their head a strange
kind of attire, fashioned in pyramidal form, the top thereof half an ell good
from the crown of their head, and thereupon a carchef of lawne or some other
fine linen hanging down to the very ground: a fond attire and worthy to be
derided. The men disguised themselves no less than the women, some vvare
their clothes so short, that they hardly covered those parts that nature her
self shameth to discover: their hair was curled and of such length that it
hindered their sight: upon their heads they ware felt-hats copletanked, a
quarter of an ell high or more: they stuffed their dublets about the shouldens
and breast marvelous full of bombast, to the end they might seem square and
broad brested, a thing greatly displeasing God: their clokes were not so short
but their gowns were as long, for they trained after them upon the ground. To
be short, the whole world could not devise stranger kinds of disguising than
they had, and that was woorst of all is this, that every rascal and every
woman in beggars estate would be apparelled princelike, and imitate the fashion
of Court, without regard either of cost or calling. Compare this with the
excess of England at these days, and we shall see in a glass our own
vanities, and have just cause to look for the same miseries that fell upon
this house of Burgundy after this excess.

7 The 15. of May says Meyer, but the 25. Annal. Burgund. the Earl departed
from his father.

8 The Earl of Charolois as he passed named himself the Duke of Berries
lieutenant, for the which cause the towns here mentioned the willinglyer
received him. Annals Burgund.

9 The Earls army showed it self before Paris about the 12. or 13. of July,
at which time all the princes should have met him there. Meyer.

10 The Earl of S. Paul took a great bote upon the river of Seine, in the
which he passed the river, and took Pont S. Clou. Annal. Burgund.

11 Read a letter written by the King to the Duke of Bourbon and his answer
thereunto. Annal. Burgund. page 889.

12 This Cardinal of Bourbon was Archbishop of Lions, and brother to the Duke
of Bourbon, Annal. Burgund. for the which cause I think it best in the French
to read freres for friar, because the Earl of Beauieu and this Cardinal were
both brethren to the Duke of Bourbon.

How the Earl of Charolois encamped near to Montl'hery, and of the battle
fought there between the King of France and him. Chap. 3.
THe Earl of Charolois supposing that the King (being departed out of
Burbonnois (as before you have heard) came down purposely to fight with him:
resolved likewise to set forward against the King, and then read openly the
contents of the letter sent him by the Lady above mentioned, (not uttering her
name) and required his soldiers to play the men, saying, that he was fully
resolved to hazard the battle, wherefore he marched and encamped at a village
near to Paris called Longiumeau, and the Earl of S. Paul with the vawarde
lodged at Montl'hery, two leagues beyond Longiumeau, from whence he sent
foreriders and scoutes abroad, to understand of the Kings coming, and what way
he took: farther in the presence of the Earl of S. Paul, the Lord of
Hault-bourdin, and the Lord of Contay, Longiumeau was assigned for the place of
the battle, and thither it was agreed that the Earl of S. Paul should retire
with the vawarde if the King happened to come.

Now you shall understand that the Earl of Maine with seven or eight hundred
men of arms lay continually in face of the Dukes of Berry and Britain, who
were accompanied with a number of wise and valiant knights, that King Lewis had
put out of pension at his first coming to the state, (notwithstanding the
great services that they had done his father, in the recovering and pacifying
of the realm:) whereof afterward full often he repented him. Among these
knights was the Earl of Dunois, a man of great experience in all matters 1, the
marshall of Loheac, the Earl of Dampmartin, the Lord of Bueil and diverse
others, accompanied with the number of five hundred men of arms, who lately
had forsaken the Kings pay, and retired themselves to the Duke of Britain, of
whose only subjects this whole force consisted. The Earl of Maine who lay
continually in face of the two Dukes camp, (as you have heard) finding
himself too weak to encounter with them, dislodged continually before them,
approaching nearer and nearer to the King, in like manner the Dukes of Berrie and
Britain endeavored to join with the Burgundians. Some have held opinion that
the Earl of Maine had secret intelligence with the Princes, but I could never
understand any such thing, neither do I believe it, 2.

The Earl of Charolois lying in camp at Longiumeau (as you have heard) and
his vawarde at Montl'hery, was advertised by a prisoner, that the Earl of
Maine with his whole force, all the men of arms of the Kings ordinary retinue,
being to the number of two an twenty hundredth, and the arriereban 3. of
Daulphine together with forty or fifty gentlemen of Sauoy, excellent good
soldiers, were al joined with the King.

The King in the mean time consulted with the Earl of Maine, the high
Seneschall of Normandy called De Brezey, the Admiral of France who was of the
house of Montauban, and others, what was to be don, and in the end whatsoever
was said or advised to the contrary, resolved not to fight, neither approach
near to the Burgundians camp, but only to enter into Paris, 4 which in mine
opinion was the best and safest course. He stood in great doubt of his high
Seneschall of Normandy, and therefore desired him to tell him truly whether he
had given his faith in writing to the Princes that came against him: whereunto
the Seneschall answered after his merry ieasting manner, that he had, and that
the writing should remain with him, but the body should serve him, which his
answer the King took in good part, and gave him the leading of his vaward,
and put also under his charge, the guides whose help he used because he meant to
shun the battle as you have heard. But the Seneschall being wedded to his own
will, said privily to certain of his familiar friends, that he would that day
join the two armies so nere together, that he had need to be a good man of war
that should sever them without battle, which his promise he performed, though
to his own cost, for the first man that was slain was himself 5, and his
band with him. These his words, the King has often since rehearsed to me, for
I served then the Earl of Charolois.

But to proceed, the 27. of July, 6 the year 1465. the Kings vawarde came to
Montl'hery, where the Earl of Saint Paul lodged, who incontinent advertised
the Earl of Charolois lying two leagues thence (namely at Longiumeau, the
place assigned for the battle) of their arrival, desiring him of aid with all
speed, and alleging that because all his men of arms and archers were lighted
on foot, and enclosed with their carriage, he could not possibly retire to
Longiumeau, according to the order agreed on, without seeming to fly, whereby
he should both discourage and endanger the whole army. Which message received:
the Earl of Charolois sent forthwith the bastard of Burgundy called Anthony
with a great band of men to join with the Earl of S. Paul, and debated with
himself whether he should go thither in person or not, and in the end marched
forward with the rest, and came to the place about seven of the clock in the
morning: but before his arrival five or six of the Kings ensigns were
displaied along upon a great ditch side between the two armies.

The Vicechauncellor of Britain called Rouuille was yet in the Earl of
Charolois camp, and with him an ancient man of arms named Maderey, the
selfsame that delivered Pont S. Maxence to the Burgundians: against these two
the whole army murmured, because the battle being now ready to be given: the
forces they had so much vaunted of were yet vncome. Wherefore they were both in
great fear, and fled before the two armies joined, taking the way to the
Britains camp. The Earl of Charolois company set themselves in order of
battle as they marched, and at their arrival found the Earl of S. Paul on
foot, and all the archers dismounted, each man having a pale pitched before him.
Farther, they beat out the heads of diverse pipes of wine to drink: and sure for
those few battles I have been in, I never saw men in my life more desirous to
fight, which me thought was a good sign and a great comfort. Order was given
at the first that we should all light on foot none excepted, but that order
was afterward altered. For almost all the men of arms mounted again on
horseback, save certain valiant Knights and Esquiers appointed to fight among
the footmen, namely, Monseur de Cords, and Master Philip of Lalain, with
diverse others: for at that time among the Burgundians the honorablest
personages fought on foot among the archers, to the end the infanterie might
be the better assured and fight the more courageously, which order they learned
of the English men, with whom Duke Philip (being confederate in his youth) made
war upon the realm of France the space of two and thirty years without truce
7. But the burden of those wars lay upon the English men's shoulders, who were
at that time rich and mighty, and had a wise, goodly and valiant King called
Henry, accompanied with sage, hardy, and expert captains, namely, the Earl of
Salisburie, Talbot and others, whom I pass over, because those wars were
before my time, notwithstanding I have seen the relics of them. For when God
meant to withdraw his goodness from the English men, this wise King died at Bois
de Vincennes, and his son who proved but a simple man, was crowned King of
France and England at Paris. Soon after, all was turned topsie turuie in
England. For civil wars arose among them which have endured almost till this
present, by reason that the house of York usurped the crown, or held it by
good title, I wot not well whether, for the lot of kingdoms is given from
heaven.

But to return to the history, this dismounting and remounting of the
Burgundians, caused both great delaie of time, and loss of men, for at this
instant, that young valiant knight master Philip of Lalain, being but slenderly
armed was slain 8. The Kings forces marched scatteringly along by the forest
of Torfou, being hardly 400. men of arms at our first arrival, so that if we
had then charged them, in mine opinion we had found no resistance, for they
that were behind, could not have aided the former, because they could not
march forward upon a front, but one by one after an other. Notwithstanding,
their number continually increased, which this wise knight Monseigneur de
Contay perceiving, came and told his master the Earl of Charolois, that if he
would obtain the victory it was time to give the charge, confirming his
opinion by diverse good reasons, and adding that if he had assailed his enemies
at his first arrival, they had already been discomfited, for then their number
was small, but now greatly increased as easy it was to be discerned, and sure
he said true 9. Then was every man's advise asked, and the former order clean
altered, but in the mean time a great and hot skirmish was already begun, at
the very entry into the village of Montl'hery, all of shot on both sides, the
Kings bands were lead by Poncet of Riuiere, being all archers of his ordinary
retinue, glistering in gilt and very well appointed. But the Earls shot was
out of order, obedient to no man, and doing all things of their own brain.
Thus began the skirmishes in the which the Lord Philip of Lalain 10, and James
of Mas a valiant gentleman, afterward master of the horse to Duke Charles of
Burgundy, fought on foot among the archers. The Burgundians being the greater
number, took a house, and bare two or three doors before them, wherewith they
covered themselves in steed of targates, and after they were entered the
street, set fire on a house, the wind was with them, and blew the flame in
their enemies faces, who thereupon retired, and afterward took horse and fled,
with the which hue and cry, the Earl of Charolois began to march, leaving the
order first devised. For order was first given that the bands should rest twice
by the way, because the Earls vawarde and his battle were far asunder 11. The
Kings army stood near to the castle of Montl'hery, a great hedge and a ditch
being between them and us. The fields beyond them bare that year wheat,
beans, and other grain, grown marvelous high and thick: for the soil
there is very good. All the Earls shot marched on foot before him in very
evil order, notwithstanding that in mine opinion in a battle the principal
hope of victory consists in the shot, I mean if the force of shot be great
(for small force serves to small purpose) and either evil mounted (to the end
they be not unwilling to forsake their horses) or not mounted at all. Farther
the day of a battle, those that are ignorant of the wars will do a greater
exploit, than those that have been long trained up therein, this is the
Englishmens opinion, who are best shot in the world: order was first given (as
you have heard) that the Earls battle should rest twice upon the way, to the
end the foot men might breath them, because the vaward and it were far
asunder, and the corn high and thick which troubled their going, yet
notwithstanding the clean contrary was done, as though men would purposely
have lost all. Wherefore heerby, God manifestly declared that he is the Lord of
hosts, and disposes of the victory as seems best to him, and sure for my
part, I cannot be persuaded that the wisdom of one man is sufficient to
govern such a number of men, nor that an enterprise can be executed in the
field, as it is devised in the chamber: and farther I verily believe, that who
so ableth himself by his own wit and capacity to give order in so weighty a
matter, misbehaueth himself toward God. Notwithstanding every man ought to do
his endeavor therein, acknowledging the wars to be one of the accomplishments
of Gods judgments, which oftentimes he begins upon small occasions, to the
end that by giving victory now to one, and now to another, some great realms
and seniories may fall to ruin and desolation, and other some increase and
flourish with large empire and dominion, for farther proof whereof mark this
that follows. The Earl of Charolois marched without any breathing given to
his shot and footmen upon the way. The Kings men of arms passed through the
hedge above mentioned at two several places, and when they approached so near
their enemies, that they began to charge their staves, the Burgundian men of
arms brake their own shot, and passed through it, not giving them leave to
let one arrow fly, notwithstanding that the shot were the principal force and
only hope of their army, for of the men of arms (being to the number of
twelve hundred) I think hardly fifty knew how to charge a lance, there were
not four hundred of them armed with quiracies, and of their retinue not one
armed, all the which inconveniences grew partly because they had rested so long
in peace, and partly because this house of Burgundy for ease of their
subjects, entertained no soldiers in ordinary. But since that day, these
Seniors of Burgundy have continued in troubles, which even at this present
rather increase than diminish. Thus the Burgundian men of arms (as you have
heard) brake themselves the chief force and only hope of their army, yet
notwithstanding, so it pleased God to dispose of this matter, that on the right
side of the castle, where the Earl himself stood no resistance was found.
All this day I my self never departed from the Earl, being less afraid than
in any other battle that ever I was at since, for I was young and knew not
what peril meant, but wondered how any man durst resist the Prince I served,
supposing none to be comparable to him. Such are the cogitations of men lacking
experience, which causes them oftentimes to maintain fond arguments, grounded
upon small reason. Wherefore it is good to follow his advise that says, A man
seldom repents him of too little speech, but often of too much. On the
lefthand stood the Lord of Rauastin, and master James of S. Paul, with diverse
others, who well perceived their force too weak to encounter with the enemy
that came to charge them, but they were now so near joined together, that it
was too late to devise any new order. To be short, these were utterly
overthrown, and persued even hard to our carriage, where certain of the
footmen relied themselves, but the greatest part took the forest, being but
half a league thence. The principal that followed the chase were the gentlemen
of Daulphine and Sauoy, with certain companies of men of arms, who supposed
the victory to have been theirs, and not without cause, for sure the
Burgundians flight was great on that side, yea and of great personages. The
most part fled toward Pont S. Maxence, 12 supposing it had held yet for the
Earl. In the forest also a great number stayed, among whom was the Earl of
S. Paul well accompanied, for he stood near to the forest side, and declared
afterward that he held not the battle as lost.

The Notes.
1 This John Earl of Dunois was bastard to Lewis Duke of Orleans. Meyer.

2 Yet La March says, that the Earl of Maine was of the Princes confederacy.

3 The Arriereban is an edict never proclaimed but in cases of great
extremity: for all as well nobles as others are thereupon bound to repair to
the King, diverse of the which before the proclamation thereof are not bound by
their tenure to move. The Arriereban of Daulphine here named, were all those
of the country of Daulphine, that held by this tenure. Read the edict made by
King Francis anno 1543. and Girarde of the state of France, lib. 2. fol. 113.

4 The King by the persuasion of the Earl of Maine and the Seneschall Brezey
resolved at the last to fight. Annal. Burgund.

5 Brezey had changed armor with the King, which caused his death: for those
that slew him supposed it had been the King, Annal. Aquitan. but Meyer says he
was reported to be slain by the Kings procurement, which I know not where
he finds.

6 Of the day of the battle Annal. Franc. agree with our author, but Annal.
Burg. and Annal. Aquit. say 17. Meyer has 17. Call. Augusti, that is the 16.
day of July, and with him agrees Gaguin La March, who was present at the
battle and knighted in it.

7 The Duke was joined with the English men but 15. or 16. years, as says
also Introduction de la March, for the league began anno 1419. and ended anno
1435.

8 The Burgundians dismounted so suddenly, that laying down their complete
armor they had not leisure to buckle their lighter armor about them, which
was the cause of Lalains death, Annal. Burgund.

9 Contay used another reason to persuade the Earl to assail his enemies
here not expressed, to wit, to prevent the Parisians, who if they issued
forth should enclose him betvveene them and the King, Annal. Burgund.

10 This Lalain seems to be the father of him that was slain.

11 Betvveene Longiumeau where the Earls battle lay, and Montl'hery where
his vavvard ledged are four English miles.

12 Pont S. Clou, and Pont S. Maxence were yielded by the Burgundians, because
the rumor was that the Earl of Charolois was slain in the battle. Meyer.

Of the danger the Earl of Charolois was in, and how he was rescued. Chap. 4.
THe Earl of Charolois pursued his enemies on that side himself stood, half
a league beyond Montl'hery, and found no resistance, notwithstanding that he
were but slenderly accompanied and met with maine enemies, wherefore he held
the victory for his: but suddenly an old gentleman of Luxembourg called
Anthony le Breton, came to him and advertised him that the French were relied
upon the field, so that if he followed the chase any further, he should cast
away himself. But the Earl regarded not his speech, notwithstanding that he
repeated it twice or thrice. But even in that instant arrived Monseur de
Contay, who told him the selfsame tale the old gentleman of Luxembourg had
done, and that in so stout and bold terms, that he gave credit to his words
and experience, and presently returned. And I think verily if he had passed
but two bow shot farther, he had been taken as diverse were that followed the
chase before him. As he returned, hard by the village he met with a band of
footmen flying, whom he pursued being accompanied hardly with an hundred
horse: none of these footmen made resistance but one, who gave the Earl such
a blow on the breast with a iauelin, that the mark thereof appeered at night:
the greatest part of the rest escaped through the gardens, but he that struck
the Earl was slain. And as we passed hard by the castle, we found the
archers of the Kings guard before the gate, who never abandoned their place for
our coming: whereat the Earl much marvelled, for he thought the battle had
been at an end, but he found it otherwise: for as he turned about to enter
into the field (part of his company being scattered from him) suddenly 15. or
16. men of arms gave a charge upon him, and at the very first slew his caruer
named Philip D'orgues bearing a gydon of his arms. The Earl was there in
great danger and received many hurts, especially one in the throat with a sword
(the mark whereof stack by him as long as he lived) by reason that his beauer
being evil fastened in the morning was fallen away, and I my self saw when it
fell. The enemies laid hands upon him, saying, My Lord yield, we know you well
enough, be not wilfully slain: but he manfully defended himself. And at that
instant a physicians son of Paris that served the Earl, named John Cadet
being a great lubberly fellow, mounted upon a strong jade like himself, ran
through the enemies, and brake them 1, wherewith they retired to the ditch
side, (the place they had taken in the morning) the rather for that they
discovered one of our ensigns marching in the midst of the field, and
approaching near to us, being the bastard of Burgundies ensign, all to totterd
and torn, to the which the Earl all embrewed in his own blood retired,
leaving at his archers ensign not above forty men, with whom we being hardly
thirty, joined in great fear. The Earl incontinent changed his horse, having
a fresh horse brought him by Simon of Quingy then his page, and since a man
well known: and rode about the field to rely his men, leaving us that tarried
behind him in such fear, that by the space of an hour we were all fully
resolved to fly, if but a hundred enemies had marched against us:
notwithstanding our men came to us by ten and twenty in a troop, as well
horsemen as footmen, but of the footmen many were hurt, and all very weary,
partly because of the battle, and partly because of their unreasonable journey
in the morning. Soon after returned the Earl himself, hardly accompanied
with an hundred men, but by little and little our number increased. The corn
which but half an hour before had been so high, was now trodden flat down, by
means whereof, arose a terrible dust, all the fields lay strawed with dead
bodies of men an horses, but because of the dust none could be known.

Immediately after this, we discovered the Earl of S. Paul issuing out of the
forest, accompanied with forty men of arms, and his ensign marched straight
toward us, and continually increased in number, but because he was far from
us, we sent twice or thrice to him desiring him to make haste, which
notwithstanding he did not, neither altered his pace, but caused his men to take
up the lances that lay upon the ground, and came in very good order, which
sight much comforted us. With him a great number relied themselves, and in the
end came and joined with us, so that we were then to the number of eight
hundred men of arms, but footmen few or none, which was the only let the
Earl obtained not perfect victory, for there was a great ditch and a thick
hedge between his battle and the Kings.

Of the Kings part fled the Earl of Maine with diverse others, to the number of
eight hundred men of arms. Some have held opinion that the said Earl of
Maine had intelligence with the Burgundians, but for mine own part I believe
it not. Never was in any battle so great flight on both sides, but the two
Princes kept the field: of the Kings part there was a man of honor that fled as
far as Luzignan without stay, and of the Earls part a noble personage to
Quesnoy le Comte, these two had no great desire to bite one another 2.

While the two armies stood thus in order of battle, the one in face of the
other, the artillery shot terribly, which slew men on both sides, but neither
party desired a new field. Notwithstanding our band was greater then the
Kings, but his presence and the courteous language he used to his soldiers, was
a great stay to his people, so far forth, that I am thoroughly persuaded both
by mine own knowledge and that I have since heard, that had it not been for
him alone they had all fled. Some of our company desired a new battle,
especially the L. of Haultbourdin, alleging that he discovered a troop of our
enemies flying, and undoubtedly if he could have recovered but a hundred
archers to have shot through the hedge above mentioned, all had been ours.

While this matter was in communication, and both the armies standing thus in
order of battle without fight, the night approached, and the King retired to
Corbeil, but we thought he had encamped in the field, because fire falling by
chance into a barrel of powder, and certain carts laden with munition in the
place where the King had stood, took in the end the great hedge above
mentioned, which we supposed to have been the French men's fires there encamped,
whereupon the Earl of S. Paul and the Lord of Haultbourdin, who seemed to be
the men of greatest experience in our army, commanded our carriage to be brought
to the place where we were, and our camp to be enclosed therewith, and so it
was. And as we stood there relied together in order of battle, diverse French
men returnng from the chase, and supposing the victory to be theirs, and our
camp the Kings, passed through the midst of us, some of them escaped, but the
most were slain. The men of name that died on the Kings part were these,
master Geffrey of S. Belin, the high Seneschall of Normandy, and captain
Floquet, and of the Burgundians, master Philip of Lalain: of footmen and
common soldiers we lost more than the King, but of horsemen the King more than
we: of prisoners the French took the best of those that fled. There were
slain of both sides two thousand at the least 3. The field was well fought,
and there were of both parties that did their endeavor, some in fighting, and
some in flybut sure in mine opinion it was a worthy feat of arms to rely
themselves together upon the field, and to stand three or four houers in order
of battle, the one in face of the other, and undoubtedly both the Princes had
good cause to make account of their subjects that stood so well by them at
their need. But they did heerin like men not like angels, for some lost their
offices for flying, which were bestowed upon others that fled ten leagues
beyond them: one of our part lost his credit, and was commanded out of his
masters presence, but within one month he was in greater favor than before.

When we were enclosed with our carriage, every man lodged himself as
commodiously as he could, a great number of us were hurt, and the whole army
almost discouraged, fearing that the Parisians with two hundred men of arms
that were within the city, and the Marshall Ioachin the Kings lieutenant there
would issue forth and assail us on the other side. After it was dark night
fifty lances were commanded to go forth to understand where the King lodged,
but hardly twenty of them went, notwithstanding that our camp were not above
three bow shot from the place where we supposed the King had encamped. In the
mean time the Earl of Charolois ate and drank a little, as did all the rest
of the company, each man in his own lodging, and the wound in his neck was
dressed: but we were forced to remove out of the place where he refreshed
himself, three or four dead bodies to make him room, and to bring two
bottles of straw, upon the which he sat down. And as they removed these dead
bodies, one of the poor naked souls began to call for drink, into whose
mouth was powered a little of the tysan the Earl had drunk of, wherewith his
spirits revived, and then he was known to be an archer of the Earls guard
named Sauaric a valiant fellow, and he was dressed and healed.

The Earl debated with his Council what was to be done, the first that spoke
was the Earl of Saint Paul, who said we stood in great danger, and gave
advise by break of day to retire homeward, to burn part of our carriage, to
save only the artillery, and to give order that none should lead back any
carriage, but such as had above ten lances under their charge, adding that it
was impossible to lie there without victuals between Paris and the King. After
him spoke Mounseur de Haultbourdin almost to the same effect, save that he
advised us to stay till we understood what news our scoutes that were abroad
would bring us, to the which purpose spoke also three or four others. But the
last that spoke was Mounseur de Contay, who said that so soon as the army
should understand of this resolution rhey would al fly, and by that means be
taken and spoiled before they had gone twenty leagues: which his opinion he
confirmed by diverse very good reasons. Wherefore he gave advise that every man
should lodge himself as commodiously as he could that night, and the next
morning by break of day begin a new field with determination either to live or
die upon the place, which he said to be a safer course than to fly. The Earl
of Charolois followed the said Contaies advise, and gave every man commandment
to take his rest for two hours, and at the sound of the trumpet to be in a
readiness: farther he willed diverse by name to send to comfort his soldiers.

About midnight our scoutes that were abroad returned, and it well appeered
they had not been far: for they brought word that the King lodged at the fires
above mentioned. Incontinent others were sent forth, and within an hour after
every man put himself in a readiness to fight, but the most part had rather
have fled. About break of day our scoutes last sent foorh met one of our
Carters whom the enemies had taken prisoner that morning as he brought a pot of
wine from Montl'hery. This Carter told them that the French were all fled,
whereof they sent word incontinent to the camp, and went themselves to the
place, and found the Carters report true, whereupon they returned with this
news to the great comfort of the whole army, and then a number cried to
pursue them, that made but small haste after them. Not an hour before my self
had an old horse half tired, who by chance thrust his head into a paile of
wine and drunk it off, which made him lustier and fresher that day than ever
before.

When it was broad day every man mounted on horseback, and the squadrons made a
goodly show in the field, notwithstanding all our companies were not yet come
together, but a number returned at that present which had lien hidden in the
woods all night. The Earl of Charolois suborned a Friar Franciscan, who
brought word to the camp that he came from the Britains, who would be there
the selfsame day, which news comforted not a little the whole army, but all
men believed it not.

Immediately after, to wit, about ten of the clock in the morning, arrived the
Vicechancellor of Britain, called Rouuille, and Maderey above mentioned with
him, accompanied with two archers of the D. of Britains guard in their livery
coats, which comforted maruellously the whole army, and the said
Vicechancellor was asked where he had been, and was commended for his departure
(considering the great murmuring that was risen against him) but much more for
his return, and every man welcomed them and made them good cheer.

All this day the Earl of Charolois kept still the field, reioicing greatly
and wholly attributing the honor of the victory to himself alone, which glory
cost him dear, for after this he never followed any man's devise but his own,
and whereas before he had hated the wars, and loved nothing that appertained
thereunto: his thoughts were after this so clean altered that he continued in
the wars till his death, in them ended his life, and by them desolated his
house, at the least brought it maruellously underfoot, though not altogether
destroyed it. Three noble and wise Princes his predecessors had so highly
advanced it, that few Kings except the K. of France were mightier than he, and
in rich and strong towns none passed him: but no man, especially no Prince
ought to attribute too much to himself, but to acknowledge all prosperity and
good success to proceed from God. Sure these two things I dare boldly say in
his commendation, first that I think never man endured more travel than he in
all points of bodily labor and exercise, and secondarily that in mine opinion,
I never knew hardier gentleman: for I never heard him complain of wearines, I
never saw him show any countenance of fear, yet was I with him seven years
together in the wars: every summer without fail, and sometime both winter and
summer his attempts and enterprises were so high and difficult, that only God
by his absolute power could have atchiued them, for they passed far man's reach.

The Notes.
1 De la March calls him that delivered the Earl, Robert Couterel, or
Coutereau a horseman of Bruxels, his Physicians son, whom for that fact
immediately he made knight and feudarie of Brabant. Gaghin writes that the
Earl was twice in danger, once in the hands of Geffery De S. Bealin, and
again in the hands of Gilbert Grassaie.

2 For the two places here named be above three hundred English miles asunder.

3 There were slain at the battle of Montl'hery, 2000. Annal. Burgund. Meyer
says 3000. Gaguin 3600.

How the Duke of Berry the Kings brother, and the Duke of Britain joined with
the Earl of Charolois against the King. Chap. 5.
THe next day being the third after the battle, we removed our camp and
lodged at Montl'hery, out of the which the people fled, part into the Church
steeple, and part into the Castle, but the Earl caused them to return to
their houses, neither lost they the value of one penie, for every man paid his
shot as truly as if he had been in Flaunders. The castle held for the King,
and was not assaulted by us. The third day being passed, the Earl of Charalois
by the Lord of Contais advise departed to Estampes (a good and commodious
lodging, and a fruitful soil) meaning to prevent the Britains, who came that
way, and before their ariuall to lodge his men that were sick and hurt in the
town, and the rest abroad in the fields. This good lodging and the Earls long
abode there saved many a man's life. At the said town of Estampes arrived the
Lord Charles of France then Duke of Berry, and the Kings only brother,
accompanied with the Duke of Britain, the Earl of Dunois, the Lord of
Dampmartin, the Lord of Loheac, the L. of Beueil, the Lord of Chaumount, and
master Charles of Amboise his son (who since has carried great credit in this
realm) all the which the King at his first coming to the crown had displaced
and put out of office, notwithstanding the great services they had done the
King his father and the realm, both in the conquest of Normandy and in diverse
other wars. The Earl of Charolois and all the noble men that were with him
went forth to receive them, and lodged their persons in the town, where their
lodgings were already made, but their forces lay abroad in the fields. They had
with them eight hundred men of arms very well appointed, a great number of the
which were Britons, who lately had forsaken the Kings pay, and these made a
gallant show in their camp: of archers and other soldiers armed with good
Brigandines they had great force, so that I suppose they were six thousand men
on horseback, all in very good order, and sure this army showed the Duke of
Britain to be a great Prince, for they were all paid out of his coffer 1.

The King being retired to Corbeil (as you have heard) was not idle, neither
forgot what he had to do, but went straight into Normandy partly to leuy men,
and partly because he feared rebellion in the country, but a great part of his
forces he left about Paris in those places that had most need of defense.

The first evening that all these Princes met at Estamps, they told news each
to other, the Britons had taken prisoners certain of the Kings part that fled,
and if they had been but a little nearer the place of the battle, they had
either taken or discomfited the third part of his army. They had first given
order to send forth certain bands before them, to understand how near the
Kings army and the Earls were together, but they altered their minds.
Notwithstanding master Charles of Amboise and certiane with him scoured the
country before their army, to see if they could meet any of their enemies,
and certain prisoners as you have heard they took, and part also of the Kings
artillery. These prisoners made report unto them, that undoubtedly the King
was slain (for so they supposed because they fled at the very beginning of the
battle,) which news the abouenamed master Charles of Amboise and they that
were with him brought to the Britains camp, who reioiced maruellously
thereat, supposing it had been true, and hoping for great rewards if the Lord
Charles were King. Further they debated in council (as a man of credit there
present, afterward advertised me) how they might rid the country of the
Burgundians, and send them home in the devils name, and were in manner all
agreed to cut their throtes if they could, but this their joy soon ended,
whereby you may perceive what sudden alterations are in a realm in such
troubles.

But to return to the camp lying at Estampes, when every man had supped and a
great number being walking in the streets: The Lord Charles of France, and
the Earl of Charolois withdrew themselves to a window, where they entered into
very earnest communication. Now you shall understand that there was among the
Britains one that took great pleasure in throwing squibs into the air, which
when they fall to the ground run flaming among men, his name was master John
Boutefeu, or master John de Serpens, I wot not well whether. This merry
companion being secretly hidden in a house, threw two or three squibs into the
air from a high place where he stood, one of the which by chance struck
against the bar of the window where these two Princes communed together,
wherewithal both of them started suddenly up, being astonished at this
accident, and each beholding other, suspecting this to be purposely done to
hurt them: then came the Lord of Contay to his master the Earl of Charolois,
and after he had told him a word or two in his ear, went down, and caused all
the men of arms of the Earls house, and all the archers of his guard, and a
number of other to arm themselves. Incontinent also the Earl of Charolois
moved the Duke of Berry to command the archers of his guard to do the like,
whereupon immediately two or three hundred men of arms, stood on foot in
harneis before the gate, with a great number of archers, the which sought round
about from whence this fire might come: in the end the poor fellow that had
done the deed fell down upon his knees before them confessing the fact, and
threw three or four other squibs into the air, whereby he put diverse out of
suspicion each of other, thus the matter turned to a jest, and every man
unarmed himself and went to bed. The next day in the morning they sat in
council to debate what was to be done, all the Princes with their principal
servants being there present, and as they were of diverse parts and not obedient
to one head: so were they also of diverse opinions as in such assemblies it
cannot be otherwise chosen. But among the rest of their talk, certain words
that passed the Duke of Berry (who was young and unacquainted with such
exploits) were especially marked: for he seemed already to be weary of this
enterprise, alleging the great number of the Earl of Charolois men that he
had seen in the town hurt and maimed, of whom to show that he had pity and
compassion he brake forth into this speech and said, that he had rather the
matter had never been begun, than that so much mischief should arise by his
occasion and for his cause, which words displeased greatly the Earl of
Charolois and his men as hereafter you shall hear: Notwithstanding they
concluded in this assembly to go before Paris, to prove whether the town
would enter into league with them for the benefit of the common wealth (which
they al pretended to be the only cause of their assembly) being fully
persuaded that all the towns in the realm would follow the example thereof.
The words above mentioned uttered by the D. of Berry in this assembly, put the
Earl of Charolois and his men into such a dumpe, that they said thus one to
another, heard you this man speak? he is discouraged for seven or eight
hundred hurt persons that he sees in the town, who are none of his but mere
strangers to him, he would be otherwise troubled than if the matter should
touch himself in any point, and easily be won to agree with his brother and
leave us in the mire, and because of the long wars that have been in times past
between King Charles his father and the D. of Burgundy my father, both the
parties would soon consent to turn their forces against us, wherefore it is
good to provide us of friends in time. And upon this suspicion only, William
of Cluny Prenotarie, who died Bishop of Poictiers was sent to England to King
Edward the 4. then reigning, to whom the Earl of Charolois had ever before
been mortal enemy, supporting the house of Lancaster against him, of the
which he was issued by his mother 2. And the said Clunies instructions were to
treat with King Edward of a marriage between the Kings sister called Margaret,
and the Earl of Charolois, not to conculde the matter, but only to put the
King in hope thereof: for the Earl knowing how greatly the King desired this
marriage, supposed by this means to win him to take his part if he needed his
help, at the least to stay him from attempting ought against him. And
notwithstanding that he meant nothing less then the accomplishment thereof,
because as fervently as he loved the house of Lancaster, as extreemly hated he
the house of York: yet was the matter so labored, that many years after the
marriage was accomplished 3, and the Earl received also the order of the
Garter, and ware it till his dying day. Many a such deed is often done upon
suspicion only, especially among great Princes, who are much more suspicious
then other men, because of the doubts and reports that are daily brought unto
them oftentimes by flatterers upon no occasion.

The Notes.
1 The Britains army was of 10600. men Anna. Aqui. and the archers here
mentioned were all mounted one horseback, otherwise the men of arms could not
arise to six thousand.

2 Charles D. of Burgundy was of the house of Lancaster after this sort. John
of Gaunt D. of Lancaster had issue by Blaunche his first wife, daughter and
heir to Henry D. of Darby and Lancaster, Philip which married with John King
of Portugal bastard of Ferraude, by whom she had issue Isabell married to
Philip D. of Burgundy, by whom she had issue this D. Charles.

3 Margaret king Edwards sister, arrived in the Low countries, 25. Iunij Ann.
1468. Meyer.

How the Earl of Charolois and his confederates with their whole army, passed
the river of Seine upon a bridge made of botes, how John D. of Calabria joined
with them, and how they all encamped before Paris. Chap. 6.
ALl these Princes according to their determination departed from Estampes,
having soiourned there certain days and marched to Saint Maturin of Larchant,
and Moret in Gastinois, in the which two little towns the Lord Charles of
France, and the Britains lodged, but the Earl of Charolois encamped in a
great meadow upon the river of Seine, and made proclamation that every man
should bring a hook with him to fasten his horse therewith, he carried also
with him seven or eight small boats in carts, and great store of pipeboorde,
meaning therewith to make a bridge over the river of Seine, because these
Princes had no passage there. The Earl of Dunois accompanied him riding in a
litter, for because of the gout he could not sit on horseback,
notwithstanding his ensign was borne with him. When they came to the river
they launched forth the boats they brought with them, and took an Island in
the midst of the stream, where certain of our archers landed and skirmished
with a company of horsemen that defended the passage on the other side under
the leading of the Marshall Ioachin and Sallezard. The place was much to their
disadvantage, because it was high and in a goodly vine country, besides that
the Burgundians had great store of artillery under the charge of a notable
gunner named Master Girald, whom they took prisoner at the battle of
Montl'hery, being then in the Kings service. To be short, the above mentioned
horsemen were forced to abandon the passage and retire to Paris. The selfsame
night the bridge was made from the side of the river where we lay to the Island,
where incontinent the Earl of Charolois caused his pauilion to be pitched, and
lodged there all night with fifty men of arms of his house: by day break a
great number of Coopers were set on work to make casks of the pipe board we
brought with us, who so bestirred themselves, that before noon the bridge was
made from the Island to the other side of the river. Incontinent passed the
Earl of Charolois, and caused his tents whereof he was well furnished, to be
pitched: over the same bridge passed also his whole army and artillery, and
lodged upon the side of a hill hanging toward the river, by means whereof his
camp made a goodly show to those that came after.

It was that whole days work to convey over the Earls own forces, but the
next morning by day break passed also the Dukes of Berry and Britain with
their whole army, commending this bridge to be very commodiously and speedily
made, and marched when they were passed, a little beyond the Earl, and
encamped also upon the hill. When it was dark night we discovered a great
number of fires as far from us as we could well discern, which diverse supposed
to be the Kings forces, but bofore midnight we were advertised that it was John
Duke of Calabria 1 only son to King Rene of Sicilie 2 with nine hundred men
of arms of the Duchy and County of Burgundy. The said Duke had with him few
footmen, but was well accompanied with horsemen, and those in so good order,
that for their number I never saw a goodlier company nor a more warlike: for
he had with him six score men of arms barded, all Italians or trained up in
the Italian wars, among whom were James Galiot, the Earl of Campobache, the L.
of Baudricourt now governor of Burgundy, and diverse others: his men of arms
were very expert soldiers, and to say the truth, the flower of our army, I
mean number for number. With him were also four hundred crossebow men that
the Palsgraue had lent him, all very well mounted and very good soldiers.
Besides whom he had also in pay five hundred Switzers footmen, which were the
first that ever came into this realm, and these so valiantly behaved
themselves in all places where they came, that they purchased great renown to
their whole nation, which their countrymen that have serned here since, have
well maintained. This company the next morning approached near to us, and
passed that day over our bridge, which a man may boldly say conuaied over all
the power of France save only the Kings army. And I assure you the force was
so great of valiant men well appointed, and in very good order, that I wish all
the friends and welwillers of the realm had seen it, and likewise the enemies:
for by that means the former would have esteemed of the realm as it
deserves, and the later ever after the more have feared it. The Burgundians
that accompanied the Duke of Calabria were led by the L. of Neuf-chastell
Marshall of Burgundy, who had with him his brother the L. of Montagu, the
Marquess of Rotelin, and a great number of knights and esquiers: some of the
which had been in Bourbonnois, as I have made mention in the beginning of this
history 3, but they all joined for their more safety with the Duke of
Calabria, who showed himself to be as noble a Prince, and as good a soldier as
any in the company, whereupon great love and amity grew between him and the
Earl of Charolois.

After this whole force (being as I suppose to the number of an hundred
thousand horse good and bad) was passed the river, the Princes determined to
show themselves before Paris, wherefore they put all their vawards together. The
Burgundians vaward was led by the Earl of S. Paul, and the vaward of the
Dukes of Berry and Britain by Oudet of Rye 4 afterward Earl of Comminges, and
the Marshall Loheac as I remember, and in this order marched they, but all the
Princes remained in the battle. The Earl of Charolois and the Duke of
Calabria were very diligent in commanding and giving good order in the army,
and rode very well armed, and showed that they meant to do their duty, but the
Dukes of Berry and Britain were mounted upon small ambling nags, and armed
with slight brigandines, light and thin, yea and some said they were not
plated, but studded only with a few gilt nails upon the satin for the less
weight, but I will not affirm it for a truth. Thus marched this army to Pont
de Charenton two little leagues from Paris, which was taken incontinent,
notwithstanding the resistance of certain frank archers 5 that were within
it: over the said bridge of Charenton passed the whole force. The Earl of
Charolois lodged in his own house called Conflans, situate upon the river not
far from thence, and enclosed a great piece of ground, with his carriage and
artillery, and lodged his camp within it, and with him lay the Duke of
Calabria: but the Dukes of Berry and Britain, with part of their forces lodged
at S. Mor-des-fosses, and the rest they sent to S. Denis being also two leagues
from Paris, in the which places this whole company lay eleven weeks, during
the which space these things happened that now I will rehearse.

The next day in the morning began the skirmishes hard at Paris gates, within
the town was the Lord of Nantoillet, L. great Master of France (who did the
King good service there as before I have said) and the Marshal Ioachin. The
poor people of the town were in great fear, but of the better sort some
wished the Burgundians and the other Princes within the town, because this
enterprise seemed unto them good and profitable for the realm: others there
were borne in the said Princes dominions, wherefore they furthered their
affairs, hoping by their means to obtain some good offices in the town,
which are more hunted after there than in any other place, and no marvel: for
those that are in office make of their offices what they can, not what they
ought, which is the cause that some offices in the town of no fee at all are
sold for eight hundred crowns, and other some of very small fee, for more than
the fee will amount to in fifteen years. Seldom is any man put out of
office: for the Court of parliament allows these sales of offices as lawful,
the reason whereof is because it is a general case. Among the Councillors are
always a number both of virtuous and worthy personages, and also of lewd and
evil conditioned persons, as are also in all other estates.

The Notes.
1 It is requisite that I should here set down the particular quarrel that
every one of these princes had to the King, some are mentioned by our author,
and others in other authors. The D. of Berries quarrel was for a larger
partage. The Earl of Charaloys demanded the restitution of the territories
upon the river of Sum. The D. of Britain had cause to be offended and
afearde, because the King had picked a quarrel to him by demanding of him three
things, never before demanded of any D. of Britain: The first, that he should
no more write in his style Dei gratia Britanniae Dux: The second, that he
should pay to the King a yearly tribute: The third, that all the spiritual
livings in Britain should be left to the Kings disposing. For these causes the
D. of Britain joined with the princes: the D. of Calabria had cause of
offense, because being entered into Italy to recover the Realm of Naples, and
the King having promised him aid: after the said D. of Calabria was
overthrown at Troia in Apulia: the King refused to send him the aid promised,
so that he was forced utterly to abandon his enterprise. The D. of Bourbon had
married the Kings sister, and could not get her marriage money: the Duke of
Nemours, Earls of Dunois, Dalebret, and the rest of the noble men and
gentlemen were against the King, some because they were put out of pension and
office, many because the King sought to deprive them of the roialties they had
in their seniories touching Hunting and Hawking, and sought to draw all to
himself, but all in general were offended because he contemned his nobility,
and entertained none but men of base estate about him. Thus much I have set
down because it might otherwise seem strange, that all these Princes should
thus conspire against the King for zeal of the common wealth, if other
particular greifes had not more moved them than the misgouernment of the
estate.

2 To the end the reader find it not strange that Rene is here called King of
Sicily, since the house of Arragon possessed the same Realm at that time: it is
to be understood that the race of the Normans (who about the year 1060.
subdued Sicily, Calabria and Apulia: and about the year 1102. took upon them
the title of Kings of Sicily,) being extinct in Roger the last King of Sicily
of that race about the year 1195. the said Realm fell to the issue of the
Emperor Fridericus Barbarossa by the marriage of Constantia daughter to Roger
the first King of Sicill, and aunt to Roger the last King of Sicill of this
race, with Henry the said Barbarossas son, in which race it continuedtily
Manfridus bastard son to Fridericus the Emperor, son to the above named
Henry obtained the crown of Sicill and Naples by dispossessing Conradinus his
nephew the true heir thereof. Against this Manfridus Pope Vrbanus the 4. called
into Italy Charles of Amon brother to S. Lewis King of France who slew
Manfridus in battle, and afterward executed also Conradinus the true heir of
the crown, being taken in battle, coming with an army to conquer the said
realms of Naples and Sicily as his true inheritance: and thus obtained this
Charles of Aniou the crown both of Naples and Sicily, till not long after by
the coming of Peter king of Arragon, who had married Constantia daughter and
heir to Manfridus: the Sicilians arose suddenly against the French, slew them
all in one evening, and yielded the Realm of Sicily to the said Peter, whose
posterity ever since even till this day have continued in possession
thereof. Notwithstanding the posterity of Charles of Aniou held still the
Realm of Naples with the title of the Realm of Sicily, till the time that the
later Jane Queen of Naples, to fortify her self against Pope Vrbanus Sextus
adopted Alfonse of Arragon, son to Ferrande King of Arragon, which Ferrandes
mother named Elenor was daughter to King Peter: but after the said Jane for
displeasure conceived against the said Alfonse adopted secondarilie Lewis D.
of Aniou, brother to Charles the 5. King of France, descended of the race of
the first Charles King of Sicily, against whom and his son Lewis Alfonse long
warred, and in the end after Queen Ianes death chased them both out of Italy,
and left the Realms of Arragon and Sicily to John his brother: but the Realm
of Naples to Ferrande his base son, with whom Rene here mentioned (brother
to Lewis the 2. of that name D. of Aniou and king of Sicily, and by him with
Ianes consent adopted) long vvarred, but prevailed not: so that Rene had only
the title of Sicily and Naples by the adoption aforesaid, but no possession
thereof: for Sicily the kings of Arragon held ever since the conquest of Peter,
and the realm of Naples Ferrande the bastard held of his fathers gift, from
whose posterity how in the end after many alterations it fell to the house of
Arragon that now possesses it, shall be set down at large in the wars of
Naples made by King Charles the 8. who had the house of Anious title, whereof
our author treats in the 7. and 8. book of this history.

3 This force led by the Marshall of Burgundy was of 4000. men. Meyer.

4 This Oudet is he that acquainted the Duke of Berry with this confederacy,
and conueighed him into Britain. Meyer. La March.

5 Franck archers were these: King Charles the 7. in the year 1449. being
destitute of footmen, appointed that every threescore houses in his realm
should arm a man, who in time of war received pay of the King, and were
exempt from all subsidies and payments: for the which cause they were all
called franck, that is free, but King Lewis the 11. anno 1480. abolished these
franck archers and waged Switzers in their place.

A discourse upon ambitious hunting after offices and estates, by the example
of the English men. Chap. 7.
I Speak of these offices and estates, because in changes they are so greedily
desired, and are also cause thereof, as appears by that which has happened
not only in this our age, but also in the time of King Charles the sixth, under
whom the wars began that endured till the treaty of Arras, during the which
wars the English men entered into the realm, and conquered so far that at the
time of the said treaty (which continued 1 the space of two months) the Duke
of Bedford brother to Henry the fifth King of England, being married to Duke
Philip of Burgundies sister, was regent in France for the English men, whose
monthly allowance in that office amounted to 20000. crowns at the least. At
the said treaty were present for the King of France, four or five Dukes or
Earls, five or six Prelates, and ten or twelve Councellers of the Parliament.
For Duke Philip likewise diverse Noble men 2 in much greater number, for the
Pope 2. Cardinals as mediators, and for the English men diverse noble
personages. Duke Philip greatly desired to acquit himself honorably toward
the English men before he would abandon them, because of the ancient league
that had been between them: wherefore the Duchies of Normandy and Guien were
offered to the King of England, with condition that he should do homage for
them to the crown of France, as his predecessors had done, and restore all
the places he held in the Realm out of the said Duchies: which condition the
English men because of the homage, refused, but to their great loss: for being
abandoned of this house of Burgundy, their good success altered, and all
their intelligences within the realm failed, whereby their power daily so
diminished, that in short space they lost Paris, and by little and little all
that they held in this realm. After their return into England, none of them
would diminish his estate, but the offices within the realm sufficed not for
maintenance of them all, whereupon long civil wars arose among them, in the
which King Henry the sixth, who had been crowned King of England and France at
Paris, was proclaimed traitor, and imprisoned in the tower of London, where he
remained the greatest part of his life, and in the end was there murdered. The
Duke of York father to King Edward that last died, entitled himself right
heir to the crown, and soon after was slain in the battle, and had his
head smitten off, as had also the Earl of Warwick 3 that last died, whose
credit was so great in England, and all the rest that were slain in those
wars. The said Earl of Warwick led the Earl of March afterward named Edward
the fourth, by sea to Calais with a small company escaped out of battle 4,
for the Earl of Warwick took part with the house of York, as the Duke of
Sommerset did with the house of Lancaster. To be short, these wars endured so
long, that all they of the houses of Warwick and Sommerset were either slain
or beheaded in them. King Edward caused afterward his own brother the Duke of
Clarence to be drowned in a Butt of malmesey, charging him that he meant to make
himself King: but after King Edwards death, his other brother the Duke of
Gloucester murdered the said Kings two sons, proclaimed his daughters
bastards, and usurped the crown. Immediately after the which cruel deed, the
Earl of Richmond now King (who had been prisoner many years in Britain)
passed into England, and discomfited and slew in battle this bloody King
Richard, late murderer of his two nephews. Thus have there died in England in
these civil wars since my remembrance, above fowerscore persons of the blood
Royal, part of the which I my self knew, and part understood of by the
English men resident with the Duke of Burgundy at the same time that I served
him. Wherefore you see it is not at Paris only, nor in France alone that men
fall at variance for worldly goods and honors. But sure all Kings and great
Princes ought to take heed that they suffer not factions to arise in their
courts: for thereof kindles the fire that consumes their whole country in
the end. Notwithstanding such alterations happen not in mine opinion, but by
Gods disposition, for when Princes and realms have long flourished in great
wealth and prosperity, and forget from whence all these benefits proceed: God
raises up an enemy against them, whom they never feared nor stood in doubt
of, as appears by the Kings mentioned in the Bible, and by that also which
has happened and daily does happen, not only in England, and in these countries
of Burgundy, but in diverse other places also.

The Notes.
1 The last of July arrived the French Kings ambassadors at the treaty of Arras
Annal. Burg. so that the treaty began in the beginning of August, and the
English men departed discontented the 6. of December. Annal. Bur. and the
treaty ended the 21. of September, but De la March says the 10. of December.
Meyer. 11. Calen. October. which agrees with Annal. Burg.

2 At the treaty was present Philip D. of Burgundy himself. La March.
Meyer.

3 Our Chronicles report that the Duke of York with diverse others slain in
the battle, and the Earl of Salisbury father to the Earl of VVarvvick, who
was taken prisoner in the battle were behedded, and their heds sent to York
in derision: but I remember not that the Earl of VVarvvick was behedded after
he was slain, and I suppose the unskillful corrector has here omitted a
word or two, and that we must read in place of Luy and le Comte de Warwic.
Luy and le pere du Comte de Warwic.

4 The Earls of March and VVarvvick went to Calice before the Duke of York
was slain, or overthrown in battle: for they fled from Ludlovv lying in
camp there against the kings force, because they found themselves too vveake,
and their counsels betrayed by Andrew Trowlop who fled from them to the King.

How King Lewis entered into Paris, while the Princes of France practiced with
the citizens. Chap. 8.
I Have been long in this discourse, and it is now time to return to the
history. After the Princes were come before Paris, they began to practice with
the citizens, promising offices and great rewards to diverse, and omitting
nothing that might further their purpose. At three days end the citizens
assembled together in the town hall, where when they had long debated these
matters, and heard the Princes requests and demands made openly to them for the
benefit of the whole realm (as they pretended:) they determined to send
ambassadors to them to treat of peace, according to the which determination a
great number of the best citizens came to Saint Mor where the Princes lay, and
Master William Chartier then Bishop of Paris, a notable prelate, declared the
citizens embassage, and for the Princes the Earl of Dunois was appointed to be
mouth. The Duke of Berry the Kings brother was president of this Council
sitting in a chair, and all the other Princes standing about him. On the one
side stood the Dukes of Britain and Calabria, and on the other the Earl of
Charolois armed at all pieces save the head piece and vantbrases, and wearing
upon his quirage a short cloak marvelous rich: for he came from Conflans: and
Bois-de-Vincennes being well manned was held for the King: wherefore it stood
him upon to come armed and well accompanied. The Princes request was to enter
into Paris to confer with the citizens about the reformation of the state,
which they said was evil governed, charging the King with diverse disorders.
The citizens gave them very lowly and humble language, desiring respite before
they could make any resolute answer: yet (notwithstanding this delay) the King
was afterward discontented both with the Bishop and the rest that accompanied
him. Thus returned these ambassadors into the town, continuing still their
former practice: for every one of the Princes talked with them apart, and I am
of opinion that some of them had agreed secretly to suffer the Princes in their
own persons to enter the town, and their men also (if they so thought good)
by small troops: which practice if it had taken effect, had not only been the
winning of the town, but the atchieuing of the whole enterprise. For the
citizens would easily have been brought for diverse considerations to revolt to
them, and so consequently all the other towns in the realm. But God put wise
counsel into the Kings head, which also he executed accordingly, being
already advertised of all these practices.

Before the ambassadors that were returned from the Princes had made their
report, the King in person entered the town of Paris, accompanied like a prince
that comes to relieve his people: for he brought with him into the town two
thousand men of arms, all the nobles of Normandy, a great number of frank
archers, and all his own servants, pensioners and others that use to
accompany the King in such affairs. Thus this practice was broken off, and
all the people altered their minds, neither durst any of them that had been
with us make farther mention of the Princes demands. Some of them also sped
but evil for that they had already done, notwithstanding the King used no
extremity toward them 1, but some lost their offices, and others were sent to
dwell in other places: for the which easy revenge the King undoubtedly
deserved great commendation, considering that if this practice begun had taken
effect, the best that could have happened to him had been to forsake his
realm, which also was his resolution. For as himself has often told me, if
he could not have entered into Paris, but had found the town revolted, he would
have retired to the Switzers, or to Francis Duke of Milan, whom he accounted
his especial friend, and so also the Duke showed himself, as well by the aid
he sent him being five hundred men of arms and three thousand footmen under
the leading of his eldest son Galeas afterward Duke of Milan (who came as far
as the country of Forrestz in Auuergne, where he made war upon the Duke of
Bourbon, and afterward returned home because of his fathers death:) as also by
the counsel he gave him at the treaty of peace held at Conflans, where he
sent him word to refuse no condition of peace, but to sever his company, and
retain his own forces still about him.

We had hardly been three days before Paris when the King entered the town,
immediately after whose arrival sharp war was made upon us, especially upon
our forragers, whom we were constrained to guard with great forces, because
they went far from our camp. Now to speak somewhat of the town of Paris, we
must needs confess that it is marvelous well situate in the I Will of France,
seeing the country about it was able to victual two such huge armies: for as
touching us we never lacked, and they within the town found nothing enhaunced,
save only a denier 2 upon every loaf of bread, the reason whereof was, because
we held not the rivers above the town, being these three, Marne, Yonne, and
Seine, besides diverse small streams that run into them. Wherefore all things
considered this town is situate in the best and fruitfullest soil that ever I
saw, yea it is almost incredible how great the provision is that comes
thither. I my self was resident there since the time I now write of, half a
year together with K. Lewis being lodged at the Tournelles, and ordinarily
eating and lodging in the court. Since his death also by the space of twenty
months, full sore against my will I was held prisoner in his palace, where I
saw daily out of my window the provision that came up the stream out of
Normandy, and likewise down the stream, which was so great that I would
never have believed it, had I not seen it.

Diverse bands as you have heard issued daily out of Paris, and the skirmishes
were great, our watch being of fifty lances, stood near to la Grange aux
Merciers, but our escouts rode as near Paris as was possible, the which were
often beaten back to our watch, and eftsoons (the enemy on their back) as
far as our carriage, retirng sometime a softpace, and sometime a fast trot. Then
used we to renforce them with new supplies, which beat back the enemies hard
to the town gates, and this was daily and howerly done, for within the town
were above 2500. men of arms in very good order, and a great number of
gentlemen of Normandy, and frank archers, besides that they saw daily their
Ladies which encouraged them to put forth themselves. Our force was also very
great, but in horsemen we were not so strong as they, for we had with us only
the Burgundians being about two thousand lances good and bad, nothing so well
armed as they within Paris, because of the long peace wherein they had lived as
before is mentioned, of the which number also two hundred men of arms were at
Laigny with the Duke of Calabria, but of footmen we had great force, and those
very good. The Britains army lay at Saint Denis, making war on that side the
town of Paris all the ways they could, and the other noblemen were disparkled
some here some there, to make provision of victuals. In the end the Duke of
Nemours, the Earl of Armignac, and the Lord of Albret came to us, but their
forces lodged a good way from our camp because they had no pay, and should
have famished our army, if they had taken ought without money. This I am sure
of, that the Earl of Charolois gave them five or six thousand franckes, and
took order that they should come no nearer us. They were at the least five or
six thousand horse that did marvelous much harm in the country.

The Notes.
1 Yet Meyer vvriteth that the King afterward poisoned the Bishop, but Meyers
words are no Gospel.

2 A Denier is the twelfth part of threehalfepence starling.

How the Earl of Charolois artillery and the Kings artillery shot the one
against the other near to Charenton, and how the Earl of Charolois caused
another bridge to be built upon boats over the river of Seine. Chap. 9.
NOw to return to the camp before Paris, you may be sure that no day passed
without loss on both sides, but no great exploit was done, for the King would
suffer no great force to issue out of the town, neither meant to hazard the
battle, but desired peace, and wisely to disparkle this assembly.
Notwithstanding, one morning very early 4000. archers came and encamped along
by the river side upon the very bank, directly over against Conflans. The
gentlemen of Normandy and certain of the Kings ordinary men of arms lay in
a village but a quarter of a league from them, and between them and their
footmen was only a fair plain. The river of Seine ran between them and us,
and they began to dig a trench hard by Charenton, which ran in length to the
very end of our camp, directly over against the which, (the river being
between us and them as you have heard) they built a bulwark of wood and
earth, and thereon mounted greatstore of artilirie, which at the very first
shot chased the Duke of Calabrias men out of the village of Charenton, and
forced them in great haste to come and lodge with us with loss both of men and
horses. But the Duke of Calabria himself lay in a little house between the
river and the Earl of Charolois lodging, directly over against the enemies.

This artilerie shot also into our camp, and put the whole army in great
fear, for the very first shot slew certain of our men, and twice it struck
through the Earl of Charolois chamber as he sat at dinner, and slew a
trumpetter upon the stairs, bearing up a dish of meat. Wherefore after dinner
the Earl removed into a low parlor resolving not to depart thence. The next
morning the Princes met at his lodging to consult what was to be done: for they
ever sat in counsel there, and at their rising dined also there together. The
Dukes of Berry and Britain sat next to the wall upon the bench, and the Earl
of Charolois and the Duke of Calabria over against them. The said Earl placed
every one of them above himself, as reason was he should some of them, yea all
of them seeing they were in his lodging. There they devised to countermount all
the artillery in their army against the Kings, whereof the Earl of Charolois
had great store, as had also the Dukes of Calabria and Britain: for
accomplishment of which their purpose, they pierced the walls along the river
side behind Conflans, and there mounted all the best pieces of their
artillery, save the Bombards and the other great pieces which shot not: the
rest also they planted in other places where they might do best service, and by
this means the Princes had much more artillery on their side than the King on
his.

The trench that the French had made was of great length, and they wrought
continually upon it, advancing it toward Paris, and casting the earth toward
us, thereby to save themselves from our shot: for they lay all in their trench,
neither durst one of them peep out, because the meadow where they lodged was as
plain as a man's hand. To conclude I never heard in so short space such a
number of Canon shot, for we on our side meant to remove them thence by force
of artillery, but unto them ordinance came daily from Paris, and they plied
the matter diligently and spared no powder. A great number in our army dug
pits in the ground before their lodging, many also were made to their hands,
for it was a place where men wrought for stone. Thus every man shifted for
himself the best he could, and three or four days we passed in this estate,
but the fear was greater on both sides than the loss, for not one man of name
was slain.

But when the Princes saw that their enemies dislodged not, they accounted it
a thing tending greatly to their dishonor, and also very dangerous: for the
Parisians were thereby so greatly encouraged, that one day of truce it seemed
all the town was come forth to the trenches. Wherefore the Princes concluded
as they sat in council, to make a large bridge of great botes, the noses
whereof were coupled 1 together, and the rest covered with planks, and the last
couple nearest to the shore fastened to the ground with great anchors: besides
these, a number of other great botes upon the river of Seine were brought
thither, wherein they meant to pass over certain bands to assail the Kings
forces. The charge of this work was committed to Master Giralde the Master
gunner who said, that our bands that passed the river should have great
advantage over their enemies, because their trenches would be far underneath
us, considering that they had thrown the earth on the side toward us,
alleging farther that they durst not issue forth of their trenches, for fear
of our shot, which reasons much encouraged our men, and made them the willinger
to pass over. Thus the bridge being finished all save the last couple of
botes, which also were upon the point to be fastened to the rest, and all the
other botes appointed for conueiance over of our men being likewise in a
readiness: suddenly one of the Kings heralds arrived there, who said to Monseur
de Bonillet and others there present, that we had broken the truce. For because
that day and the day before were days of truce, every man that listed came to
see what we did, but that night the truce ended, our bridge was so large that
three men of arms with their staves ready to charge, might have passed over
it upon a front. Farther there were five or six great boats, every one of the
which would have conveyed over a thousand men at a time, besides a number of
less boats to pass over the artilerie that should serve in this enterprise.
The bands were also named, and their names enroled that should go, and the
Earl of S. Paul, and the Lord of Haultbourdin ordained to lead them. After
midnight they that were appointed to this enterprise began to arm themselves,
and before day were al in a readiness. Some also went and heard mass, and did
as good Christians ought to do in such a case. The same night I was my self in
a great tent in the midst of the army where the watch stood, being also one
of the watch: for no man was excused. The captain of the watch was Monseur de
Chastell Guyon 2, slain afterward at the battle of Granson 3. And as we stood
there waiting when this pastime should begin, suddenly we heard the French as
they lodged in their trenches cry alowd: Farewell neighbors, farewell,
immediately whereupon they set fire on their lodgings and retired their
artillery. The day began to break, and they that were appointed to this
enterprise were already upon the river, at the least part of them when they
saw the enemies afar off retiring to Paris, whereupon they returned all, and
unarmed themselves, reioicing much because of their departure. But you shall
understand that the King sent them thither only to beat our camp with
artillery, not to fight: for he would put nothing in adventure, as before I
have said, notwithstanding that his force were sufficient to have encountered
with all these Princes joined together, but his only desire was, as he well
declared, to treat of peace, and to sever this company without hazarding his
estate and the state of this large and noble realm of France in battle, than
the which nothing can be more uncertain nor dangerous.

Every day they practiced on both sides to with draw men each from other, and
diverse days of truce were made, during the which Commissioners sat on both
sides to treat of peace at La Grange aux Merciers hard by our camp. For the
King, the Earl of Maine with diverse others came thither, and for the Princes,
the Earl of S. Paul accompanied with diverse others in like manner. These
Commissioners met often, but no good was done: notwithstanding all that time
the truce endured, and a number of both the armies met and communed together at
a great ditch in the midway: the one, on the one side: and the others, on the
other: for neither party might pass the ditch. Notwitstanding the truce, no
day escaped by reason of this meeting and communication, but that ten or
twelve, and sometime more, came and yielded to the Princes, and another day as
many went from us to the King: wherefore this place was afterward called the
market place, because such merchandise was bought and sold there. Now to show
you mine opinion in this case, me thinks that such meeting and communing
together at such times, and in such sort is very dangerous, especially for him
that is likest to take the foil: for naturally most men desire to advance
themselves, at the least to save themselves: wherefore they will easily be
won to turn to the strongest. Some there are I confess so faithful and
constant, that none of these respects can alter them, but few such are to be
found. Farther this danger is then specially to be feared, when we deal with a
Prince that will endeavor him self to win men: which sure is a great grace of
God in any Prince that can frame him self thereunto, for it is a token that he
is not infected with the foul vice and sin of pride, which all men detest
and abhor. But to conclude this discourse, when a Prince minds to treat of
peace, he ought to employ therein the faithfullest and trustiest servants he
has, being men of ripe years, lest their lack of experience cause them
either to conclude some dishonorable treaty, or put their master in greater
fear at their return than there is cause why. Farther a Prince ought to
commit such affairs rather to those that have received benefit at his hands
than to such as never were benefited by him, but especially to wise men, for he
shall never make profit by employing a fool. Besides this, such treaties ought
to be held rather far from his camp than near unto it, and when the
Commissioners return, the Prince must give them audience, himself alone or in
presence of very few, to the end that if their news be discomfortable, they
may be instructed how to answer those that will be inquisitiue, for all men
will desire to understand news of them, yea and some of their familiars will
think that they will hide nothing from them, notwithstanding if they be such
men as I have here described, and know their master to be wise, they will
reveal nothing to any man whosoever.

The Notes.
1 Couperoit in the French is undoubtedly to be read Coupleroit as I have here
translated it, for to read it Couperoit is senseless, for the better
understanding of this place peruse Valturius de re militari lib. 11. page 313.
where you shall se the right description of this bridge.

2 This Chastel Guyon Chasteau Guyen, and Chasteau Guyon as our author also
afterward names him was the Prince of Orenges son, La March.

3 The old copy says he was slain at Morat but De la March, who was at the
battle says at Granson: but here is to be noted that the Chasteau Guyon
mentioned by our author, lib. 5. cap. 2. and by Annal. Burgund. that went into
Piemont after the battle of Granson was not this, but son or brother to this
which is proved by Commines own words, for in that place he calls him
Mounseor De Chasteau Guyon qui est de present, and whether this Chasteau Guyon
were slain at Granson or Morat, he cold not be alive in Charles the 8 time,
when our author writ. Thus much I have said lest Commines should seem to vary
from La March or rather from himself.

A discourse upon certain vices and virtues of King Lewis the 11. Chap. 10.
I Am entered into this discourse because I have seen much falsehood in the
world, and many servants deceive their masters, oftentimes through their
masters own fault: for this I dare boldly auowe, that proud and disdainful
Princes, and such as will give audience but to few, are oftener abused then
those that are courteous, and ready to give ear to every man: wherein sure
King Lewis our master surmounted far all the Princes of his time, for he was
the wisest Prince in winding himself out of trouble and adversity, the
humblest in words, the plainest in apparel, and the greatest traveler to win
a man that might do him service or harm that ever I knew. Neither used he to
relinquish his suit for the first refusal, but labored the party continually by
large promises and liberal gifts, as well of great sums of money as also of
such estates and offices as he knew would content him. And as touching those
whom he had banished and withdrawn his favor from in peace and prosperity: he
bought them dearly again when he needed them, and employed them in his
service, clean forgetting all offenses passed. He loved naturally men of mean
estate, and was enemy to all such as needed not to depend upon him: never
Prince gave audience to so many men, never Prince was inquisitiue of so many
matters, nor desirous to be acquainted with so many strangers as he, whereby he
knew as well all that were in authority and estimation in England, Spain,
Portugale, Italy, and the Seniories of Burgundy and Britain, as his own
subjects. And by these virtues preserved he his estate, which stood in great
danger at his first coming to the crown, because of the enemies himself had
procured to himself. But his great liberality especially served him to good
purpose, for as in adversity he wisely behaved himself, so contrariwise in
time of peace or truce, he lightly fell out with his servants, by picking
trifling quarrels to them, and such was his disposition, that he could hardly
away with peace or quietness. In his talk he spared no man, neither absent nor
present, save such as he feared, which were many, for naturally he was very
fearful. Farther, when his talk had either turned him to displeasure, or was
like so to do, he would endeavor himself to amend the matter, by using these or
such like words to the party offended: I know well that my tongue has wrought
me much displeasure, but it has also oftentimes stood me in great stead,
notwithstanding reason it is that I should repair the injury done, and when
he used this familiar speech, he ever gave withal some great present to the
party grieved. Sure the knowledge of good and evil is a great gift of God to
a Prince, I mean when the good surmounteth the evil, as it did in the King
our Master, who in mine opinion was much bettered by the trouble he sustained
in his youth, when he fled from his father and soiourned with Duke Philip of
Burgundy the space of six years 1: for he was constrained there to frame
himself to the humor of those whom he stood in need of, which singular virtue
adversity taught him. But after his fathers death, when he came first to the
state he thought only upon revenge, but soon felt the smart thereof, and
therefore forthwith changed his mind, acknowledged his error, repaired the
harms done, and sought to recover by large benefits those whom he had
offended, as hereafter you shall perceive. And I think verily he should never
have wound himself out of those troubles had not his education been better
than noble men's commonly is in this realm, who are brought up altogether in
wantonness and dissolutenes, as well in apparel as in talk, they are utterly
unlearned, there is not one wise man about them: they have governors that
dispose of all their affairs, but they themselves do nothing: yea some noble
men there are hardly of four nobles rent that glory in saying, Speak to my
servants, thinking thereby to imitate great Princes. But I have oftentimes
seen their servants so make their profit of them, that their folly has
thereby appeered to the whole world. And if any of them happen at the length to
look about him, and to attend to his own business, it is so late that it
seems almost to no purpose: for all those that have been great or done great
things began in their tender age, which virtue proceeds either of their
bringing up, or of the grace of God.

The Notes.
1 King Lewis departed from his father into Daulphin anno 1447. and there
remained till the year 1456. at the which time because of the force his father
sent thither against him, he was constrained to fly to the Duke of Burgundy
where he remained till the year of his coronation, which was in the year
1461. Annal. Burgund. De la March. Meyer.

How the Burgundians lying near to Paris, and looking for the battle,
supposed great thistles to have been lances held upright. Chap. 11.
I Have been long in this discourse, but it serves to so good purpose that
sooner I could not end it. Now to return to the wars, you have heard how these
archers that lay in the trench along upon the river of Seine, dislodged at the
very instant that we should have assailed them. The truce never endured past a
day or two, and when it ended sharp war began again, and the skirmishes
continued from morning till night, but no great force issued forth of the
town, notwithstanding they beat back our scoutes oftentimes whom we ever
relieved with new supplies. There passed no day without some skirmish great or
small, and I think the King would have had them greater, had it not been
because he was ielous of diverse though needlessly. I have heard him say that one
night he found the posterne of Saint Anthonies bastile toward the fields wide
open, which put him in suspicion of Master Charles of Melun, whose father kept
the place, yet sure a faithfuller servant than the said Charles that year the
King had none.

One day they within Paris determined to issue forth to fight with us, of the
which enterprise I suppose the King understood nothing, but it was only his
captains resolution, they meant to assail us three several ways, their
greatest band should have come from Paris, another from Pont de Charenton,
which two could not greatly have endamaged us, and the third appointed to be
two hundred men of arms from Bois-de-Vincennes. Of this resolution we were
advertised about midnight by a Page that told us this news as loud as he could
cry from the other side of the river by the commandment of the Princes
friends within the town, some of the which also he named and so departed. By
break of day issued forth Master Poncet of Riuiere before Pont de Charenton,
and the Lord of Lauon the other side from Bois-de-Vincennes even hard to our
artillery, where they slew one of our gunners. The alarm was great in our
camp: for we supposed this to be the enterprise, whereof the Page advertised
us over night. The Earl of Charolois was soon armed, yet not so soon as John
Duke of Calabria, for at all alarmes he was the first man armed, and that at
all points, and his horse ever barded. Moreover he ware such a garment as the
famous men of war use in Italy, and showed himself both a noble Prince, and a
worthy Captain: he rode straight to the barriars of our camp to stay our
men fom issuing forth, where he was as well obeyed as the Earl of Charolois
him self: yea the whole army obeyed him more willingly than any man in the
company, of the which honor undoubtedly he was worthy. Incontinent our whole
force was in arms and stood in order of battle within our carriage, all save
two hundred horse that kept our watch abroad. To be short, this day we looked
assuredly for the battle, but never before nor never after. Soon after the
Earl of Charolois and the Duke of Calabria, arrived the Dukes of Berry and
Britain, whom I never saw armed but this day only. The Duke of Berry was
armed at all points: notwithstanding they were but weakly accompanied, in the
which estate they passed through the camp, and rode forth to the Lords of
Charolois and Calabria where they communed together. Our scoutes being
renforced, rode as near Paris as they could, and discovered a great number of
our enemies scouts, coming to learn what noise this was in our army. Our
artillery shot terriblie when Monseur De Lau approached so near us: the King
also had good pieces upon Paris walls, that shot into our camp which was
strange: for we lay two leagues from the town, but I think the pieces were
mounted to the most advantage. This thundering of the artillery, caused both
the parties to think some great enterprise to be toward: The day was very
dark and cloudy, and our scouts approaching near to Paris, discovered many
enemies abroad in the field, and a good way beyond them, a number of lances
held upright (as they supposed,) which they judged to be the Kings whole force,
and all the people of Paris issued forth of the town in order of battle:
which imagination the darkness of the heavens put into their head. They returned
forthwith to the Princes being yet without our camp, and advertised them of
this news, assuring them of the battle. The scoutes that were issued forth of
Paris approached still nearer and nearer to our camp, because they saw ours
retire: which thing so much the more increased in our scoutes their former
imagination. Then came the Duke of Calabria to the place where a great number
of the Earl of Charolois household servants stood to accompany his standard
and his banner ready to be displaied, and the guidon of his arms according to
the custom of the house of Burgundy, and there the said Duke of Calabria spoke
thus to us all: We have now our desire, for the King is issued forth with his
whole force, and marches forward as our scouts tell us. Wherefore let us
determine to play the men. So soon as they be out of the town we will enter,
and measure with the long ell 1, and with such like words rode he about
encouraging the company: our scouts at the length perceiving the enemies to be
but weak recovered their spirits, and rode again toward Paris, where they
discovered these battles in the selfsame place they left them: whereupon they
entered into a new cogitation what they might be, but when they approached near
to them (the day being broken up and clear) they perceived them to be high
thistles, whereupon they rode hard to the town gates, and found not a man
abroad, whereof incontinent they advertised the Princes, who upon this news
went to mass and afterward to dinner: but our scoutes were ashamed of their
first advertisement, notwithstanding the darkness of the day, together with the
message of the Page brought unto us ouernight, somewhat excused them.

The Notes.
1 By the long ell he means the pike, wherewith soldiers at the sack of a
town use to measure veluets, silks, and cloths.

How the King and the Earl of Charolois met together to treat of peace. Chap.
12.
THe treaty of peace continued still, between the King and the Earl of
Charolois especially, because the principal force of both the armies was
theirs. The Princes demands were great: namely the Duke of Berries, who
required all Normandy for his partage, which the King would by no means
condescend unto. The Earl of Charolois demanded the towns situate upon the
river of Sum: namely, Abbeuille, Amiens, Saint Quintin, Peronne, and the rest
that King Charles the 7. had engaged by the treaty of Arras to D. Philip of
Burgundy, of whom King Lewis had redeemed them for the sum of four hundred
thousand crowns, not past three months before: but the Earl of Charolois
alleged that during his life, the King could not redeem them, 1 putting him
always in remembrance how much he was beholding to the house of Burgundy,
which received him when he fled from King Charles his father, furnished him of
money to maintain his estate, the space of six years 2 and accompanied him
at his coronation to Reimes and Paris 3, wherefore the Earl of Charolois took
the redeeming of these towns in very evil part. This treaty of peace was so
followed, that one morning the King came by water directly over against our
camp, leaving his horsemen that accompanied him upon the river side, and
having in the barge with him besides the water men that rowed, only four or
five persons, namely Monseur Du Lau, Monseur De Montauban then admiral of
France, and Monseur De Nantouillet, with one or two more. The Earls of
Charolois and Saint Paul stood on the other side of the river to receive the
King, who said thus to the Earl of Charolois, Brother, do you assure me in the
word of a Prince, (for the Earls first wife was the Kings sister 4:) whereunto
the Earl answered, Yea sir as one brother should assure another. Then the King
and his company landed, the two Earls receiving him honorably according to
his estate, and he having words at will, began thus and said: Brother, I know
you to be a gentleman and of the house of France: why, sir, quoth the Earl?
because said the K. when I sent of late mine Ambassadors to mine uncle your
father, and you to Lisle, where my foolish chancellor Moruillier so much
misbehaued himself toward you: you sent me word by the Archbishop of Narbonne
(who is a gentleman as his behavior there well declared,) that before a year
expired I should repent me of the proud language the said Moruillier there
used. You have kept promise indeed, and that long before your day: which words
the King spoke with a merry cheerful countenance, knowing his nature with
whom he talked to be such that they would please him well, as undoubtedly they
did. Then the King proceeded further saying, I love to deal with men that
keep promise. Afterward he disauowed Moruilliers words, saying that he had
spoken beyond his commission. To be short, the King walked a long time between
these two Earls, a great number of the Earl of Charolois soldiers in arms
standing by, and marking diligently their behavior. At this meeting the Earls
required the Duchy of Normandy, and the towns situate upon the river of
Sum, with diverse other particular demands for themselves, and certain
ouertures lately treated of for the common wealth of the realm, but upon those
they stood lest: for the weal public was now turned into wealth private. As
touching Normandy the King would hardly hear thereof, but he granted the
Earl of Charolois demands, and for his sake offered the Earl of Saint Paul
the office of Constable: which communication ended, the King took barge and
returned to Paris, and the Earls to Conflans, departing each from other in
very courteous and loving manner.

Thus passed we the time, sometime in peace and sometime in war, but
notwithstanding that the treaty of peace at la Grange aux Merciers where the
Commissioners used to sit, were clean broken off on both sides: yet continued
still the communication above mentioned between the King and the Earl of
Charolois, and messengers went between them notwithstanding the war: for the
Earl sent to the King William of Bische and Guillot Diusie, being both his
own servants, but yet beholding to the King: for when Duke Philip had banished
them, the King at the Earl of Charolois request entertained them. Many
misliked these sendings to and fro, so far forth that the Princes began now to
mistrust and abandon each other, in such sort that had not one thing happened
soon after 5, they had all departed with great dishonor. Twice I saw them
hold three several assemblies in one chamber where they were together,
wherewith the Earl of Charolois was maruellously offended: for he thought,
seeing the greatest force of this army was his, that they did him wrong to sit
in counsel in his chamber, he being present, without calling him to it:
wherefore he debated this matter with the Lord of Contay a very wise gentleman,
who advised him to take it patiently, because if he should alienate their
minds from him they could better make their peace than he, adding that as he
was the strongest, so ought he to be the wisest, and farther counselling him to
do his endeavor by all means possible for their continuance together in
friendship, and in no wise to fall at variance with them, but to digest and
wink at all these disorders. Lastly he told him that all men woondered, yea
his own servants, that so mean personages as the two above named were
employed in so weighty affairs: alleging great danger to be therein,
considering how liberal a Prince he was whom he had to deal with. True it is
that this Contay hated William of Bische, notwithstanding heerin he spoke but
as others did, and I think verily not upon malice but as the case required.
The Earl of Charolois followed his advise, and began to sport and pastime with
the Princes otherwise than he had been accustomed, to show them a cheerful
countenance, and to commune oftener both with them and their servants, and sure
so was it requisite: for they stood even upon the point to sever themselves. A
wise man does good service in such a company, if he may be credited, neither
can he be valued too dear, but I never knew Prince in my life that could find
the difference between man and man till he stood in need of men: and if any
happily do, yet make they no account of a wise man, but place in authority
about them those whom they favor better, either because they are of equal
years with them, or seek in all things to feed their humors, wherein they
are often nuzled by the furtherers of their wanton pleasures. But wise Princes
will soon reform themselves when need requires, such as were the King our
master, the Earl of Charolois at that time, King Edward of England, and diverse
others: but these three especially I have seen at so low an ebb, that they
have stood in great need of those whom before they despised. Notwithstanding
as touching the Earl of Charolois, after he was Duke of Burgundy, and
highlier advanced by fortunes favor than ever was any of his predecessors, and
grown so great that he feared no Prince of his estate, God overthrew him in
all his glory: and so bereaved him of his wits, that he contemned all men's
counsel but his own, whereby he miserably ended his life, with a great number
of his servants and subjects, leaving his house desolate as you see.

The Notes.
1 The Earls meaning was, that the King could not redeem them during the said
Earls life, because they were engaged to Duke Philip and his heirs males.

2 The Duke of Burgundy allowed the Dolphin being in his countries monthly
3000. florences for his entertainment. Meyer.

3 King Lewis was crowned anno 1461. Augusti 14.

4 The Kings sister that married the Earl was named Catherine, but he had no
issue by her. Annal. Burgund. Meyer. His second wife was Isabell daughter to
Charles Duke of Bourbon, by whom he had issue a daughter named Marie, which
also was his heir. His third wife was Margaret sister to Edward the fourth
King of England, by whom also he had no issue.

5 He means the taking of Roan mentioned in the next chapter.

How the town of Roan by practice was put into the Duke of Bourbons hands, for
the D. of Berry, and how the treaty of Conflans was fully concluded. Chap. 13.
YOu shall now understand what moved me to discourse so long of the dangers
depending upon these treaties, and why I advised Princes to be wise and
circumspect whom they employ in them, especially him that has the worse end
of the staff. For while the commissioners sat to treat of peace, by means
whereof men met and communed together: in steed of treating of peace some
practiced to yield the Duchy of Normandy to the Kings only brother the Duke
of Berry, to the end he might there take his partage, and restore Berry to the
King, which enterprise was also executed according: for the Lady of Brezey, the
late Seneschall of Normandies widow, and certain of her kins folks and
servants by her persuasion, received John Duke of Bourbon into the castle of
Roan, and finally into the town, the which willingly consented to this
mutation, as did also all the other towns and places in the country, a few
excepted. For the Normans have ever been and yet are of opinion, that it is
requisite for them (their country being so large) to have their Prince
resident among them, neither desire they any thing more: and sure it is a
goodly thing and a rich: for I my self have known the revenues thereof nine
hundred and fifty thousand frankes, 1 and some say they are greater.

After the town was revolted, all the inhabitants gave their oath to the Duke
of Bourbon as the Duke of Berries lieutenant, save the bailiffe of the town
named Onaste (who had been a groom of the Kings chamber in Flaunders and near
about him) and another called William Piquart, afterward general of
Normandy, and the high Seneschall of Normandy that now is, who also departed
to the King against his mothers will, who (as you have heard) was the chief
author of the citizens revolt. When the King heard this news he resolved to
make peace, seeing he could not undo that was already done. Wherefore
incontinent he sent word to the Earl of Charolois being in his camp, that he
would gladly speak with him, and appointed the hour when he would meet him
in the fields by Conflans, near to the said camp, at which hour he came,
accompanied with an hundred horse, all in manner Scottish men of his guard. The
Earl of Charolois met him with a small train without any ceremony,
notwithstanding many of his servants went after him, so that in the end his
company was greater than the Kings, but he caused them to stay a pretty way
off, and when the King and he had walked together a while, the King told him
that the peace was already made, and advertised him of all that was happened at
Roan (whereof the Earl as yet understood nothing) adding that notwithstanding
he would never willingly have granted his brother so large a partage: yet now
seeing the Normans themselves had made this mutation, he would agree thereunto,
and pass the treaty in manner and form, as before at diverse meetings was
devised, for as touching the other articles they had to agree upon, they were
but trifles. The Earl of Charolois was glad of these news, for his army lay
in great distress of vittailes, but more of money, and had not this happened,
all these Princes had been forced to depart with great dishonor.
Notwithstanding to the Earl of Charolois the same day, or within two or three
days after came a new relief both of men and money, sent him by Duke Philip
his father out of Burgundy, under the leading of the Lord of Sauenses, being
six score men of arms, and fifteen hundred archers, and six score thousand
crowns upon ten sumpter horses, with great store of bows and arrows, which
furnished reasonably well the Burgundians army, who stood in great doubt that
the other Princes would make peace without them.

This communication of peace pleased so well both the King and the Earl of
Charolois, and so desirous they were (as I have heard the Earl himself say,)
to conclude the treaty, that they marked not which way they walked, but rode
straight toward Paris, so far forth, that they entered into a great bulwark of
wood and earth, that the King had caused to be made a good way without the
town, at the end of a trench, by the which lay a way into the town. The
Earl was accompanied but with four or five persons who were much abased when
they saw themselves within the bullwarck: notwithstanding he himself set a
good face on the matter. But when this news came to the camp the whole army
began to mutter, and the Earl of S. Paul, the marshal of Burgundy, the Lord
of Contay, the Lord of Hault-bourdin, and diverse others assembled together,
blaming greatly both the Earl, and those that accompanied with him, of this
folly, and alleging the inconvenience that hapened to his grandfather at
Montereau-faut-Yonne in the presence of King Charles the 7. Wherefore
incontinent they commanded all the soldiers that were walking abroad in the
fields to retire into their camp. And the marshall of Burgundy surnamed
Neuf-chastel said thus: though this foolish harebrained young Prince be gone to
cast away himself: yet let us provide that his house, his fathers estate, and
we our selves fall not into danger: wherefore mine advise is that every man
repair to his lodging, and be in a readiness, banishing al fear whatsoever
hapen. For we are strong enough if we sever not, to retire to the marches of
Henaut, or Picardie, or into Burgundy. When he had thus said, he and the Earl
of Saint Paul mounted on horseback, and walked out of the camp to see if they
could descrie any body coming from Paris: where after they had stood a
while, they discovered forty or fifty horses being certain of the Kings
servants, as well archers as others that waited back upon the Earl of
Charolois: who so soon as he perceived these two approach, caused the French
men to return: he stood in awe of the marshall, because he used to give him
very sharp language, neither feared sometimes to tell him that he was but
lent him during his fathers life. Wherefore minding now to prevent him, he said
thus, Chide me not, I acknowledge my great folly, but I was hard by the
bulwark before I wist. But this notwithstanding the marshal said more to his
face, then he had spoken behind his back, and sure he was a faithful and a
trusty knight. The Earl answered nothing but held down his head, and entered
into this camp where they were all glad of his return, and commended the
Kings faith: and sure it is to be thought that both the King and the Earl had
great regard of their honor, considering that each of them putting himself
into others hands: Yet neither of them received harm, notwithstanding the
Earl never after returned under the Kings power.

The Notes.
1 That is 118750. pounds sterling.

How the treaty of peace was concluded between the the King and the Earl of
Charolois and his confederates. Chap. 14.
IN the end all matters were fully concluded, and the next day as the E. of
Charolois was making his musters to know what number he had lost: suddenly the
King accompanied with thirty or forty horse, came thither without warning
given, and rid about to view all the bands one after another, save the
marshals of Burgundy who loved him not: because not long before the King having
once given him Pinal in Loraine, took it afterward again from him to bestow
upon John Duke of Calabria greatly to the said marshals damage. The King
(acknowledging his error) by little and little reconciled him self to the wise
and valiant knights that served the King his father, whom he at his first
coming to the crown displaced, wherefore they were with the Princes in arms
against him. Farther it was agreed that the next day the King should come to
the Castle of Vincennes, and likewise all the Princes that were to do him
homage: for whose safety the said Castle should be put into the Earl of
Charolois hands, according to which agreement the next morning thither came the
King, and likewise all the princes none being absent, the porche and the gate
being manned with Burgundians well armed: there the treaty of peace was
concluded. 1 The Lord Charles did the King homage for the Duchy of Normandy,
and the Earl of Charolois for the towns in Picardie above mentioned, as did
also all the rest that had homage to do, and the Earl of Saint Paul took his
oath for the office of Constable: but according to the common proverb, never
was so plentiful a marriage feast, but some departed vndined, for here some
had what them lusted, and others nothing. The King received into his service
certain gentlemen that were with his brother, and also certain mean persons,
but the greatest part remained still with his said brother the new Duke of
Normandy and the D. of Britain, who went to Roan to take possession. At their
departure from the castle of Vincennes they took their leave each of other,
and returned to their lodgings: farther, all letters, pardons, and other
writings serving for the confirmation of the peace were made. On one day
departed all these three Princes, the Duke of Normandy and Britain first into
Normandy, and the Duke of Britain from thence into his own country, and the
Earl of Charolois into Flaunders. But when the Earl was ready to take horse,
the King meaning effectually to show how greatly he desired his friendship,
came to him and accompanied him to Villiers-le-bell a village four leagues
from Paris, where both these Princes lodged that night. The Kings train was
very small, but he commanded two hundred men of arms to follow him to convey
him back: whereof the Earl of Charolois being advertised as he went to bed,
fell into great suspicion thereof, and commanded a great number of his servants
to be in arms. Thus you see how impossible it is for two great Princes to
agree, because of the suspicious tales and reports that are daily and howerly
beaten into their heads. Wherefore two Princes that desire to continue in
friendship ought never to come together, but to employ virtuous and wise men
between them, who will increase their amity, and repair all such breaches as
shall happen.

The next morning the two Princes took their leave each of other with much
courteous and wise talk, and the King returned to Paris accompanied with the
men of arms above mentioned, called thither for that purpose, whereby he
removed all suspicion the Earl had conceived of their coming. The said Earl
rode toward Compiengne and Noyon, being received by the Kings commandment
into all the towns he passed by. From thence he marched to Amiens where they
did him homage, as did also all the other towns upon the river of Sum, and
the territories in Picardy restored to him by this treaty, which the King not
past nine months before had redeemed for the sum of four hundred thousand
crowns, as before you have heard. This done, he marched incontinent into the
country of Liege, because they had by the space of five or six months made
war upon his father in his absence, in the countries of Namur and Brabant,
where also they had slain certain of his subjects 2: but because the winter
approached he could do no great exploit, notwithstanding a number of villages
were burnt, and diverse small overthrows given to the said Liegeois, whereupon
they made a treaty with the Duke of Burgundy, and for performance thereof
stood bound to him in a great sum of money. This done, the Earl of Charolois
returned into Brabant.

The Notes.
1 The treaty was sworn the fifth of October, the conditions whereof read in
Meyer fol. 337. where he says, that by this treaty Flaunders was exempt from
the Kings sovereignty, which says Degrassalius cap. 1. page 6. the King could
not grant, Quia vltimus resortus alienari aut remitti non potest: which also
may well appear to be law, because we read lib. 5. cap. 17. of our author,
that notwithstanding this treaty, the Chauncellor of Burgundy and Himbercourt
being imprisoned and condemned by the citizens of Gaunt, appealed to the
Parliament of Paris, which appeal notvvithstanding whether it were lavvfull
or unlawful, or whether they appealed to delay the time for safety of their
lives, hoping their friends would deliver them, or the King happily, thereby
to recover his former sovereignty: I leave here to discuss. Notvvithstanding
if any such condition were in the treaty of Conflans, as Meyer reports, in
my simple judgment these two wise men would not have appealed contrary to
it, and thereby have made the cause of their death just though before unjust,
by violating this privilege, and so infringing the liberties of the state of
Flaunders obtained by this treaty of the King.

2 The King persuaded the Liegeois to rebel in June 1465. which was the
same summer the Earl of Charolois was in France, thereby to withdraw the
Earl of Charolois out of France home, vvhereupon the Liegeois about mid
August defied the Duke of Burgundy, and hung his sons image on a gibbet with
vile reproachful words. Read Annal. Burgund. fol. 900. and Meyer fol. 337.
page 2. but soon after, namely 19. October. the same year the Duke of Burgundy
by the conduct of the Earl of Nassau the Seneschall of Hainault, the Lords of
Grutuse, Gasebecque, and Rubempre gave them an overthrow at Montenac where
they lost 2200 men: wherefore seeing their forces broken, and the Earl of
Charolois returned home, they desired peace which they obtained 22. Ianuarij
anno 1466. as our author in this chapter makes mention, and likewise Meyer
fol. 338. and Annal. Burgund. fol. 909. where also read the conditions of the
peace, but this peace the same year about June they brake again, by aiding
them of Dinand, as in the second book our author sets forth at large.

How by the division that happened between the Dukes of Britain and Normandy,
the King recovered the said Duchy which he had given his brother. Chap. 15.
NOw to return to the Dukes of Normandy and Britain, who after their
departure from Bois-de-Vincennes, went together as you have heard to take
possession of Normandy. You shall understand that immediately after their
entrey into Roan, they fell at variance about partition of the booty 1, for
the knights above mentioned were yet with them, who being accustomed under King
Charles the seventh, to live in great authority, and enjoy goodly offices:
thought now, seeing this enterprise at an end, and themselves vnrestored to the
Kings favor, to be advanced by the new Duke of Normandy, wherefore they gaped
for the best offices in the country as due to them. On the otherside the Duke
of Britain thought it reason that part of them should be at his disposition,
because the greatest burden of these wars had lien upon his shoulders. To be
short, the fire so kindled between them, that the Duke of Britain for safety
of his person was forced to retire to mont S. Katherine near to Roan, where
also the Duke of Normandies men with the citizens of Roan were about to besiege
him, so that in the end he was forced to retire the high way to Britain. Of
this division the King being aducrtised, furthered it I warrant you to the
uttermost of his power (for he was master in this Art) and in the mean time
approached with his army near to the country, whereupon those that held the
strong places began to yield them to him, thereby to recover his favor. I
speak of these matters upon the Kings own report, for I my self was not
present at them. But to proceed, the King practiced with the Duke of Britain
(who held certain of the strong places in base Normandy 2) utterly to abandon
his brother, for conclusion whereof they were together a certain space at
Caen, where they made a treaty, by the which, the said town of Caen and
diverse other places remained in the L. of Lescuts hands, with a certain number
of soldiers in pay, but this treaty was so confused, that I think neither
party understood it thoroughly well. Thus returned the D. of Britain into his
own country, and the King bent his whole force against his brother the Duke
of Normandy, who seeing himself unable to withstand him, and that the King
had already taken Pont de l'Arche and diverse other places in the country,
determined to fly into Flaunders. The Earl of Charolois was yet at Sainctron
3, a little town in the country of Liege, where he was maruellously busied,
for his army was all broken and out of order, and part thereof, notwithstanding
the winter, in war against the Liegeois. This variance between the two Dukes
above mentioned much troubled him, for he desired nothing more than to see a
Duke of Normandy, because thereby the King should lose the third foot of his
realm? wherefore he levied men in Picardie to put into Dieppe, but before they
were ready, he that held the town yielded it by composition to the King, who
by this means recovered all the Duchy of Normandy save those places that the
Lord of Lescut held by the treaty of Caen.

The Notes.
1 He means by the booty, the offices in Normandy.

2 The places the Duke of Britain held, were Caen, Auaranches, Licieux, etc.

3 Some copies have Saint Oen, but the old copy and de la March Sainctron,
some call it Centron, and Saint Truden, as says Guicci. Hubertus names it in
latin Centrones. Berlandus, fanum Trudonis, but corruptly says Hubertus: the
ancient name in deed is Centrones, wherefore it is to be read Centronor
Sainctron, but not Saint Oen.

How the new Duke of Normandy returned into Britain in very poor estate,
and utterly discouraged, because he had failed of his enterprise. Chap. 16.
THe Duke of Normandy was once determined (as you have heard) to fly into
Flaunders, but at that very instant the Duke of Britain and he reconciled
themselves, acknowledging both of them their errors, and well perceauing all
good things by division to perish and come to naught. And sure in mine opinion
it is almost impossible, that many Princes of equal estate being together
should long continue in friendship and amity, unless they have a superior
over them, who also must be wise and well esteemed, to the end he may hold them
in due obedience. I have my self seen many examples hereof, and therefore
speak not upon hearesay. Besides that, common experience proves that we are
naturally inclined to fall at variance to our own harm, not regarding the
inconveniences that ensue thereof, which is a general fault through the whole
world. Wherefore in mine opinion a wise Prince having ten thousand men at his
commandment, and knowing how to govern them, is more to be feared and
esteemed than six Princes confederate together, with each of them ten thousand,
because so many matters fall in question between them, that all good occasions
are lost, before they can resolve upon any thing.

Thus returned the Duke of Normandy into Britain in very poor estate, and
utterly abandoned of all the Knights above mentioned that had served the King
his father. for they made their peace with the King, and were better
entertained by him than ever they had been in his fathers time. These two
Dukes were wise after the hurt received (as the common proverb says) of the
Brittons, and lived together in Britain, being governed by the Lord of Lescut
their principal servant. And diverse ambassadors ran between the King and
them, and between them and the Earl of Charolois, and likewise between the
King and the Duke of Burgundy, some to learn news, some to corrupt one
another servants and subjects, and some for diverse other evil purposes, and
all under color of good faith. Some also went with good intent trusting to
pacify these troubles, which sure was great simplicity in them to think
themselves wise and sufficient enough by their presence to appease Princes so
great, so subtle, and so well acquainted with all sorts of fine practices as
these were, especially neither party inclining to reason. But some there are so
blinded with vain glory, that they think themselves able to deal in matters
that oftentimes they understand not: for their Masters do not always discover
to them the bottom of their thoughts. To such it often happens that they go
but to furnish the feast, yea many times to their own cost: for ever one
by-fellow or other accompanies them, that has some secret practice apart, at
the least thus have I seen the matter ordered at all times and in all places
where I have been. Wherefore as I said before, that Princes ought to be
circumspect whom they employ in their affairs: so say I now, that those that
are employed ought to take heed how they negotiate in Princes businesses. And
who so can shift off the charge, unless he understand it thoroughly well, and
perceive his Master to be well affected thereunto, is to be accounted wise: for
I have known many a good man in a pecke of troubles with such affairs.
Princes also I have seen of two contrary dispositions, the one so subtle and
suspicious, that a man can never be acquainted with their humor, for they
think all the world bent to deceive them: the other trust their servants well
enough, but they themselves are so gross and understand so little of their
own affairs, that they know not who does them good service or bad, whereby
they alter their minds in a moment from love to hatred, and from hatred to
love. And notwithstanding that of either sort few are good and constant: yet I
for my part had rather live under the wise than the foolish: because there are
more ways to avoid their displeasure, and recover their favor lost: but with
the ignorant a man can devise no shift, for no man deals with themselves in
any matter, but altogether with their servants, whom also they change as often as
the wind. Notwithstanding in those countries where such Princes reign, all
men are of duty bound to serve and obey them. Wherefore all things considered,
our only hope ought to be in God: for he alone is constant, he only is good:
but this lesson we learn too late: yea never before we need his help,
notwithstanding it is better late than never.

THE SECOND BOOK.
Of the wars between the Burgundians and Liegeois, and how the town of Dinand
was taken, sacked, and rased. Chap. 1.
IMmediately after these troubles above mentioned, ended in France, the Duke of
Burgundy year by year had war with the Liegeois, against whom when the King
saw him busied: he usually attempted some enterprise against the Britons,
sending also some small aid to the said Liegeois: whereupon the Duke
forthwith either turned his force against the King to succor his
confederates, or they concluded some treaty or truce. Now you shall understand
that in the year 1466. Dinand was taken by the Duke of Burgundy, 1 being a
town in the country of Liege strong and rich for the bigness thereof, by reason
of their great trade of copper works, commonly called Dinandrie, being pots,
pans, and such like implements. Philip Duke of Burgundy (who died in the
month of June in the year 1467) in his extreme age was borne thither in a
litter, so much hated he the said town, because of their great cruelty used
against his subjects in the county of Namur, especially against a little town
called Bouuines, situate within a quarter of a league of Dinand, and severed
only with the river of Maze. For not long before the time I now write of, they
of Dinand besieged the said town of Bouuines (the river running between 2)
the space of eight months, committed many cruel murders in the country
thereabout, and shot all that space continually with two bombards, and other
great pieces of artillery into the town: so that the poor people were
constrained to save themselves in their sellers, and there to abide. It is
almost incredible the great hatred that was between these two towns,
notwithstanding that their children usually married together, because there was
no other good town near them.

The year before the destruction of Dinand being the same summer, the Earl of
Charolois came before Paris with the Princes of France as you before have
hard: they made a treaty with the Duke of Burgundy, whereby they agreed to
give him a certain sum of money to abandon their league with the city of
Liege, and to govern their estate apart, a manifest token of imminent
destruction, when they that ought to continue together in amity, sever
themselves and forsake each other, which I speak as well to great Princes in
league together as to towns and commonalties. But because I suppose every man
to have seen and read a number of examples, to this purpose I will lightly
pass over this discourse, only noting by the way that King Lewis our Master
was the finest and cunningest Prince in dissoluing freindship between men that
ever I knew, for he spared neither money, goods, nor traueill, but labored as
well the servants as the masters. Now to return to the history, they of
Dinand soon repented them of the treaty above mentioned, for they cruelly put
to death four of their best citizens that had been the chief perswaders of
them thereunto, and began war a new in the county of Namur: wherefore partly
for these considerations, and partly because of the earnest solicitation of
the citizens of Bouuines, D. Philip laid the siege before the town, but the
charge of the whole army was committed to his son. Thither came also from his
own house the Earl of S. Paul Counstable of France to aid the Duke, not by
the Kings commandment, nor with the men of arms that were under his charge,
but with such force only as he had levied in the marches of Picardie. Once
they of Dinand made a proud sallie, and were repulsed to their great loss: and
the eight day after the town being maruellouslie beaten with canon was taken
by assault, 3 so that their friends had not leisure to bethink them whether
they should aid them or not. The town was burnt and rased, and the prisoners
being to the number of eight hundred drowned before Bouuines. 4 Sure the
revenge was cruel upon them, but I think God had so ordained it because of
their great wickedness.

The next day after the town was taken, the Liegeois came thither with great
force 5 to succor it, contrary to their promise, for by the treaty above
mentioned: they and the town of Dinand had abandoned each other. Duke Philip
because of his old age returned home, but his son with the whole army
marched against the Liegeois whom we met sooner than we looked for. For by
chance our vaward missed the way for lack of guides, by means whereof our
battle met first with them, wherein were the principal Captains of our army.
It was almost night when we arrived at the place where they lodged: yet
notwithstanding we marched against them, but even at that very instant they
sent ambassadors to the Earl of Charolois, desiring him for the honor of the
virgin Mary, whose even that was, to have compassion upon this poor people,
excusing their fault the best they could. Yet this notwithstanding their army
made show as though they desired the battle, and their behauior seemed clean
contrary to their ambassadors request. But after the said ambassadors had
passed twice or thrice between them and us, they concluded to observe the
treaty made the year before, and to give the Duke a certain sum of money,
for the performance of the which conditions, better than the former, they
promised to deliver to the Earl by eight of the clock the next morning three
hundred hostages, 6 named in a role by their Bishop and certain of his
servants being in our camp. This night our army was in great trouble and
fear, for our camp was neither fortified nor enclosed, besides that, we lay
scattered here and there, and in a place much for the Liegeois advantage, who
were all footmen, and knew the country better then we. Some of them desired
to assail us, and in mine opinion if they had so done, they might easily have
defeated us, but their ambassadors that entreated for peace brake off that
enterprise.

By break of day our army was come together, and our battles stood in very
good order, our force was great. For we were three thousand men of arms good
and bad, and twelve or thirteen thousand archers, besides great force of
footmen, of the countries thereabout. We marched straight upon our enemies
with intent either to receive the hostages, or give them battle if they
refused to deliver them. We found them severed into small bands, and in great
disorder, as a people obedient to no man's commandment. None drew near, the
hostages being yet vndeliuered. Wherefore the Earl of Charolois asked the
Marshall of Burgundy there present, whether he should assail them: who
answered yea, alleging that they might now be discomfited without danger, and
that no conscience was to be made in the matter, seeing the fault was theirs.
The like advise gave also the Lord of Contay, adding that he should never have
them at such advantage, and showing him how they went scattering here and
there in small bands, wherefore he councelled him without farther delay to
invade them. But the Earl of Saint Paul constable of France, being asked his
advise, was of the contrary opinion, saying, that if he assailed them, he
should do against his honor and promise, because such a number of people could
not so soon agree upon the delivery of so many hostages. Wherefore he held it
best to send again to them to know what they would do. The Earl of Charolois
debated this matter long with himself. On the one side he saw his ancient and
mortal enemies defeated without all danger, but on the other he feared the
staying of his honor if he should invade them. In the end he sent a trumpeter
to them, who met with the hostages upon the way, whereupon the wars ended, and
every man returned home, but the soldiers were much offended with the
Constables advise, for they saw a goodly booty before them. Incontinent
ambassadors were sent to Liege to confirm the peace 7: but the people being
inconstant and wavering, vaunted that the Earl durst not fight with them, and
discharged harquebuses upon his ambassadors, and entreated them very ill. But
the Earl returned into Flaunders, and this summer died his father 8, for whom
he made a great and solemn funeral at Burges, and advertised the King of his
death.

The Notes.
1 The peace made the 22. of January, ann. 1466. whereof mention is made in the
14. Chap. of the last book, about June the same year, the Liegeois brake as
here is rehearsed, and again they hung up the image of the Duke and his
son, with the most barbarous insolency that ever was heard of. Read Annal.
Burgund. page 911. and 912. and Meyer page 338. where also their intolerable
cruelty is described.

2 The Dinandois durst not pass the river into the Dukes dominions, wherefore
they planted their artilery on their own side of the river, meaning only to
beat the town, not to make any breach.

3 Dinand was taken in August. Annal. Burgund. the 25. of August says Meyer,
and the Dukes army before the town was thirty thousandmen, Meyer.

4 The eight hundred drowned before Bouuines, were those that hanged up the
image of the Duke and his son with such reproaches. Annal. Burgund.

5 Others say but fifty hostages.

6 The Liegeois army was of forty thousandmen. Annal. Burg. but Meyer says
but six and thirty thousand.

7 This peace was concluded the 1. of September an. 1466. the conditions read
in Meyer fo. 339. page 2. and Annal. Burgund. page 915. Farther about the
midst of September the next year being 1467. they brake this peace again.

8 Duke Philip died the 15. of June 1467. Annal. Burgund. Berlandus. De la
March. Meyer says the 16. of July, Gaguin in one place says June, and in
another the 14. of July, he gourned 48. years, lived 71. Meyer. Farther here
is to be noted that in this place, our author begins the year 1467. for
that year died the Duke as he says before in this chapter, and these words,
where he says, And this summer died his father, have not relation to the same
summer Dinand was taken, and the peace made with the Liegeois: for if the Duke
had died that summer, he could not have been at the taking of Dinand, for
Dinand was taken in August, and then the Duke dying in June, must have been
dead before, if he had died that summer: but these words have relation to the
Earl of Charolois return into Flanders which was in the beginning of the
summer anno 1467. for the peace was made 1. September 1466. and all that winter
(to the end he might make all sure at Liege:) he remained in those countries,
and in the beginning of the next summer, anno 1467. returned into Flanders, and
in June after died his father. Thus much I have been forced to say, lest our
author by slipping over that winter because nothing was done in it, should
seem to write contrarieties.

How the Liegeois brake the peace with the Duke of Burgundy then Earl of
Charolois, and how he discomfited them in battle. Chap. 2.
DVring these wars and ever after, many secret practices were entertained
between these Princes. The King was maruellously offended with the Dukes of
Britain and Burgundy, by means whereof they could hardly hear one from
another: for oftentimes their messengers were stayed, and in time of war forced
to go by sea out of Britain into Flaunders, at the least to pass out of
Britain into England, and so to travel by land to Dover, and there to cross
over to Calice: for they could not pass the next way through France without
great danger. But during all the space of twenty years or more, that these
princes were at variance, sometime in open war, and sometime in a dissembled
truce, wherein each party comprehended their confederates: God showed so great
favor to the realm of France, that the civil wars in England were not yet
fully ended, notwithstanding that they began fifteen years before, and had
continued with cruel and bloody battles, wherein many a good man lost his
life. For you shall understand, that there were in England two houses that
claimed the crown, to wit, Lancaster and York: for the which cause both the
parties proclaimed their enemies traitors, and the division of these two houses
was the preservation of the estate of France: for doubt you not but that this
realm had sustained great troubles if the English men had been in such estate
then as in times past. But to return again to our matter, the Kings chief
desire was to conquer Britain, both because it seemed easier to be subdued,
and of less defense than this house of Burgundy, and also because the Britons
received all his evil willers, namely his brother, and other his enemies that
had intelligence in his realm. Wherefore he practiced continually with the
Duke of Burgundy, making him diverse offers if he would forsake the Britons, and
namely that he would in like manner abandon the Liegeois, and all other the
Dukes enemies. Whereunto the Duke of Burgundy would not agree, but made a new
voyage against the Liegeois, because they had again broken the peace, and
taken and spoiled a town called Huy 1, and chased his men out of it,
notwithstanding the hostages delivered the year before under pain of death,
and the great sum of money they had bound themselves to forfeit, if they brake
the said treaty. The Duke levied his army about Louuain in Brabant, and upon
the marches of Liege, whither came to him from the King the Earl of Saint
Paul Constable of France (now become altogether French, and resident
continually with the King) accompanied with Cardinal Balne and others, who
advertised him that the Liegeois were the Kings confederates, and comprehended
in the truce: wherefore the King would succor them if he invaded them.
Notwithstanding they offered if he would abandon the Dukes of Berry and
Britain to the King, that the King would then abandon the Liegeois to him.
Their audience was short and in open court, neither stayed they above one day.
The Duke excused himself, and charged the Liegeois with breach of the peace,
alleging that they had invaded his dominions, wherefore he saw no reason why
he should not be revenged on them without forsaking his confederates, and this
was his answer for that time. Again the next day after their arrival, the
Duke being ready to take horse, told them that he humbly besought the King to
attempt nothing against the Duke of Britain, whereunto the Constable replied
and said, sir you choose not but take all, for you will make war at your
pleasure upon your friends, and constrain us to lie still and not invade our
enemies as you do yours, it may not be so, neither will the King endure it.
Then the Duke taking his leave said thus again, the Liegeois are assembled
together, and within three dies I look for the battle, if I be overthrown, I
am sure you will do after your accustomed manner: but if the victory fall on my
side, the Britains shall live quietly enough by you. Which talk ended, he
mounted on horseback, and the ambassadors repaired to their lodgings, to make
them ready to depart. The Duke marched in arms from Louuaine with great force,
and laid his siege before a town called Sainctron, his power was marvelous
great, for all the strength of Burgundy was come to him, so that this army was
far greater than any other that I had seen with him before.

A little before his departure, he debated with his counsel, whether he should
put the Liegeois hostages to death, or what he should do with them. Some gave
advise to kill them all, especially the Lord of Contay so often above
mentioned, whom I never heard speak so cruelly as at that present. Wherefore it
is necessary for a Prince to have more than one of his counsel, for the wisest
err, yea, and that often. Otherwhiles because they are partial to the matters
debated, through hatred or love, sometime because they seek to contrary some
one that has spoken before them, possible also their bodies may be evil
disposed, for it is not to be held for counsel that is given after dinner. But
you will say, that men subject to such imperfections are unfit to be of a
Princes council, whereunto I answer, that we are all men, and that who so will
have no councillors but such as never fail to speak wisely, nor are more
troubled at one time then another, must seek them in heaven, for he shall not
find them on earth. But for redress of this inconvenience, sometime one of the
council will speak very well and wisely, that uses not often so to do, and
thus the one supplieth the others defects. Now to return to the matter debated
in this assembly, two or three were of the said Contais opinion, moved
thereunto by his great authority and wisdom: for in such assemblies a great
number give their opinion but as they have heard some other speak before them,
not understanding the matters debated, but seeking only to flatter some one
being of credit and authority that has already spoken.

After this the Lord of Himbercourt, a gentleman borne near to Amiens, and one
of the wisest knights that ever I knew, being asked his advise said, that to
the end the Duke might have God on his side, and discharge himself of cruelty
and desire of revenge before the world: he thought it best to pardon all those
hostages, considering they came thither with a good intent, supposing the
treaty should have been observed, notwithstanding he advised the Duke at their
departure to give them to understand, how great grace and favor he showed them,
and to desire them to do their endeavor in persuading their citizens to peace,
which if they could not obtain, yet at the least they themselves acknowledging
his goodness toward them, should never after bear arms neither against him,
nor their bishop there present with him. This opinion took place, and the
hostages when they were delivered promised to do as the Duke required. Farther
this was told them at their departure, that if any of them were herafter taken
in arms against the Duke, he should die and thus they were dismissed.

It is not amiss to rehearse here how after Monseur de Contayes cruel
sentence pronounced against the hostages: (part of them which were come thither
with a good meaning and upon very simplicity,) one of the Counsel said thus
to me in mine ear: Mark well this man, his body is healthful enough, though
he be old: yet dare I lay a good wager he shall not live a year to an end,
because of this cruel sentence he has given, and sure so it fell out, for he
lived not long after. Notwithstanding before his death he did his Master good
service in the battle against the Liegeois, whereof you shall now hear.

I have made mention before how the Duke departing from Louuain, laid his
siege before Sainctron, and bent his artillery against it. Within the town
were three thousand Liegeois under the charge of a valiant knight, the self
same that was their chief commissioner for peace when we met them in order of
battle the year before. But the third day after the Dukes arrival before the
town, the Liegeois with great force came to levy his siege about ten of the
clock in the morning, they were thirty thousand men 2 and above good and bad,
all footmen save fine hundred. They were well furnished of artillery, and
encamped within half a league of us in a strong village called Breton, part
whereof was environed with a marish. Farther Francois Royet, Baillif of Lions,
and the Kings ambassador at that time to the said Liegeois, was with them in
their army. 3 Our fourragers were the first that advertised us of their
arrival, for we had no scoutes abroad, which was a foul oversight: I never
was in place with the Duke of Burgundy where I saw him give good order of him
self but this day only. Incontinent he raunged all his battles in the
field, save certain bands appointed to lie still at the siege, among the
which were five or six hundred English men. Farther he beset both the sides of
the village with twelve hundred men of arms, and placed him self with eight
hundred men of arms directly over against the village, somewhat farther off
then the rest: he caused also a great company of gentlemen and men of arms to
light on foot with the archers, and then the L. of Rauastain with the vaward
(being all on foot, as well men of arms, as archers) marched forward with
certain pieces of artillery even hard to the Liegeois trenches which were
broad, deep, and full of water: yet notwithstanding with force of arrows and
cannot shot, the enemies were repulsed, and their trenches won, and their
artillery also: but when our shot failed us, the Liegeois recovered their
spirits and with their long pikes gave a charge upon our archers and their
Captains, of whom they slew in a moment four or five hundred, in such sort
that all our ensigns begane to waver as men half discomfited. At which
instant the Duke commanded the archers of his battle to march, being led by
Philip of Creuecoeur, Lord of Cords (a wise gentleman) and diverse other
valiantmen, who so courageously assailed the enemies, that with the turning of
a hand they were put to flight. But neither the horsemen above mentioned that
stood on both sides of the village, neither the Duke himself could follow the
chase because of the marish: for they were placed there only to this end, that
if the Liegeois had broken the D. vawarde, and issued forth of their trenches
into the plain, they might then have given a charge upon them. The Liegeois
fled along through the marish, being pursued only by our footmen,
notwithstanding the Duke sent part of the horsemen that accompanied himself to
follow the chase, but they were forced to ride two leagues about before they
could find any passage, by means whereof they were benighted, which saved
many a Liegeois life. The rest of his horsemen the Duke sent to his camp,
because they heard a great noise there, and doubted the enemies sally, and
indeed they had issued forth thrice, but were always repulsed, especially
through the valiantns of the English men that the Duke left there behind him: a
few of the Liegeois after they were put to flight relied themselves together at
their carriage, but stayed not long there. In this battle were slain 9000.
men, 4 which number I am sure shall seem great to all that love truth, but I
have been in my time in many battles, where for one that was slain men made
report of a hundred, thinking thereby to please their Masters whom often they
abuse with such untruths. Sure had we not been benighted, there had been
slain above fifteen thousand: the battle being ended, 5 the Duke when it was
dark night returned with the whole army into his camp, save a thousand or
twelve hundred horse that were gone two leagues about to follow the chase, for
otherwise they could not come near their enemies because of a little river that
was to pass. They did no great exploit because of the night: notwithstanding
some of their enemies they slew, and some they took, but the greatest part
escaped into the city. The Lord of Contay did good service this day in giving
order in the battle, and died shortly after in the town of Huz and made a
good end: he was a wise and a valiant knight, but lived not long after his
cruel sentence pronounced against the hostages above mentioned. The D.
immediately after he was unarmed called one of his secretaries, and wrote a
letter to the Constable and the other ambassadors departed from him at Louuain
not above four days before, wherein he advertised them of his victory and
desired them to attempt nothing against the Bretons.

Within two days after the battle, the pride of this foolish people was
clean abated, though their loss were not great: whereby appears how
dangerous a thing it is for any Prince to hazard his estate in battle, if he
may by any other means make a good end, for a small loss in a battle changes
and alters the minds of his subjects that receives the overthrow more than
any man would think, causing them not only to stand in great fear of their
enemies, but also to despise and contemn their Prince and those that are in
authority about him, yea to murmur and practice against him. They demand
boldlier than they were accustomed, and storm if ought be denied them, so that
the Prince might have done more with one crown before the battle, than with
three after it. Wherefore if he that has received the overthrow be wise, he
will not adventure a second battle in this estate with those that have fled,
but only defend his own, and seek some small enterprise easy to be
atchiued, to the end thereby his subjects may recover their former courage, and
remove all fear. To conclude, the loss of a battle traineth with it a
number of inconveniences to him that is vanquished. Notwithstanding great
conquerors have just cause to desire the battle to abridge their labors, as
have also the Englishmen and Switzers, both because they are better footmen
then their neighbors, as appears by the great victories they have obtained,
(which notwithstanding, I write not to the dispraise of other nations) and also
because their men can not keep the fields long without doing some exploit, as
Frenchmen and Italians can, who also are more full of practice and easier to be
governed than they. Now on the otherside, he that obtains the victory,
increases his honor and estimation, his subjects are the more obedient, they
deny him nothing that he demands, his soldiers also wax thereby the hardier,
and the more courageous. Notwithstanding oftentimes the Princes themselves
after a victory obtained, are so puffed up with pride and vain glory, that
commonly their good success turns to their harm, all the which happens by
Gods disposition, who sends alterations according to men's deserts.

When they within Sainctron saw the battle lost, and themselves enclosed on
all sides, supposing also the discomfiture to be much greater then indeed it
was: they laid down their armor, yielded the town, and delivered such men to
the Dukes mercy as he demanded, whom he incontinent caused to be beheaded, six
of them being of the hostages that he had dismissed a few days before, under
such conditions as you have heard. From thence he dislodged and marched to
Tongres, which abode the siege: but because the town was nothing strong, they
yielded before the battery under the same conditions that their neighbors of
Sainctron had accepted, and delivered also ten men to the Duke, who were put to
death as the former, five or six of them being likewise of the hostages above
mentioned.

The Notes.
1 The new copy has Liny, but the old and La March name it Huy, Guicci.
Hoey, Hubertus Huyum, Meyer, Hoyum, and almost all other good authors.

2 The Liegeois army to succor Sainctron was of 20000. men, (but understand
besides the Kings forces) lead by Messir Bare or Barrado as Meyer terms him
who was slain in the battle. Meyer.

3 The King sent to aid the Liegeois 400. men of arms and 6000. archers.
Meyer.

4 There were slain at this battle 6000. says the old copy, 3000. Meyer.
grounding himself upon certain obscure Annalists, one of Flanders, the other
of Brabant, of purpose to contrary our author as in my epistle is shevved more
at large.

5 This battle was fought upon Alhallovve Eeuen, De la March, but Meyer
says the 27. of October.

How some of the citizens of Liege agreeing to yield their town and others
refusing so to do, the Lord of Hymbercourt found means to enter into it for
the Duke of Burgundy. Chap. 3.
FRom Tongres the Duke marched to the city of Liege, where the people were in
great division, for part of them gave advise to defend the town: saying that
they had force sufficient within it so to do, the chief of the which faction
was a knight called Master Raz of Laitre, but others seeing all the country
about burned and destroyed, would in any wise have peace, were the conditions
never so unreasonable: wherefore when the Duke approached near to the city,
diverse ouertures of peace were made by certain mean persons, as prisoners and
such like. But the principal dealers in the matter were certain of our
hostages, who doing clean contrary to the others above mentioned, and
acknowledging the great favor the Duke had showed them, brought to his camp
with them three hundred of the best citizens in their shirts, bare headed, and
bare legged, who presented the keys of the city to him, and yielded themselves
to his mercy, humbly beseching him only to give them his word, that the town
should neither be fired nor sacked. And at the self same time that they came
in this estate to the Duke, the Kings ambassadors being Monseur de Mouy, and a
secretary called John Preuost were there present, who were come to the Duke
with the same demandes that the Constable had made a few days before. Farther
the very day of the composition, the Duke supposing to enter the city, sent
the Lord of Hymbercourt thither before him because he was well acquainted in
the town, and had been governor thereof under Duke Philip during the years
they lived in peace: notwithstanding entry was denied him for that day,
whereupon he retired and lodged in an abbey without one of the town gates,
being accompanied with fifty men of arms, the whole number amounting to two
hundred soldiers, and I my self being one of them. The Duke of Burgundy sent
him word if the place where he lay were strong not to dislodge, otherwise to
retire back to him, for he could hardly have succored him because all that
country is rock and stone. The said Hymbercourt resolved not to move (for the
place was very strong,) but retained with him five or six of the citizens that
brought the keys to ^he Duke, minding to use their help to good purpose, as
hereafter you shall peceiue. At nine of the clock at night we heard a bell
ring, at the sound whereof the citizens use to assemble, whereupon the said
Hymbercourt, doubted that this bell called company together to issue forth to
assail us, (for he was advertised that Master Raz of Laitre and other of the
citizens would not agree to peace,) and in deed his surmise was true, for that
was their determination, and they were even upon the point to sally. Then said
the Lord of Hymbercourt to us, if we can dalie with them but till midnight, we
are safe, for they will wax weary and desirous of sleep, and then those that
are our enemies in the town will fly when they shall see their enterprise
frustrate: wherefore to bring his purpose to pass, he dispatched two of the
citizens that he had stayed with him, and delivered them certain freindly
articles in writing, meaning only to busy the citizens with farther talk to
win time: for their manner was and yet is to assemble together at the Bishops
palace to debate of their affairs, when the bell above mentioned is rung.
These two Burgesses which had been of our hostages, when they came to the gate
being hardly two bow shot from the abbey where we lodged: found a great number
of the citizens there in arms, some of the which would needs issue forth to
assail us, and some not. Then our two Burgesses told the Mayor of the city
aloude, that they brought certain friendly articles in writing from the Lord
of Hymbercourt the Duke of Burgundies lieutenant in those countries, willing
him to return to the palace to read them, whereunto he agreed, and
incontinent we heard the bell ring again, whereby we understood that they were
busied about our articles. Our two Burgesses returned not, but about an hour
after we heard a greater noise at the gate than before, and a much greater
number came thither in arms, crying and railing upon us from the walls, whereby
the Lord of Hymbercourt perceived our danger to be now rather increased then
diminished: wherefore he dispatched the other four hostages that were yet with
him, by whom he wrote a letter, the contents whereof were that during the time
he was governor of the city, for the Duke of Burgundy, he had used them
gently and lovingly, neither would for any thing consent to their
destruction, especially seeing not long before he had been a commoner of one
of their companies in the town, namely the Goldsmithes company: 1 wherefore
they ought so much the rather to credit his words. To be short he said if they
would obtain peace, and save their country, they most first receive the Duke
into the town according to their promise, and then subscribe to certain
articles written in the scedule he there sent them. After he had well
instructed these four hostages, they went to the gate as did the former, which
they found wide open. Some of the citizens welcomed them with sharp words,
but others were content to hear their message. To be short in the end they
returned again to the palace, immediately whereupon we heard the bell ring
which much comforted us, and by little and little, the noise that was at the gate
ceased. They were together in the palace till two of the clock after midnight,
and in the end concluded to keep the composition they had made, and the next
morning to deliver one of the town gates to the Lord of Hymbercourt: whereupon
incontinent Master Raz of Laitre and his whole faction fled out of the town.

I would not have stood so long upon this point being of so small importance,
had it not been to declare that by such fine devises proceeding of deep
wisdom, great perils, dangers, and losses are often eschewed. The next morning
by day break, a number of the hostages came to the Lord of Hymbercourt,
desiring him to come to the palace where all the people were assembled, there
to assure them by his oath of the two points they doubted of: to wit the firing
and sacking of the town, which being done, they promised to put one of the
gates into his hands: whereof he sent word to the Duke, and then accompanied
them to the palace, where after he had sworn as they demanded, he returned to
the gate. And the citizens commanded the soldiers that were upon it to come
down, and he put into it twelve men of arms, and certain archers, and reared
up the Duke of Burgundies ensign. From thence he went to another walled gate,
into the which he put the bastard of Burgundy, who lay near at hand. Into the
third he put the Marshall of Burgundy, and into the fourth certain gentlemen
that were with himself, and thus were four gates well manned with
Burgundians, and the Dukes ensigns upon them.

Now you shall understand, that at that time the city of Liege was one of the
mightiest and most populous towns in those quarters, except four or five,
besides that, a great multitude of the people of the country round about was
retired thither, so that their loss in the battle was no whit perceived.
Farther they were well furnished of all things, and it was the deep of winter
when we came before the town, the weather was marvelous foul, and the ground
wonderful soft and mirie. We on the other side were in great distress both
of vitailes and money, and our army in a manner broken. Wherefore the Duke had
no purpose to besiege the city, neither could he though he would, and if they
had stayed the composition but two days longer, he was fully resolved to
return home. Wherefore I may well conclude, that the great honor he obtained
in this voyage proceeded of the mere grace of God, contrary to man's
expectation: for he durst hardly have craved at Gods hands the good success he
gave him, which great honor and godly victory in the judgment of all virtuous
and wise men happened to him, for the favor and mercy showed to the hostages
above mentioned. This I write because both Princes and others oftentimes find
fault as it were with themselves, when they have don a pleasure or a good turn
to a man, saying, that they were accursed when they did it, and will beware
hereafter how they pardon so lightly, how they bestow any such benefit, or show
any such favor to any man, which notwithstanding, are things incident to their
office. Wherefore in mine opinion this is evil spoken, and proceeds of a
base and abject mind: for a Prince or any other man that never was deceived,
can be but a beast, because he understands not the difference between good
and evil. Besides that, all men are not of one disposition, and it is no
reason for the naughtines of one or two to cease from doing good to a great
number, when time and occasion serves. Notwithstanding I wish Princes to make
good choice of those they benefit, for all men deserve not alike. But me think
it almost impossible for a wise man to be unthankful, or unmindful of a good
turn, and if Princes bestow upon fools, they are worse than mad, for they
shall perceive in the end that a fools acquaintance can stand them in no
steed. Farther in mine opinion, this is the greatest point of wisdom in a
Prince to have near about him wise and virtuous men: for himself shall be
judged to be of the nature and disposition of those that are most familiar with
him. Wherefore to conclude this discourse, me think we ought never to be
weary of well doing: for one man alone, yea the meanest of those we have
pleasured, may happily so requite our friendship, that he shall recompense the
ingratitude of a multitude, as appeered by these hostages, the greatest part
whereof, were ingrate and unthankful, but some of them acknowledged and
requited the benefit received: for by the only means of five or six of them,
this enterprise was atchiued, which turned so greatly to the Duke of Burgundies
honor and profit.

The Notes.
1 There were in this city 32. companies, without whom nothing was concluded:
the principal was the Goldsmithes company, but the most ancient the
Blacksmithes. Guicci.

How the Duke of Burgundy made his entry into the town of Liege, and how the
citizens of Gaunt where he had been evil entreated before, humbled themselves
unto him. Chap. 4.
THe next day after the gates were yielded, the Duke entered the town in great
triumph 1, for a breach was made in the wall for his entry twenty fathoms
long, and the town ditch all the length of the breach filled up even with the
ground: with him entered on foot two thousand men of arms armed at all pieces,
and two thousand archers, yet notwithstanding the force in his camp was
marvelous great. The Duke himself entered on horseback, accompanied with all
his household servants, and the noblest men in his army, clad and apparelled
the most sumptuously that might be: and in this estate rode he through the
town, and lighted at the great Church. To be short, he abode there certain
days, and put to death five or six more of his hostages that had broken
promise, and with them the town messenger whom he hated extremely: he
established certain new laws and customs, and commanded a great sum of
money to be levied in the city, which he said was forfeited to him for the
treaties and compositions broken the years before. Farther, he carried away all
their artillery and armor, and rased all their gates and walls.

This done he returned into his own countries where he was honorably and
dutifully received especially of the citizens of Gaunt, who before his voyage
to Liege had after a sort rebelled against him with certain other towns, but
now they received him as a conqueror, with so great lowlines and humility,
that certain of the best citizens came on foot to him as far as Bruxels,
bringing with them all the banners of their town, which they did for this
cause: Immediately after his fathers death he chose the city of Gaunt for the
first town he would make his entry into: for supposing that to be the town
where he was best beloved, and therefore looking for all duty and obedience at
their hands: he hoped also by that means to find the like in all the other
towns of his dominions, assuring himself that they would all follow the
example of this, which opinion proved true as touching this latter point. But
you shall understand that the next day after his entry, they came in arms
upon the market place, bringing with them a Saint called Saint Lieuin, with
whose shrine they beat down a little house called La Cueillette: where a
custom of corn was received for payment of certain dets the town ought to
Duke Philip by the treaty of peace called the treaty of Gaures 2, for two
years they had been in wars with him. To be short, they said this Saint would
pass through this house without stouping, and in a moment beat down the
house, which disorder the Duke seeing, went himself to the market place: a
great number of noble men in arms offering to wait upon him as he passed
through the streets, which he refused, commanding them to stay before the
towne-house, and attend him there. Notwithstanding, by little and little the
throng of people forced them at length into the market place also, whither when
the Duke came, he went up into a house to speak to these rebels, commanding
them to take up the shrine and bear it into the church, which some obediently
did, but others caused it to be laid down again. Then they presented
supplications to him against certain of the town, touching paiments of money,
wherein he promised to do justice. But when he saw they would not depart, he
returned to his lodging, and they abode in arms upon the market place the
space of eight days. The next morning they brought articles to him, demanding
the restitution of all their privileges that Duke Philip had taken from them
by the treaty of Gaures, of this one especially, that every company in the
town (being threescore and twelve in all) might have a banner according to
their ancient custom. The Duke seeing the danger he stood in, granted them all
their demands, and all such privileges as they required, which word was no
sooner passed him, but they reared up all their banners upon the market place,
being all ready made, whereby appeered that they would have had them perforce,
if he had not granted them. His opinion at his first entry into Gaunt proved
true, that all the other towns would follow their example: for indeed diverse
rebelled as the town of Gaunt did, slew his officers, and committed diverse
other disorders. But if he had believed his fathers proverb, that the citizens
of Gaunt love their Princes son well, but their Prince never, he had not been
deceived, and to say the truth, next to the citizens' of Liege these of Gaunt
are the most inconstant in the world. Notwithstanding, one good property they
have among so many bad, that they never lay hands upon their Princes person 3,
besides that, the best Burgesses of the town are very honest men, and much
offended with the peoples insolency.

The Duke was forced to digest and wink at all these rebellions, fearing to
enter into a dooble war at one time with his own subjects, and the Liegeois.
Notwithstanding his meaning was if he sped well in his voyage to Liege, to
teach them their duty at his return, as also it happened, for as I have already
made mention, they brought to him on foot to Bruxels, all their banners,
privileges, and writings, as well those they made him grant at his departure
from Gaunt as others, all the which in a great assembly held in the hall of
Bruxels, in the presence of diverse ambassadors they presented to him, to do
with them at his pleasure. Than the Haralts of arms by his commandment, took
the said banners from the staves whereto they were fastened, and carried them to
Bullen, a haven town eight leagues from Calis, where the other banners yet
remained that D. Philip his father took from them, when the wars ended,
wherein he vanquished and subdued them. Farther the Duke Chauncellor took all
their privileges, and rent one of them concerning the election of their
Senate: for in all the other towns of Flaunders, the Prince every year
choseth the Senate, and receives their accounts, but by this privilege he
might chose but four in Gaunt, and the rest being two and twenty they
themselves chose: when the Senators of the towns are friends and faithful
subjects to their Prince, he lives that year in peace, and they willingly
grant him all his demands: but if they be otherwise, commonly some rebellion
happens. Lastly the citizens of Gaunt paid the Duke thirty thousand
gildons and six thousand to his principal servants, and banished certain out
of their town, but all their other privileges were restored them, the rest of
the towns bought also their peace with money, for they had attempted no great
matter against the Duke.

By this example a man may perceive how great good ensues victory in a
battle and how many inconveniences the overthrow. Wherefore a Prince ought to
beware how he hazard his estate upon a day unless necessity force him
thereunto: and if that happen, then must he bethink him self before the hour
of all doubts and dangers that may be imagined. For those that fear a matter
commonly provide well for it, and have oftener good success than they that
proceed with a careless contempt: unless God be fully resolved to strike the
stroke, against whom man's wisdom cannot prevail. Which point is sufficiently
proved by the example of these Liegeois above mentioned, who had been
excommunicated the space of five years for their variance with their Bishop,
whereof notwithstanding they made no account, but continued still in their
folly and naughtines, moved thereunto only through wealth and pride.
Wherefore King Lewis was wont to say, that when pride rides before, shame and
damage follow after, (a very wise saying in mine opinion) and sure for his
part he was free from that vice.

The Notes.
1 The Duke entered into Liege the 11. of November 1467. Meyer.

2 The French corrector through unskillfulness had corrupted this place, and
sometime calls it La paix de Gand, and sometime nothing, but I have here
restored it out of Meyer and Annal. Burgund. This peace was concluded 3.
Calend. Augusti 1453. whereof read Annal. Burgund. lib, 3. page 829. Meyer lib.
16. fol. 314. and others.

3 Yet the citizens of Gaunt anno. 1338. constrained Lodouicus Niuernensis
Earl of Flanders to fly for the safety of his life into a castle in Gaunt
called Petra Comitis where they also besieged him. Again anno 1346. they
constrained Lodouicus Maleanus perforce to go with them to Bergen, and against
his will to give his faith to Isabell daughter to King Edward the third: they
set a guard also about his person, but he escaped and fled into France. Meyer.

How the King seeing what had happened to the Liegeois, made war in Britain
upon the Duke of Burgundies confederates, and how they two met and communed
together at Peronne. Chap. 5.
THese troubles being thus ended, the Duke went to Gaunt where he was received
with great pomp and triumph, for he entered in arms, and the citizens made a
posterne into the fields, by the which he putmen in and out at his pleasure:
many messengers ran between him and the King, and likewise between the Duke
of Britain and him, and thus passed this winter. The King traueilled
continually with the Duke of Burgundy to suffer him to invade Britain at his
pleasure, making him diverse offers in consideration thereof: whereunto the Duke
would not condescend, for the which cause partly, and partly for the overthrow
given to the Liegeois his confederates, the Kings displeasure was so kindled
that longer he could not forbear, but in the very beginning of summer entered
into Britain, at the least his forces for him, and took two small castles,
the one called Chantosse, the other Anseny, whereof the Duke of Burgundy was
incontinent advertised, and earnestly pressed by the Dukes of Normandy and
Britain with all speed to levy his army for their aid, whereupon he wrote
to the King, humbly beseeching him to relinquish his enterprise, seeing these
two Dukes were comprehended in the truce as his confederates, but receiving
such answer as liked him not, he encamped with great force near to Peronne.
The Kings army was still in Britain, but the Court lay at Compiegne, from
whence the King sent Cardinal Balue to the Duke within three days after his
arrival at Peronne, who stayed not long with him, but made certain ouertures
of peace, aduertising him also that they in Britain could make their
composition welll enough without him, for the Kings drift was to sever them.
The Cardinal was honorably received, well feasted, and soon dispatched, and
returned with this answer, that the Duke was not come forth into the field to
endammage the King in any respect, but only to succor his confederates: so
the messages that passed between them were very courteous on both sides.

Immediately after the Cardinals departure a heralt called Bretaigne arrived at
the Duke of Burgundies camp with letters from the Dukes of Normandy and
Britain, wherein they advertised him that they had made peace with the King, and
renounced all leagues and confederacies, and namely their league with him, and
farther that the Duke of Normandy had surrendered Normandy (lately given him
for his partage) to the King, and should receive in recompense thereof, and of
all other partages the yearly revenues of three score thousand franks, which
conditions (though never so unreasonable) necessity forced the Lord Charles of
France to accept. The Duke of Burgundy was woonderfully abashed at these
news: for he had put himself into the field only to aid the said Dukes. And
sure the heralt was in great danger, for because he passed by the Court, the
Duke suspected that the King had forged these letters, notwithstanding he
received immediately after, the like advertisement from other places. The King
thought now his enterprise half won, and that he should easily persuade the
Duke of Burgundy to forsake these two Dukes, as they had him: whereupon secret
messengers ran between them, and the King gave the Duke six score thousand
crowns, whereof he paid the one half presently the better to content the said
Duke, who had consumed great sums in leuying this army. Farther, the Duke
sent to the King a groom of his chamber very near about him, named John
Vobrisset, whereupon the King conceived great hope of his enterprise, and
seemed desirous to commune with the Duke in person, trusting to obtain of him
all that he required, both because of the two foresaid Dukes ingratitude
toward him, and also because of the great sum of money he had given him.
Wherefore he advertised the Duke of certain matters by the said Vobrisset, and
sent back with him Cardinal Balue and Master Tanneguy du Chastell governor of
Roussillon, who gave the Duke to understand by their words, that the King
desired greatly that they two might commune together in person.

They found the Duke at Peronne who seemed to have no great devotion to this
meeting, because the Liegeois made show as though they would rebel anew, being
solicited thereunto by two ambassadors sent thither by the King for that
purpose before the truce was made which he and the Duke concluded, for certain
days between them and their confederates. But Cardinal Balue and the other
ambassadors put this doubt out of his head, alleging that the Liegeois durst
attempt no such thing, considering he had vanquished them, and rased but their
walls the year before: and farther, if they had any such desire, yet when they
should see this amity between him and the King, they would soon alter their
minds. Thus in the end it was concluded that the King should come to Peronne
seeing it pleased him so to do, and the Duke sent him a letter written with his
own hand, containing sufficient surety to come and go at his pleasure. And
thus departed the ambassadors, and returned to the King being then at Noyon.
But the Duke minding to make all sure in the country of Liege, sent thither
their Bishop for whose quarrel all the wars above mentioned first began, and
in his company the Lord of Hymbercourt (the Dukes lieutenant in those parts)
with certain bands of men.

You have heard how it was concluded that the King should come to Peronne,
according to the which determination thither he came without his guard, for his
pleasure was wholly to put himself under the guard and surety of the Duke, and
that Monseur de Cords (who then served the Duke) should convey him thither
with the said Dukes archers which was done accordingly. The Kings train was
very small, notwithstanding he came accompanied with diverse noble personages,
namely, the Duke of Bourbon, the Cardinal his brother, and the Earl of Saint
Paul Constable of France, who had not busied himself about this meeting but
much misliked it. For he was now waxed proud and high minded, and behaved not
himself to the Duke of Burgundy with such lowlines and humility as he was
accustomed: wherefore there was no good will between them twain. Thither came
also Cardinal Balue the governor of Roussillon, and diverse others. And when
the King drew near to Peronne, the Duke with a goodly train issued forth to
receive him, and brought him into the town, and lodged him in a goodly house
near to the castle being the receivers, for the castle was a little old
thing naught worth.

War between two great Princes is easily begun but hardly ended, because of
the number of accidents depending thereupon: for each party dispatcheth
messengers to and fro to hurt his enemy, which suddenly cannot be stayed nor
revoked, as appeered by these two Princes, who concluded this meeting upon a
sudden not aduertising their servants thereof, who were far from them executing
the charge their Masters had given them. For you shall understand that the Duke
had sent for his army into Burgundy, being furnished at that time with a
number of gentlemen, namely the Lord of Bresse of the house of Sauoy, and his
two brethren the Bishop of Geneua, and the Earl of Remont: for the Sauoyans
and Burgundians have ever borne great love one to another. In this army were
also certain Almaines borderers upon Sauoy and the county of Burgundy. Now you
shall understand that the King in times past had held the Lord of Bresse in
prison, because of two Knights he commanded to be slain in Sauoy, wherefore
there was no good will between them two. In this army were also the Lord of
Vrfe, Master of the horse afterward to King Charles, Master Poncet of Riuiere,
and the Lord of Lau, whom the King after special good liking of him had also
held long in prison, but he escaped and fled into Burgundy. All this company
above mentioned arrived near to Peronne, even at the very instant that the
King came thither, and the Lord of Bresse with the three above mentioned, every
one of them wearing the Saint Andrews cross entered the town, supposing they
had come time enough to accompany the Duke when he should go to receive the
King, but because they came too late they went straight to the Dukes chamber to
do their duty to him, where the Lord of Bresse humbly besought him that the
three above named, notwithstanding the Kings coming, might be there under his
safeguard and protection, as he had promised them in Burgundy at their first
arrival into his dominions, adding that they were ready to serve him against
all men none excepted: which request the Duke granted with his own mouth, and
for their good will thanked them. The rest of this army (led by the Marshal of
Burgundy) lodged without the town as they were appointed. The said Marshall
hated the King no less than the others above named, because of Pinall a town
in Lorraine which the King had once given him, and afterward taken from him to
bestow upon John Duke of Calabria so often mentioned in this history. The King
being forthwith advertised of these noble men's arrival, and the apparel they
ware 1 fell suddenly into great fear, and sent to the Duke desiring him that
he might lodge in the castle, because all these above named were his enemies.
The Duke reioiced to see him in such fear, and caused his lodging to be made
there, willing him to be of good cheer and doubt nothing.

The Notes.
1 He means by apparel the Saint Andrews cross.

A discourse wherein is declared how greatly learning especially in histories
profits Princes and noble men. Chap. 6.
IT is greatfolly for one Prince to put him self under the power of another,
especially when they are in war together, as those Princes well know that have
studied histories in their youth, wherein they find diverse examples of great
falsehood and treason used in times past at such enteruiewes and of diverse that
have stayed as prisoners, and slain those that have come to them under their
surety 1. I say not that all have used so to do, but the example of one is
sufficient to teach a number wit, how to look to themselves. I my self for my
part have seen some experience in the world, having been by the space of
eighteen years and better, employed continually in Princes services, and
privy all that while to the waightiest and secretest affairs that have passed
in this realm, or the countries bordering upon it, and sure in mine opinion
the best way to learn wisdom is to read ancient histories, which will teach
us by example of our auncesters, wisely to behave our selves, safely to defend
our selves, and advisedly to attempt any enteprise. For our life is so short
that experience cannot sufficiently instruct us, considerlng withal that our
years are abridged, and neither our lives so long, nor our bodies so strong, as
were our ancesters in ages past: which way as we are weakened, so is our faith
also each to other much diminished 2, in such sort, that I know not how one man
may assure himself of another, especially great Princes, who are commonly
inclined to all wilfulnes, without any regard of reason, and (which is woorst
of all) have for the most part such men about them, as study only to flatter
them, and sooth them in all their doings be they good or bad, and if some one
endeavor himself to redress this inconvenience, all the rest will straight be
upon his top.

Farther I must needs blame ignorant and unlearned Princes in this respect
also, they have all commonly about them great clerks and lawyers, as it is
requisite they should if they be good, but if they be otherwise, they are the
dangerousest people in the world to be about a Prince, for they have ever a law
or an history at their fingers ends, which be it never so good they writhe and
wrest in such sort, that they will make black white, and white black. But
those Princes that be wise and have read as well as they, will not suffer
themselves to be abused by them, neither dare they be so hardy as to report
untruths to such Princes. Farther think you that God has established the
office of a King or Prince, to be executed by such beasts as glory in saying: I
am no scholar, I trust my Council well enough, and refer all matters to them,
and so without farther answer depart to their sports and pastimes? No, no, if
they had been well trained up in their youth, they would use other language,
and seek to be esteemed for their own virtues and woorthines. I say not that
all Princes are served by evil conditioned persons, but sure the most part of
those that I have seen have not always had their courts unfurnished of such,
although some I confess I have known that in time of necessity could make
choice of their men, and use the service of the best and wisest. Wherein sure
the King our master far passed all the Princes of his time, for never Prince
advanced so highly, nor made so great account of wise and worthy men as he
did. He was himself reasonably well learned 3, he was very inquisitiue and
desirous to understand of all matters, and had an excellent wit, which passes
all learning attained to by study: for as reading profits two manner of
ways, the one by acquainting us with ages past, and the other by teaching us
more in a book in three months, than twenty men living successively can
learn by experience: so if a man lack wit to put that which he reads in
practice, his reading serves to no purpose. Wherefore to end this discourse, me
think the greatest plague that God can lay upon a realm, is to give them an
unwise Prince, the root and fountain of all mischief: for first division and
civil wars arise thereof among his subjects, because he gives his authority
to others, which especially above all things he ought to reserve to himself.
After division ensues famine and mortality, and all other evils that accompany
the wars, wherefore hereby we may consider how much a Princes subjects ought
to lament, when they see his children wantonly brought up and governed by evil
conditioned persons.

The Notes.
1 Of treasons in treaty we have numbers of examples. First of Iugurtha taken
by his father in law Boccus, and delivered to the Romans. Sertorius slain at
a banquet by Perpenna. In England we have the treason of Hengist to Vortiger.
In Scotland we read of William Earl of Douglasse slain by James King of
Scots in treaty. In Germany Albert Earl of Franconia betrayed in treaty by
Ottho Bishop of Mentz. John of Angieu, slain by Albertus Bauarus Earl of
Henault and Flanders, notwithstanding his safe conduct. In France John Duke of
Burgundy slain by Charles the 7. William Duke of Normandy by Arnulph Earl
of Flanders. Lewis King of France taken prisoner by the Normans and Danes at
Roan. John Duke of Britain taken at a banquet and imprisoned by Margaret
Countisse of Pontibera. Guido Earl of Flanders twice taken prisoner under
safeconduct by Philip le Bell King of France. Charles the simple slain by the
Earl of Vermandoys. What should I speak of the tresons of Ferrande and
Alfonse Kings of Naples, or of Christiern King of Denmark, with numbers of
others recorded in histories as our author here very truly reports.

2 Others be of a contrary opinion, that our life is as long as in David's time
appears by the 90. Psalm, where he shows the usual age of man in his time
to have been 70. and sometime 80. years which men reche to at this day also,
and if man's life be as long now as then, it is a good consequent that his body
is as strong, as is to be proved by many reasons too long to rehearse. Now
that our faith is as good as theirs appears also by the ancient histories,
for if this be a true saying, Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. And the
Princes in times past were so evil as none could be worse, (as who so list to
read without partiality shall be forced to confess.) I see no reason that the
world should be worse now then in times past, although it seem so to many,
because we see the worst of our own age, yea and feel too many times, but
commonly the histories deliver to us but the best of times past, and bury the
worst, and though they did, yet the evil seen with our eye is more lively
imprinted in mind, then the evil we conceive by our ear, which is the cause
men ever think better of the times past, then the present estate.

3 Imaruell if King Lewis were learned, he would have his son to learn only
this lesson, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare.

How and for what cause the King was stayed and held prisoner in the castle of
Peronne by the Duke of Burgundies commandment. Chap. 7.
YOu have heard how the King and this army of Burgundy arrived at Peronne both
in one istant, for the Duke could not countermand them in time, because they
were well forward upon the way when the Kings coming was first communed of.
Their arrival troubled the feast, because of diverse doubts that sprang
thereof. Notwithstanding these two Princes appointed certain of their servants
to negotiate together about their affairs, in most loving and freindly sort.
But after three or four days communication, these strange news came from
Liege which I will now rehearse. The K. coming to Peronne had clean forgotten
the two ambassadors sent to Liege to solicit them to rebel against the Duke,
who so diligently executed their charge, that before the Kings arrival at
Peronne, the Liegeois had levied great force and were gone to surprise the
town of Tongres, where the Bishop of Liege and the Lord of Hymbercourt lodged
accompanied with two thousand men and better: and the said Bishop and
Hymbercourt they took with certain other of the Bishops familiar friends, but
few they slew, neither was the number of the prisoners great: the rest fled as
men discomfited, leaving bag and bagage behind them. This done the Liegeois
returned toward their city not far distant from Tongres: and upon the way
thitherward the Lord of Hymbercourt compounded for his ransom with a knight
called Master William de Ville, named by the French Le Sauuage, who fearing
lest this furious people should kill him, suffered him to depart upon his word:
which notwithstanding he never challenged, for soon after himself was slain:
the people reioiced much for the taking of their Bishop. Farther you shall
understand that they hated extremely certain chanons of the Church taken
prisoners that day: of whom for the first repast they slew five or six, one of
the which was named Master Robert the Bishops special friend, whom I my self
have often seen armed at all pieces waiting upon his Master, for such is the
manner of the Alemaigne Prelates. 1 The said Master Robert they slew in the
Bishops presence, and hewed him into a number of small gobbets which they threw
one at another in dirision. To be short, before their return to Liege which
was but eight leagues from Tongres, they slew sixteen chanons and others all in
manner the Bishops servants. This done, they received advertisement that the
treaty between the King and the Duke was already begun, wherefore they
dismissed certain Burgundians supposing to excuse their fault, by seeming to
have attempted nothing against the Duke, but only against their Bishop, whom
they led prisoner into the city. Those that escaped put all the country in an
uproar as they went, by means whereof this news came soon to the Duke: some
said all were slain, others the contrary, for such aduertisements are never
reported after one sort. At the length certain arrived that saw these chanons
slain, who supposing the Bishop and Hymbercourt to be of the number, auowed
constantly that all were murdered, and farther, that they saw the Kings
ambassadors in the company, whom also they named. All this was told the Duke,
who forthwith believed it, and fell into an extreme fury, saying that the
King was come thither to abuse him, and gave commandment to shut the gates of
the castle and the town, spreading a fond rumor that he did it, because of a
budget with jewels and money that was lost. The King seeing himself shut into
this little castle, and a number of archers before the gate: stood in great
doubt of his person, the rather because he lodged hard by a great tower, in the
which an Earl of Vermandois had in times past caused a King of France one of
his predecessors to be slain 2. I was yet in service with the Duke, and one of
his privy chamber, into the which I entered at my pleasure, according to the
use of this house of Burgundy. The Duke when the town gates were shut,
commanded all men to void his chamber, and said to two or three of us that
tarried with him, that notwithstanding he for his part had never any taste in
this meeting, but agreed to it only to content the King: yet the King on the
contrary side was come thither purposely to abuse him. Then rehearsed he all
these news of Liege, how the King had ordered the matter by his ambassadors
and caused all his men to be slain: and such a rage he was in against the
King, and so threatened him, that I think verily if those to whom he spoke had
pressed forward the matter, and counseled him to work the King some
mischief, he would have done it, at the least have imprisoned him in the great
tower above mentioned. None were present when these words passed the Duke, but
my self and two grooms of his chamber, one of the which was named Charles of
Visin borne at Dyion, an honest gentleman and in good credit with his master.
We mitigated this matter, and sought to appease the Duke as much as in us lay,
notwithstanding soon after he used also the like speech to others, by means
whereof it was blown all over the town, and came at length into the Kings
chamber, who was in marvelous fear, as universally all men were, because of
the great evils they saw like to ensue a quarrel begun between two so great
Princes, who sure were both blame worthy, for that they advertised not their
servants of this meeting, who were far from them executing their commandments,
whereby some great inconvenience was sure to ensue.

The Notes.
1 These were chanons of S. Lambert in Liege, the which were not forced to be
priests, but might come forth and marry if they had not soong mass. Guicci.

2 This Earl of Vermandois was named Hebart or Herbau, and the King of France
Charles le Simple, whom this Hebart slew in the tower here mentioned anno 926.
or after Annal. Burgund. 921. because the King had slain in battle Robert
Duke of Aquitaine, or after some of Aniou, who had married this Hebarts sister.
But note here poenam talionis upon the King, for as he was stayed here
notwithstanding the Dukes safe conduct: so had he himself taken and imprisoned
by the space of two years Philip Lord of Bresse, having called him to him
under his safe conduct. Meyer. Of the Lord of Bresses imprisonment our author
makes mention in the fifth chapter of this book.

A discourse wherein is showed, that an enteruiew between two great Princes
for treaty of their affairs, hurts more than profits. Chap. 8.
IT is great folly for two Princes being in manner of equal force and estate
to meet together, unless it be in their youth when their minds are wholly set
upon pleasures and pastimes, but after they are come to man's estate, and grown
desirous to encroch each upon other, such enteruiewes do but increase their
hatred and evil will, though happily their persons might be there in safety,
which notwithstanding I hold almost for a thing impossible. Wherefore it is
better to pacify all controversies by wise and discreet men, as before I have
said: for proof whereof I will rehearse certain examples that have happened in
my time, some of the which I my self have seen, and of the rest have been
credibly informed.

A few years after King Lewis his coronation before the war called the WEAL
PVBLIQVE began, a sollemne meeting was appointed between him and the King of
Castile, 1 which are the two nearest confederated Princes in Christendom, for
their league is between King and King, Realm and Realm, and man and man of
their subjects, which also they are both bound under great curses to keep and
observe inviolable. To this meeting came Henry King of Castile with a goodly
train to Fontarabia, and the King our Master to Saint John de Luz four
leagues distant, both of them being upon the frontires of their dominions. I
was not present my self at this meeting, but I have heard both the King and
the Lord of Lau make report thereof, and have been informed of it also by
certain Lords of Castille there present with the King their Master, who came
to this enterview accompanied with the Lord great Master of Saint James, and
the Archbishop of Tolledo which two bare all the swaie in Castile at that time,
the Earl of Lodesme the King of Castils minion was there also in great
bravery, and all the said Kings guard, being to the number of three hundred
horse, all Moors of Granado and some of them Negros. But K. Henry himself was
a man of so small understanding, that he gave away all his inheritance, at the
least suffered every man that would to spoil him of it: our King was also
accompanied with a goodly train, as you know his use was, but his guard
especially was brave and in very good order. To this meeting came in like
manner the Queen of Arragon about a controversy between her and the King of
Castile, for Estell and certain other places in Navarre: whereof the King was
made arbitrator. But now for proof that such enterviews between great Princes
are not meet nor convenient, you shall understand that these two Kings had
never been at variance, there was no quarrel between them, neither saw they
one another past once or twice upon a river side that parts both their
realms, 2 hard by a little castle called Heurtebise, where the King of Castile
passed to the hither side of the river. At their first meeting they had no
great liking one of another, especially our King, who perceived the King of
Castille to be but a simple man doing nothing of himself, but wholly governed
by the great Master of Saint James and the Archbishop of Tolledo above
mentioned. Wherefore he made no account of their Master but sought their
freindship, whereupon they came to him to Saint John de Luz where he entered
into amity with them, and had great intelligence by their means. The greatest
part of both these Princes trains lay at Bayonne, and at the very first
meeting fell together by the ears, notwitstanding their league: and no
marvel. For their manners and languages differed. Afterward the Earl of
Lodesme came also to visit the King, and passed the river in a boat, the
sail whereof was cloth of gold. Farther he ware a pair of buskins embrodred
thick with stone, for he was a Prince of great wealth and reuenews in
Castille, and created since the Duke of Albourg. In the end these two
confederate nations began to scoff and jest each at other, the King of Castile
was deformed, and the French misliked his apparel, wherefore they derided him.
Our King ware his apparel very short, and marvelous uncomely, and was clad
sometime in very course cloth, besides that, he ware an old hat, differing from
all the rest of his company, and an image of lead upon it, whereat the
Castilians iested, saying that this proceeded of misery. Thus ended this
enterview with such scoffs and taunts, that afterward these two Princes
neuerloued together. Farther great dissension arose among the King of Castiles
servants, which continued till his death and long after, in such sort that I
have seen him the poorest Prince that ever reigned, and abandoned of all his
servants and subjects. The Queen of Arragon departed also discontented, for
the King pronounced sentence for the King of Castile. Wherefore both the King of
Arragon her husband and she hated him ever after. And notwithstanding that they
used his help a while in their necessity against the town of Barcelonne, yet
endured not their friendship, but wars arose between them, which continued
above sixteen years, and the controversy remains yet undecided. Now to
proceed to other examples.

Duke Charles of Burgundy since the time above mentioned, by his own great
suit and solicitation, met with the Emperor Frederick now reigning, at Treues
3, where the Duke made great preparation to show his pomp and magnificency.
The Emperor and he treated there of many matters, and among the rest, of their
childrens marriage, which was afterward accomplished. But when they had been
together a certain space, the Emperor to the Dukes great reproach and dishonor,
departed without leave taking, wherefore they never loved after, neither
themselves nor their subjects. The Almains disdained the Dukes pomp and lofty
manner of speech, saying that it proceeded of pride, the Burgundians on the
contrary side despised the Emperors small train, and simple attire. To be
short, this iar grew so great that the wars of Nuz sprang thereof.

I was also at Saint Paul in Artois when the Duke of Burgundy and King Edward
of England met there 4. The Duke had married his sister, they were companions of
one order, and abode there together two days. The Kings servants were divided
into two factions, and both the parties complained to the Duke, who enclining
more to the one than the other, increased their hatred, and notwithstanding
that, he aided the King for the recovery of his realm, (out of the which he
was chased by the Earl of Warwick) and furnished him both of men money, and
ships: yet after this meeting, they never loved together, neither could afford
each other a good word.

I was likewise at Bruxels when the Palszgraue of the Rheine came thither to
the Duke of Burgundy, where he was honorably received, sumptuously feasted, and
lodged in a chamber richly furnished. The Dukes men reported the Almains to be
slouens, and void of ciuility, alleging that they threw their mirie boots
upon their rich and stately beds, wherefore they made less account of them,
then before they knew them. The Almains on the contrary side like envious
persons misliked this great pomp. To conclude, after this they never loved
together, neither sought to pleasure one another.

I saw also the meeting of the Duke of Burgundy, and D. Sigismunde of Austrich
5, who sold unto the said Duke the County of Ferret, bordering upon the County
of Burgundy for a hundred thousand gildons, not being able to defend it against
the Switzers. These two Princes liked not greatly one another. Afterward also
Duke Sigismunde made peace with the Switzers, and took again the said County
of Ferret without paying back the money, whereof ensued infinite harms to the
Duke of Burgundy. At the self same time also came the Earl of Warwick to the
Duke, who after their meeting were mortal enemies each to other.

I was also present at the enteruiewe between the King our master, and King
Edward of England at Picquigny 6, near to Amiens, whereof I will make mention
hereafter more at large. All that they did there was but mere dissimulation,
for they performed no whit of that they promised. And notwithstanding, that
they were never after in war together (because the sea severed them) yet
perfect friendship was there none between them. Wherefore to conclude this
discourse, me think that two great Princes minding to continue in amity, ought
never to meet together. The occasions of troubles that arise at such
assemblies are these, their servants can not refrain from talking of matters
past, and words will easily be taken in evil part. Secondarily, it is
impossible but that the train of the one should be in better order then the
other, where of scoffs arise, which they that are scoffed stomach. Thirdly,
if they be two nations, their language and apparel differ, and that that
pleases the one displeases the other. Last of all, it commonly happens that
the personage of the one Prince is comlier and better to be liked than the
other, wherefore he is praised, and reioiceth and glories to hear his own
commendation, which cannot be without the dispraise of the other. And
notwithstanding that three or four days peradventure after the assembly
ended, these matters be communed of closely and covertly in men's ears: yet by
use they fall in time in open talk at dinners and suppers, and so are reported
to both the parties, for few things in this world can be concealed, especially
tales and reports. Thus you have heard the reasons and examples that I my self
have seen touching this point.

The Notes.
1 The meeting of the King and the King of Castile was anno 1463.

2 The river where the two Kings met was named Audaye.

3 The meeting between the Emperor and the Duke was says Munster anno 1469.
Berlandus says anno 1472. Meyer 1473. the 28. of September.

4 What year the meeting of King Edward and the Duke was, appears
afterward lib. 3. cap. 6.

5 Ferret was engaged to the Duke about midsommer anno 1469. for seventy
thousand crowns. Annal. Burgund. but Meyer says anno 1467. for fifty
thousand gildons, and other say for 80. thousand gildons.

6 When this meeting was at Picquigny look lib. 4. cap. 10.

How the King to deliver himself out of the castle of Peronne, renounced his
league with the Liegeois. Chap. 9.
NOw to return after my long discourse, to the King who was stayed at Peronne,
as you have heard, the gates remained shut with watch and ward before them two
or three days, all the which time the Duke saw not the King, neither entered
any French man into the castle but by the wicket, and but sew after that sort,
notwithstanding none of the Kings servants were forbidden to repair to him,
but few or none of the Dukes went to commune with him, neither yet into his
chamber, especially of those that were of any credit with the Duke. The first
day all men were in great fear, and muttered up and down the town: the
second the Duke was somewhat pacified, and sat in counsel almost the whole
day, and part also of the night. The King caused all those to be labored that
he thought could aid him in this extremity, making them large offers and
promises, and commanded also fifteen thousand crowns to be divided among the
Dukes servants, but he to whom the charge was committed acquit himself not
faithfully thereof: for part of the money he retained to his own use, as the
King afterward understood. The King fearing especially those above named, that
came with this army of Burgundy, who in times past had been his own
servants, but were now his brothers the Duke of Normandies as they said. In
this council above mentioned this matter was diversely debated, some were of
opinion that the safe conduct given the King should not be broken, seeing he
offered to swear the treaty as it was articled in writing: others gave
counsel rudely to imprison him without farther ceremony, and others to send
for his brother the Duke of Normandy, and to conclude a peace for the
advantage of all the Princes of France. They that gave this advise thought if
their opinion took place, that the King should be restrained of his liberty
for ever, and held continually under guard, because a great Prince being in the
hands of his enemy, and used after such sort, never or very hardly recouereth
his liberty for fear of revenge. This last opinion failed not much to take
effect: for the matter was so far forward that I saw a man booted, and ready
to depart with a packet of letters to the Duke of Normandy being then in
Britain, and stayed only for the Duke of Burgundies letter, notwithstanding
all this was dashed again. The King caused certain ouertures to be made,
offering to leave there in hostage the Duke of Bourbon and the Cardinal his
brother, and the Constable, with diverse others, under this condition, that the
peace being concluded he might depart to Compiegne, promising incontinent
either to cause the Liegeois to repair the harms done, or to declare himself
their enemy. They whom the King named for hostages outwardly made earnest
offer of themselves, I know not whether they meant as they said, and I doubt me
they did not: for I verily believe if the King had left them there, they should
never have returned into France.

All this night being the third after the news brought, the Duke never
unclothed him, but lay down twice or thrice upon his bed, and then rose and
walked: for such was his manner when he was troubled. I lay that night my self
in his chamber, and communed with him diverse times. In the morning he was
farther out of patience than ever before, using terrible menaces, and being
ready to execute some great matter: notwithstanding in the end he was pacified,
and resolved to hold himself contented, if the King would swear the treaty,
and go with him to Liege to help to revenge the injuries the Liegeois had done
him, and the Bishop of Liege his cosen, with the which message suddenly he
departed into the Kings chamber, whereof the King had a privy watch word by a
friend 1, who advertised him that nothing was to be feared if he agreed to
these two points, otherwise that he should put himself in so great danger,
that none could be greater. When the Duke came to the Kings presence, his voice
trembled, and even there he was like to fall into a new rage, so much was he
troubled. His behauior toward the King was humble and lowly, but his
countenance furious, and his language sharp, for he asked him in few words
wherher he would observe the treaty concluded, and also swear it: Whereunto
the King answered that he would. For you shall understand that the said treaty
as touching the Duke of Burgundy himself was altered in no point otherwise than
it was concluded before Paris, and as touching the Duke of Normandies partage,
it was much amended for the King. For it was agreed that in stead of Normandy
he should have Champaine and Brie, and certain other places there about, for
his partage. Then the Duke asked him again, whether he would go with him to
Liege to help him to revenge the treason the Liegeois had wrought by his
means, and by his coming thither, putting him also in mind of the near
kindred that was between the said King and the Bishop of Liege, being of the
house of Bourbon, whereunto the King answered, that after he had sworn the
treaty (which was the thing he most desired) he would accompany him to Liege,
and lead thither with him, as small or as great force as the Duke should think
good: at which words the D. much reioiced, and incontinent the treaty of peace
was brought, and the self same cross that Charlemaigne usually ware called
the cross of victory: taken out of the Kings coffers, and there the two
Princes swear the treaty: 2 whereupon all the bells in the town rung, and all men
were glad and reioiced. It has pleased the King since to attribute this honor
to me, that I did him great service in furthering this accord. The Duke sent
these news forthwith into Britain and the treaty with all, wherein he
severed not himself from the said two Dukes, but named them his confederats.
And sure the Lord Charles had now a good partage in respect of the treaty made
in Britain, whereby he should have but a pension only of forty thousand
franks as before you have heard.

The Notes.
1 It was Commines himself, that gave the King advise not to refuse to go to
Liege with the Duke. Annal. Burgund.

2 The peace of Peronne was sworn the fovverteenth day of October, anno
1468. Meyer lib. 17. fol. 346. page 1. where read also the conditions of the
peace.

How the King accompanied the Duke of Burgundy, making war upon the Liegeois,
who before were his confederates. Chap. 10.
THe next day after the treaty sworn, the King and the Duke departed from
Peronne, and went to Cambray, and from thence into the country of Liege in the
very beginning of winter, and in a marvelous foul season. The King had with
him few soldiers or none, others than the Scottish men of his guard, but gave
commandment that three hundred men of arms should follow after him. The Dukes
army was divided into two bands, the one led by the Marshall of Burgundy (so
often already mentioned) in the which were all the Burgundians, and the noble
men of Sauoye above named, besides great forces of the countries of Haynault,
Luxembourg, Namure, and Lamburge, the other band the Duke him self lead: when
they drew near the city of Liege they debated in the Dukes presence what was
to be done. Some gave advise to dismiss part of the army, considering that the
gates and walls of the city were rased the year before, and the citizens in
utter despair of succor: the King him self being there in person against
them, and offering in manner the self same conditions of peace on their behalf
that were demanded. The Duke allowed not of this opinion, which was a happy
turn for him, for if he had, he had marred all, but his suspicion of the King
caused him to take the wisest course: and sure his Captains opinion in
thinking themselves too strong, proceeded either of great pride or of great
folly. Notwithstanding I have often heard diverse Captains give the like
advise, some because they think thereby to win an opinion of hardness, and
some for that they understand not the matters debated, but wise Princes weigh
not such fond opinions. As touching this point, the King our Master had learned
his lesson, for as he was slow and fearful in attempting any thing: so when he
took once an enterprise in hand, he so thoroughly furnished him self of every
thing thereunto appertaining, that he could not but obtain his purpose.

Order was then given that the Marshall of Burgundy with his band should go
before and lodge in the city, and if the citizens made difficulty to receive
him, as it was thought they would not, because diverse of them were already come
to the Duke to treat of peace, that then he should attempt to enter by force.
The said Marshall and his company went to Namur, and the next day departed
thence, and the King and the D. arrived there. But when the Marshall approached
near the city, this foolish people salied forth to the skirmish and were
easily repulsed, and a great number slain, the rest retired into the town,
and at that very instant escaped their Bishop and came to us. Within the town
was a legate sent thither by the Pope to understand of the variance between
the Bishop and the people, and to pacify the matter. For the sentence of
excommunication pronounced against them was yet vnreuoked, because of their
offenses above rehearsed. This legate passing the bands of his commission,
favored altogether the people in hope to obtain the Bishopric for him self,
and commanded them to take arms for their defense, and encouraged them to
diverse other folies. Notwithstanding now seeing the city in this danger, he
issued forth with intent to fly, but was taken and all his train being to
the number of five and twenty very well mounted. The Duke hearing these news
seemed notwithstanding to take no notice thereof, but sent word to those that
took him that they should lead him into some secret place, and make their
profit of him as of some merchant, and in no wise to advertise him of this
accident, alleging that if he came openly into his camp, he could not suffer
them to keep him, but must of force deliver him, for honor of the sea
apostolic. Notwithstanding they could not do as they were commanded, but fell
at variance for him in such sort, that openly at diner time certain that
claimed part in the booty, came and complained to the Duke: wherefore he sent
immediately and took him from them, and restored him all that he lost, and
entertained him very honorably.

This vaward led by the Marshall of Burgundy and the Lord of Hymbercourt,
marched straight to the city, supposing to enter without resistance, and
through covetousness (hoping to have the spoil thereof to themselves) refused
the composition that was offered, neither thought it needful to tarry for the
King and the Duke, being seven or eight leagues behind them, but marched with
such speed that they arrived at the town by twilight, and entered into a
certain suburbs leading straight to a gate that the citizens had somewhat
repaired. There the Liegeois and they parled together but could not agree. In
the mean time they were benighted, their lodgings were unmade, neither was the
place large enough for the seat of their camp, beside that they were in great
disorder, some walked up and down, some called their masters, their
companions, and their captains: which folly and disorder Master John de
Villette and other captains of the Liegeois perceiving, took heart and
determined to issue forth, and their misfortune I mean the ruin of their
walls, served them to good purpose in this enterprise: for they salied forth
where liked them best by the breaches thereof, and came in order of battle to
the foremost ranks of the Burgundians. Farther, among the vines and little hills
they assailed the pages and straglers that walked their Masters horses without
the suburbs by the which our men entered. A great number of good soldiers were
there slain, but a greater number fled, for the night covers all shame. To
be short, the Liegeois so courageously executed their enterprise, that they
slew at the least eight hundred: one hundred of them being men of arms. But
the hardy and valiant soldiers of this vaward being in manner all men of arms
and gentlemen of good houses, joined themselves together, and marched with
ensign displaied straight to the gate, fearing the citizens salie there. The
ways were marvelous deep, because of continual rain, in such sort that the
men of arms being all on foot stood in mire above the ankles. Once all the
citizens thought to salie forth at the said gate with great torches and
lights, but our men had mounted four good pieces of artillery in the very
mouth thereof, the which shot twice or thrice along the high street, and slew
a great number, whereupon they all retired out of the suburbs, and shut their
gates. But during this skirmish in the suburbs, the others that had salied
forth to assail the pages above mentioned, took certain carts near to the
town, in the which they lodged themselves very vncommodiously, and tarried
without the city from two of the clock after midnight, till six in the
morning, but so soon as the day brake that one might descry another, they were
repulsed, and in their retract master John de Villette, and one or two more of
their captains hurt, who died all within two days after.

How the King arrived in person with the Duke of Burgundy, before the city of
Liege. Chap. 11.
NOtwithstanding that salies out of a town be sometimes necessary, yet are they
very dangerous for those that defend the place, for the loss of ten men is
more to them, than of an hundred to those that besiege them, first because
their number is not equal, secondarily because they cannot put men into the
town at pleasure, and lastly because happily they may loose one of their chief
captains, which mishap causes oftentimes the loss also of the place. These
discomfortable news were forthwith brought to the Duke, lying four or five
leagues from the town, and the first report was, that his whole vaward was
discomfited, yet that notwithstanding he and the whole army mounted on
horseback, commanding that no word should be made to the King of this
misfortune. And when he drew near the city on the contrary side to that where
his vaward lay, he was advertised that all was well, and the loss nothing so
great as was thought, neither any man of name slain but a knight of Flaunders
named Monseur de Sergine, notwithstanding they sent him word that the valiant
gentlemen and soldiers of his vaward were utterly wearied, and in great trouble
and distress, for all that night they had stood upright in the mire by the
town gate. Farther they told him that certain of the footmen that fled were
returned so discouraged, that they seemed unfit for any great exploit.
Wherefore they desired him for Gods love to make haste, to the end the citizens
might be forced to retire every man to the defense of his own quarter, and
that it would please him to send them some vittails, for they had not one
morsel of meat. The D. forthwith commanded two or three hundred to ride
thither as fast as their horses could gallop, to comfort his soldiers, and sent
after them all the vittails he could come by, and so was it high time, for by
the space of two days almost and a night, they had neither eaten nor drunk,
unless it were some one that carried a draught of wine in a bottell. Besides
that, the weather was marvelous foul, neither could they possibly enter the
town on that side they lay, unless the Duke embusied the enemy on the other
side. A great number of them were hurt, and among the rest the Prince of Orange
(whom I had forgotten to name before) who behaved himself that day like a
courageous gentleman, for he never moved foot off the place he first
possessed. The Lords of Lau and Vrfe did also very valiantly, but the number of
the footmen that fled the night of the skirmish was at the least ten thousand.
It was almost dark night when the Duke received this news, but after he had
dispatched all his business he returned to his ensign and rehearsed the whole
order of the skirmish to the King, who reioiced to hear that all was so well,
for the contrary might have turned to his prejudice. When they approached near
the town, a great number of gentlemen and men of arms lighted on foot with
the archers to take the suburbs which were easily won, and there the bastard
of Burgundy (who had great charge in this army under the Duke,) the Lord of
Rauastaine, the earl of Roucy, the Constables son and diverse other gentlemen
lodged, even hard by the gate, which the enemies had also repaired as the
former. The Duke lodged in the midst of the suburbs, but the King lay that
night in a great grange, a quarter of a league from the town, where was very
good lodging, being accompanied with a great number of men, as well of his own
as of ours.

This town is situate upon mountains and valleys, and in a marvelous
fruitful soil 1, the river of Maz runs through it: it is about the
greatness of Roan, and was at that time a marvelous populous city. From the
gate where we lodged to the other where our vaward lay, the way was short
through the town, but without, it was at the least three leagues going, so
crooked and foul are the ways especially in winter, in the midst whereof we
came thither. Their walls were all rased, so that they might saly forth where
best liked them, and their defense was only a little rampire of earth: for the
town was never ditched, because the foundation is hard and sharp rock. The
first night of the Dukes arrival, our vaward was much refreshed and eased: for
the force within the town was then divided into two parts. About midnight they
gave us a hot alarm, whereupon the Duke issued forthwith into the street, and
soon after arrived also the King and the Constable with great speed,
considering how far off they lay. Some cried they saly out at such a gate,
others spoke diverse discomfortable words, the dark and rainie weather
increased also their fear. The Duke lacked no courage, but failed sometime in
good order giving: and to say the truth, at this time he behaved not himself
so advisedly as many wished, because of the Kings presence. Wherefore the King
took upon him authority to command, and said to the Constable, Lead your men
into such a quarter, for if they salie that is their way: and sure both his
words and behavior showed him to be a Prince of great virtue and wisdom, and
well acquainted with such exploits: notwithstanding this great alarm proved
nothing, whereupon the King and the Duke returned to their lodging.

The next morning came the King and lodged also in the suburbs in a little
house hard by the Dukes lodging, accompanied with an hundred Scottish men of
his guard, and his men of arms lying in a little village hard by him, which
bred great suspicion in the Duke that he would either enter the city, or
escape before it were taken 2, or peradventure work him some displeasure lying
so near him. Wherefore he put into a great grange just between their two
lodgings three hundred men of arms, being all the flower of his house, who
brake down the panes of the walls to saly forth the more speedily if need so
required, and these had their eyes continually upon the Kings lodging which was
hard by them. The siege continued eight days, during which space neither the
Duke nor any of the company unarmed themselves. But the evening before the
town was taken, the Duke determined to assault it the next morning being
Sunday the 30. of October, the year 1468. and the token given to our vaward
was this, that when they heard one bombard and two great serpentines discharged
one incontinent after another, without more shot they should then courageously
go to the assault, and the Duke on his side would do the like. Farther, the
hour appointed for the enterprise was eight of the clock in the morning: the
same night the assault was thus concluded, the Duke unarmed himself, which
since the beginning of the siege he had not done, and commanded the whole
army, especially those that lodged in the grange between his lodging and the
Kings to do the like, to the end they might refresh themselves: but the
selfsame night the citizens as though they had been advertised of this
determination, concluded to make a salie out of the town on this side, as they
had before on the other.

The Notes.
1 Of the seat of this town read Guicci, page 370.

2 Basinus vvriteth that the Duke for diverse considerations had rather have
lacked the Kings company then have had it, but that the King to blind the
Duke with a pretense of good will offered himself to go with him, which
report all the circumstances considered seems utterly repugnant to truth.

How the Liegeois made a desperate salie upon the Duke of Burgundies men, where
he and the King were in great danger. Chap. 12.
I Will now rehearse an example whereby you shall perceive how easily even a
few enemies may work a great Prince displeasure, and how much it imports
Princes thoroughly to way their enterprises before they attempt them. Within
this city there was not one man of war but of their own territory, they had
with them neither knight nor esquire: for those few they had were either
slain or hurt two or three days before in the saly above mentioned. They were
unfurnished of gates, walls, trenches and artillery ought worth. To be short,
within the town were none but the citizens themselves, and seven or eight
hundred footmen of a little territory beyond Liege, called Franche-mount: true
it is that the people of those parts have ever been accounted good soldiers.
But now to the matter. These Liegeois despairing of succors, seeing the K.
there in person against them, concluded to make a desperate saly, and to put
all things in adventure, knowing themselves to be but lost men.

Their enterprise was this, they determined that by the breaches of their walls
hanging over the backside of the Dukes lodging, their best soldiers being six
hundred men of the country of Franchemont should salie forth, leading with
them for guides the hosts of the Kings lodging and of the D. Farther there lay
a privy way through the rocks, by the which they might come under covert
almost to the lodgings of both these Princes before they were discovered,
provided that they made no noise: and as touching our scoutes that lay in
their way, they made account either to kill them, or to be at the Princes
lodging as soon as they. Thus they resolved to follow these two hosts into
their houses, where the two Princes lodged, without staying by the way in any
place, hoping to steal upon them on such a sudden, that either they would kill
them, or lead them away prisoners before their forces could come to rescue
them, considering withal how short their retrait was into the town, and if
the woorst fell (that was to die:) they were fully resolved in the executing of
such an enterprise to take their death in good part: for they saw themselves
but lost men on all sides. They gave order also that all the people of the
town with hue and cry, should issue forth at the gate opening upon the
suburbs where we lay, trusting thereby to discomfite all our company that
lodged there. Neither were they out of hope of a goodly victory, at the least
they were sure of a glorious end. This their enterprise notwithstanding it had
been desperate and dangerous, though they had been accompanied with a thousand
valiant men of arms: yet these few failed not much to atchieue it. For
according to their determination, these six hundred men of Franche-mont salied
forth by the breaches of their walls, about ten of the clock at night, and came
on a sudden upon our scouts and slew them, three of them being gentlemen of the
Dukes house, and if they had gone straight forth without any noise to the
place appointed, undoubtedly they had slain both these Princes in their beds.
But you shall understand that behind the Duke of Burgundies lodging, there was
a pauilion where the Duke of Alenson that now is, and Monseur de Cran lodged.
There these Liegeois stayed a while and thrust their pikes through it, and slew
a serving man within it: whereupon a noise arose in the camp which caused some
to arm themselves, at the least to arise. From this pauillion they departed
toward the two Princes lodgings, whereunto adioined the graunge above
mentioned, into the which the Duke had put three hundred men of arms. There
they stayed a while also, and thrust their pickes in at the panes of the walls
which these men of arms had broken down to salie forth with the more speed.
All the gentlemen that lay there had unarmed themselves not past two hours
before to refresh them against the assault the next morning: in the which
estate the Liegeois found them. Notwithstanding a few of them having put on
their quiracies because of the noise they heard at the Duke of Alensons
pauilion, fought with their enemies at the broken panes of the walls, and at the
door, which was the only preservation of these two great Princes lives: for
this delay gave a great many leisure to arm themselves and to come forth into
the street. I lay that night in the Dukes chamber (which was very straight)
with two other gentlemen of his privy chamber, and above him lodged twelve
archers that kept the watch and sat up at dice, but the body of his watch
stood by the town gate far from his lodging. To be short the Dukes host
came with a band of Ligeois, and assailed his own house the D. being within
it, upon such a sudden that we hardly had leisure to buckle his quirace about
him and put a sallet on his head: for immediately as we went down the stayres
to issue forth into the street, we found our archers busied in defending the
door and windows against the Liegeois: farther there was a marvelous noise in
the streets, some cried God save the King, others God save the Duke, and others
God save the King, kill, kill, kill. It was two Pater nosters while before our
archers and we could get forth of the house, we knew not in what estate the
King was, nor whether he were with us or against us, which much troubled us.
Incontinent after we were issued forth with two or three torches, we met
others in the streets with lights also, and saw fighting and killing round
about us, but the conflict soon ended: for men came running on all sides to
the Dukes lodging. The first man of the enemies that was slain was the Dukes
host, but he died not presently, for I my self heard him speak. To be short
all the Liegeois that accompanied him, a very few excepted were also slain.
They assailed in like manner the K. lodging, into the which his host entered and
was slain by the Scottish men of his guard, who showed themselves talle felows:
for they never stirred from their Masters foot, but shot arrows continually
which hurt more Burgundians then Liegeois. The citizens appointed to issue
forth at the town gate salied accordingly, but our watch being assembled
together repulsed them incontinent, neither showed they themselves so desperate
as these others. Immediately after these were beaten back, the King and the
Duke met, doubting because of the number they saw slain, their own loss to
be great: notwithstanding of their men few were slain, but many hurt.
Undoubtedly if these Liegeois had not stayed at these two places above
mentioned, especially at the grange where they found resistance, but had
followed these two hosts being their guides, they had slain both the King and
the Duke, and thereby peradventure discomfited the whole army. Both the Princes
returned to their lodgings woonderfully abashed at this desperate enterprise,
and forth sat in counsel to take advise what should be done touching the
assault the next morning. The King seemed to stand in great doubt of the matter
in respect of himself in very deed, for knowing how greatly the Duke doubted
wars with France if he were once out of his hands: he feared if the city
could not be taken by assault, that his return into his realm should be
delaied, and peradventure himself put in prison for the Dukes better
assurance. Whereby you may perceive in how miserable estate these two princes
lived, which could by no means assure themselves each of other: for they had
concluded and solemnly sworn a final peace not past fifteen days before, yet
could all this put neither of them in assurance.

How the city of Liege was assaulted, taken, and spoiled, and the Churches
also. Chap. 13.
THe King to rid himself of all danger, about an hour after his return from
this salie above mentioned to his lodging, sent for certain of the Dukes
principal servants that had been in counsel about the assault, and inquired
of them what was concluded. They told him that the resolution was to assault
the city the next morning, according to the order first appointed. Then he
very wisely began to allege diverse great doubts, which pleased well the Dukes
men, for they all feared the assault maruellously both because of the great
number of people within the town, and also because of the desperate salie made
not past two hours before: wherefore being desirous to stay the assault for
two or three days, and take the town by composition, they went forthwith to
the Duke to make report of the Kings allegations, I my self being present when
they came. There they rehearsed all the doubts the King alleged, and as many
as they themselves could devise, but al they fathered upon the King, doubting
that he would not take it well at their hands. The D. answered, that the King
alleged these doubts only to save the citizens, and took it in evil part,
saying that there could be no danger in the enterprise, considering that they
within could make no counterbatterie, neither had any walls for their defense,
adding also that the rampires they had made at the gates were already beaten
down, wherefore he would use no further delays, but go to the assault the next
morning, as it was concluded. Notwithstanding he would be contented that the
King, if it so pleased him, should go to Namur till the taking of the town
under this condition, not to depart thence till the issue of this enterprise
were seen: which answer pleased none of them all, for every man feared the
assault because of this salie. The Dukes answer was reported to the King, not
in so hard terms as he delivered it, but in much milder language. The King
understood the meaning of it well enough, and said he would not go to Namur,
but be at the assault the next day among the rest. In mine opinion if he had
been so disposed, he might very easily have escaped that night, for he had with
him an hundred archers of his guard, and certain gentlemen of his house,
besides three hundred men of arms that lodged hard by him: but undoubtedly
where he stood upon his honor he would not be stained with cowardice. Every man
reposed himself in his armor til morning, and some disposed of their
consciences, because the enterprise seemed very dangerous. When it was broad
day light, and that the hour appointed drew near, which was eight of the
clock, the Duke commanded the bombard and the two serpentines to be discharged,
thereby to advertise our vaward of the assault, which lay on the other side far
from us, if you take the way without the town, but not far going through it,
as before you have heard. They hearing the shot incontinent prepared themselves
to the assault. The Dukes trumpets sounded, and his ensiegnes were anaunced
toward the walls, their bands following them. The King stood in the midst of the
street very well accompanied, for all his three hundred men of arms, his
guard, and certain noble men, and gentlemen of his house were with him. And
when we approached so near the walls that they and we should have joined, no
resistance was found, neither any man upon the walls, save two or three of the
watch, all the rest were gone to diner, supposing we would not give the assault
upon the Sunday, so that we found the cloth laid in every house at our entry.
Small account is to be made of rude people unless they be led by some captain
whom they reverence, although sometime in their fury they be greatly to be
feared.

These Liegeois were before the assault maruelously spent and wearied, partly
because of their two salies, wherein they lost a great number of their men and
all their leaders, and partly because of the great labor and travel they had
sustained the space of eight days: for because they lay open to the enemy on
all sides, they were all forced to be continually upon the walls, and I suppose
they thought to repose themselves this day because of the Sabbath, but it
chanced to them contrary to their expectation. On that side we entered was no
resistance made, and less yet on the other where our vawarde lay, which entered
the town before us. Few were slain 1, for all the people fled by the bridge
over the river of Maze toward the country of Ardennes, and from thence to
other places for their more safety. On the side that we entered I saw but two
men and one woman slain, neither think I that there died two hundred persons
in all, for the rest fled or hid themselves in churches and houses. The King
seeing no resistance, and the whole army (being as I guess to the number of
forty thousand) throng into the town at two breaches, marched forward at
leisure, to whom the Duke being entered a good way into the city suddenly
returned, and accompanied him to the palace, from whence he went to the
cathedral Church of Saint Lambert 2, which his men were about to break into
by force to take the prisoners and spoil that was conueighed thither. And
notwithstanding that he had appointed certain of his house to guard the said
church: yet could they not do it because the soldiers assaulted both the doors.
Wherefore the Duke himself went thither, and one man I saw him slay with his
own hand 3, whereupon all the company disparkled, and the church was
vnspoiled. Notwithstanding in the end, they that were within it were taken and
their goods also. The rest of the churches (being so many in number, that I
have heard the Lord of Himbercourt, who knew the town well, report as many
masses to be song there every day as in Rome 4,) were in manner all spoiled
under color of taking prisoners. For mine own part I entered into none but the
cathedral church, but thus I was advertised and saw also good proof thereof:
for the Pope many years after excommunicated all those that withheld any of
these church goods, unless they restored them, and the Duke appointed certain
commissioners to go through his country, to see the Popes commandment
executed. The city being thus taken and sacked, about noone the Duke returned
to the palace. The King had already dined, and seemed greatly to rejoice at
the taking of the town, and commended also much the Dukes courage and
valiantnes, knowing that report thereof should be made to him, and that these
good words would somewhat further his return into his realm, which was his
special desire. After diner the Duke and he met and communed together very
pleasantly: and if the King commended his valiantnes behind his back, I
warrant you he dispraised it not before his face, which the Duke took in very
good part.

I must now return to speak somewhat of this miserable people that fled out of
the city, for proof of a discourse I made in the beginning of this history
touching inconueniencies I have seen ensue a battle lost by a King, a D. or a
meaner Prince. These miserable souls fled through the country of Ardennes
with their wives and children. But a Knight dwelling in those parts who ever to
fore had taken part with them, slew now a great number of them, and to recover
the conquerors favor, sent word thereof to the Duke reporting the number of
those that were slain and taken, to be much greater then in deed it was:
Notwithstanding that it were great, whereby he made his peace with the Duke and
saved him self. Others fled toward Meziers upon the Maz being within the
realm of France, but upon the way two or three of their Captains were taken,
(one of the which was named Madoulet) who were lead to the Duke, and by his
commandment put to death. Some of these people died also of hunger, some of
cold, and some for lack of sleep.

The Notes.
1 Some write that there were slain in one day at Liege 100000. and Munster
writes 40000. and 12000 women drowned in the river, which seems to disagree
with Commines, who reports not above 200. to have been slain:
notwithstanding our author must here not be understood so strictly as though
there had not died above 200. in all, for his meaning is only that at the
entrance into the town, there were not slain above two hundred, otherwise
considering the number that were slain in Churches, houses, and flight it
cannot be but that many thousands died, neither is our authors meaning
otherwise.

2 Some copies have Saint Lavvrence, but the old copy Saint Lambert which
Annal. Burgund. and Guicci. report to be the principal Church in Liege.

3 The Duke slew before the Church of Saint Lambert two or three archers with
his own hand. La March.

4 There were in Liege to the number of 32. Churches and eight Colleges of
priests. Meyer. four abbeys, four frieries, three nunneries, and without
and within the town above an hundred Churches. Guicci. Hubertus.

How King Lewis returned into France with the Duke of Burgundies consent, and
how the Duke proceeded in destroying the countries of Liege and Franchmont.
Chap. 14.
Four or five days after the taking of the town, the King began to solicit
such of the Dukes servants as he held for his friends to move their Master for
his departure, but he himself first brake the matter to the Duke after a sage
and a wise sort, saying, that if he could stand him in any more stead he should
not spare him, otherwise he desired to return to Paris to cause the treaty to
be recorded in the Court of parliament: for the manner in France is to record
all treaties there, otherwise they are of no force, notwithstanding the Kings
authority may do much therein. He required also the Duke, that the next summer
they might meet again in Burgundy, and make merry a month together, whereunto
the Duke in the end agreed, mumbling somewhat to himself. Farther the Duke
commanded the treaty to be read again before the King to know whether ought
were passed in it that he misliked, putting him to his choice to allow or
disalowe thereof at his pleasure. Somewhat also he excused himself for bringing
him to this siege. Lastly he besought him that one article might be added to
the treaty in favor of the Lords of Lau, and Vrfe, and Poncet of Riuiere, to
wit, that they might be restored to all their estates and offices that they
enioied before the wars began, which request misliked the King, for there was
no reason why the Duke should require to have them comprehended in the treaty,
both for that they were none of his partakers in the wars above mentioned 1,
and also because they served the Lord Charles the Kings brother not the Duke.
Notwithstanding the King answered that he would grant his demand upon condition
that he would accord the like to the Lords of Neuers and Croy, whereunto the
Duke replied naught. This was a very wise answer of the King, for the Duke
hated these Lords by him named so extremely, and held so goodly possessions of
theirs, that he would never have condescended to restore them: of the other
articles the King answered he would alter none, but confirmed the whole treaty
as they two had sworn it at Peronne. Thus was it agreed that the King should
return home, and the Duke accompanied him about half a league. But at their
leave taking the King said thus unto him, if my brother who is now in Britain
will not accept this partage that I have given him for your sake, what will you
that I do 1. Whereunto the D. answered thus suddenly without farther
deliberation, if he will not, I refer the order thereof to you two, of the
which demand and answer sprang a great matter as hereafter you shall hear.
Thus returned the King in great joy, being safe conducted by the Lords of
Cords and Meriens 2 great bailife of Haynault, to the frontiers of the Dukes
dominions. The Duke abode still in the city of Liege, which was extremely
handled I must needs confess, but sure they had well deserved so to be dealt
with, because of the great cruelties they had continually used against the
Dukes subjects ever since his grandfathers days. Besides that, they never
performed any promise nor kept any treaty they made, and this was the fifth
year that the Duke himself had been there year by year in person, and
concluded peace, which ordinarily the next year they brake. Farther they had
continued excommunicated of long time, for their great cruelty against their
bishop, whereof notwithstanding they made no account, neither would obey the
commandments of the church on that behalf.

Immediately after the Kings departure, the Duke with small force determined to
go into Franchemont, a country alitle beyond Liege, lying among sharp rocks
and thick woods. From thence came the best soldiers the Liegeois had, and of
this country were they that made the desperate saly above mentioned. Before
his departure a great number of poor prisoners that hid themselves in houses
at the taking of the town were drowned. Farther it was concluded that this
city heretofore so populous, should be burned at three several times 3, and
three or four thousand footmen of the country of Lambourg 4, being neighbors
to the Liegeois, and almost of the same manners and language, were appointed to
fire it, but to save the churches. First the great bridge built over the river
of Maze was beaten down, then a great number were chosen out to defend the
chanons houses about the cathedral church, to the end they might have lodging
that should say divine service. In like manner also diverse were appointed for
defense of the other Churches. This done the Duke departed into the country of
Frachemont, and immediately after he was out of the town we saw a great number
of houses on this side the river on fire: he marched forward and lodged four
leagues off, yet heard we the noise as easily as if we had been there
present: I wot not whether it were because the wind sat that way, or because
we lodged upon the river. The next day the Duke departed thence, and those that
were left behind in the town continued still the fire as they were commanded,
but the Churches were all saved afew excepted, and above three hundred houses
to lodge the Church men, which caused the town so soon to be replenished
again: for much people returned to dwell with these Priests.

Because of extreme frost and cold the greatest part of the Dukes army was
forced to go on foot into the country of Franchemont, which had never a
walled town in it but all villages. The Duke lodged five or six days in a
little valley called Polleneg, his army was divided into two bands the sooner
to destroy the country. All the houses he commanded to be burned, and all the
iron mils broken, which is their only trade of living. Farther our men hunted
the poor people out of great woods and forests where they lay hidden with
their goods, and many they slew and took prisoners, and there the soldiers
got good booties. The cold was more extreme then is almost credible: for I saw
a gentleman that with cold lost the use of his foot and never recovered it,
and a Page that had two of his fingers rotted from his hand, and in like manner
a woman dead for cold and her child with her, whereof she was newely
delivered. Farther by the space of three days all the wine that was drunk in
the Dukes lodging was cut with hatchets: for it was so frozen in the vessels
that we were forced to break them, and cut the wine being a mass of yse into
small pieces, which men bare away in hats and baskets as best liked them. I
could rehearse diverse other strange accidents of the cold too long to write. To
conclude at eight days end hunger drew us thence in haste, and the Duke
departed to Namur, and so into Brabant, where he was honorably received.

The Notes.
1 This was the treaty of Conflans at the conclusion whereof these three here
named (as our auhor himself before reherseth,) were the Dukes enemies and
took part with the King: wherefore no reason it was that the Duke should
seek to have them comprehended in the treaty as his friends, seeing at the
conclusion thereof they were his enemies.

2 This des Murz the old copy names De Meriens, La March d'Emeries. Annal.
Burgund. d'Aymeries. The towns name is Aymeries in Henault upon the river of
Sambre, Guicci. in the description of Henault, yet the same author in his
description general names the man d'Emery. Annal. Burgund. in another place
names him d'Esmeriez. Meyer Aymericius and Emericius, so that I suppose it
best to read it as I have translated it, but that des Murz is very corrupt I
am out of doubt.

3 This city was divided into three quarters, as appears by Guic.
description, for the which cause it was fired at three several times.

4 The old copy has Lambourg as I have translated it, the new Luxembourg, as
have also Annal. Burgund. but not well in mine opinion. For Lambourg is hard
by Liege, but Luxembourg farther off.

How the King by subtle means persuaded the Lord Charles his brother to take
the Duchy of Guienne for Brie and Champaigne, to the Duke of Burgundies
coffeehouse. Chap. 15.
THe King after his departure from the Duke returned with great joy into his
realm, attempting nothing against the Duke for his evil usage at Peronne and
Liege, but seeming to take all in good part. Notwithstanding sharp war arose
afterward between them, but not soon, neither was this the chief cause thereof,
(though happily it might in part further it:) for if this treaty had been
concluded at Paris, it had passed in effect as it did at Peronne. But the Duke
by his officers advise sought to advance the bonds of his dominions, besides
that diverse subtle practices were used to set these two Princes again at
variance as you shall hear when occasion serves. The Lord Charles of France
the Kings only brother and late Duke of Normandy, being advertised of this
treaty made at Peronne, and the partage assigned to him thereby: sent
forthwith to the King desiring him to accomplish the treaty and perform his
promise. The King sent in like manner to him about that matter, and many
messengers ran to and fro between them. The Duke of Burgundy sent also his
ambassadors to the said Lord Charles, desiring him to accept no other partage
then Champaigne and Brie, which by his means was granted him, showing him
withal how great good will he bare him, since notwithstanding he had abandoned
him, yet would not he do the like as the sequel well declared, but had also
comprehended the Duke of Britain in the treaty as his confederate. Farther he
sent him word that Champaigne and Brie lay very commodiously for them both,
because if the King should at any time attempt ought against him, he might
within two days warning have succors out of Burgundy: the two countries
bordering on upon another. Lastely he advertised him that his partage was very
good, and that he might levy in his countries, aides, customs, and subsidies,
neither could the King claim any thing there but homage, resort, and
soueraignity. This Lord Charles was a man doing little or nothing of himself,
but wholly lead and governed by others: notwithstanding that he were above five
and twenty years of age. Thus passed the winter which was well spent before
the Kings departure from us, messengers ran continually to and fro about this
partage: for the King meant nothing less then to give his brother that he had
promised, because he would not have him and the Duke of Burgundy so near
neighbors. But he treated with his brother to take Guienne, (which is in manner
all Aquitaine:) for Brie and Champaigne. The Lord Charles feared to displease
the Duke of Bourgundy, and doubted if he yielded to the Kings request, and he
should not keep touch with him, that then he should loose both friend and
partage, and so be left bare board. But the King being the subtilest prince
then living, and the cunningest dealer in such treaties, perceiving that he
should do no good unless he wan those that were in credit with his brother,
fell in communication of this matter with Oudet of Rye, Lord of Lescut
afterward Earl of Comminges (who was borne and married in the country of
Guienne) desiring him to persuade his master to accept this partage being much
better than that he demanded, and that they might be friends and live together
like brethren, adding also that this partage should be much more beneficial
both for his brother and his servants, (especially for the said Oudet) than
the other, and farther assuring him that without fail he would deliver his
brother quiet possession of the said country. By this means was the Lord
Charles won to accept this partage of Guienne to the Duke of Burgundies great
discontentation and his ambassadors there present. And the cause why cardinal
Balue bishop of Angiers 1, and the bishop of Verdun were imprisoned, was for
that the said Cardinal writ to the Lord Charles, aduising him to accept none
other partage than that the Duke of Burgundy had procured him by the treaty of
Peronne, which also the King had sworn and promised (laying his hand within
the said Cardinals) to deliver him, alleging withal such reasons to persuade
him thereunto as he thought necessary, wherein he did clean contrary to the
Kings purpose. Thus the Lord Charles was made Duke of Guienne, the year 1469.
and the possession of the country together with the government of Rochell
delivered him, and than the King and he saw one another, and were together a
long time.

The Notes.
1 The Cardinals imprisonment was because he persuaded the King to go to
Peronne, and advised the Duke of Guienne to beware of poison, and not to take
the partage of Guienne, Meyer. and for disclosing the Kings secrets by letters
to the Duke of Burgundy, Gaguin. But if the Duke of Guienne had been wise, he
would of himself without persuasion have refused this partage. For when a man's
enemy offers him that that has an appearance of good, let him ever refuse
it: nam latet anguis in herba, as the sequel of this matter well declared, for
the accepting of this partage, which the King alleged and that truly to be
better than the other the Duke demanded, cost the Duke of Guienne his life, as
here after shall appear.

THE THIRD BOOK.
How the King took occasion to make war anew upon the Duke of Burgundy, and
how he sent a purseuant of the parliament of Gaunt to sommon him to appear at
Paris. Chap. 1.
THe year 1470. the King determined to be revenged of the Duke of Burgundy,
supposing he had now found a time convenient so to do, for he privily
solicited and caused also others to solicit the towns situate upon the river
of Sum, namely Amiens, Saint Quintine, and Abbeuille to rebel against the
Duke, and to send for succors into France, and to receive them into their
towns 1. For all great Princes (if they be wise) will seek ever some color
for their doings. And to the end you may perceive what cunnig is used in
France, I will show you how this matter was managed, for the King and the Duke
were both abused, whereof arose whot and sharp war, which endured thirteen or
foureteen years. The King desired greatly to move these towns above named to
rebellion, pretending (to the end he might have the better means to practice
with them) that the Duke advanced his limits farther then the treaty would
bear: whereupon ambassadors ran to and fro, who under color of their
embassage practiced continually as they passed through these towns, to the end
above mentioned. In the said towns were no garrisons but all was quiet both in
the realm, in Burgundy, and in Britain. And the Duke of Guien lived to all
men's judgments in great amity with the King his brother. Notwithstanding when
the King first moved this war, his meaning was not to take one or two of these
towns only, but sought to stir all the Duke of Burgundies subjects to
rebellion, trusting to atchieue his enterprise by this means. Diverse to obtain
his favor entertained these practices, and reported their intelligence to be
far greater then it was: for one promised to take this town, an other that,
and yet indeed all was nothing. Wherefore notwithstanding that the King had
just cause to be displeased for his evil usage at Peronne, yet if he had
thought this enterprise would have fallen none otherwise out then it did, he
would not have broken the treaty nor moved war: for he had made the peace to
be proclaimed at Paris three months after his return into his realm, and
began this war with some fear, but the great hope he had conceived of it,
pricked him forward: and mark I pray you what cunning was used to further it.
The Earl of Saint Paul Constable of France, (a very wise man,) and certain
of the Duke of Guien his servants, with diverse others desired rather war then
peace between these two great Princes, for two respects: The one they feared
least their great offices and pensions should be diminished, if peace
continued. For you shall understand that the Constable had under his charge 4.
hundred men of arms or lances paid by his own hands every muster, without
controuler: farther besides the fee and profits of his office, he had a yearly
pension of thirty thousand frankes and better, and received also the reuenews
of many goodly places that he kept.

The other respect was this, they sought to persuade the King, and talked also
to the like purpose among themselves, that his disposition was such, that his
head could never be idle, wherefore unless he were busied with great Princes
abroad he would be in hand with his servants and officers at home. For these
two reasons therefore they sought to entangle him with wars: whereunto the
better to persuade him the Constable promised to take Saint Quintine at all
times when him listed, because his lands lay round about it, vaunting further
that he had great intelligence in Flanders and Brabant, so far forth that he
would make a number of towns to revolt from the Duke. The Duke of Guienne also
being there present and all their principal servants, offered very earnestly
and promised very faithfully to serve the King in this quarrel, and to lead
with them four or five hundred men of arms that the said Duke held in
ordinary pay: but their drift was other than the King supposed, as hereafter
you shall hear. The King because he would seem to proceed with due advise
and deep consideration, called a Parliament of the three estates of his realm
at Tours, in the months of March and April in the year 1470. which was the
first and last Parliament that ever he assembled. But to this Parliament came
only such as were purposely named, and such as the King knew would not gainsay
him in any point. There he caused diverse enterprises to be discovered, that the
Duke of Burgundy had attempted against the crown, and made the Earl of Eu
openly to complain of him, saying, that the Duke detained from him contrary
to all law and equity Saint Valery and certain otherlands, that he the said
Earl held of the Duke as parcels of the Seignorie of Abbeuille, and the county
of Ponthieu, the only cause whereof was, for that a little ship of war of Eu
had taken a Flemmish hoy laden with merchandise, the loss whereof the Earl
offered to repay: further adding, that the Duke would constrain him to do him
homage, and give him his faith against all men none excepted, which he would
never do, because it should be prejudicial to the Kings estate. At this
assembly were diverse lawyers as well of the Parliament of Paris as other
places, who concluded according to the Kings pleasure, that the Duke should be
summoned to appear in the Parliament at Paris. The King knew well that he would
answer disdainfully, or do somewhat prejudicial to the authority of the
court, whereby he should have the iuster pretense of war against him. Thus the
Duke being in Gaunt was sommoned as he went to mass by a purseuant of the
Parliament to appear at Paris: wherewith he was much abashed and discontented,
and caused the purseuant forthwith to be apprehended and committed to ward,
where he remained certain days, but in the end was dismissed and sent home.
Thus you see what preparation was made to invade the Duke of Burgundy, who
being advertised thereof, levied a great band of men paid with home wages (as
they termed them) which was a trifle they received to be in a readiness in their
own houses. Notwithstanding they mustered monthly in the towns where they
dwelt, and received their pay. But at three or four months end the Duke waxed
weary of the charge and dismissed these men, banishing all fear because the
King sent often to him, and so departed into Holland. He entertained no
soldiers in ordinary pay for the safety of his country, neither held any
garrisons in the frontire towns, whereof ensued great inconvenience: for there
was daily practicing in Amiens, Abbeuile, and Saint Quintine to yield them
again to the King. The Duke being in Holland was advertised by John late Duke
of Bourbon, that shortly war should be made upon him as well in Burgundy as in
Picardie, and that the King had great intelligence not only in his dominions
but also in his house: with the which message he was maruelously abashed: for
he was utterly unfurnished of men of war, because he had discharged the band
above mentioned. Wherefore in great haste he passed the sea 2 and went into
Artois, and thence straight to Hedin, where he entered into jealousy both of
some of his servants, and also of those practices that were entertained in the
towns above mentioned: but his preparation for the wars went but slowly
forward. For he believed not all that was told him. Notwithstanding he
commanded two of the chiefest citizens of Amiens whom he suspected for these
treaties to repair unto him, who so cunningly excused themselves, that he
dismissed them without further inquire. Immediately after certain of his
servants fled out of his house, namely the bastard Baldwine 3 and others, which
caused him to fear a greater train to be behind. Wherefore incontinent he
made proclamation that all men should be in a readiness, but because winter was
begun, and he but newly returned out of Holland few stirred.

The Notes.
1 The Kings color was this, he would not seem to make war upon the Duke, but
only to have sent men to these towns at their request, who because of the
Dukes cruel exactions had prayed in aid of him as of their sovereign.

2 This sea was one of the streams of the river of Rhene that enuiron Holland.

3 This Baldwine was the Dukes base brother: the cause of his departure was for
that he had attempted with others corrupted by the King to poison the Duke:
notwithstanding afterward he recovered his favor, and was taken prisoner at the
battle of Nancy. Meyer.

How the towns of Saint Quintin and Amiens were yielded to the King: and for
what causes the Constable nourished the war between the King and the Duke of
Burgundy. Chap. 2.
TWo days after his servants departure, which was in the month of December
the year 1470. the Constable entered into Saint Quintine and swear them to the
King. Then the Duke perceived his affairs to be in bad estate, for he had no
force with him, but had sent all his servants abroad to muster men in his
dominions: Notwithstanding with those few he could levy being four or five
hundred horse he went to Dourlans, minding to keep Amiens from reuolting.
There he abode five or six days: all the which space they in Amiens
continually practiced. The Kings army lying not far off, showed it self
before the town and was once refused: for part of the citizens held for the
Duke: wherefore the Duke sent thither to make his lodging, and if he had been
so strong that the might have adventured to enter in person, the town had
never been lost, but he was afraid to go thither weakly accompanied:
notwithstanding that diverse of the town required him so to do. But when they
of the contrary faction saw his fear that he durst not enter the town, they
executed their enterprise, and reioiced the Kings forces. They of Abbeuille
thought to do the like, but the Lord of Cords entered in thither for the Duke,
and prevented their purpose. Dourlans is distant from Amiens but five small
leagues, wherefore the Duke was forced to depart thence, so soon as he
understood of Amiens revolt: from thence therefore he went to Arras in great
haste and fear, doubting the execution of diverse other such enterprises, for
that he saw himself environed with the Constables kinsfolks and friends:
farther because the bastard Baudouin was fled, he entered into suspicion of his
other brother the great bastard of Burgundy: notwithstanding his forces
repaired to him by little and little. The King thought now that all had been his
own, supposing the aduertisements to be true that the Constable and the rest
had given him of their intelligences, whereupon if he had not hoped, he would
have wished this enterprise vnbegun.

It is meet I should hear declare what moved the Constable and the Duke of
Guienne considering the great favor, courtesies, and benefits the Duke of
Guienne had received at the Duke of Burgundies hands, to kindle the fire
between these two Princes that lay at rest in their dominions, and which way
this war could turn to their profit. Somewhat I spoke heerof before, saying,
that they did it to be in the more assurance of their estates and offices. For
they feared if the King lived in peace he would keep some stir among them.
Notwithstanding this was not the only cause that moved them. But you shall
understand that the Duke of Guienne and they had been earnest suitors to
conclude a marriage between the said Duke of Guienne, and the Duke of
Burgundies only daughter and heir (for son he had none) which matter they
had often moved to the Duke, who in words showed himself not unwilling
thereunto, yet notwithstanding would never conclude it, but entertained others
also in hope thereof. Now mark how these men sought to atchieue their
enterprise by constraining the Duke of Burgundy to this marriage. Immediately
after these two towns were taken, and the Duke gone to Arras to leuy forces with all speed: the Duke of Guienne sent a secret messenger to him, who brought him
three lines written with the said Dukes own hand, foulded up in a small lump
of wax, and containing these words. Endeavor your self to appease your
subjects, and you shall not fail of friends. Farther the Duke of Burgundy
being at the first in exceeding great fear, sent to the Constable, desiring
him to show himself favorable, and not to press forward this war begun without
any defiance made. At the which message the Constable greatly reioiced,
supposing that he now held the Duke in such fear as he desired, which to
increase, he sent him a speedy and discomfortable answer, the effect whereof
was, that his state stood in marvelous danger, so far forth that he saw no
way for him to wind himself out of these troubles but one. Namely by giving
his daughter in marriage to the D. of Guienne, which if he would do, he should
than be succored with great forces: for both the Duke of Guienne and diverse
others Lords would declare themselves for him against the King, and he also
would restore him Saint Quintine and take his part, otherwise he said he durst
do nothing, considering how strong the K. was, having both his army very well
appointed, and also great intelligence in the Dukes dominions. This was the
answer he sent, with diverse other fearful messages. But I never knew man in
my life come to good end that sought to put in fear and hold in subjection his
master, or any other great Prince with whom he had to do, as in the end the
Constables example shall well declare. For notwithstanding that the King were
then his master, and that the greatest part of his revenues lay, and all his
children were resident in the Duke of Burgundies dominions: yet continued he
these practices against both these Princes, with intent to hold them both in
fear each by other, which cost him dear in the end, and no marvel. For
notwithstanding that every man desire to live out of subjection and fear, and
that all men naturally hate these that hold them in awe: yet none so extremely
as Princes. For I never knew Prince that hated not mortally all those that
sought to put him fear.

After the D. of Burgundy had received the Constables answer, he perceived well
no friendship to be in him, and farther that he was the only author of this
war. Whereupon he conceived so extreme hatred against him, that after this he
could never brook him, especially because by these fearful messages he fought
to constrain him to mary his daughter at his pleasure: a vain attempt. For
before the return of the Constables answer, the Duke had recovered his
spirits, and had a great army with him. You may easily perceive both by the
message sent by the Duke of Guienne first, and the Constables answer afterwarn,
that this was a compact matter between them, and the rather for that the like
message or a more dreadful came soon after from the Duke of Britain, who
sent also to the Kings service a hundred Britons, all men of arms under the
leading of the Lord of Lescut. Wherefore we may boldly say that this war was
moved only to constrain the Duke of Burgundy to conclude this marriage, and
that they did but abuse the King in persuading him to begin war: for they were
all in manner lies that they told him of their intelligences in the Dukes
dominions. Notwithstanding, in this voyage the Constable did the King great
service, and showed extreme malice against the Duke of Burgundy, knowing that
the Duke had conceived mortal hatred against him. The Duke of Guienne also
served the King in these wars very well accompanied, so that the Duke of
Burgundy stood upon hard terms. But if at the first he would have assured his
daughter to the Duke of Guienne, both the said Duke of Guienne, the Constable,
and diverse other noble men with all their adherents would have revolted to him
against the King, and done their endeavor to have pulled him upon his knees. But
whatsoever man purposes in such cases, God disposes afterward of them at his
pleasure.

How the Duke of Burgundy took Piquigny, and afterward found means to make
truce with the King for a year to the Constables great grief. Chap. 3.
YOu have heard at large the cause of this war, at the beginning whereof both
the Princes were blinded, inuading each other and neither of them knowing the
cause why, which was a marvelous cunning of the contriuers of this enterprise.
For a man might have pronounced the old Proverb of these two Princes: that the
one part of the world was not acquainted with the others manners nor actions.
All these affairs above rehearsed since the beginning of these wars, chanced in
very short space, for within less then fifteen days after the taking of
Amiens, the Duke put himself into the field near to Arras, (for farther he
retired not,) and from thence marched toward the river of Sum, and so
straight to Piquigny, but upon the way thither he met with a messenger of the
Duke of Britain on foot, who advertised him from the Duke his Master, that
the King had given his said Master to understand of diverse secrets, and among
others of intelligences he had in many great towns of his dominions: namely
Andwerp, Bruges, and Bruxelles, adding also that the King was determined to
come and besiege him into what town soever he should retire, were it even into
Gaunt. All the which aduertisements I suppose the Duke of Britain sent in
favor of the Duke of Guienne, hoping thereby to further much the marriage
above mentioned. But the Duke of Burgundy took this message in evil part,
and forthwith dispatched the messenger, willing him to tell his master that he
was misinformed by some evil servants about him, who put these fears and
doubts into his head, to the end he should not aid him as he was bound by
their league. And farther that he knew not what towns Gaunt and the other
cities were: in the which he said the King would come to besiege him: for they
were too great to be besieged. He bad him farther to inform his Master in what
sort he found him accompanied, and to advertise him that the world went
otherwise with him then he supposed, for he was determined to pass the river
of Sum, and to fight with the King, if he would come to stop him upon the
way. Last of all, he willed him to desire his Master on his behalf to join
with him against the King, and to show himself a friend to the Duke of
Burgundy, as he had showed himself to him by the treaty of Peronne. The next
day the Duke of Burgundy approached near to a town upon the river of Sum
called Piquigny, the seat whereof was meruellous strong. There he determined to
make a bridge to pass the said river, but four or five hundred frank
archers, and certain gentlemen, who by chance lodged at that present in the
town, seeing the Duke pass by, salied out to the skirmish upon a long causey,
and issued forth so far from the place, that thereby they gave the Dukes men
occasion to pursue them, who followed them so speedily that they slew a great
number of them, before they could retire into the town, and took the suburbs
into the which the causey lead. Then four or five pieces of artilery were bent
against the town, notwithstanding that it were impregnable on that side, for
that the river ran between the town and the Dukes battery. But these frank
archers fearing (because they saw the bridge in hand) to be besieged also on
the other side, abandoned the place and fled. The castle held two or three
days and than yielded also by composition, and the soldiers departed in their
doblets and their hose. The good success of this small exploit so much
encouraged the Duke that he led his army before Amiens, where he built two or
three lodgings, saying that he would keep the field, to see if the King durst
come to fight with him, and in the end approached with his artillery so near
the town, that it shot at randon over and into it: in the which estate he lay
there at the least six weeks. Within the town was the Constable and all the
great officers of the realm: namely the Lord great Master, Admiral, Marshall,
Seneshals, and others accompanied with fourteen hundred men of arms, and
four thousand francke archers. The King in the mean time lying at Beauuais
made a great muster, being accompanied with the Duke of Guienne his brother,
and Nicolas Duke of Calabria, son and heir to John Duke of Calabria and
Lorraine, and only heir of the house of Aniou. Farther all the nobles of the
realm subject to the Arriereban were come thither to him, who traveled
earnestly (as I have been since informed) to understand the bottom of this
enterprise, for they saw the troubles so far from pacification that the King
was now more busied with wars then ever. They within Amiens determined to
assail the Duke of Burgundy and his army, if the King would send his forces
being at Beauuais to join with them. But the King being advertised of this
enterprise, sent forthwith to countermand it: for notwithstanding that in all
appearance the success thereof was like to be good: yet was it not altogether
void of danger, especially for those that should have salied: for considering
that they must all have issued forthwith on foot, and at two gates one of the
which was hard by the Dukes camp: if happily they had been repulsed, they
should have put both the town and themselves in great hazard. In the mean
time the Duke sent one of his Pages to the King called Simon of Quincy,
afterward Bailife of Troy with a letter of six lines written with his own
hand, wherein he humbled himself to him, saying that he was very sorry he had
thus invaded him for other men's pleasures, which he supposed he would not have
done, if he had been well informed of their practices. The Kings army sent
into Burgundy 1 had defeated all the force of the country in battle, and
taken many prisoners. The number of the dead was not great, but the
discomfiture was great, in such sort that the Kings forces had already taken
some places, and besieged other some, wherewith the Duke was somewhat abashed,
notwithstanding he made the contrary to be bruted in his camp, saying that his
army had obtained the victory.

When the King had read the Dukes letter above mentioned, he reioiced much
thereat, both because of the reason above alleged 2, and also for that he soon
waxed weary of all long enterprises. Wherefore he gave him a speedy answer,
and directed a commission to certain in Amiens authorizing them thereby to
treat of truce. Whereupon diverse truces were concluded one after another for
four and five days: and in the end one so far as I remember for a year, to
the Constables great discontentation: for undoubtedly whatsoever men have
thought or can think to the contrary, he was then mortal enemy to the Duke,
and many hauty words passed between them in such sort, that after this they
never were friends as the sequel well declared. True it is that they sent
afterward one to another, but all for practice sake, and each to make his
profit by the other. For all that the Duke did was only to recover Saint
Quintine, which the Constable ever when he stood in fear of the King promised
to restore, and some of these treaties between them I have known so far
advanced, that the Dukes men upon the Constables promise to be received, have
come within two or three leagues of the town. But when the matter should be
executed, he ever continued in his accustomed dissimulation, and sent a
countermaund, which his double dealing cost him dear in the end. He thought
because of the seat of the town, the great number of men he had under his
charge paid out of the Kings cofers, and the variance between these two
Princes (which himself nourished) to hold them both in fear, but his
enterprise was too too dangerous: for they were both too great, too strong, and
too subtle.

When these armies were dismissed, the King returned into the country of
Touraine, the Duke of Guienne into his own country, and the Duke of Burgundy
into his: in the which estate these affairs remained awhile. The said Duke of
Burgundy assembled all the estates of his dominions 3, and declared unto them
what damage he had received by not having soldiers in ordinary pay as the King
had: alleging that if there had been but five hundred men in a readiness to
defend the frontires, the King would never have moved this war, but they
should have lived in peace. He showed further what great dangers they were like
to fall into if this inconvenience were not speedily redressed: and pressed
them earnestly for the payment of eight hundred light horse. In the end they
agreed to give him a subsidy of six score thousand crowns 4 over and above
all other duties they yearly paid him, in the which subsidy Burgundy was not
comprehended. But his said subjects for diverse respects feared to put
themselves into such subjection and slavery, as they saw the realm of France
in by reason of these men of arms: which their fear was not without cause:
for after the Duke had obtained five or six hundred men of arms in ordinary,
he sought continually to increase the number, and began to attempt more boldly
against his neighbors in such sort, that in the end these 120000. crowns grew
to 500000. and the number of his men of arms augmented so excessiuely, that
his subjects were greatly charged for their maintenance. To say my fancy of
these ordinary men of arms, I think under a wise Prince they be well
employed, but if he be otherwise, or happily at his death leave his children in
their minority, the service wherein their governors employ them is not always
profitable neither for the King, nor for his subjects. The hatred between the
King and the Duke diminished not but still endured. Further the Duke of Guienne
being returned into his country, sent often to the Duke of Burgundy, following
still his suit for his daughters marriage, who fed him continually with fair
words, as he did every other man that required her. And I think verily that he
neither was desirous of a son 5, neither would have married his daughter
during his life: but have kept her to intertaine men, thereby to obtain their
friendship and aid. For he had so many great enterprises in his head, that all
his life time could not suffice to atchieue them, and those adventures almost
impossible to be compassed: for half Europe would not have contented him. He
had courage enough to attempt any thing, his body was able to endure as much
labor and travel as was needful, he was furnished both of men and money, but
he lacked finenes and cunning sufficient for the managing of his affairs. And
what Prince soever desires to be great (notwithstanding that he be
accomplished with all other good parts:) yet if he lack an excellent wit all
is to no purpose, which undoubtedly proceeds of the mere grace of God. To be
short, if part of the Dukes virtues and part of the King our masters had been
tempered together, they would have made a perfect Prince: for undoubtedly in
wit the King far excelled him, as it well appeered in the end.

The Notes.
1 Of this army he spoke somewhat in the Duke of Bourbons advertisement sent to
the Duke of Burgundy mentioned in the first chapter of this book, it was led
by the Earl Daulphin d'Auuergne son to the Earl of Montpensier. Of this
discomfiture read Annal. Burgund. page 945.

2 The reason was because he perceived the intelligences of the Constable and
the rest to be untrue.

3 This assembly was held the 16. of June. Meyer.

4 But this subsidy of 120000. crowns was granted but for three years.
Meyer. page 348. and 367.

5 The Duke desired no son, because then his daughters marriage could not
have stood him in such stead as now it did.

Of the wars among the Princes of England during these troubles between King
Lewis and Charles Duke of Burgundy. Chap. 4.
I Must now discourse of Edward King of England, because Note that from this
place til the 7. Chapter, all these English affairs, fall into the years
1469. and 1470.
these three great Princes, namely our King, the King of England, and the Duke
of Burgundy, lived all in one age: in the which discourse, I will not observe
the Historiographers usual order in writing, who set down the certain years
and days when each thing happened, neither will I vouch examples out of ancient
histories, for you know them better than my self, and in so doing I should
but seem to reason of Divinity before a Doctor. But I will rudely advertise
you of all that I have seen, known or heard, of these Princes of whom I
write. You live in the self same age that all these things happened, wherefore
me think it needless so exactly to note the hours and seasons.

I have before rehearsed what occasion moved the Duke of Burgundy to mary King
Edward's sister, and said it was principally to fortify himself against the
King, otherwise he would never have done it, for the great affection he bare to
the house of Lancaster, whereof he was descended by his mother: for she was
daughter to the King of Portugal, and her mother daughter to the Duke of
Lancaster 1, so that as fervently as he loved the house of Lancaster, as
extremly hated he the house of York. But you shall understand that at the time
of this marriage, the house of Lancaster was utterly destroyed, and the house of
York no more spoken of. For King Edward being both King and Duke of York
reigned peaceably. During the civil wars between these two houses, were
fought in England seven or eight cruel battles, and in them slain three or
four score Princes and Lords of the blood royal, as before is rehearsed in
this history. The rest that escaped being all young Lords, whose fathers died
in these battles above mentioned, lived as banished men in the Duke of
Burgundies court, who received them as his kinsmen of the house of Lancaster,
before his marriage with King Edward's sister. I have seen them in so great
misery before they came to the Dukes knowledge, that those that beg from door
to door were not in poorer estate then they: for I once saw a Duke of Excester
run on foot bare legged after the Duke of Burgundies train, begging his bread
for Gods sake, but he uttered not his name. He was the nearest of the house of
Lancaster, and had married King Edward's sister 2, but when he was known, the
Duke gave him a small pension to maintain his estate. They of the house of
Somerset and diverse others, were there in like manner, who died all afterward
in the wars. Their fathers and kinsmen had spoiled and destroyed the realm of
France, and possessed the greatest part thereof many years, and afterward
slew one another, and those that remained alive in England and their children
have died as you have seen. Yet men say, that God punishes not now as he did
in the children of Isreal's time, but suffers evil men and evil Princes to
live unpunished. True it is that he threatens not now by express messengers
as he was wont: for he has left examples enough to instruct us.
Notwithstanding you may perceive by these discourses, ioining thereto the great
knowledge you have besides, that of evil Princes and such as have authority in
this world, and abuse it to cruelty or tyranny, few or none escape unpunished
though it happen not by and by after the fault committed, neither so soon
happily as those that are afflicted desire. But to return to King Edward, the
chief man in England that maintained the house of York was the Earl of
Warwick. And on the other side the greatest champion of the house of Lancaster
was the Duke of Sommerset. The said Earl of Warwick might justly be called
King Edwards father, as well for the training of him up, as also for the great
services he did him, for the which the King had also highly advanced him, for
besides his own inheritance which was great, he held goodly lands of the Kings
gift, as well crown lands, as lands forfeited by attaindor. Farther he was
deputy of Calice, and had diverse other great offices, so that I have heard his
yearly revenues valued at four score thousand crowns, besides his own
inheritance. But in the end he fell at variance with the King his master, about
a year (as I guess) before the Duke of Burgundies coming before Amiens: which
breach the said Duke furthered to the uttermost of his power. For the Earls
great authority in England much discontented him, besides that they two were
not friends, for the Earl had continual intelligence with the King our
master. To be short, about this present or not long before, the Earl of
Warwickes force was so great, that he seized the King his master into his
hands, and put to death diverse personages that he highly favored, namely the
Lord of Scales the Queens father 3, and two of his sons, (the third being
also in great danger) and with them diverse other knights. He entertained the
King his master for a season very honorably, and placed new servants about him,
supposing that through simplicity he would soon forget the old. The Duke of
Burgundy being not a little troubled with this adventure, practiced secretly
how King Edward might escape, and they two commune together, which enterprise
had so good success, that the King escaped indeed, and levied men, and
defeated certain of the Earls bands. He was a fortunate Prince in the field:
for he wan at the least nine great battles, fighting himself on foot in every
one of them. The Earl of Warwick unable to make resistance, advertised his
friends what they should do, and embarked at leisure, accompanied with the Duke
of Clarence, who had married his daughter and took part with him,
notwithstanding that he were King Edwards brother. They transported with them
both wives and children, and a great band of men, and sailed straight toward
Calais: within the which was the Earls lieutenant named the Lord of Vaucler 4,
and diverse of the said Earls household servants, who in stead of receiving
their Master presented him the canon. Further you shall understand, that as
they lay at anchor before the town, the Duchess of Clarence daughter to the
Earl of Warwick was delivered of a son, and great entreaty was made,
before Vaucler and the rest of the town would suffer two flaggons of wine to
be brought forth to her, which was great extremity of the servant toward the
master. For it is to be supposed that the Earl thought himself well assured
of this place, which is they very key of England: and the goodliest captainship
in mine opinion in the world, at the least in Christendom: which I dare boldly
auow, because I was there diverse times during these wars, and heard also the
Mayor of the staple report, that he would willingly farm yearly the
deputyship of Calais of the King of England for fifteen thousand crowns. For
the deputy receives the profits of all that they have on this side the sea,
and of all safe conducts, and places also the greatest part of the garrison at
his pleasure.

The King of England favored highly the Lord of Vaucler for this refusal made
to his Captain, and granted him by his letters patents the office of Deputy,
which the Earl his master before held: for he was a wise and an ancient
knight, and one of the order of the garter. The Duke of Burgundy also who then
lay at Saint Omer, conceived a marvelous good opinion of him, so far forth
that he sent me to him, granting him a yearly pension of a thousand crowns,
and desiring him to continue a true and faithful servant to the King his
Master as he had begun: which at my coming thither, I found him fully
determined to do, so that he swear in Staple Inn in Calais, (laying his hand
within mine) to be faithful and true to King Edward, and to serve him against
all men. The like oath all the town and all the garrison swear also. Farther I
was by the space of two months almost continually resident at Calais, at the
least posting daiely between Calais and Bullen to entertain the said Vaucler:
for you shall understand that during these English troubles, the Duke of
Burgundy came to Bullen where he prepared a great army by sea against the
Earl of Warwick, who at his departure from Calais, took many ships of the
Dukes subjects, which advanced forward the war between the King of France and
us. For the Earls men sold the booty in Normandy: whereupon the Duke of
Burgundy arrested all the French Merchants that came to the Mart at Andwerp.
Now because it is meet to understand as well the cunning and subtle, as the
just and upright dealings of the world, (not to practice them, but to know how
to avoid them,) I will rehearse unto you a slight or subtilitie (term it as
you list) that was cunningly conueighed. Farther I would that men should
understand the practices as well of our neighbors as our selves, to the end it
may appear that in all places are both good and bad. When the Earl of Warwick
came before Calais, thinking to enter into it as his only refuge: the Lord of
Vaucler being a very wise gentleman, sent him word that if he entered the town
he should cast away himself: considering that all England, the Duke of
Burgundy, the people of the town, and a great part of the garrison: namely
the Lord of Duras Marshall there for the King of England, and diverse others
that had men in the town were his enemies: wherefore his best way should be to
retire into France, and as touching the town of Calais he willed him not to
trouble himself: for he would yield him good account thereof when time and
occasion should serve. He did his Captain good service by giving him this
advise, but showed himself thereby a very Judas to his Master. For undoubtedly
a more traitorous part was never played, considering both that the King of
England had made him Deputy of the town of Calais, and the Duke of Burgundy
given him so large a pension.

The Notes.
1 Philippa daughter to John Duke of Lancaster was married to John King of
Portugale, and had issue by him Isabell mother to Duke Charles.

2 This was Henry Holland Duke of Exceter, whose wife was Anne sister to King
Edward the fourth, and his grandmother was Elizabeth daughter to John Duke of
Lancaster by his first wife, but he died without issue.

3 Our chronicles name the Queens father Earl of Rivers, and so does
afterward also our Author lib. 5. cap. 15.

4 This Vaucler was a Gascoine borne.

How by King Lewis his aid, the Earl of Warwick chased King Edward out of
England, to the Duke of Burgundies great grief, who received him into his
countries. Chap. 5.
THe Earl of Warwick followed Vauclers advise, and landed in Normandy, where
the King honorably received him, and furnished him largely of money for his men's
expenses, and appointed also the bastard of Bourbon Admiral of France being
well accompanied, to defend the Englishmen and their ships against the Duke of
Burgundies navy, which was so mighty and strong that no man durst stir in
these narrow seas for fear of it, making war upon the Kings subjects both by
sea and land, and threatening them every where. All this happened the summer
before the King surprised Saint Quintine and Amiens, which was (as before you
have heard) in the year 1470. The Duke of Burgundies navy above mentioned was
stronger than the Kings and the Earls joined together. For he had taken at
Sluse many great ships of Spain, Portugal and Genua, and diverse hulks of
Almaine. King Edward was a man of no great forecast, but very valiant, and the
beautifullest Prince that lived in his time. He took no care for the Earl of
Warwicks landing as the Duke of Burgundy did, who perceiving great tumults
already arising in England in the Earls favor, advertised the King often
thereof. But he made small account of any danger, neither seemed to fear his
enemy: which sure was great folly considering the great preparation he saw
made. For the King armed all the ships to the sea that he could get, and manned
them well, and provided furniture also for the English men.

Besides this, he made a marriage between the Prince of Wales and the Earl of
Warwickes second daughter. The said Prince was only son and heir to King
Henry of England, who lived yet prisoner in the Tower of London. This was a
strange marriage when the Earl had deposed and imprisoned the Princes father,
to cause him to mary his daughter, and to entertain also the Duke of Clarence,
brother to the King of the other faction, who had just cause to fear his own
estate, if the house of Lancaster recovered the crown. Thus we see that such
enterprises are not achieved without dissimulation. At the self same time
that this army above mentioned lay in a readiness to sail into England, I was
at Calice to entertain the Lord of Vaucler, whose dooble dealing till that
very instant I never perceived, notwithstanding that it had now continued the
space of three months. But at that present, I desired him (because of the news
we heard) to put all the Earl of Warwicks household servants being to the
number of twenty or thirty out of the town, alleging that I was sure the
Kings army and the Earls were ready to depart out of Normandy where they lay,
and if the Earl should happen suddenly to land in England, some such tumult
might arise in the town of Calice by means of his servants, that he should
not be master thereof. Wherefore I pressed him earnestly in all haste to put
them out of the town, which he always heertofore promised me to do, but now
he drew me aside saying, that he would be master of the town well enough, and
required me to do this message to the Duke of Burgundy, that if he would be a
friend to the realm of England he should endeavor himself to make peace and
not war: which words he spoke because of the navy the Duke had on the sea
against the Earl of Warwick. He told me farther, that peace might easily be
made, because that day a gentlewoman passed through Calice to go into France
to the Duches of Clarence with certain ouertures of peace from King Edward.
And he said true indeed, but as he abused others, even so was he himself
deceived by this gentlewoman: for she went about a great enterprise, which also
she achieved to the prejudice of the Earl of Warwick, and his whole faction.
Of this fine practice, and all other that have been managed on this side the
sea, I write the more at large because I am well assured that no man is able to
make truer report of them then my self, at the least of those that have happened
within these twenty years.

The secret delivered to this woman was to counsel the Duke of Clarence not to
cause the destruction of his own house, by setting up again the house of
Lancaster, but to remember their ancient harred and division, adding that he
might well assure himself that the Earl of Warwick having married his daughter
to the Prince of Wales, and already done homage to him, would by all means
possible seek to make him King. This gentlewoman so wisely executed the charge
committed unto her, that she wan the Duke of Clarence, who promised to revolt
to the King his brother immediately after his return into England. She was a
woman well advised and of few words, and because of her sex, had leave granted
her to pass to her Meistres easilier then a man should, and as crafty a fox
as this Vaucler was, this woman went beyond him, and was the only contriuer of
the enterprise, whereby the Earl of Warwick and his whole faction were utterly
destroyed: wherefore it is no shame to be suspicious, and to have an eye upon
those that pass to and fro, but great shame it is to be deceived, and undone
through our own folly. Notwithstanding suspicions ought to be grounded upon
some good presumption, for to be too suspicious is naught.

You have heard, already how the Earl of Warwicks army, and the Kings ships
appointed to wafte him over were in a readiness to take sea, and how the Duke of
Burgundies navy being at Hancy lay prepared to fight with them. But it pleased
God so to dispose of this voyage, that the self same night so great a tempest
arose that the Dukes navy was forced to sever: part wherofran upon the cost of
Scotland, and part into Holland: and not long after the Earl having a good
gale of wind, passed into England without all danger. The Duke of Burgundy
had advertised King Edward in what part the Earl would land, and had sent men
purposely to him to solicit him to look to himself: but he little regarding
the danger, passed forth the time in hunting, having none so near him as the
Archbishop of York, and the Marquis of Montagu, the Earl of Warwicks
brethren, who had promised and solemnly sworn to serve him against their
brother and all others, wereunto he gave credit. Immediately after the Earls
landing, great forces joined with him: wherewith the King being much abashed,
began then, (but all too late) to look about him, and sent word to the Duke of
Burgundy, desiring him that his navy might still keep the Sea to stop the
Earl from retiring again into France (for upon the land he would match him
well enough) which message pleased no man that heard it: for it had been much
better to have kept him from landing, then to be constrained to hazard his
estate in battle when he was landed. Five or six days after the Earls
arrival his power was so great, that he encamped within three leagues of King
Edward. Notwithstanding the Kings force was greater than his, if all his men
had been faithful and true, and lay also in camp to fight with him. Further
you shall understand that the King lodged (as himself told me) in a strong
village, at the least a strong house into the which no man could enter but by a
draw bridge, which was a happy chance for him: the rest of his army lay in
other villages round about. But as he sat at dinner, suddenly one came running
in, and brought news that the Marquis of Montague the Earls brother and
certain other were mounted on horseback, and had caused all their men to
cry, God save King Henry. Which message the King at the first believed not,
but in all haste sent other messengers forth, and armed himself, and set men
also at the barriers of his lodging to defend it. He was accompanied with the
Lord Hastings Lord Chamberlain of England, a wise Knight and of the greatest
authority about him, who was married to the Earl of Warwicks sister, yet
notwithstanding was true and faithful to his Master, and had three hundred
horse under his charge in the Kings army as himself told me. With the King
was also the Lord of Scales the Queen of Englands brother, and diverse other
valiant Knights and Esquires, who all perceived that this business went not
well: for the messengers brought word that the report was true, and that the
enemies assembled to assault the King.

But God so provided for the King that he lodged hard by the sea side, near a
place where a little ship laden with victuals that followed his army, and two
hulks of Holland fraughted with merchandise lay at anchor: he had no other
shift but to run to save himself in one of them 1. The Lord Chamberlain
stayed awhile behind him, and talked with the lieutenant of his band and
diverse other particular men in the Kings army, willing them to go to the
enemies, but to bear true and faithful hearts to the King and him: which talk
ended, he went aboard to the rest being ready to depart. Now you shall
understand that the custom in England is, after the victory obtained, neither
to kill nor ransom any man, especially of the vulgar sort: knowing all men
then to be ready to obey them, because of their good success. Wherefore these
soldiers after the Kings departure received no harm. Notwithstanding K. Edward
himself told me, that in albattels that he wan, so soon as he had obtained
victory he used to mount on horseback, and cry too Save the people and kill the
nobles: for of them few or none escaped. Thus fled King Edward the year 1470.
with two hulks and a little bote of his own country, accompanied with seven
or eight hundred persons, having none other apparel than they ware in the
wars, utterly unfurnished of money, and hardly knowing whither they went.
Strange it was to see this poor King (for so might he now well be called) to
fly after this sort pursued by his own servants, and the rather, for that he
had by the space of twelve or thirteen years lived in greater pleasures and
delicacies than any Prince in his time: for he had wholly given himself to
dames, hunting, hawking, and banketting, in such sort that he used when he went
a hunting in the summer season, to cause many pauilions to be pitched to solace
himself there with the Ladies. And to say the truth his personage served as well
to make court as any man's that ever I knew: for he was young, and as goodly a
gentleman as lived in our age, I mean in this time of his adversity: for
afterward he grew marvelous gross. But behold now how he fell into the trobles
and adversities of the world. He sailed straight toward Holland, and at that
time the Easterlings were enemies both to the English men and the French, and
had many ships of war upon the sea, wherefore they were much feared of the
English men, and not without cause: for they were very good soldiers, and had
done them great harm that year, and taken many prises. These Easterlings
discried afar off the ships wherein the King fled, and seven or eight of them
began to make sail after him, but in vain: for he was far before them, and
fell upon the coast of Holland or somewhat lower: for he arrived in Freezland by
a little town called Alquemare 2, as near the which as was possible his
mariners cast anchor: for because it was ebbing water they could not enter the
haven. The Easterlings came in like manner and anchored hard by them, minding to
board them the next tide. Thus we see that one mischief never comes without
company.

King Edwards good success was now clean altered, and his thoughts quite
changed: for not past fifteen days before this misfortune, he would little
have believed him that had told him that the Earl of Warwick should chase him
out of England, and subdue the whole country in eleven days: for in that small
space he brought it to due obedience. Further, he mocked the Duke of Burgundy
for spending his treasure in defending the sea: and wished that the Earl were
already landed in England. But what excuse could he make now for himself
receiving so great loss through his own fault, save this, that such a mishap
was not to be doubted: of which excuse a Prince grown to man's estate ought to
be ashamed, for it will not serve. Wherefore let King Edwards example teach all
Princes that think it shame to fear their enemies, to be wise in time: for
notwithstanding that the greatest part of their servants through flattery
uphold their sayings, and that themselves also by such words suppose to
purchase an opinion of great courage: yet sure (whatsoever is said to their
face) wise men account such language but mere folly: for it is great honor to
fear that which is to be feared, and to provide for it accordingly. Further, a
wise man in a Princes company is a great treasure and jewel, if he may be
believed and have leave to speak the truth.

By chance the Lord of Gruteuse the Duke of Burgundies lieutenant in Holland
was at that present in the place where King Edward arrived, who being
advertised by certain that the King sent to land, both of his arrival, and of
the danger he was in of the Easterlings, gave commandment forthwith to the
said Easterlings not to touch him: and went also himself into the Kings ship
to welcome him. And thus he landed 3 being accompanied with his brother the
Duke of Gloucester (who afterward named himself King Richard) and a train of
fifteen hundred persons. The King had not one penny about him, but gave the
Master of the ship for his passage a goodly gown furred with martins,
promising one day to do him a good turn: and as touching his train never so
poor a company was seen. But the Lord of Gruteuse dealt very honorably with
them: for he gave much apparel among them, and defraied the King to La Hay in
Holland whither he himself also waited upon him. Afterward he advertised the
Duke of Burgundy of this adventure, who was maruellously abashed at the news,
and had much rather have heard of the Kings death: for he feared the Earl of
Warwick, who was his mortal enemy, and bare now the whole sway in England.
The said Earl soon after he was landed, found infinite numbers of men to take
his part. For the army that King Edward left behind him, what for love, what
for fear yielded to him in such sort, that every day his forces increased. And
in this estate went he to London, where a great number of Knights and Esquires
(who afterward did King Edward good service) took sanctuary, as also did the
Queen his wife, who was there delivered of a son in very poor estate.

The Notes.
1 The King embarked at Lyn.

2 Alquemare Meyer names Tessela.

3 King Edward landed in Holland the 9. of October. Meyer.

How the Earl of Warwick took out of prison King Henry of England. Chap. 6.
THe E. immediately after his arrival at London, went forthwith to the tower
and took K. Henry out of prison, whom himself many years before had lead
thither crying before him, Traitor, Traitor: but now he called him his
sovereign Lord, and conueighed him to his palace at Westminster, where he sat
him under the cloth of estate in the Duke of Clarences presence, who little
liked that sight. Farther he sent forthwith three or four hundred men to
Calais to spoil and forray the country of Boulenois, whom the Lord of Vaucler
(so often above mentioned) friendly received, and made then open declaration of
the good will he had always borne the Earl his Master. The same day that the
Duke received news of the Kings arrival in Holland: I was come from Calais to
Bulen (where the Duke then lay,) understanding nothing of this adventure, nor
of the Kings flight. The Duke was first advertised that he was dead, whereof he
forced not greatly, for he loved the house of Lancaster much better then the
house of York. Besides that he had with him the Dukes of Excester and
Sommerset and diverse others of King Henry's faction, by whose means he thought
himself assured of peace with the house of Lancaster. But he feared the Earl
of Warwick, neither knew he how to entertain him that was come to him 1, I
mean King Edward who was his brother in law, and of the same order: for the
King ware the golden Fleese, and the Duke the Garter.

The Duke forthwith sent me back again to Calais, accompanied with a
gentleman or two of this new King Henry's faction, and gave me instructions
how to deal with this new world, pressing me earnestly to go because it stood
him upon to be well served in this business. I went as far as Tournehan a
castle near to Guiens, and further durst not pass, because I found the
people flying for fear of the English men, who were abroad and spoiled all the
country. But I sent forthwith to the Lord of Vaucler desiring a safe conduct:
for before I was accustomed to go without any, and was always honorably
received: for the English men are very courteous and honorable in their
entertainment. All this seemed strange to me: for I never had seen such sudden
alterations in the world. I advertised the Duke the same night of the danger I
should be in if I passed further, making no mention of the safe conduct I had
sent for, because I doubted what answer I should receive thereof. The Duke sent
me a ring from his finger bidding me go forward, and if I were taken prisoner
he would redeem me: for he cared not greatly to endanger one of his servants
at his need. But I had provided well for my self: for I received a safe
conduct with very courteous letters from the Lord of Vaucler. Wherein he sent me
word that I might go and come after my woonted manner. Whereupon I went to
Guisnes, and found the captain at the castle gate, who offered me a cup of
wine, without that he led me into the castle as he was accustomed, but he
feasted and entertained honorably these gentlemen of King Henry's faction that
accompanied me. From thence I went to Calais, where no man came forth to
receive me after their woonted sort, but al men ware the Earl of Warwicks
livery. Further, upon the gate of my lodging they made above an hundred white
crosses and rimes, signifying that the King of France and the Earl of Warwick
were all one: all the which seemed strange to me. Soon after my coming to
Calais, I sent to Graueling, being but five leagues thence, commanding all
English merchants and merchandises to be stayed, because the Englishmen had so
spoiled the country. The Lord of Vaucler sent for me to diner, being well
accompanied, and wearing on his cap a white ragged staff of gold enamiled 2,
being the Earls cognizance, which all the rest that were with him ware
likewise, and he that could not have it of gold, had if of cloth. It was told
me there at diner, that within less than a quarter of an hour after these
news came out of England, every man ware the said cognizance: so speedy and
sudden was the change. This was the first time that I began to consider how
unstable and uncertain all worldly things are. The said Vaucler gave me very
courteous language, and made certain excuses in the Earl his captains
behalf, rehearsing also what great benefits he had received at his hands. But
as touching the rest that were with him, I never saw men so far out of frame:
for those that I took to have bin the Kings trustiest servants, were they that
most threatened him: some I think for fear, but others in good earnest. Those
household servants of the Earls, whom I had required the Lord of Vaucler
heretofore to put out of the town, were now in great credit. Notwithstanding
they never understood that I had moved the said Vaucler to any such purpose.
In all communication that passed between them and me, I ever told them that
King Edward was dead, whereof I said I was well assured, notwithstanding that I
knew the contrary, adding further, that though it were not so, yet was the
league between the Duke of Burgundy and the King and realm of England such,
that this accident could not infringe it: for we would account him King whom
they did. I said moreover, that because of the alterations that had happened in
times past, these words, With the King and the Realm, were inserted into the
league, for performance also whereof four of the best towns in England were
in pledge to the Duke. The merchants required in any wise to have me stayed,
because their goods were taken at Grauelin by my commandment as they said. In
the end peace was thus concluded between them and me, that they should pay for all the cattle they had taken, or restore it again: for by agreement between
the house of Burgundy and them, they might go into certain pastures thereabout,
and take cattle for the provision of the town, at a price which they now
paid, and prisoners they had taken none. Thus it was agreed that the league
should remain firm and unviolable between us and the King and the realm of
England, save that for Edward we named Henry.

This appointment pleased well the Duke of Burgundy, for the Earl of Warwick
was sending four thousand English men to Calice to make sharp war upon his
dominions, neither could the D. pacify him by any means. Notwithstanding the
rich merchants of London, diverse of the which were then at Calice, in the end
persuaded him to peace, because their staple of wools is there, which is a far
goodlier thing than a man would believe: for it is almost incredible of how
great value the wool is that is transported thither twice a year, and lies
there till merchants come to buy it. The chief vent whereof is into Flaunders
and Holland, which was the principal cause that moved these merchants to
labor so earnestly for peace, and for stay of the soldiers the Earl was
sending over: which sure was a happy chance for the Duke of Burgundy, for it
was even at the very same instant that the King took Amiens and Saint
Quintine: and if both the realms had made war upon him at once, undoubtedly he
had been undone. He traveled to appease the Earl of Warwick by all means
possible, alleging that he would attempt nothing against King Henry, seeing he
was himself of the house of Lancaster, and using such words as might best
serve for his purpose.

Now to return to King Edward, he came to Saint Paul to the Duke of Burgundy,
and pressed him earnestly for aid to return home, assuring him that he had
great intelligence in England, and desiring him for Gods love not to abandon
him, considering he had married his sister, and that they were brethren of one
order. The Dukes of Somerset and Excester labored him to the contrary, to wit,
to take part with King Henry. The Duke could not tell whom to please, and
either party he feared to displease. But in the end because sharp war was
already begun upon him, even at his very nose 3, he inclined to the Duke of
Somerset and others above named, accepting their promises against the Earl of
Warwick their ancient enemy. Wherewith King Edward there present was
woonderfully disquieted. But the Dukes servants alleged the best reasons they
could in excuse hereof, saying that the Duke used this dissimulatio^ to avoid
war with both the realms at once, adding thereto, that if he should be
overthrown, he could not after aid him at his ease. Notwithstanding the Duke
seeing that he could no longer stay the King there, but that needs he would
return into England, and fearing for diverse considerations altogether to
discontent him: pretended openly that he would not aid him, and made
proclamation that no man should go to his service: but covertly he delivered
him 50000. gildons of the Saint Andrews cross, and caused three or four
great ships to be armed for him at La Vere in Zeland 4, which is a haven where
all nations are received. Besides all this, he entertained for him secretly
fowerteen ships of the Easterlings well appointed, who promised to serve him
till he were landed in England and fifteen days after, which was great aid
considering the time.

The Notes.
1 He means whether he should aid the King or no.

2 Our author reports this ragged staff to be black, but because the Earls
of Warwick never gave it black but the Earls of Kent, I have translated it
white, no whit doubting but that either the printer has faulted here, or our
authors memory failed him.

3 To wit by the Englishmen sent over by the Earl of Warwick.

4 La Vere, otherwise called Camphere is in the I Will of VValkeren in Zeland not
in Holland, and is the Scottish staple, wherefore I have been bold to amend
the book.

How King Edward returned into England, where he slew in battle first the
Earl of Warwick, and then the Prince of Wales. Chap. 7.
KIng Edward departed out of Flanders the year 1471. at the self Here our
English affairs begin the year, 1471.
same instant that the D. of Burgundy went to Amiens against the King. The
said Duke thought now howsoever the world went in England he could not speed
amiss, because he had friends on both sides: King Edward immediately after his
landing, marched straight toward London, because three or four hundred
Knights and Esquires of his faction, together with others of the meaner sort,
to the number of two thousand and better had retired themselves into the
Sanctuaries of the city, which was a happy chance for him, for if he landed
with small force. The Earl of Warwick being in the north parts with a great
army, hearing these news made haste to be at London before him, rather for
other respects than for that he greatly feared the revolt of the town,
notwithstanding the contrary happened. For King Edward was received into the
city with great joy and triumph the tuesday before Easter, contrary to the
expectation of most men, for all the world accounted him as utterly undone. And
undoubtedly if they had shut the gates against him, he had been past all
recovery: for the Earl of Warwick was but a days journey behind him. There
were three things especially (as I have heard) that caused the town to revolt.
First, the gentlemen that were in the sanctuaries and the young Prince lately
borne. The second, the great debts that the King owed in the town, in respect
whereof the merchants to whom he was indebted thought it their best way to take
part with him. The third, a great many women of honor and rich merchants wives,
with whom in times past he had been familiar, persuaded their husbands and
friends to incline to him. He stayed not past two or three days in the town:
for upon Easter even he departed with all the force he could leuy, and marched
against the Earl of Warwick, whom he met the next morning being Easter day:
and as they stood in order of battle, the one in face of the other, suddenly
the D. of Clarence the Kings brother (who was reconciled to the King as before
you have heard) revolted to the King with twelve thousand men and better 1,
which no less astonished the Earl than encouraged the King, whose force was not
great. But all this notwithstanding the battle was cruel and blooddy. They
were all footmen on both sides, of the Kings vaward a great number were
slain: then his battle and the Earls met, and joined so fiercely together,
that the King himself fought in person more valiantly than any man of either
army. The Earl of Warwick used never to fight on foot, but his manner was when
he had led his men to the charge, to take horse, and if the victory fell on his
side to fight among his soldiers, otherwise to depart in time. But at this
battle he was constrained by his brother the Marquis of Mountacute, a valiant
knight, to light on foot and send away his horse. To conclude, in this battle
died the Earl and his brother, with a great number of gentlemen, and the
slaughter of the poor people was also great. For King Edward at his departure
out of Flaunders, resolved to cry no more to save the people and kill the
nobles: but he had conceived extreme hatred against the communalty of England,
both for the great favor they bare the Earl of Warwick, and for other respects
also: wherefore at this battle he spared them not. Of the Kings side died
about fifteen hundred, and the field was valiantly fought.

At the time of this battle the Duke of Burgundy lay before Amiens where he
received letters from the Duches his wife, that King Edward her brother was not
a little discontented with him, alleging that the aid he gave him, was given
in evil sort, and with evil will, so far forth that he was almost utterly
forsaken of him: and to say the truth the King and he after this never loved
one an other. Notwithstanding the Duke supposing that this victory would
greatly further his affairs, caused the news to be published in all places.

I had forgotten to tell you how King Edward finding King Henry at London, lead
him with him into the battle above mentioned. This King Henry was a very
simple man, and almost an innocent: and if I have not heard a lie, incontinent
after the battle the Duke of Gloucester K. Edwards brother, (who afterward
named himself K. Richard) slew this holy man K. Henry with his own hands, or
caused him to be slain in his presence in some secret place 2. The Prince of
Wales was landed in England when this battle above mentioned was fought,
having in his company the Dukes of Excester and Sommerset, with diverse others
of his kinsfolks and ancient folowers of his house. His army was to the number
of forty thousand, as I have been informed by diverse that were with him: and if
the Earl of Warwick would have stayed for him, it is very like the victory
would have been theirs. But the Earl feared both the Duke of Sommerset, whose
father and brother he had slain: and also Queen Margaret the Princes mother:
wherefore he fought alone and would not tarry for them 3. Mark here by this
example how long ancient factions and partialities endure, how much they are to
be feared, and what great damage ensues thereof. So soon as King Edward had
obtained this victory, he marched incontinent against the Prince of Wales,
where another cruel battle was fought: for the Princes force was greater than
the Kings, notwithstanding the lot of victory fell to the King, and the Prince
was slain upon the place 4 with diverse other great Lords, and a marvelous
number of common soldiers. The Duke of Sommerset was taken, and the next day
beheaded. In eleven days the Earl of Warwick subdued the whole realm of
England, at the least brought it to obedience: and in one and twenty King
Edward recovered it, having fought two great and cruel battles. Thus you see
what sudden mutations have been in England. K. Edward caused many of the
people to be put to death in many places, especially such as had made
assemblies against him. And from that day forward reigned peaceably in England
till his death, though not without great trouble and vexation of mind. I will
here end my discourse of these English affairs, till time and occasion serve
in some other place, only adding this, that of all the nations in the world,
the English men are most desirous to try their quarrels by dint of sword.

The Notes.
1 Our Chronicles report that the Duke turned on the Kings side at Couentrie
before the Kings coming to London: and they vary also in other circumstances
from our author.

2 Our histories report otherwise of King Henry's death, for he was slain in
the Tower, and not so soon after the battle.

3 Our Chronicles report that the Duke of Summer set was at Barnet field with
the Earl of VVarvvicke, and repaired afterward to the Queen, and was taken in
the second battle, and then be he aded.

4 Our histories write that the Prince was not slain in the battle but soon
after, having had communication with King Edward.

How the wars revived between King Lewis and Charles Duke of Burgundy, by the
solicitation of the Dukes of Guienne and Britain. Chap. 8.
I Will now return to our affairs on this side the sea, whereof I have made no
mention since the Duke of Burgundies departure from before Amiens, the Kings
return into the country of Touraine, and the Duke of Guienne his brother into
Guienne. The said Duke of Guienne continued still his suit above mentioned for
his marriage with the Duke of Burgundies daughter, whereunto the said Duke in
word ever showed himself willing, but in deed meant nothing less, both
because he purposed to use her as an instrument whereby to entertain all the
world, and a merchandise to put every man in hope of, and also for that he
stomacked the evil practices they had contrived to constrain him to this
marriage perforce. The Earl of Saint Paul Constable of France busied himself
in this treaty very earnestly, desiring that the marriage might seem to be
effected by his only means and procurement. On the other side the Duke of
Britain traueled therein, to the end the whole honor thereof might redound to
him. The King was as busy as the best to break it off, though needlessly, as
well for the two reasons above alleged, as also because the Duke of Burgundy
was not desirous of so great a son in law, wherefore in vain the King
troubled himself, but he could not see another man's thoughts. And sure he had
just cause of fear, for if this marriage had taken effect, his brother should
have been so mighty, that he and the Duke of Britain joined together, might
have put the Kings estate and his childrens in great danger. In the mean time
about these affairs many ambassadors passed to and fro as well secretly as
openly.

This often passing to and fro of ambassadors is a thing very dangerous: for
under color thereof many times evil practices are set abroch: yet
notwithstanding ambassadors must of force both be sent and received. They that
shall read this history will ask peradventure what remedy I can devise
against this inconvenience, because it seems almost remediless. For answer
whereunto I will show mine advise, notwithstanding that I know a number far
better able to discourse heerof than my self. Ambassadors that come from
perfect friends, with whom no occasion of quarrel can arise, must be well
entertained, and permitted to come often to the Princes presence, I mean if
the Prince be wise and of comely personage, otherwise the less he be seen the
better. Notwithstanding when he must of necessity be seen, let him be well
apparelled, and well instructed what to say, and use short speech according to
Princes amity, which usually is but short. But if ambassadors be sent openly
or secretly between Princes that are in continual hatred and war, as all
those have been that I have known or been conversant with in my time, sure
there is great danger therein. Notwithstanding mine advise is, that ambassadors
be well entertained and honorably received: for to send to meet them, to lodge
them well, to appoint trusty and wise men to accompany them, are not only
points of great courtesy, but also of great safety. For thereby you shall both
understand who they are that resort to them, and also stay such as be light
headed and discontented with the present estate, from bringing them
intelligence: for there is no Princes court wherein all have contented minds.
Further, they must have speedy audience, and soon be dispatched. For me
think it a perilous matter for a man to harbor his enemy in his house, but to
defray them, to lodge them well, and to give them presents is but courtesy.
Further, in time of open war no practice nor ouerture of peace must be
altogether broken off (because peradventure the lest of them may serve us to
good purpose) but all must be continued and entertained, and all ambassadors
heard, using them as before is said, and appointing sure watch to epsy who go
to bear them intelligence, and are sent to them either by day or night: but
this must be done as secretly as may be. Further, for one ambassador they send
to you, send you two to them: and though they be weary of your ambassadors,
and forbid any more to come: yet send still when time and occasion serves. For
no spy shall have such liberty to inquire and understand of all matters as
they. And if you send two or three together, it is impossible for your enemy to
have so good watch (I mean using them with good terms as ambassadors are to
be used) but that some of them shall have conference and intelligence with one
or other. Lastly, a wise Prince must always endeavor himself to have some
secret friend or friends about his enemy, and beware as near as he may (for
in such cases men cannot always do as they would) that his enemy have not the
like about him. You will say peradventure that by such often sending I shall
increase mine enemies insolency and pride. But I force not thereof: for by
this means I shall understand his secrets, and in the end all the profit and
honor shall redound to me. And notwithstanding that mine enemy may deal with
me after the same sort, yet would I not cease from sending, but intertaine all
ouertures and break off none, to the end I may always have occasion to send.
For all men have not like wisdom, like cunning, nor like experience in these
affairs, neither like occasion to travel for experience, and in these cases
the wisest win the garland: whereof I will give you a manifest example. In all
treaties of peace concluded between the English and French nations, the French
have always showed more finenes, subtlety, and cunning than the English, so
far forth that the said English men have a common proverb, as once they told
me, when I treated with them: that in all battles fought with the French, ever
or for the most part they have obtained honor and victory, but in all treaties
that have been concluded between them they have ever received loss and
damage. And sure in mine opinion I have known in this realm (especially of
King Lewis his training up) men as sufficient to negotiate in a treaty of
peace as any in the world. For those that are employed in these affairs must
be mild men, and such as can bear patiently all rude words to compass their
purposes for their Masters profit, and such only would King Lewis employ. I
have been somewhat long in discoursing how ambassadors actions must diligently
be observed, but not without cause: for I have seen and known so great
falsehood and treachery used under color thereof, that I could no sooner end
my discourse.

This marriage between the Duke of Guienne and the Duke of Burgundies daughter
was so earnestly labored, that in the end some promise was made thereof both by
mouth and letter. But I have known the like done to Nicholas Duke of Calabria
and Loraine 1 son to John Duke of Calabria so often above mentioned, and to
Philibert Duke of Sauoy that last died, and to Maximilian Duke of Austrich now
King of Romans only son of Frederike the Emperor, who also received a letter
written with the damsels own hand by her fathers commandment, and a diamond
therewith. All which promises were made in less than three years space: yet
am I well assured that during the Dukes life, none of them should have been
accomplished, at the least with his consent. But this letter above mentioned
furthered much Duke Maximilians suit, as hereafter you shall hear. I write
not this to charge thereby the Duke of Burgundy, or any of those above
mentioned, but only to rehearse the course of these affairs. Further, I
persuade my self that rude and simple men will not busy their brains about
the reading of this history: but Princes and Courtiers shall find in it good
lessons and aduertisements in mine opinion. During this treaty of marriage
diverse new enterprises against the King were in communication. With the Duke
of Burgundy was the Lord of Vrfe, Poncet of Riuiere, and certain other mean
personages that ran to and fro, for the D. of Guiennes affairs. In like manner
the Abbot of Begarde afterward Bishop of Leon was resident with him, for the
Duke of Britain. These advertised the Duke of Burgundy that the King practiced
to corrupt the Duke of Guiens servants, and to withdraw them from him, partly
by love, partly by force: adding also that he had already razed a certain
place belonging to the Lord of Estissac, the Duke of Guiennes servant, and had
begun diverse other attempts against his brother, so far forth, that he had
withdrawn from him certain of his household servants: whereby appeered
manifestly (as they said) that he meant to take Guienne from him now as in times
past he had done Normandy once granted him for his partage as before is
mentioned. The Duke of Burgundy sent diverse ambassadors to the King about these
affairs, who ever excused himself 2, and accused his brother, saying that for
his part he minded not to touch his brothers partage: but that his brother by
seeking to enlarge his limits, was author of all these troubles.

We have here to consider how troublesome, dangerous, and far from all good end
the affairs of this Realm are, when it is in discord and civil dissension:
for notwithstanding that at the beginning of the troubles all men hope shortly
to see them at an end: yet is the contrary greatly to be feared, for though the
fire be kindled at the first, but between two or three Princes or men of
meaner estate: yet before two years be exspired, all our neighbors shall be
bidden to the banquet, as plainly may appear by this that follows. At this
very instant that I now write of, the D. of Guienne at the least his servants,
and the D. of Britain desired the Duke of Burgundy in no wise to call the
Englishmen to his aid: for seeing all that they did was for the good and
benefit of the realm, they would not bring the ancient enemies of the crown
into the realm: adding farther that if he would be in a readiness they should
be strong enough of themselves, as well because of their great forces as also of
the good intelligence they had in the realm with diverse Captains and others.
And once it was my chance to be present when the Lord of Vrfe had communication
with the Duke to this effect, and withal pressed him earnestly with all speed
to leauy his army. The Duke stood at a window and called me to him and said:
Here is my Lord of Vrfe that presses me earnestly to leauy the greatest force
that possible I may, alleging that it shall be greatly for the benefit of the
realm: what think you of this motion if I enter into the realm with my army,
shall I do any great good there? I answered him merrily that I thought no: then
said he: I love the realm of France better than my Lord of Vrfe weeneth, for
where it has one King I would it had six.

During the treaty of marriage above mentioned, Edward King of England who
thought verily that the marriage should have bin accomplished: (wherein he was
deceived, as was also the King) traueled earnestly with the Duke of Burgundy to
break it off, alleging that the K. had no issue male, wherefore if he happened
to die the crown should descend to his brother, whereby (if this marriage took
effect) the realm of England should stand in great danger, so many seigniories
being united to the crown. This matter troubled maruellously though needlessly,
not only the King of England, but also his whole Council in such sort, that
they would give no credit to the Duke of Burgundy, what promise soever he made
to the contrary. The said Duke notwithstanding the request above mentioned
made unto him by the Dukes of Guienne and Britain, for not calling in
strangers to his aid, was very desirous that the King of England should invade
some part of the realm, and himself would have pleaded ignorance therein. But
the Englishmen would not be won thereunto: for they so much feared the annexing
of the house of Burgundy by this marriage to the crown of France, that they
would at that time rather have aided the King, than invaded him. You see here
all these Princes thoroughly busied and accompanied with a number of wise men,
who (as the sequel well declared) foresawe a far of more by the one half than
in their life time took effect: for they all through this continual toil and
travel, in short space one after another ended their lives, each man reioicing
at others death as of a thing most desired. Soon after also followed their
masters, leaving their successors troubles enough, all save the King our master
who left his realm to his son, quiet both from foraine wars and civil
dissension, so that he did more for him than ever he either would or could do
for himself: for I never knew him in peace save only a little before his death.

The Duke of Guienne at this present lay sick and in danger of death as some
said, but others affirmed the contrary: his men pressed earnestly the Duke of
Burgundy to put himself into the field, because the time of the year served
fitly for that purpose, and advertised him that the Kings army was abroad, and
lay at Saint John d' Angelie, or at Xainctes, or thereabout. To be short, they
labored the Duke so importunately, that he went to Arras, and there assembled
his forces, and marched toward the towns of Peronne, Roye, and Montdidier:
his army was marvelous great, yea the greatest that ever he had before: for in
it were twelve hundred Lances of his ordinary retinue, every one of them
accompanied with three archers well armed and well mounted: farther in every
company of these Lances were ten men of arms for a supply, besides the
lieutenant and ensine bearer. The gentlemen of the Dukes dominions were
likewise in very good order: for they were very well paid and led by valiant
knights and esquires. And sure at that time these countries were marvelous
rich.

The Notes.
1 This Nicolas is named in other histories Marquis du Pount.

2 The King made war upon his brother because he had restored the Earl of
Armignac to all his possessions in Guienne, whom the King before had banished.
Annal. Aquit.

How the final peace treated of between the Duke of Burgundy and the King
brake off because of the Duke of Guiens death, and how these two great Princes
sought to deceive each other. Chap. 9.
WHile the Duke was leuying his army above mentioned, the Lord of Cran and the
Chauncellor of France named Master Peter Doriole, came to him twice or thrice
from the King, and secretly treated with him of a final peace, which heertofore
could never be concluded, because the Duke required the restitution of Amiens
and Saint Quintine, whereunto the King would never condescend: but now partly
because of the great preparation he saw made against him, and partly in hope to
compass certain purposes whereof hereafter you shall hear, he agreed to yield
them. The conditions of this peace were, that the King should restore to the
Duke Amiens and Saint Quintine, and whatsoever else was in controversy
between them. That he should abandon the Earls of Neuers and Saint Paul
Constable of France, and permit the Duke to do with them and all their
possessions at his pleasure, and seize them into his own hands if he could.
That the Duke in like manner should abandon the Dukes of Guienne and Britain,
and permit the King to do with them and their seigniories at his pleasure. I
was present when the Duke of Burgundy swear this treaty, and likewise the
Lord of Cran, and the Chauncellor of France in the Kings name, who also at
their departure from the Duke advised him not to dismiss his army, but to
march still forward, to the end the King their Master might make the speedier
delivery of the two places above named. Further Simon of Quinchy was sent with
them to see the King swear and confirm this treaty, which his ambassadors had
concluded: but the King delaied the confirmation a certain space, and in the
mean time happened his brothers death.

The D. being ready to depart from Arras received two several aduertisements:
one that Nicholas Duke of Calabria and Loraine, heir of the house of Aniou,
and son to John Duke of Calabria was coming to him about his daughters
marriage, whom the Duke honorably received, and put in great hope of his suit.
But the next day being the 15. of May 1472. (as I remember) came letters from
Simon of Quinchy the Dukes ambassador to the King, wherein he advertised his
Master of the Duke of Guiennes death, and that the K. had already recovered a
great part of his country. The like aduertisements received he also
incontinent from others, but reporting diversely of the said Dukes death. Soon
after returned Simon of Quinchy from the King with a cold answer: for he
refused to swear the treaty, which the Duke took very disdainfully as a
matter tending to his contempt and dishonor. His men also in time of war as
well for this as other causes spoke very villainous and opprobrious words of the
King, and I warrant you the French requited them with the like. The Duke of
Burgundy being almost out of his wits because of these news, by the
persuasion of certain no less sorry for this accident than himself, writ
letters to diverse towns of the realm, charging the King with his brothers
death, but little it auailed, for no man stirred 1. Notwithstanding if the Duke
of Guienne had lived, undoubtedly the King should have had enough to do: for
the Britons were in a readiness to invade him, having greater intelligences in
the realm than ever before: all the which failed by the Dukes death.

The Duke of Burgundy in this fury put himself into the field, and marched
toward Nesle in Vermandois, making foul and cruel war, contrary to his
accustomed manner: for he spoiled and burned all the country as he passed. His
vaward marched before him, and besieged the said town of Nesle being of no
force: but the Duke himself lodged three leagues from it. Within the town
were certain frank archers that slew a herald of the Dukes coming to summon
them. Further, their captain came forth to parle under surety, thinking to
bring the matter to composition but could not, and as he returned into the
town (the truce yet continuing because of his saly) they within the town
(notwithstanding that themselves stood open upon the wall no man seeking to
hurt them) slew yet two other of the Dukes men, wherefore the truce was
disauowed, and word sent to the Lady of Nesle being within the town, to come
forth with all her household and stuff, which she did accordingly: and
immediately after, the place was assaulted and taken, and the greatest part of
them that were within it slain: all that were taken alive were hanged, save a
few whom the soldiers for very pity let go, a number also had their hands cut
off. It lotheth me to make mention of this cruelty: but because I was present,
somewhat I am forced to write thereof. And sure either the Duke was maruellously
passioned, in that he committed so cruel an act, or some great caused moved
him thereunto. He alleged two, the one the Duke of Guiennes death, whereof he
spoke very strangely upon other men's report: the other the grief he had
conceived for the loss of Amiens and Saint Quintin above rehearsed.

Some that shall read this that follows, will think happily that there was
small faith in these two Princes, or that I misreport them: I would be loath to
misreport either of them. And to the King our Master, how much I am bound all
the world knows. But to continue my history (right reverend father in God) in
such sort as you have required, I am forced to utter that I know howsoever it
passed. And I doubt not but these two, being compared with other Princes, shall
seem noble, worthy, and honorable, and the King our Master wise above all the
rest, who left his realm enlarged and in peace with all his enemies. Wherefore
let us now consider whether of these two Princes sought to deceive the other,
to the end that if hereafter this history happen to fall into the hands of
some young Prince that has to negotiate in such like affairs, he may by
reading thereof be the better instructed how to look to himself. For
notwithstanding that neither Princes nor enemies be always alike, nor deal
alike, in like affairs: yet is it good to know the histories of times past. To
speak therefore uprightly, I think both these Princes were fully bent each to
deceive other, and tended both to one end, as you shall hear. Both of them had
their armies abroad in a readiness. The King had already taken diverse places,
and during the treaty made sharp war upon his brother, whom the Lords of
Courton, Patris, Foucart and diverse others had already relinquished, and were
received into the Kings service. Further, his army lay about Rochell, having
great intelligence in the town, for the citizens practiced continually, as
well because of the rumor of this treaty, as also because of the Dukes sickness.
And I think the Kings resolution was, if he could atchieue his enterprise
there, or his brother happened to die, not to swear the treaty: but if he found
great resistance, to swear it, and perform his promise, thereby to avoid all
danger. And sure he lost no time, but used great diligence, delaying also very
cunningly Simon of Quingy the space of eight days, during the which delay, his
brother died: further, he knew well the Duke of Burgundy so greatly to desire
the restitution of these two towns above named, that he durst not flatly fall
out with him. Wherefore he meant to delay him, and feed him forth with fair
words fifteen or twenty days (as he did accordingly) to see in the mean time
what would happen. Now that I have spoken of the King, and showed how he was
purposed to deal with the Duke, it is fit I should also declare how the Duke
was minded toward him, and thought to delude him, had not the Duke of Guiennes
death happened. Simon of Quinchy by the Kings request had a commission from the
Duke his Master, commanding him immediately after the treaty sworn, and
writings delivered for the confirmation thereof, to go into Britain to inform
the Duke of Britain of the conditions of the peace, and in like manner the Duke
of Guiennes ambassadors resident in Britain, to the end they might advertise
their Master thereof at Bordeaux: whereby the King meant to put the Britons
into the greater fear, when they should see themselves abandoned of him that
was their chief anchor hold.

Now you shall understand that Simon of Quinchy had in his company a rider of
the Dukes Escuirie called Henry a Parisian borne, a wise fellow and of good
experience: who had a letter of credit to the said Simon written with the Dukes
own hand, but his commission was not to deliver it till the said Simons
departure from the King, and his arrival to the Duke of Britain at Nantes,
where his charge was to deliver him the letter and this message withal. That
he should will the Duke of Britain not to think that his Master would abandon
the Duke of Guienne and him, for he would succor them both with body and
goods, and that he had concluded this treaty to none other end but to avoid
war, and recover the towns of Saint Quintine and Amiens: which the King in
time of peace contrary to his promise had taken from him. And further to
advertise the said Duke, that the Duke his Master would send an honorable
embassage to the King (so soon as he should be seized of that he demanded)
humbly to beseech him to end this war, and relinquish his enterprise against
the said two Dukes, and not to give credit to the oath he had sworn, which he
was no more determined to observe, than the King had observed the treaty ^ade
before Paris called the treaty of Conflans: and the treaty which he had
sworn at Peronne, and long after confirmed also. Further desiring him to call
to remembrance, that he took these towns against his faith and promise in
time of peace: wherefore he must hold himself contented if he recovered them
after the same sort. And as touching the Earl of Saint Paul Constable of
France, and the Earl of Neuers whom the King had permitted him to use at his
pleasure, he would protest, that notwithstanding he hated them as he had just
cause to do: yet would he forgive all their offenses, and let them live in
quiet, desiring the King to grant these two Dukes the like: and that it would
please him to suffer all men to live in peace and safety, in such manner and
form as he had sworn at Conflans, when they were all there assembled
together: which if he refused to do, he would then succor his confederates.
And it was determined that the Duke should be in camp when this embassage
should be sent to the King. But God disposed otherwise of these purposes: for
death which departs all things, and changes all determinations, set them
otherwise a work, as partly you have understood already, and shall hereafter
perceive more at large: for the King restored not these two towns, and yet had
the Duchy of Guienne by his brothers death, as reason was.

The Notes.
1 The Duke of Guienne died the 12. of May, but Meyer says the 24. Annal.
Aquit. the 11. Of his death read Annal. Burgund. lib. 3. fol. 946. Meyer. lib.
17. fol. 353. writes thus of it. Rex fratri venenum miscet per Iordanum
Abbatem, Diui Ioannis beenedictini nominis: where read also what Thomas
Basinus Bishop of Lisieux writes of the Dukes death, who compares King Lewis
to Cain, Atreus, Thiestes, Polinices, and Eteocles. Hollandiae scriptor says
thus: Rex ille, inquit idem, fecit quod Cain, qui vnicum fratrem suum Abel
interfecit. Dedit enim Rex mortiferu^ Carolo fratri venenum, quo no^ statim
extinctus est, sed mensibus aliquot miserabiliter afflictus. Gaguin a French
historiographer says thus: The King was advertised of his brother D. Charles
his death, who died at Bordeaux poisoned by a certain Abbot, but not without
the Kings consent as the report went. Annal. Aquit. written by a French man
seem to make King Lewis accessorie to his brothers death. The Duke was
poisoned as he sat at the table with the Lady of Mount soreau whom he
entertained, and who was also poisoned with him. The King commanded the Abbots
process to cease, and the rest which were suspected: whereby he plainly
bewraied his own guilty conscience.

How the Duke of Burgundy seeing that he could not take Beauuais, before the
which he had laid his siege, went to Roan. Chap. 10.
NOw to return to the war, you have heard how certain poor frank archers
were handled at the taking of Nesle: thence the D. departed and went before
Roye: within the which were 1500. frank archers and certain men of arms of
the Arriereban. The Dukes force was never so great as at that present. The next
day after his arrival, these frank archers fearing their lives, leapt down
the walls and yielded themselves to him: and the third day they that yet
remained within rendered themselves and the town by composition, leaving
behind them both horse and harness, save that every man of arms brought
forth a traveling nag. The Duke left men in the town and went to Mondidier
which he began to raze, meaning utterly to destroy it and lay it desolate, but
because of the good will he perceived the people of those parts 1 to bear him,
he caused it to be repaired, and left a garrison in it. From thence he
departed, meaning to march straight into Normandy: but as he passed hard by
Beauuais the L. of Cords who led his vaward, rode to the town, and at his
first arrival the suburbs before the Bishops palace were taken by a covetous
Burgundian named Master James of Montmartin: who had under his charge one
hundred lances, and three hundred archers of the Dukes ordinary retinue. The
Lord of Cords scaled the town on the other side, but he lacked ladders, and
those few he had were too short. He had two canons which shot twice at the
town gate, and brake down a piece thereof: and if he had been furnished to
have continued the shot, undoubtedly he had entered the town, but he was
unprovided, because he came not for any such exploite. At his first arrival
none were in the town but the citizens themselves, and the captain of the
town called Loyset of Bailligny, with certain soldiers of the Arriereban, but
not ynow to defend the place. Notwithstanding it pleased God miraculously to
preserve it as he manifestly declared. For the Burgundians that were with the
Lord of Cords fought hand to hand with the French at the breach made in the
gate: whereupon the said Lord of Cords sent word diverse times to the Duke of
Burgundy to make haste thither, assuring him that the town was his own. But
in the mean time while the Duke was upon the way, one within devised to throw
flaming fagots in their faces that were about to break down the gate: whereof
they threw so great plenty, that the gate and the porch took fire in such
sort, that the Burgundians were forced to retire till the fire ceased. Soon
after arrived the Duke himself, who in like manner held the town as taken, the
fire being once quenched which was very great, for all the porch was on fire.
And undoubtedly if he had lodged part of his army on the other side of the
town toward Paris, no man could have entered to relieve it. But it pleased God
he should make doubt where none was: for because of a little brook that was to
pass he made difficulty so to do then, and yet afterward when a great number
of men were entered the town he would have done it, and was hardly dissuaded
from it: notwithstanding that thereby he should then have endangered his whole
army. All this happened the eight and twentieth of June in the year 1472. The
fire above mentioned continued all day, and in the evening ten lances only of
the Kings ordinary retinue entered the town, as I was afterward informed: for
I served yet the Duke of Burgundy, but we saw them not enter, both because
every man was busied in making his lodging: and also because we had no force on
that side the town. By break of day the Dukes battterie was bent against the
walls: but soon after we saw two hundred men of arms enter the town: and had
it not been for their coming, I think the citizens would have treated of a
composition: which notwithstanding the Duke in this fury would never have
granted: for he desired to take the town by assault, and if he had so done,
undoubtedly he would have burnt it, which had been great pity: sure it was
preserved by very miracle. After these men of arms were entered, the Dukes
artillery shot continually the space of fifteen days, and the place was as
well beaten as ever was any, in such sort that the breach was saultable: but
the ditch of the one side of the burned gate stood full of water, so that we
were forced to build a bridge over it: but on the other side we might come hard
to the walls without any danger, save of one flanker which was so low that our
artillery could not beat it.

It is great danger and folly to assault a town so well defended as this was:
for within it was the Constable 2 (as I remember) or lay by it, I wot not well
whether, the Marshall Ioachin, the Marshall of Loheac, the Lord of Crussoll,
William of Valleu, Merry of Croy, Sallezarde, Theuenot of Vignoles, being all
ancient captains, accompanied with an hundred men of arms of the Kings
ordinary retinue: besides a great number of footmen and others that were come
thither with them. Yet the Duke contrary to the opinion of his whole army,
determined to give the assault. And the night before, as he lay on his field
bed in his clothes, according to his accustomed manner, he asked certain there
present, whether they thought the town would abide the assault: who answered
that they thought yea, seeing they were force sufficient to defend it: at the
which answer he scoffed, saying that they should not find a man there the next
day. In the morning by break of day the assault was given very courageously,
and the breach no less valiantly defended. A great number went thronging on
our new made bridge in such sort, that an ancient knight of Burgundy called
Despiris was smothered there, who was the best man that died before the town.
On the other side of the gate certain of our men got up to the top of the
wall, but some of them never returned. They fought hand to hand a great while,
and the assault continued so long, that fresh bands were appointed to succeed,
the first being wearied: but because the Duke saw his men to labor in vain, he
caused them to retire: yet notwithstanding they within salied not, for they saw
company enough ready to receive them. At this assault were slain twelve
hundred soldiers 3, and the best man that died there was the above named
Despiris. It was thought at the first that many more had been lost: for above a
thousand were hurt. The next night they within salied forth, but because their
number was small, and the most of them on horseback, and thereby encombred with
the cords of our tents, they did no great exploit, but lost two or three
gentlemen of their company, and hurt one of ours named Master James d'Orson, a
very honest gentleman, and master of the Dukes Ordinance, who a few days after
died of the said hurt.

Seven or eight days after this assault, the Duke would have divided his army
into two bands, and lodged part thereof at the gate toward Paris, contrary to
all men's advise and to all reason, considering the great number of soldiers
within the town. This should have been done at the beginning, but now it was
too late. Wherefore seeing no remedy, he raised his camp in very good order 4,
hoping that they within would issue forth to the skirmish, which
notwithstanding they did not. From thence he marched into Normandy, because he
had promised the Duke of Britain to come as far as Roan, where the said Duke
of Britain had promised in like manner to meet him. But because of the Duke of
Guiennes death, he altered his mind, and stirred not out of his country. The
Duke of Burgundy came before Eu, which was yielded unto him, as was also Saint
Valery, and he burnt all this quarter even hard to Diepe. He took likewise
Neuf-chastell, and burnt both it and all the country of Caux, or the greatest
part, even hard to Roan gates: further, he presented himself in person before
the said town of Roan: he lost many of his foragers, whereby his army was in
great distress of victuals. In the end because winter approached he departed
homeward, and his back was no sooner turned, but the French recovered Eu and
Saint Valery, and took prisoners by composition seven or eight Burgundians
that were within them.

The Notes.
1 The French has Chastellenies, which were places where certain courts of
the inferior jurisdiction were held, to the which the country there about was
bound to repair.

2 Annal. Franc. report that the Constable lay hard by the town, but moved
not to defend it, for the which cause it was thought he had intelligence
with the Duke.

3 Gaguin says, that there were slain at the assault of Beauuais 1500. men.

4 The Duke lay before Beauuais six and twenty days, and levied his siege
the 22. of July. Meyer.

How the King made peace with the Duke of Britain, and truce with the Duke of
Burgundy, and how the Earl of Saint Paul escaped for that time a conspiracy
that these two Princes made against him. Chap. 11.
ABout this time I came to the Kings service in the year 1472. who received
also the selfsame year, the greatest part of his brother the Duke of Guienne
his servants. He lay then at Pont de See, making war upon the Duke of Britain:
whither certain ambassadors came to him out of Britain, and from whence also
he sent his ambassadors thither. Among the rest that came to him to the said
town of Pont de See, were Philip of Essars, servant to the Duke, and William
of Sousplenuille servant to the Lord of Lescute, the which Lord of Lescute
seeing his Master the Duke of Guienne at the point of death, took sea at
Bordeaux and departed into Britain, fearing to fall into the Kings hands: he
embarked in time, and carried away with him the Duke of Guiennes Confessor 1,
and a rider of his stable, who were charged with the Dukes death, and remained
prisoners in Britain many years after. When these runnings to and fro had
endured a while, the King in the end determined to have peace with the Duke of
Britain, and to deal so liberally with the Lord of Lescute that he would
thereby assuage the evil will he bare him, and win him to his service. For as he
knew the Duke of Britains forces, being governed by so worthy a man, greatly
to be feared: so was he assured if he could win the Lord of Lescute to his
service, that the Britons would labor for peace, because he was their only man
of wisdom and experience in the country: besides that, generally the
Britains desire nothing more than peace with France: because continually a
great number of them have good entertainment, and be in good estimation in this
realm, and not unworthily: for sure in times past they have done great
service here. Wherefore me think the King did very wisely in concluding this
treaty, notwithstanding that some not considering so deeply thereof as
himself did, thought otherwise of it. He had a very good opinion of the Lord
of Lescute, and knew there was no danger in putting those offices and places of
charge that he did into his hands, because he was a man of honor, and would
never during these divisions have any intelligence with the English men, nor
consent that the towns in Normandy 2 should be yielded to them, but had been
the only stay thereof, which was the cause of all his preferment. When the
King had well debated this matter, he commanded Sousplenuille to put in writing
all that his Master required, as well for the Duke as himself: which done, the
King granted him all his demands being these: A pension of 80000. franks for
the Duke: for his master the Lord of Lescute a pension of 6000. franks, the
government of Guienne, the two Seneschalships of Launes and Bordelois, the
captainship of one of the castles of Bordeaux, the captainship of Blaye, and of
the two castles of Bayonne, of Dax, and of Saint Sever, 24000. crowns in ready
money, the Kings order, and the Earldome of Comminges. All the which the King
granted and agreed unto, save that the Dukes pension was diminished by the one
half, and continued but two years. Further, the King gave the said
Sousplenuille 6000. crowns (which with the other 24. thousand given to his
Master were to be paid in four years) a pension of 1200. franks, the
Mayraltie of Bayonne, the Bailywick of Montargis, and certain other small
offices in Guienne. All the which above rehearsed estates, his Master and he
enioied till the Kings death. Philip d'Essars likewise was made Bailife of
Meaux, and lieutenant of the waters and forests throughout the realm of
France, and had also a pension granted him of 1200. franks, and 4000. crowns
in ready money: all the which offices and estates from that day till the King
our Master his death they quietly enioied, and the Lord of Comminges continued
during his life his trusty and faithful servant.

The King having pacified all matters in Britain marched straight toward
Picardie: for he and the Duke of Burgundy used always when winter approached,
to make truce for six months, or a year, and some time more. After the which
their woonted manner they made truce at this present, which the Chancellor of
Burgundy with certain others came to the King to conclude. There the Kings
Commissioners read the final peace made with the Duke of Britain, whereby the
said Duke renounced the league he was entered into with the English men and the
D. of Burgundy: wherefore the King required the Duke of Burgundies ambassadors
not to comprehend the Duke of Britain in the truce as their confederate:
whereunto they would not condescend, but agreed that the Duke of Britain
should be at his choice to declare himself within the time accustomed, either
the Kings confederate or theirs: alleging that heertofore also the said Duke
had abandoned them by writing, yet had not departed from their friendship.
Further adding, that though he were a Prince wholly led and governed by others,
and doing little of himself: yet in the end he ever yielded to that which was
best and most necessary for his estate. All this was done in the year 1473.

During this treaty they murmured on both sides against the Earl of Saint
Paul Constable of France: for the King and those that were nearest about him
had conceived marvelous hatred against him. And the Duke of Burgundy hated him
worse than they, as he had just cause to do: for I know the reasons that
moved them both to bear him ill will. The Duke had not yet forgotten that he
was the only occasion of the loss of Amiens and Saint Quintin, and perceived
well that he nourished this war between the King and him. For in time of truce
he spoke him as fair as was possible, but so soon as the war opened, he
showed himself his mortal foe. Further, the Earl had sought to constrain
him by force to marry his daughter to the Duke of Guienne, as before (...)
^^ue heard. Besides all this there was yet another grudge: for while the Duke
lay before Amiens, the Constable made a road into Henault, and among other
cruel exploits burned the castle of Seure, belonging to a Knight named Master
Baudouin of Launay: before the which time they used on neither side to fire any
place. But in revenge thereof the Duke this last summer burned the country all
the way his army passed, as before you have heard. Thus they began to practice
the Constables destruction: for the accomplishment whereof diverse of the Kings
men conferred with such of the Dukes servants as they knew to be his mortal
enemies: for the French had him in as great jealousy as the Duke of Burgundy
had, and accused him as the only occasion of the war: wherefore all his
treaties and practices with both parties were ripped up and discovered, and
they both sought his death.

Some man may peradventure ask hereafter, if the King alone were not of power
sufficient to put him to death: whereunto I answer that he was not. For his
lands lay just in the midst between the King and the Duke: further, he held
Saint Quintin a great and strong town in Vermandois, and of his own Han,
Bohain, and other very strong places near to the said Saint Quintin, the which
he might man at all times with any nation at his own pleasure. He had charge
under the King of four hundred men of arms well paid, of the which company
himself was controller and took the muster, which was no small profit to him:
for his companies were not complete. Besides all this he had a yearly pension
of 45000. franks, and of every tun of wine that passed through his country
into Flaunders or Henault, he received a crown for impost. He had also goodly
seigniories and possessions of his own inheritance, and great intelligence as
well in France as in the Dukes dominions, where he had many kinsfolks and
allies.

The truce between the King and the Duke continued a whole year: all the
which space this practice endured, and the Kings men addressed themselves
wholly to the Lord of Hymbercourt (so often before named,) who of long time had
been the Constables enemy: besides that, their hatred was lately increased.
For in an assembly held at Roye, where the Constable and others were
commissioners for the King: and the Chancellor of Burgundy and the Lord of
Hymbercourt, with diverse others for the Duke: as they conferred together of
their affairs, the Constable gave the lie very shamefully to the said
Hymbercourt, who answered thereunto, that he would not bear this reproach at
his hands, were it not in respect of the Kings honor, under whose safe conduct
he was come thither as ambassador, and of the Duke his Master whose person he
represented, and to whom he would make report of this injury done unto him.
This only villainy and outrage so soon done, cost the Constable both lands
and life as hereafter shall be declared more at large. Wherefore those that
are in authority, yea and Princes themselves ought to take great heed how they
injury any man by word or deed, and whom they injury: for the greater they
are, the greater grief and sorrow is conceived of their words, because they
that are iniuried think that the great authority of the person that iniurieth
them, will cause them the more to be marked and noted. And if he be their
Master or Prince they utterly despair of benefit or good turn at his hands:
and most men serve rather for the good they hope to have, than for that they
have already received.

But to return to the point, the Kings men practiced continually with
Hymbercourt, and likewise with the Chancellor, as well because the words spoken
at Roye touched him in part, as also because of the near friendship that was
between Hymbercourt and him. And the matter was so earnestly pressed, that an
assembly was held about it at Bouuines a town near to Namur, whither the King
sent the Lord of Courton governor of Lymosin, and Master John Heberge afterward
Bishop of Eureux: and the Duke the said Chancellor and Hymbercourt, being the
year 1474.

The Constable being informed that they practiced at Bouuines to his cost, sent
with all speed to both the Princes, aduertising them he understood of all
their doings, and so cunningly he wrought, that he persuaded the King that the
Duke meant nothing but deceit, only to allure the said Constable to his
friendship: whereupon with all speed the King sent to his ambassadors at
Bouuines, commanding them to conclude nothing against the Constable for certain
reasons he would declare unto them, but to prolong the truce according to their
instructions, for a year or six months I wot not well whether. But when the
messenger arrived, he found the treaty already concluded, and the writings
sealed and delivered the night before. Notwithstanding the ambassadors had so
good intelligence together, and were so great friends each to other, that they
delivered the writtings back again: the contents whereof were, that the
Constable for the reasons therein rehearsed, was declared enemy and traitor to
both the Princes: who promised and swear each to other, that whether of them
could first lay hands on him, should either put him to death within eight
days, or deliver him to the other to do with him at his pleasure. It was also
therein concluded, that he should be proclaimed by sound of trumpet enemy to
both the Princes, and likewise all that should serve, help, aid, or favor
him. Further, the King promised to deliver to the Duke the town of Saint
Quintin, so often before mentioned, and to give him all the Constables treasure
and moouables that should be found in the realm of France, with all such
seigniories and lordships as were held of the said Duke, and among the rest Han
and Bohain, which are two very strong places. Lastly, a day was appointed when
both the King and the Duke should send their forces to besiege him in Han.
Notwithstanding for the reasons above rehearsed, this conclusion was clean
broken off, and a day and place assigned where the Constable should come to
commune with the King under safe conduct: for he stood in doubt of his person,
because of the late treaty held at Bouuines. The place assigned was three
leagues from Noyon near to the town of La Fere, upon a pretty river which no
man could pass, because the Constables men had taken up all the bridges. In
the said place was a narrow causey, overthwart the which a strong grate was
built, whither the Constable came first, accompanied with all his men of arms,
or the greatest part: for he had with him above three hundred gentlemen all men
of arms: and he himself ware his quirace under a short gown ungirt. The King
came accompanied with the Earl of Dampmartine Lord great Master of France,
the Constables mortal enemy, and with six hundred men of arms and better,
and sent me before him to make his excuse to the Constable of his long stay:
and soon after arrived himself, and they communed together: at which their
communication were present five or six of the Kings servants, and as many of
the Constables, who excused his coming thither in arms, because he stood in
fear of the Earl of Dampmartin as he said. To be short, in the end it was
agreed that all offenses past should be forgiven and forgotten: and the
Constable passed through the grate to our side of the river, where the Earl of
Dampmartin and he were made friends. That night he lodged with the King at
Noyon, and the next morning returned to Saint Quintin thoroughly reconciled as
he said. But when the King had well weighed this matter, and heard the
murmuring of the people, he accused himself of great folly in going after this
sort to commune with his servant, and stomaked not a little, that he found the
grate shut between them, considering that all the Constables men of arms were
his subjects and paid out of his coffers: wherefore if his hatred against the
Constable were great before, sure this meeting much increased it: and as
touching the Constable, his proud stomach was no whit abated.

The Notes.
1 This Confessor was the Abbot of S. John d'Angely, who died prisoner at
Nantes in Britain, in the great tower du Buffoy, where he confessed marvelous
matters, and died very strangely. Annal. Aquit.

2 These places were those that remained in the Lord of Lescuts hands by the
treaty of Caen, mentioned lib. 1. cap. 15.

A discourse very fit for this place, of the wisdom of the King and the
Constable, with good aduertisements to such as are in credit with Princes.
Chap. 12.
IF a man consider well this action of the Kings, he cannot but judge it to
proceed of great wisdom: for I am of opinion that the Duke of Burgundy to
recover Saint Quintin would easily have pardoned the Constable all his
offenses, notwithstanding any promise made to the King of the contrary:
Further, as touching the Constable, though he were a gentleman of great
wisdom and understanding, yet did he very unadvisedly, and it appeered that
God had utterly bereft him of all good advise, in that he came thus disguised
before the King his Master, whose subjects all the men of arms were that
accompanied him: and to say the truth, his very countenance showed him to be
astonished and abashed thereat: for when he came in person to the place, and
found the grate shut between the King and him, he caused it forthwith to be
opened, and passed to our side of the river, where undoubtedly he was in great
danger.

This his doing peradventure himself and his familiar friends accounted a
worthy exploit: supposing the King to stand in fear of him, whom also they
reputed a timorous Prince. And true it is that he was so at times when there
was cause why: but not always when the world so judged of him. For you shall
understand, that the civil wars with the Princes of his realm, out of the
which he had wound himself by large gifts and promises, had beaten this lesson
into his head, not to put any thing in adventure if he could compass his
purposes by any other means: which caused a number of men to suppose all his
doings to proceed of fear. But diverse that upon this imagination attempted
foolish enterprises against him, found themselves much deceived, namely, the
Earl of Armignack and others, whom their fond attempts cost full dear. For
the King knew when it was time to fear, and not to fear. Sure this praise I
dare boldly give him (which though happily I have written before, yet deserves
again to be spoken) that he was the wisest man in adversity that ever I knew.
But to return to my discourse of the Constable, who desired peradventure to
hold the King in fear, at the least I suppose so (for I will not charge him
with it, but write this only for an advertisement to those that are in Princes
service, and understand not all alike the affairs of this world:) for mine
own part, if I had a friend, I would advise him to endeavor himself that his
Master might love him, not fear him: for I never knew man whose authority
depended of the fear his Master had of him, that sped not evil in the end,
and that by his Masters consent. Examples ynow have been seen heerof in our
time, or not long before. In this realm of the Lord of Trimouille and others:
In England of the Earl of Warwick and his faction. I could name some also in
Spain and in other countries. But those that shall read this discourse may
peradventure be able to say more therein than my self. This their presumption
oftentimes proceeds of their good service: for they think their experience
so great that they cannot be spared, and their deserts such that their Masters
ought to bear all things at their hands. But Princes on the contrary side
both say and think, that men are bound to do them service, and desire nothing
more than to be rid of such malapart fellows. Touching the which point, I must
needs speak somewhat of the King our Master: for once he told me in talking
of those that do their Prince great service (naming withal his author from
whom he received this opinion) that good service sometime vndooeth men: and is
recompensed with great ingratitude, not always by the Masters forgetfulness,
but many times through the servants own fault: who presuming upon their good
service, behave themselves arrogantly, either toward their Masters or their
fellows: Further, as touching those that come to preferment in Court, this was
his opinion: that he is happier that receives a benefit of the Prince he
serves, without great desert, whereby he stands bound to his Prince: than he
that has done so great service, that his Prince seems in debted to him:
adding, that he for his part loved those better that were bound to him, than
those to whom he was bound. Thus you see how hard it is to live in this world
in any estate: wherefore greatly are they bound to God, whom he has endued with
understanding how to govern themselves in their vocation. This enteruiew
between the King and the Constable was in the year 1474.

THE FOVRTH BOOK.
How the Duke of Burgundy being seized of the Duchy of Gueldres, sought to
encroch farther upon the Almaines, and how he laid his siege before Nuz. Chap.
1.
THe same summer (as I remember) that the King and the Constable met, the Duke
of Burgundy went to conquer the Duchy of Gueldres, upon a title worthy to be
declared, to the end we may thereby consider the wonderful judgments and power
of God. There was a young Duke of Gueldres named Adolph, who married his wife
(being of the house of Bourbon, and sister to Peter Duke of Bourbon 1 now
living) in the Duke of Burgundies court, for the which cause he was well favored
there. This Duke Adolph committed an horrible fact: for one evening he took
his father named Duke Arnold prisoner as he was going to bed, and led him five
dutch miles on foot bare legged in a marvelous cold night, and laid him in a
deep dungeon the space of six months 2, where he saw no light but through a
little hole. Wherefore the Duke of Cleues (whose sister the old Duke being
prisoner had married) made sharp war upon this young Duke Adolph. The Duke of
Burgundy sought diverse means to agree them, but no good could be done.
Wherefore in the end the Pope and the Emperor began to stir in this matter so
far forth, that the D. of Burgundy under great curses, was commanded to take
the old Duke out of prison, which he did accordingly: for the young Duke durst
not withstand him, both because he saw so many good men against him, and also
because of the Dukes great force. I have often seen them both together in the
Duke of Burgundies chamber, pleading their cause before a great assembly, and
once I saw the good old man present the combat to his son. The Duke of
Burgundy was very desirous to agree them, and offered the young Duke (whom he
favored) the title of Governor 3 of Guelderland with all the revenues thereof,
save of one little town near to Brabant called Grave, which should remain to
the father, with the revenues of three thousand florens, a yearly pension of
as much, and the title of Duke, as was but reason. I with others wiser than my
self were appointed to make report of these conditions to the young Duke, who
answered us, that he had rather throw his father headlong into a Well, and
himself after, than agree to such an appointment, alleging that his father
had been Duke forty four years, and that it was now time for him to govern.
Notwithstanding he said that he would willingly agree to give him a yearly
pension of three thousand florens, with condition that he should depart the
country as a banished man, never to return: and diverse other such like lewd
speeches he used. This happened at the very same instant, that the King wan
Amiens from the Duke of Burgundy, who was then with these two Dukes at
Dourlans, whence because of the wars he departed in haste to Hedin, forgetting
this matter. This young Duke put on French apparel 4, and departed with one
only servant, to repair home into his country. But as he ferried over a
water near to Namur, he paid a gildon for his passage, whereupon a Priest
there present mistrusting who he should be, communed thereof with the ferry
man, and viewed well the young Duke and knew him. There he was taken and led to
Namur, where he remained prisoner till the Duke of Burgundies death: after the
which, the Citizens of Gaunt delivered him, and would perforce have constrained
the Dukes daughter afterward Duches of Austrich to marry him. They led him also
with them before Tournay, where being weakly accompanied in a certain skirmish
he was miserably slain, in full revenge of his impiety against his father. The
father during his sons imprisonment died: the Duke of Burgundy yet living,
whom because of his said sons ingratitude and unnaturalness he made his heir,
by the which title the Duke at this present conquered the said Duchy of
Gueldres 5, where he found some resistance: but because he was mighty and in
truce with the King, he easily subdued it, and held it all the days of his
life, and his offspring possesses it yet at this day, and shall do as long as
it pleases God. This as I said at the beginning, I have rehearsed only to
show, that such cruelty and impiety never remains unpunished.

The Duke of Burgundy being returned into his country grew wonderful lofty
and high minded, because he had gotten this Duchy into his claws, and began to
find great sweetenes in this Duch enterprises, both for that the Emperor was a
Prince of an abject mind, enduring all things rather than he would spend any
thing: and also because without aid of the Princes of the Empire his own
force was but small. Wherefore the Duke prolonged the truce with the King. Some
of the Kings servants were of opinion, that the King did unadvisedly to prolong
the turce, and suffer the Duke to grow as he did. And sure they had some
appearance of reason to lead them so to say, but because they lacked experience
and had not seen the world abroad, they wist not what the matter meant. But
others that understood the case better than they, and were able to say more
therein, because they had traveled those countries, advised the King to
prolong the truce, and permit the Duke to wear and weary himself against the
country of Almaine (the greatness and force whereof is almost incredible) 6
alleging that after he had taken one place, or atchiued one enterprise, he
would forthwith attempt another: for one good adventure could not content his
nature, wherein he was of disposition clean contrary to the King: for the Duke
the more he was busied, the more he sought to busy himself. Wherefore they
told the King that he could no way better be revenged of the Duke than by
suffering him to run himself out of breath as he did, aduising him withal
rather to send him some small aid, than put him in any doubt of breach of the
truce: further alleging, that it could not otherwise happen but that he must
of necessity utterly consume himself against the greatness and force of
Almaine, because the Princes of the Empire would make resistance, were the
Emperor never so simple a man: and so it came to pass in the end.

There was a quarrel 7 between two pretending title to the Bishopric of
Coulon: one of the which was the Lantzgraue of Hesses brother, and the other
the Palzgraue of the Rhene his cosen 8. The Duke of Burgundy took part with
the Palzgraue, and attempted to place him in the sea of Coulon by force,
trusting thereby to seize some places of the country into his own hands, and
to that end went and laid his siege before Nuz, a town near to Coulon, in the
year 1474. He had so many great enterprises in his head, that in the end the
burden thereof pressed him to the ground: for in the selfsame summer he both
traveled with Edward King of England to pass with his army into France,
being in a readiness by his suit and solicitation: and purposed also to
atchieue his enterprise in Almaine which was this: If he had taken Nuz, he
meant to man it well, and two or three other places above Coulon 9: whereby the
city of Coulon being at his commandment 10, he might have gone up
countermount against the river of Rhene into the country of Ferrette which he
then held, and so all the Rhene should have been under his subjection even
down to Holland, where it enters the sea: upon the which river are more
strong towns and castles than any realm christened except France. The truce
with the King was prolonged for six months, which time being now almost
expired, the King traveled to prolong it still, to the end the Duke might do
his pleasure in Almaine: whereunto the Duke would not agree because of his
promise to the English men.

I would gladly pass over this siege of Nuz, because it is out of the course
of my history, for I was not present at it: notwithstanding somewhat I am
forced to speak thereof, because of diverse accidents depending thereupon. The
said town of Nuz was marvelous strong, and within it was the Lantzgraue of
Hesse 11, with many of his kinsfolks and friends, to the number of 1800.
horsemen as I have been informed (who valiantly behaved themselves,) and of
foot men sufficient. The Lantzgraue, as I have said, was brother to the Bishop
elected, against him whom the Duke of Burgundy defended, who laid his siege
before Nuz in the year 1474.

His force was never so great as then, especially of horsemen: for because he
meant to attempt somewhat in Italy, he had in pay a thousand Italian men of
arms good and bad, under the leading of one called the Earl of Campobache a
Neapolitan borne of the house of Anious faction, a dangerous and a traitorous
fellow. In the Dukes camp served also James Galeot a valiant gentleman of
Naples, and diverse others, whose names for brevity I pass over. Further, he
had in his army three thousand English men excellent good soldiers, and of his
own subjects a marvelous number well armed, and who long had been trained up
in the wars, besides great force of goodly pieces of artillery: all the which
preparation he put in a readiness to join with the English men at their
landing, who used as great diligence in England as they could. But it is long
before an army can be levied there, because the King may attempt no war before
he have assembled his court of Parliament, being the same in effect that the
three estates in France, which me think is a very good and a laudable
custom. For the King by that means is the stronger and the better served in
all enterprises he takes in hand with the consent of his estates, to whom when
they are assembled he declares his intent, and desires aid of his subjects:
for no subsidy is levied in England, but for invasion of France or Scotland,
or such like enterprises of great charge, which then the people grant willingly
and liberally, especially to pass into France: wherefore the Kings of England
use often when money fails them to leuy an army, and make show as though
they would invade Scotland or France. But after they have received money for a
year, they lie abroad in camp three months, and then return home and
dismiss their army: which practice King Edward was well acquainted with and
used often.

It was at the least a year before this English army could be in a readiness,
but when it was furnished of all things necessary, the King of England
advertised the Duke of Burgundy die thereof, who in the beginning of the
summer went before Nuz, trusting in short space to put his Bishop in
possession, and to retain certain places, as Nuz and others in his own
hands, to what purpose you have heard before.

I think verily that this proceeded of God, who beheld with a pitiful eye
this realm of France: which undoubtedly the Duke might shrewdly have shaken,
considering that his army was mighty and all of old soldiers, accustomed by
the space of many years to enter and spoil this realm without any
resistance, save only by defense of the strong towns. True it is that this
proceeded of the King who would hazard nothing, partly for fear of the Dukes
force, and partly for doubt of rebellion in his realm if he should receive an
overthrow: for he knew himself not to be beloved of all his subjects,
especially the nobility. And (if I may utter all) he has eftsoons told me,
that he knew his subjects well enough, and should find them rebellious if his
assaires happened to have hard success: wherefore when the Duke of Burgundy
entered into the realm, he manned the towns well by the which he passed:
whereby in short space the Dukes army brake it self, and the King never
endangered his estate: which undoubtedly proceeded of great wisdom. But all
this notwithstanding the Dukes force being so great as it was: if the King of
Englands army had also entered in the beginning of summer, (as assuredly it
would, had not the Duke so obstinately line before Nuz,) undoubtedly the realm
had stood in great danger: for never King of England passed at once with so
great force, nor so well disposed to fight. All the great Lords of England were
there none excepted. Their men of arms were 1500. at the least, (which was
much for the English men) all well appointed and well accompanied, and 14000.
archers on horseback, besides a great number of foot men that served in the
army, and in all their camp was not one Page. Further, the King of England had
in a readiness three thousand men to land in Britain, to join there with the
Duke of Britains forces. I saw my self two letters written with the Lord of
Vrfes own hands, (then servant to the Duke of Britain, but afterward Master
of the horse to King Charles:) the one addressed to the King of England, and
the other to the Lord Hastings Lord great Chamberlain of England 12. The
contents whereof among diverse other things were, that the Duke of Britain
would do more in France by intelligence in a month, than the King of England
and the Duke of Burgundy, (notwithstanding their great forces) in half a
year: which words I think would have proved true, if the matter had come to
execution. But God (who has always loved this realm) disposed of these
affairs, as hereafter you shall hear. These letters above mentioned, the
King bought of one of the King of Englands Secretaries, for three score marks
of silver.

The Notes.
1 This Duke Adolph married Katherine daughter to Charles Duke of Bourbon, and
Agnes sister to Philip Duke of Burgundy. Meyer.

2 Duke Arnold lay in prison six years, Meyer. but he misseth the cushion:
for other approved authors, and namely Guicciardin agree with Commines.

3 The French has Mambourg or Membourg, which is as much as captain or
governor: look more heerof in the pedigree of the Dukes of Gueldres.

4 Least it seem strange that this young Duke, whom our author in this very
Chapter reports to have been well favored of the Duke of Burgundy should be
stayed and imprisoned in his dominions: you shall understand that the Duke of
Burgundy upon hope to be Duke Arnolds heir himself, altered his mind, and of
the young Dukes friend became his foe.

5 The Emperor stirred not against the Duke of Burgundy, for taking by force
the Duchy of Gueldres which was held of the Empire, because the Dukes of
Gueldres by the space of thirty years had done no homage to the Empire. The
Duke subdued Gueldres, anno 1473. Meyer.

6 It was our author himself that gave the King this advise. Meyer.

7 This quarrel began anno 1473. Meyer.

8 The Palzgraues name was Robert, his Chapter and he were at variance in such
sort, that they had gotten him excommunicated, and chosen Harman the Lantzgraue
of Hesses brother to govern the charge. Then the Duke of Burgundy took upon
him to place him again in his Sea, which appertained not to him, but to the
Emperor and the Pope: in the end this Robert was taken and died in prison.

9 The league between the Duke and the Bishop was, that these places here
mentioned (belonging to the Church of Coulon, should have remained to the Duke
for his charges. Nuz was besieged the 28. of July. 1474.

10 Nuz is beneath Coulon, so that if the Duke had held that and three or four
places above Coulon, the said city of Coulon being on al sides environed by
him, must perforce have been at his commandment.

11 This Lantzgraue was Lodouicus, grandfather to Philip that last died.

12 The Lord Hastings was indeed but Chamberlain of the King house.

How the town of Nuz was succored by the Emperor and the Almains against the
Duke of Burgundy, and of other enemies that the King procured the Duke. Chap. 2.
THe Duke of Burgundy as you have heard, was now busied before Nuz, and found
the enterprise of more difficulty than he supposed. The city of Coulon situate
upon the river of Rhene, four leagues above Nuz, spent monthly 1 in the wars
100000. gold gildons for fear of the Duke. And they and certain other towns
above them had already put fifteen or sixteen thousand footmen into the
field, who encamped on the other side of the river, directly over against the
Duke, and planted great force of artillery upon the bank, thinking thereby to
cut off his victuals that came up the stream out of Guelderland, and to sink
the botes by canon shot. Moreover, the Emperor and the Princes Electors of the
Empire assembled together about this business, and concluded to leuy an army:
whereunto the King sent diverse messengers to solicit them, to whom also they
sent a Chanon of Coulon, of the house of Bauiere, accompanied with another
ambassador, who brought him a roll of the army the Emperor was resolved to
leuy, if he for his part would join in the enterprise. It is not to be doubted
but that they received a good answer with promise of all they demanded:
further, the King assured by letters as well the Emperor as diverse Princes and
towns, that so soon as the Emperor with his army should be come to Coulon, he
would send twenty thousand men to ioin with him, under the leading of the Lord
of Cran and Sallezarde. Thus this Dutch army prepared to march, being greater
than is almost credible 2: for all the Princes of Almaine as well spiritual as
temporal, all the Bishops, towns, and commonalties had men there, yea, so
great numbers every one of them, that (as I was informed) the Bishop of
Munster, who is none of the richest Bishops, had in this army six thousand
footmen, fourteen hundred horsemen, and twelve hundred wagons all covered
with green: true it is that his Bishopric lies near to Nuz 3. The Emperor
was seven months in leuying this army: which time expired, he came and
encamped within half a league of the Duke of Burgundy: by diverse of whose men
I have been advertised, that though the King of Englands army and the Dukes
had been joined both together, yet should they not have been the third part
of the Emperors, neither in men nor in tents and pauilions. Besides the
Emperors force was also this other army above mentioned, which lay directly
over against the Duke on the other side of the river, and endamaged greatly his
camp, and cut off much of his victuals.

When the Emperor and the Princes of the Empire were come before Nuz, they sent
to the King a Doctor of great authority with them called He seuare, afterward
a Cardinal, who came to solicit the King to perform his promise, and send
the forces whereof he had assured the Emperor by letters, otherwise to tell him
that the Almaines would conclude peace.

The King put him in good hope that he would so do, and gave him a present of
four hundred crowns, and sent with him to the Emperor one called John
Tiercelin Lord of Brosse: notwithstanding the Doctor departed nothing well
contented. During this siege marvelous practices were entertained. The King
traveled to conclude peace with the Duke of Burgundy, at the least to prolong
the truce, to the end the English men should not pass the seas. The King of
England on the other side labored to the uttermost of his power to persuade the
Duke to depart from Nuz, and perform his promise by aiding him to make war in
France, alleging that the summer was far spent. And the Lord of Scalles a
courteous Knight, nephew to the Constable of France, with diverse others, was
twice sent ambassador to the Duke to solicit him thereunto: but he was
obstinate. Whereby it manifestly appeered, that God had troubled his wits and
understanding: for all his life time he had labored the English men to pass
into France, and now when they were in a readiness, and all things prepared for
the wars as well in Britain as elsewhere, he lay obstinately before a place
impregnable. With the Emperor was a legate sent from the Pope, who rode daily
between the two camps to treat of peace. The King of Denmark came also
thither, and traveled to pacify this controversy, being lodged in a little
town hard by both the armies: so that the Duke might have departed to the
English men with honorable conditions. Notwithstanding he would not, but
excused himself to the King of England upon his honor, which he said should be
stained if he levied his siege, with diverse such like slender excuses. Here
you must note, that these were not those English men that in the time of Duke
Philip his father had made war so long in this realm, but these were young
soldiers utterly unacquainted with our French affairs. Wherefore the Duke
proceeded very fondly if he meant to use their help: for he should the first
summer have been continually with them, leading them from place to place, and
instructing them what was to be done.

While the Duke lay thus obstinately before Nuz, war arose against him on two
or three sides: for the Duke of Lorraine, who hitherto had been in peace with
him, sent to defy him before Nuz, by the Lord of Crans persuasion, who to
further the Kings affairs allured the Duke of Lorraine thereunto, assuring him
that it would turn greatly to his profit. Incontinent the said Duke of
Lorraine put himself into the field, and spoiled all the Duchy of Luxembourg,
and razed a place there called Pierre-forte, two leagues from Nancy. Further,
by the Kings procurement and certain of his servants, a league was made for
ten years between the Swissers and certain towns upon the river of Rhene 4
(namely, Basil, Strasbourg, and others) which before had been their enemies.
Peace was also concluded between Duke Sigismond of Austrich and the said
Swissers, the conditions whereof were, that Duke Sigismond should take again
the county of Ferrette 5, which he had engaged to the Duke of Burgundy for a
100000. florens. But this one article remained yet in variance between Duke
Sigismond and them: namely, that the Swissers required passage through four
towns of the county of Ferrette 6 at their pleasure: which controversy was
referred to the Kings arbitrament, who pronounced sentence for the Swissers.
Hereby you may perceive what enemies the King stirred up covertly against the
Duke of Burgundy.

As the matter was concluded, so also was it executed: for in a fair moon
shine night Peter Archambaut 7 governor of the county of Ferrette for the Duke
of Burgundy, was taken prisoner, accompanied with eight hundred soldiers, who
were all dismissed safe and sound save himself alone, whom they led to Basil
8, and there endited of diverse extortions and outrages committed in the said
county of Ferrette, and in the end struck off his head. Immediately after his
death all the county of Ferrette yielded to Duke Sigismond, and the Swissers
began to make war in Burgundy, and took Blasmond a town being the Marshals
of Burgundy, who was of the house of Neuf-chastell, and besieged the castle
of Hericourt, belonging also to the said house of Neuf-chastel, whither the
Burgundians went to levy the siege, but were discomfited 9, and a great number
slain. The said Swissers maruellously endamaged the country, and then
returned home for that time.

The Notes.
1 The city of Coulon took part with the Chapter against the D. of Burgundies
Bishop.

2 The Emperor had in pay in this army 80000. men.

3 But his Bishopric is on the other side the river of Rhene.

4 These towns were Strasbourg, Slecstat, Basil, Colmar, etc.

5 Ferrette in Dutch Pfirt.

6 The towns the Swissers desired passage through were Reinfeld, Loufenberg,
Neustat, and Brissac.

7 Others call him Peter Hagenbach, but the variance arises because one names
him by his surname, the other by his seigniorie: for he was called Peter
Archambaut of Hagenbach.

8 Others write that he was beheadded at Brisac a town near to Basil.

9 The Lord of Blasmond led this army, and in this battle the Burgundians
lost 2000. men. Annal. Burgund.

How the King wan from the Duke of Burgundy the castle of Tronquoy, the
towns of Montdidier, Roye, and Corbie, and how he sought to persuade the
Emperor Frederick to seiz upon all that the said Duke held of the Empire. Chap.
3.
ABout this time the truce ended between the King and the Duke, to the Kings
great grief, who gladly would have prolonged it, but seeing no remedy, he
went and besieged a little castle called Tronquoy in the year 1475. in the
very beginning of summer, the pleasantest time of the year. The castle in
short space was taken by assault. The next day the K. sent me to parle with
them that were within Montdidier, who yielded the place, and departed with bag
and baggage. Thence I went the third day being accompanied with the Admiral of
France bastard of Bourbon, to parle with them that were within Roye, who in
like manner yielded the piece because they were utterly in despair of succors,
which sure if the Duke had been in the country they would not have done.
Notwithstanding both these towns were burned contrary to our promise. Thence
the King departed, and laid his camp before Corbie which abode the siege.
Goodly approches were made to the town, and the Kings artillery bet it three
days: within it was the Lord of Contay 1 and diverse others, who yielded the
place, and departed with bag and baggage: two days after, this poor town was
also sacked and burned as the two former. Then the King thought to repair home
with his army, trusting to persuade the Duke of Burgundy to make truce,
considering the distress he was in. But a certain Lady whom I know well, yet
will not name because she is still living, writ him a letter, willing him to
lead his army to Arras, and into those parts: whereunto the King agreed, for
she was a woman of honor. I commend her not in thus doing: for she was in no
respect bound to the King. The King sent thither the Lord Admiral bastard of
Bourbon with a great band of men, which burned many towns in those quarters,
and spoiled all the country between Abbeuille and Arras: whereupon the
citizens of Arras, who were puffed up with pride because of their long
prosperity, compelled the garrison of the town to issue forth. But being too
weak to encounter with the Kings forces they were put to flight, and pursued
so speedily that many of them were slain and taken, together with all their
captains, namely, Master James of Saint Paul 2 the Constables brother, the
Lord of Contay, the Lord of Carency, and diverse others: some of the which were
near kinsmen to the Lady her self that caused this enterprise, so that she
received great damage by the overthrow: but the King for her sake repaired all
in time.

The King sent to the Emperor (as you have heard) John Tiercelin Lord of
Brosse, partly to solicit him not to make peace with the Duke of Burgundy,
and partly to make his excuse for not sending his forces according to his
promise: and further, to assure him, that he would shortly send them, and would
also continue to spoil and endamage the Dukes dominions, as well in the
marches of Burgundy 3, as also in Picardy. Lastly he made him a new ouuerture,
which was, that they should swear each to other, not to make peace the one
without the other, and that the Emperor should seize into his hands all the
seigniories that the Duke held, and ought to hold of the Empire, and proclaim
them forfaited to him, and he would do the like with all those that were held
of the crown of France, namely Flaunders, Artois, Burgundy and the rest. The
Emperor though all his life time he had made small show of any valor, yet was
he wise and of great experience, because of his ancient years. Further, these
practices between us and him had continued so long that he waxed weary of the
wars, notwithstanding that they cost him never a grote. For all the Princes of
Almaine lay there upon their own charge, as their manner is when the war
concerns the state of the empire. The Emperor answered the Kings ambassadors
after this sort: There was sometime near to a certain city in Germany, a great
Bear that much endamaged the country, three good fellows of the which city
being tavern haunters, came to a tavern where they were indebted, desiring
their host yet once more to give them credit, promising him within two days
payment of the whole debt: for they would take this Bear that did so much
harm in the country, whose skin was worth a great sum of money, besides the
presents that good folks would give them, whereunto their host agreed: and
when they had dined, forth they went toward this beasts cave, near to the
which when they approached, they met with the Bear unlooked for, and being
stricken with sudden fear fled, one got up into a tree, the other fled toward
the town, but the third the Bear took and overthrew, and foiled under her
feet, holding her mussell hard to his ear. The poor soul lay flat upon the
ground, as though he had been dead. Now you shall understand that the nature of
a Bear is such, that whatsoever she holds in her claws man or beast, so
soon as she sees it leave stirring, she forthwith forsakes it, supposing it
to be dead, as also this Bear left this poor fellow, not doing him any great
harm, and returned to her den. Then he seeing the danger past, arose and went
toward the town. But his fellow that stood in the tree having beheld all this
pageant, came down and ran crying after him to stay: and when he had overtaken
him, desired him to tell him faithfully what counsel the Bear gave him in his
ear, whereto she held her mussell so long: whereunto his fellow answered, that
she bad him never to sell the Bears skin till the Bear were slain. And with
this fable paid the Emperor our King, not giving his ambassadors any further
answer, as though he should have said, come hither according to your promise,
and let us take this Duke if we can, and then make partition of his goods.

The Notes.
1 This Contay is successor to him mentioned in the wars against the Liegeois.

2 This James is named in other histories Lord of Richebourg.

3 For in the marches of Burgundy, the Duke of Bourbon had given the
Burgundians a great overthrow, as our author in the next chapter makes mention.

How the Constable began to be had in suspicion again, as well of the King as
of the Duke of Burgundy. Chap. 4.
YOu have heard how Master James of Saint Paul and others were taken prisoners
before Arras. Their captivity was to the Constables great grief: for the said
Master James was a loving and natural brother to him. But this was not the
only misfortune that fell upon him: for at this very instant was also taken
the Earl of Roussy his son, governor of Burgundy for the Duke 1, and
likewise his wife died, which was a vertous Lady, and sister to the Queen of
France, so that for her sake he had found great friendship and favor in our
court. The practice begun against him still continued, which as you have heard
was almost concluded at the assembly held thereabout at Bouuines: after the
which, the Constable never thought himself in assurance, but mistrusted both
the Princes, especially the King, who seemed to repent the reuoking of his
letters there sealed. Further, the Earl of Dampmartin and others whom the
Constable feared as his enemies, lay with their men of arms near to Saint
Quintins: wherefore he held himself within the town, and put into it three
hundred footmen of his own tenants, having but small affiance in his men of
arms. He lived in great trouble, for the King had often sent to him to
solicit him to come forth to do him service in the marches of Henault, and
to besiege Auennes at the same time that the Admiral with his band went to
burn the country of Artois as you have heard, which commandment he obeyed
but with great fear: for after he had lien a certain space before the said
town of Auennes with a continual guard about his person, he retired into his
own places, and sent the King word by one of his servants (who did his message
to me by the Kings commandment) that he had raised his siege, because he was
certainly informed, that there were two in the army purposely hired by the King
to kill him: whereof also he told so many apparent tokens, that he seemed
indeed to have some notice thereof, so far forth that one of them was
suspected to have disclosed somewhat to him, that he ought to have kept secret:
but I will name no man, neither speak further heerof. The Constable sent often
to the Duke of Burgundies camp, I suppose to persuade him to relinquish his
foolish enterprise, aduertising the King also usually at his men's return of
some such news as he thought would like him well, and withal what was the
cause of his sending thither, hoping by this means to entertain him with fair
words. Sometime also he gave him to understand, that the Dukes affairs had good
proceeding, thereby to put him in fear. Further, doubting greatly that the
King would invade him, he desired the Duke to send unto him his brother Master
James of Saint Paul (being at Nuz before he was taken prisoner) and the Lord of
Fiennes, with certain others of his kinsmen, promising to put them and their
bands into Saint Quintins (but without the Saint Andrews cross 2) and to keep
the town for the Duke, and restore it him shortly after: for performance also
whereof he offered to give him his faith in writing. The Duke did as he
required, and when the said Master James the Lord of Fiennes, and the rest of
the Constables kinsmen were twice come within a league or two of the town
ready to enter, the Constable thinking the storm past, altered his mind, and
sent a countermaunde. This did he thrice: so desirous was he still to live in
dissimulation, and swim as it were between two streams, fearing maruellously
both these Princes. Of this matter I have been informed by diverse, but
especially by Master James of Saint Paul himself, who thus reported the
circumstance thereof to the King, when he was brought prisoner before him,
where no man was present but my self alone. The said Master James answered
frankly and without dissimulation to all the Kings demands, whereby he wan
greatly his favor. First, the King asked him how many men he had with him to
enter the town: whereunto he answered that the last time he had three
thousand. Then the King inquired further, if he had entered and had been Master
of the town, whether he would have held it for the King or the Constable.
Whereunto he likewise answered, that the two first times he came but to comfort
his brother, but the last (seeing his dissimulation to his Master and him) if
he had entered and had been Master of the town, he would have held it for his
Master, not offering his brother any outrage, nor doing any thing to his
prejudice, save only that he would not have departed the town at his
commandment. Soon after, the King delivered the said James of Saint Paul out
of prison, and gave him charge of a goodly company of men of arms, and used
his service till his death: of which his preferment his wise answers were the
only cause.

The Notes.
1 This overthrow the Duke of Bourbon gave the Burgundians, near to a place
called Gray or Gy, not far from Chausteauguion, and in the battle was slain
the Lord of Conches, others say but taken, and there were taken prisoners the
Earl of Roussy, being governor of Burgundy, the Marshall of Burgundy, the
Earl of Ioigny, the Earl of Saint Martins son, Monseur de L'Isle, Monseur
de Longey or Longny, the bailife of Ampois, and the bailife of Auxerre. This
battle was fought on tuesday the 20. of June. 1475. and in it two hundred men
of arms Lombards were slain, Meyer. About this time also the Prince of Orange
was taken prisoner, and by means thereof revolted from the Duke to the King.
Annal. Burgund.

2 The Saint Andrews cross is the Burgundians cognizance, and if they had
entered with this cross upon their cotes, the Constable could have no longer
temporised with the King of France, but should forthwith have been proclaimed
traitor.

How the Duke of Burgundy levied his siege before Nuz by composition, and how
the King of England his confederate sent to defy King Lewis. Chap. 5.
I Have discoursed of diverse affairs since I began with the siege of Nuz,
because they all happened in that time, for the siege endured a whole year.
There were two causes especially that moved the Duke to leuy his siege: one
the war the King made in Picardy, where he had burned two proper towns, and
destoied a goodly champaine country in Artois and Ponthieu. The other, the
mighty army the King of England levied at his suit and solicitation: whom till
now he could never persuade to pass into France, notwithstanding that he had
labored him thereunto all the days of his life. The said King of England and
all his nobles were maruellously discontented with the Dukes delays, and
besides entreaties used threatenings, and not without cause, considering the
great charges they had sustained, and all to no purpose, the summer being now
almost spent. The Duke gloried much that this Dutch army being so great that
the like has not been seen in our age nor many years before: and in the
which were so many Princes, Prelates, and free cities joined together, was not
able to raise his siege 1. But this glory cost him full dear: for he that has
the profit of the war, reapeth also the honor thereof. Notwithstanding the
Legate above mentioned (who rode continually between the two camps) made peace
in the end between the Emperor and the Duke 2: and the town of Nuz was put
into the said Legates hands to do therewith according to the determination of
the Sea Apostolic. Now consider in how great distress the Duke of Burgundy
was, being on the one side vexed with war by the King, and threatened on the
other by the King of England his friend, so that notwithstanding he knew the
town of Nuz to be brought to such extremity, that within less than fifteen
days famine would have constrained them to yield to his mercy, yea within ten
days (as one of the captains within the town, who afterward served the King
advertised me:) yet for the reasons above alleged, he was forced to levy his
siege 3 in the year 1475.

Let us now return to the K. of England, who led his army to Dover, there to
embarke to cross the seas to Calice. The force that passed with him at this
present was the greatest that ever came into France, all of them being on
horseback in very good order and well armed. All the nobles of the realm were
there, a few excepted: they were 1500. men of arms very well mounted, and the
most of them barded, and richly trapped after the manner of our wars, and well
accompanied with horsemen of their retinue. They were at the least 15000.
archers all mounted, and a great number of footmen and others, as well to pitch
their tents, (wherefore they were well furnished) as also to attend upon their
artillery and enclose their camp, and in all their army they had not one
Page: besides these there were three thousand English men appointed to land in
Britain. This I have written before, but rehearse it here again, to the end
you may perceive that God was purposed to trouble the Duke of Burgundies wits,
and preserve this realm which he has ever more favored than any other:
otherwise it is to be thought that the Duke would so obstinately have lien
before Nuz, a place so strong and so well defended, seeing all his life time
till now he could never find the English men disposed to invade the realm of
France, and knew them to be utterly unacquainted with our French wars till
they be trained therein: for if he would have done any good with them, he
should never have left them the first summer, but helped them and taught them
to order and lead their battles after the manner of our wars: for there is no
nation so ignorant and rude as the English men at their first landing in
France, but in very short space they become excellent good soldiers, hardy and
wise. But the Duke did clean contrary: for besides these other his
ouersights, he made them lose the summer: and as touching him self, his army
was so broken, so poor, and in so evil order, that he durst not present it
before them: for he lost before Nuz four thousand soldiers taking pay: some of
the which were the best men he had 4. Thus you see how God disposed him in all
points to do contrary both to that his affairs required, and also to the art
of war, wherein himself had been exercised by the space of ten years more
than any man living.

When King Edward came to Dover, the Duke of Burgundy to further his passage
sent five hundred botes of Holland and Zealand called Scuts, which are flat and
low, built very commodiously for transporting of horses. But notwithstanding
all this help they had from the Duke, and all the King of England could
command himself, he was above three weeks in passing between Callice and
Dover, yet are they but seven leagues distant: whereby you may perceive with
how great difficulty a King of England inuadeth France. And if the King our
Master had been as well acquainted with the wars by sea as by land: King Edward
had never passed over, at the least not that summer. But the King understood
them not, and those that had charge of them much less. The King of England as
I have said, was three weeks in passing: one ship of Eu took two or three of
his small passengers.

Before King Edward embarked, he sent from Dover to the King one herault alone
called Garter a Norman borne 5, who brought a letter of defiance from the King
of England in very good language, and so excellently well penned, that I am
verily persuaded it was never of English man's doing. The contents of the
letter were, that the King should yield unto him the realm of France being
his inheritance, to the end he might restore the clergy and nobility to
their ancient liberty, ease them of the great charges they sustained, and
deliver them from the miseries they lived in: which if he refused to do, he
protested what great mischeefes should ensue thereof, in manner and form as in
such cases is accustomed. The King read the letter softly to himself, and
afterward all alone withdrew himself into a wardrob, and commanded the herault
to be brought to his presence, to whom he made this answer: First, that he knew
well the King of England was not passed the seas of his own motion, but by the
persuasion of the Duke of Burgundy and the commonaltie of England:
secondarily, that the summer was now almost spent, and that the Duke of
Burgundy returned from Nuz, as a man discomfited and utterly unfurnished of
all things: thirdly, as touching the Constable he knew well (he said) that he
had intelligence with the King of England, because he had married his niece 6,
but would deceive the King his master, as he had deceived him: notwithstanding
all the great benefits he had received of him, which he there rehearsed,
adding thereunto, that the said Constable meant to live in continual
dissimulation and entertain every man to make his profit of him: last of all,
he alleged to the herault diverse other reasons to persuade the King his Master
to peace, and gave him with his own hands three hundred crowns, promising him
a thousand more if peace were concluded: further, openly he gave him for a
present a goodly piece of crimosin velvet of thirty else.

The herault answered, that he would travel the best he could for peace, and
thought the King his Master would easily be won thereunto, but that no mention
must be made thereof till he were on this side the sea: and then he willed the
King our Master to send a herault to the English camp, to demand a safe
conduct for certain ambassadors that he would send to the King of England, and
to address his letters to the Lord Howard or the Lord Stanley, and to
himself also to help to convey his herault.

A great number there were without in the hall while the King talked with the
herault, very desirous to hear the Kings answer, and to see his countenance at
his coming forth. When he had made an end, he called me to him, bidding me
continually to entertain the herault, till some were appointed to bear him
company, to the end no man might commune with him: and further, to give him a
piece of crimosin velvet of thirty else, which I did accordingly. Then the
King began to talk with diverse, rehearsing unto them the contents of these
letters of defiance: and seven or eight he called apart causing the said
letters to be read, and showing a good and assured countenance void of al
fear: for he was glad of the comfort the herault had put him in.

The Notes.
1 Melancthon writes, that the Emperor would not hazard a battle neither
with Matthias King of Hungary, nor Duke Charles: Quia sibi sciebat, Martem in
genesi infoeliciter positum esse. But Berlandus says, that the Duke fought
with the Emperor. Meyer says, that in a skirmish the Duke ouerthrevv the
Marquess Albert of Brandenbourg, and slew 120. of his men, and took diverse
prisoners: and another time ouerthrevv the Bishop of Munster, slew fifty,
took sixteen, and chased the Bishop hard to the Emperors camp: and likewise
another time the Bishops of Mentz, Treues, Munster, and Marquess Albert, and
slew a great number of their men. And last of all, because the Emperor and the
Duke contended whether of them should first depart from before Nuz, their
footmen joined, and the Duke slew 1500.

2 Peace was concluded betvveene the Emperor and the Duke 31. Maij. 1475.

3 The Emperor departed from Nuz 29. Iunij, leaving the Duke there, who would
not levy his siege before the Emperors departure because of his honor, but
soon after departed also the Duke. Meyer.

4 The Duke lost before Nuz 15000. men, Annal. Burgund. wherefore Meyer has
small reason to reprove our author for saying, that the Dukes army was in so
poor estate that he durst not let the English men see it.

5 Hall in his Chronicle reproves our author for reporting this Garter to be a
Norman, saying that never Norman was King of heraults: which notwithstanding I
Know not why we should believe: for he him self confesses, that King Edward
the fourth made a Gascoine, namely Vaucler, Deputy of Calice: a much higher
and more dangerous office to be in a strangers hand than this.

6 How the Queen of England was the Constables niece, the pedigree in the end
of this book will declare.

Of the trouble the Constable was in, and how he sent letters of credit to the
King of England and the Duke of Burgundy, which after were in part cause of his
death. Chap. 6.
I Must yet speak a word or two more here of the Constable, who was not a
little troubled, as well for the lewd touch he had played the Duke of Burgundy
about the restitution of Saint Quintins, as also because he saw himself
utterly disfauored of the King, so far forth that his chief servants, namely
the Lords of Genly and Mouy had already relinquished him, and were in the
Kings service: notwithstanding the said de Mouy resorted still to him sometime.
Further, the King pressed the Constable earnestly to come to him, offering to
make him such recompense for the county of Guise as he required, and the King
had often promised him. The Constable was willing to go, so that the K. would
swear by the cross of S. Lou of Angiers to do him no harm, nor consent that
any other should: alleging that he might as well swear thereby now as in times
past he did to the Lord of Lescute: whereunto the King answered, that he would
never give that oath to any man 1, but any other he would not refuse to swear.
You may easily guess how much both the King and the Constable were troubled:
for that no day escaped for a certain space but one or other passed between
them about this oath. Wherefore if we well weigh our estate, man's life is very
misery: for we toil and travel our selves to shorten our own days, saying
and writing a number of things clean contrary to our thought. To conclude, if
these two were troubled on the one side, I warrant you the King of England and
the Duke of Burgundy were no less troubled on the other.

At one time in a manner, both the King of England landed at Callice 2 and the
Duke of Burgundy departed from before Nuz, who in great haste rode straight to
Callice to the said King with a very small train: for he had sent his army in
such poor estate, as you have heard, to spoil the country of Barrois and
Lorraine, to the end they might there make merry and refresh themselves: which
he did, because the Duke of Lorraine had begun war upon him, and defied him
before Nuz. But this sending of his forces into Lorraine, among diverse other
his ouersights in his actions with the English men was not the lest: for they
thought at their landing to have found him with 2500. men of arms well
appointed, and great force of other horsemen and footmen (for so he had
promised, thereby to allure them to pass the seas:) and further, that he would
have made war in France three months before their arrival, to the end they
might find the King the wearier and the weaker: but God as you have heard,
disposed otherwise of this matter. The King of England departed from Callice in
company of the Duke of Burgundy, and passed through Bolaine, and from thence
to Peronne, where the Duke gave the English men but cold entertainment: for he
caused the gates to be straightly guarded, and would suffer but few to enter, so
that the greatest part of them lodged in the fields, as they might well do: for
they were well provided of all things necessary for that purpose.

After they were come to Peronne, the Constable sent to the Duke of Burgundy
one of his servants called Lewis of Creuille, by whom he excused himself: for
the withholding of Saint Quintins, alleging that if he had restored it, he
could have stood him in no stead in the realm of France: for he should
utterly have lost his credit and intelligence there, but now seeing the King of
England was come over in person, he promised to do hereafter all that the Duke
should command him, whereof the better to assure him, he sent him a letter of
credit directed to the King of England, but referring the matter of credit to
the declaration of the Duke. Further, he gave the Duke his faith in writing, to
serve and succor him, his friends and confederates, as well the King of
England as others, against all men none excepted. The Duke delivered the King
of England his letter, and withal the matter of credit, adding somewhat thereto
of his own devise: for he assured the King that the Constable would deliver
into his hands both Saint Quintins and all his other places: which the King
easily believed, partly because he had married the Constables niece, and partly
because he saw him in so great fear of the King our Master, that he thought he
durst not fail of his promise made to the Duke and him, and the Duke believed
it also. But the Constable meant nothing less, for the fear he stood in of the
King our Master was not so great that it could force him so far. But he used
still his woonted dissimulation, hoping by these fair messages to content
them, and show them so apparent reasons of his doings, that they would not as
yet constrain him to declare himself. Now you shall understand that King
Edward and his men were nothing acquainted with our affairs, but went bluntly
to work, so that they could not as yet smell out the cunning used here on
this side the sea: for naturally the English men that never traveled abroad
are very colerick, as are also al people of cold countries 3. The realm of
France as you see is situate between both: for it is environed with Italy,
Spain and Catalonia toward the east 4, and with England, Flaunders and
Holland toward the west 5, and all along the country of Champaigne, Almaine
bordereth upon it: so that our country takes part both of heat and cold,
wherefore the French are of two complexions: but in mine opinion I never saw
country in my life better seated than the realm of France.

The King of England who reioiced maruellously at this message sent by the
Constable (although happily he had received some such promise before, but not
so large) departed from Peronne with the Duke of Burgundy (who had no force
there, for his army was in Barrois and Lorraine) toward Saint Quintins,
whereunto when they approached, a great band of Englishmen ran before, thinking
(as I heard it reported a few days after) that the bells should have rung at
their coming, and that the citizens would have received them with cross and
holy water. But when they drew near the town, the artillery shot, and the
soldiers issued forth to the skirmish, both on horseback and foot, so that
two or three English men were slain, and some taken. Further, it rained
terribly, and in this estate returned they in great rage to their camp,
murmuring against the Constable and calling him traitor.

The next morning the Duke of Burgundy would have taken his leave of the King
of England to depart to his army into Barrois, promising to do maruels in his
favor. But the English men who naturally are suspicious, and were strangers in
these countries, marvelled much at his so sudden departure, (seeing they had
passed the seas at his request) and were greatly discontented therewith, neither
would they believe that his army was in a readiness. Besides that, the Duke
could by no means repair the Constables former credit with them:
notwithstanding that he affirmed all his doings to be to a good end. The
winter also which drew near dismayed them, so that they seemed by their words
desirous rather of peace than war.

The Notes.
1 The King would not swear by the cross of Saint Lou of Angiers, because
who so touched that cross and for swore himself, died miserably within a
year after.

2 The King of England landed at Calais the 4. of July. Meyer.

3 The reason is, Propter crassos humores quibus abundant eorum corpora, qui
vehementiores excitant affectus, and innatam caloris vim quae etiam augetur per
antiperistasin.

4 By the east he means all seas to the great Ocean.

5 By the west he means all west and north seas.

How the King clothed a poor servant in a cote armor with a scutchin, and sent
him to speak with the King of England in his Camp, where he received a very
good answer. Chap. 7.
IN the mean time, even at the very instant that the D. of Burgundy was taking
his leave, the English men took prisoner a gentleman's servant of the Kings
house named James of Grass, whom forthwith they led to the King of England
and the Duke being together, and from them into a tent: where when they had
examined him, the Duke took his leave to go into Brabant, and from thence to
Maizieres, where part of his army lay. The King of England commanded the said
servant to be dismissed, because he was their first prisoner. And at his
departure the Lord Howard and the Lord Stanley gave him a noble saying: Do our
humble commendations to the K. your Master if you can come to his presence. The
fellow came in great haste to the King being at Compiegne with these news, who
forthwith began to suspect him as a spy, because Gilbert of Grass his
Masters brother, was then very well entertained in the Duke of Britains court,
wherefore he was committed to ward, and straightly kept that night.
Notwithstanding the King commanded diverse to commune with him, by whose report
his tale seemed void of all suspicion and fear. Wherefore they desired the
King to vouchsafe to hear him, and according to their request the next morning
he himself spoke with him, and when he had heard him, his irons were knocked
off, but he remained still in ward. Then the King went to diner debating with
himself whether he should send to the English men or not. And before he sat
down talked three or four words thereof with me. For you know (my Lord of
Vienna) that oftentimes he communed very familiarly with those that were near
about him, as I was then, and others after, and loved to talk in a man's ear:
he called then to mind the herault of Englands advise, which was, that he
should not fail to send to the King of England so soon as he was landed, to
demand a safe conduct for certain ambassadors that he would send to him: and
further, to adresse his herault to the above named Lord Howard and the Lord
Stanley. After the King was set to diner, and had mused a while, as you know
his manner was (which seemed strange to those that knew him not: for unless a
man had beenwel acquainted with his behauior, he would have judged him of no
great wisdom, notwithstanding that his doings sufficiently declared the
contrary) he bad me in mine ear to arise and dine in my chamber, and send for
a certain servant of the Lord of Halles, son to Merichon of Rochell, and to
commune with him, to know whether he durst adventure to go to the K. of
Englands camp in a heraults cote: which his commandment I executed
forthwith, maruelling much when I saw the said servant: for he seemed to me
neither of personage nor behauior fit for such an enterprise: notwithstanding
he had a good wit and a very pleasant tongue, as I afterward perceived: the King
had never spoken with him before but once. The said servant was maruellously
astonished with my message, and fell down before me on his knees, as one
accounting himself a dead man, but I comforted and confirmed him the best I
could, promising him an office in the I Will of Re, and a sum of money, and to
cheer him the better, told him that this proceeded of the English men
themselves. Then I made him dine with me, none being present but we two, and
one of my servants, and by little and little persuaded him to do as he was
required. After I had been at diner a while, the King sent for me, and I told
him how I had wrought with this good fellow, naming diverse others, who in mine
opinion seemed fitter for this purpose than he, but the King would none but
him. Wherefore he came and talked with him himself, and confirmed him more with
one word, than I had with an hundred. None entered into the chamber with the
King save only the Lord of Villiers, then Master of the horse, and now bailife
of Caen. When the King perceived this good fellow to be well persuaded to go:
he sent the said Master of the horse to fetch a trumpet banner, thereof to make
this counterfeit herault a cote armor: for the King because he was not pompous
as other Princes are, had neither herault nor trumpeter with him. Thus the
Master of the horse and one of my men made his cote armor as well as they
could: which being finished, the said Master of the horse fetched a scutchin of
a little herault of the Lord Admirals called Pleinchemin, which was fastened to
our counterfeit herault: his boots also and his cloak were brought privily to
him, and likewise his horse: whereupon he mounted no man understanding any
thing of his journey. Further, a goodly budget was tied to his saddle bow,
into the which he put his cote armor. Thus being well instructed what to say,
he rode straight to the English camp: where when he arrived with his cote
armor on his back, he was stayed incontinent, and brought to the King of
Englands pauilion. Where being demanded the cause of his coming, he said that
he came from the King to speak with the King of England, and had commandment
to address himself to the Lord Howard and the Lord Stanley, whereupon they
led him into a tent to diner, and made him good cheer. After the King of
England was risen from the table (for he was at diner when the herault arrived)
the said herault was brought before him, and the King gave him audience. His
message was chiefly grounded upon the great desire the King had of long time
to be in perfect amity with the King of England, to the end both the realms
might live together in peace and quietness: adding further, that since the time
he was first crowned King of France, he never had attempted any thing against
the King of England or his realm 1: secondarily, he excused himself for
receiving in times past the Earl of Warwick into his dominions, saying that
he did it only against the Duke of Burgundy and not against him. Further, he
declared unto him that the said Duke of Burgundy had for none other cause
called him into France, but that by the occasion of his coming he might
conclude a better peace for himself with the King. And if happily any others
were furtherers thereof, it was only to amend the broken state of their own
affairs, and for their own private commodity: but as touching the King of
Englands good success, they were altogether careless thereof: he put him also
in mind of the time of the year, alleging that winter approached, and
likewise of the great charges he sustained: lastly he said, that
notwithstanding a great number in England, as well gentlemen as merchants
desired war with France: yet if the King of England would incline to peace, the
King for his part would condescend to such conditions, as he doubted not but he
and his realm would allow of: lastly, to the end he might the better be
informed of all these matters, he said: that if the King of England would grant
a safe conduct for an hundred horse, the King his Master would send ambassadors
to him well informed of their Masters pleasure, or if the said King of England
should like better to assign the place of treaty in some village between
both the armies, and to send Commissioners thither on both sides, the King his
Master would willingly agree thereunto: and send the like safe conduct for his
part.

The King of England and part of his nobles liked these ouuertures very well,
and granted our herault as large a safe conduct as he demanded, and gave him
four nobles of gold 2 in reward. Further, an English herault was sent back
with him to the King, to bring the like safe conduct from him as the King of
England had granted. And the next morning in a village near to Amiens the
Commissioners of both Princes met, being these: for the King, the bastard of
Bourbon Admiral of France, the Lord of Saint Pierre, and the Bishop of Eureux
called Heberge: and for the King of England the Lord Howard, one called
Chalanger 3, and a Doctor named Morton, at this present Chancellor of England
and Archbishop of Canterbury.

Some may think peradventure that the King humbled himself too much, but
those that be wise will easily perceive by that I have above rehearsed, in how
great danger the realm stood, had not God put to his helping hand, as well in
causing the King to take this wise course, as also by troubling the D. of
Burgundies wits, who committed so many errors as you have heard in this action,
and lost now through his own folly that which so long he had wished for and
desired. Many secret practices lay hidded at that time among our selves, as
well in Britain as elsewhere, which would soon have broken forth into great
inconveniences, had not this peace been speedily concluded. Wherefore I assure
my self by that I have seen in my time, that God had then, and yet has a
special regard of this realm.

The Notes.
1 King Lewis had forgotten that before this time he had attempted to restore
Queen Margaret daughter to King Rene. Annal. Burgund.

2 Hall reports, that the French herault had given him a gilt cup and an
hundred angels.

3 This Chalanger our chronicles name Sentleger.

How truce for nine years was treated of between the Kings of France and
England, notwithstanding all the lets and impediments that the Constable and
the Duke of Burgundy made. Chap. 8.
THe Commissioners of both the Princes met (as you have heard) the next day
after our heraults return, for we lay within four leagues or less together.
The said herault was well cheered, and had his office in the I Will of Re where he
was borne, and the sum of money that was promised him. Many conditions of peace
were treated of between our Commissioners. The English men after their woonted
manner, first demanded the crown, at the least Normandy and Guienne, but they
were no more earnestly demanded than strongly denied. Notwithstanding even at
this first meeting the treaty was brought to a reasonable point: for both the
parties desired peace: whereupon our ambassadors returned to the King, and the
others to their camp. The King heard the English men's demands and last
resolutions, which were these: That he should pay to the King of England
presently before his departure out of France 72000. crowns 1. That the King
that now is then Daulphine should marry King Edwards eldest daughter at this
day Queen of England, and that she should have the Duchy of Guienne for her
maintenance, or 50000. crowns yearly to be paid in the Tower of London by
the space of nine years: which term expired, the King that now is and his
wife should peaceably enjoy the revenues of the whole Duchy of Guienne, and
then the King our Master to be clearly discharged of all paiments to the King
of England. Diverse other trifling articles there were, touching matter of
trafike, which I ouerpasse. Lastly, this truce was to endure nine years
between the two realms: all the confederates of both parties being
comprehended therein, and namely on the King of Englands behalf, the Dukes of
Burgundy and Britain if they themselves would. Further, the King of England
made a marvelous strange offer, which was, to name in writing certain noble
men, who he said were traitors to the King and his crown. The King reioiced
maruellously at the report that his Commissioners made at their return, and
sat in counsel about these ouertures of peace: where among others I my self
was present. Some supposed all this treaty to be mere deceit and cunning of
the English men, but the King was of a contrary opinion: for he alleged first
the time of the year, saying, that winter now approached, and that they had not
one place to lodge in: secondarily, he declared the evil turns the Duke of
Burgundy had done them, who was also departed from them. And as touching the
Constable he did in manner assure himself, that he would put no places into
their hands, because he sent howerly to him to entertain him, to assuage his
malice, and to keep him from doing harm: lastly, he alleged the King of
Englands disposition, whom he knew well to be a Prince wholly given to his
pleasures and delights. Wherefore he seemed to discourse wiselier than any man
of the company, and better to understand than any other the matters there
debated. He concluded therefore with all speed to pay this sum of money, and
devised order how to levy it, and in the end commanded that every man should
lend a portion the sooner to furnish it: for the King cared not what he did to
rid the King of England out of his realm, save only that he would in no wise
consent to put any places into the English men's hands: for rather than he would
suffer that, he was fully determined to hazard all.

The Constable who began to smell these practices, was stricken with sudden
fear, because he had offended all the three Princes. Further, he doubted much
the treaty almost concluded against him at Bouuines. Wherefore he sent often
to the King, and even at this present arrived at the Court one of his gentlemen
named Lewis of Creuille, with one of his Secretaries called John Richer who
are both yet living. They delivered their message to the Lord of Bouchage and
me before they spoke with the King, as his pleasure was they should. The news
they brought liked the King well, because he meant to use them to good purpose
as you shall hear. The Lord of Contay (servant to the Duke of Burgundy)
lately taken prisoner before Arras as you have heard, went to and fro upon his
word between the Duke and the King: and the King had promised to release him
his ransom, and to give him a great sum of money if he could persuade his
Master to peace. By chance he returned to the King the selfsame day that these
two servants of the Constables arrived. Wherefore the King made him and me to
stand in a great old press in his chamber, to the end he might hear and make
report to his Master, of the language the Constable and his servants used of
him. We being there placed, the King sat down on a form hard by the press,
to the end we might the better hear Lewis of Creuilles and his companions
message. Who began thus, that of late being by their Masters commandment with
the Duke of Burgundy, to persuade him to depart from the English men's
friendship: they found him in such a rage against the King of England, that
they had almost won him not only to abandon the English men, but also to
help to spoil and destroy them in their return home. And in uttering these
words (the better to please the King) the said Lewis of Creuille counterfetting
the Duke of Burgundies gesture by stamping upon the ground and swearing Saint
George, rehearsed many reproachful speeches that (as they said) the Duke used
of the King of England. To be short, they uttered as many scofs and mocks of
the D. as was possible. The King made great sport with this matter, and bad the
said Lewis of Creuille to speak alowd, faining himself to be grown somewhat
deaf, and to tell him this tale again: which the other making no bones
thereat, did with a good will.

The said Contay (who stood with me in the press) was maruellously astonished
at this talk, neither would have believed it unless himself had heard it.
The Constables men's conclusion was this. They counseled the King, for avoiding
of all these great dangers he saw hang over his head, to conclude a truce (for
the which the said Constable offered to travel to the uttermost of his power:)
and to put into the English men's hands (the better to content them) some small
town or two to lodge them in this winter, saying, that were they never so bad,
yet the English men would hold themselves contented with them. And it seemed
by their talk, though they named no place, that they meant Eu and Saint Valery.
By this means the Constable trusted to recover the King of Englands favor,
which he had lost because of the refusal made him of his places. But the King
who thought it sufficient to have played his part by bringing the Lord of
Contay to hear what language the Constable and his men used of the Duke his
Master, gave them no evil answer, but said that he would send to his brother
2, to advertise him of such news as he knew, and so licensed them to depart.
Notwithstanding, one of them before his departure swear to reveal unto him
whatsoever he could learn touching him or his estate. The King had much adoo
to dissemble any longer when he heard them counsel him to put towns into the
English men's hands. Notwithstanding, he gave them no such answer, whereby they
might gather their counsel to be taken in evil part (because he feared that
would the more increase the Constables malice:) but sent one back with them to
their Master: it was not far between him and us, for a man might go and come
in very short space. When the others were departed, the L. of Contay and I came
out of the press: the K. laughed maruellously, and was very merry with this
pageant. But the said Contay was so far out of patience to hear such petit
companions thus flout and scoff his Master (especially the Constable,
pretending so great friendship to his Master, and treating with him of so many
matters) that he thought every hour ten til he were on horseback to advertise
the Duke his Master thereof. Wherefore he was dispatched with all speed, and
wrote his instructions himself: he carried also with him a letter of credit,
written with the Kings own hand, and so departed.

The peace with the English men was already concluded as above is mentioned,
and all these practices were abroch in one instant. The Kings Commissioners had
made report of their negotiation as you have heard, and the King of Englands
were also returned to him. Further it was concluded and agreed on both sides by
the ambassadors that passed between them, that the two Princes should meet
together, and after they had seen one another and sworn the treaty, the King
of England should return home into his country, having first received the sum
above mentioned of 720000. crowns, and leaving in hostage behind him, till he
were passed the seas, the Lord Howard, and the Master of his horse called sir
John Cheinie. Lastly, a pension of 16000. crowns was promised to be divided
among the King of Englands principal servants, of the which sum the Lord
Hastings had two thousand. The rest had the Lord Howard, the Master of the
horse, Master Chalanger, Master Montgomerie, and others: besides this, great
sums of money and goodly presents of silver plate were given to King Edward's
servants.

The Duke of Burgundy hearing these news, came in great haste from Luxembourg
where he lay, to the King of England, accompanied only with sixteen horse.
The King being much astonished at this his so sudden arrival, asked him what
wind drove him thither, perceiving by his countenance that he was displeased.
The Duke answered that he was come to talk with him. The King demanded whether
he would speak with him privately or publicly. Then said the Duke, have you
concluded peace? I have quoth the King made truce for nine years, wherein both
you and the Duke of Britain are comprehended, and I pray you agree thereunto.
But the Duke grew marvelous hot, and spoke in English (for he could the
language) rehearsing what noble acts diverse Kings of England had done in
France, and what great travel they had sustained to purchase honor and
renown. Afterward he inueighed vehemently against this truce, saying, that he
had not desired the English men to pass the seas for any need he had of their
help, but to the end they might recover their own right. And to the intent
they might perceive that he stood in no need of their coming: he protested
that he would not make truce with the King, till the King of England had been
three months at home in his realm: which talk ended, he departed and
returned from whence he came. The King of England and his Council took these
words in evil part: but they that misliked the peace commended much the Dukes
speech.

The Notes.
1 Meyer says thus: Quinquaginta millia aureorum pro tributo Aquitaniae
Septuaginta quinque millia praeterea soluta prae manibus Edwardo a Gallorum
Rege. Annal. Aquit. say 65000. our chronicles and Gaguin 75000. But the truce
says Gaguin was concluded but for seven years. Introduction de la March
says 60000. crowns the yearly tribut, but in the second book cap. 1. the
same author says but 36000.

2 The King calls the Constable brother, because the King and he had married
two sisters, as our author makes mention in this book cap. 4.

How the King feasted the English men in Amiens, and how there was a place
assigned for the enteruiew of the two Kings. Chap. 9.
THe King of England to the end the peace might be fully concluded, came and
encamped within half a league of Amiens. The King was at the gate, from whence
he might behold the English men a far off as they came. To say the truth they
seemed but young soldiers: for they rode in very evil order. The King sent to
the King of England 300. carts laden with the best wines that might be gotten:
the which carriage seemed a far off almost as great as the King of Englands
army. Many English men because of the truce repaired to the town, where they
behaved themselves very indiscreetly, and without all regard of their Princes
honor. They came all in arms, and in great troops: and if the King our Master
would have dealt falsely with them, so great a number might never so easily have
been destroyed. Notwithstanding he meant nothing less, but studied to make
them good cheer, and to conclude a sure peace with them for his time. He had
caused to be set at the entry of the town gate two long tables, on each side
of the street one, furnished with all kinds of delicate meats that provoke
drink, and with the best wines that might be gotten, and men to wait upon
them: of water there was no mention. At each of these tables he had placed five
or six great fat gentlemen of good houses, thereby the better to content those
that desired to drink. The gentlemen's names were these: Monseur de Cran, de
Briqueber, de Bresmes, de Villiers, and others. So soon as the English men
drew near the gate, they might behold this good cheer. Besides this, men
purposely appointed took their horses by the bridles, saying that they would
break a staff with them, and so led them to the table, where they were
feasted according to the variety of the meats: which they took in very good
part. After they were within the town, what house soever they entered into they
paid nothing. Further, nine or ten tauerns were well furnished at the Kings
charge of all things necessary: whither they went to eat and drink, and
called for what they would, but the King defraied all: and this cheer endured
three or four days.

You have heard how the Duke of Burgundy misliked the peace, which howsoever
it displeased him, troubled the Constable much more, because he saw he had
failed of his enterprise, and purchased himself hatred on all sides: wherefore
he sent his Confessor to the King of England with a letter of credit, desiring
him for Gods love to have no affiance in the Kings words and promises, but to
accept the towns of Eu and S. Valerie, and there to lodge himself part of the
winter: adding, that within two months he would find means to lodge him more
commodiously. Other assurance heerof gave he him none: for his only meaning
was to feed him forth with these fair words. Last of all, to the end he
should not conclude a dishonorable treaty for greedines of a little money, he
promised to lend him fifty thousand crowns, with diverse other large offers.
But the King had already caused the two places above mentioned to be burned,
because he knew the King of England had intelligence that the Constable had
persuaded him to put them into the English men's hands. King Edwards answer was,
that the truce was already concluded, and that he would alter nothing therein,
but if he had performed his promises, he would have made no such appointment:
which answer drove the Constable into utter despair.

You have heard of the English men's great cheer in Amiens, but one evening
Monseur de Torcy came to the King and told him, that so great a number of them
were in the town, that it stood in some danger. But the King was displeased
with his message: wherefore every man forbear to bring him any more such news.
The next morrow was one of the days that represented Childermas day that year
1, on the which the King used not to debate any matter, but accounted it a
sign of some great misfortune toward him, if any man communed with him of his
affairs, and would be maruellously displeased with those that were near about
him and acquainted with his humor, if they troubled him with any matter
whatsoever. Notwithstanding the same morning I now speak of, as he (being but
newly risen) was saying his prayers, one brought me word that there were at the
least nine thousand English men within the town: which news I hearing,
determined to advertise him thereof. Wherefore I entered again into his closet,
and said unto him: Sir, though this day represent unto you Childermas day, yet
necessity inforceth me to inform you of that I hear. Then I advertised him at
large of the great number of English men that were within the town, adding
that they entered continually all armed, and that no man durst refuse them the
gate for fear of displeasing them. The King was content to hear me speak,
and forthwith arose from his prayers, saying, that he would not observe the
ceremony of Innocents that day, and bad me mount on horseback to see if I
could speak with the English men's captains, to cause them to depart the
town: further, he commanded me if I met any of his own captains, to bid them
repair unto him, saying also, that he himself would come to the gate
immediately after me. I did as I was commanded, and spoke to three or four
English captains with whom I was acquainted, aduertising them what I thought
good to be done in this case: but for one they put forth of the town, twenty
came in. The King sent immediately after me the L. of Gie now Marshall of
France, to take order for this inconvenience: we two entered together into a
tavern, where were spent that morning 111. shots, yet was it but nine of the
clock. The house was full, some sang, some slept, and some were drunk: which
when I saw, I perceived no danger to be of such men, and sent word thereof to
the King: who came incontinent with a goodly train to the gate, and caused two
or three hundred soldiers to arm themselves secretly in their captains
houses, and placed some also upon the gate where the English men entered.
Further, he commanded his diner to be brought into the porters lodge, where he
caused diverse English gentlemen to dine with him. The King of England being
advertised of this disorder, was ashamed thereof, and sent to the King desiring
him to give commandment, that no English man should be suffered to enter the
town: whereunto the King answered, that he would never so do: but desired him
if it so pleased him, to send certain of the yomen of his crown to keep the
gate, and let in such as they should think good: and so the King of England
did, whereupon a great number of English men departed the town by his
commandment.

It was then determined that for perfect conclusion of the peace, Commissioners
should be appointed on both sides to assign a place for the enteruiew of the
two Kings. For our King, the L. of Bouchage and I my self were named: and for
the King of England, the L. Howard, one called Chalenger, and a herault. After
we had ridden up and down and viewed all the river, we agreed in the end the
pleasantest, safest, and most commodious place to be Picquigny, a town three
leagues from Amiens, with a strong castle, belonging to the Vidame of Amiens.
Notwithstanding that it were once burned by the Duke of Burgundy. The town
stands in a bottom, and the river of Some passes through it, which is deeper
there than a man's height, but very narrow. The country on both sides of the
river through the which the two Kings should pass was very open and pleasant,
save that when the King of England drew near to the river side, there was a
causey at the least two bow shot long environed with a marsh (a very dangerous
passage if we had not meant good faith.) Wherefore without doubt the Englishmen
(as before I have said) are not so subtle and circumspect in these treaties
and assemblies as the French. For (whatsoever men say of them) they go bluntly
to work, but a man must have patience with them and give them no cross
language.

After the place was assigned, we determined to build a strong large bridge
over the river, the work men and stuff we furnished. In the midst of this
bridge a wooden grate was made like to a lions cage, the space between each
bar being no greater than that a man with ease might thrust in his arm: over
the head it was boorded to keep off the rain, so broad that ten or twelve
might stand covered under it on each side: over the bridge no man could pass:
for the grate was framed clean overthwart it, and upon the river was but one
bote with two men in it, to ferry over such as passed from the one side to the
other.

I will tell you what moved the King to make this grate in such sort that no
man could pass through it, because it may peradventure stand some man in stead
that shall have occasion to make the like. In King Charles the 7. youth, this
realm was grievously plagued by the English men. For King Henry the 5. held
the siege before Roan, and had brought the town to great extremity: the most
part of the inhabitants being either subjects to John Duke of Burgundy then
living, or of his faction.

Between the said Duke John of Burgundy and the Duke of Orleans great variance
had been of long time, so far forth, that the whole realm or the greatest
part was rent into two factions, whereby the Kings estate was much weakened:
for partiality never arises in any realm, but in the end the fire thereof is
dangerous and hard to be quenched. This variance grew so hot, that the Duke of
Orleans was slain at Paris about eleven years before 2. The Duke of Burgundy
led a great army, with the which he marched toward Normandy, minding to leuy
the siege before Roan 3, but to the end he might be the stronger, and the
better assured of the King, it was agreed that the King and he should meet at
Montereau faut Yonne, where a bridge was made and a grate overthwart it, with a
little wicket in the midst boulted on both sides, so that a man might pass
through with consent of both parties. The King 4 came on the one side of the
bridge, and the Duke on the other: being both accompanied with a great number
of men of arms, especially the Duke. They fell in communication together upon
the bridge: at the which were present on the Dukes side only three or four 5.
But after they had talked a while, the Duke either through earnest
solicitation of those that were with the King, or of a desire he had to humble
himself before him, vnboulted the wicket on his side, and the others on
theirs. Three of the Dukes men went through before him, and then himself
passed being the fourth and was immediately slain 6, and they also that
accompanied him: wherefore ensued great miseries and calamities to this realm
7, as all the world can witness. This history was before my time, wherefore I
forbear further to speak thereof: but thus the King rehearsed it to me word
for word at the same time that this enteruiew with King Edward was appointed:
saying, that if there had been no wicket, no occasion had been to desire the
Duke to pass through the grate, and then that great misfortune had not
happened. The authors whereof were certain of the Duke of Orleans servants
that was slain, who were then in great credit with King Charles.

The Notes.
1 The King upon a super slition kept holy twelve days in the year, viz.
every month one, in remembrance of the Innocents day: and the day here
mentioned was one of them.

2 These eleven years was in the text but one year: the Printer for onze ans
auoit having printed un an auoit. For the Duke of Orleans was slain ann. 1407.
the 22. of November, and the King of England laid his siege before Roan 1418.
the last of July. but Meyer says in June, and it was yielded to him the 19. or
16. as some write of January 1419. which was eleven years and somewhat more
after the Duke of Orleans death.

3 All authors report, that not only Roan but tall Normandy was taken before
D. John of Burgundy was slain: for Roan was yielded to the English 1419. the
19. of January, and the Duke slain the same year in November, September, or
August (for authors so diversely report the time) but Commines manner (as
himself writes) is not to stand so exactly upon times. Further, authors agree
not among themselves about this matter. Lastly, this place may be understood,
that when Duke John levied his army, his meaning was to raise the siege before
Roan, though he could not come time ynongh to execute his enterprise. Of the
Dukes death read Meyer lib. 15. fol. 255. and 256. Chron. Fland. fol. 281.
Annal. Burgund. etc.

4 Note that this notwithstanding, he was not King yet but Daulphin.

5 The French writers say each of them having ten Knights.

6 The French to excuse the Daulphin say, that Tanneguy du Chastell (sometime
servant to the Duke of Orleans that was slain) slew Duke John with one blow
of a battle axe, because of certain arrogant words used at that time to the
Daulphin: whereas Commines and Meyer report that too great humility was cause
of his death. Tanneguy du Chastell, Oliver Layet, Peter Frotier, and William
Batilier slew Duke John and the Lord of Nouaille with him, who drew his sword
in the Dukes defense. Annal. Burgund. Introduct. de la March. Meyer.

7 For Duke Philip of Burgundy to revenge his fathers death, entered into
league with the English men.

How the two Kings met and swear the treaty before concluded, and how some
supposed that the holy Ghost came down upon the King of Englands pauilion in
the likeness of a white pigeon. Chap. 10.
Our grate being finished as you have heard, the next day the two Kings came
thither in the yeeere 1475. the 29. of August 1. The K. had with him about
eight hundred men of arms, and arrived first at the grate: on the King of
Englands side stood all his army in order of battle, which undoubtedly was
great both of horsemen and footmen: yet could not we discover his whole force.
We on our side seemed but a handful to them, and no marvel: for the fourth
part of the Kings army was not there. It was appointed that each of the Kings
should be accompanied at the grate with twelve persons, which were already
named, of the noblest personages and such as were nearest about them. Moreover,
on our side were four of the King of Englands servants to view what we did,
and as many of ours on their side. The King as I told you, arrived first at the
grate, and twelve of us waited upon him, among whom were the late Duke John of
Bourbon and the Cardinal his brother. It pleased him that I should wear that
day a suit of apparel like his own: for he had used of long time, and that
very often, to command one or other to be apparelled like himself. The King
of England came along upon the causey above mentioned with a marvelous goodly
train, as was convenient for the majesty of a Prince: he was accompanied with
the Duke of Clarence his brother, the Earl of Northumberland, and diverse other
noble men, namely the Lord Hastings his Chamberlain, his Chauncellor, and
others. But there were not past three or four besides himself apparelled in
cloth of gold. Further, he ware on his head a black velvet cap with a
marvelous rich jewel, being a Flower de luce set with stones. He was a goodly
tall Prince, but inclined now to be somewhat gross, and I had seen him before
much beautifuller than at this present: for sure when the Earl of Warwick
chased him out of England, he was the goodliest gentleman that ever I set mine
eye on. When he came within five foot of the grate, he took off his cap, and
bowed down within half a foot of the ground: the King in like manner who was
leaning upon the grate, used great reverence toward him: and when they came to
embrace each other through the grate, the King of England again made low
obeisance. Then the King began the talk and said: Cousin, you are most heartily
welcome, there is no man in the world whom I have so much desired to see as you,
and praised be God that we are met here to so good a purpose: heereunto the
King of England answered in good French. This talk ended, the Chancellor of
England, who was a Prelate and Bishop of Elie, began his oration with a
prophecy (whereof the English men are never unfurnished 2:) which said that in
this place of Picquigny an honorable peace should be concluded between the
realms of France and England. The Bishops oration being ended, the letters
were opened that the King had delivered to the King of England touching the
conclusion of the treaty: and the said Chancellor asked the King whether they
were written by his commandment, and whether he auowed them: whereunto the
King answered yea. Then the Bishop asked him again, if he held himself
contented in like manner with those letters and writings that were delivered him
on the King of Englands behalf: whereunto the King answered as before. Then
was the missall brought forth and opened: upon the which each of the Kings
laid one of their hands, and the other upon the true holy cross, and swear
both of them to keep and observe the articles concluded between them, namely
the truce for nine years, wherein the confederats of both parties were
comprehended, and the marriage of their children to be accomplished in manner
and form as was comprehended in the treaty. After they had both sworn, the
King (who had his words at commandment) began to enter into pleasant talk
with the K. of England: saying that he should come to Paris to solace himself
there with the Ladies, and that he would give him the Cardinal of Bourbon for
his confessor, who would easily assoile him of that sin, if any were
committed. The King of England took great pleasure in this talk, and answered
with a merry countenanee: for he knew the Cardinal to be a good fellow. After
some such like speeches passed between them, the King to show that he had
authority among his men, commanded those that were with him to withdraw
themselves, saying that he would commune with the King of England in secret:
which they that accompanied the King of England seeing, retired without
commandment. After the two Kings had communed awhile together, the King called
me to him, and asked the King of England if he knew me, who answered, that he
knew me well, and named the places where he had seen me, adding, that in times
past I had taken pains to do him service in Calais during the time I was with
the Duke of Burgundy. Then the King inquired of him, if the Duke of Burgundy
would not be comprehended in the truce (as it was to be presumed because of his
froward answer, that he would not) what it would please him that he should do?
The King of England said, that he would offer it him yet once more, and if he
refused to accept it, that then they two should do as they thought good.
Afterward the King fell in talk of the Duke of Britain (which was the only
end why he moved this question) and asked him in like manner of him. The King
of England desired him earnestly to attempt nothing against the D. of Britain,
saying that in his necessity he never found so faithful a friend: whereupon
the King ended this communication: and then calling the company together
again, with the most courteous and gracious language that might be, took his
leave of the King of England, giving very good words in like manner to every one
of his servants. And so the two Princes in a manner both at one instant departed
from the grate and took horse. The King returned to Amiens, and the King of
England to his camp, whither we sent from the court all kind of provision
necessary for him, so far forth, that torches and lights were not forgotten.
At this enteruiewe the Duke of Gloucester King Edwards brother, and certain
others were not present, because they misliked the peace. Notwithstanding,
afterward they were well enough persuaded to allow of it, so far forth that
the said Duke of Gloucester came to Amiens to the King, who gave him many goodly
presents of silver plate, and horses with all kind of furniture.

After the King was returned from this meeting, upon the way he debated two
points with me: the one, he found the King of England so willing to come to
Paris that it liked him never a whit. For he is, quoth he, a goodly Prince, and
much given to love: he may peradventure meet with some dainty dame at Paris,
that will entertain him with so many sugared words, that she may happily make
him desirous to return thither again. But his predecessors have soiourned too
long both at Paris and in Normandy. I like not his company on this side the
sea, but so long as he keeps home, I wish to have him my good friend and
loving brother. The other point was this, he was sorry that he found the King of
England somewhat hard when he made mention of the D. of Britain: for the King
was so desirous to persuade him to suffer war to be made in Britain, that
afterward he solicited this matter anew by the Lords of Bouchage and Saint
Pierre. But the King of England seeing himself thus earnestly pressed,
answered in few words, that who so should make war upon the Duke of Britain,
he would pass the seas yet once again in his defense: which answer being
heard, the matter was no further mentioned. After the K. was returned to
Amiens, even as he was going to supper, arrived three or four noble men of
England such as had furthered the peace, and the Lord Howard (who was one of
them) began to talk with the King in his ear, saying, that if it pleased him,
he would find means to bring his Master to Amiens, and peradventure to Paris,
to make merry with him, which offer though the King liked never a whit, yet
made he show of great good liking thereof, and began to wash, not answering
much to that point, but told me softly in mine ear, that the thing he most
feared was happened, meaning this offer. After supper they fell again in
communication of the selfsame matter, but with wise words the enterprise was
broken off: for the King said, that with all speed he must depart to go
against the Duke of Burgundy. Although these affairs were of great importance
and sagely ordered on both sides: yet you see merry toies happened also among
them which are not to be forgotten. But as touching the K. who will marvel
(considering the great harms the English men have done in France but of late
years) if he traveled his body, and spent his money to rid them friendly out
of the realm, to the intent hereafter he might keep them his friends, at the
least not have them his foes.

The next day after this meeting, a great number of English men repaired to
Amiens, some of them affirming that the holy Ghost had made this peace (for
they grounded all on prophesies.) The reason that moved them so to say was,
for that a white pigeon sat upon the King of Englands pauilion the day of the
enteruiew, and would not remove thence notwithstanding any noise made in the
camp. The cause whereof as some men judged, was, for that it had rained a
little, and afterward the sun shining very hot, the pigeon lighted upon this
pauilion (being higher than the rest) to dry her self: which reason was given
by a gentleman of Gascoine servant to the King of England, named Lewis of
Bretailles, who was not a little offended with the peace. And because he and I
were of old acquaintance, he talked familiarly with me: saying that we would
deride the King of England for this treaty. I asked him how many battles the
said King had won: he told me nine, in the which himself had been in person.
Then I demanded of him again, how many he had lost: and he answered never but
one, which was this we now bereaved him of: adding, that he received greater
dishonor by returning home after this sort, than he had obtained honor in
winning the other nine. Of this communication I advertised the King, who said
he was a dangerous knave, and that some means must be found to stop his mouth:
whereupon he sent for him, and made him dine at his own table, offering him
very large offers and goodly offices if he would tarry in France. But seeing
he would by no means be won thereunto, he gave him a thousand crowns in
money, promising also a good turn to his brethren that were on this side the
sea, and I gave him a watchword in his ear, to employ his credit to continue
the friendship and amity begun between the two Princes.

The King feared especially above all things least some word should escape him
at unawares, whereby the English men might gather that he derided them. And by
chance the next morning after this meeting, as he was in his closet, and not
past three or four of us with him, he spoke a merry word touching the wines
and presents sent to the English camp: and as he turned about espied a
merchant of Gascoine that dwelt in England, who was come to move a suit to him
for a license to ship certain Gascoine wines into England without impost,
which was a suit that might much benefit the said merchant if he could obtain
it. The King woondered when he saw him how he was gotten in thither, and asked
him of what town he was in Guienne, and whether he were a merchant and married
in England. The merchant answered yea, but that his wealth was not great.
Incontinent before his departure thence, the K. appointed one to accompany him
to Bordeaux, and I communed with him by his commandment. Further, a good
office in the town where he was borne was given him: the license for the wines
which he demanded was granted him, and besides this 1000. franks were delivered
him for his wives charges upon the way, and he sent a brother of his into
England for her, but went not himself. Thus the King condemned himself in
this penalty for his over large speech.

The Notes.
1 The old copy says the 19. day, Meyer the 31. day, Gaguin the 28. of
October.

2 The like reparteth Iouius of the French.

How the Constable after the truce made with the English men, sought to excuse
himself to the King: and how truce was also concluded for nine years between
the King and the Duke of Burgundy. Chap. 11.
THe selfsame day above mentioned, being the next day after the enteruiew, the
Constable sent letters to the King by a servant of his named Rapine (who was a
trusty servant to his Master, and whom also the King preferred afterward)
Monseur de Lude and my self were commanded to hear his message. Now you shall
understand that Monseur de Contay was already returned from the Duke of
Burgundy to the Court, about the practice above mentioned devised against the
Constable: so that the said Constable knew not to what Saint he should vow
himself, but remained in utter despair. Rapines message was very humble,
tending to excuse his Master of the sundry evil reports that he knew had been
made of him to the King, for that the end sufficiently declared, that he never
meant to do otherwise than duty required. And to the intent he might the
better assure the King of his true dealing, he promised so to practice with the
Duke of Burgundy, that he would persuade him to help to destroy the King of
England and his whole army, if it so pleased the King. And it seemed by his
speech that his Master was in utter despair. We told him that we were in
perfect amity with the English men, and would no war. But Monseur de Lude who
was with me, adventured to ask him if he knew where his Masters treasure lay.
I marvelled to hear such a word pass him: for seeing this Rapine was a very
trusty servant to his Master, this speech was sufficient to have caused the
Constable to fly, and to understand in what estate he was, and what was a
brewing for him, especially seeing the danger he had been in not past a year
before. But I never knew man in my life neither here nor elsewhere, that could
dislodge in time and shun the danger hanging over his head: some because they
think they shall not be received nor be in safety in strange countries, and
other some because they are too much affectionate to their goods, wives and
children: which two reasons have been the cause of many a good man's undoing.

After we had made report to the King of Rapines message, he called for one of
his Secretaries, none being with him but the Lord Howard the King of Englands
servant, (who understood nothing of this practice against the Constable,) the
Lord of Contay who was returned from the Duke of Burgundy, and we two that had
talked with the said Rapine. Then he indicted a letter to the Constable, wherein
he advertised him of all that was done the day before, namely, the treaty of
peace. Further, he sen^^^^ word that he was busied with diverse affairs of
great importance, and had need of such a head as his: which word was no sooner
uttered, but he turned to the Englishmen and the Lord of Contay, saying softly
to them, I mean not that we should have the body, but the head without the
body. This letter was delivered to Rapine, who liked it marvelous well,
especially those words that the King had need of such a head as his Masters,
but he understood not the mystery thereof. The King of England also sent the
King the two letters of credit that the Constable had written to him, and
disclosed all the messages that he had sent him, whereby you may perceive how
the Constable had behaved himself toward these three great Princes, and in
what estate he was: every one of the three desiring his death.

The King of England upon the receipt of his money departed, and marched in
great haste toward Callice, fearing the D. of Burgundies malice and his
subjects, and not without cause: for whenever his men scattered and singled
themselves, some of them came short home. At his departure he left for hostages
with the King, till his return into England according to his promise, the Lord
Howard, and the Master of his horse called Sir John Cheiny.

You have heard before at the entrance into these English affairs, that K.
Edward had no great devotion to this voyage into France: for being come to
Dover, before he embarked he began to practice with us. But there were two
causes that moved him to pass the seas: one, the desire his whole realm had
according, to their natural humor, to make war in France, and the rather at
this present, because the Duke of Burgundy pressed the war so earnestly: the
other, the hope he had to reserve to himself a great part of the subsidy
levied in England for this voyage: for as before I have said, the Kings of
England receive only the bare revenues of their lands, save when they levy
money to make war in France. Further, K. Edward had devised this subtlety to
appease his subjects: he had brought with him ten or 12. great fat paunches, as
well of the city of London, as of other towns in England, who were the
wealthiestmen of the commonaltie, and had been the chiefest instruments both in
persuading the King to pass into France, and also in leuying this mighty
army. The King caused them to be lodged in good tents, but that was not the
life they were accustomed to lead: wherefore they soon waxed weary of it. At
their first arrival they looked for the battle within three days after their
landing. But the King of England alleged many doubts unto them, and endeavored
to put them in fear of the battle, and to persuade them to allow of the
peace, to the end they might aid him at their return into England to pacify
the murmuring and grudging of the people that happily might arise because of
his return: for never King of England since King Arthur, passed at one time
with so great force, and so many noble personages into France. But after the
peace was concluded, the King of England repaired homeward with speed,
reserving to himself a great sum of money levied in England for the payment
of his soldiers; so that he obtained in effect all his purposes. His body
could not away with such labor as a King of England must endure that minds to
atchieue any great enterprise in France. Further, the King our Master had made
great preparation for resistance, though to say the truth he could not well
have provided defense sufficient against all his enemies: for he had too many.
Lastly, the King of England had a marvelous great desire to accomplish the
marriage of his daughter with King Charles the 8. now reigning, which caused
him to wink at a number of inconveniences, that turned after to the King our
Masters great profit.

After all the English men were returned home saving the hostages: the King
took his journey toward Laon, and lodged in a little town upon the ma^^^es
of Henault called Veruins, and to Auennes in Henault came the Chauncello^ o^
Burgundy with the Lord of Contay and other ambassadors from the Duke. The King
was very desirous at this time to conclude a final peace: for this mighty
English army had put him in fear, and no marvel: for he had seen in his
time of their doings in this realm, and would in no wise their return. The
said Chauncellor writ to the King, desiring that it would please him to send
his Commissioners for the peace to a certain bridge in the midway between
Auennes and Veruins, saying, that he and his colleagues would meet them there.
The King sent him answer, that he would come thither himself; and
notwithstanding that diverse, whose advise he asked in this matter, persuaded
him to the contrary: yet thither he went, leading also with him the English
hostages, who were present when he received the Dukes ambassadors, the which
came very well accompanied with archers and men of war. At this first meeting
they did but salute the King, and then went to dinner. One of the English men
began to repent him that the treaty was concluded, and said to me at a window,
that if they had seen many such men with the Duke of Burgundy, peradventure
they would not have made peace. Which words the Vicount of Narbonne 1 (now Lord
of Fouez) hearing, said: Were you so simple to think, that the Duke of
Burgundy had not great force of such men? he had sent them only to refresh
themselves: but you were so desirous to return home, that six hundred pipes
of wine, and a pension the King gives you, blew you quickly back into
England. The English man in a great fury answered; I perceive now their
sayings to prove true, that told us you would deride us for making peace. Call
you the money the King gives us, a pension? it is tribute, and by Saint George
you may babble so much that you may soon make us to return. But I brake off
their talk and turned it to a jest: notwithstanding the Englishman was
discontented and cast out a word thereof to the King, who was maruellously
offended with the Lord of Narbonne for his speech.

The King communed not long at this first meeting with the Chancellor and the
other ambassadors: for it was agreed that they should go with him to Veruines,
where when they arrived he commanded M. Tanneguy du Chastell, and M. Peter
Doriole Chancellor of France, and others to negotiate with them: much ado
there was between them, many reasons alleged, and many demands made on each
side. The Kings Commissioners made report to him that the Burgundians used
fierce and stout language, but that they had paid them with the like, and
withal told him what their answers were. Which he much misliked, saying, that
the like answers had been made diverse times before, and that they treated not
of a final peace, but only of truce; wherefore he would have no more such
language used, but would himself commune with them: and thereupon caused the
said Chauncellor and the (...) ^^bassadors to come into his chamber, out of the
which all men were commanded to avoid, save the late L. Admiral called the
bastard of Burbon, Monseur de Bouchage, and my self. There the King concluded
truce for nine years, wherein it was agreed, that every man should be restored
to his former estate. But the ambassadors besought the King that the truce
might not yet be proclaimed, to save the D. their Masters oath, who had sworn
not to make truce before the King of England had been a certain space in his
realm, least he should think their Master had accepted his truce.

But the King of England (who thought great scorn that the Duke would not be
comprehended in his truce) being advertised that he treated with the King of an
other, sent over into France a knight near about him called Sir Thomas
Montgomery, who came to Veruins at the very same instant that the King treated
with the Duke of Burgundies ambassadors of this truce above mentioned. The said
Sir Thomas required the King in the King his Masters name, to make no other
truce with the Duke of Burgundy, than that which was already concluded between
them two. Further desiring him not to deliver Saint Quintins into the Dukes
hands, and offering that if he would continue war with the Duke, his Master
would be content the next summer to pass the seas again for him, and in his
aid, with these conditions. First, that the King should recompense the loss
the King of England should sustain by the wool custom of Calice, amounting
yearly to 50000. crowns: which if the war opened with Flaunders were clearly
lost. And secondarily, that the King should pay the one half of the English
army, and the King of England the other. The King yielded great thanks to the
King of England for this courteous message, and gave a goodly present of silver
plate to the said Sir Thomas. Notwithstansting, as touching the war he excused
himself, saying, that the truce was already concluded, being the very same
that the King of England and he had made for the term of nine years, save
that the Duke would have his letters apart. Thus to content the ambassador he
excused the matter the best he could, and the said Sir Thomas returned into
England, and the hostages with him. The King marvelled much at the King of
Englands offers, at the report whereof I only was present. But it seemed to
him a dangerous thing, to cause the King of England to pass the seas again,
both because every trifle would breed quarrels between the French and English
being in camp together; and also because it was to be feared that the
Burgundians and they would easily concile themselves: wherefore he was so much
the more desirous to conclude the truce with the Duke of Burgundy.

The Notes.
1 The French having only Monseur de Narbonne, made Sleidan translate it the
Bishop of Narbonne, whereas in deed he was Vicount of Narbonne not Bishop, as
other authors affirm; and these words, (Qui an iourd'huy s'appele Monseur de
Fouez) plainly prove: wherefore for avoiding of Sleidans error, I have put
this word (Vicount) into the text, though it be not in the French.

How the Constables death was fully concluded and sworn between the King and
the Duke of Burgundy, and how he went into the Dukes dominions, where by his
commandment he was stayed and delivered to the King, and after put to death.
Chap. 12.
THe truce being concluded, the old practice against the Constable was revived:
and to the end the process thereof should be short; they ratified all that was
done before at Bouuines, and the writings there made (as before you have heard)
were again interchangablie delivered. In the said writings the King promised
the Duke Saint Quintins, Han, Bohain, and all the lands that the Constable held
of the Duke, and all his moouables wheresoever they were found 1. Further, the
manner how to besiege him in Han (where he lay) was devised. It was also agreed
that whether of the two Princes could first take him, should either put him to
death within eight days, or deliver him to the other. All men incontinent
began to fear this confederacy, so far forth that the Constables principal
servants forsook him, namely Monseur de Genly and diverse others. Further, he
being advertised that King Edward had delivered his letters to the King and
discovered all that he knew of him; and seeing also that his enemies had made
truce, fell into great fear, and sent to the Duke of Burgundy, humbly
beseeching him to give him a safe conduct to come and speak with him about
certain affairs that greatly imported him. The Duke at the first made dainty
to grant a safe conduct, but in the end sent him one. This mighty noble man had
often debated, whither he should fly to save himself: for he was informed of
all that was done, and had seen the writings devised against him at Bouuines.
Sometime he consulted with certain of his servants, being Lorrains,
determining to fly with them into Almain, carrying a great sum of money with
him (for the way was very safe) therewith to buy some place upon the river of
Rhene to remain in, till he were reconciled to one of the two Princes. Sometime
he resolved to put himself into his strong castle of Han, which had cost him
so much money, and which he had fortified to serve him at such a pinch, and
furnished of al things as well as any castle that ever I knew. But he could
not find men to his mind to put into the place, because all his servants were
borne under the Dominions of one of the two Princes. And peradventure his fear
was so great, that he durst not wholly discover himself and his estate to them;
for I think a great many of them would not have forsaken him: neither was it
so dangerous for him to be besieged of both the Princes as of one, for it had
been impossible for the two armies to agree.

But in the end he concluded to go to the Duke of Burgundy under this safe
conduct, being accompanied only with fifteen or twenty horse, and rode to
Montz in Hainault, where the Lord Desmeriez great bailife of Hainault and his
especial friend lay. With him he soiourned a certain space, attending news
from the Duke of Burgundy, who had lately begun war upon the Duke of Lorraine,
because he had defied him when he lay at the siege before Nuz, and done much
harm in the country of Luxembourg.

The King being advertised of the Constables departure, purposed so to order
the matter, that he should never recover the Duke of Burgundies favor: for he
levied seven or eight hundred men of arms, and rode with them in all haste to
Saint Quintins, knowing well what force was within the town; near to the
which when he approached, certain of the Citizens came forth to receive him.
The King commanded me to enter the town, and appoint every captain to his
quarter, and so I did. First the soldiers entered, and then the King, who was
very honorably received of the towns men: whereupon certain of the Constables
servants retired into Hainault. The King immediately advertised the Duke by a
letter of his own hand, of the taking of Saint Quintins; thereby to put him
utterly out of hope to recover it by the Constables means. Which news when
the Duke understood, he sent word to the Lord Desmeriez great bailife of
Hainault, to guard the town of Montz in such sort, that the Constable could
not depart, and farther to command him to keep his lodging: which
commandment the bailife executed accordingly, for he durst do no less.
Notwithstanding, the guard was not strong enough for such a personage, if he
had been disposed to escape. What shall we say here of Fortune? This noble man
dwelt upon the frontiers of both these Princes dominions being enemies, having
strong towns in his hands, and four hundred men of arms well paid, of the
which he was Comptroller himself, and placed whom it pleased him, and had been
their Captain the space of twelve years. He was a wise and a valiant knight,
and of great experience, and had great treasure in ready coin: yet
notwithstanding at this last pinch his courage so failed him, that he wist not
what shift to make. We may well say, that fickle Fortune beheld him with a
frowning countenance: or rather (if we will speak like good Christians) we
must say, that such great miseries depend not upon Fortune: for Fortune is bu^^
fantastical fiction of Poetry. Wherefore we must think if we will well
weigh both the reasons above alleged, and diverse others here vnrehearsed,
that God had utterly forsaken him and given him over. And if it were lawful
for man to judge, as I know it is not (especially for me) I would say that in
mine opinion all this misery fell upon him, because he traveled continually to
the uttermost of his power to nourish the war between the King and the Duke of
Burgundy, knowing his great authority and estate to depend thereupon: although
to say the truth, the matter needed no great labor, for there was a natural
antipathy between them. Who is so rude or ignorant to think that Fortune or
any other like chance was able to cast so wise a man into the disgrace of both
these Princes at once, (who in their lives never agreed in any thing save only
this,) especially into the King of Englands disgrace, who had married his niece,
and loved entirely all his wives kinsmen, especially those of this house of
Saint Paul. It is like therefore, yea it is most certain, that God had
withdrawn his grace from him, in that he had purchased himself such hatred of
all these three Princes, and had not one friend in the world that durst give
him a nights lodging. Neither was it fained Fortune that struck this stroke,
but God alone. The like whereof has happened, and shall happen to diverse others,
who after great and long prosperity fall into great adversity and trouble.
After the Constable was arrested in Hainault by the Duke of Burgundies
commandment, the King sent word to the Duke either to deliver him into his
hands, or execute him according to the tenure of the writings above mentioned.
The Duke answered that he would so do, and commanded the Constable to be led to
Peronne, and there straightly kept. Further you shall understand that the Duke
had already taken diverse places in Lorraine and Barrois, and at this present
held the siege before Nancy, which was valiantly defended. The King had great
force of men of arms in Champaigne, which held the Duke in fear: for the King
was not bound by the truce to suffer him to destroy the Duke of Lorraine, who
was retired into France. The Lord of Bouchage and diverse other ambassadors
sent by the King, pressed the Duke earnestly, to perform his promise and oath;
and he answered ever that he would so do; but yet delaid it more than a month
over and above the eight days wherein he should either have delivered the
Constable, or put him to death. Notwithstanding in the end seeing the matter so
earnestly pressed, and fearing that the King would hinder his enterprise in
Lorraine, which he so much desired to atchieue, to the end he might have the
passage open from Luxembourg into Burgundy, and join all these Seniories
together: for this little Duchy of Lorraine being his, he might come upon his
own dominions from Holland, almost as far as Lions 2. For these considerations
I say, he wrote to his Chancellor and the Lord of Himbercourt so often already
mentioned, (which two had absolute authority in his absence, and were both of
them the Constables enemies, and evil willers) to go to Peronne and deliver
the Constable at a day by him prefixed, to those that the King should there
appoint to receive him, sending word withal to the Lord Desmeriez to deliver
him to the said Chancellor and Himbercourt.

The Duke of Burgundy in the mean time beat continually the town of Nancy:
but there were good soldiers within it which valiantly defended it. Further,
one of the Dukes own Captains, called the Earl of Campobache, a Neapolitane
born, but banished thence for the house of Anious faction, was lately entered
into intelligence with the Duke of Lorraine, heir apparent of the house of
Aniou after the death of King Rene his mothers father. This Earl of Campobache
promised to prolong the siege, and find means that such things should be
lacking as were necessary for the taking of the town 3. Which his promise, he
was very well able to perform, being then the greatest man in the Dukes army;
but a false traitor to his Master, as hereafter you shall hear more at large.
This was a preparatiue as it were of all those evils and miseries that fell
afterward upon the Duke of Burgundy. The said Duke meant as I suppose, if he
had taken the town before the day appointed for the Constables delivery, not
to deliver him at all. And on the otherside I think, if the King had had him,
he would have done more in the Duke of Lorraines favor than he did: for he was
advertised of the Earl of Campobaches traitorous practices, but meddled not
with them: yet was he not bound to let the Duke of Burgundy do what him listed
in Lorraine, (notwithstanding for diverse respects he thought it best so to do:)
besides this he had great forces upon the frontiers of the said country of
Lorraine.

The Duke could not take Nancy before the day appointed for the Constables
delivery 4, which being come, the two above mentioned executed willingly their
Masters commandment 5, and delivered him at the gate of Peronne to the bastard
of Bourbon Admiral of France, and to Monseur de Saint Pierre, who led him to
Paris. Diverse have told me, that within three hours after his departure,
messengers came in post from the Duke with a countermaund, to wit, that he
should not be delivered before Nancy were taken, but it was too late. At Paris
the Constables process was made, and the Duke delivered all his letters that
were in his hands, and all such evidence as served for the process. The King
pressed the Court earnestly, and Justices were appointed for the hearing of his
cause, who seeing the evidence that both the King of England and the Duke gave
against him, condemned him to die 6, and confiscated all his goods.

The Notes.
1 Understand this as well of the moouables he had in the Kings dominions, as
under the Duke.

2 The Duke desired Lorraine, not only for the cause here alleged by our
author, but also to proclaim himself under that color King of Sicile and
Jerusalem.

3 This Campobache (as some report) wrought this treason, for that the Duke had
once in his rage given him a blow. Meyer.

4 He took Nancy about the 19. of November, but la March says in the end of
November. Meyer. 28. Nouemb. 1475. and the Constable was delivered the 30. of
November.

5 The Chancellor and Hymbercourt delivered him with such speed through evil
will, whereas they ought to have staide till the second message had come from
the Duke: for as says Meyer. Ferebat consuetudo exiure militari ciuilique
desumpta, vt in talibus grauibus rebus secundam semper praetores ministrique
expectarent iussionem; at hoc isti duo odio grauissimo deflagrantes in comitem
stabuli, gratumque volentes facere regi mirum in modum sanguinem illius
sitienti, non obseruauerunt. Si obseruassent vt debeant, fortassis and virum
ipsum, and ducem Dominum suum seque ipsos plane seruassent. Siquidem statim
post Caroli interitum ambo apud Gandauum accepere talionem.

6 The Constable died the 19. of December 1475. Annal. Franc. Gaguin. Meyer. in
whom read the causes of his death fol. 368.

A discourse of the fault the Duke of Burgundy committed in delivering the
Constable to the King contrary to his safe conduct, and what ensued thereof.
Chap. 13.
THis delivery of the Constable was marvelous strange; notwithstanding I
speak it not to excuse his faults, neither to accuse the Duke, for sure he had
just cause to seek his death. But me think that he being so great a Prince
and of so noble and honorable an house, should not have given him a safe
conduct, and then arrest him. And undoubtedly it was great cruelty to deliver
him where he was sure to die, especially for covetousness. But soon after he
had thus dishonored himself by this deed, he received great losses and began
to fall to ruin. So that if we well consider the works that God has done in
these our days, and daily does, we shall easily perceive that he will leave no
fault unpunished, and that these strange punishments are inflicted only by
him, because they surmount far the works of nature. For his punishments are
sudden, especially upon those that use violence and cruelty: who can not be
mean persons, but mighty men, either in seniories or authority. This house of
Burgundy had long flourished, for by the space of a hundred years or
thereabout, (during the which time reigned four of this house) it was more
esteemed than any other house in Christendom. For all those that were mightier
then it, had suffered great afflictions and adversities, but it lived
continually in perpetual felicity and honor. The first great Prince of this
house was Philip surnamed the Hardy, brother to Charles the fifth King of
France, who married the daughter and heir of the Earl of Flaunders; being
Countess not only of that country, but also of Artois, Burgundy 1, Neuers
and Rethell. The second was John: the third was the good Duke Philip, who
joined to his house the Duchies of Brabant, Luxembourg, Lambourg, and the
Counties of Holland, Zeland, Hainault, and Namur. The fourth was this Duke
Charles, who after his fathers death was one of the richest and most redoubted
Princes of Christendom; and had in moueables, namely jewels, plate, tapestry,
books, and naprie, more than three of the greatest Princes in Christendom. Of
treasure in coin I have seen greater abundance in other Princes Courts: for
Duke Philip by the space of many years levied neither subsidies nor taskes:
yet notwithstanding at his death, he left his son above three hundred
thousand crowns in ready money, and in peace with all his neighbors, which long
endured not: notwithstanding I will not impute the whole occasion of the wars
to him, for others were as busy as he. His subjects immediately after his
fathers death, upon a small request granted him very willingly a subsidy
(every country apart) for the term of ten years, amounting yearly to the
sum of 350000. crowns: Burgundy not being comprehended therein. Yea and at
the time he delivered the Constable, he levied yearly over and above the
former sum more then 300000. crowns, and had above 300000. crowns in coin;
and all the Constables goods that came to his hands, amounted hardly to the
value of 80000. crowns, for he had but 76000. in coin. So that the Duke
committed this foul fault for small gain, yet was the punishment thereof
great: for God raised up an enemy against him of small force, of young years,
and of little experience in all things, and caused his servant whom he then
most trusted, to become false and traitorous. He made also the Duke himself to
mistrust his own subjects and faithful servants. Are not these such manifest
tokens and preparatiues as God used in the old Testament, against those whose
good fortune and prosperity he meant to chang into misery and adversity? Yet
he never humbled himself before God, but even till the hour of death
attributed all his good success to his own wisdom and prowess: before his
death he was mightier than any of his predecessors, and more esteemed through
the whole world.

Before the Constables delivery he was fallen into a marvelous mistrust or
great disdain of his own subjects: for he had sent into Italy for a thousand
men of arms Italians. Before Nuz also he had great forces of Italians in his
camp: for the Earl of Campobache had under his charge four hundred men of
arms and better. This Earl had no possessions for his maintenance, for
because of the wars the house of Aniou had made in the realm of Naples (which
house he served,) he was banished his country and lost all his lands, and
served ever since his departure out of Italy in Prouence or Lorraine under
King Rene of Sicile, or Duke Nicholas son to Duke John of Calabria. After
whose death the Duke of Burgundy gave entertainment to most of his servants,
especially all his Italians: namely this Earl of Campobache, James Galeot a
valiant honorable and faithful gentleman, and diverse others. The said Earl of
Campobache when he went into Italy to levy his men, received of the Duke of
Burgundy 40000. ducats in pressed for his company. But as he passed through
Lions, he fell in acquaintance with a Physician named Master Simon of Pauy, by
whom he advertised the King that if he would grant him certain demands, he
would promise him at his return to deliver the Duke of Burgundy into his
hands: the like offer made he also to Monseur de Saint Pray, then ambassador in
Premont for the King. Again, at his return having his men of arms lying in
the County of Marle, he offered the King that so soon as he should be in camp
with his Master, he would not fail either to kill him, or take him prisoner;
showing withal the manner how he would do it, which was this. The Duke rode
often about his camp to view it, mounted upon a little nagge, and very
slenderly accompanied, at some such time this Earl said he would assault him,
and execute his enterprise. He made yet also another offer to the King, namely,
if the King and the Duke met together in battle, to turn with his men of
arms on the Kings side, under condition that the King would grant him certain
demands. The King detested much the treason of this man, and of a noble courage
advertised the Duke of his practices by the Lord of Contay above mentioned.
Notwithstanding the Duke would not credit the message, (supposing that the King
sent him this advertisement to some other end) but loved the Earl all the
better. Wherefore you may see how God had troubled his wits, in that he would
give no credit to those manifest demonstrations the King showed him. Well, this
Earl of Campobache was not so false and traitorous: but James Galeot was as
true and trusty, who lived many years, and died with great honor and renown.

The Notes.
1 Understand this of the County of Burgundy, not of the Duchy.

THE FIFTH BOOK.
How the Duke of Burgundy making war upon the Swissers, was overthrown at the
straights of the mountains near to Granson. Chap. 1.
THe Duke of Burgundy having conquered the Duchy of Lorraine, and received
Saint Quintins, Han and Bohain, with all the Constables goods of the King,
treated with him of a final peace: for accomplishment whereof they two
resolved to meet upon a bridge built over a river, like to that made at
Piquigny, at the enteruiew of the Kings of England and France. About the which
meeting messengers passed to and fro, so far forth that the Duke was once
purposed to dismiss the greatest part of his army, to the end his men (being
in very evil order, as well because of the siege of Nuz, as also of this small
war in Lorraine) might refresh themselves: and the rest to put in garrison into
certain of the Earl of Romonts places, near to the towns of Berne and
Fribourg; upon the which he was fully resolved to make war, because they had
invaded his dominions while he was before Nuz, had helped to take the county
of Ferrette from him (as you have heard) and had also conquered from the Earl
of Romont part of his country. The King earnestly pressed him to come to the
meeting appointed, to leave these poor Swissers in peace, and to refresh his
army. The Swissers also seeing him approach so near them, sent their
ambassadors to him, offering to restore all that they had taken from the Earl
of Romont, who on the other side pressed him earnestly to succor him in
person: whereupon the Duke altered his mind, and determined to march against
them, leaving that course which in all men's opinions seemed best, considering
both the time of the year, and the state of his army. Further, it was agreed
between the King and him, that for the Duchy of Lorraine they should not fall
at variance.

The Duke departed out of Lorraine with this poor, weary, and defeated army,
and entered into Burgundy, where the ambassadors of these ancient confederates
of Almaine commonly called Swissers, repaired again to him, making larger
offers than before: for besides the restitution of the Earl of Romonts places,
they offered to depart from all leagues that he should not allow of, especially
their league with the King, and to enter into confederacy with him, and to
serve him against the King with six thousand men well armed (and that for very
small pay) as often as he should require: which offers he refused; for God was
fully purposed to bring him to destruction. In those countries are certain
towns called the new confederates, namely, Basil, Strasbourg, and diverse
other imperial cities 1 situate near the river of Rhene, which in times past
had been enemies to the Swissers in favor of Sigismond Duke of Austrich,
whose confederates they were during the wars between the said Swissers and
him. But now all these towns joined with the Swissers, and a league was made
between them for ten years, and peace also between Duke Sigismond and them:
which league (as before you have heard) was concluded by the Kings procurement,
earnest suit, and great expenses, at the same time that the county of Ferrette
was taken from the Duke of Burgundy, and his lieutenant there called Peter
Archambault beheaded at Basil. The only cause of which inconvenience
proceeded of this Archambault himself, which sure was a shrewd check to the
Duke of Burgundy, being the very fountain of all his other miseries. Wherefore
a Prince that has lately joined a strange country to his dominions, ought to
be circumspect what governors he places there. For whereas subjects newly
conquered ought to be courteously entreated, to have Justice truly administered,
and to be better used than under their former government: this Archambault did
the clean contrary, for he used great violence and extortion; whereupon ensued
utter destruction to himself, his Master, and many a good man besides.

This league above mentioned made by the Kings only procurement, turned
afterward to his great benefit, yea greater than the world weeneth, so far
forth that for my part, I account it one of the wisest deeds that ever he did,
and most to the damage of his enemies. For the Duke of Burgundy once destroyed,
the King of France never found man afterward of his own subjects that durst
lift up his finger against him: for they sailed all with his wind. Wherefore
it was a worthy exploit to join Duke Sigismunde of Austrich and these new
confederates in league with the Swissers, whose ancient enemies they had been:
and I warrant you it was never brought to pass without great expenses and many
voiages.

After the Duke of Burgundy had put the Swissers from all hope of peace, they
returned to advertise their confederates thereof, and to make preparations for
defense. The Duke led his army into the country of Vaulx in Sauoye, which the
Swissers (as you have heard) had taken from the Lord of Romont. There he wan
three or four places belonging to Monseur de Chasteauguion, which the Swissers
held, and negligently defended. From thence he removed, and laid his siege
before a town called Granson 2, belonging also to the said Lord of
Chasteauguion, within the which were eight or nine hundred Swissers 3 choice
men: for because the place was near their country they had manned it well.
The Dukes force was reasonable great, for diverse bands came daily to him out of
Lombardy, and the subjects also of this house of Sauoy were in pay with him. He
loved strangers better than his own subjects, notwithstanding that he might
have levied in his own dominions great force of good soldiers: but the
Constables death together with certain other conceits he had in his head,
caused him to mistrust his own people. His artillery was marvelous strong,
and he lay in great pomp and triumph in his camp, to show his magnificence to
the ambassadors that came to him out of Italy and Almaine: for the which
purpose also he had brought with him all his best jewels and plate, and great
abundance of all kind of furniture. Moreover he had many phansies in his head
touching the Duchy of Milan, where he trusted shortly to have great
intelligence. After he had besieged this town of Granson, and battered it with
the canon certain days, they yielded to his mercy 4, and he put them all
cruelly to death. The Swissers were assembled, but in small number, as diverse
of them have told me: for they are not able to leuy so great force in their
country as the world supposes, and at that time much less than now, because
sithence most part of them have forsaken their husbandry and given themselves
to arms. Further, of their confederates few were with them, because they were
forced to succor the place in haste; but so soon as they were abroad in camp,
they heard of their companions death. The Duke contrary to their opinion whose
advise he asked, determined to meet them at the entry of the mountains where
they yet lay, greatly to his own disadvantage: for he was encamped in a place
very well seated for the battle, being fortified on the one side with his
artillery, and on the other with a lake; so that by all presumption they could
not have endomaged him. He had sent a hundred archers before him to keep a
strait directly over against the mountain where the Swissers lay, and marched
forward himself, and his enemies encountered him, the greatest part of his army
being yet in the plain. The first ranks of his men thought to retire to join
with the rest; but those that were behind, supposing these to fly, began to
turn their backs, and by little and little the Dukes army retired toward his
camp; some of them valiantly behauing themselves. But to be short, when they
drew near to their camp, they never stood to defense, but fled all 5. So that
the Almaines wan the Dukes camp, his artillery, al his tents and pauilions and
his men's also, (whereof there was great abundance) and other riches and
treasures infinite 6: for nothing was saved but the men only. Moreover the
Duke lost here all his goodly jewels, notwithstanding in this battle were
slain only seven men of arms; all the rest fled, and himself also. A man
may iustlier say of him that he lost this day honor and reputation, than of
King John of France, who valiantly defending himself, was taken prisoner by
the English men at the battle of Poictiers.

This is the first misfortune that ever happened to this Duke: for all his
other enterprises turned him either to honor or profit. But what a deadly wound
received he this day by following his own brain, and despising good advise?
what damage received his house heerby? in how miserable estate is it yet, and
shall be we know not how long? how many men became his enemies, and declared
themselves against him that the day before spoke him fair, and temporized with
him? And for what quarrel began this war? forsooth for a lode of sheep skins
taken by the Earl of Romont from a Swisser passing through his country. Sure
if God had not utterly abandoned the Duke of Burgundy, it is not to be thought
he would have put himself into so great danger for so small a trifle,
considering both the offers made him, and the men he had to do with, by
vanquishing whom he could obtain neither riches nor honor. For at that time
the Swissers as touching their valor were not esteemed as they be now, and
their poverty was so great, that a Knight of their country, who was one of
their first ambassadors to the Duke, told me, that among diverse other reasons
he used to dissuade him from this war, this was one: that by conquering them he
could gain nothing, because their country was barren and poor, and void of
all good prisoners, so far forth that he thought verily if all their country
men were taken, they should not be able to pay a ransom to the value of the
spurs and bridle bits in his camp.

But to return to the battle: the King being immediately advertised of all
that was happened, by the sundry spies and messengers he had abroad in the
country, most of them were strangers; reioiced much at these news, and
sorrowed only that so few were slain. Further, because of these affairs he
lay at Lions, to the end he might the sooner be advertised of all that
happened, and the better countermine all such enterprises as the Duke had in
his head. For the King being a wise Prince feared least he should join the
Swissers to him by force. As touching the house of Sauoy, the Duke disposed
thereof as of his own: the Duke of Milan was in league with him: King Rene of
Sicilie was fully bent to have put the country of Prouence into his hands. So
that if his affairs had received good success, he should have held under his
dominion all that lies between the west and east seas, and have so brideled
the subjects of this realm, that they could have stirred no way out of France
but by sea without his permission: Sauoy, Prouence, and Lorraine being under
his subjection. To every one of these Princes the King sent ambassadors. The
one, namely the Duches of Sauoy was his sister, but friend to the Duke of
Burgundy to the uttermost of her power. The other, to wit, King Rene of
Sicilie was his uncle, who hardly gave his ambassadors audience, but referred
all matters to the Duke of Burgundy. The King sent also to these confederates
of Almaine, but with great difficulty; for because the passages were stopped,
he was forced to send beggars, pilgrims, and such kind of men. The said
confederates gave him a proud answer, that unless he would declare himself
for them, they would make peace with the Duke, and join with the Burgundians
against him: which notwithstanding that he greatly feared, yet thought he it
not time as yet to discover himself the Dukes enemy, doubting also least some
of his messengers whom he sent about the country should be taken, and so all
his practices discovered.

The Notes.
1 These towns were Basil, Strasburg, Slecstat, Colmar, Sunggau, and Brisgau.

2 He laid his siege before Granson the 12. of February 1476. beginning the
year at New years tide with 50000. men, and 500. pieces of artillery. Annal.
Burgund.

3 Others write but 400.

4 Others write that they would not yield, unless the Duke would receive them
to his mercy which he did, and yet after put them cruelly to death.

5 This battle was fought on Saturday the second of April or of March as some
say, the Swissers at this battle were not above 5000. and the most
harquebusiers. Annal. Burg.

6 All that the Duke lost that day was valued at three millions of crowns.
Annal. Burgund.

How after the overthrow at Granson, the Duke of Milan, King Rene of Sicilie,
the Duches of Sauoy and others, departed from their league with the Duke of
Burgundy. Chap. 2.
LEt us now see how the world changed after the battle, and how the courage of
the Duke of Burgundy and his confederates altered, and withal how wisely the
King governed his affairs. For this shall be a goodly example for young
Princes that attempt foolish enterprises, not considering what may ensue
thereof: and despise the counsel of those whose advise they ought to use,
notwithstanding that themselves be utterly void of all experience. First, the
Duke himself sent the Lord of Contay to the King with a lowly and humble
message, contrary both to his accustomed manner and to his nature. Mark here
how suddenly he was changed even in a moment: he desired the King faithfully to
keep the truce, and excused himself for not coming to the meeting appointed
at Auxerre, promising shortly to meet him there or else where at his pleasure.
The King received the said Contay very honorably, assuring him of all his
demands: for as yet he thought it not time to declare himself, because he knew
well the loyalty of the Dukes subjects to be such to their Prince, that he
should soon be aflote again. Wherefore he was desirous to see the end of this
war, without giving occasion to either party to make peace. But
notwithstanding the good entertainment the King gave the said Contay, yet heard
he many scoffs and taunts in the town: for ballads were openly sung in the
commendation of the vanquishers, and reproach of his folly that was vanquished.

So soon as Galeas Duke of Milan (then living) understood of this adventure,
he reioiced not a little thereat, notwithstanding that he were the D. of
Burgundies confederate: for he was entered into league with him for fear only,
seeing the Duke so highly favored in Italy. Wherefore the said D. of Milan sent
in all haste to the King a citizen of Milan, a man of small appearance, who by
mediation of others was directed to me, and brought me a letter from the Duke:
whereof when I had advertised the King, he commanded me to hear his message.
For he would not give him audience himself, because he was displeased with the
Duke of Milan for abandoning his league with him, to enter into confederacy
with the Duke of Burgundy, and the rather for that his wife was the Queens
sister. The said ambassadors message was, that his Master the Duke of Milan was
advertised that the King and the Duke of Burgundy should meet to conclude a
final peace and a league greatly to his Masters discontentation, and diverse
slender reasons he alleged to dissuade the K. from the conclusion thereof. But
his last persuasion was, that if the K. would be bound to make neither peace
nor truce with the D. of Burgundy, his M. would presently give him 100000.
ducats. When the K. heard the substance of his embassage, he caused him to come
to his presence, my self only being with him, and said thus briefly unto him:
Here is Monseur d'Argenton that aduertiseth me thus and thus: tell your M. I
will none of his money; for I leauie once in a year thrice as much as he. And
as touching peace or war, I will dispose thereof at my pleasure: but if your
Master repent him that he has forsaken his league with me, to enter into
confederacy with the Duke of Burgundy, tell him I am contented that the
league between us shall continue as it was first concluded. The ambassador
gave him most humble thanks, perceiving him by his answer to be no covetous
Prince, and desired that it would please him to cause the said league between
him and his Master to be proclaimed in manner and form as it was first
concluded, saying that he had power to bind his Master to agree thereunto. The
K. was contented, and after dinner it was proclaimed, and an ambassador
forthwith dispatched to Milan, where the league was again proclaimed with
great solemnity. This is one blow adversity gave the Duke of Burgundy: for
here is one mighty Prince suddenly fallen from him; who had sent a great and
solemn embassage to enter into league with him but three weeks before.

King Rene of Sicilie was purposed to make the Duke of Burgundy his heir, and
to put Prouence into his hands, so far forth that Monseur de Chasteauguion that
now is, and diverse others were already gone into Piemont with 20000. crowns to
leuy men to take possession of the said country for the Duke of Burgundy: but
upon the news of this overthrow they fled, and hardly saved themselves; and as
touching their money, the Lord of Bresse being then in those parts took it.
The Duches of Sauoy hearing these news sent word thereof immediately to King
Rene of Sicilie, extenuating the overthrow, and willing him to be of good
cheer, notwithstanding this small loss: but her messengers being Prouincials
were intercepted, and thereby King Renes practice with the Duke of Burgundy
discovered. Whereupon the King sent forces to the frontiers of Prouence 1, and
ambassadors to the King of Sicilie, desiring him to come to him and assuring
him of good entertainment, which if he refused to do, he threatened by force to
prevent this inconvenience. Wherefore in the end the King of Sicilie agreed to
repair to Lions to the King, where he was honorably received and well feasted.
I was with the King and heard the words that passed between them at their
first meeting: which being ended, John Cosse Seneschal of Prouence, a worthy
gentleman and of a good house in the realm of Naples, said thus to the King.
Sir, you must not marvel if the King my Master your Uncle offered to make the
Duke of Burgundy his heir: for he was counseled thereunto by his servants,
especially by my self, because you being his sisters son and his nephew,
have done him so great wrong in taking from him the castles of Bar and Angiers,
and handled him so ill in all his other affairs. Wherefore we meant to enter
into this practice with the Duke of Burgundy, to the end that you hearing this
news might endeavor your self to repair the injuries you have done us, and
acknowledge in the end the King our Master to be your Uncle: but we never
minded to bring this treaty to a full conclusion. The King being a wise Prince
took this practice in good part, which the said John Cosse uttered indeed
simply as it was meant; for he himself was the only contriuer thereof. In
short space all controversies between them were ended, and money was given to
the King of Sicilie and his servants. Further, the King feasted him with the
Ladies, and used him in all points according to his own humor as near as he
could; and of the Duke of Burgundy no more mention was made, but he was utterly
abandoned of King Rene. This is another mishap that ensued this small adversity.

The Duches also of Sauoye who of long time was thought great enemy to the King
her brother, sent one Monseur de Montaigny (who was addressed to me) with a
secret message to reconcile her self to the King, alleging diverse reasons why
she was fallen out with him, and wherein she stood in fear of him.
Notwithstanding she was a very wise Lady and the Kings sister indeed: for it
appeered that she meant to temporize as he did, to see what would happen
further to the Duke before she would abandon him. The King gave her better
words than he was accustomed, and sent the messenger very good answers by me,
willing him to desire his Mistres to come into France; and thus her man was
dispatched. See here an other of the Duke of Burgundies confederats practicing
to forsake him. Besides this, through the whole country of Almaine enemies
began to declare themselves against him, and all the Imperial towns, as
Nuremberg, Francfort and diverse others, joined themselves with these old and
new confederates of Swisserland: so that all the world seemed to be persuaded
the doing of him harm to be good service to God.

The spoils of his camp enriched maruellously these poor Swissers, who at
the first knew not what treasures were fallen into their hands, especially
those of the ruder sort: one of the goodliest and richest pauilions in the
world was torn al to pieces. There were that sold a number of silver plates
and dishes for two souse a piece, supposing them to be pewter. The Dukes great
diamond being the goodliest jewel in Christendom, at the which hung a great
orient pearl, was taken up by a Swisser, who put it again into the box where
it was kept and threw it under a cart; but after returned to seek it, and sold
it to a Priest for a guldon, who sent it to the Lords of their country, of
whom he received three franks for it. They wan also three goodly ballais
rubies, called the three brethren, because they were in all points like, and
another great ballais rubie called La hot, with a goodly stone called the
round ball of Flaunders, the greatest and fairest stones in the world. Other
infinite treasures they gained also; which since has taught them to know what
is money worth. Further, the victories they obtained, the account the King
made of them ever after, and the sums of money he bestowed upon them, have
maruellously enriched them. Every ambassador of theirs that came to him at the
beginning of these wars, received goodly presents of him either in money or
plate, whereby he assuaged the displeasure they had conceived against him for
not declaring himself the Duke of Burgundies enemy: for he sent them home well
contented, with full purses and clothed in silks and veluets. Then began he
also to promise them a yearly pension of 40000. guldons, which afterward he
truly paid, but the second battle was past first. Of this pension twenty
thousand guldons were for the towns, and the other twenty thousand for the
governors of the towns. And I think verily I should not lie, if I said that
between the first battle of Granson and the King our Masters death, these
towns and governors of the Swissers received out of France above a million of
florens. When I name towns I mean but these four: Berne, Lucerne, Friburge,
and Zurich, together with their cantons situate in the mountains. Swisse also
is one of their cantons though but a village. Yet have I seen an ambassador of
that village clothed in very simple apparel give his advise in every matter as
well as any of the rest. The other two cantons are called Soleurre and
Vnderwalde.

The Notes.
1. For Prouence was held of the crown of France, and therefore the King
would not suffer his enemy the Duke of Burgundy to possess it.

How the Swissers vanquished the Duke of Burgundy in battle near to the town
of Morat. Chap. 3.
NOw to return to the Duke of Burgundy, he levied men on all sides, so that
within three weeks he had assembled a mighty army: for a great number of his
soldiers that fled the day of the battle, repaired again to his camp. He lay
at Losanna 1 in Sauoy, (where you my Lord of Vienna) assisted him with your
counsel in a dangerous sickness he was fallen into, for sorrow and grief of the
dishonor he had received, which so much altered him that I think after this
battle of Granson, his wits were never so fresh nor so good as before 2. Of
this new army he now levied I speak upon the Prince of Tarentes report, who
made relation thereof to the King in my presence. For you shall understand that
the said Prince about a year before the battle, was come to the Duke of
Burgundy with a goodly train in hope to marry his daughter and heir. And
notwithstanding that his behavior, apparel and train showed him indeed to be
a Kings son, and his father the King of Naples to have spared no cost in
setting him forth: yet did the Duke but dissemble with him, and fed at the
self same time with fair promises the Duches of Sauoye putting her in hope of
this marriage for her son. Wherefore the Prince of Tarente called Don
Frederick of Arragon and his Counsel misliking these delays, sent to the King
our Master a herault of arms a wise fellow, who humbly besought him to grant
the Prince his safe conduct to pass through his realm to the King his father
who had sent for him, which he easily obtained of the King, because it seemed
to tend to the Duke of Burgundies dishonor and discredit. Notwithstanding
before the Princes messenger was returned to his Master, a great number of
these confederated towns were assembled and encamped hard by the Duke of
Burgundy. The said Prince obeying the King his fathers commandment took his
leave of the Duke the night before the second battle was fought, for at the
first he was present, and behaved himself like a valiant gentleman. Some say
(my Lord of Vienna) that he used your advise herein: for when he was here
with the King I have heard both him and the Duke of Ascoly commonly called the
Earl Iulio, and diverse others affirm, that you wrote in Italy of the first
and second battle, and told what should ensue thereof, long before they were
fought.

At the Princes departure, great forces of these confederate towns were
encamped (as I have said) hard by the Duke of Burgundy, and came to give him
battle, meaning to levy the siege he held before Morat 3 a little town near
to Berne, belonging to the Earl of Romont. The said towns had in their army
(as some that were at the battle have informed me) 35000. men, whereof four
thousand were horsemen, the rest footmen well chosen and well armed; that is
to say, 11000. pikes, 10000. halberds, and ten thousand harquebusiers. Their
whole force was not yet assembled, and these only fought the battle, neither
needed any more help. The Duke of Lorraine arrived at their camp a little
before the battle, with a very small train, which his coming turned
afterward to his great profit: for the Duke of Burgundy held then all his
country, and a happy turn it was for him that they waxed weary of him in our
Court, as al those that maintain a noble man overthrown usually do;
notwithstanding he never understood thus much. The King gave him a small sum
of money, and sent a good troop of men of arms to conueigh him safe through
Lorraine; who brought him to the frontiers of Almaine, and then returned home.
This Duke of Lorraine had not only lost his Duchy of Lorraine, the County of
Vaudemont, and the greatest part of Barrois (the rest being withheld from him
by the King, so that he had nothing left:) but his subjects also, yea his
household servants had voluntary done homage to the Duke of Burgundy: so that
his estate seemed almost irrecouerable. Notwithstanding God remains always
judge to determine such causes at his pleasure.

After the Duke of Lorraine was passed through Lorraine into Almaine, and had
iourneied a few days, he arrived at the Almaines camp with small force three
or four hours before the battle began: which voyage (as before I have said)
turned to his great honor and profit; for if his success had been bad, I
think he should have found but cold entertainment in any place. At the very
instant that he arrived, the battles marched on both sides. For the
confederates had lien in camp three days or more in a strong place hard by
the Duke of Burgundy, who was at the very first discomfited and put to flight
4: neither had he so good luck here as in the former battle, wherein he lost
but seven men of arms; which happened because the Swissers had then no
horsemen: but at this battle near to Morat (whereof I now speak) they had
four thousand horsemen well mounted, the which pursued fiercely the
Burgundians that fled. Further, their battle of footmen joined also with the
Dukes battle, which was mighty and strong: for besides great force of his own
subjects, and certain English men that served him; diverse bands were newly
come to him out of Piemont and the Duchy of Milan. So that the Prince of
Tarente at his being here with the King told me, that he never saw in his life
so goodly an army: for he himself and diverse others by his commandment
numbering the force as it passed over a bridge, had told to the number of 23000.
soldiers taking pay, besides those that followed the army and were appointed
to serve at the artillery; which force me think was great, notwithstanding
that many talk of millions, and report they wot not what, making armies five
times greater than they are. The Lord of Contay who came to the King
immediately after the battle, confessed in my hearing, that the Duke his
Master lost there 8000. soldiers taking pay, besides the straglers: so that the
wholenu^ber of the dead (for ought I could ever learn to the contrary)
amounted to 18000. 5 which is not incredible, considering both the great force
of horsemen that diverse Princes of Almaine had there; and also the great number
of men that were slain in the Dukes camp, lying still at the siege before
Morat 6. The Duke fled into Burgundy utterly discomforted, and not without
cause; and held himself close in a town called La Riuiere, where he assembled
all the forces he could. The Swissers followed the chase but that night, and
then retired without further pursuit of their enemies.

The Notes.
1 The Duke after the battle of Granson retired first to Ioingne, from thence
to Noseret, and then to Losanna. La March.

2 This proves both Vitia animi scatere ad corpus, and animam sequi
temperaturam corporis, which proceeds of the great sympathy between the
mind and body. Liuie lib. 1. decad. 1. writes thus; Longinquus morbus, Tulli
mores prorsus immutauit.

3 The Duke laid his siege before Morat (called in Dutch Murten) the 9. of June
1476. with 40000. men. Annal. Burgund. and so had the Swissers also, Idem.
Meyer says the Duke had but 24000. and the Swissers 30000.

4 This battle was fought 22. day of June. 1476. Annal. Burgund. Meyer.

5 Others write 17000. others 22700. others 26000. and of the Swissers but 50.
Meyer says the Duke lost 14000.

6 For better understanding of this place, we must know that after the Dukes
vaward was overthrown, they within Morat issued forth and joined with the
Duke of Lorraine, and entered perforce the Duke of Burgundies camp lying before
the said town of Morat, where they made a great slaughter, as our author here
makes mention.

How after the battle of Morat the Duke of Burgundy took the Duchess of
Sauoy, and how she was delivered and sent home into her country by the Kings
means. Chap. 4.
THis misfortune drove the Duke into utter despair: for he well perceived by
the sequel of the first battle at Granson (between the which and this second
there was but three weeks space 1) that all his friends would abandon him.
Wherefore by the advice of those that were about him, he made the Duchess of
Sauoy and one of her children now Duke of Sauoy, to be led by force into
Burgundy: but her eldest son was conveyed away by certain of her servants;
for those that committed this outrage did it in great fear and upon a sudden.
The cause that moved the Duke heerunto was partly fear, least the Duchess
should retire to the King her brother; and partly because all these misfortunes
were happened to him (as he said) for succouring this house of Sauoy. Thus was
the Duchess led to the castle of Rouure near to Dyion, where a small guard
was appointed over her. Notwithstanding every body that would, went to visit
her, and among others the Lord of Chasteauguion, and the Marquess of Rotelin
that now are, between the which two and two of the Duchesses daughters the
Duke of Burgundy endeavored to make two marriages, which afterward were
accomplished. Her eldest son called Philibert then Duke of Sauoy, was led by
those that stole him away to Chambery, where the Bishop of Geneua lay, who was
also of the house of Sauoy. This Bishop was altogether given to sloth and
wantonness, and governed wholly by a Knight of the Rhodes 2: but the King so
practiced with him, and the Knight his governor, that they put into his hands
the said Duke of Sauoy, and a little brother of his called Le Prothonostaire,
together with the castles of Chambery and Montmelian, and held also to the
Kings use another castle where all the Duchesses jewels lay. When the Duchess
was come to Rouure accompanied with all her women, and a great number of her
servants; she perceiving the Duke of Burgundy to be busied in leuying men, and
those that guarded her not to stand in such fear of their Master as they were
accustomed: determined to send to the King her brother to reconcile her self
to him, and to desire him to deliver her out of this thraldom. For
notwithstanding that she feared much to fall into his hands, because of the
great and long hatred that had been between them: yet the misery wherein she
was, forced her in the end thereunto. Wherefore she sent to him a gentleman of
Piemont called Riuerol being steward of her house, who was directed to me. When
I had heard his message, and advertised the King thereof, he commanded him to
come to his presence: and after he had given him audience, answered, that he
would not forsake his sister in this extremity notwithstanding their former
variance: and that if she would enter into league with him, he would send for
her by the governor of Champaigne, called Master Charles of Amboise Lord of
Chaumont. The said Riuerol took his leave of the King, and returned with
speed to his Mistres, who reioiced much at this news. Notwithstanding she
sent yet again to the King upon the return of the first message, to desire a
safe conduct and assurance therein, that she should depart out of France into
Sauoy, and that the Duke her son and his little brother, together with the
places which the King held, should be restored to her: and further that he
would help to maintain her authority in Sauoy; and she for her part would
forsake all confederacies, and enter into league with him. All the which her
requests the King granted, and immediately sent a man purposely to the said
Lord of Chaumont about this enterprise: the which was well devised and executed
accordingly. For the said Lord of Chaumont went himself peaceably through the
country with a good band of men to Rouure, from whence he led the Duchess of
Sauoy and all her train to the next place of the Kings dominions. Before the
dispatch of the Duchesses last messenger, the King was departed from Lions,
where he had lien half a year to overthrow covertly the Duke of Burgundies
enterprises without breaking the truce. But if a man consider well the Dukes
estate, the King made sharper war upon him by letting him run himself out of
breath, and privily stirring up enemies against him, than if he had openly
proclaimed war. For immediately upon the proclamation, the Duke would have
relinquished his enterprise, and then all these mishaps had never fallen upon
him.

The King being departed from Lions continued still his journey, and from
Rouuenne went down the river of Loire to Tours, where at his arrival he
received news of his sisters liberty; whereat he reioiced not a little, and
sent for her with all speed to come to him, and gave order for her charges upon
the way. Moreover, when she drew near, he sent a great company of gentlemen to
wait upon her, and went himself to receive her as far as the gate of Plessis
du Parc; where at their first meeting with a merry countenance he said unto
her: Lady of Burgundy you are heartily welcome. Then she knowing by his
countenance that he did but sport, made him a wise answer saying. Sir, I am a
true French woman, and ready to obey you in all you shall command. The King led
her to her chamber, where she was very honorably entertained. True it is that
he desired to send her home as speedily as might be, whereof she was no less
desirous than he: for she was a very wise woman, and they were well acquainted
the one with the others conditions. The whole charge of this matter was
committed to me, first to provide money to defray her in her return:
secondarily to seek silks and veluets for her: and lastly to put in writing
the articles of their new league and amity. Moreover, the King endeavored to
dissuade her from the marriage of her two daughters above mentioned; but she
made her excuse by the daughters themselves, who were obstinate therein: which
when the King perceived he yielded unto them, and in mine opinion they were
well bestowed. After the Duches had soiourned at Plessis seven or eight days,
the King and she swear thence forth to be friends each to other, and writings
touching their amity were interchangably delivered between them: which done,
the Duches took her leave of the King, who caused her safely to be conueighed
into her own country, and restored unto her, her children, all the places
that were in his hands, all her jewels, and all that belonged to her. They were
both glad of their departure, and lived ever after as brother and sister even
till their death.

The Notes.
1 I suppose, yea I assure my self that the Printer has here made a great
fault, and that these three weeks, must be read three months. For the battle
of Granson was fought the 2. of March or April, and this battle the 22. of
June; which is much more then three weeks, and agrees well with three
months, and so also Annals Burgundiae report the time.

2 The French has Un Commandeur de Rhodes, what this Commandeur is look in
the notes of the 9. Chapter of the 7. book.

How the Duke of Burgundy lived as it were solitarilie the space of certain
weeks, during the which time the Duke of Lorraine recovered his town of
Nancy. Chap. 5.
But to proceed in this history, I must now return to the Duke of Burgundy,
who after the battle of Morat, which was in the year 1476. fled to the
frontiers of Burgundy and kept himself close in a town called La Riuiere;
where he lay more than six weeks with intent to leuy yet another army, wherein
notwithstanding he proceeded but slowly: for he lived as it were solitarily, in
such sort that all his doings seemed (as you shall hereafter perceive) rather
to proceed of obstinacy than any reason. For the grief he had conceived of the
first overthrow at Granson so inwardly vexed him, that he fell into a dangerous
sickness; which so altered his complexion, that whereas before his choler and
natural heat was so great that he drank no wine, but Tysan every morning
ordinarily, and ate conserve of roses to refresh him: now this sorrow and grief
had so much weakened his spirits, that he was forced to drink the strongest
wine without water, that could be gotten. And further, to reduce the blood to
the heart, his Physicians were feign to put burning flax into boxing glasses,
and so to set them on his breast near to the heart. Of this his sickness (my Lord
of Vienna) you can better write than my self, because all the time thereof you
were continually with him to assist him with your advise, and caused him also
to shave his beard, which before he ware long. But in mine opinion after this
sickness his wits were never so fresh as before, but much weakened and decayed.
Such are the passions of those that being fallen into great misfortunes seek
not the true remedies, especially of proud and disdainful Princes. For in such
a case the best and soueraignest remedy is to have recourse to God, to bethink
our selves if we have in any point offended him, to humble our selves before
him, and to acknowledge our faults: for he it is that determines these causes,
and to him no man may impute any error. The second remedy in such a case is to
confer with some familiar friend, to reveal boldly unto him all our
passions, and not to be ashamed to utter our grief to our dear friend: for
that eases and comfort the mind, and by talking thus in counsel with a
faithful friend, the spirits recover their former virtue and strength. The
third remedy in such a case is to fall to some exercise and bodily labor: for
seeing we are men such pensiuenes and grief can not be passed over without
great passions either public or private 1. But the Duke took the clean
contrary course, for he hid himself and kept himself solitary; whereas he
should have put to flight al such melancholic austerity. Further, because he
was a terrible Prince to his servants, none durst presume to give him counsel
or comfort, but suffered him to follow his own sense, fearing if they had gone
about to persuade with him, it might have turned them to displeasure.

During this six weeks space or thereabout that he soiorned at La Riuiere
with small force, (which was no marvel having lost two so great battles) many
new enemies arose against him, his friends fell from him, his subjects being
defeated and discomfited began to murmur and despise him, which is a thing
usual (as before I have said) in such adversities. Further, many places in
Lorraine were either razed or won from him, namely Vaudemont, Espinall, and
diverse others, and on every side enemies prepared to invade him, and the
miserablest slaves were the hardiest. In this hurliburly the Duke of Lorraine
assembled a small force and came before Nancy: of the little towns thereabout
he held the greatest part; notwithstanding the Burgundians kept still
Pont-a-mousson being four leagues distant from Nancy.

Among those that were besieged within the said town of Nancy, was a
worshipful knight called Monseur de Beures of the house of Croy, who had under
him certain harquebusiers; within the town was also an English captain
though but of mean parentage, yet very valiant called Colpin 2, whom I my
self preferred with certain others of the garrison of Guisnes to the Dukes
service. This Colpin had within the town under his charge a band of three
hundred English men, the which grew weary of the siege (though they were
troubled neither with battery nor approches) because the Duke made no more
haste to succor them. And to say the truth, he committed a foul oversight in
that he approached no near to Lorraine, but lay thus in a place far off and
where he could do no service: since it stood him more upon to defend that he had
already gotten, than to invade the Swissers in hope to revenge his losses. But
his obstinacy turned him to great inconvenience, in that he would ask no man's
advise, but trusted wholly to his own brain: for notwithstanding that they
that were besieged continually, and earnestly solicited him to succor the
place; yet lay he still upon no necessity, at the said town of Riuiere six
weeks or thereabout; whereas if he had done otherwise, he might easily have
relieved the town. For the Duke of Lorraine had no force before it, and by
defending the country of Lorraine the passage from his other seniories into
Burgundy should ever have been open through Luxembourg and Lorraine. Wherefore
if his wits had been such then as before time I had known them, he would sure
have used greater diligence.

During the time that they within Nancy looked daily for succors, Colpin above
mentioned, Captain of the English band within the town, was slain with a
canon shot greatly to the Duke of Burgundies loss. For the presence of one man
alone endued with virtue and wisdom, though but of base race and parentage,
oftentimes delivers his Master from great incoueniences. As touching the
which point I commend above all others the wisdom of the King our Master: for
never Prince feared so much the Loss of his men as he did. Colpin being thus
slain, the English men within the town began to mutine and despair of
succors: for neither knew they of how small power the Duke of Lorraine was,
nor what goodly means the Duke of Burgundy had to levy new forces. Further,
because of long time the English men had made no wars out of their own realm,
they understood not what the siege of a town meant. Wherefore they resolved in
the end to parliament, and told Monseur de Beures captain of the town, that if
he would not fall to composition with the Duke of Lorraine, they would compound
without him. He notwithstanding that he were a trusty Knight lacked courage,
and fell to entreaties and persuasions; whereas in mine opinion stouter
language would better have prevailed: but God had already disposed heerof. If
the town had been held but three days longer, it had been relieved. To
conclude, the said de Beures agreed to the English men, and yielded the place
to the Duke of Lorraine 3: and so departed he and all that were within it with
bag and baggage.

The next day or at the furthest within two days after the town was yielded,
the Duke of Burgundy arrived there well accompanied considering his estate:
for certain bands were come to him from Luxembourg, which had been levied in
his other seniories. Before Nancy the Duke of Lorraine and he met; but no great
exploit was done, because the Duke of Lorrains force was small. The said Duke
of Burgundy continuing still his former enterprise, determined to lay his
siege again before Nancy: wherefore better it had been for him not to have
delaide so long upon selfewill the succouring of the town. But God gives such
extraordinary minds to Princes when he is purposed to alter their good
success. If the Duke would have followed good advise, and manned well the
small places about the town, he might easily in short space have recovered it:
for it was unfurnished of victuals, and he had men ynow, yea too many to have
held it in greater distress. In the mean time he might commodiously have
refreshed and repaired his army, but he took the contrary course.

The Notes.
1 Cardanus gives three natural remedies or purgations of sorrow: fasting,
weeping, sighing.

2 This Colpin the new copy calls throughout Cohin, but the old Colpin, and
La March, Iehannin Collepin, wherefore I have been bold to amend it according
to the old copy.

3 Nancy was yielded the 6. of October. Meyer.

Of the Earl of Campobaches great treasons, and how he kept the Duke of
Burgundy from hearing a gentleman that would have revealed them to him before
he was put to death, and how the said Duke made no account of the advertisement
the King sent him. Chap. 6.
DVring the time the Duke of Burgundy held before Nancy this siege, unfortunate
to himself, to all his subjects, and to many others whom this quarrel in no
wise concerned: diverse of his men began to practice his destruction. For (as
you have heard) many enemies were now risen against him on all sides, and among
others Nicholas Earl of Campobache in the realm of Naples, whence he was
banished for the house of Anious faction. This Earl after the death of
Nicholas Duke of Calabria whom he served, having as I said before neither lands
nor living; was received with diverse others of the said Duke of Calabrias
servants into the Duke of Burgundies house, who at his first coming delivered
him 40000. ducats in pressed to go into Italy to leuy therewith four hundred
lances that were under the said Earls charge and paid by himself. From the
which day forward even till this present he ever sought his Masters
destruction, and now seeing him in this adversity began to practice a fresh
against him, both with the Duke of Lorraine and also with certain of the Kings
captains and servants that lay in Champaigne near to the Dukes camp. To the
Duke of Lorraine he promised so to order the matter, that this siege should
take no effect. For he would find means that such things as were necessary
both for the siege and battery should be lacking; which promise he was well
able to perform, for the principal charge thereof was committed to him;
neither had any man so great authority in the army under the Duke of Burgundy
as he. But his practices with the Kings captains touched the quick nearer: for
he continually promised them either to kill his Master or take him prisoner,
demanding for recompense thereof the charge of these four hundred lances,
twenty thousand crowns to be delivered him in ready money, and some good
Earldom in France.

While this Earl was practicing these treasons, certain of the Duke of
Lorraines gentlemen attempted to enter the town of Nancy. Some of the which
entered, and some were taken, among whom was one Cifron a gentleman born in
Prouence, who was the only man that entertained these practices between the
Earl of Campobache and the said Duke of Lorraine. The D. of Burgundy presently
commanded this Cifron to be hanged, alleging that by the law of arms after a
Prince has laid his siege before a place and made his battery, if any man
attempt to enter to comfort those that are besieged he ought to die. Yet is
this law not practiced in our wars which are much crueller then the wars of
Italy or Spain where it is put in use. But law or no law, the D. would that in
any wise this gentleman should die, who seeing no remedy, sent word to the D.
that if it would please him to give him audience he would reveal a secret to
him that touched his life; whereof certain gentlemen to whom he uttered this
speech went to advertise the Duke: with whom at their arrival they found the
Earl of Campobache, come thither either by chance or of purpose to be alwais
at hand, fearing least Cifron whom he knew to be taken should reveal all his
conspiracies: for he was privy to them all; and that was indeed the secret he
would have discovered. The Duke made answer to these gentlemen that brought him
this message, that he used this delay only to save his life, commanding him to
open the matter to them: upon the which word the Earl of Campobache laid hold,
persuading the Duke that so it should be best. For you shall understand that
none of the Dukes counsel, neither any other persons were present with him at
the debating of this matter, but this Earl only who had charge of the whole
army, and a Secretary that was writing. The prisoner answered that he would
utter it to no man but to the Duke only: whereupon the Duke commanded him
again to be led to execution, and so he was. But upon the way thitherward, he
desired diverse gentlemen to entreat the Duke their Master for him; affirming
this to be such a secret as the Duke would not for a Duchy but know. Many that
were acquainted with him pitied him, and went to desire the Duke to vouchsafe
him the hearing. But this traitorous Earl, who kept the Dukes chamber (being
of timber) so straightly that no man might enter in: refused the door to these
gentlemen, saying that the Duke had commanded him to be hanged with speed; and
further sent diverse messengers to the Provost to hasten the execution. Thus was
this Cifron hanged to the Duke of Burgundies great prejudice, and better had it
been for him to have used less cruelty, and gently to have heard this
gentleman; which if he had done, peradventure he had been yet living, his house
flourishing, his dominions in safety, yea and much enlarged, considering the
broiles that have happened since in this realm.

But it is to be thought that God had otherwise disposed hereof, because of
the dishonorable part the Duke had plaide the Earl of Saint Paul Constable of
France not long before. For you have already heard in this history how
notwithstanding his safe conduct, he took him prisoner, delivered him to the
King to put him to death, and sent also all the letters and writings he had of
the said Constables serving for his process. And although the Duke had just
cause to hate him even to the death, and to procure his death for diverse
considerations too long to rehearse, (so that he might have done it without
stayning his honor:) yet all the reasons that may be alleged on his behalf,
cannot excuse his fault in that contrary to his promise and honor, having
given him a sufficient safe conduct; he took him and sold him for covetousness,
partly to recover the town of S. Quintin with other the said Constables
places, lands and goods; and partly to stay the King from hindering his
enterprise at Nancy when he first besieged it. For lying at that siege, after
many delays he delivered the Constable, fearing least the Kings army being in
Champaigne would have hindered his said enterprise if he had done otherwise.
For the King threatened him by his ambassadors, because it was agreed between
them, that whether of them could first lay hands upon him, should deliver him
to the other within eight days, or put him to death. But the Duke had passed
the term of the Constables delivery many days as you have heard; so that the
only fear of losing Nancy, and the greedy desire of having it caused the
Duke to deliver him to the King. But even as in this place of Nancy he
committed this foul fault, and afterward also in the same place at the second
siege put Cifron to death, refusing to hear him speak, as one having his
ears stopped and wits troubled: even so in the selfsame place was he himself
deceived, and betrayed by him whom he most trusted, and peradventure justly
punished for his false dealing with the Constable, in delivering him for
covetousness to have the said town. But the judgment heerof appertains to
God alone, neither speak I it to any other end but to declare this matter at
large, and to show how much a good Prince ought to eschew such false and
faithless dealing, what counsel soever be given him thereunto. For oftentimes
those that give a Prince such advise; do it either to flatter him, or because
they dare not gainsay him: and yet when the fault is committed, they are sorry
for it, knowing the punishment both of God and man that is like to ensue. But
such counselors are better far from a Prince than near about him.

You have heard how God appointed this Earl of Campobache his deputy in this
world, to take revenge of the Constables death committed by the Duke of
Burgundy, in the selfsame place, and after the same manner, or rather a
crueller. For even as the Duke contrary to his safe conduct and the trust the
Constable had reposed in him, delivered him to death: even so was himself
betrayed by the trustiest man in his army (I mean by him whom he most
trusted) and whom he had received into his service being old, poor, and
destitute of living, and whom he yearly entertained with an hundred thousand
ducats, wherewith this Earl himself paid his men of arms, besides diverse
other great benefits that he had received at the Dukes hands. And when he first
began to conspire his death he was going into Italy with 40000. ducats, which
(as you have heard) he had received in pressed of the Duke to levy therewith his
men of arms. Moreover, the better to execute his traitorous enterprise, he
practiced in two places, first with a physician dwelling in Lions called Master
Simon of Pauia; and afterward with the Kings ambassador in Sauoy, as before I
have rehearsed. Again at his return out of Italy, his men of arms lying in
certain small towns in the county of Marle which is in Lannois, he began anew
to practice against his Master, offering either to deliver into the Kings hands
all the places he held: or when the King should be in battle against his
Master, a privy token to be between them; upon the sight whereof he would
turn with all his company to the King against the Duke his Master. But this
last ouerture pleased not the King. He offered yet further, so soon as his
Master should be abroad with his army, either to take him prisoner or to kill
him, as he went to view the seat of his camp; which last enterprise
undoubtedly he would have executed. For the Dukes manner was when he alighted
from his horse at the place where he encamped, to disarme himself all saving
his quirace, and to mount upon a little nagge, accompanied only with eight or
ten archers on foot, or sometime two or three gentlemen of his chamber; in the
which estate he used to ride about his camp, to see if it were well enclosed:
so that the said Earl might with ten horses easily have executed his
enterprise. But the King detesting the continual treasons of this man against
his Master, especially this last being attempted in time of truce; and further
not knowing thoroughly to what purpose he made these offers: determined of a
noble courage to discover them to the Duke of Burgundy; and accordingly
advertised him at large of them all by the Lord of Contay (so often before
named) I my self being present when he declared them to the said Contay, who I
am sure like a faithful servant revealed them to his Master. But the Duke
taking all in evil part, said that if it were so, the King would never have
advertised him thereof. This was long before he laid his siege before Nancy; yet
think I that he never spoke word thereof to the said Earl: for he loved him
ever after rather better than worse.

How the Duke of Lorraine being accompanied with good force of Almains, came to
the town of Saint Nicholas during the siege of Nancy, and how the King of
Portugale who was in France, came to see the D. of Burgundy during the said
siege. Chap. 7.
LEt us now return to our principal matter, I mean the siege the Duke held
before Nancy, which he began in the midst of winter with small force, evil
armed, evil paid, and the most part sick. The mightiest in his camp
practiced against him as you have heard, and generally they murmured all, and
despised all his doings, as in adversity commonly it happens: but none
attempted ought against his person or estate, save this Earl of Campobache
only; for in his subjects no disloialtie was found. While he lay there in this
poor estate, the Duke of Lorraine treated with the confederated towns before
named, to levy men in their territories to fight with the Duke of Burgundy
lying before Nancy, whereunto all the towns easily agreed, but the Duke of
Lorraine lacked money: wherefore the King sent ambassadors to the Swissers in
his favor, and lent him also 40000. franks toward the payment of his Almains.
Further, the Lord of Cran who was then the Kings lieutenant in Champaigne, lay
in Barrois with seven or eight hundred lances and certain frank archers led
by very expert captains. The Duke of Lorraine by means of the Kings favor and
money, drew unto his service great force of Almains as well horsemen as
footmen, besides the which the towns also furnished a great number of their
own charge. Moreover, with the said Duke were many gentlemen of this realm,
and the Kings army as I said before lay in Barrois, which made no war, but
waited to see to whether part the victory would incline. The Duke of Lorraine
being accompanied with these Almaines above mentioned, came and lodged at Saint
Nicholas two leagues from Nancy.

The King of Portugale had been in this realm at that present the space of
nine months: for the King our Master was entered into league with him against
the King of Spain that now is. Whereupon the said King of Portugale came into
France, hoping that the King would lend him a great army to invade Castile by
the frontires of Biscay or Navarre. For the said King of Portugale held
certain places in Castile bordering upon Portugale, and certain also upon the
confines of France; namely, the castle of Bourgues, and diverse others: so
that if the King had aided him as once he was purposed, it is like his
enterprise had taken effect: but the King altered his mind, and foded him
forth with fair words the space of a year or more. During the which time his
affairs in Castile daily impaired: for at his coming into France all the
nobles in manner of the realm of Castile took part with him, but because of
his long absence, by little and little they altered their minds, and made peace
with King Ferrande and Queen Isabell now reigning. The King our Master excused
his not aiding him according to his promise by the wars in Lorraine, alleging
that he feared that the Duke of Burgundy (if he recovered his losses) would
forthwith invade him. This poor King of Portugale being a good and a just
Prince 1, resolved to go to the Duke of Burgundy his cousin german 2 to treat
of peace between the King and him, to the end that then the King might aid
him: for he was ashamed to return into Castile or Portugale in this estate
having done no good here in France; and the rather because he had taken this
journey upon him very rashly, and contrary to the advice of the most of his
counsel. Wherefore he put himself upon the way in the midst of winter to go
to the Duke of Burgundy his cousin lying before Nancy: where at his arrival he
began to treat with him according to the Kings instructions. But perceiving it
an impossibility to agree them because their demands were contrary in all
points; after he had remained there two days he took his leave of the Duke of
Burgundy his cousin, and returned to Paris from whence he came. The Duke
desired him to stay a while, and to go to Pont-a-musson four leagues from
Nancy to defend that passage: for the Duke was already advertised that the
Almains army lay at Saint Nicholas. But the King of Portugale excused himself,
saying: that he was neither armed nor accompanied for such an enterprise; and
so returned to Paris, where he remained a long time, till in the end he
entered into jealousy, that the King meant to take him prisoner and deliver him
to his enemy the King of Castile. Whereupon he and two of his servants
disguised themselves, purposing to go to Rome there to enter into religion. But
as he iourneied in this disguised attire, he was taken by a Norman called
Robinet le Beuf. Of this his departure the King our Master was both sorry and
ashamed: and thereupon armed diverse ships upon the coast of Normandy to convey
him into Portugale; of the which fleet George Ledger was appointed Admiral.

The occasion of his war upon the King of Castile was for his sisters daughter.
For you shall understand that his sister had been wife to Don Henry King of
Castile that last died; and had issue a goodly daughter which lives yet in
Portugale unmarried. This daughter Queen Isabell sister to the said King Henry
3, held from the crown of Castile, saying that she was illegitimate; of the
which opinion were also many others, alleging that King Henry was impotent to
generation, for a certain impediment that I ouerpasse. But whether it were so
or no; notwithstanding that the said daughter were borne under the veil of
marriage: yet remained the crown of Castile to Queen Isabell and her husband
the King of Arragon and Sicilie 4 now reigning.

This King of Portugale above mentioned, labored to make a marriage between the
said daughter his niece and King Charles the eight now reigning, which was the
cause of this his voyage into France, that turned so greatly to his damage and
grief. For soon after his return into Portugale he died. Wherefore (as I
said in the beginning of this history) a Prince ought to beware what
ambassadors he sends into a strange country. For if they had been wise that
came from the King of Portugale into France to conclude the league above
mentioned (whereat I my self was present, as one in commission for the King)
they would have informed themselves better of our affairs in these parts
before they had counseled their Master to enter into this voyage, which turned
so much to his loss and damage.

The Notes.
1 He means a simple Prince of wit.

2 How the King of Portugale and the Duke of Burgundy were cousin germans, the
Pedigree in the end of the work will declare.

3 The Pedigree in the end of the work will make this plain.

4 Before he calls Rene King of Sicilie, but King Rene had but the title not
the possession.

How the Duke of Burgundy refusing the good counsel of diverse of his men, was
discomfited and slain in the battle fought between him and the Duke of
Lorraine, near to Nancy. Chap. 8.
I Would have passed over this discourse of the King of Portugale, had it not
been to show that a Prince ought to beware how he put himself into another
Princes hands, or go in person to demand aid. But now to return to the
principal matter. Within a day after the King of Portugales departure from the
Duke of Burgundy, the Duke of Lorraine and the Almains that served him,
dislodged from Saint Nicholas, and marched to fight with the said Duke; and the
self same day the Earl of Campobache to accomplish his enterprise departed
from the Dukes camp 1, and revolted to his enemies with eight score men of
arms, sorowing only that he could do his Master no more harm. They within
Nancy had intelligence of this Earls practices, which encouraged them to
endure the siege. Further, one that leaped down the ditches entered the town
and assured them of succors, otherwise they were upon the point to have yielded
it. And to say the truth had it not been for the said Earls treasons, they
could never have held it so long; but God was fully determined to bring the
Duke to his end.

The Duke of Burgundy being advertised of the Duke of Lorrains arrival,
assembled his counsel contrary to his accustomed manner; for he was never wont
to ask any man's advise, but in all matters to follow his own sense. Most of
them counseled him to retire to Pont-a-musson, being but four leagues thence,
and to man the places well which he held about Nancy, alleging that the
Almains would depart so soon as they had victualed the town, and the Duke of
Lorrains money fail him; so that he should not be able in long time to assemble
the like force. They said further, that his enemies could not victual the
town so well, but that before winter were half expired it should be in as
great distress as at that present, and in the mean time, he might leuy men:
for I have been informed by those that perfectly understood it that he had not
in all his army above four thousand soldiers, of the which hardly twelve
hundred were able to fight. Money he lacked not, for in the castle of
Luxembourg being not far thence, were at the least 450000. crowns, and men
enough he might have recovered. But God would not give him grace to follow this
wise advise, nor perceive how many enemies lodged round about him on every
side: so that he took the woorst course, and by the advice of certain
harebrained fools determined to hazard the battle with these few terrified
and hartlesse men; notwithstanding all the reasons alleged to him, both of the
great force of Almains the Duke of Lorraine had, and also of the Kings army
that lay hard by his camp. When the Earl of Campobache was come to the Duke
of Lorraine, the Almains commanded him to depart, saying, that they would have
no traitor among them. Wherefore he retired to Conde a castle and passage
near at hand 2, which he fortified with carts and other provisions the best he
could, trusting that when the Duke of Burgundy and his men fled, some of them
would fall into his hands, as indeed a great many did. But this practice with
the Duke of Lorraine was not his greatest treason; for a little before his
departure he conspired with diverse in the Dukes army, resolving with them
(because he saw no hope of killing or taking his Master prisoner) to revolt to
the enemies at the very instant that the two battles should join; but sooner
not to depart, to the end their sudden revolt might the more astonish and
terrify the Dukes whole army. Further, he promised assuredly, if the Duke fled
that he should never escape alive; for he would leave thirteen or fowerteene
trusty fellows behind him, some to begin to fly at the very instant that the
Almains should march: and other some to have an eye on the Duke to kill him if
he fled, which enterprise he made full account to execute; and two or three I
knew afterward my self of those that were left behind for that purpose.
After he had conspired these abominable treasons, he returned again to the
Dukes camp, and then revolted from him (as you have heard) when he saw the
Almains march, of whom being refused, he retired as I said before to this
castle of Condy. The said Almains marched forward, being accompanied with
great force of French horse men that had leave given them to be at the battle.
Diverse also there were that lay in ambushes near to the place, to the end if
the D. were discomfited they might get some good prisoner or booty* Thus you see
the miserable estate this poor Duke of Burgundy was fallen into, by refusing
good advise. When the two armies joined, the Dukes having been already twice
discomfited, and being but small and in very evil order, was incontinent
broken and put to flight; a great number escaped, the rest were either slain 3
or taken, and namely the Duke himself died upon the place. Of the manner of his
death 4, I will not speak because I was not there present: but I have communed
with some that were there, who told me that they saw him stricken to the ground,
and could not succor him because they were prisoners. Notwithstanding to their
judgment he was not then slain, but after these came a great troop which
slew him in the midst of them, stripped him, and left him among the dead
bodies, not knowing who he was 5. This battle 6 was fought the fifth of January
7, 1476. upon Twelfth even. 1477. beginning the year as New years tide.


The Notes.
1 He departed upon wensday with 180. Meyer says almost 200. men of arms,
that is 800. horse, and on saturday departed the Lords of Dauge or Augy as
Meyer names him, and Montfort with 120. men of arms, that is 480. horse, and
upon sunday was the battle. Annal. Aquit. Meyer. Annal. Burgund.

2 The castle of Condy was the passage upon the bridge of the river of
Moselle. Meyer.

3 The Duke lost in the battle of Nancy 3000. men. Annal. Burgund.

4 He had three wounds, one with a halberd in the side of his head, which claue
his head down to the teeth, another with a pike through the haunches, and the
third a push also with a pike by the fundament. Annal. Burg. He was born the
11. of November 1433. and was 34. years old when he began to govern: he lived
43. years, one month, and 26. days: and governed nine years, six months,
and twenty days. Meyer.

5 The name of him that slew Duke Charles was Claude of Bausmont, captain of
the castle of Saint Dier in Lorraine. The Duke was mounted upon a black
courser, and seeing his battles overthrown, took a little river supposing to
have saved himself, but in the river his horse fell and ouerthrevv him: and
then this gentleman not knowing him, and by reason he was deaf not hearing
the Duke, who cried to him for the safety of his life, ran upon him, slew
him, stripped him, and left him lying stark naked in the ditch. Where the
next day after the battle, his body was found so fast frosen in the ice,
that when it was drawn forth a piece of his cheek tarried there behind.
The Duke of Lorraine to his great honor solemnly buried him, himself and al
his nobles accompanying the corpse in mourning attire. The place where the Duke
was slain was hard by S. John's Church without Nancy, where the Duke of
Lorraine erected a cross for a memorial thereof. The gentleman that slew him
died soon after of melancholy, when he understood that he had slain so
vvoorthie and courageous a Prince. Champier. Annals Burgund.

6 The battle at Nancy Meyer names the battle of Iaruilla.

7 Being sunday, and as others write ann. 1477. but the variance both in this
place and diverse others betvveene Commines and them is, because they end the
year at New years tide, and he not before our Lady day, as by the course of
his history is most plain.

A discourse upon certain virtues of the Duke of Burgundy, and of the time
his house flourished in prosperity. Chap. 9.
I Saw at Milan since his death a signet that I have often seen him wear at
his breast, which was a ring set with a camee, having very curiously cut into it
an iron to strike fire 1, wherein his arms were graven. This ring was sold at
Milan for two ducats, and he that stole it from him was a false knave, that had
been a groom of his chamber. Many a time have I seen him made ready and
unready with great reverence and solemnity, and that by great personages. But
now when death came, all these honors fleeted away, and both he and his house
were destroyed as you have heard, in the selfsame place where a little before
he had consented for covetousness to deliver the Constable to death. I had
known him in times past a mighty and honorable Prince; as much yea more
esteemed and sought to of his neighbors, than any Prince in Christendom.
Further, in mine opinion the greatest cause of Gods indignation against him,
was for that he attributed all his good success, and all the great victories
he obtained in this world, to his own wisdom and virtue; and not to God, as
he ought to have done. And undoubtedly he was endued with many goodly virtues:
for never was Prince more desirous to entertain noble men, and keep them in
good order than he. His liberality seemed not great 2, because he made all men
partakers thereof. Never Prince gave audience more willingly to his servants
and subjects than he 3. While I served him he was not cruel, but grew
marvelous cruel toward his end: which was a sign of short life. In his
apparel and all other kind of furniture he was wonderful pompous, yea
somewhat too excessive. He received very honorably all ambassadors and
strangers, feasting them sumptuously, and entertaining them with great
solemnity. Covetous he was of glory, which was the chief cause that made him
move so many wars: for he desired to imitate those ancient Princes, whose fame
continues till this present. Lastly, hardy he was and valiant, as any man
that lived in his time: but all his great enterprises and attempts ended with
himself, and turned to his own loss and dishonor; for the honor goes ever
with the victory. Yet to say the truth, I wot not well whether God powered out
greater indignation upon him, or upon his subjects: for he died in battle
without any long grief; but they sithence his death never lived in peace, but
in continual war; against the which they have not been able to make resistance,
because of their own civil troubles and divisions. Yea and another thing that
most greeueth them is, that they that now defend them are strangers, who not
long since were their enemies, namely the Almaines. To conclude, since the
Dukes death never man bare them good will, no not they that defend them.
Further, if a man consider well their actions, it seems that their wits were
as much troubled, as their Princes before his death: for they despised all good
counsel, and sought all means to hurt themselves. In the which vale of misery
they are still like to continue; or if happily they wade out of it for a
season, like they are to fall into it again.

Wherefore I am of a certain wise man's opinion of my acquaintance, that God
gives to subjects Princes, according as he will punish or chastise them; and
likewise toward the Prince disposes the subjects hearts, according as he will
advance or abase him: and even so dealt he with the subjects of this house of
Burgundy. For after three great, good and sage Princes, who governed them the
space of 120. years or more, with great wisdom and virtue, he gave them in
the end this D. Charles, who held them in continual wars, travel and charges,
almost as much in winter as summer: so that a great number of rich wealthy men
were either slain in these wars, or starued in prison. Their great miseries
began before Nuz, and continued with the loss of three or four battles, till
the hour of the Dukes death; who in this last battle wasted and consumed the
whole force of his country, and lost all his servants that could or would have
defended the estate and honor of his house. It seems therefore (as before I
said) that this adversity has counteruailed all the time of their felicity.
For as I say, that I have seen him a great, mighty and honorable Prince: so
may I say also of his subjects: for I have traveled the best part of Europe in
mine opinion, yet saw I never country in my life of the like greatness, no nor
far greater, abound with such wealth, riches, sumptuous buildings, large
expenses, feasts, bankets and all kind of prodigality, as these countries of
Burgundy did, during the time that I was there. And if those that knew them not
during the time that I speak of, think my report too large: I am sure others
that knew them then as well as my self, will think it too little. But God
with one blow has laid flat on the ground this sumptuous building, I mean
this mighty house that bred and maintained so many worthy men; that was so
greatly esteemed both far and near, and obtained greater victories, and lived
in greater honor during the time it flourished than any other: which great
felicity and grace of God toward them continued the space of a hundred and
twenty years. During the which time all their neighbors suffered great
afflictions, namely, France, England and Spain, so far forth that all these
at one time or other have come to crave help and succor of this house of
Burgundy, as you have seen by experience, of the King our Master, who in his
youth while his father King Charles the seventh reigned, lived in Burgundy the
space of six years, with good Duke Philip, who lovingly received him. As
touching the Princes of England, I have seen in the Duke of Burgundies court
King Edward's two brethren the Dukes of Clarence, and Gloucester who afterward
named himself King Richard the third: and on the contrary side of the house of
Lancaster that took part with King Henry, I have seen in manner all the noble
men suing to this house of Burgundy for aid. To be short, as I have known
this house honored of all men: so have I also seen it at one instant fall
down topsie turuy, and become the most desolate and miserable house in the
world, both in respect of the Prince and also of the subjects. Such like works
has God brought to pass before we were borne, and will also when we are dead.
For this we ought certainly to believe, that the good or evil success of
Princes depends wholly upon his divine ordinance.

The Notes.
1 Of the devise of the Fuzill read the chronicles of Flanders page 345. Claude
Paradin in his devises heroiques page 46. and Annal. Burgund. lib. 3. page 711.
who says that he gave the striking iron, because it is made in the form of B.
which is the first letter of Burgundy. Further, he gives the said iron
striking against a stone with infinite sparkles flying from them, to signify
that the cruel wars between the Duke of Burgundy and the realm of France
had set all their neighbors on fire.

2 His meaning is that because he bestowed upon every man, he could not bestow
much upon any one, whereby his liberality was the less apparent.

3 He means in hearing their suits; for as touching matters of counsel he
has said before in diverse places that he would never use any man's advise.

How the King was advertised of the Duke of Burgundies last overthrow, and how
he governed his affairs after the said Dukes death. Chap. 10.
But to proceed in our history, the King who had now laid posts in his realm
(for before were never any) looked howerly for the certain news of this
battle of Nancy, because of the occurrents he had already received of the
Almains arrival, and of all the other circumstances above rehearsed: and was
forthwith advertised of the Dukes overthrow. Diverse there were that waited
diligently to bear him the first news heerof; for always he gave somewhat to
him that first brought him tidings of any good news, withal not forgetting
the messengers. Further, his delight was to talk of them before they came, and
to promise reward to him that could bring him some good news. Monseur de
Bouchage and my self being together, received the first word of the battle of
Morat, whereof both of us jointly advertised the King, who gave to each of us
two hundred marks of silver. Monseur de Lude who lodged without Plessis, was
the first man that knew of the Courriers arrival with the letters of this
battle of Nancy, and commanded the said Courrier to deliver him his packet,
who durst not deny it him, because of the Kings great favor toward him. The
next morning by break of day the said de Lude came rapping at the door next
to the Kings chamber, which forthwith was opened to him; and in he went and
delivered these letters sent from the Lord of Cran and diverse others;
notwithstanding none of them writ any certainty of the Dukes death: but some
reported that he was seen fly, and was escaped. This news at the first so
ravished the King with joy, that he wist not what countenance to show:
notwithstanding two doubts there were that troubled him; the one, least the
Almaines, if the Duke were taken, for greedines of money (whereof the Duke had
plenty) would not only ransom him, but also conclude some treaty with him,
and of his foes become his friends. The other, if the Duke were escaped thus
thrice discomfited, whether he should seize into his hands his seniories of
Burgundy or no, knowing them easy to be taken, because in manner all the force
of the country was slain in these three battles. Touching the which point,
his resolution (whereunto few I think but my self were privy) was, if the
Duke were escaped alive, to command his army that lay in Champaigne and Barrois
to enter incontinent into Burgundy during this great fear and astonishment of
the people; and having seized all the country into his hands, he meant to
advertise the Duke, that he did it only to save it for him, and defend it from
the Almaines. For because the said Duchy was held of the crown, he would for
no good that it should be a pray for them: but whatsoever he had taken, he
would faithfully restore; as undoubtedly he would, though many happily will not
credit it. And no marvel; for they know not the reasons that would have
moved him thereunto: but he altered this determination when he understood of
the Dukes death. Immediately after the King (being at Tours) had received the
letters above mentioned, which reported nothing of the Dukes death; he sent
into the town for all his captains, and diverse noble men, to whom he read
these letters; whereat they seemed in appearance greatly to rejoice: but those
that looked narrowlier into their behavior, perceived that a great many of
them forced their mirth, and wished with all their hearts, notwithstanding their
outward show, that the world had gone otherwise with the Duke. The reason
whereof peradventure was, because the K. heretofore had lived in great fear;
but now they doubted, seeing him delivered of so many enemies, that he would
alter many things, especially offices and pensions. For there were a great
number in the company, that had borne arms against him both in the war called
THE WEAL PVELIKE (whereof you have heard in the beginning of this history)
and in diverse other broiles between him and the Duke of Guienne his brother.
After he had communed a while with these noble men and captains, he went to
mass; which being ended, he caused the table to be covered in his chamber, and
made them all dine with him; the Lord Chauncellor, and certain others of his
counsel being also present. All dinner-while he talked of these affairs: but
I and diverse others marked with what appetite those that sat at the table
dined. And undoubtedly there was not one of them (I wot not whether for joy or
sorrow) that ate half a meals meat; yet were they not ashamed to eat in the
Kings presence, for every one of them had often before dined at his table. When
the King was risen from dinner, he withdrew himself, and gave to diverse,
certain of the Duke of Burgundies lands if he were dead, and soon after
dispatched the Admiral of France, called the bastard of Bourbon and my self,
giving us commission to receive into his allegiance as many as would become his
subjects; and further: commanding us to depart incontinent, and to open all
courriers packets that we should meet with, to the end we might be certainly
informed whether the Duke were dead or alive. We departed in great haste,
though in the extremest cold weather that ever I felt: and when we had ridden
about half a days journey, we met with a Post, whom we commanded to deliver
us his letters; the contents whereof were, that the Duke was found among the
dead bodies 1, and known by an Italian Page that served him, and by his
Physician called Master Louppe a Portugale borne, who sent word to Monseur de
Cran of the Duke his Masters death, who incontinent advertised the King thereof.

The Notes.
1 By what marks the Dukes body was knuwne, read Annal. Burgund.

How the King after the Duke of Burgundies death seized into his hands the
town of Abbeuille, and of the answer they of Arras gave him. Chap. 11.
WHen we understood these news, we rid forthwith to the subburbs of
Abbeuille, and were the first that brought word of the Dukes death into those
parts. At our arriual we found the towns men in treaty with Monseur de Torcy,
whom they had loved of long time. But the soldiers and those that had been the
Dukes officers, treated with us about the delivery of the town by a messenger
whom we sent thither before us, so far forth that upon our promises they
caused four hundred lances to depart the town, which the towns men seeing,
immediately opened the gates to Monseur de Torcy, greatly to the hinderance of
the captains and the other officers of the town; to seven or eight of the
which we had promised both money and pensions (for we had commission from the
King so to do) whereof nothing was performed because the town was not yielded
by their means. This town of Abbeuille was parcel of those lands that King
Charles the seventh engaged to Duke Philip of Burgundy at the treaty of Arras,
under this condition, that for default of heir male they should return to the
crown. Wherefore it is not to be marvelled if so lightly they opened to us
their gates. From Abbeuille we rid to Dourlans, and sent to sommon Arras the
chief town of Artois, the ancient inheritance of the Earls of Flaunders,
which has always descended as well to the heirs females as males. Monseur de
Rauastain and Monseur de Cords, who were within the town condescended to come
and treat with us at an abbey near the town called Mont Saint Eloy, bringing
with them certain of the town. To the which treaty we agreed that I should go
and certain with me, for because we supposed they would not yield to our
requests: it was thought good that the Admiral should not go. Immediately
after my arrival at the place assigned, the Lords of Rauastaine and Cords
being accompanied with diverse gentlemen, and certain also of the town
repaired thither. Among those that came to negotiate with us for the town, was
their Recorder, called Master John de la Vaquerie, since that time chief
president in the court Parliament at Paris. We required them at this meeting to
open us the gates and to receive us into the town for the King, saying that he
claimed both town and country as his by way of confiscation; adding that if
they refused so to do they were like to be forced thereunto, seeing both their
Prince was slain and their country utterly unfurnished of men of war, because
of these three battles they had lost. The Lords above named made us answer by
the said Master John de la Vaquerie, that this county of Artois appertained of
right to the Lady of Burgundy, daughter and heir to Duke Charles, and
descended to her by inheritance from the Lady Margaret sometime Countess of
Flaunders, Artois, Burgundy, Neuers, and Retell, the which married with Philip
the first, Duke of Burgundy, son to King John of France 1, and yoongest
brother to King Charles the fifth: wherefore they humbly besought the King to
keep the truce concluded between him and the late Duke Charles. Our
communication was but short; for we supposed before our meeting, that this
should be our answer. But the chief cause of my going into those parts, was to
commune with certain of mine acquaintance there, and to draw them to the Kings
service: with some of the which I spoke, who soon after became his faithful
servants accordingly. These countries were in marruellous fear and
astonishment, and not without cause; for I think that in eight days they
could not have levied eight men of arms. Further, in all those quarters were
not above 1500. soldiers, horsemen and footmen, which lay toward Namur and in
Henault, and were of those that escaped out of the battle where the Duke was
slain. Their woonted terms and manner of speech were now clean altered; for
they spoke lowly and humbly: which I write not to accuse them, as though in
times past their words had been more arrogant than became them; but the truth
is when I was there they thought so well of themselves, that they used not such
reverent language, neither to the King, nor of the King, as they have done
sithence. Wherefore if men were wise, they would use such fair speech in time
of prosperity, that in adversity they should not need to change their
terms. I returned to the Admiral, to make report of my negotiation:
immediately whereupon we were advertised that the King was at hand; for he set
forth soon after us, and commanded letters to be written both in his own
name, and diverse of his servants names, to cause certain to repair to him; by
whose means he trusted to bring all these seniories under his obedience.

The Notes.
1 The pedigree in the end of this work will show, how all these titles
descended to this Lady Margaret.

A discourse not appertaining to the principal matters of the greatioie the
King was in to see himself delivered of so many enemies, and of the error he
committed touching the reducing of these countries of Burgundy to his
obedience. Chap. 12.
THe King reioiced not a little to see himself thus delivered of all those
whom he hated and were his principal enemies: of some of the which he had
taken the revenge himself; namely the Constable of France, the Duke of
Nemours, and diverse others, his brother the Duke of Guyenne was dead whose
inheritance was fallen to him. In like manner all they of the house of Aniou
were dead, namely King Rene of Sicilie, the Dukes of Calabria John and
Nicholas, and their cousin the Earl of Maine, and afterward of Prouence: the
Earl of Armignac was slain at Lestore, and all their lands and goods fallen
to the King. But because this house of Burgundy was greater and mightier than
the rest, and had made sharp war with the English men's aid upon his father K.
Charles the seventh, thirty two years without truce, and had their dominions
bordring upon his, and their subjects always desirous to make war upon him and
his realm: therefore he reioiced more at their Princes death, than at the
death of all the rest. Further, he now fully persuaded himself, that during
his life, no man neither within his realm, nor in the countries bordering upon
it, would once lift up his finger against him. For he was in peace (as you have
heard) with the English men, the which he traveled to the uttermost of his
power to continue. But although he were thus void of all fear: yet did not God
permit him to take the wisest course for the atchieuing of this his enterprise
being of so great importance. And sure it appears both by that God showed
then and has showed since, that he meant sharply to punish this house of
Burgundy, as well in the person of the Prince, as of the subjects, and of those
that lived amongst them. For if the King our Master had taken the best course,
the wars that have consumed them since had never happened. For if he had done as
he ought to have done, he should have sought to join to the crown all those
great Seniories whereunto he could pretend no title, either by marriage or by
courteous dealing with the subjects; which thing he might then easily have
accomplished, seeing the great fear, misery, and distress these countries
were in at that time. And if he had thus done, he should both have rid them of
many troubles, and enlarged and enriched his own realm through long peace,
which by this means had been easily obtained. He might also hereby have
eased his realm diverse ways, especially of the charge of men of arms, who
continually rode up and down from one corner of the realm to another,
oftentimes upon small occasion. While the Duke of Burgundy yet lived, he
eftsoons debated with me what were best to be done if the said Duke happened to
die. And then he discoursed marvelous wisely thereof, saying, that he would
travel to make a marriage between the King his son now reigning, and the
Dukes daughter, afterward Duches of Austrich, which if she refused because of
the Daulphin his sons young age; then he would attempt to win her to mary some
young Lord of this realm, to obtain thereby her friendship and her subjects,
and recover without blows that he claimed to be his: in the which mind he
continued till eight days before he understood of the Dukes death. But this
wise deliberation he began somewhat to alter the self same day he received
news thereof, and the very instant that he dispatched the Admiral and me.
Notwithstanding he discovered not his purpose therein, but made promise to
diverse of lands and lordships that had been in the Dukes possession.

How Han, Bohain, Saint Quintin and Peronne were yielded to the King, and how
he sent Master Oliver his barber to practice with them of Gaunt. Chap. 13.
THe King being on the way coming after us, received good news from all
parts: for the castles of Han and Bohain were yielded unto him, and the
citizens of Saint Quintins of their own accord received Monseur de Mouy their
neighbor into the town for him. Further he assured himself of Peronne, which
William of Bische held, and was put in hope both by us and others, that
Monseur de Cords would revolt to him. Further he had sent his barber called
Master Oliver to Gaunt, in a village near to the which he was borne, and had
dispatched diverse others into other places, being in great hope of them all;
but the most part of them served him rather with words then deeds. When he
drew near to Peronne I went to meet him, and found him in a village, whither M.
William of Bische and certain others came and presented him the keys of the
town, whereof he was right glad. The King abode there that day, and I dined with
him after mine accustomed manner: for his pleasure was that seven or eight at
the least and sometimes more should ordinarily sit at his own table. But after
dinner he withdrew himself, and seemed to be discontented with the small
exploit the Admiral and I had done, saying: that he had sent Master Oliver his
barber to Gaunt to bring that town to his obedience, and Robinet Dodenfort to
Saint Omers, who was well friended there: and those he commended as fit men to
receive the keys of a town, and put his forces into it. Diverse others also he
named, whom he had sent to other great towns: and this matter he made Monseur
de Lude, and two or three others to debate with me. It became not me to reason
against him, nor gainsay his pleasure; but I told him that I feared Master
Oliver and the others whom he named, would not so easily take these great
towns, as they supposed. The King used this communication with me, because he
had altered his mind, and hoped by reason of his good success in the
beginning, that all the country would yield unto him. Moreover, he was
counseled by diverse (and was also of himself inclined thereunto) utterly to
destroy this house of Burgundy, and to disperse the seniories thereof among
diverse men; some of the which he named, upon whom he was purposed to bestow the
Earldoms, namely, Henault and Namur that border upon France: with the greater
seniories, as Brabant, Holland, and the rest, he meant to win certain Princes
of Almaine to his friendship, to the end they might aid him in the atchieuing
of his enterprise. All the which matters it pleased him to acquaint me with,
because I had counseled him before to take the other course above rehearsed:
wherefore he would that I should understand the reasons, why he followed not
mine advise. Further he alleged, that this course should be most beneficial
for his realm, the which had sustained infinite troubles, because of the
greatness of this house of Burgundy, and the mighty seniories that it
possessed. And sure as touching the world, his reasons carried great show
(though in conscience me thought otherwise:) notwithstanding such was his
wisdom, that neither I nor any of his servants could see so far into his
affairs as himself did; for undoubtedly he was one of the wisest and
subtilest Princes that lived in his time. But in such weighty affairs God
disposes the hearts of Kings and great Princes, which he holds in his hands,
and directs them into those ways that best serve for the executing of his
determinations: for undoubtedly if it had pleased him, that the King should
still have continued in that course, which he of himself had devised before
the Dukes death; the wars that have been since, and yet are, had never
happened. But we were unworthy on both sides to enjoy that quiet peace that
was then offered us, which sure was the only cause of the Kings error, not
want of wit: for, as you have heard, in wit no man excelled him. I write of
these affairs at large, to show that when a man attempteth any great
enterprise, he ought at the first thoroughly to debate it, to the end he may
choose the wisest way; but especially to submit himself to God, and humbly to
beseech him to direct him into the best course, which is the principal point,
as appears both by the scriptures and by experience. I mind not here to
blame the King, nor say that he erred in this behalf: for peradventure diverse
which knew and understood more than my self, were then and yet are of his
opinion; notwithstanding the matter was not debated there nor elsewhere.
Further, those that write Chronicles, frame their style commonly to their
commendation of whom they speak, omitting diverse points, sometimes because they
know not the truth of them. But as touching my self, I mind to write nothing
but that is true, and which I my self either have seen or learned of such
parties as are worthy of credit, not regarding any man's commendation. For no
Prince is to be thought so wise, but that he erreth sometime, yea oftentimes if
he live long, as should well appear by their actions, if they were always
truly reported. The greatest Senates and Consuls that be or ever have been,
have erred and do err, as we may read and daily see.

When the King had reposed himself one day in this village near to Peronne,
he determined the next morning to make his entry into the town; for it was
yielded him as you have heard. And at his departure he drew me aside, and
commanded me to go into the country of Poictou and the frontiers of Britain,
telling me in mine ear that if neither Master Oliuers enterprise took effect,
nor Monseur de Cords revolted to him; he would cause all the country of
Artois called La Leuee lying upon the river of Lis, to be burned; and that done
return again into Touraine. I desired him to be good to certain who by my
means were become his servants, and to whom I had promised in his name pensions
and great rewards: whereupon he took their names of me in writing, and
performed all that I had promised. Thus I took my leave of him for that time.
But even as I was taking horse, Monseur de Lude came to me, whom the King for
certain considerations favored greatly. He was a man much given to his own
private gain, and as he cared not to deceive and abuse any man: so was he also
very light of belief, and often beguiled himself. He had been brought up with
the King from his childhood, and knew which way to feed his humor, and had a
very pleasant head. He came and said thus to me (wisely after a jesting manner)
what depart you now when you should be made or never, seeing the great things
that fall daily into the Kings hands, wherewith he may enrich those that he
loves? For my part I look to be governor of Flaunders, and to make my self
all of gold, in uttering the which words, he brake forth into great laughter:
but I had no lust to laugh because I feared that this proceeded of the King.
Mine answer was, that I would be right glad if his fortune might be such, and
that I trusted the King would not forget me.

A certain knight of Hainault was come to me not past half an hour before my
departure, who brought me news of diverse with whom I had peswaded by letters
to put themselves into the Kings service. The said knight and I are kinsemen,
and he is yet living, wherefore neither will I name him, nor those of whom he
brought me this advertisement. His offer in few words was to yield unto the
King the chief places and towns in Hainault. Whereof I advertised the King
even as I was taking my leave; who after he had talked with the said knight,
told me that neither he nor those others whom I named were such as he had need
of. He misliked one for this point, and another for that, and their offer
seemed unto him nothing: for he thought to obtain all that he desired without
them. Again, after my departure the King made Monseur de Lude to commune with
the same knight, who was much discontented with the said de Ludes words, and
departed incontinent without entering into farther treaty, because the said de
Lude and he would never have agreed in any point. For whereas this knight was
come out of Hainault to get somewhat at the Kings hands whereby to enrich
himself: the said de Lude at the first meeting asked him what the towns would
give him to commend their cause to the King. I think verily that this refusal
the King made to these knights proceeded also of God; for since that time he
would have made good account of them if he could have drawn them to his
service. But peradventure God would not accomplish his desire in all points
either because of the reasons above alleged, or for that he would not suffer
him to usurp this country of Hainault (which is held of the Empire) both
because he had no title thereunto, and also because of the ancient league
between the Emperors and the Kings of France, whereof the King himself also
seemed afterward to take notice. For he held Cambray, le Quesnoy, and Boissi 1
in Hainault, whereof Boissi he yielded again, and restored Cambray being an
Imperial town to neutralitie as it was before. Athough I my self were not
present at these actions, yet was I informed how they passed: for I had good
means to understand of them because I was acquainted, and had been brought up
in both these Princes dominions, and have since also communed with diverse that
were the principal managers of these affairs on both sides.

The Notes.
1 This Boissi libr. 6. cap. 3. he calls Bouchain: and so out of doubt it
should be read here.

How Master Oliver the Kings barber failing to execute his enterprise at Gaunt,
found means to put the Kings forces into Tournay. Chap. 14.
MAster Oliver (as you have heard) was gone to Gaunt, and carried letters of
credit to the Lady of Burgundy Duke Charles his daughter, having also
commission to persuade with her apart, to put her self into the Kings
government 1. But this was not his principal charge: for he doubted that he
should not obtain leave to commune with her apart; and though he did, yet
supposed he that he should not frame her to his request. But his hope was to
raise some great tumult in this town of Gaunt, which has ever been inclined
to rebellion, and was the easier to be moved thereunto at this present,
because under Duke Philip and Duke Charles they had lived in great awe, and
lost diverse privileges by the treaty made with the said Duke Philip, after
their wars with him ended. Duke Charles also had taken one privilege from them,
concerning the election of their Senate, for an offense made the first day he
entered into the town as Duke: whereof because I have made mention before, I
will here write no further. All these reasons encouraged Master Oliver the
Kings barber to proceed in his enterprise, so far forth that he discovered
his purpose to some such of the citizens, as he thought would give ear unto
him, offering (besides diverse other promises) to cause the King to restore them
their privileges that they had lost. But notwithstanding that he were not in
their Towne-house to speak publicly to their Senate, because he meant first
to assay if he could do any good with this young Princess; yet was his
enterprise smelt out: wherefore after he had soiourned a few days in Gaunt, he
was sent for to declare his message; whereupon he repaired to the Princes
presence, being apparrelled much more sumptuously than became one of his
calling, and delivered his letters. The said Lady sat in her chair of estate,
having about her the Duke of Cleues, and the bishop of Liege, with diverse other
noble men, and a great number of her subjects. When she had read her letter,
she commanded him to declare his message. But he answered that he had nothing
to say but to her self alone. Whereupon it was told him, that this was not the
manner of their country, especially to commune in secret with this young Lady
being unmarried. But he still continued his former answer, that he had nothing
to say but to her self apart. Whereupon they threatened to make him say
somewhat else: which words put him in fear. And I think verily, that when he
came to deliver his letter, he had not bethought him what to say: for this was
not his principal charge, as you have heard. Thus Master Oliver departed for
this time without further speech. Some of the Council began to scorn him, as
well because of his base estate, as of his foolish speech and behavior, but
especially they of Gaunt (in a little village near whereunto he was borne)
scoffed and derided him, so far forth that suddenly he fled thence, being
advertised if he staide there any longer, that he should be thrown into the
river; which I think would have proved true. The said Master Oliver named
himself Earl of Melun, a little town near to Paris whereof he was captain.
From Gaunt he fled to Tournay, a town in that country subject to neither
Prince, but maruellously affectioned to the King: for it is his after a sort,
and paieth him yearly six thousand franks; but in all other respects lives
in liberty, and receives all sorts of men: it is a goodly town and a strong,
as all the inhabitants thereabout can testify. The churchmen and citizens have
al their possessions and revenues in Henault and Flaunders, in both the which
countries it is situate. Wherefore they used always during the long wars
between King Charles the seventh and Philip Duke of Burgundy, to pay yearly
unto the said Duke ten thousand franks; the which sum I have seen them pay
also to Duke Charles: but at the time that Master Oliver came thither, they
were quit of all paiments, and lived in great wealth and quietness. Although
Master Oliuers charge above mentioned were too weighty for him to deal in,
yet was not he so much to be blamed, as they that committed it to him: for
notwithstanding that his enterprise had such success, as it was ever like to
have; yet showed he himself wise in that he afterward did. For perceiving the
said town of Tournay to be situate upon the frontiers of both the countries
above named, and very commodious to endammage them both, if he could put the
Kings forces that lay in those parts into it; and knowing further, that the
towns men would never consent thereunto, because they never took part with
either Prince, but showed themselves friends indifferently to both: he sent
word secretly to Monseur de Mouy (whose son was bailife of the town, but not
resident there) that he should bring his company which he had within S.
Quintins, and certain other bands that lay in those quarters, to the town of
Tournay; who at the hour appointed came to the gate, where he found Master
Oliver accompanied with thirty or forty persons, who partly by favor, and
partly by force caused the gate to be opened, and received the Kings men;
wherewith the people of the town were well enough contented, but not the
governors: of whom Master Oliver sent seven or eight to Paris, whence they
departed not during the Kings life. After these men of arms, entered also
diverse other soldiers, who did great harm afterward in the two countries above
named: for they spoiled and burned many goodly villages and fair farms, more
to the damage of the inhabitants of Tournay, than of any other for the reasons
above alleged. To be short, so long they spoiled that the Flemmings arose, and
took out of prison the Duke of Guelderland (whom Duke Charles had held
prisoner) and made him their captain: and in this estate came before the town
of Tournay, where they lay not long, but fled in great disorder; and lost many
of their men, and among the rest the Duke of Gueldres, who had put himself
behind to maintain the skirmish (being evil followed) was there slain, as
afterward you shall hear more at large. Wherefore this honor and good success
that happened to the King, and the great loss his enemies received, proceeded
of the said Master Oliuers wisdom and judgment: so that peradventure a wiser
man, and a greater personage than he, might have failed to atchieue the like
enterprise. I have spoken enough of the great charge this sage Prince committed
to this mean person, unfit to manage so weighty a cause; only adding, that
it seemed that God had troubled the Kings wits in this behalf. For, as I said
before, if he had not thought this enterprise far easier than indeed it was;
but had appeased his wrath, and laid down his greedy desire of revenge upon
this house of Burgundy, undoubtedly he had held at this day all those Seniories
under his subjection.

The Notes.
1 The King claimed this Lady as his ward, because diverse of her dominions,
namely Flaunders, Artois, etc. were held of the crown of France: besides
that, he was her godfather, which was the cause why he commanded this Oliver
to move this request.

Of the ambassadors the Lady of Burgundy daughter to the late Duke Charles sent
to the King, and how by means of Monseur de Cords the city of Arras, the
towns of Hedin and Bollein, and the town of Arras itself, were yielded to
the King. Chap. 15.
YOu have heard how Master William Bische yielded Peronne to the King. The
said Bische was a man of base parentage, borne at Molins-Engibers in Niuernois;
but enriched and greatly advanced by Duke Charles of Burgundy, who made him
captain of Peronne, because his house called Clery (being a strong and goodly
castle that the said Bische had purchased) was near unto it. But to proceed,
after the King had made his entry into the town, certain ambassadors came to
him from the Lady of Burgundy, being all the greatest and noblest personages
that were able to do her any service: which was unadvisedly done to send so
many together; but such was their desolation and fear, that they wist not well
what to say or do. The above named ambassadors were these; the Chauncellor of
Burgundy called Master William Hugonet, a notable wise man, who had been in
great credit with Duke Charles, and was highly adaunced by him. The Lord of
Himbercourt (so often before mentioned in this history) was there also, (who
was as wise a gentleman, and as able to manage a weighty cause as ever I knew
any) together with the Lord of la Vere, a great Lord in Zeland, and the Lord of
Grutuse, and diverse others as well noble men as church men, and burgesses of
good towns. The King before he gave them audience, traveled both generally
with them all, and apart with every one of them to draw them to his service.
They all gave him humble and lowly words, as men in great fear.
Notwithstanding, those that had their possessions far from his dominions in
such countries as they thought to be out of his reach, would not bind
themselves to him in any respect, unless the marriage between his son the
Daulphin and the said Lady their Mistres took effect. But the Chauncellor and
the Lord of Himbercourt, who had lived long in great authority, wherein they
still desired to continue; and had their lands lying near to the Kings
dominions; the one in the Duchy of Burgundy, the other in Picardy near to
Amiens: gave ear to his offers, and promised both to serve him in furthering
this marriage, and also wholly to become his the marriage being accomplished:
which course he liked not (though it were simply the best) but was displeased
with them, for that they would not then absolutely enter into his service.
Notwithstanding he showed them no countenance of displeasure because he would
use their help as he might. Moreover, the King having now good intelligence
with Monseur de Cords captain and governor of Arras, by his counsel and
advise required these ambassadors to cause the said de Cords to receive his
men into the city of Arras 1: for at that time there were walls and trenches
between the town and the city, but the town was then fortified against the
city 2; and now contrariwise the city is fortified against the town. After
diverse persuasions used to the said ambassadors, that this should be the best
and readiest way to obtain peace in showing such obedience to the King, they
agreed to his demand, especially the Chauncellor and Himbercourt, and sent a
letter of discharge to the said de Cords, wherein they advertised him of their
consent to the delivery of the city of Arras. Into the which so soon as the
King was entered, he raised bulworks of earth against the gates of the town,
and in diverse other places near to the town. Further, because of this
discharge, Monseur de Cords and the men of war that were with him, departed
out of the town 3, and went whither them listed, and served where them best
liked. And as touching the said de Cords, he now accounting himself
discharged of his Mistres service, by the ambassadors letters above mentioned;
determined to do homage to the King, and to enter into his service; both
because his house, name, and arms were on this side the river of Sum (for he
was called Master Philip of Creuecoeur, second brother to the Lord of
Creuecoeur:) and also because the territories so often above mentioned, which
the house of Burgundy had possessed upon the said river of Sum, during the
lives of Duke Philip and Duke Charles, returned now without all controversy to
the crown. For by the conditions of the treaty of Arras, they were given to
Duke Philip, and his heirs males only. Wherefore seeing Duke Charles left no
issue but his daughter, the said Master Philip of Creuecoeur became without all
doubt the Kings subject: so that he could commit no fault by entering into the
Kings service, and restoring to him that which he held of him, unless he had
done homage anew to the Lady of Burgundy. Notwithstanding men have reported,
and will report diversely of him for this fact: wherefore I leave the matter to
other men's judgments. True it is that he had been brought up, enriched, and
advanced to great honor by Duke Charles, and that his mother for a certain
space was gouernesse of the Lady of Burgundy in her childhood: and further,
when the Duke of Burgundy died, he was governor of Picardie, Seneschall of
Ponthieu, Captain of Contray, governor of Peronne, Montdidier and Roye, and
Captain of Bolloin and Hedin. All the which offices he holds yet at this
present of the King; in such manner and form, as after the Dukes death the King
our Master confirmed them unto him.

After the King had fortified the city of Arras (as you have heard) he
departed thence to besiege Hedin, leading thither with him the said de Cords,
who had been captain of the place not past three days before, and his men
were yet within it, and made show as though they would defend it for the Lady
of Burgundy, saying; that they had sworn to be true unto her: but after the
artillery had beaten it two or three days they fell to parliament with the
said de Cords their late captain, and yielded the town to the King. But this
was indeed a compact matter between the King and them. From thence the King
went before Bolloin, where the like was also done: but they held, as I
remember, a day longer than the others. This was a very dangerous enterprise if
there had been soldiers in the country; and that the King knew well enough, as
he afterward told me: for diverse in Bolloin, perceiving this to be a mere
collusion between the soldiers and him, traveled to put men into the town, if
they could have levied them in time, and to have defended it in good earnest.
During the space of five or six days that the King lay before Bolloin, they
of Arras perceiving how they had been abused, and considering in what danger
they stood, being environed on every side with a great number of soldiers, and
great force of artillery: traveled to leuy men to put into their town, and
write thereabout to their neighbors of Lisle and Douay. At the said town of
Douay was Monseur de Vergy, and diverse others whose names I remember not, with
a few horsemen escaped out of the battle of Nancy. These determined to enter
the town of Arras, and levied all the force they could, being to the number of
two or three hundred horse good and bad, and five or six hundred footmen. But
they of Douay (whose pecockes feathers were not yet all pulled) constrained
them spite of their teeths to depart the town at noone day, which was great
folly, and so came of it. For the country beyond Arras is as plain as a man's
hand, and between Douay and Arras are about sieve leagues. If they had tarried
till night (as they would if they might have been suffered) they had sure
accomplished their enterprise. But when they were upon the way, they whom the
King left in the city of Arras, namely Monseur de Lude, John de Fou, and the
Marshall of Loheacs company being advertised of their coming, determined with
all speed to issue forth and encounter them, and to put all in hazard rather
then to suffer them to enter the town: for they well perceived that if they
entered the town, the city could not be defended. Their enterprise was very
dangerous, yet they executed it valiantly, and put to flight this band issued
out of Douay; the which also they so speedily pursued, that they were all in a
manner either slain or taken, and amongst the prisoners was Monseur de Vergy
himself. The next day the King arrived there in person, reioicing much because
of this discomfiture, and caused all the prisoners to be brought before him,
and of the footmen commanded a great number to be slain, to put thereby those
few men of war yet remaining in those quarters, into the greater fear.
Moreover, Monseur de Vergy he kept long in prison, because he would by no
means be brought to do him homage; notwithstanding that he lay in close prison
and in irons: But in the end having been prisoner a year and more, by his
mothers persuasion he yielded to the Kings pleasure; wherein he did wisely. For
the King restored him to all his lands, and al those he was in suit for. He
gave him farther ten thousand franks of yearly revenues, and diverse other
goodly offices. They which escaped out of this discomfiture, being very few
in number entered the town, before the which the King brought his artillery
and laid his battery. The artillery was goodly and great, and the battery
terrible; but the town wall and the ditch nothing strong: wherefore they
within were in great fear, the rather because the town was utterly unfurnished
of soldiers. Furher, Monseur de Cords had intelligence within it; and to say
the truth, the city being in the Kings hands the town could not be defended:
wherefore they fell to parliament and yielded it by composition, which
notwithstanding was evil observed; whereof Monseur de Lude was partly to blame.
For diverse burgesses and honest men were slain in the presence of him and
Master William de Cerisay, who maruellously enriched themselves there: for the
said de Lude told me that he got during the time of his being there twenty
thousand crowns, and two timbers of Marterns. Moreover, they of the town lent
the King 60000. crowns, which sum was much too great for their ability; but
I think it was repaied them, for they of Cambray lent 40000. which I am sure
were restored, as I think were these also.

The Notes.
1 This request the King made as Tutor and Godfather to the young Lady, in
which respect also the said ambassadors did as he required.

2 Arras was cut in two, to wit into the town and the city; the town under
the Dukes of Burgundy was fortified and the dravve bridge was drawn into the
town: but the King beat down the fortification of the town, and fortified
the city, and altered also the draw bridge, and drew it up into the ccitie,
whereas before it was drawn up into the town.

3 If the King had demanded the town of Arras, the ambassadors would never
have granted it, because it was the whole strength of the country: but by
obtaining the city (at that time not greatly accounted of because it was
utterly unfortified,) he got the said de Cords discharge, who soon after
procured him both the town of Arras, and the greatest part of the country of
Artois.

4 For they were vvilling to yield it, but because they would depart like
soldiers, and without suspicion of treason they desired to have the cannon
brought before it.

How the citizens of Gaunt having usurped authority over their Princess after
her fathers death, came in embassage to the King, as from the three estates of
their country. Chap. 16.
THe same time the siege lay before Arras, the Lady of Burgundy was at Gaunt
in the hands of her mutinous subjects greatly to her loss; but to the Kings
profit: for always ones loss is an others gain. These citizens of Gaunt so
soon as they understood of Duke Charles his death, thinking themselves thereby
clearly delivered out of captivity: apprehended their Senators being to the
number of six and twenty, and put them all or the greatest part to death;
pretending that they did it because the said Senators the day before had
commanded one to be beheaded, though not without desert, yet without authority
(as they said,) their commission being determined with the Dukes death, by whom
they were chosen into that office. They slew also diverse honest men of the
town that had been the Dukes friends; amongst whom were some, that when I
served him dissuaded him in my presence from destroying a great part of the
town of Gaunt, which he was fully resolved to have done. Further, they
constrained their Princes to confirm al their ancient privileges, both those
they lost in the time of Duke Philip by the treaty of Gauures, and those also
that Duke Charles took from them. The said privileges served them only for
firebrands of rebellion against their Princes, whom above all things they
desire to see weak and feeble. Moreover during their Princes minority, and
before they begin to govern, they are marvelous tender over them; but when
they are come to the government they cannot away with them, as appears by
this Lady whom they loved dearly and much tendered before her coming to the
state. Further, you shall understand that if after the Dukes death these men of
Gaunt had raised no troubles, but had sought to defend the country: they might
easily have put men into Arras, and peradventure into Peronne; but they minded
only these domestical broiles. Notwithstanding while the King lay before the
town of Arras, certain ambassadors came to him from the three estates of the
said Ladies countries. For at Gaunt were certain deputies for the three
estates, but they of the town ordered all at their pleasure, because they held
their Princess in their hands. The King gave these ambassadors audience, who
among other things, said: that they made no ouerture of peace; but with consent
of their Princess; who was determined in all matters to follow the advice and
counsel of the three estates of her country. Further, they required the King
to end his war in Burgundy and Artois, and to appoint a day when they might
meet to treat friendly together of peace; and in the mean time that he would
cause a surcease of arms. The King had now in a manner obtained all he desired,
and hoped well of the rest. For he was certainly informed, that most of the men
of war in the country were dead and slain, and knew well that a great many
others had forsaken the said Ladies service, especially Monseur de Cords, of
whom he made great reckoning, and not without cause; for he could not have
taken by force in long time, that which by his intelligence he obtained in few
days, as before you have heard: wherefore he made small account of these
ambassadors demands. Further, he perceived these men of Gaunt to be such
seditious persons, and so inclined to trouble the state of their country, that
his enemies by means thereof should not be able to advise, nor give order how
to resist him. For of those that were wise, and had been in credit with their
former Princes, none were called to the debating of any matter of state, but
persecuted, and in danger of death: especially the Burgundians whom they hated
extremely, because of their great authority in times past. Moreover, the King
(who saw further into these affairs than any man in his realm) knew well
what affection the citizens of Gaunt had ever borne to their Princes, and how
much they desired to see them affeebled; so that they in their country felt no
smart thereof. Wherefore he thought it best to nourish their domestical
contentions, and to set them further by the ears together; which was soon
done: for these whom he had to do with, were but beasts; most part of them
towns men unacquainted with those subtle practices, wherein he had been
trained up, and could use for his purpose, better than any man living.

The King laid hold upon these words of the ambassadors, that their Princess
would do nothing without the consent and advise of the three estates of their
country, and answered that they were evil informed of her pleasure, and of
certain particular men about her: for he knew very perfectly, that she meant
to govern all her affairs by the advice of certain particular persons, who
desired nothing less than peace: and as touching them and their actions, he
was well assured they should be disaduowed. Whereunto the ambassadors (being
not a little moved, as men unacquainted with great affairs) made a hot
answer, that they were well assured of that they said, and would show their
instructions, if need so required. Whereunto answer was made, that they should
see a letter, if it so pleased the King, written by parties worthy of credit,
wherein the King was advertised, that the said Lady would govern her affairs
by four persons only. Whereunto the others replied, that they were sure of
the contrary. Then the King commanded a letter to be brought forth, which the
Chauncellor of Burgundy, and the Lord of Himbercourt delivered him at their
last being with him at Peronne. The said letter was written partly with the
young Ladies own hand; partly by the Dowager of Burgundy Duke Charles his
widow, and sister to King Edward of England; and partly by the Lord of
Rauastain brother to the Duke of Cleues, and the said young Ladies nearest
kinsman: so that it was written with three several hands, but signed with the
name of the young Lady alone; for the other twain set to their hands only to
give it the greater credit. The contents of the letter were, to desire the King
to give credit to those things, whereof the Chauncellor and Himbercourt should
advertise him. And further, it was therein signified unto him, that she was
resolved to govern all her affairs by four persons; namely, the Dowager her
mother in law, the Lord of Rauastain, and the above named Chauncellor and
Himbercourt, by whom only and none others, she humbly besought him to
negotiate with her; because upon them she would repose the whole government of
her affairs.

When these citizens of Gaunt, and the other ambassadors had seen this letter,
it heated them thoroughly; and I warrant you those that negotiated with them,
failed not to blow the fire. In the end the letter was delivered them, and no
other dispatch of importance had they, neither passed they greatly of any
other: for they thought only upon their domestical divisions, and how to make
a new world, never looking further into this business; notwithstanding that the
loss of Arras ought to have grieved them much more than this letter: but they
were towns men (as I said before) unacquainted with these affairs. They
returned straight to Gaunt where they found their Princess accompanied with
the Duke of Cleues, her nearest kinsman, and of her blood by his mother 1: he
was an ancient man, brought up continually in this house of Burgundy, where he
received a yearly pension of six thousand guildons; wherefore besides that he
was their kinsman, he resorted thither ofttimes as a pensioner to do his duty.
The Bishop of Liege and diverse noble men were there also, partly to wait upon
this young Lady, and partly for their own particular affairs. For the said
Bishop entertained a suit there to discharge his country of a payment of
thirty thousand guildons or thereabout, which they gave yearly to Duke Charles
by the treaty they made with him, when the wars above mentioned ended. All the
which wars began for the said Bishops quarrel, so that there was no cause why
he should move this suit; but rather seek to keep them still in poverty;
for he received no benefit there more than of his spiritual jurisdiction and
of his demaines, (which also were but small 2 in respect of the wealth of his
country, and the greatness of his dioces.) The said Bishop (brother to the
Dukes of Bourbon John, and Peter now living) being a man wholly given to
pleasures and good cheer, and little knowing what was profitable or
unprofitable for himself: received into his service Master William de la
March 3, a goodly valiant knight, but cruel and of naughty conditions; who
had been enemy of long time both to the said Bishop and also to the house of
Burgundy for the Liegeois cause. To this de la March the Lady of Burgundy
gave fifteen thousand guildons, partly in favor of the Bishop, and partly to
have him her friend: but he soon after revolted both from her and from the
said Bishop his Master, and attempted by force through the Kings favor to make
his own son Bishop. Afterward also he discomfited the said Bishop in
battle, slew him with his own hands, and threw him into the river, where his
dead corpse floted up and down three days. But the Duke of Cleues was come
thither in hope to make a marriage between his eldest son and the said Lady,
which seemed to him a very fit match for diverse respects; and sure I think it
had taken effect if his sons conditions had liked the young Lady and his
servants: for he was descended of this house of Burgundy, and held his Duchy
of it, and had been brought up in it; but peradventure it did him harm that
his behauior was so well known there.

The Notes.
1 This Duke of Cleues was called John, whose father Adolph had married Marie
sister to Duke Philip of Burgundy. Meyer lib. 17. page 257. but Annal.
Burgund. say that Adolph was son to one of Duke Philips sisters, but
corruptly, as the pedigree in the end of this work will declare.

2 The Bishop of Liegeois reuenevves are nine thousand pound starling.
Guicchiar.

3 This de la March was named Aremberg, how he died after this murder read
Berlandus, fol. 77.

How they of Gaunt after their ambassadors return, put to death the
Chauncellor Hugonet, and the Lord of Himbercourt against their Princesses will,
and how they and other Flemmings were discomfited before Tournay, and their
general the Duke of Gueldres slain. Chap. 17.
NOw to proceed in the history. After these ambassadors were returned to
Gaunt, the council was assembled, and the Princess sat in her chair of
estate, accompanied with all her noble men, to give them audience. Then the
ambassadors made rehearsal of the commission she gave them, touching
principally that point that served for their purpose, and saying that when they
advertised the King, that she was determined to follow in all points the advice and counsel of the three estates of her country: he forthwith
answered that he was sure of the contrary, and because they auowed their
saying, offered to show the said Ladies letters in that behalf. The Princess
being therewith moved, suddenly answered in the presence of them all that it
was not so, assuring hirselfe that the King had not showed her letter. Then he
that spoke being Recorder of Gaunt or Brucels, drew the letter out of his
bosom before the whole assembly and delivered it her. Wherein he showed
himself a lewd fellow and an uncivil in dishonoring openly after such a sort
this young Lady, who ought not so rudely to have been dealt with: for though
she had committed an error; yet was it not publicly to be reformed. It is no
marvel if she were greatly ashamed thereof; for she had protested the
contrary to the whole world. The Dowager of Burgundy, the Lord of Rauastain,
the Chauncellor, and the Lord of Himbercourt were all four there present also.

The Duke of Cleues and diverse others who had been put in hope of this young
Ladies marriage, stormed maruellously at this letter, and then began their
factions to break forth. The said Duke was ever persuaded heretofore that
Hymbercourt would further his suit for his son: but now perceiving by this
letter his hope to be frustrate, he became his mortal foe 1. The Bishop of
Liege, and his minion Master William de la March who was there with him,
loved him not for the things done at Liege, whereof the said Hymbercourt had
been the chief instrument. The Earl of Saint Paul son to the Constable of
France, hated both him and the Chancellor; because they two delivered his
father at Peronne to the Kings servants, as before you have heard at large.
They of Gaunt also hated them both, not for any offense made, but because of
the great authority they had borne: whereof undoubtedly they were as worthy
as any man that lived in their time, either here or there; for they were ever
true and faithful servants to their Master.

To be short, the same day at night that this letter was showed, the above
named Chancellor and Hymbercourt through the furtherance as I am persuaded of
their enemies above named, were apprehended by the citizens of Gaunt, which
danger notwithstanding that they were forewarned of by their friends; yet had
they not power to avoid, as it has often happened to diverse others. With them
was also apprehended M. William of Clugny then Bishop of Therouenne, and since
of Poictiers; and all three imprisoned in one place. They of Gaunt proceeded
against them by color of process (contrary to their accustomed manner in
their revenge) and appointed certain of their Senate to hear their cause:
with whom they joined in commission one of this house of La March, deadly
enemy to the said Himbercourt. First they demanded of them, why they caused
Monseur de Cords to deliver the city of Arras to the King, but thereupon they
stood not long; notwithstanding that they had nothing else justly to charge
them with. But this was not it that grieved them: for neither cared they to see
their Prince affeebled by the loss of such a town; neither had they the wit
to consider what great damage might ensue thereof to themselves in tract of
time. Wherefore they rested chiefly upon two points 2; the first, they charged
them that they had received bribes of the town of Gaunt, namely for a suit in
law, which of late the said town had obtained by their sentence pronounced by
the said Chauncellor, against a particular man whom they had in suit. But of
all this matter of briberie, they acquitted themselves very honorably; and as
concerning that particular point where they of Gaunt charged them, that they
had sold justice, and taken money of them to pronounce sentence on their
behalf: they answered, that the town of Gaunt obtained their suit, because
their cause was good; and as touching the money they took, they never demanded
it, nor caused it to be demanded, but received it being offered. The second
point was, that during the time they were with the late Duke Charles their
Master, and also being his lieutenants in his absence, they had done diverse
things against the privileges and state of their town, and that whosoever does
against the privileges of Gaunt, ought to die. But this point touched them no
whit: for they were neither their subjects nor citizens, neither able to
infringe their privileges; and if the Duke or his father took any of their
privileges from them, they did it by the treaty made between them, after
their long wars and divisions: but the others that were left them (being more
than was requisite for their profit) were never broken, but kept and observed.
Well, notwithstanding the answers these two notable men made to these two
points (for of the principal matter first objected against them, no word was
spoken) yet the Senate of the town condemned them to die as they stood at the
bar, because (as they said) they had broken their privileges, and received
bribes after judgment given upon the matter in law above mentioned. These two
worthy personages hearing this cruel sentence, were not a little astonished,
and no marvel: for they saw no way how to escape, being in their enemies
hands: notwithstanding they appealed to the King and his court of Parliament,
trusting by this means to delay their death, to the end their friends in the
mean time might devise some way to save them. Before their arrainment, they
racked them extremely against all order of law. Their process endured but six
days, and (notwithstanding their appeal) after sentence pronounced, they gave
them but three hours respite to confess them, and bethink them of their
souls health. Which time expired, they led them into their market place, and
set them upon a scaffold. The Lady of Burgundy (afterward Duchess of
Austrich) being advertised of their condemnation, went to the townehouse to
make request and supplication for their lives: but perceiving that she could do
no good there, she went to the market place, where all the people were
assembled together in arms, and there saw the two noble men above named,
standing upon the scaffold. The said Lady was in her mourning apparel, having
nothing on her head but a kerchiefe, which was an humble and simple attire) and
ought of right to have moved them to pity. There she desired the people with
weeping eyes, and her hair loose about her shoulders, to have pity upon these
her two servants, and to restore them unto her. A great part of the people were
willing that her pleasure should be done, and that they should not die; but
others would in no wise give ear unto her: whereupon they bent their pikes the
one against the other. But those that desired their death were the stronger,
and cried to them that stood upon the scaffold to dispatch them; immediately
whereupon both their heads were stricken off: and in this estate returned this
poor Lady to her court sorrowful and comfortless; for these two were the
principal persons, in whom she had reposed her whole confidence. After they of
Gaunt had done this exploit, they removed from about the said Lady, the Lord
of Rauastain, and the Dowager Duke Charles widow her mother in law, because
they had also written part of the letter above mentioned, which Himbercourt and
the Chauncellor delivered to the King, and they of Gaunt redeliuered to their
Princess after their return, as before you have heard. Further, they usurped
all power and authority over this poor young Lady: for so might she now well
be called, both because of the great damage she had already received by the
loss of so many notable towns, irrecouerable by force, considering his power
in whose hands they were, although by favor, friendship, or composition some
hope yet remained; and also because she was in the hands of the ancient enemies
and persecutors of her house, which was a great misfortune to her.
Notwithstanding these citizens of Gaunt in all their public actions have ever
showed more gross folly than cunning, and no marvel: for they that carry
credit and authority among them, are for the most part, wealthy men of
occupation, unacquainted with weighty affairs, and little understanding what
belongs to the government of a state. Their cunning consists but in two
points; the one, that they study by all means possible how to weaken and
impouerish their Prince: the other, that when they have made a fault, and find
the party offended too strong for them, they crave pardon with greater
humility, and buie peace with larger gifts than any people in the world; yea
and know what instruments to work by, and what persons to labor for obtaining
of peace, better than any town that ever I knew.

After they of Gaunt had taken by force the government of their Princess, put
the two above mentioned to death, and removed from about her those that
misliked them; they began every where to place and displace officers at their
pleasure, and to banish and spoil all those that had best served this house of
Burgundy, not regarding their good or evil desert: but above all other men
they hated the Burgundians, especially so far forth that they banished them
all, and traveled to make them the Kings servants and subjects as much as the
King himself did, who solicited them thereunto by fair words, wise
persuasions, large gifts and promises, and sought also to constrain them by
great force which he had in their country. Moreover these men of Gaunt meaning
to begin their government with some case of novelty, took out of prison (as
already is mentioned) the Duke of Gueldres, who of long time by Duke Charles
his commandment had been held prisoner for the causes above rehearsed, and him
they made general of an army which they among themselves, namely the towns of
Bruges, Gaunt, and Ypre, levied and sent to Tournay to set fire on the
subburbes thereof, which was little for their Princess profit. For 200.
soldiers sent in time to Arras or ten thousand franks to have entertained men
to put into it, when the siege came before it; would have done both her and
them much more service than ten such armies as this. For this army could do no
good but fire a few houses in a place, whereof the King made small account:
for he levied neither taskes nor subsidies there, but their wit was not able to
reach thus far. After the Duke of Gueldres was come before Tournay with this
army being to the number of twelve or fifteen thousand men, very well paid
by the towns abouementioned, he set fire on the suburbs. But within the town
were three or four hundred men of arms which sallied out and charged his men
on the back as they retired, and incontinent put them to flight. But the D.
himself being a valiant Prince, turned against his enemies meaning to
maintain the skirmish, to the end his men might have leisure to retire: but
being evil followed he was overthrown and slain, and a good number also of
this people; yet was the Kings force that did this exploit very small. The
Flemmings army retired with this loss, for there was but one band of them
defeated. The Lady of Burgundy (as I have heard) and her friends reioised much
at this news; for the brute ran for a certainty that they of Gaunt were
determined to compel her by force to marry this Duke of Gueldres, which
willingly she would never have done for diverse reasons above rehearsed.

The Notes.
1 With the letter the King had also uttered the message, that the Chauncellor
and Him^^rcourt brought, which was to treat of a marriage between the
Daulphin and this Lady, which also they offered the King to further; and this
was the cause why the Duke of Cleues became Himbercourts enemy.

2 The causes of the Chauncellors and Himbercourts death, read in Berlandus
fol. 69.

A discourse upon this point that wars and divisions are permitted of God for
the chastisment of Princes and evil people, with diverse good reasons and
examples for the instruction of Princes, which happened in the authors time.
Chap. 18.
I Cannot imagine for what cause God has so long preserved this town of
Gaunt, the fountain of so many mischiefs, and of so small importance for the
benefit of the country where it is situate. For it yields no commodity to
the common wealth, much less to the Prince: neither is it comparable to
Bruges, which is a place where there is greater traffic of merchandise and
resort of strangers in my opinion, than in any town in Europe; so that the
destruction thereof should be an irrecouerable loss. But it seems that God
has created nothing in this world neither man nor beast, without an enemy to
hold it in fear and humility; and for that purpose serves this town of
Gaunt very well 1. For there is no country in Christendom more inclined to
all wanton pleasures, pomps and delicacies than this country of Flaunders,
notwithstanding they are good Christians there, and serve and honor God well.
But it is not this nation only, to whom God has given as it were a continual
prick, to put them in mind of their duty: For to France he has given the
English men for enemies; to the English men the Scots; to the realm of Spain
Portugale, I will not say Granado: for they are enemies of the faith;
notwithstanding hitherto the said country of Granado has much troubled and
endammaged the realm of Castile. Against the Princes of Italy, the greatest
part of the which hold their lands by no title, unless it be given them in
heaven (whereof we can but divine) and who rule cruelly and violently over
their subjects by extreme exactions and leuies of money: God has raised up the
free states of the said country, namely Venice, Florence, Genua, and sometime
Bononia, Senes, Pisa, Luques, and others, which in diverse points are contrary
to the Princes, and the Princes to them, each of them having an eye upon other,
that none grow too great. But to speak more particularly of the state of
Italy; against the house of Arragon God has raised the house of Aniou;
against the Sforces (which usurp the place of the Vicounts in the Duchy of
Milan) the house of Orleans; against the Venetians, the Princes of Italy, as
before I have said, and besides them the Florentines; against the Florentines
their neighbors of Senes, Pisa, and the Genuois; and against the said Genuois
their own evil government, and want of faith each to other, which is so
universally known, that every man can tell thereof: for their factions are in
league the one against the other, as appears by the Fourgouze 2, Adorni,
d'Orie, and others. Now to speak of Almaine; you have always the house of
Austriche and Bauiere at variance, and particularly them of Bauiere divided
among themselves. In like manner the house of Austriche has particularly
opposite to it the Swissers; the beginning of which their variance arose but
about a little village called Swisse 3, unable to arm six hundred men,
whereof the other Swissers bear their name; who are now so increased, that two
of the Duke of Austriches best towns, namely Zurich and Fribourg be of their
cantons. Moreover, they have obtained great victories, and slain of the Dukes
of Austrich in the field 4. Diverse other quarrels also there are in Almaine, as
the Duke of Cleues against the Duke of Gueldres; the Dukes of Gueldres against
the Dukes of Iulliers: the Easterlings who inhabit so far northward, against
the Kings of Denmark. And to speak generally of Almaine, there are so many
strong places there, so many men inclined to mischief, to spoil, to rob, and
that use force and violence one against another upon small occasions, that it
is wonder to see: for a man that is able to maintain but himself and his
servant, will proclaim war against a great city or a Duke, that under color
thereof he may the better rob and spoil: for he will have some small castle
situate upon a rock to retire into, where he entertaineth twenty or thirty
horsemen, which run down to rob and spoil the country at his commandment.
These men are very seldom punished by the Princes of Almaine, because they use
their help when they need their service: but the towns, if they take any of
them, punish them cruelly, and often besiege and destroy their castles.
Further, the said towns have soldiers always in pay for their defense.
Wherefore it seems that these Princes and towns of Almaine are preserved,
the one to force the other to that is right and good. And it is necessary that
such divisions should be not only there, but through the whole world. I have
hitherto spoken but of Europe; for I am not well informed of Asia and Affrike:
yet we hear that they are divided and make war one upon another as we do, yea
after a much beastlier sort. For I know in this part of Afrike bordering upon
us, diverse places where they sell one another to the Christians, as also well
appears by the Portugales, who have bought and daily do buie of them many
slaves. But I doubt how well we may vpbraid this to the Sarracens, since in some
part of Christendom they do the like: notwithstanding those countries are
either under the Turks dominion, or next neighbors to him; as for example some
part of Greece.

It seems then that such divisions are requisite through the whole world, and
that these pricks and stings before spoken of which God has given every
estate, and in a manner every particular person, are necessary. And surely for
mine own opinion (speaking as a man unlearned, and one that will maintain no
opinion not to be maintained) I think they are necessary indeed, especially
because of the beastlines of some Princes, and the wickedness of othersome, who
having wit and experience sufficient, do notwithstanding abuse it. For a Prince
or any other man of what estate or condition soever he be, having power and
authority where he dwells over the rest, if he be learned and have seen and
read much, is thereby either much amended or empaired, for much learning makes
the evil worse, and bettereth the good 5: Notwithstanding, it is to be
presumed that learning rather amendeth a man than empaireth him: for if men be
but ashamed of themselves when they know they do evil, it suffices either to
keep them altogether from doing evil 6, or at the least from doing so much
evil as otherwise they would. For although they be not good indeed, yet shame
will cause the^ to make a show of goodness: whereof I have seen diverse examples of
great personages, whom learning oftentimes has withdrawn from doing evil,
joined with the fear of Gods punishments, whereof they have more understanding
than ignorant men which never saw nor read any thing. Wherefore those Princes
that know not themselves, but lack wit, either because they have been evil
brought up, or because nature has graffed folly in them, can never understand
how far the power and authority extends that God has given them over their
subjects. For they never read it themselves, neither are informed by them that
know it; nay few that understand it are admitted to their presence; and if some
one be, yet dare he not instruct them in it for fear of displeasure; or if
happily at any time he put them in mind thereof no man will abide him, at the
least he shall be accounted but a fool, paraduenture also it may be taken in
evil part, and so turn him to displeasure. But to proceed, it is manifest
that neither natural reason, neither knowledge, neither fear of God, neither
love toward our neighbor, is sufficient to keep us from using violence
against others, from withholding other men's goods, nor from rauishing by all
means possible that which appartaineth to others. For if great Princes
withhold towns and castles from their kinsfolks or neighbors, none of these
reasons can move them to restore them: and after they have given forth some
color or forged some pretense to withhold them, all their subjects commend
their proceedings, at the least such as are near about them, and hunt after
their favor. Of mean persons that be at variance I speak not, for they have a
superior who sometimes does justice to the parties, at the least he that has a
good cause, and follows it earnestly, and defends it stoutly, and spends
frankly, shall in process of time have right, unless the Court, that is to
say, the Princes authority under whom he lives, be against him. Wherefore it
appears most manifestly, that God is constrained and forced as it were of
necessity to show many examples among us, and to beat us with many rods,
because of our negligence, or rather wickedness: but in Princes especially
negligence and ignorance is very dangerous, and much to be lamented, because
the good or evil government of their Seniories depends wholly upon them. For
if a Prince being mighty and having a number of soldiers in ordinary, by whose
means he leuieth great sums of money at his pleasure, as well to pay them, as
to spend in all kind of wantonness not necessary, will diminish none of this
foolish and excessive expenses; further if all men seek to flatter him, and no
man dare show him what is good, either for fear of displeasure, or because he
knows it will not prevail: who can redress this inconvenience but God
alone? True it is, that God talks not to men now as in times past, neither
are there Prophets now a days by whose mouth he speaks: but his word is
dispersed through the whole world, and well enough known to all those that
will understand and know it; so that no man can excuse himself by ignorance,
at the least none that have had space and time to live and are endued with
natural wit. How shall those Princes then escape that govern their Seniories
after such sort, that by force they leuy what they list, and by tyranny
maintain their authority, and hold their subjects in so great thraldom, that
the least commandment they give touches life? Some punish under color of
justice, and have lawyers ever at hand ready in all points to execute their
commandments, and to make a deadly sin of a venial. If they have not matter
enough against a man, they find means to delay the hearing of the cause, or
the taking of the depositions to hold the party still in prison, or to undo
him by charges, waiting continually if any man will come to accuse him that is
thus held in prison, and to whom they wish evil. If this way be not colorable
enough, nor speedy enough for their purpose, they devise other readier ways
alleging that it was necessary to do thus and thus for examples sake, and
make the case as heinous as pleases them: with others that hold of them and be
of some power, they go more plainly to work, saying, thou do against thine
allegiance thou owe me, thou disobeiest me, and so proceed by force to take
from him that is his if they can, (if they do not, it is no thank to them)
causing him to live in great trouble and unquietness. Their neighbors that be
strong and mighty they meddle not with; but if any be weak, he can rest no
where for them: for either they say that he has aided their enemies, or they
make their men of arms to live in his countries, or buie quarrels to have
color to assault him, or find some occasion to destroy him by aiding his
neighbor against him, and lending him forces to invade him. Such of their
subjects as have been in authority, and served well their predecessors, they
put out of office because they live too long, and place new men in their
rooms. The Church men they encomber and trouble about their benefices, to the
end they may thereby wring some thing from them to enrich some one of their
darlings, at the suit eftsoons of those that have not deserved it, and at the
request of such men and women as at times can prevail much with them. The
nobility they hold in continual travel and charge under color of their
wilful wars, which they take in hand without the counsel or advise of their
estates, and of such as they ought to make privy thereunto before they attempt
them: for these they be that spend both goods and lives in the wars: wherefore
it is reason they should understand the cause of them before they begun. Their
subjects they poule in such sort that they leave them nothing; for
notwithstanding that they pay them taskes and subsidies above their ability:
yet seek they not to redress the disorder of their men of arms, which live
continually upon their people without paiement, doing besides infinite
mischiefs and injuries as all the world knows. For they are not contented
with such cheer as they find in the husband man's house and is set before
them; but beat also the poor men, and constrain them to go forth to buie
them wine, bread, and victuals: and if the good man have a fair wife or a
daughter, he shall do wisely to keep her out of their sight. Notwithstanding,
seeing these men of arms are duly paid, this inconvenience might easily be
redressed, and order given that their pay should be made at every two months
end at the furthest; so should they not be able to allege any pretense of
their mischievous doings under color that they want pay: for the money is
levied, and at the years end there is not one penie owing them. I speak this
for our realm which is more afflicted and plagued with these men of arms than
any other country that I know. But none can redress this matter but a wise
Prince: other realms bordering upon us have other scourges. Wherefore to
continue this discourse, is there any King or Prince that has power to leuy
one penie upon his subjects besides his demaines, without leave and consent of
those that must pay it, unless it be by tyranny and violence? A man will say
that sometime the Prince can not tarry to assemble his estates, because it would
require too long time. Whereunto I answer, that if he move a war offensive,
there needs no such haste: for he may have leisure enough at his own
pleasure to make preparation. And further, he shall be much stronger and much
more feared of his enemies, when he moves war with the consent of his
subjects than otherwise. Now as touching a war defensive, that cloud is seen
long before the tempest fall, especially when it is foreign war; and in this
case good subjects ought not to complain, nor refuse any thing that is laid
upon them. Notwithstanding such invasion cannot happen so suddenly, but that
the Prince may have leisure at the least to call together certain wise
personages, to whom he may open the causes of the war, using no collusion
therein, neither seeking to maintain a trifling war upon no necessity,
thereby to have some color to leuy money. Money is also necessary in time of
peace to fortify the frontiers for defense of those that dwell upon them,
least they be taken unprovided; but this must be done measurably. In all these
matters the wisdom of a sage King suffices; for if he be a just Prince, he
knows what he may do, and not do, both by Gods law and man's. To be short, in
mine opinion of all Seniories in the world that I know; the realm of England
is the country where the common wealth is best governed, the people least
oppressed, and the fewest buildings and houses destroyed in civil wars, and
always the lot of misfortune falls upon them that be authors of the war.

Our King is the Prince in the whole world that has least cause to allege
that he has privileges to leuy what him lists upon his subjects, considering
that neither he nor any other Prince has power so to do. And those that say he
has, do him no honor, neither make him to be esteemed any whit the mightier
Prince thereby; but cause him to be hated and feared of his neighbors, who for
nothing would live under such a government. But if our King or those that
seek to magnify and extol him should say, I have so faithful and obedient
subjects that they deny me nothing I demand, and I am more feared, better
obeyed, and better served of my subjects than any other Prince living, they
endure patiently whatsoever I lay upon them, and soonest forget all charges
past: This me think (yea I am sure) were greater honor to the King than to
say; I leuy what me lists, and have privileges so to do, which I will stoutly
maintain. King Charles the fifth used no such terms, neither did I ever hear
such language proceed from any King, but from diverse of their servants, who
thought they did their Masters great service in vttring such speeches: but in
mine opinion they misbehaued themselves toward their Prince, and used such
language partly because they would seem to be good servants, and partly
because they knew not what they said. But for a manifest proof of the French
men's loialty and obedience to their Prince, we need allege none other example
than that we our selves have seen of late by experience; when the three
estates were assembled at Tours, after the death of our Master King Lewis the
eleventh, which was in the year of our Lord 1483. A man might then have
thought that this good assembly was dangerous for the Kings estate; yea, and
diverse there were of mean calling, and less honesty, that said then and have
often said since, that it is treason to make mention of assembling the estates,
and a thing tending to the diminishing of the Kings authority: but they
themselves are those that work treason against God, the King, and the common
wealth; neither do any use these speeches but either such as are in authority
without desert and unworthy thereof; or such as are common tale-carriers, and
accustomed to talk of trifling matters; or such as fear great assemblies,
least their doings should there be ripped up and reprehended. At this assembly
I now speak of, all men of what estate soever they were, thought the realm
much weakened and impouerished, because it had paid by the space of 20. years
or more great and excessive subsidies; yea so great, that they surmounted
yearly by the sum almost of three millions of francks all subsidies that
ever were levied in France. For King Charles the seventh levied yearly but
eighteen hundred thousand franks 7: but King Lewis his son levied at his
death seven and forty hundred thousand 8, besides the charges of the
artillery and such like expenses. And sure it was a pitiful thing to behold
the miserable estate of the poor people. But one good property had the King
our Master, that he hoorded up no treasure, he took all and spent all, and
bestowed more upon fortification of towns and places for the defense of his
realm, than all his predecessors joined together. He gave also much to
churches, but in some respects he had done better to have given less: for he
took from the poor to give to them that had no need. But there is no man
perfect in the whole world.

Well to proceed. Notwithstanding that this realm were so impouerished and
oppressed diverse ways: did the people yet after the King our Masters death
raise any sedition against the K. that now is? the nobility and commons took
they arms against their young King? went they about to choose an other? sought
they to diminishe his authority, or to bridle him that he should not use the
authority of a King? I think no, and to say the truth how could they? though
diverse glorious fools said they might. But his subjects did clean contrary;
for they all repaired to him, as well the Princes, as the gentlemen and
Burgesses of good towns: they all acknowledged him for their King, and did him
homage and fealty, and the Princes and nobility presented their requests in
writing, humbly kneeling upon their keenes. Further, they chose among
themselves a counsel of twelve men, and the King being but thirteen years of
age commanded upon report of the said counsel. Moreover at this assembly
certain supplications were made, and bills exhibited in the presence of the
King and his Counsel in great humility for the common wealth of the realm,
referring all to the King and his Counsels pleasure. They granted the King
without any denial all that was demanded, and all that was showed in writing
to be necessary for the maintenance of his estate. The sum the King demanded
was two millions and a half of franks, 9 which was enough and enough again,
yea rather too much than too little without some extraordinary accident.
Further, the said estates humbly required, that at two years end they might
assemble again: saying, that if the King had not money enough, they would give
him more at his pleasure. They promised moreover if he had wars, or that any
enemy should invade him, to adventure their bodies, to spend their goods, and
not to refuse any thing for his service. Are subjects that give thus liberally
to be choked with privileges whereby the Prince may take what him lists?
shall not the King do iustlier both before God and the world to levy after
this sort, rather than by extraordinary will? seeing no Prince, as I have said
before, has authority to command money but by grant; unless he will use
tyranny and incur the danger of excommunication. But a number of Princes are
very beasts, not knowing what is lawful or unlawful for them to do in this
behalf. Subjects there are also that offend their Prince and refuse to obeie
him, and succor him in time of need: yea in stead of aiding him when he has
great affairs in hand contemn him and stir up rebellion and sedition against
him, contrary to the allegiance that they owe him. When I say Kings or
Princes, I mean either themselves or such as govern under them: and when I
say subjects, I mean such subjects as have pre-eminence and bear swaie in the
common wealth. The greatest mischiefs are wrought commonly by those that are
mighty, for the weak desire peace and quietness. When I say mighty, I mean
as well women as men, sometime and in some places where they have rule and
authority, either because of their husbands affection toward them, or because
they govern their affairs, or for that their Seniories are their wives
inheritance.

If I should write of men of mean calling in this world, my discourse would be
too tedious. Wherefore it shall suffice to speak of great estates, because in
them the power and justice of God is most apparent. For although two hundred
thousand mishaps chance to a poor man, no man regards them: but attributes
them either to poverty or evil looking to; as for example, if he be drowned
or break his neck, they say this chanced because he was alone, so that
hardly men will give ear to it. But if some misfortune fall upon a great city
it is otherwise talked of, yet not so much as when it chances to a Prince.
What is the reason then that God shows his justice rather upon Princes and
great men, than upon men of low degree? because mean and poor men find ynowe
in this world to punish them when they offend; yea oftentimes they are punished
without desert, either for examples sake, or for their goods, or peradventure
through the judges fault: sometime also they deserve punishment, and then it is
reason that justice be done. But as touching great Princes or Princesses and
their governors and counselors: again, as touching provinces and towns,
rebellious and disobedient to their Princes and governors, who will search out
their lives? Who will inform the Justice of their actions? What Justice will
take notice thereof? or who will punish their faults? I speak of the evil not
of the good, but few there are of those. What is the cause then that moves
both them and all others to commit these faults above rehearsed, and many mo
(which for brevity I ouerpasse) not regarding the power and justice of God? I
answer, that it is lack of faith, and in those that are ignorant lack of wit
and faith together, but especially of faith, which in mine opinion is the only
fountain of all mischiefs. I mean such mischiefs as fall upon those that
complain, that they are trodden under foot, and oppressed by those that are
mightier than they. For if men were fully persuaded the pains of hell to be
such as indeed they are, and believed firmly (as we ought all to believe)
that who so has taken ought by violence, or possesses ought that his father
or grandfather took wrongfully: shall never enter into the ioies of paradise,
unless he make full satisfaction and restitution of all that he withholdeth from
his neighbor; (whether it be Duchies, Earldoms, towns, castles, mooueables,
meadows, ponds, or mils, every man according to his estate) there is no man
living, be he poor or rich, or of what estate and condition soever he be, that
would withhold ought that is not his own. No, if all men believed this
firmly, it is not to be thought, that there is either Prince, Princess, or
any other man through the whole world, what estate or condition soever he be
of, be he high or low, spiritual or temporal, man or woman, that would
wittingly withhold any thing from his subject or neighbor, wrongfully put any
man to death, hold him in prison, take from one to give to enrich another, or
seek to procure dishonesty to his kinsfolks and servants for his wanton
pleasures, as for women, and such like, which is the filthiest attempt that may
be made. No undoubtedly we would never do as we do, if we had a steadfast faith,
and believed that which God and his Church commands us to believe, under
pain of damnation: knowing our days to be short, and the pains of hell
horrible and endless. Wherefore we may conclude, that all mischiefs proceed
of want of faith. For example whereof, when a King or Prince is taken prisoner,
and fears to die in prison, is there any thing in the world, be it never so
dear unto him, that he will refuse to give for his deliverance? as appears
by King John, who being taken prisoner by the Prince of Wales at the battle of
Poictiers, paid for his ransom three millions of franks, and yielded to the
English men all Aquitaine (at the least all that he held in his hands) with a
number of other cities, towns and places; yea in a manner the third foot of
his realm: whereby he brought his realm into such poverty, that many years
after they used leather money, with a little stud or nail of silver in the
midst thereof. And all this gave he and his son King Charles surnamed the
Wise, for his ransom. And if they would have given nothing, yet would not
the English men have put him to death, but his greatest pain had been
imprisonment. But admit they had put him to death, yet had not that pain been
so great by the hundred thousandth part, as the least pain in hell. Why gave
he then all this great ransom above rehearsed, destroying his children and
subjects? but only because he believed that which he saw and perceived well,
that he could not otherwise be delivered. But peradventure when he committed
the fault, for the which this punishment fell upon him, his children, and
subjects: he believed not firmly, that the offense he made against God and his
commandments, should be punished. Now to conclude, there is no Prince, or very
few, that will restore one town they withhold from their neighbor, for the
love of God, or to eschew the pains of hell; and yet King John gave all this
to deliver his body out of prison.

I asked a question before, who will search out great men's faults, who will
inform the Justice of them, and who will be the Justice to punish them?
Whereunto I now answer, that the information shall be the lamentable cry and
plaint of their subjects, whom they tyrannize and oppress so many ways
without any compassion, the sorrowful lamentation of widows and orphans,
whose husbands and fathers they have wrongfully put to death; by means whereof
their wives and children have ever after lived in affliction and misery; and
generally the complaints of all those whom they have persecuted either in their
persons or goods. These, I say, shall give information against them by their
great mourning, wailing, and pitious tears, and shall accuse them before the
Lord God, who will be the just judge thereof, and peradventure will not delay
the punishment till the world to come; but will also punish them in this world:
which punishment proceeds of lack of faith, because they had not a firm and
steadfast belief in Gods commandments.

We must therefore of necessity confess, that God is forced to show such
tokens and examples, to the end both Princes themselves and all the world may
believe, that these punishments fall upon them for their misbeleefe and sins,
and that God shows his mighty power and justice upon them, because none
other in this world but he, has power over them. At the first happily they
amend not their lives for Gods scourges, be they never so great and long. But
no misfortune falls upon a Prince, upon those that govern his affairs, or
upon those that rule great commonalties, but the issue is hurtful and
dangerous to the subjects. When I say misfortunes, I mean none but such as
cause the subjects to smart; for to fall from a horse, to break a leg, to be
punished with a sharp ague, are no misfortunes to a Prince, because he may be
cured of them, and peradventure they may do him good, and teach him wit: but I
call these misfortunes, when God is so displeased with a Prince, that he will
no longer suffer him to reign, but show his power and justice upon him. For
then first he weakeneth his wits, which is a shrewd blow for all those that
have to do with him, he troubles his house, and suffers it to fall into
division and disquietnes: and the Prince himself is so far in Gods disgrace,
that he flies the counsel and company of the wise, and aduaunceth none but
young fools, void of wit, oppressors, flatterers, and such as soothe him in
all his sayings. If he take one penie, they bid him take two; if he threaten a
man, they bid hang him, and after that sort in all other actions. Further, they
give him counsel in any wise to cause himself to be feared, and they also
behave themselves cruelly and proudly, trusting by this means to hold men in
awe of them, as though authority were their inheritance. Those whom such
Princes, by the advice of these new Counselors have banished and displaced,
having served many years, and being well acquainted and friended in their
country, will storm at this usage, and for their sakes their friends and well
willers also; and peradventure such injury shall be offered them, that they
shall be forced either to defend themselves, or to fly to some Prince their
neighbor, who perchance is enemy to him that banisheth and chaseth them, and so
by inward division stangers shall enter into the land. Is any plague or misery
so great, as wars betwixt friends and acquaintance? Is any malice so rank and
deadly? As touching foreign enemies, when the subjects are linked together they
may easily make resistance, because their enemies have no intelligence nor
acquaintance in the realm. Think you that an unwise Prince being accompanied
with fools, can smell a far off how great a mischief division among his
subjects is? or believe that it can hurt him? or proceeds of God? he eats
and sleeps no whit the worse for it; he has neither fewer horses in his
stable, nor fewerrobes in his wardrobe, but many mo companions. For he allureth
men unto him by promises, and by parting among them the spoils and offices of
those whom he has banished; he gives also of his own to win thereby fame and
renown: but when he shall least think of it, God will raise up an enemy
against him whom peradventure he never mistrusted. Then will he wax pensive,
and suspect those whom he has iniuried, yea he will fear such as indeed owe
him no evil will: yet notwithstanding he will not have his refuge to God in
this extremity, but seek to redress this inconvenience by force. Have we not
seen in our days examples heerof even among our next neighbors? Have we not
seen the late King of England Edward the fourth of that name, heir of the
house of York, utterly destroy the house of Lancaster, under the which both
his father and he had lived many years? Further, the said King Edward having
done homage to King Henry the 6. being of the house of Lancaster, did he not
afterward hold him prisoner many years in the tower of London, the chief
city of the realm, where in the end he was put to death?

Have we not also seen the Earl of Warwick principal governor of all the
said King Edwards affairs, (after he had put to death all his enemies,
especially the Duke of Sommerset) in the end become deadly enemy to his Master,
give his daughter in marriage to the Prince of Wales son to King Henry,
attempt to set up again the house of Lancaster, pass with the said Prince
into England, discomfited in the field, and slain both he, his brethren and
kinsfolks, and diverse other noble men of England, who in times past had done
the like to their enemies? After all this, the children of these when the world
turned, revenged themselves; and caused in like manner the others to die, which
plagues we may be assured happened not but by the wrath of God. But (as before I
said) the realm of England has this special grace above all other realms
and dominions, that in civil wars the people is not destroyed, the towns be
not burned nor razed, but the lot of fortune falls upon the soldiers,
especially the gentlemen whom the people envy to too beyond reason: for nothing
is perfect in this world. After King Edward was quiet in his realm and
received yearly out of France fifty thousand crowns paid him in the tower of
London, and was grown so rich, that richer he could not be, he died suddenly
as it were of melancholy, because of our Kings marriage that now reigns, with
the Lady Margaret the Duke of Austriches daughter. For so soon as he was
advertised thereof he fell sick, and began then to perceive how he had been
abused touching the marriage of his daughter, whom he made to be named the Lady
Daulphinesse. Then also was the pension which he received out of France taken
from him, which he called tribute, although indeed it were neither the one nor
the other, as before I have declared 10. K. Edward left by his wife two goodly
sons, one Prince of Wales, the other D. of York, and two daughters. The D.
of Gloucester his brother took upon him the government of his nephew the Prince
of Wales, being about ten years of age, and did homage to him as to his
sovereign Lord, and lead him to London pretending that he would there crown
him King, hoping by that means to get the other brother out of the Sanctuary
at London, where he was with his mother, who began already to be jealous of his
proceedings. To be short, by means of the Bishop of Bathe (who having been
sometime of K. Edwards Council, fell afterward into his disgrace, and was put
in prison, and made to fine for his deliverance,) the D. of Gloucester executed
this exploit, which you shall now hear. This Bishop advertised the Duke that
K. Edward being in love with a certain Lady, promised her marriage upon
condition that he might lie with her, whereunto she consented, so far forth
that the said Bishop married them together, none being present but they two and
he himself. Which matter this Bishop being a jolly courtier never disclosed
during K. Edward's life, but caused also the said Lady to conceal it, so that
it was kept secret. After this the said King falling again in love, married the
daughter of an English knight, called the Lord Rivers, being a widow, and
mother of two sons. But after K. Edward's death, this Bishop of Bathe
revealed this matter to the D. of Gloucester, whereby he egged him forward not a
little to the executing of his mischievous pretended enterprise. For the said
D. murdered his two nephews, crowned himself King by the name of Richard the
third, proclaimed his brothers two daughters bastards in open parliament, took
from them their arms, and put to death all the faithull servants of the late
King his brother, at the least as many as he could lay hands on. But this
cruelty remained not long unpunished: for when the said King Richard thought
himself safest, and lived in greater pride than any King of England did these
hundred years (having put to death the Duke of Buckingham, and having a great
army in a readiness) God raised up an enemy against him of no force, I mean the
Earl of Richmond then prisoner in Britain, but now King of England, of the
house of Lancaster, though not This error of Commines touching K. Henry the 7.
you shall find controuled by the pe^egree in the end of this book.
the nearest to the crown 11, whatsoever men say, at the least so far as I can
learn. The said Earl told me a little before his departure out of this
realm, that from the fifth year of his age he had lived continually like a
prisoner and a banished man. And indeed he had been fifteen years or
therabout prisoner in Britain to Duke Frances that last died, into whose hands
he fell by tempest of the sea as he fled into France, accompanied with the
Earl of Pembroke his uncle. I my self saw them when they arrived, for I was
come of a message to the D. at the same time. The Duke entreated them gently
for prisoners, and after King Edwards death lent the said Earl great force of
men, and a great navy; with the which he sent him having intelligence with the
Duke of Buckingham, (who for this cause was afterward put to death) to land in
England: but the wind was against him, and the seas so rough, that he was
forced to return to Diepe, and from thence by land into Britain. From whence
soon after he departed with his band into France without taking leave of the
Duke, partly because he feared to ouercharge the Duke; (for he had with him
five hundred English men,) and partly because he doubted lest the Duke would
agree with King Richard to his prejudice: for he knew that King Richard
practiced with him to that end. Soon after, the King that now is appointed
three or four thousand men to waft him over only, and delivered those that
accompanied him a good sum of money and certain pieces of artillery: and
thus passed he over in a ship of Normandy to land in Wales where he was borne.
King Richard forthwith marched against him; but a kinght of England called the
Lord Stanley, who was married to the Earls mother, joined himself with the
Earl, and brought unto him at the least 26000. men 12. The battle was given,
King Richard slain, and the Earl crowned King in the field with the said
Richards crown. Will you say that this was fortune? No, no, it was the
judgment of God: and for further proof thereof mark this also. Immediately
after the King had murdered his two nephews, he lost his wife, whom some say
he murdered also. Further, he had but one only son, who died in like manner
incontinent after this murder. This example would have served better
hereafter when I shall speak of King Edwards death; for he was yet living at
the time my former Chapter treats of: but I have rehearsed it here to
continue my discourse which I am fallen into. In like manner we have seen of
late the crown of Spain altered after the death of Dom Henry that last died.
For the said Dom Henry had to wife the King of Portugales sister last deceased,
by whom he had issue a goodly daughter, which notwithstanding succeeded not her
father, but was put from the crown under color of adultery committed by her
mother. But the matter ended not without great contention and war: for the King
of Portugale took part with his niece, and diverse great Lords of Castile
joined with him: yet notwithstanding the said Dom Henry's sister, wife to the
son of Dom John King of Arragon, obtained the crown and possesses it yet at
this day: and thus this partage was made in heaven as diverse others are.
Further, you have seen of late days the King of Scotland and his son being
thirteen years of age in battle, the one against the other: the son and
his faction prevailed, and the King was slain upon the place 13. This King
murdered his own brother, and was charged with diverse other crimes, namely
the death of his sister and such like. You see also the Duchy of Gueldres out
of the right line, and have heard what impiety the Duke last deceased used
against his father. Diverse other examples I could rehearse which should
manifestly appear to be punishments and scourges of God, which scourges are
the principal cause of wars, whereof ensue mortality and famine, all the which
evils proceed of lack of faith. Wherefore I conclude, considering the
wickedness of men especially of great men, who know not themselves, neither
believe that there is a God: that it is necessary for every Prince and
governor, to have an adversary to keep him in fear and humility, otherwise
no man should be able to live under them or near them.

The Notes.
1 He means that this town of Gaunt is situate where it is for a plague to
the whole country of Flaunders, which otherwise because of the great abundance
thereof, would soon forget God.

2 Fregosi and Fregosini in other histories.

3 This division began anno 1309. between the Abbot of Einsidlen and the
village of Suitz, and the said Abbot demanded aid of Leopolde Duke of Austrich.

4 As for example, Leopolde Duke of Austrich brothers son to the former that
began this division, whom they slew at the battle of Sempache 9. Iulij. ann.
1386.

5 The reason heerof read in Aristot. Politic. lib. 1. cap. 2. and Problem.
Anthonii Zimarae 12.

6 Shame comes of knowledge, so that if a man do a fault, and for lack of
learning know not that it is a fault, he can never be ashamed of it, nor seek
to amend it.

7 1800000. franks are 225000. pound starling after eight souse to the English
shilling, and the French liver at two shillings six pence starling.

8 4700000. franks are 587500. pound starling.

9 That is 2500000. franks, which amounts to 312500. pound starling.

10 For it was due by the conditions of the treaty.

11 How King Henry the seventh was next* heir of the house of Lancaster, the
pedigree in the end of the work will declare, where also Philip de Commines
error is controlled.

12 Our Chronicles say but 3000. and some 5000.

13 This King that slew his father in battle was James the 4. who married
Margaret sister to King Henry the 8.

THE SIXTH BOOK.
How the Duchy of Burgundy was yielded to the King. Chap. 1.
NOw to return to the principal matter, and to proceed in this history,
written at your request, my Lord of Vienna: while the King brought under his
subjection the places and towns above named in the marches of Picardie, his
army lay in Burgundy, the general whereof in appearance, was the Prince of
Orange 1 that now is, who was borne in the county of Burgundy, and a subject
thereof; but lately revolted the second time from Duke Charles: wherefore the
King used his help; for he was a great Lord, well friended, and well beloved
both in the said county, and also in the Duchy of Burgundy. But the Lord of
Cran was the Kings lieutenant, and he it was in truth that had the charge of
the whole army, and in whom the King reposed his principal trust, and sure he
was a wise man and faithful to his Master, but somewhat too greedy of his own
gain. The said Lord of Cran when he drew near the country of Burgundy, sent
the Prince of Orange before him with certain others to Digeon, to persuade
with the citizens to become the Kings subjects: which enterprise so well they
achieved by the said Princes means, that the town of Digeon, and all the
other places of the Duchy of Burgundy yielded to the King, Aussonne and
certain castles excepted, which held yet for the Lady of Burgundy. The King
had promised the Prince of Orange many goodly estates, and to restore him to
all his grandfathers inheritance in the county of Burgundy: for the which he
was in suit with the Lords of Chauuerguion his uncles 2, whom (as he said) Duke
Charles had favored to his prejudice. For this cause had been often pleaded
before him with great solemnity, and once the Duke being accompanied with a
number of lawyers, gave judgment against the Prince, at the least thus he
reported: wherefore he forsook the Dukes service, and went to the King. But
Monseur de Cran after he was entered into all these towns above mentioned, and
had gotten into his hands all the best places that should descend to the said
Prince by right of inheritance: refused to yield them to him, notwithstanding
both the Kings promise, and the said Princes request. The King also wrote often
to him about this matter without all collusion, knowing that he much misused
the Prince: notwithstanding he feared to displease the said de Cran, because he
had the charge of the whole country, neither thought he that the Prince either
would or could have caused the country of Burgundy to rebel, as afterward he
did, at the lest the greatest part thereof. But I will here leave these
Burgundies affairs, till another convenient place shall serve to speak
further thereof.

The Notes.
1 This Prince of Orange was John de Chaslons: the Prince of Orange that now
is, is of the house of Nassaw.

2 The old copy has Chasteauguion. Annal. Burgund. Chaumergnon. Annal.
Franc. Chauuerguion, and so undoubtedly it is to be read: for Chasteauguion was
brother to this Prince of Orange. Gaguin.

How the King entertained the English men after the death of Charles Duke of
Burgundy, to the end they should not hinder his conquest of the said Dukes
dominions. Chap. 2.
THose that hereafter shall read this history, and happily understand the
affairs both of this realm and the countries bordering upon it better than my
self, will marvel that since the death of Duke Charles, I have hitherto by
the space almost of one whole year made no mention of the English men, and
will wonder that they suffered the King to take the towns bordering so near
upon them, namely Arras, Bolloin, Ardres, and Hedin, with diverse other castles,
and to lie so long with his camp before Saint Omer 1. But you shall understand
that the reason thereof was, for that our King in wisdom and sense surmounted
far Edward King of England then reigning: for notwithstanding that the said
King Edward were a most valiant Prince, and had won in England eight or nine
battles, wherein he fought always himself on foot greatly to his renown;
yet were these troubles but by fits, so that his head was not continually
busied in matters of state: for immediately after the victory obtained, he
returned to his former sports and pleasures, till another storm arose. For you
shall understand, that when war begins in England, in ten days or less the
one or the other gets the garland. But our affairs in France passed not
after that sort, for besides the war it self, the K. was forced to have an eye
continually upon diverse places as well of his own realm as of his neighbors,
but especially by all means possible to content the King of England, and to
entertain him by ambassadors, presents, and smooth words, to the end he should
not entermeddle with our affairs. For the K. knew well the English men as well
Nobles and Commons as the Clergy, to be naturally inclined to make war upon
this realm, as well under color of the title they pretend thereunto; as also
in hope of gain. For they trust to have ever such success here as their
predecessors have had, whom God permitted to obtain in this realm many great
victories, and large dominion both in Normandy and in Guienne, the which they
had possessed by the space of three hundred and fifty years 2, when King
Charles the seventh first recovered it. During the which time they enriched the
realm of England with great spoils and much treasure, that they got as well of
the Princes and noble men of France, a great number of whom they took
prisoners; as also of the towns and places which they subdued. Notwithstanding
they should hardly have had such success in the King our Masters time: for he
would never have endangered his estate in battle as King Charles the sixth did
at Agincourt, where all the nobility of France lighted on foot to fight with
the English men; but would have proceeded more warily if the matter had come to
execution, as you may perceive by the course he held in sending King Edward
home. Wherefore the King well perceived that he must in any wise keep the King
of England and his principal servants his friends, whom he saw altogether
inclined to quietness and very greedy of his money: for the which cause he paid
duly at London the pension of fifty thousand crowns, which they called
tribute. And further gave yearly sixteen thousand crowns to the said Kings
principal servants, whose names were these: the Lord Chauncellor; the Master
of the Rols who now is Chauncellor; the Lord Hastings Lord great Chamberlain,
a man of singular wisdom and virtue, and in great authority with his Master,
and not without cause, for he ever served him faithfully; Sir Thomas
Montgomery; the Lord Howard, afterward Duke of Norfolk and partaker with the
wicked King Richard; the Master of the Horse called Master Cheiny; Master
Challenger, and the Marquis Dorset the Queen of Englands son by her first
husband. Further, he gave goodly presents to all the ambassadors that came to
him, were their messages never so sharp and bitter, and sent them home with
such goodly words and Princely rewards, that they returned well contented. And
notwithstanding that some of them understood that he did all this only to win
time, the better to atchieue his enterprise in the conquest of the Duke of
Burgundies dominions: yet winked they at it because of the great riches they
received at his hands. To all these above named he gave besides their pensions
many goodly presents, so largely that the Lord Howard over and above his
pension received of him in less then two years space in money and plate four
and twenty thousand crowns. To the Lord Hastings also L. great Chamberlain
of England, he gave at one time a present of plate to the value of ten thousand
marks. The acquittances of all which great personages are yet to be seen in
the chamber of accounts at Paris, save of the Lord Hastings Lord great
Chamberlain of England, which is an high office, for there is never but one
alone in it. This L. Chamberlain was long labored before he would become the
Kings pensioner, my self being the only man that persuaded him thereunto. For
I wan him first to Charles Duke of Burgundies friendship during the time I
served him, who gave him yearly a pension of a thousand crowns; whereof when I
had advertised the King, he would in like manner that I should be a means to
make him his friend and pensioner: for in times past during Duke Charles his
life, and after his death also in favor of the Lady of Burgundy, he had always
been the Kings extreme enemy, and traveled once to persuade the King of
England to aid the said Lady against the King our Master. I began this
friendship by letters, and the King gave him a pension of two thousand crowns,
which was double the sum he received of the Duke. Further, the King sent to
him one of the stewards of his house called Peter Cleret, charging him to bring
with him the said Lord Chamberlains acquittance, to the end hereafter it might
appear that the great Chamberlain, Chauncellor, Admiral, and Master of the
Horse of England, besides diverse others, had been the French Kings pensioners.
The said Peter Cleret was a wise fellow, and communed privily alone with the
Lord Chamberlain at his lodging in London; where, after he had declared his
message from the King: he presented him his two thousand crowns in gold (for
the King never gave but gold to strangers) which money when the Lord
Chamberlain had received, Peter Cleret humbly besought him for his discharge,
to give him an acquittance; wherein the said Lord Chamberlain made
difficulty. Then Cleret desired him to give him only a letter of three lines
to the King to testify the receipt of the money, least the King being a
suspicious Prince should think that he had converted it to his own use. Which
reasonable demand the Lord Chamberlain hearing, answered thus: Sir, you
require but reason, but this gift proceeds of the King your Masters
liberality not of my request; if it please you that I shall receive it put it
here into my sleeue, and other letter or testimonial get you none of me. For
I will not for my part that any man shall say that the Lord great Chamberlain
of England has been pensioner to the French King; nor that my acquittances be
found in his chamber of accounts. Whereunto the said Cleret replied not, but
departed leaving the money behind him; and at his return made report thereof
to the King, who was not a little displeased with him for that he brought no
acquittance: but as touching the said Chamberlain, he commended and esteemed
him more than all the King of Englands other servants, and his pension was ever
after paid without acquittance.

After this sort lived the King with the English men. Notwithstanding the King
of England was oftentimes earnestly pressed by this young Princes for aid, and
therefore sent ambassadors often to negotiate with the King our Master about
these affairs, desiring him to grant her either peace or truce. Now you shall
understand that those that were at the debating of these matters in England,
especially in their parliament, (which is an assembly of the three estates,
where diverse wise men were present that smelt our dissimulation a far off, and
received no pension of the King as the others did) were very desirous; and yet
the commons of the realm more desirous, that the King of England should send
aid without further delay to the said Lady: saying, that we here did but
abuse them, and that the marriage should never be accomplished: alleging that
at the treaty made at Picquigny between the two Kings, we had faithfully
sworn and promised that the King of Englands daughter whom they had already
called the Lady Daulphinesse, should be sent for into France within a year;
which term was now long expired. But what reasons soever the subjects made,
the King would give no ear thereunto, but alleged diverse excuses to the
contrary. And to say the truth, he was a very corpulent man and much given to
pleasures, neither could his body endure the toil of the wars. Further, he had
wound himself out of great troubles and was loath to enter into them again.
The covetousness also of the 50000. crowns yearly paid him in the tower of
London qualified his mind. Besides all this, his ambassadors that came hither
were so courteously entertained and so well rewarded, that they departed ever
well contented; but they never received any resolute answer: for the King
sought only to protract the time ever saying, that ere it were long he would
send to the King their Master certain noble men with such assurance of those
matters he stood in doubt of, as he knew well would content him. According to
the which promise, within three weeks or a month after these ambassadors
departure, sometime more, sometime less, (which was no small delaie in such a
case) he used to send ambassadors to the K. of England: but at every voyage
sundry men, to the end that if the former had made any ouerture not performed,
the latter might played ignorance therein. They also that were sent, persuaded so
well the King of England that we meant nothing but good faith, that he lay
still, and never stirred: for both he and the Queen his wife so much desired
this marriage, that partly for this cause, and partly for the other reasons
above alleged; he was content to wink at this war, which some of his Counsel
told him plainly to be very prejudicial to his realm. But he feared the
breach of this marriage, because men began already to scoff at it in England,
especially such as desired rebellion and civil war. Now to discourse a little
upon this point. You shall understand that the King our Master never meant to
accomplish this marriage, because there was no equality between the age of the
two parties: for King Edwards daughter at this present Queen of England, was
much elder than the Daulphin now reigning. But by these dissimulations a month
or two was gained in running to and fro, by which means the King foded forth
his enemy one whole summer, wherein he might have done him harm. For
undoubtedly if the King of England had not hoped upon this marriage, he would
never have suffered the King to take the places bordering so near upon the
English dominions, but have sought to defend them: and if at the beginning he
had declared himself for the Lady of Burgundy, the King who was by nature
timorous, and would put nothing in adventure, had never weakened this house of
Burgundy as he has. Thus much I write chiefly to show how these affairs
passed; and secondarily, to the end that if hereafter those that have to manage
great affairs happen to read this history, they may thereby learn how to
help themselves in the like case: for be their wisdom never so great, yet a
small advertisement does good many times. True it is, that if this Lady of
Burgundy would have consented to marry the Lord Rivers the Queen of Englands
brother, she should have been aided with great force: but this had been an
unequal match; for he was but a poor Earl, and she one of the greatest
inheritors in her time. Many practices were entertained between the Kings of
France and England; and amongst others the King offered him, that if he would
join with him, and pass over in person into the Lady of Burgundies countries,
he would be contented that the King of England should hold the country of
Flaunders without homage, and also the Duchy of Brabant: offering further, to
conquer for him at his proper costs and charges four of the greatest towns in
Brabant, and to put them into the King of Englands hands, to wage him 10000.
English men for four months, to the end he might the better sustain the
charge of the wars, and to lend him great store of artillery, and men and
carriage to convey it, and attend upon it, with this condition, that the King
of England should conquer the country of Flaunders, during the time the King
our Master invaded on the other side. Whereunto the King of England made answer
that the towns of Flaunders were strong and great; and both that country, and
also the country of Brabant hard to be kept if they were conquered: adding
further, that this war liked not the English men because of their intercourse
with those countries. But seeing it pleased the King to make him partaker of
his conquest, if he would give him certain towns he had already conquered in
Picardie, as Bolloin and diverse other which he named; he would then be
contented to declare himself for him, and send men to serve him if he would
pay them, which was a very wise answer.

The Notes.
1 The King could not take Saint Omer, for the Lord of Chanteraine valiantly
defended it. Read De la March lib. 2. cap. 9. page 410.

2 Others write but 295. others 296. and others 299.

How the marriage between the Lady of Burgundy and Maximilian Duke of
Austrich, afterward Emperor, was concluded and accomplished. Chap. 3.
Diverse practices were entertained (as before you have heard) between these
two Kings to delay time; but in the mean while the Lady of Burgundies force
still diminished: for of those few men that remained alive after her fathers
death, diverse revolted from her to the King, especially after Monseur de Cords
was entered into his service; for he led away a great troop with him. Others
necessity forced to shrink from her, because they dwelt either within the
towns the King had already conquered, or near unto them. Some also put
themselves into his service to be enriched; for no Prince dealt so liberally
with his men, as the King our Master did. Moreover, civil dissentions and
factions among themselves increased daily in the great towns, especially in
Gaunt, which bare the greatest sway in the country, as you have heard. For the
Lady of Burgundy diverse marriages were mentioned; for all men were of opinion,
that either she must get her a husband to defend that she yet held, or marry
the Daulphin, thereby quietly to possess all. Some desired greatly that this
marriage with the Daulphin might take effect, she her self especially, before
the King delivered the letters above mentioned, sent unto him by her
Chauncellor and the Lord of Himbercourt: but others disallowed of this
marriage, both because of the said Daulphins young age (for he was but nine
years old) and also because of the marriage promised in England: and these
labored for the Duke of Cleues son. Others there were that traveled for the
Emperors son Maximilian now King of Romans. The said Lady had conceived
extreme hatred against the King for the delivery of the letters above
mentioned, which was the only cause of the two noble men's death, and of the
dishonor she received when her letters were openly redeliuered her before the
assembly, whereof you have heard. Further, the delivery of the said letters
seemed also to be the only occasion that moved them of Gaunt to banish so
many of her servants from her, to remove from about her, her mother in law
and the Lord of Rauastaine, and to put her women in such fear, that they durst
not open a letter before they of Gaunt had seen it, nor commune with their
Mistres in her ear. Wherefore she began now to remove from about her the
Bishop of Liege, who was of the house of Bourbon, and an earnest suter for her
marriage with the Daulphin, which sure had been a very honorable match for her,
had not the said Daulphin been so young, notwithstanding the Bishop had no
regard thereof. To be short, the said Bishop departed to Liege, whereupon
every man gave over that suit. It had been hard to deal in this business to the
contentation of all parties, and I think who so should have intermedled in it,
should have had but small thank for his labor in the end: wherefore every man
forbear to speak therein. Notwithstanding before her marriage was fully
concluded, there was an assembly held about it, whereat the Lady of Halleuin
the Princess of Burgundies principal woman was present, who said (as I have
heard reported) that they had need of a man not a child, and that her Mistres
was a woman grown and able to bear children, which should be the only stay
of the country. This opinion took place, notwithstanding some blamed this
Lady for speaking thus frankly; but others commended her, saying, that she had
spoken but of such marriage as was most necessary for the estate of the
country. There was now no more to do but to find a fit man. And I think
verily if it had so pleased the K. she would willingly have married the Lord of
Angoulesme that now is 1; so much desired she to continue her alliance with the
house of France. But God was minded to make another match whereof peradventure
the sequel is yet unknown. Notwithstanding this, we are able to say by that is
already past, that of the said marriage many great wars have arisen both here
and there, which perchance had never happened if she had married the Lord of
Angoulesme: whereas by reason of this other match both the countries of
Flaunders and Brabant have suffered great afflictions. The Duke of Cleues was
at Gaunt with the said Lady, making friends there in hope to conclude a
marriage between her and his son: but she had no fancy thereunto; for both she
and those that were about her, misliked much his sons conditions. Wherefore some
began to motion a marriage between her and the Emperors son now King of
Romans, the which in times past had been so far forth treated of between the
Emperor and Duke Charles, that it was concluded between them two. Further, the
Emperor had a letter written with the Ladies own hand by her fathers
commandment, and a ring set with a diamond. The contents of the which letter
were, that according to the pleasure of her Lord and father, she promised to
the said Duke of Austrich the Emperors son, to accomplish the marriage
concluded between both their parents, in such manner and form as her said
Lord and father should appoint.

From the Emperor came certain ambassadors to the said Lady being at Gaunt,
who received letters at Bruxels commanding them to stay there, because
Commssioners should be sent thither to treat with them, which was the Duke of
Cleues doing, who was loath of their coming, and sought to send them home
discontented. But the said ambassadors passed forth that notwithstanding, for
they had good intelligence in the Ladies court, especially with the Dowager of
Burgundy, who was removed from the said Lady, as you have heard, because of
the letter above mentioned. She advertised them (as it was reported) that they
should not stay at Bruxels notwithstanding these letters, instructing them
further what they should do at their coming to Gaunt, and assuring them that
the said Lady and diverse about her were well disposed to their suit. The
Emperors ambassadors followed her advise, and rid straight to Gaunt,
notwithstanding the message above mentioned. Wherewith the Duke of Cleues was
not a little discontented, but he was not acquainted with the disposition of
the said Lady and her women. The Council concluded that these ambassadors
should have audience, and their message being heard: the Princess should bid
them heartily welcome, and tell them that she would take advise with her
Council, which words being uttered, she should withdraw hirselfe without
farther communication. Whereunto she agreed. The ambassadors when audience was
given them, presented their letters and declared their message, which was, that
her marriage had been concluded between the Emperor and the Duke of Burgundy
her father with her consent; as appeered both by her letters written with her
own hand which they there showed, and also by the diamond which they said she
had sent and given in token of marriage. Moreover, the said ambassadors
required her on their Masters behalf, that it would please her to accomplish
the said marriage according to the will and promise both of her said Lord and
father, and also of hirselfe. Further, desiring her to declare before the
assembly there present, whether she had written the said letter or not, and
whether she minded to perform her promise. Whereunto the said Lady without
further deliberation answered, that she had sent the said diamond, and written
the letter by the commandment of her Lord and father, and would perform all
that was contained therein. Then the ambassadors gave her humble thanks, and
returned with ioifull minds to their lodging. But the Duke of Cleues was highly
displeased with this answer, being clean contrary to her councels resolution,
and told her that she had done unadvisedly. Whereunto she answered that she
could do no otherwise because her promise was past, which she would not break.
Which words the Duke hearing, and knowing diverse about her to be of the same
opinion: determined soon after to return home into his own country and
relinquish his suit. Thus was this marriage concluded, for the accomplishment
whereof Duke Maximilian came to Colen, where certain of the Ladies servants
met him, and brought him money, whereof I think they found him bare enough:
for his father was the hardest man either Prince or private man that lived in
his time. The said Emperors son being accompanied with seven or eight hundred
horse was conveyed to Gaunt, where the marriage was accomplished, which at the
first was more unprofitable than profitable to the Ladies subjects; for the
Almains in steed of bringing money with them, had money given them. Their
number was not sufficient to withstand the Kings forces, and their conditions
agreed not with her subjects manners: for they had lived under rich Princes
which gave goodly offices, kept honorable and pompous houses both in furniture
and fare, and had sumptuous apparel, both for themselves and their servants:
but the Almains are of a clean contrary disposition, for they are rude
fellows and live grossly.

I doubt not but that by sage and wise advise and by the special grace of God,
the law Salicke was ordained in France which barreth women from the crown, to
the end the realm fall not into the hands of a strange Prince and nation. For
neither the French men nor any other people can easily digest the government of
a stranger. And to say the truth there is no great seniorie but in the end the
dominion thereof remains to the natural country men, as appears by the
realm of France, a great part whereof the English men possessed the space of
four hundred years; and yet now hold nothing therein but Calice, and two
little castles, the defense whereof costeth them yearly a great sum of
money: the rest they lost much sooner than they wan; for they lost more in a
day, than they got in a year. The selfsame appears also by the realm of
Naples, the isle of Sicilie, and the other provinces possessed by the French men
many years, where now is no memorial of their being there, save only their
ancestors graves. For notwithstanding that men may away with a strange Prince
being wise, and accompanied with a small train well disposed; yet can they
hardly digest a great number of strangers: for if the Prince bring with him a
great multitude, or send for great forces upon occasion of wars, quarrels will
arise between them and the subjects of the country, because of the diversity
of their manners and conditions, and because they will not forbear to offer the
subjects wrong, and are not beloved as the natural country men be: which
inconvenience then happens especially, when strangers seek to have the
highest offices and estates, and the government of the affairs in the
commonwelth. Wherefore a Prince that goes into a strange country, had need to
be wise and careful in setting all things in good order: for if he lack this
virtue of prudence, which proceeds especially of the grace of God, whatsoever
other good parts be in him, all is but lost; and if he live a man's age both he
and those that live under him shall taste of great troubles, especially in his
old age when his subjects and servants despair of amendment.

After this marriage above rehearsed was accomplished, their affairs amended
not, for the Princes were both very young, and Duke Maximilian for his part
simple and of small understanding, as well because of his young years 2, as
also for that he was in a strange country, and utterly unacquainted in his
education with any matter of state. Lastly, he wanted force sufficient for any
great exploit, so that for these causes these countries fell into great
miseries, wherein they yet remain and are like to remain. Sure it is a
grievous plague when a Province is forced to seek a strange Prince to govern
it. Wherefore God has showed great grace to the realm of France by the law
above mentioned, which barreth women from the crown: for by such marriages
with strangers a private house (I confess) may be enriched, but to a great
realm such as this, many inconveniences should thereof ensue. Soon after this
marriage accomplished, or while they were treating thereof: the King wan the
country of Artois. It suffices me to rehearse the substance of these
affairs, and if I fail otherwise in the exact computation of the time a
month or two, I trust the Readers will hold me excused. The Kings good
success daily increased; for no man withstood him, by means whereof he wan
every day some place or other, unless truce or some ouuerture of peace were
made: which notwithstanding could never be brought to conclusion because both
the parties were unreasonable. Wherefore the war continued still. Duke
Maximilian and the Lady of Burgundy had issue the first year Archduke Philip
now living 3. The second year they had a daughter called Margaret now our
Queen 4. The third year they had a son named Francis of Francis Duke of
Britain 5, who christened him. The fourth year she died 6 with a fall from her
horse 7 or of an ague: but true it is that she fell, and some said she was with
child. Her death was a great loss to her subjects, for she was a virtuous and
liberal Lady, well-beloved of her people, and more reverenced and feared of them
than her husband; and no marvel, for she was Lady of the land. She loved her
husband entirely well, and was well reported of all men. She died in the year
1482. The King held in Hainault the towns of Quesnoi-le Count, and Bouchain,
the which he restored again, whereat diverse woondered, considering that he
seamed not desirous of peace, but rather to take all and leave this house of
Burgundy nothing. And sure I think if he could easily have dispersed and given
away all the Seniories thereof, he would utterly have destroyed it indeed. But
two causes there were, as he afterward told me, that moved him to render
these places: the one, he said that a King ought to make more account of places
of force and defense within his own realm where he is anointed and sacred,
than of those that are out of his realm, as these two were. The other was
because of the solemn oath and league that is between the Kings of France and
the Emperors, that they shall not incroche the one upon the other, and these
places above mentioned were situate in the Empire, and were restored the year
1477. The same cause moved him to leave Cambray also, and to restore it to
neutrality, and to say the truth, they received him into the town under that
condition.

The Notes.
1 This was Charles Duke of Angoulesme father to King Frauncis the first.

2 Maximilian was borne the 22. of March 1459. and this marriage was
accomplished in August 1477. Introduct. de la March, so that he was eighteen
years old and six months when he was married.

3 This is Philip father to the Emperors Charles the fifth and Ferdinande, he
was borne the 23. of June 1478. and died the 25. of September 1506.

4 This Margaret is she whom they of Gaunt against her fathers will betrothed
to King Charles the 8. as Commines writes in this book cap. 9. The said King
Charles never accomplished the marriage with her, but being grown to man's
estate, sent her home to her father, as Commines writes, lib. 7. cap. 3.
Afterward she married the Prince of Castile as is mentioned lib. 8. cap. 17.
and lastly Philibert Duke of Sauoy. She was borne anno 1480. de la March.

5 This Frauncis was borne anno 1481. Introduct. de la March, he died a
child, and another son also, as other historiographers report, named George.

6 Or rather the fifth, for she was married anno 1477. and died 1482. as our
author in the 7. chapter of this book reports. She was borne anno 1457. and
King Lewis christened her. Meyer. Annal. Burgund.

7 She died 2. of March an. 1482. by reason that through womanly bashfulnes she
would not suffer her thigh which was broken with the fall from her horse to
be cured, but chose rather to die.

How King Lewis by the conduct of Charles of Amboise his lieutenant, recovered
diverse towns in Burgundy, which the Prince of Orange had caused to revolt
from him. Chap. 4.
THe war endured still in Burgundy, where the King could not atchieue his
enterprise, because the Prince of Orange being revolted from him was made
lieutenant of the Burgundians, and had some aid of the Almaines for his money,
but not in favor of Duke Maximilian: for as touching him, there never came man
into the country for his service, at the least during the time I now write of.
But these Almains were certain bands of Swissers that served the Prince of
Orange as adventurers, but not as Maximilians waged soldiers: for the Swissers
are not friends nor well willers of the house of Austrich: other aid this
country of Burgundy had little; notwithstanding enough it might have had if
their payment had been good. And as touching aid, no man might better have
given it than Duke Sigismunde of Austriche, Duke Maximilians uncle 1, whose
dominions bordered upon these countries of Burgundy, especially the County of
Ferrette, which a few years before 2 he sold for 100000. gildons, to Charles
Duke of Burgundy, and took it afterward again without paying back the money
3, by the which title he yet possesses it. He was a man of small wisdom, and
little regarding his honor, and in such friends men find small help. Further,
he was one of those Princes above mentioned that understand nothing of their
own affairs, further then it pleases their servants to acquaint them with,
who are ever plagued for their beastlines in their age as this Duke Sigismunde
was. For his servants during these wars, made him take part with whom them
listed; so that for the most part he joined with the King our Master against
his nephew, and would have given his inheritance being very large from his own
kindred to a strange house: for he never had child, notwithstanding that he
were twice married. But now within these three months by the persuasion of
another faction of his servants, he has conveyed a present estate of his whole
patrimony to the said Maximiliam his nephew King of Romans, reserving to
himself a pension only amounting to the third part of his revenues, without
any further power or authority in the country. But (as I have heard) he has
often repented him thereof; and if I have heard a lie, yet it is like enough to
be true. Such is the end of all Princes that live like beasts, against whom I
inueigh thus vehemently, because of the great office and charge that God has
given them in this world. Notwithstanding those that are bereft of their wits
ought to be free from all reproach; but sure those that have good wits and
healthful bodies, and yet employ their time in nothing but folly and idleness;
are not to be moaned when any misfortune falls upon them: as on the other
side those that spend their time according to their age, sometime in wisdom and
council, and sometime in honest' recreation, are greatly to be commended, and
happy be the subjects that live under such a Prince.

This war in Burgundy endured long, because of the Swissers small aid above
mentioned; notwithstanding the Kings force was much too strong for them:
besides that the Burgundians lacked money; for the which cause the garrisons
that were in the strong places turned by intelligence. Monseur de Cran the
Kings lieutenant there, laid the siege before Dolle the chief city of the
county of Burgundy, the force within it being so small that he despised it,
which turned to his loss: for they salied forth and assaulted him on a
sudden, and took part of his artillery, and slew certain of his men, which
was a great dishonor to him, and put him also into the Kings disgrace; who
being troubled with this accident determined to send a new governor into
Burgundy, partly because of this misfortune, and partly because of the great
pillings and pollings the said de Cran had used in the country, which were in
deed too excessive. Notwithstanding before his departure he overthrew a band
of Almains and Burgundians, and took prisoner Monseur de Chasteauguion 4, the
greatest Lord in Burgundy. Other exploit none was done that I have heard of,
notwithstanding the report went, that the said de Cran behaved himself there
very valiantly as touching his own person. The King; as before I said,
determined for the reasons above alleged, to place a new governor in
Burgundy, not diminishing any whit of the said de Crans profits, offices, or
estates, save only that he took from him all his men of arms, except half a
dosen or a dosen archers, left to accompany him home. This Monseur de Cran was
a very gross man, and willingly departed to his own house, where he lived at
ease. The King placed in his room Master Charles of Amboise Lord of Chaumont a
valiant, wise, and diligent gentleman. Moreover, he practiced to win all the
Almaines that made war against him in Burgundy, to his service, not so much to
use their help, as thereby to conquer the easilier the rest of the country.
The King sent also to the Swissers, whom he called the Lords of these Almaine
leagues, making them many goodly offers; for he promised a yearly pension of
20000. franks 5 to their towns, which be four, Berne, Lucerne, Zurich, and I
think Fribourg was the fourth. Their Cantons also, as I suppose, received part
of this pension, which be three villages situate in the mountains, namely
Swisse, whereof the whole country is named; Soleurre, and Ondreual: other
20000. franks he promised yearly to the said Swissers governors, and to
certain particular men that should further his affairs. Moreover, he enrolled
himself one of their Burgesses, and desired to be their principal
confederate, and to have writings thereof; wherein though they made some
difficulty at the first, because the Duke of Sauoy had ever been their chief
confederate: yet in the end they granted him his demands, and promised to send
continually to his service 6000. men under this condition, that their
entertainment should be monthly four gildons and a half, which band
continued in pay till the Kings death 6. A poor Prince had not been able to do
this, but sure it turned greatly to the Kings profit, though in the end I
think it will be their destruction. For now they flow so with money,
especially with gold (wherewith before they were unacquainted) that they are
ready to fall at variance among themselves, otherwise no man should be able to
annoy them. For their country is so poor, and so full of mountains, and
themselves so good soldiers, that few would seek to invade them. After these
treaties were ended, and all the Almaines in Burgundy won to the Kings
service, the Burgundians force was clean broken. To be short, after diverse new
enterprises achieved by the governor the Lord of Chaumont, he besieged
Rochfort a castle near to Dolle, defended by Master Claude de Vauldray, and
yielded by composition. Afterward he besieged the town of Dolle, from the
siege whereof his predecessor in this office was raised (as before you have
heard) and took it by assault. The report was that some of these Almaines
lately received into the Kings service, thought to have entered the town to
defend it; but so many frank archers thronged in with them, not understanding
their treason, but only for desire of gain, that after they were once entered,
they fell all to the spoil, and burned and destroyed the town. A few days
after the taking whereof, the governor besieged Aussonne a very strong town,
but he had good intelligence within it. And before he brought the siege
thither, he writ to the King, desiring that the offices of the town might be
bestowed upon certain whom he named: which request was forthwith granted.
Although I were not present at these actions, yet understood I of them, both by
the reports made thereof to the King, and also by the letters written to him;
the which oftentimes I my self perused to make answer thereunto by his
commandment. The force within Aussonne was but small, and the captains had
intelligence with the governor, by means whereof within five or six days the
place was yielded. Thus was all Burgundy conquered, save three or four
castles situate upon mountains, namely Ieu, and certain others, and the town
of Bezanson which is imperial, not subject to the county of Burgundy, but
environed therewith; and therefore at the commandment of the Prince thereof.
The governor entered into it for the King, and came forth again; they of the
town doing unto him all such services as they were accustomed in times past to
do to the Princes of Burgundy. Thus was all Burgundy subdued by the governors
great diligence, whereunto the King earnestly pressed him, doubting that he
would leave some place unconquered, to the end his help might be needed there
still, and he not be called from thence to serve the King in some other place.
For Burgundy is a fruitful country, whereof he disposed as of his own; so
that both the Lord of Cran before named, and this governor also, filled their
bags well there. The country remained quiet awhile under the government of the
said Lord of Chaumont: notwithstanding certain places, namely Beaune, Verdun,
and others 7 rebelled soon after: at the which time I my self was there, sent
thither by the King, with the pensioners of his house, who never had captain
over them before, but sithence continually. The said places above rehearsed
were soon recovered by the wisdom and conduct of the governor, and by his
enemies lack of conduct and good order. Whereby you may perceive, what
difference God of his goodness has set between man and man: for to that part
which he means to protect and defend, he gives the wisest men, and likewise
wisdom to those that are in authority to employ the wisest. Further, he has
always showed and does daily show himself in all things a defender and
protector of our Kings, not only of our Master that dead is, but of the King
likewise now reigning, notwithstanding that sometime they taste also of his
scourges. They that lost again these towns thus revolted, were force
sufficient to have defended them, if they had with speed put themselves into
them: but through their negligence they gave the governor leisure to levy men,
which was great folly; for they knew well enough his estate, considering the
great favor all the country bare them. Wherefore they ought to have entered
with speed into Beaune, being a strong town, and of defense, as the others
were not. The selfsame day that the governor went to besiege a little beggarly
town called Verdun, being well informed of the state thereof: these
Burgundians entered there, minding to put themselves into Beaune. They were
six hundred choice men horsemen and footmen, partly Almaines, and partly of
the county of Ferrette, led by certain expert gentlemen of Burgundy, of the
which Simon of Quinchy was one. But they spent time at Verdun while they might
have entered into Beaune, which the governor could never have recovered, if they
had once been within it. But for lack of good counsel, they stayed a night too
long in Verdun, where they were besieged and taken by assault. Afterward Beaune
was also besieged, and all that was lost recovered, since the which time our
enemies were never of any force in Burgundy. I was at this present in the
country with the Kings pensioners (as you have heard) from whence the King
revoked me, because of a certain letter written to him, wherein he was
advertised that I forbear to lodge our men of arms in certain Burgesses
houses of Dyion. This with another small suspicion conceived of me, caused him
suddenly to send me to Florence: to which his commandment I obeyed as reason
was, and departed so soon as I had my dispatch.

The Notes.
1 This Sigismund was not uncle to Maximilian, as other histories report, but
cousin germane to his father; for Ernestus father to the Emperor Friderick, and
Fridericus Seinor this Duke Sigismunds father were brethren, sons to Leopold
Duke of Austriche, slain in battle by the Swissers anno 1386.

2 He sold it ann. 1469.

3 Others write that the money was paid to a merchant of Basil to the Duke of
Burgundies use, and the paiement signified to the said Duke, who would not
accept it unless it were paid at Bezanson.

4 This was the Prince of Orenges brother who came to levy the siege that
Monseur de Cran held before Gy, where he had besieged the said Prince of
Orange, with him were slain 14. or 15. hundred.

5 Before lib. 5. cap. 2. he reports these 40000. franks to be florens, and
so in mine opinion it should be read here.

6 When these Swissers began first to be entertained, then were the franck
archers cassed, which was anno 1480.

7 The old copy raseth Verdun and has Semur, which the Annals of France
call Sennier: saying, that both this and Verdun also rebelled.

How Monseur d'Argenton during these wars of the conquest of Burgundy, was
sent to Florence, and how he received homage of the Duke of Milan in the Kings
name for the Duchy of Genua. Chap. 5.
MY voyage into Italy was about a quarrel that arose between two great houses,
very famous in those days, the one the house of Medicis, the other the house
of Pacis; the which Pacis by the supportation of the Pope and Ferrande King of
Naples, thought to have slain Laurence of Medicis and al his adherents:
notwithstanding of him they failed; but his brother Julian they slew in the
great church of Florence, and with him one called Francis Noly, a servant of
this house of Medicis, who stepped forth before the said Julian to save him.
Laurence de Medicis being sore hurt retired into the vestrie of the church, the
doors whereof are of copper, and were made by his fathers commandment. A
servant whom he delivered out of prison but two days before, did him good
service that day, and received many wounds for him. This murder was committed
while hie mass was sung: for the time agreed upon for the execution was when
the Priest that sung mass began Sanctus. But the success of the enterprise
answered not their expectation. For supposing all to have been fully
accomplished: certain of them went up to the palace, minding there to have
slain all the Lords of the town being to the number of nine, which have the
whole government of the city, and change at every three months end. But they
that attempted this enterprise were evil followed by their companions, by
means whereof when they came to the top of the palace stairs, one shut a
door after them: whereupon they seeing themselves not past four or five were
astonished and wist not what to say, which the Lords of the town that were
above and their servants perceiving, looked out at the windows, and saw all
the town in an uproar and hard Master James of Pacis with his companions cry
in the midst of the market place before the palace, Liberta Liberta, and
Popolo Popolo: which were words whereby they thought to allure the people to
take part with them, which notwithstanding the people did not, but held
themselves quiet. Whereupon Master James de Pacis and his companions seeing the
evil success of their enterprise, fled out of the place as men astonished.
Which when the Lords and governors of the town being within the palace
perceived: they took immediately those five or six that were come up evil
accompanied, and evil followed, with intent to have slain them and taken the
government into their hands; and commanded them presently to be hanged at the
bars of the palace windows, the archbishop of Pise 1 being one of them.
Further, the said governors perceiving all the city to take part with them and
the house of Medicis: gave commandment forthwith, that all found men flying
should be stayed at the passages and brought back to the town; at the which
instant Master James of Pacis was taken, and with him one sent thither by Pope
Sixtus, being a captain of certain bands under the Earl Hieronimo, which
Earl was also of the conspiracy. The said Pacis with his companions was in
like manner immediately hanged at the bars of the palace windows: the Popes
servant was beheaded; and besides these diverse were taken in the town, who
were al hanged in this heat, of the which Francis de Pacis was one. There were
as I guess hanged in all fowerteene great personages, besides certain servants
slain in the town. A few days after this uproar, I arrived at Florence from
the King, having used great diligence after my departure out of Burgundy, for I
stayed no where but two or three days with the Duchess of Sauoye the Kings
sister, who entertained me very honorably. From thence I went to Milan, where I
soiorned also two or three days, and demanded aid of them to succor the
Florentines, with whom at that time they were in league, which my request they
willingly granted, both because of the Kings demand, and also for their
leagues sake: wherefore they sent forth at that present three hundred men of
arms, and soon after other bands. But to proceed, the Pope excommunicated
the Florentines immediately after this fact committed, and caused forthwith
his own forces and the King of Naples forces to march. Their army was strong
and great, and they had in pay a number of good soldiers. They besieged first a
little forte near to Senes called the Chastellennie, which they took with
diverse other places so that the Florentines were in great distress: for
because they had lived long in peace, they were unacquainted with the wars,
neither understood the danger they were in. Laurence de Medicis their chief
governor in the town was but young, and ruled altogether by young men, yet the
whole city rested upon his opinion. Moreover, they had but few Captains, and
their force was very small: but the general of the Popes and King Ferrand of
Naples army was the Duke of Vrbin, a valiant and wise Prince, and a good
captain. In their camp were also the Lord Robert of Arimini, who since has
been a man of great estimation, the Lord Constantine of Pesaro, and diverse
others that accompanied the King of Naples two sons, the Duke of Calabria,
and the Lord Dom Frederic, (who are al yet alive;) besides a great number of
other valiant soldiers. Thus they took all the places that they besieged; but
not so speedily as we would have done in France, because they understood not
what appertained neither to the siege nor defense of a town so well as we: but
sure as touching the leading of an army, and giving order both for victuals and
al other things necessary for a camp, they pass us far. The favor the King
showed the Florentines stood them in some stead, though not so much as I
wished; but I had no forces there to aid them with, save only my train. I
stayed at Florence and in their dominions about a year, altogether upon their
charge: they used me very honorably, and till the last day my entertainment
rather amended then impaired. Then the King called me home, and as I passed
through Milan, I received homage for the Duchy of Genua of the Duke of Milan,
called John Galeas, at the least of the Duchess his mother, who did homage to
me as the Kings deputy in her sons name. From thence I returned to the King
our Master, who received me graciously and acquainted me with his affairs more
than ever before, and appointed me also to be his bedfellow, notwithstanding
that I were unworthy of that honor, and that diverse others were fitter for
that place than my self: but he was so wise that no man could fail to please
him if he executed his commandments, without adding ought thereto of his own
brain.

The Notes.
1 This Archbishops name was Francis Saluiat, and this uproar was the 27. of
April anno 1478.

Of Monseur d'Argentons return out of Italy into France, and of the battle
of Guinegate. Chap. 6.
AT my return the King our Master looked somewhat aged, and his body was
disposed to sickness, but his disease brake not forth as yet. His affairs he
governed with great wisdom, and the war endured still in Picardie, wherewith
he was not a little discontented, as were his enemies also in the said
country: but they could not remedy it. The Duke of Austriche now King of
Romans having the Flemmings this year at his devotion, laid the siege before
Therouenne: but Monseur de Cords the Kings lieutenant in Picardie, levied all
the forces the King had in that country, and the frontiers thereabout, to the
number of eight thousand frank archers, and went to succor the place. Whom
when the Duke of Austriche perceived to approach, he levied his siege, and
marched against him: the two armies met at a place called Guinegate. The Duke
had of Flemmings to the number of twenty thousand or better, and certain
Almaines together with three hundred English men, led by an English Knight that
had served Charles Duke of Burgundy, called sir Thomas Abrigan. The Kings
horsemen being much stronger than their enemies, brake the Dukes horsemen, and
pursued them and Master Philip of Rauastain their captain as far as Air,
whereupon the Duke joined himself with his footmen. The King had in this
army at the least 1100. men of arms of his ordinary retinue 1: all the which
followed not the chase; but Monseur de Cords who was general did, and Monseur
de Torcy with him, which was a valiant deed, but against the law of arms; for
the captains of the vaward and rereward ought not to follow the chase. Some of
the Dukes horsemen retired, under color of defending the strong places; but
others fled in good earnest. The Dukes footmen fled not, yet were they upon the
point so to do; but they had with them on foot two hundred valiant gentlemen
their leaders, among whom were the Lord of Romont of the house of Sauoye, the
Earl of Nassaw, and diverse others yet living. The courage of these gentlemen
stayed the footmen, which was a wonder, considering they saw their horsemen
broken. The Kings frank archers fell to spoil the Dukes carriage, and the
straglers that followed it, as victuallers, and such like: but certain of the
Dukes footmen set upon them, discomfited them, and slew some of them. The Dukes
loss was greater than ours; for more of his men were taken, and more slain 2:
but the honor of the field was his. And I think verily if he had returned to
Therouenne, he had not found a man neither in it, nor in Arras; and it was
greatly to his loss, that he durst not attempt so to do. But in such cases men
are not always informed of the best: and to say the truth, great cause he had
to fear that enterprise. I speak of this battle but by hearsay; for I was
not present at it: notwithstanding to continue the order of my history,
somewhat I was forced to write thereof. I was with the King when these news
were brought him, which undoubtedly nipped him at the very heart; for he was
not accustomed to lose, but had such success in all his attempts, that fortune
seemed to be at his commandment, which undoubtedly his wisdom greatly
furthered. For he would hazard nothing, neither feared any thing more than a
battle; and as touching this now mentioned, it was fought without his
knowledge. His armies he made so strong, that few Princes were able to
encounter them; he was better furnished of artillery, than any King that ever
reigned in France: he attempted always to take places upon a sudden,
especially such as he perceived to be evil fortified; which after he had once
gotten, he furnished so well both of men and artillery, that it was impossible
for his enemies to recover them. Further, if the captain of any strong place,
or any other within it, would practice to yield it for money, he was sure of a
copes mate, neither would he shrink were the sum never so great that was
demanded, but liberally give it. He was afeard at the first when news was
brought him of this battle, supposing the truth had not been told him, but
that his whole force had been overthrown, knowing, if it were so, all to be
lost that he had conquered over this house of Burgundy in those parts, and the
rest in great danger: but when he understood the truth, he took the matter
patiently, and was well enough contented with Monseur de Cords.
Notwithstanding he purposed to give order, that no more such enterprises should
be attempted without his knowledge. From this day forward he resolved to treat
of peace with the Duke of Austriche, so that it might be wholly to his own
advantage, and that he might thereby so bridle the said Duke, by means of his
own proper subjects (whom he knew to be inclined to practice against their
Prince) that he should never be able to do him harm. Moreover, he was very
desirous to redress all disorders in his realm, especially the long delays
of processes and suits in law: which thing the better to compass, he minded to
bridle the Court of parliament, not by diminishing their number or authority,
but many things were done there against his mind, for the which he hated it.
He was also desirous to reduce his whole realm to one custom, and one kind
of weight and measure: and further, that all the laws and customs should be
written in the French tongue, in a fair book to avoid the pillings and
pollings of the Counselors in law, which are more excessive in this realm
than in any other, as the nobility has good cause to know. And undoubtedly
if God had spared him life and health five or six years longer, he would have
done much good in the realm, as great cause he had to do; for he had more
oppressed it than ever had any of his predecessors: but neither authority nor
persuasions could have won him to unburden his people till it had come of
himself, as in his latter days sure it would if God had preserved him from
sickness. Wherefore it is requisite to do good while a man has leisure, health,
and understanding. The treaty the King desired to make with the Duke and
Duchess of Austrich, and their dominions, was this: he meant by means of the
citizens of Gaunt to treat of a marriage between the Daulphin his son now
our King, and the daughter of the said Duke and Duchess, under these
conditions, that if the marriage were accomplished, they should permit him
quietly to enjoy the counties of Burgundy, Auxerrois, Masconnois, and
Charolois; and he for his part would restore unto them Artois, reserving only
to himself the city of Arras, in such sort as he had fortified it: for the
town was now nothing worth, considering the fortification of the city. For
before the King took Arras, the town was fortified with ditch and rampire
against the city; but now the city was fortified against the town, and held
for the King by the Bishop: wherein the King did contrary to the Princes of
this house of Burgundy. For they always at the least by the space of these
hundred years, made Bishop whom they listed, and placed a captain in the
town besides: but the King to increase his authority did clean contrary,
and caused also the town walls to be beaten down, and the city to be
fortified: so that now the city shuts upon the town, a great ditch being
between both. Wherefore the King indeed offered nothing; for whosoever has the
city, has the town at commandment. Of the Duchy of Burgundy, the county
of Bolloin, the towns situate upon the river of Sum, the territories of
Peronne, Roye, and Montdidier no mention was made. After these ouuertures were
once set on foot, they of Gaunt furthered them to the uttermost of their power,
and used very rudely the Duke and Duchess his wife, as did also diverse other
great towns of Flaunders and Brabant, which were fully bent to follow the
proceedings of them of Gaunt, especially Brucelles, which was grown so
wealthy, because of the continual residence that Duke Philip and Duke Charles
of Burgundy had made there: (as did also at this present the Duke and Duchess
of Austriche) that the wealth and quietness wherein they had lived under these
two Dukes above named, made them forget God and their duty to their Prince: so
that they procured themselves that misfortune, which afterward, as you have
seen, fell upon them.

The Notes.
1 The old copy says but 500. men of arms.

2 There were slain at the battle of Guinegate 11000. Burgundians, and 5000.
French men. Gaguin.

How King Lewis being visited with sickness, lost his wits, and lay speechless,
sometime recovering, and eftsoons falling into his disease again: and how he
behaved himself in his castle of Plessis les Tours. Chap. 7.
ABout this time in the year 1479. in the month of March truce was made
between these two Princes. The King was very desirous of peace especially in
those parts, so that it might be altogether for his aduentage. For he began now
to wax old and sickely; so far forth that once being at dinner at Forges
near to Chinon, he was suddenly taken in all parts of his body and lost his
speech: he was taken up from the table and held to the fire, and the windows
shut; to the which notwithstanding that he desired to go, yet some of his
freiends held him and would not suffer him so to do, meaning all for the best.
This disease took him in the year of our Lord 1480. in the month of March:
he lay altogether speechless, he knew no man, and his memory was wholly
taken away. At the which instant you (my Lord of Vienna) came thither, and
served him at that time in steed of a Physician: for you gave him a glister,
and caused the windows to be opened, and the air to be let in; whereupon
immediately he recovered his speech and his memory after a sort, and took
horse and returned to Forges: for this disease took him in a village a quarter
of a league thence whither he went to hear mass. He was diligently tended and
made signs what he would have done: among other things he desired that the
official of Tours might be called to shriue him, and made signs also that I
should be sent for, for I was gone to Argenton being ten leagues thence: when I
came, I found him at the table with Master Adam Fumee, (who sometime had been
King Charles the seauenths Physician, and was at that present Master of the
requests,) and another Physician called Master Claude: he understood little
what any man said, notwithstanding grief he felt none, he spoke plainly
almost never a word, but made signs that I should be in his chamber. I waited
upon him the space of 15. days 1 at his table, and about his person as one of
the grooms of his chamber, which I accounted great honor to me, and thought my
self in duty bound so to do. After two days he recovered his speech and his
memory after a sort: and because he thought that no man understood him so well
as my self, his pleasure was that I should always be by him, and he confessed
himself to the official in my presence, otherwise they would never have
understood one an other. He had not much to say, for he was shriuen not long
before, because the Kings of France use always to confess themselves when
they touch those that be sick of the Kings evil, which he never failed to do
once a week. If other Princes do not the like, they are to blame, for
continually a great number are troubled with that disease. After he was
somewhat recovered, he began to enquire who they were that held him by force
from going to the windows, whose names when he heard, forthwith he banished
them the Court; so that they never came afterward to his presence, and some of
them also he put out of office. From others, namely the Lord of Segre and
Gilbert de Grass Lord of Champeroux he took nothing, but commanded them to
depart. Many woondered at this toie, blaming him for so using them, considering
that all that they did was for the best, and they said truth: but Princes
imaginations are strange, and a number are bold to prattle of them that
understand them not. The King feared nothing so much as the diminishing of his
authority being marvelous great, for the which cause he would not be
disobeied in any point. Further, he remembered that when King Charles his father
fell into the disease whereof he died, he entered into suspicion that his
servants sought to poison him at his sons request 2: which fancy sanke so
deeply into his head that he refused his meat. Wherefore it was concluded by
the advice of his Physicians, and of his chiefest and trustiest servants, that
he should be forced to eat: the which was executed very orderly and advisedly
by those that served him, for cooliz was powered into his mouth, but soon after
this force he died. The King our Master who had ever misliked this ordering of
his father, stomacked maruellously that he had been held thus perforce; but yet
made show of much greater displeasure than indeed he had conceived thereof. The
chief cause that moved him so to do was fear, least they should Master him
in all other things, especially in the expedition of his weighty affairs,
under color of the imperfection of his wits.

After he had dealt thus roughly with these above named, he inquired what his
Council had done during the time of his sickness, and what dispatches they had
made, whereof the Bishop of Alby, his brother the governor of Burgundy, the
Marshall of Gie, and the Lord of Lude had the whole charge: for these were
present when his sickness took him, and lodged all in two little chambers
underneath him. Further, he would needs see the letters and packets that had
been brought and came howerly. The principal whereof were showed him, and I
read them before him: he made a countenance as though he understood them, and
took them into his hands, faining that he read them, notwithstanding that
indeed he understood never a word. Sometime also he spoke a word or two, or made
signs what should be the answer to these letters; but little or no thing was
dispatched, for we expected an end of his disease, because he was a Master with
whom it stood us upon to deal circumspectly. This sickness held him about
fifteen days, and then his wits and speech he recovered perfectly, but his
body was marvelous weak; for the which cause we feared greatly a relapse, the
rather because naturally he was inclined to give but small credit to Physicians.
Immediately after he was well recovered, he restored Cardinal Ballue (whom he
had held in prison fowerteene years) to liberty. Whereunto notwithstanding
that he had been required oftentimes before, both by the Sea Apostolic and
others, and all in vain: yet now he purchased the absolution of that fault
himself, by a bull sent from our holy father the Pope by his own procurement.
When his disease first took him, they that at that present were about him held
him for dead, and sent forth diverse commandments for the reuoking of an
excessive and cruel subsidy lately laid upon his subjects, by the advice of
the Lord of Cords his lieutenant in Picardy, wherewith were waged ten thousand
footmen, to be always in a readiness, and 2500. pioners, the which were called
the Soldiers of the camp. Moreover, he appointed fifteen hundred of his
ordinary men of arms to accompany them, and to fight on foot when need so
required. He caused also a great number of carts to be made to enclose them,
and tents and pauilions, imitating therein the D. of Burgundies camp. The
charge of this army amounted yearly to 1500000. franks 3. When these soldiers
were in a readiness, and furnished of all things necessary, he went to see them
muster in a valley near to Pont de l'Arche in Normandy, where the band of the
six thousand Swissers above mentioned mustered also, the which never saw the
King but at this time only. After all was ended, the King removed to Tours,
where he fell again into his former disease, and lost his speech as before,
and was by the space of two hours in such case that all men held him for dead.
He lay in a gallery upon a mattresse of straw, diverse standing about him.
Monseur de Bouchage and I vowed him to Saint Claude, and all the rest that were
present vowed him also. Immediately whereupon he recovered his speech, and
soon after arose and walked up and down the house, but his body was
marvelous feeble. The second fit of sickness took him in the year 1481.
notwithstanding he rode up and down the country as before, and went to
Argenton to my house, where he lay a month marvelous sick. From thence he
went to Tours, where (notwithstanding that he still remained sick) he took
upon him his voyage to Saint Claude, to whom as you have heard he was vowed,
and at his departure thence commanded me to go into Sauoye against the Lords of
Chamber, Miolant, and Bresse, because they had taken prisoner the Lord of Lins
in Daulphine, whom he had appointed governor of Duke Philibert his nephew. Yet
notwithstanding covertly he aided these Lords against whom I went. He sent also
a great band of soldiers after me, whom I led to Mascon against the Lord of
Bresse, but he and I agreed well enough secretly. Further, the Lord of Chamber
made a composition with the Duke of Sauoye at Thurin in Piedmont where he lay,
whereof he advertised me; and immediately thereupon I caused my forces to
retire. He led the said Duke to Grenoble, whither the Marshall of Burgundy,
the Marquess of Rothelin, and my self went to receive him. The King commanded
me to return home, and to meet him at Beauieu in Beauiolois, where when I
arrived, I woondered to see him so lean and bare, much more to ride up and
down the country, but his noble heart carried him. At Beauieu he received
letters, that the Duchess of Austriche was dead of a fall from her horse; for
she rid a fierce hobby that threw her upon a block, notwithstanding some say
she died not of the fall, but of an ague: but howsoever it were, she died soon
after the fall, to the great damage of her subjects and friends, who since her
death never had quietness nor good success. For this people of Gaunt and the
other towns bare much more reverence to her than to her husband, because she
was Lady of the country. She died in the year 1482. The K. told me these news
in great joy, adding, that the two children remained in the citizens of Gaunts
custody, whom he knew to be inclined to sedition and rebellion against this
house of Burgundy. Further, he thought the time now come when he might do some
great exploit, seeing the D. of Austriche was but young, his father yet living,
his countries troubled on every side with wars, and himself a stranger and
weakly accompanied. For the Emperor his father was too extremely covetous, for
the which cause his son found the less favor. The King immediately after
the Duchess death, began to practice with the governors of Gaunt, by means of
Monseur de Cords, and to treat of a marriage between the Daulphin his son,
and the said Dukes daughter called Margaret, at this present our Queen. The
said de Cords addressed himself wholly to two men, the one a pensioner of the
town called William Riue, a subtle crafty fellow; the other the clarke of
their Senate named Coupe Nole, who was a hosier, but in great credit with the
people: for such men of occupation, when they are most unruly, are there best
esteemed. The King returned to Tours, and kept himself very close, so that few
saw him: for he waxed jealous of all men, searing that they would take the
government from him, or diminish his authority; for the which cause he
removed all those from him, that he had most favored, and had been nearest
about him, not diminishing their estates in any respect: but he sent them away
some to their offices and charges, and some to their houses, but this endured
not long, for soon after he died. He did diverse strange things which caused as
many as saw them to think him out of his wits; but they were not thoroughly
acquainted with his conditions. As touching suspicious, all great Princes are
suspicious, especially those that be wise, and have had many enemies, and have
offended many as the King our Master had. Further, he knew himself not to be
beloved of the nobility of his realm, nor of a great number of the
commonalty. Besides this, he had more charged his people than ever had any of
his predecessors: notwithstanding he was desirous now in his latter days (as
before I said) to have eased them, but he should have begun sooner. King
Charles the seventh by the persuasion of diverse wise and valiant Knights that
had served him in the conquest of Normandy and Guyenne (which the Englishmen
held,) was the first that began to leuy subsidies at his pleasure, without the
consent of the States of his realm; and to say the truth, cause there was then
so to do: for the charges were marvelous great, as well for the manning of the
countries newly conquered, as also for the defeating of the companies of
robbers, which went about spoiling the realm. For the which cause the nobility
of France consented to the King, and had certain pensions promised them in
consideration of the sums of money that should be levied upon their lands. If
this King had always lived and those of his council that were about him, he
would sure greatly have enlarged his realm. But considering what happened after
his death, and is like further to happen, he charged maruellously his soul,
and the souls of his successors by this fact: for he gave his realm a cruel
wound, which will bleed this many a year, by entertaining in continual pay a
terrible band of men of arms, after the manner of the Italian Princes. The said
King Charles levied in his realm at the hour of his death but 1800000. franks
all manner of ways, and had in ordinary about seventeen hundred men of arms,
the which he kept in good order, and so placed in diverse provinces for the
defense of his realm, that many years before his death they rid not spoiling
up and down the country, to the great quietness and comfort of his people. But
the King our Master levied at his death 4700000. franks, he had in pay four or
five thousand men of arms, and of footmen for the camp and in garrison,
above five and twenty thousand: wherefore it is not to be marvelled if he had
many phansies and imaginations in his head, and thought himself not
well-beloved. But sure as these matters caused him greatly to fear some; so had
he a sure confidence in many of those whom he had brought up and highly
advanced, of the which I think there were a number, whom death it self could
never have withdrawn from doing their duty. There came into Plessis du Parc,
(which was the place where he lay) very few besides his household servants, and
the archers of his guarde being four hundred, of whom a great number all the
day long kept watch and ward at the gate, walking up and down the place. No
noble man or great personage lodged within the castle, neither might be
suffered to enter in, save only the Lord of Beauieu Duke of Bourbon his son
in law. The said stell of Plessis he had made to be environed with a grate of
great iron bars, and at the entry into the ditches thereof had caused sharp
spears of iron, every one of them having many heads, to be masoned into the
wall. He caused also four strong watch houses of iron to be built, and a place
to be made in them where men might stand and shoot at ease, which was a
sumptuous thing to behold, and cost above 20000. franks. In the end he put into
these houses forty crossebowe men, which were day and night in the ditches,
and had commission to shoot at every man that approached near the castle
after the shutting of the gates, til they opened in the morning. Further, he
had an imagination that his subjects would be very ready to take the government
into their own hands when they should see convenient time. And sure some there
were that consulted to enter into Plessis and dispatch the affairs at their
pleasure, because nothing was dispatched; but they durst not attempt it,
wherein they did wisely, for the K. had given good order for that matter. He
changed often both the grooms of his chamber and al his other servants,
saying, that nature delights in variety; and he had with him to bear him
company one or two very mean men and of evil report, who might well have
thought if they had been wise, that immediately after his death they should at
the least be put out of office and spoiled of all they had, as also it happened.
These informed him of no message that was sent him, not of any matter that was
written to him, were it never so important, unless it touched the preservation
of the State, or the defense of his realm: for that was his only care to be
in truce and peace with all men. He gave to his Physician ordinarily every
month ten thousand crowns, and in five months he received of him 54000. He
gave also goodly lands to churches; but this gift was made void, and not
without cause, for the clergy men had too much.

The Notes.
1 It was forty days: but because the old copy has 15. days, and that
himself also afterward in this very chapter says thus; This sickness held him
about fifteen days, I have been bold to amend it.

2 King Lewis was suspected to have poisoned his father by Adam Fumee his
fathers physician, who was imprisoned by King Charles, but soon after
advanced to honor by King Lewis, who so maruellously reioiced at the first
news of his fathers death (being the self same day that his father died,
which was strange, King Lewis being then at Genappe in Brabant) that in the
self same place he built a chapel to our Lady.

3 It was 15000. but the old copy had 1500000. and so undoubtedly it is to be
read: for for 15000. franks will hardly maintain 100. soldiers a year.

How the King caused the holy man of Calabria to come to Tours, thinking that
he could heal him: and what strange things the said King did to maintain his
authority during his sickness. Chap. 8.
AMong men famous for devotion, he sent into Calabria for one Friar Robert,
whom he called the holy man, because of his holy life, and in whose honor the
King that now is, caused a Church to be built at Plessis du Parc, in place of
the chapel near to Plessis at the bridge foot. This heremite being twelve
years of age entered into a rock, where he remained till he was forty three
years old, or there about, to wit, even till this present that the King sent
for him by one of the stewards of his house, whom the Prince of Tarente the
King of Naples son accompanied thither. For the said heremite would not
depart thence, without permission both of the Pope and of his Prince; which was
great wisdom in so simple a man. He builded in the place where he lived two
Churches, and never ate since the time he entered into this strait kind of
life, either fish, flesh, eggs, any kind of whitmeate, or of fat. I never saw
in my time a man of so holy life, nor by whose mouth the holy Ghost seemed
rather to speak; for he never had been scholar, but was utterly unlearned:
true it is that his Italian tongue caused somewhat the greater admiration of him.
This heremite passed through Naples, being honored and received, as if he had
been a great Legate sent from the Sea Apostolic; both by the King and by his
children, with whom he communed of the affairs of the Court, as if he had
been a Courtier all the days of his life. From thence he went to Rome, where
he was visited by all the Cardinals, and had audience given him thrice of the
Pope, communing with him alone, and sitting each time hard by him in a goodly
chair three or four hours together; which was great honor to so simple a
person. His answers were so wise, that all men woondered at them; so far forth
that our holy Father gave him leave to erect a new order, called the heremites
of Saint Francis. From thence he came to the King, who honored him as if he had
been the Pope himself, falling down before him, and desiring him to prolong
his life: whereunto he answered as a wise man should. I have often heard him
talk with the King that now is, in presence of all the nobility of the
realm, and that within these two months, and sure he seemed by his words, to
be inspired with the holy Ghost, otherwise he could never have communed of such
matters as he did. He is yet living, and may change either to better or worse:
wherefore I will speak no further of him. Some mocked at this heremites
coming, whom they called the holy man; but they knew not the deep cogitations
of this wise King, neither had seen the occasions that moved him to send for
him.

The King lay in his castle of Plessis accompanied with few besides the archers
of his guard, and troubled with these suspicions above rehearsed.
Notwithstanding he had given good order for this inconvenience, for he left
none of those whom he suspected either in town or country, but made his
archers to cause them to depart and to conueigh them away. No man debated any
matter with him, unless it were of some great importance that concerned
himself: he seemed rather a dead corpse then a living creature, for he was
leaner then a man would believe: he appare lled himself sumptuously, yea more
sumptuously then in all his life before; for he ware no gown but of crimsin
satin furred with good marterns: he gave gifts to whom it pleased him without
any suit; for no man durst move any suit to him, nor debate any matter with
him: he punished faults sharply to the end he might be feared, and not lose
his authority as himself told me: he changed officers, cassed companies of
men of arms, diminished pensions, or took them clean away, and told me but a
few days before his death that he passed away the time in making and undoing
of men. To be short, he caused himself to be more spoken of within his realm
then ever was any King, and all for fear lest men should think him dead. For
as I said, few saw him but when they hard of his doings; all men stood in fear
of him, so far forth that they hardly believed him to be sick. Out of the
realm he had men in all places, as for example in England he had some to feed
K. Edward still with hope of his daughters marriage, and he paid truly both
him and his servants all that was due unto them. Out of Spain he received
goodly words and fair promises of perfect freindship and amity, and great
presents from all places: he made a good horse or a good mule to be bought for
him whatsoever it cost; but this he did not in this realm, but in some strange
country to persuade men that he was in health. Dogs he sent for round about,
into Spain for a kind of Spanish greyhound, called in French Allans; into
Britain for little beagles, greyhounds and spaniels, which he paid dear for;
into Valence for little rugged dogs, which he made to be bought above the
owners own price; into Sicily he sent for good mules, especially to some
officer of the country, for the which he paid double the value; to Naples for
horses, and for diverse strange beasts into diverse countries, as into Barbary
for a kind of little lions, no greater then little foxes, which he called
Adites; into Denmark and Sweden for two kind of strange beasts, one of the
which were called Helles 1, being of shape like a Heart, and of the greatness of
a buffe, with horns short and thick; the other Rengiers 2, being of the bigness
and color of a bucke, save that their horns be much greater: for each of the
which two beasts he gave to the merchants that sold them 4500. guildons. But
when all these strange things were brought him he made no account of them, no,
very seldom spoke with those that brought them. To be short, he did so many
such like strange things that he was more feared now both of his neighbors and
subjects than ever before, which was his only desire, for to that end did he
all this.

The Notes.
1 Gesnerus de Quadrupedibus lib. 1. fol. 1. and Munster in the third book of
his Cosmographie in his treatise of Prussia (where this beast is found) name
this beast in Greek (...), in Latin Alces, in Dutch Elch, Ellend, Hellend,
and Ellent: which is not far from the name here given. The Moscouites name it
Lozzos.

2 This beast, says Munster Cosmog. lib. 4. is found in Lapponia or
Lappenland, a country in Sweden. The Lapponians call it Reen, as he writes in
the same place, and Gesner also de Quadrup. lib. 1. fol. 950. The Romans, says
Gesner, name it Rangiferus, the Germans Rein (and Reinen, says Munster)
Reiner, Rainger, Renschieron: the French men Rangier (as he is here named) or
Ranglier.

How the marriage between the Daulphin and the Lady Margaret of Flaunders was
concluded, and how she was brought into France: whereupon Edward King of
England died for sorrow. Chap. 9.
But to return to the principal matter, namely, the perfect conclusion of
this our history of King Lewis, and of the affairs of all those great Princes
that lived in his time: we must show how the treaty of marriage was concluded
between the King that now is, then Daulphin, and the daughter of the Duke and
Duchess of Austriche, by means of the citizens of Gaunt, to the King of
Englands great grief, who then well perceived the hope to be frustrate, which
he had conceived of the marriage between his daughter and the said Daulphin
now King of France: which he and the Queen his wife had so greatly desired,
that they would never credit any man that advertised them to the contrary,
were he English man or stranger. For the Council of England had debated this
matter with him, at the same time that the King conquered that part of Picardie
that ioineth to Calice, alleging, that after he had subdued that, he might
easily attempt to take Calice and Guisnes. The like was also told him, by the
ambassadors resident in England for the Duke and Duchess of Austriche, and by
the Britons, and diverse others: but he believed no whit of all this, which
incredulity turned much to his loss. Notwithstanding I suppose, it proceeded
rather of covetousness than ignorance: for he feared the loss of the fifty
thousand crowns the King paid him: besides that, he was loath to leave his ease
and pleasures, whereunto he was maruellously addicted. About the conclusion of
this marriage, an assembly was held at Halots in Flaunders, whereat the Duke of
Austriche now King of Romans, was present, together with certain deputies for
the three estates of Flaunders, Brabant, and the other countries belonging to
the said Duke and his children. The citizens of Gaunt did many things there
contrary to the Dukes mind; for some they banished, and some they removed
from about his son: in the end they told him how great desire they had to see
this marriage accomplished, thereby to obtain peace, and forced him to consent
thereunto. The Duke was very young, and accompanied with few noble men: for all
the subjects of this house of Burgundy (very few excepted, I mean of great
personages, that could have given him counsel or aid in these affairs) were,
as you have heard, either dead, or revolted to the King. As touching himself,
he was come thither very slenderly accompanied, and now having lost his wife,
being Lady of the country, he durst not give them so stout language, as before
he was accustomed. To be short, the King being advertised of all these actions
by Monseur de Cords, reioiced much thereat, and a day was appointed when this
Lady should be brought to Hedin.

Not long before the conclusion of this marriage, to wit, in the year 1481.
the town of Air was yielded for a sum of money to Monseur de Cords, by the
Lord of Croy of the country of Artois, who held it for the Duke of Austriche,
and the Lord of Beures his captain. The town is very strong, situate in the
country of Artois, and the delivery thereof increased the Flemmings desire to
further this marriage, because it stands upon the very entrance into
Flaunders. For notwithstanding that they wished the weakening of their Prince,
yet were they not willing to have the King so near a neighbor to their
frontiers. After these matters above mentioned were fully concluded,
ambassadors came to the King out of Flaunders and Brabant, but all depended
upon them of Gaunt; both because of their force, because the children were in
their hands, and for that they were always the ringleaders of all tumults.
There came also from the King of Romans for the pacifying of his dominions
certain Knights, young men like himself, and of small experience, whose names
were Master John de Bergues and Master Baudouin de Launoy, and certain
Secretaries. The King was brought marvelous low with sickness, so that hardly
he suffered himself to be seen, and made great difficulty to swear the
treaty, because he was loath to come abroad in sight: notwithstanding in the
end he swear it. It was very auantageous for him; for in all assemblies that
had been held heretofore about this marriage, he never required but the
county of Artois or Burgundy, one of the two: but now the Lords of Gaunt (as
he termed them) caused them both to be yielded unto him, together with the
counties of Masconnois, Charolois, and Auxerrois; yea and if it had lien in
them to have put into his hands, Hainault and Namur, and all the seniories of
this house of Burgundy, being of the French language, they would willingly
have done it, thereby to affeeble their Prince. The King our Master being a
wise Prince understood well, that no account was to be made of Flaunders, nor
the Earl thereof, without he had the country of Artois, which lying between
the King of France and the Flemmings, is as it were a bridle to them. For in
the country of Artois are levied very good soldiers, to scourge the Flemmings
when they play the fools. Wherefore by taking away from the Earl of Flaunders
the country of Artois, he left him the poorest Prince in the world, and
without all obedience of his subjects, save only at the pleasure of them of
Gaunt. After this embassage was returned home, the said Lady was led to Hedin,
and delivered into the hands of Monseur de Cords in the year 1483. She was
conveyed thither by the Lady of Rauastain, bastard daughter to Duke Philip of
Burgundy, and was received there by the Duke and Duchess of Bourbon that now
are, and by the Lord of Albret, and diverse others sent thither by the King; who
led her to Amboise where the Daulphin lay. If the Duke of Austriche could have
rescued her before she was passed out of his dominions from them that conveyed
her, he would willingly have done it: but they of Gaunt had sent her well
accompanied. And as touching the said Duke, all his subjects began to disobey
him, so far forth that a great number took part with them of Gaunt, because
they had his son in their hands, and removed from him, and placed about him
such as pleased them: and among the rest that were resident at Gaunt, was the
Lord of Rauastain brother to the Duke of Cleues, principal governor of the
said young infant called Duke Philip, who is yet living, and like to be a great
Prince, if God spare him life. Whosoever reioiced at this marriage, the King of
England was highly displeased therewith; for he accounted it great reproach and
dishonor to be thus deluded, and feared both the loss of the pension the King
paid him, which the English men called Tribute; and also that the contempt
hereof would stir his subjects to rebellion against him, because he would give
no ear to good advice. Further, he saw the King with great force near to his
dominions: for the which causes he conceived such inward grief when he heard
these news, that soon after he ended his life, some say of a catarrhe. But
whatsoever his disease were, the report goes, that the sorrow conceived of
this marriage caused the disease, whereof he died soon after in the month of
April, anno 1483. It is a foul fault in a Prince, to trust more to his own
brain, than to the advice of a great number: for it causes oftentimes both
great sorrow, and also loss irrecouerable.

Immediately after King Edward's death, the King our Master was advertised
thereof, and seemed nothing ioifull of the news: but soon after received
letters from the D. of Gloucester, who had usurped the crown of England
(signing his letters by the name of Richard,) and cruelly murdered the King
his brothers two children. This King Richard sought the Kings friendship, and
was desirous, as I suppose, to have this pension paid also unto him. But the K.
would make no answer to his letters, neither give his messenger audience, but
esteemed him a wicked and cruel tyrant. For after K. Edward's death, the said
Duke of Gloucester had done homage to his nephew as to his sovereign Lord and
King, and yet immediately thereupon committed this murder, and caused in open
parliament the said King Edward's two daughters to be degraded and proclaimed
bastards, under color of a certain matter which he proved by the testimony
of a bishop of Bathe, who sometime had been in great credit with King Edward,
but afterward fell into his disgrace, and was laid in prison, and made to fine
for his deliverance. This Bishop affirmed that King Edward being in love with
a certain gentlewoman in England (whom he named) promised her marriage to have
his pleasure of her, which promise he said was made in his presence, and
thereupon the King lay with her, minding only to abuse her. Such pastimes are
very dangerous, especially when such poofe may be brought forth: But I have
known many a courtier that would not have lost a good adventure that liked him
in such a case for want of promise. This wicked Bishop buried revenge in his
heart the space of twenty years. But God plagued him for his wickedness: for he
had a son whom he loved entirely, and whom King Richard so much favored, that
he meant to give him to wife one of these two daughters, degraded from their
dignity, at this present Queen of England and mother of two goodly children.
The said son being in a ship of war by King Richard his Masters commandment,
was taken upon the coast of Normandy, and because of the contention that fell
between those that took him: led to the court parliament of Paris, and there
put in prison in the petit Chastellet, where in the end he starued for hunger
and poverty. As touching King Richard he lived not long unpunished: for God
raised up an enemy against him even at This error you are admonished of before.
that very instant being poor, having no right to the crown of England, as I
suppose, and of no estimation, save that as touching his own person he was
well conditioned, and had endured many troubles. For the greatest part of his
life he had been prisoner in Britain to Duke Francis, who entertained him well
for a prisoner from the eighteenth year of his age. This Earl of Richmond
being furnished by the King with a small sum of money, and three thousand men
levied in Normandy, of the vnthriftiest persons in the country: passed over
into Wales, where his father in law the Lord Stanley met him with six and
twenty thousand men at the least. And within three or four days after he
encountered this cruel King Richard, who was slain in the field, and the Earl
crowned King, and reigns yet at this day in England. Of this matter I have
made mention before, but it was not amiss to rehearse it here again, to show
thereby how God has plagued in our time such cruelty almost immediately after
the fault committed. Diverse other such like punishments has he showed also in
this our age, if a man would stand to rehearse them all.

How the King behaved himself toward his neighbors and subjects during the
time of his sickness, and how diverse things were sent him from diverse places for
the recovery of his health. Chap. 10.
THis marriage of Flaunders so much desired by the King was thus accomplished,
as you have heard, by means whereof he had the Flemmings at his commandment.
Britain which he so much hated was in peace with him, but lived in continual
jealousy because of the great number of soldiers he had in garrison upon their
frontiers. Spain was quiet, and the King and Queen thereof desired nothing
more then his amity and friendship: for he kept them in fear and continual
charge, because of the country of Roussillon which he held from the house of
Arragon, being engaged to him by John King of Arragon, father to the King of
Castile now reigning, under certain conditions yet unperformed. As touching
the Princes and Seniories of Italy, they desired to have him their friend, and
were in league with him, and sent often their ambassadors to him. In Almaine he
had the Swissers as obedient to him as his own subjects. The King of Scotland
and Portugale were his confederates: part of the realm of Navarre was wholly
at his devotion: his subjects trembled before him, and his commandments were
executed incontinent without delay or excuse. As touching those things that
were thought necessary for his health, they were sent him out of all parts of
the world. Pope Sixtus that last died, being informed that the King of devotion
desired to have the corporal upon the which Saint Peter song mass, sent it
him incontinent, with diverse other relickes, which were conveyed back again
to Rome. The holy viole which is at Reims and never had been removed thence,
was brought into his chamber to Plessis, and stood upon his cupboord at the
hour of his death: he was determined to be anointed therewith as at his
coronation. But many supposed that he would have anointed all his body with it,
which is unlikely, for the said holy viole is very small, and contains not
much oil. I saw it both at the time I now speak of, and also when the King
was buried at Nostre-dame-de-Clery. The Turk that now reigns sent an
ambassador to him, who came as far as Rhiue in Prouence 1: but the King would
not hear his message, neither permit him to pass any further. The said
ambassador brought him a great role of relickes remaining yet at Constantinople
in the Turks hands, all the which he offered him together with a great sum of
money, if he would keep in safe custody the said Turks brother, who was then
in this realm in the hands of the knights of the Rhodes, and is now at Rome in
the Popes keeping. By all this above rehearsed a man may perceive how great the
King our Masters wisdom and authority was, how he was esteemed through the
whole world, and how all things 2 as well spiritual of devotion and religion;
as also temporal, were employed for the prolonging of his life. But all would
not help, there was no remedy, needs he must go the way his predecessors went
before him, one great grace God showed him, that as he created him wiser,
liberaller, and more virtuous in all things than the Princes that reigned in
his time, being his enemies and neighbors; and as he surmounted them in all
good things: so did he also pass them in long life though not much. For Duke
Charles of Burgundy, the Duchess his daughter, King Edward, Duke Galeas of
Milan, King John of Arragon, were all dead a few years before him: but
between the death of the said Duches of Austrich, of King Edward, and of him,
there was no space to speak of. In all these Princes there was both good and
evil, for they were all men; but to speak uprightly, there were in him many
mo virtues and ornaments appertaining to the office of a King, than in any of
the rest. I have seen them in manner all, and knew what was in them, and
therefore I speak not at randon.

The Notes.
1 It was Reims in the French, but that undoubtedly was false: the old copy
has Rhine or Rhine: others Rins: the Italian Ries.

2 King Lewis drank childrens blood to recover his health. Gaguin.

How King Lewis the 11. caused Charles the Daulphin his son to come to him a
little before his death, and of the commandments and precepts he gave both him
and certain others. Chap. 11.
IN this year 1483. the King desired to see the Daulphine his son, whom he
had not seen of long time; for he kept him close and permitted no man to come
to him, both because of the childs health, and also for fear least he should
be taken from the place where he remained, and under color of him some
rebellion arise in the realm. For so had certain noble men in times past by
means of himself made an assembly against King Charles the seventh his
father, he being then but eleven years of age 1: which war was called la
Praguerie, but it soon ended, for it was rather a broile of court than a war.

Above all things, he recommended unto his said son the Daulphine certain of
his servants, and commanded him expressly not to change certain officers:
rehearsing to him how after King Charles his fathers death, he coming to the
State, put out of office all the valiant and worthy knights of this realm
that had served his father in the conquest of Normandy and Guienne, in chasing
the English men out of France, and restoring the realm to peace and quietness,
(for himself found it both quiet and rich:) which his hard dealing with the
said knights, turned greatly to his prejudice, for thereof sprang the war
called THE WEAL PVBLIKE in this story above mentioned, which had almost set
him besides his crown. Soon after his communication with the Daulphine his
son, and the accomplishment of this marriage above mentioned; he fell upon a
monday into the disease whereof he died: his sickness endured til the saturday
after being the 30. of August, in the year 1483. And because I was present at
his death, I mind to speak somewhat thereof. When this disease took him he
lost his speech as before, which being recovered he felt his body weaker than
ever it was, notwithstanding that he were so low brought before that he could
hardly lift his hand to his mouth, and looked so poorly and miserably, that it
pitied every man's heart that saw him: he accounted himself now as dead.
Wherefore he sent incontinent for the Lord of Beauieu now Duke of Bourbon his
son in law, commanding him to go to Amboise to the King his son, (for so he
termed him:) he recommended also unto him diverse of his servants, and gave him
the whole charge and government of the young King, and commanded expressly
that certain whom he named should not come near his son, alleging diverse
good reasons on that behalf. And if the said Lord of Beauieu had observed his
commandments, at the least part of them (for some were unreasonable and not to
be observed) I think he should thereby have benefited both the realm and
himself, considering what has happened since in France. Soon after he sent
also the Chauncellor, and all the officers of the law to the said King his
son, and in like manner part of the archers of his guarde, and his Captains,
and all his hawks and hounds with all that appertained thereunto. Further, as
many as came to visit him, he commanded to go to Amboise to the King (for so he
termed him) desiring them to serve him faithfully, and by every one of them he
sent him some message or other; but especially by Steven de Verse, who brought
up the said young King, and was the first groom of his chamber, and already
advanced to the bailiwicke of Meaux, by the King our Master. His speech never
failed him after he recovered it, neither were his wits so fresh at any time as
then: for he purged continually, by means whereof all fumes voided that
troubled his head. In all the time of his sickness he never complained as
other men do when they feel pain: at the least I my self am of that nature,
and so have I known diverse others, and men say, that complaining asswageth
grief.

The Notes.
1 Others write that he was 16. years old: this was was anno 1439. and King
Lewis was borne anno 1423. so that he was 16. years old when the Praguerie
began, and so undoubtedly it should be read here.

A comparison between the sorrows and troubles that King Lewis suffered, and
those he caused diverse others to suffer: with a rehearsal of all that he did,
and all that was done to him, till his death. Chap. 12.
HE discoursed continually of some matter or other, and that very gravely, and
his disease endured from monday till saturday night. Wherefore I will now make
comparison between the troubles and sorrows he caused others to suffer, and
those he suffered himself before his death, because I trust they have carried
him into paradise, and been part of his purgatory. For notwithstanding that
they were not so grievous, neither endured so long, as those which he caused
diverse others to suffer; yet because his vocation in this world was higher then
theirs, by means whereof he had never been contraried, but so well obeyed
that he seemed a Prince able to have governed all Europe: this little trouble
that he endured contrary to his accostomed nature, was to him a great torment.
He hoped ever in this good heremite that was at Plessis whom he had caused to
come to him out of Calabria, and continually sent to him: saying, that if it
pleased him he could prolong his life. For notwithstanding all these
commandments given to those whom he sent to the Daulphine his son, yet came
his spirits again to him, in such sort that he was in hope to recover: and if
it had so happened, he would easily have disparckled the assembly sent to this
new King. But because of the vain hope he had in this heremite, a Doctor of
divinity and certain others thought good to advertise him that his only hope
must be in the mercy of God: and they devised that Master James Cothier his
Physician, in whom he had reposed his whole confidence, and to whom he gave
monthly ten thousand crowns in hope he would prolong his life: should be
present when this speech should be used to him. This was Master Oliver his
barbars devise, to the end he might wholly think upon his conscience, and
leave all his other imaginations conceived of this holy man, and of the said
Master James his Physician. But even like as he had advanced the said Master
Oliver and others too suddenly without any desert, to a higher estate than was
fit for them: even so they took upon them boldly to do such a message to so
great a Prince otherwise than became them, not using that reverence and
humility that was to be used in such a case, and such as they would have used
whom he had brought up of long time, and lately commanded out of his presence
for the suspicions conceived of them. And again, like as unto two great
personages whom he had put to death in his time, (to wit the Duke of Nemours,
and the Earl of Saint Paul: for one of the which he repented him at his
death, and for the other not;) he had sent a sharp message of death by
Commissioners appointed thereunto; the which briefly pronounced their sentence
unto them, and forthwith gave them confessors and but a very short space to
dispose of their consciences: even so the above named signified his death unto
him rudely and in few words saying; Sir it is reason we do our duties, hope no
more in this holy man, nor any other thing, for sure you are but dead:
therefore think upon your conscience, for your hour is come, and every one of
them said somewhat briefly to him to that effect. But he answered, I trust God
will help me, and peradventure I am not so sick as you suppose. What a sharp
corosife was it to him to hear these news and this cruel sentence? for never
man feared death more than he, nor sought so many ways to avoid it as he did.
Moreover, in all his life time he had given commandment to all his servants,
as well my self as others, that when we should see him in danger of death, we
should only move him to confess himself and dispose of his conscience, not
sounding in his ears this dreadful word Death, knowing that he should not be
able patiently to hear that cruel sentence: notwithstanding he endured both
that and diverse other punishments till the very hour of death more patiently
than ever I saw any man. To his son whom he called King, he sent many
messages and confessed himself very devoutly, and said diverse prayers
answerable to the Sacraments he received, which also he himself demanded. He
spoke as heartily as if he had not been sick, and talked of all matters
touching the King his sons estate; and among other things gave commandment
that the Lord of Cords should not depart from his son by the space of half
a year after his death: and further, that he should be entreated to attempt
nothing against Calice nor elsewhere; saying, that notwithstanding he had
devised these enterprises for the Kings profit, and the benefit of the realm:
yet were they very dangerous, especially that of Calice, for fear of moving
the English men thereby to war Further, he willed especially that after his
death the realm should rest in peace the space of five or six years, a
matter which he would never yield unto during his life though very needful:
for notwithstanding that it were great and large, yet was it in poor and
miserable estate, especially because of the passing to and fro of the men of
arms, who continually removed from one country to an other. He gave order
also that no quarrel should be picked in Britain, but that Duke Francis
should be suffered to live in quiet, and not be put in any doubt or fear of
war, neither yet any other neighbor bordering upon the realm, to the end
the King and the realm might rest in peace till the King were of years to
dispose thereof at his own pleasure.

Thus you see how indiscreetly his death was signified to him, which I have
rehearsed because I began to make a comparison between those evils which he
had caused diverse of his subjects to suffer, and those he himself suffered
before his death, to the end you may perceive that notwithstanding they were
not so grievous, nor so long (as I have said:) yet were they grievous to him
considering his nature, which demanded obedience, and had been better obeyed
than any Prince in his time; so that one half word contrarying his mind was
to him a grievous punishment. Five or six days before his death he had al men
in suspicion, especially all that were worthy of credit and authority, yea,
he grew jealous of his own son, and caused him to be straightly guarded,
neither did any man see him or speak with him but by his commandment: at the
length he began to stand in doubt also of his daughter, and of his son in law
now Duke of Bourbon, and would needs know what men entered into Plessis with
them, and in the end brake off an assembly that the Duke of Bourbon his son
in law held there by his commandment. Moreover, at the same time that his said
son in law and the Earl of Dunois (returning from the conuoie of the
embassage that came to Amboise to the marriage of the King his son and the
Queen) entered into the castle of Plessis, with a great band of men: the King
who caused the gates to be straightly kept, being in the gallerie that looks
into the court of the said castle; caused one of the captains of his guard to
come to him, whom he commanded to feel as he talked with the said noble men's
servants whether they wore any brigandines under their cloakes, not making
show as though he came purposely for that intent. Hereby you may perceive if
he caused diverse others to live in fear and suspicion under him: whether he
were paid now with the like himself; for of whom could he be assured,
mistrusting his son, his daughter, and his son in law? Wherefore thus much
I will say not only of him, but of all other Princes that desire to be feared:
that they never feel the revenge thereof till their age, and then their
penance is to fear all men. What great grief think you was it to this poor
King to be troubled with these passions? He had a Physician called Master James
Cothier, to whom he gave in five months 54000. crowns, after the rate of
10000. the month, and 4000. over, besides the Bishopric of Amiens for his
nephew, and other offices and lands for him and his friends. The said Physician
used him so roughly, that a man would not give his servant so sharp language
as he gave the King; and yet the King so much feared him, that he durst not
command him out of his presence: for notwithstanding that he complained to
diverse of him, yet durst he not change him as he did all his other servants,
because this Physician once said thus boldly unto him; I know that one day you
will command me away as you do all your other servants, but you shall not live
eight days after, binding it with a great oath. Which words put the King in
such fear, that ever after he flattered him, and bestowed gifts upon him,
which was a marvelous purgatory to him in this world, considering of how many
noble men and gentlemen he had been obeyed.

Moreover, he had caused diverse cruel prisons to be made, as for example,
cages being eight foot square, and one foot more than a man's height, some of
iron, and some of wood, plated with iron both within and without with horrible
iron works. He that first devised them was the Bishop of Verdun, who
incontinent was himself put into the first that was made, where he remained
fowerteene years. Many have cursed him for his devise, and among others my
self, for I lay in one of them under the King that now reigns the space of
eight months. He had also caused certain Almains to make terrible heavy
irons to lay men in, among the which there was a fetter to put on their feet
very hard to be opened like to a carquan, with a weighty chain, and a great
iron ball at the end thereof, heavy beyong all measure. These irons were called
the Kings nets. Notwithstanding I have seen diverse gentlemen lie in them as
prisoners, who came forth afterward with great honor, and were advanced by him
to great estates: as for example, a son of the Lord of Grutuze of Flaunders
taken prisoner in the wars, whom the King afterward richely married, and made
one of his chamber, and Seneschall of Aniou, and gave him charge of a hundred
lances; and in like manner the Lord of Piennes and the Lord of Vergy taken
prisoners also in the wars, who both had charge of men of arms under the King
and other goodly offices, and were of the privy chamber either to him or his
son. The like happened also to the Lord of Richbourg the Constables brother,
and to one Roquebertin of the country of Cathelonie being likewise taken
prisoners in the wars, whom he afterward highly advanced with diverse others of
diverse countries too long to rehearse. But now to return to the matter. As in
his time these diverse and sundry cruel prisons were devised: even so he
before his death lay in the like, yea in a much crueller prison than any of
them, and was in greater fear than they that stood in fear of him, which I
account as a great grace toward him, and as part of his purgatory, and
rehearse it only to show that every man of what estate or condition soever he
be, is punished either secretly or openly, especially those that punish others.
Further, the King a little before his death enclosed his castle of Plessis with
a grate of iron bars, and at the four corners of the said castle caused four
strong-watch houses of iron to be built. The said grate was made directly over
against the castle wall round about the castle on the outer side of the
ditch, which was very steep. He caused also to be masoned into the wall a
great number of iron spears, each of them having diverse heads set close
together. Moreover, he appointed ten crossebowe men to be continually in the
said ditches, and to lie in the four iron houses built in the bottom of the
said ditches, and gave them commandment to shoot at every man that approached
near to the grate, before the gate opened. He knew well that this
fortification was to no purpose against a great force or an army, but that he
doubted not: his only fear was, that certain noble men of his realm having
intelligence in the castle, would attempt to enter into it in the night,
partly by love and partly by force, and take the government upon them, and make
him live as a man bereft of his wits, and unworthy to rule. The castle gate
never opened before eight of the clock in the morning, neither was the draw
bridge let down till that hour, and then entered his officers, and the
captains of his guard placed the ordinary warders, and appointed archers to
the watch both at the gate and within the court, as if it had been a frontire
town straightly kept: neither entered any man without the Kings commandment
but by the wicket, save the stewards of his house, and such like officers that
went not to him. Is it possible then to hold a King (I mean using him like a
Prince) in a straiter prison than he held himself? The cages wherein he held
others were about eight foot square, and he being so great a Prince had but a
little court in the castle to walk in, yea and seldom came he into that: for
usually he kept himself in the gallerie, from whence he never stirred but when
he went to mass, at which time he passed through the chambers, and not through
the Court. Think you that he was not in fear as well as others, seeing he
locked himself in after this sort, kept himself thus close, stood in such
fear of his children and nearest kinsmen, and changed and removed his
servants from day to day, whom he had brought up and whose good estate depended
wholly upon him, in such sort that he durst trust none of them, but bound
himself in these strange chains and bands? The place I confess was larger
than a common prison, so was his estate greater than a common prisoners. But a
man will say peradventure, that other Princes have been more suspicious than
he, whereunto I agree: but none sure in our time, neither any so wise as he,
nor that had so good subjects as he had: and as touching them, peradventure
they were cruel tyrants, but he never punished any without desert. All this
above written I have rehearsed, not so much to publish the suspicions of the
King our Master: as partly to prove that the patient enduring of these
passions, being equal with those he had caused others to endure; and of this
sickness being sharp and troublesome to him, and the which he feared greatly
before he fell into it; is to be accounted as a punishment God gave him in this
world, to ease him in the world to come: and partly to give an example to those
that shall come after him, to have some more compassion on their people than he
had, and to be less rigorous in punishing than he was. Notwithstanding for my
part I am not able to accuse him, neither saw I ever a better Prince; for
though himself pressed his subjects, yet would he suffer none other so to do
friend or foe.

After all these fears, sorrows, and suspicions, God (according to his
accustomed goodness) wrought a miracle upon him, healing him both in soul and
body: for he took him out of this miserable world, being perfect of sense,
understanding, and memory, having received all his sacraments without all
grief to man's judgment, and talking continually even within a Pater noster
while of his death; so that he gave order for his funeral, and named those
that should accompany his body to the grave; saying ever, that he trusted to
die on no day but saturday, and that our Lady, in whom he had ever put his
confidence, and always devoutly served, had purchased him this grace, and sure
so it happened: for he ended his life upon saturday the 30. of August in the
year 1483. at eight of the clock at night, in the said castle of Plessis,
where he fell sick the monday before. His soul, I trust, is with God, and
rests in his blessed realm of paradise.

A discourse upon the misery of man's life, by the examples of those Princes
that lived in the authors time, and first of King Lewis. Chap. 13.
SMall hope may mean and poor men have in worldly honors, seeing this mighty
King, after so long trouble and travel about them, forsook them al, and could
not prolong his life one hour for all that he could do. I knew him and served
him in the flower of his age, and in his great prosperity; yet never saw I
himfree from toil of body and trouble of mind. Above al pastimes he loved
hunting and hauking in their seasons, hunting especially. As touching women, he
was free from that vice all the time that I served him: for a little before my
coming to him, he lost one of his sons, whose death he much lamented; and
soon after made a solemn vow to God in my presence, never to accompany with
any woman but the Queen his wife. Whereunto notwithstanding that he were bound
by the laws of marriage; yet was it much that he had such stay of himself,
especially the Queen being none of those in whose beauty a man could take
great delight, but otherwise a very virtuous Lady. In this pastime of hunting
he took almost as much pain as pleasure; for the toil was great, because he
ran the Heart to death by force. Besides that, he arose very early in the
morning, and oftentimes went far, neither could any weather make him leave his
sport. Sometime also he returned very weary and in manner ever displeased with
one or other: for this game is not always made as they wish that have the
ordering thereof: notwithstanding in all men's opinions, he for his part
understood it better than any man in his time. In this pastime he exercised
himself continually, lodging about in the villages till wars began. For almost
every summer there was somewhat to do between Duke Charles of Burgundy and
him: but when winter approached they used to make truce. He had great wars also
for the county of Roussillion with King John of Arragon, the King of Spaines
father that now lives. For notwithstanding that they were very poor, and in
war with their subjects, namely them of Barselonne and others, and that the
son were of no force: (for he expected the inheritance of King Friderike 1 of
Castile his wives brother, which afterward fell to him) yet because they had
the hearts of the subjects of the said country of Roussillion, they made great
resistance against him, which cost the King and his realm full dear: for many
a good man died and was slain there, and infinite treasure was consumed in
those wars; for they endured long.

Thus you see that the pleasure the King had was but one small time in the
year, and that joined with great toil and travel of his person: when his
body was at rest, his mind was occupied, for he had to do in many places, and
busied himself as much with his neighbors affairs as with his own, seeking to
place men in their houses 2, and to bestow the offices therein at his pleasure.
When he was in war he desired peace or truce, which notwithstanding when he had
obtained, he could not long away with. He meddled with many trifling matters in
his realm, which he might well have passed over: but such was his disposition
and life. And to say the truth, his memory was so excellent that he forgot
nothing, but knew all the world, all countries, and all men of estimation round
about him; so that he seemed a Prince woorthier to govern the whole world than
one realm alone. Of his youth I am able to say nothing, for I was not with him
at that time; notwithstanding what I have heard, that I will report. Being but
eleven years of age he was busied by certain Princes and others of the
realm, in a war against K. Charles his father, called la Praguerie, which
endured not long. And when he was grown to man's estate he married the King of
Scotlands daughter 3, and during her life never ioied with her 4: after her
death because of the factions and troubles that were in the King his fathers
court, he retired into his own country of Daulphine, whither a great number
of gentlemen accompanied him, yea many mo than he was able to maintain. While
he was in Daulphine he married the Duke of Sauoies daughter, and soon after
fell at variance with his father in law, so that sharp war arose between them.
King Charles seeing his son so well accompanied with gentlemen and men of
arms, determined to go against him in person with great force, and to chase
him out of the country by strong hand: wherefore he put himself upon the way,
and endeavored to withdraw his sons men from him, commanding them as his
subjects under pain of his displeasure to repair unto him. Whereunto diverse
obeyed, to the King our Masters great grief; who seeing his fathers
indignation against him, determined (notwithstanding that his force were great)
to depart thence, and leave the country to his fathers disposing. And in this
estate traveled he through Burgundy with a small train to Duke Philip, who
received him very honorably, furnished him with money to maintain his estate,
and gave yearly pensions to his principal servants, namely to the Earl of
Cominges, the Lord of Montauban and others, and bestowed also during his being
there diverse large gifts upon his other servants. Notwithstanding, because he
entertained such a number, his money failed often to his great grief, so that
he was forced to borow some where or other, otherwise his men would have
forsaken him; which undoubtedly is a great trouble to a Prince unaccustomed
thereunto. Thus you see that he was not without vexation and anguish of mind
during his abode in this house of Burgundy: for he was forced to faune both
upon the Duke and his principal servants, least they should wax weary of him,
for he was there a long time, to wit, the space of six years. Besides that,
his father sent ambassadors continually to the Duke, requiring him either to
put him forth of his dominions or send him back to him. Wherefore it is to be
thought that he was not idle nor without great vexation of mind. All these
things considered: when may a man say that he lived in joy and pleasure? Sure
in mine opinion from his childhood till his death he was in continual toil
and trouble, so that if all his pleasant and joyful days were numbered, I
think they should be found but few: yea I am fully persuaded, that for one
pleasant there should be found twenty displeasant. He lived about threescore
and one years; notwithstanding that he had conceived an imagination that he
should never pass threescore, saying, that no King of France of long time
passed that age, some say none since Charles the great. Notwithstanding the
King our Master when he died was well forward in the threescore and one year.

Duke Charles of Burgundy what rest or quietness had he more than the King our
Master? True it is that in his youth he was not much troubled, for he attempted
nothing til the two and twenty year of his age, but lived till that time in
health and at his ease. But then he began to busy himself with his fathers
officers, whom his father maintained against him: for the which cause he
absented himself and went into Holland, where he was well received and had
intelligence with them of Gaunt, and sometime also went thither himself. He
had not one penny of his father, but this country of Holland was marvelous
rich and gave him goodly presents, as did also diverse great towns of his other
Seniories, hoping thereby to win his favor in time to come. For it is a
common thing, especially among the vulgar sort, to love better, and seek
rather to him whose power is growing, than to him who is already so great that
he can be no greater 5. For the which cause Duke Philip, when men told him that
they of Gaunt loved his son marvelous well, and that he could skill of their
humor: was wont to answer, that their Prince in expectation they ever loved
deerly; but their Prince in possession they hated ever extremely, which saying
proved true. For after D. Charles began to reign over them they never loved
him, and that they well declared as before I have rehearsed: he also for his
part bare them as little good will, notwithstanding they did his posterity
more harm than they could do him. But proceed, after the time that Duke
Charles moved war for the towns in Picardie, which the King our Master had
redeemed of Duke Philip his father, and joined himself with the Princes of
this realm, in the war called THE WEAL PVBLIKE: he never was quiet, but in
continual travel both of body and mind. For his heart was so inflamed with
desire of glory, that he attempted to conquer all that lay about him. All
summer he kept the field with great danger of his person, and took upon
himself the charge and care of the whole army: all which trouble seemed yet
not sufficient to him. He was the first up and the last down, as if he had
been the poorest soldier in his camp. If he rested from wars at any time in
winter, yet was he busied all day long from six of the clock in the morning,
either in leuying of money, or receiving ambassadors, or giving them audience.
In this travel and misery ended he his days, and was slain of the Swissers
before Nancy, as you have heard; so that a man may justly say, that he never
had good day from the time that ambition first entered into his mind, till the
hour of his death. And what got he by all this travel? what needed he thus to
have toiled himself, being so rich a Prince, and having so many goodly towns
and seniories under his subjection, where he might have lived in great joy and
prosperity, if it had so pleased him? I must now speak of Edward K. of
England, who was so great and mighty a Prince. In his youth he saw the Duke of
York his father discomfited and slain in battle, and with him the Earl of
Warwicks father 6, the which Earl of Warwick governed King Edward in his
youth, and all his affairs; yea to say the truth made him King, and was the
only man that defeated his enemy King Henry, who had reigned many years in
England, and was lawful King both in mine opinion, and in the judgment of the
whole world. But as touching great realms and seniories God holds them in
his hand, and disposes of them at his pleasure; for all proceeds of him. The
cause that moved the Earl of Warwick to serve the house of York against King
Henry, who was of the house of Lancaster, was this. The Earl of Warwick and
the Duke of Sommerset fell at variance in King Henry's court, who was a very
simple man: the Queen his wife being of the house of Aniou, daughter to Rene
King of Sicilie, took part with the Duke of Sommerset against the Earl. But
considering that they had all acknowledged both King Henry and his father and
grandfather for their lawful Princes: the said Lady should have done much
better to have taken upon her the office of Judge or mediator between them,
than to take part with either of them, as the sequel well declared. For
hereupon arose war, which continued nine and twenty years: during the which
space many bloody battles were fought, and in the end, all in manner both of
the one party and the other slain. Now to speak a word or two of factions:
surely they are marvelous dangerous, especially among great men, who are
naturally inclined to nourish and maintain them. But you will say
peradventure, that by this means the Prince shall have intelligence of all
things that pass, and thereby hold both the parties in the greater fear. In
truth I can well agree that a young Prince use this order among Ladies: for by
this means he shall have pleasure and sport enough, and understand of all
their news: but to nourish factions among men, yea among Princes and men of
virtue and courage, nothing can be more dangerous, because by that means he
shall kindle an unquenchable fire in his house: for forthwith one of the
parties will suppose the King to be against them, and then to fortify
themselves take intelligence with his enemies. The factions of Orleans and
Burgundy prove this point sufficiently; for the wars that sprang thereof
continued threescore and twelve years, the English men being parties in them,
who thought to have conquered the whole realm. But to return to King Edward,
he was very young when his father was slain, and the beautifullest Prince in
the world: but after he had vanquished all his enemies, he gave himself wholly
to pleasures, as to dames, feasting, banketting, and hunting; in the which
delicacies he continued about sixteen years 7, to wit, till the Earl of
Warwick and he fell at variance, in the which wars notwithstanding that the
King were chased out of his realm; yet continued he not long in that estate:
for he soon returned, and having obtained the victory, more abandoned
himself to all pleasures than before. He feared no man, but fed himself
marvelous fat, by means whereof in the flower of his age diseases grew upon
him, so that he died in a manner suddenly, of an Apoplexy, and his heirs males
lost the crown, as before you have heard.

In this our age reigned also two valiant and wise Princes, namely Mathias King
of Hungary, and Mahomet Ottoman Emperor of Turkey. This King Mathias was son
to a valiant knight called the white knight of Vallachie 8, a gentleman of
great wisdom and virtue, who governed long the realm of Hungary, and
obtained many goodly victories against the Turks 9, who border upon the said
realm, by reason of the Seniories they have usurped in Greece and Slauonie 10.
Soon after his death King Lancelot came to man's estate 11, who was right heir
not only of the realm of Hungary, but also of Bohemia and Polonia. He by the
counsel of certain caused the white knights two sons to be apprehended,
alleging that their father had usurped too great rule and authority in the
realm, and that the sons being gentlemen of great courage might peradventure
attempt the like. Wherefore the said King Lancelot resolved to lay them both
in prison, and incontinent put the elder to death 12, and sent the said Mathias
prisoner to Bude the chief town of Hungary, where he remained not long. And I
suppose that God took in good part the great services his father had done. For
soon after King Lancelot was poisoned at Prage in Bohemia 13, by a
gentlewoman of a good house (whose brother my self have seen) of whom he was
enamored, and she likewise of him; so far forth that she being displeased with
his marriage with the daughter of Charles the seventh King of France now called
Princess of Vienna (against his promise made to her) poisoned him in a bathe,
as she gave him a piece of apple to eat, having conueighed the poison into the
haft of her knife. Incontinently after King Lancelots death, the Barons and
Nobles of the realm assembled to choose a new King: for the custom of the
country is, when the King dies without issue, that the Nobles may proceed to
an election. And while they were there in great division about their chose; the
white Knights widow mother to Mathias came into the town with a goodly train:
for because she had great treasure left her by her husband; she was soon able
to levy great forces: and further, I think she had good intelligence both in
the town and also among the Nobility, because of the great sway her husband
had borne in the realm. She rode straight to the prison and took her son
out of it 14. Whereupon part of the Barons and Prelates there assembled for the
election, fled for fear, the rest chose the said Mathias King, who reigned in
the realm with as great prosperity as any King these many years, and has
been as highly praised and commended, yea more in some points than any of his
predecessors. He was one of the valiantest men that lived in his time, and
obtained great victories against the Turks, without all damage to his own
realm, the which he enlarged on all sides, as well toward Bohemia the greatest
part whereof he held, as also toward Valachie where he was borne, and toward
Sclauonie. In like manner upon the frontiers of Almaine he wan the greatest part
of Austrich from the Emperor Frederic now reigning, and possessed it till his
death, which happened in the year 1491. in Vienna the chief town of Austrich.
This King governed his affairs with great wisdom, as well in peace as war: but
a little before his death perceiving himself to be feared of his enemies, he
grew marvelous pompous and sumptuous in his Court, and amassed an infinite
quantity of goodly stuff, jewels and plate, for the furniture of his house.
All his affairs were dispatched by himself or by his direction. Before his
death his subjects stood in great fear of him, for he waxed cruel, and soon
after fell into a grievous and incurable disease being but young, to wit, eight
and twenty years of age 15, or thereabout. He died having spent his life in
much more labor and travel than pleasure. The Turk above mentioned 16 was a
wise and noble Prince, but using wiles and subtlety more than courage and
valor. True it is that his father left him great, for he had been a hardy
Prince, and wan Adrianople 17, which is as much to say, as the city of Adrian.
This Turk that I now write of, took in the three and twentieth year of his
age the city of Constantinople 18. I have seen his pourtraiture when he was
of those years, the lineaments whereof made show of an excellent wit. It was a
shame for all Christendom to suffer the town so to be lost: for he took it
by assault, and the Emperor of the East whom we call Emperor of Constantinople,
was slain himself at the breach 19, with a number of valiant men, and diverse
women of great estate and noble houses ravished: to be short, no cruelty was
omitted. This was his first exploit, but not his last, for he continued till
his death in atchieuing great enterprises: so that I heard once an ambassador
of Venice tell Duke Charles of Burgundy that he had conquered two Empires,
four realms, and two hundred cities. He meant the Empires of Constantinople
and Trapezonde 20; the realms of Bosne 21, Syria, Armenia, and I think Morea
22 was the fowerth, in the which the Venetians held two places. He conquered
also diverse goodly Isles in the sea, called Archipell 23, near to the said
Morea, with the Isles of Nigrepont 24 and Mitilene: he subdued in like manner the
greatest part of Albanie and Sclauonie. And as his conquests were great against
the Christians, so were they also against them of his own law, of whom he
destroyed many a great Prince, as the Caraman 25 and diverse others. The
greatest part of his affairs he governed by his own wisdom, as did our King
and the King of Hungary also: who were three of the greatest Princes that
reigned these hundred years. But the courtesy and course of life of the King
our Master, and his good usage both of his own servants and strangers, far
passed both the others; and no marvel, for he was the most Christian King. As
touching worldly pleasures this Turk had his fill; for he spent the greatest
part of his life in them, and had he not been so much addicted to them,
undoubtedly he would have done much more mischief. There was no fleshly vice
that he was free from, but in gluttony he passed, and according to his diet,
diseases fell upon him: for every spring (as I have heard those report that
have seen him) his legs swelled as big as a man's body, notwithstanding they
brake not, but the swelling assuaged of it self. No surgeon could tell the
cause of this disease save only that it proceeded of gluttony, and it may be
that it was some special punishment of God. His said disease was the cause he
came so seldom abroad, and kept himself so close in his chariot, fearing that
the miserable estate he was in, would cause his subjects to despise him. He
died being two and fifty years of age 26 or there about, in manner suddenly:
notwithstanding, he made his Testament, which I my self have seen, wherein he
made conscience of a subsidy lately levied upon his subjects, if the said
Testament be true. Let Christian Princes then weigh well what they ought to do,
considering that they have no authority in right and reason to leuy any thing
upon their subjects without their permission and consent.

The conclusion of the Author.
You see here a great number of great personages dead in short space, who
traveled so mightily, and endured so many anguishes and sorrows to purchase
honor and renoume, whereby they abridged their lives, yea and peradventure
charged their souls. I speak not this of the Turk, for I make account he is
lodged with his predecessors; but our King and the rest, I trust, God has
taken to his mercy. Now to speak of this point as a man unlearned, but having
some experience: had it not been better both for these great Princes themselves
and all their subjects that lived under them, and shall live under their
successors, to have held a mean in all things, that is to say, to have
attempted fewer enterprises, to have feared more to offend God, and persecute
their subjects and neighbors so many sundry ways above rehearsed, and to have
used honest pleasures and recreation? Yes sure. For by that means their lives
should have been prolonged, diseases should not so soon have assailed them,
their death should have been more lamented, and less desired; yea, and they
should have had less cause to fear death. What goodlier examples can we find
to teach us that man is but a shadow, that our life is miserable and short,
and that we are nothing, neither great nor small? For immediately after our
death, all men abhor and loath our bodies, and so soon as the soul is
severed from the body, it goes to receive judgment; yea undoubtedly at the
very instant that the soul and body part, the judgment of God is given
according to our merits and deserts, which is the particular judgment of God.

The Notes.
1 For ought I can read in any history, this Frederike should be Henry, and
so appears by our author himself, lib. 5. cap. 7. and cap. 18.

2 Asin Britain, Sauoye, and Prouence under King Rene.

3 Others write that he was but 14. years old when he married her; which was
in the year 1437. and she died ann. 1445.

4 This Ladies name was Margaret, she was sister to James the second King of
Scotland: she was of a loathsome complexion, and had an unsavory breath;
wherefore the King loved her not.

5 This is agreeable with Pompeies saying to Sylla, that the Romans did
Orientem potius quam occidentem solemn venerari.

6 The Earl of VVarwicks father was Richard Neuill Earl of Salisburie, who
was not slain at the battle of Wakefield with Richard Duke of York, but
taken, and within a day or two after beheaded, and his head sent to York, as
the said Dukes had been.

7 Commines says here, that King Edward had lived sixteen years in
delicacies when the Earl of Warwick chased him out of his realm: yet before
lib. 3. he says twelve or thirteen years, somewhat nearer to the truth; for
indeed he was chased the 10. year of his reign.

8 This white knight is named Johannes Huniades Coruinus, his fathers name was
Buth, of the country of Valachie, corruptly printed in the French Vallagine.

9 To wit, 20. and fought in one day against Amurathes and his Bashaes six
great battles, and obtained victory in them all.

10 Sclauonie is the country of Illyria.

11 Some write that this Lancelot called in Latin stories Ladislaus came to
full years before Huniades death, and gave him in recompense of his service
the Earldom of Bristrich, and yet afterward sought to kill him by the
persuasion of Vlrich Earl of Cilie the said Ladislaus uncle: but Huniades
valiantly defended himself, and soon after died. But indeed the truth is,
that Ladislaus was borne the 21. of February 1440. and Huniades died the 10. of
September 1456. so that at Huniades death Ladislaus was almost 17. years of
age, and by the persuasion of this Earl Vlrich had taken the government upon
himself.

12 The elder brothers name was Ladislaus. The cause of his death was, for that
in defense of himself he had slain the Earl Vlrich, who assaulted him, as
before he had done his father, and continually sought both his blood and his
brothers. Wherefore the King caused both the brethren deceitfully to be taken,
and beheaded the elder being five or six and twenty years of age. It is
written, that the hangman gave him three strokes with the sword, before he
could pearse his skin.

13 King Ladislaus died of poison the 21. of November 1457.

14 Other histories vary much in this point from Commines: for they make no
mention of Mathias delivery by his mothers means, but say that King Ladislaus
being hated in Hungary for Huniades elder sons death, departedinto Bohemia,
leading Mathias with him as prisoner, where soon after this Ladislaus died of
poison, as here before ^ention is made. After his death George Boiebrac
usurped the realm of Bohemia, this Mathias being still prisoner at Prague: but
the nobles of Hungary, because of his fathers great services, chose him their
King, and sent to the said Boiebrac requiring his delivery: who not only
accomplished their request on that behalf, but also gave the said Mathias his
daughter in marriage, and sent him into Hungary nobly accompanied.

15 This place is maruellously corrupted; for King Mathias was borne the 24. of
February 1443. and died the fifth of April at Vienna of an Apoplexy the year
1490. or as our author says 1491. so that by this computation he lived about
48. years, and so undoubtedly this 28. must be read 48.

16 This Turk is Mahomet the second.

17 Others write that Amurathes the third Emperor of Turkey wan Adrianople, and
it may be that the name deceived our author: for this Turks fathers name was
also Amurathes; but this was Amurathes the second, and he that wan Adrianople
Amurathes the first.

18 Constantinople was taken ann. 1453. the 29. of May.

19 This Emperor was named Constantinus Paleologus: but as others write he
was not slain at the breach, but thronged to death in the gate as he would
have fled.

20 How he conquered Trapezonde, Syria, Armenia, appears after in the figure
25.

21 It is corruptly in the French Bressanne. This realm of Bosne he conquered
over Stephen King of that country ann. 1463. but Mathias King of Hungary
soon after recovered it again.

22 Morea was in times past Peloponnesus.

23 This Archipell is Mare Aegeum, in the which the yles called Cyclades lie.

24 Nigrepont in times past was Euboea.

25 The French books have some of them the Carnian, some the Carmanian, and
some (because they will be sure not to err) nothing. But undoubtedly it is to
be read as I have here translated it. For further declaration whereof we
must understand, that about the year 1250. four noble houses came out of
Persia with their captains and armies, the Otthomans, Assembecs, Scandelors
or Candelors, and the Caramans. All these four houses subdued every one of
them some region: the Otthomans won Bithynia, Phrygia, Galatia. The Assembecs
Syria, Armenia, Cappadocia, Paphlagonia. The Scandelors held the greatest part
of Pontus: and the Caramans Cilicia, Lycia, Lycaonia, Pamphylia. But the house
of Otthoman in the end devoured all the other three. The Assembecs were
vanquished by this Mahomet ann. 1459. For you shall understand, that
Vsumcassanes King of the Assembecs fought three great battles with this
Mahomet. In the two first he ouerthrevv him, but in the third he was utterly
overthrown, by reason that Mahomet had great artillery in his camp, which
novelty (unknown before to the easterly nations) discomfited Vsumcassanes
army, who in this battle lost also his son Zeinalde. After this battle
Mahomet won all Cappadocia, Paphlagonia, and took Trapezonde the seat of the
Assembecs empire, with the greatest part of Armenia and Syria, as mention is
here made. Further, after this battle Mahomet took from Pyramitus Prince of
the Caramans, the greatest part of Cilicia: and after this Mahomets death
Bajazet his son slew in battle Abraham the last Prince of the Caramans, and
utterly destroyed that house. As touching the Scandelors, after the Assembecs
and Caramans were destroyed, the Prince of the Scandelors yielded his country
to Bajazet, and in exchange thereof had certain revenues given him in Natolia.
And thus were all the three houses subdued by the house of Otthoman: which
discourse for the better understanding of this place, I have been forced to
write somvvhat at large.

26 Others write 58. and others 56. but sure our author reports his age
truli^^^: for he was borne ann. 1430. the 24. of March, and died of the
collicke 1481. the third of May, so that he was entered into his two and
fiftith year.

A SVPPLY OF THE HISTORY OF PHILIP DE COMMINES FROM THE death of King LEWIS
the II. till the beginning of the wars of Naples, to wit, from 1483. till 1493.
of all the which time Commines vvriteth nothing.
Of King Charles his coming to the crown, of the death of Oliver King Lewis
his Barber and others, and of the reuoking of King Lewis his superfluous gifts.
Chap. 1.
AFter the death of Lewis the eleventh, Charles the 8. his only son being
13. years of age and two months, succeeded to the crown: notwithstanding his
coronation was deferred till the month of June in the next year, to the end
he might be full fowerteen when he should be crowned. The King his father had
brought him up at Amboise in such solitarines, that none besides his ordinary
servants could have access unto him; neither permitted he him to learn any
more Latin than this one sentence: He that cannot dissemble cannot reign:
which he did not for that he hated learning, but because he feared that study
would hurt the tender and delicate complexion of the child. Notwithstanding
King Charles after he was come to the crown, grew very studious of learning,
aod gave himseife to the reading of stories and books of humanity written in
the French tongue, and attempted to understand Latin.

Before the Kings coronation, the Princes of the blood and the nobles of the
realm, who so often had been iniuried in the late King Lewis his time by
Oliver le Dain his barber, by Daniell a Flemming the said Oliuers servant, and
by John D'oyac; (which three had wholly governed the said King Lewis,) caused
informations secretly to be exhibited against them for diverse murders,
rapines, and other heinous crimes that they had committed in King Lewis his
time, yea and some of them by his commandment: the which informations being
seen by the court Parliament, they were forthwith apprehended, their process
made, and in the end all three condemned: and the next year being 1484. the
said Oliver and Daniell his man were hanged at Paris, and D'oyac had his ears
cut off, and his tongue bored through with a hot iron. One of the crimes
committed by Oliver and Daniell, for the which they were executed was this: A
gentleman was committed to prison by King Lewis his commandment, whose wife
being young and beutifull, was contented to abandon her self to the lust of
this Oliver, upon promise that he should deliver her husband out of prison to
her; but the next day he caused Daniell his man to put him into a sack, and to
throw him into the river, where he was miserably drowned. This Oliver was a
Flemming borne, and had been barber to King Lewis, and of greater credit with
him than any man in all France, which his credit grew by vile and slavish
offices that he did about the King, so far forth that he ordinarily sucked the
Kings hemorrhoides; wherewith he was often troubled, which base service he did,
not for good will that he bare the King, but only for covetousness and to
maintain his credit, which ended soon after the King his Masters death as you
have heard: notwithstanding the great charge that the King upon his deathbed
had given his son to love the said Oliver, and not to suffer him to be
spoiled of that which he had bestowed upon him, because his service had long
preserved his life. But howsoever Princes maintain such lewd ministers in
their lives, and how ready soever such servants be to execute their Masters
unlawful and wilful commandments, supposing that they shall never be called
to account therefore: yet in the end they find that credit in Court is no
inheritance, and that God who leaves nothing unpunished, finds a time to
reward them according to their deserts. Further, soon after King Lewis his
death, consultation was had of the superfluous and superstitious gifts made by
him in his life, all the which were revoked, and all that was given reunited to
the crown.

Of the assembly of the States held at Touars, of the Duke of Orleance pursuit
for the regencie, of the mad war raised by him, and of his departure into
Britain. Chap. 2.
THe King in the month of July after his coronation, being the year 1484.
held a general and free assembly of the States of 1484
his realm at Touars, far otherwise than had been used in his fathers days:
for none came to these general assemblies in his time, but such as were of his
own denomination, neither durst any man speak his mind freely, but was
forced in all matters to yield to the Kings will, which was for the most part
unreasonable and violent. But at this assembly the presence was great, the
voices free, the complaints lamentable: the Nobility, Commons and Clergy,
every one of them presented their griefs, complaining of the burdens that the
late King (contrary to the laws of the realm, and customs of their
ancestors) had laid upon them. In this assembly it was enacted that there
should be no Regent in France; but that Anne Lady of Beauieu the Kings eldest
sister should have the government of his royal person, according to the
testament of King Lewis the 11. that the privy Council should consist of
twelve chosen out of the body of the Nobility, by whose advise all matters
should be governed and dispatched; but all in the Kings name, and under the
signature of his hand. Further, John Duke of Bourbon was created Constable. But
by little and little the whole government was derived to the said Lady of
Beauieu, because the King her brothers person was in her hands.

But Lewis Duke of Orleance being the nearest Prince of the blood royal, by
the persuasion of those that were about him, who gaped for great preferment if
the government were committed to his charge, and especially by the instigation
of the Earl of Dunois named Francis, son to John commonly called the Bastard
of Orleance, (a man of a subtle spirit, and of great enterprise) abode still
at Paris, and entered daily into the council, (notwithstanding the decree of
the three estates,) as one that would understand of all that was done there.
Wherewith the Lady of Beauieu was not a little discontented: which when the
Prince of Orange, the Marshall of Rieux, and the rest of the Barons of Britain
that were at that time fugitives in France (as hereafter shall be declared)
understood; they came to the said Lady of Beauieu, and offered her and the King
their service, which the Duke of Orleance greatly stomached. Further, the said
Duke sought by all means possible to discredit the womanish government of the
said Lady; but his persuasions little prevailed, because the Duke himself
being not as yet four and twenty years old, was under the government of his
mother, and it seemed no reason to commit the managing of the common wealth to
him that was unable to govern his own private estate: so that the same reason
barred him from the government now, that excluded his grandfather in times
past, during the frenzy of King Charles the sixth. But this reason satisfied
not the Duke nor his friends. Wherefore the Lady of Beauieu seeing that the
Duke of Orleance remaining in Paris, wan daily those that were in authority to
his side: seeking by that means to obtain the regencie of the realm: sent by
the resolution of the Kings council, certain to Paris to arrest the body of
the said Duke. Who being advertised thereof as he was at tenice, withdrew
himself, and (pretending that he went to his lodging) departed in the company
of Guyot Pot, and John of Louen (one of the gentlemen of his chamber whom he
greatly favored) and lodged that night at Pontoise. The next day he went to
Vernueil, and from thence to Alencon, where he remained a certain space:
during the which, he practiced to draw to his party the Earl of Angoulesme,
the Duke of Bourbon, and the Lord of Alebret, who in the end declared
themselves to be his friends and assistants in this enterprise. But all these
because of this their confederacy with him, were forthwith removed from all
their offices and estates, and lost al their pensions, and their charge of men
of arms: yet notwithstanding, they levied a great army of the people of their
countries, and found means to win to their side the Duke of Lorraine, the
Prince of Orange, and the Earl of Foix. Under the assurance of all the which
Princes, the D. of Orleance assembled his army at Blois, to march therewith to
Orleance: but the citizens of the town perceiving that their Duke came thither
with a purpose to supprise it, and to make it the seat of the wars, shut their
gates upon him, and would not suffer him to enter in. Wherefore with an army of
four hundred lances, and a great number of footmen, he went to Bougencie,
accompanied with the Earls of Dunois and Foix, an with Carqueleuant, and other
French captains, where they remained a certain space, and thither the King
sent to besiege them. But because they saw the place not to be of defense; and
further, that the Malcontents of the realm flocked not to them as they
supposed they would: they made a sudden peace with the King, whereby it was
agreed, that the Duke of Orleance should repair to the King, and so he did,
and that the Earl of Dunois the contriuer of all this enterprise should depart
the realm, which also he did and retired himself to Ast. But this
notwithstanding, the Duke of Bourbon and the Earl of Angoulesme, who had
levied their armies to succor the Duke of Orleance, marched toward Bourges,
whither the King went with a great army, accompanied with the Duke of Orleance,
who was constrained to arm himself against his allies and confederates.
Notwithstanding by the wisdom of the Marshall of Gie and the Lord of Grauille
(which two had great authority in the Court under the Lady of Beauieu,) peace
was concluded between the King and his nobles, wherein the Lord of Albret was
also comprehended; and thus departed all these armies without any bloodshed,
and the K. went to Amboise; the Duke of Orleance to Orleance; and the Earl of
Foix and the Cardinal his brother to Nantes to the Duke of Britain who had
married their sister. This tumult was called the mad war, and happened in the
year 1485. 1485.


After all this, the Earl of Dunois returned from Ast, and went to his own
town of Partenay in Poitou, which was then a strong town with a double ditch,
and a triple wall. Heerof the King being advertised, and withal that he
fortified himself in the said town, and knowing the said Earl of Dunois to
be full of practice, and a man of great enterprise: he sent to the Duke of
Orleans (who was at Orleans holding solemn iusts and turneies) to come to him
to Amboise. And after three or four messengers, the last whereof was the
Marshall of Gie, the Duke of Orleans went to Blois, and the next day being
twelfe even in the said year 1485. he departed out of Blois early in the
morning with his hawks, faining that he went to fly in the If you begin the
year at Newyeeres day, it was 1486.
field, and without any bait rode that night to Fronteraulx, whereof his sister
was then Abbess: from thence he went to Clisson, and from Clisson to Nantes,
where he was very honorably received of the Duke. This was the Duke of Orleans
second coming into Britain, as by that which follows hereafter shall more
plainly appear. The King being advertised of his departure, determined to
besiege the Earl of Dunois in his town of Partenay, and found means (before
any brute was made thereof) to draw to his service the Marshall of Rieux, and
the other Barons of Britain that were then retired to Chasteaubrian to the
Lady of Laual, who was Lady thereof, because the Duke of Britain by aid of
the Duke of Orleans and the Earl of Dunois sought to avenge himself of the
said Barons, for the death of Peter Landois Treasurer of Britain, whereof I
will now begin to speak.

Of the troubles that happened in Britain between the Duke and his Nobles,
and of Peter Landois death. Chap. 3.
ABout the same time, or somewhat before, that the mad tumult above mentioned
happened in France: a like stur chanced also in Britain, though not with the
like event; the seeds of the which were privily sown in the life of Lewis
the 11. but sprang not up for fear of foreign war (with the which the said
King Lewis continually threatened the Britains) till after his death. But then
all foreign fear, which had hitherto preserved their peace, being removed: the
fire flamed out, which upon this occasion was first kindled. Chauuin
Chauncellor of Britain (a very worthy man) died miserably in p^ison in the
castle of L'hermite, where the Duke had imprisoned him at the request of his
Treasurer Peter Landois a hosiers son of Touars, who after the said Chauuins
death wholly possessed the Duke. But the nobility, namely the Prince of Orange,
and the Marshall of Rieux (who were then at Nantes, and hated this Landois, as
author of the others death) conspired together to his destruction: for the
executing of which their purpose, they watched a time when they thought to
surprise him either in the castle of Nantes with the Duke, or in a house of
his own called Pabotiere a mile from the town. Wherefore they divided their
company, and part they sent to besiege the said house, and with the rest
entered into the castle: and to the end he should by no means escape, they
shut up the castle gates, they searched every corner of the castle, yea they
rushed into the Dukes chamber, supposing that the said Landois might happily
have retired himself thither, in hope to make the D. presence the buckler of
his defense. But he being a mile from Nantes in his own house above mentioned,
escaped at a back gate before the house was thoroughly beset, and so saved
himself. But presently a great uproar began in the town: for one of the Dukes
servants, at the noble men's first entry into the castle, being let down the
castle wall by a rope, made a great outcrie in the town, aggravating the
hainousnes of the fact, and affirming that the castle was forced, the Duke
assaulted, and his life in great danger unless he were speedily succored. The
citizens (ignorant that this attempt was made only for the surprising of Peter
Landois) armed themselves, and ran to the castle threatening all the nobility
with death, of whom not one durst show himself upon the wall to speak to the
furious multitude, because the people had planted shot against the castle,
meaning to spare no man so soon as he should appear, but the Duke alone. The
Duke being in the hands of his nobles, showed himself unto his people, who
presently kneeled down before him, congratulating with him for his safety,
and so the tumult ceased.

But the nobility for this bold attempt were banished, though their lives were
pardoned, who presently retired themselves into France to King Charles, as
before you have heard. Then Peter recovered his former credit with the Duke,
and caused him to write to the Duke of Orleans his cousin german, that it
would please him to come to him into Britain; which the Duke of Orleans did by
the persuasion of the Earl of Dunois, who sought to divorce him from the Kings
sister, and to marry him with Anne the Duke of Britains eldest daughter and
heir, which also happened after the said Duke of Orleans was King, though it
were not now accomplished. The Duke of Orleans accompanied with the Duke of
Alencon arrived at Nantes, in the month of April after this tumult, being the
year 1484. where they were honorably received of the Duke of Britain, who
complained to them of the outrage done unto him by the Prince of Orange and the
Marshall of Rieux, for the revenge whereof he desired their aid, which they
promised him in general terms, and then departed to go to Reimes to the
coronation of King Charles. After the which the Duke of Orleans fell at
variance with the King, and yet in the end peace was concluded between them in
the year 1485. as before you have heard.

Then Peter Landois seeing the Duke his Master in league with the Duke of
Orleans, This happened 1485.
and the said Duke of Orleans and his faction in peace with the King:
determined to be revenged of his enemies: wherefore the Duke of Britain, by
his persuasion made an edict, that all the noble men's houses that had been of
the conspiracy above mentioned, should be rased. For the execution whereof an
army was levied in the Dukes name to raze Ancenix, where the Prince of Orange
and the Earl of Comminges then remained, who being advertised thereof, by the
aid of their friends and of the banished Barons that were returned out of
exile to defend their patrimonies, levied likewise an army to withstand
Landois attempts: but when those two armies were come the one in face of the
other, the remembrance and love to their common country altered their minds
in such sort, that they disarmed themselves, and each embraced other as
friends. Then went the Prince of Orange and the Earl of Comminges to the Duke,
and recovered his favor and the government: by means whereof all the storm
fell upon Peter Landois alone, whom when the nobles knew to be within the
castle, with one consent they went thither, being fully resolved to seize upon
him, though he were in the Dukes arms. Then one whom both the nobility and
commons had by common consent chosen their new Chauncellor, by their constraint
spoke to the Duke, and advertised him that without the delivery of Peter the
tumult could not be appeased, against whom they would proceed only by order
of law, without executing any thing upon him before his cause were heard and
thoroughly examined. Thus was he yielded into their hands, and presently
imprisoned, and for fashions sake examined: many heinous crimes were objected
against him. To conclude, he was condemned and hanged before the Duke knew his
cause to be tried, who was purposed to have granted him his pardon, howsoever
law proceeded against him: for the preventing whereof the execution was
hastened. But this fact of the nobility (which the Duke accounted as a most
heinous injury done to himself) made them ten times more odious to the Duke
than they were before. The Duke created a new Chauncellor, and to make head
against his nobles received very courteously the Duke of Orleans, who about this
present fled to him out of France with a great company of his partakers: which
when the said nobles of Britain saw, they were greatly astonished, and fled for
fear the second time into France, where the King (meaning to make war upon
the Duke of Britain, for receiving the Duke of Orleans being fled from him)
welcomed them, and entered into league with them, as in the end of the last
chapter you have heard. The report went that the Duke of Orleans had a plot in
his head to divorce himself from the Lady Jane the Kings sister, as forced
upon him against his will by King Lewis the 11. and to marry with Anne the
Duke of Britains eldest daughter and heir, the hope whereof was the cause of
this his voyage into Britain: but the selfsame hope entertained also Monseur
d' Alebret, and drew him to the Duke of Britains part, the rather because he
had received assurance of the marriage in writing, under the hands of all the
noble men that were about the said D. of Britain, save of the D. of Orleans
alone.

Of the war the King made in Britain, and of the Earl of Dunois embassage to
the King for peace. Chap. 4.
THe only care of the banished nobles of Britain was to return and remain
in safety in their country, and the Kings only desire was to be revenged of
the Duke of Britain for receiving the Duke of Orleans. Wherefore the King, as
before is said, entered into league with these nobles, and in their favor
levied an army, and began war upon the Duke of Britain in the year 1486.
This army invaded Britain three several ways; for the 1486
Lord of Saint Andre with four hundred lances, and five or six thousand
footmen entered on one side; the Earl of Montpensier with a great band upon
another side, and Lewis of Trimouille Vicount of Touars, (who had married
Gabriell of Bourbon the said Earl of Montpensiers sister) upon the third, in
such sort that the country of Britain was covered with French soldiers, with
whom also the barons of Britain above mentioned, were joined, who caused
diverse castles in Britain to be yielded to the Kings army by those that were
of their faction: whereat the Duke of Britain was greatly astonished. But the
Duke of Orleans, the Earl of Dunois, and the Earl of Comminges being with
him, comforted him, and under color of a marriage to be made between the Lady
Anne the Duke of Britains eldest daughter and the Lord of Alebret, who had a
hundred lances under his charge, and was able to levy great forces of
footmen in Gascoine and Guienne, where he was mighty and of goodly revenues,
the Earl of Dunois wan the said Lord of Alebret to join with them: who
presently forsook the Kings service, and took part with them accordingly: yet
that notwithstanding the Duke of Britain leaving Nantes in the hands of his
cousin the Prince of Orange, retired himself to the castle of Malestroit,
being a strong place, where he levied an army of six hundred lances, and
16000. footmen to succor Ploermel (distant three or four leagues from
Malestroit) which the Kings army then besieged. But as this Britain army
marched thitherward, one of the company brake forth into these speeches, and
asked what this war meant, and what was the end thereof, alleging that their
Duke was wholly governed by the French, and that the French made the Britains
at their pleasure to revenge French quarrels upon the French: wherefore he
persuaded them to return home to their wives and children, and not to spend
their lives for other men's quarrels. Whereupon all the army disparkled, and
returned home: by means whereof Ploermel seeing no hope of succors yielded by
composition, and yet notwithstanding was spoiled, and the rich men taken
prisoners, and put to ransom. The Dukes of Britain and Orleans, and the
other Lords that were with them at Malestroit, being advertised of the
departure of their army, and of the taking of Ploermel, went to Vennes upon
Whitson even being the year 1487. whither the Kings army so speedily followed
them, that hardly they escaped by sea, and went to Croisick, and from thence by
the river of Loire to Nantes, being constrained to leave part of their carriage
1487
in the said town of Vennes, which presently after their departure yielded
without any resistance. Further, not long after the taking of this town, the
French in a skirmish at a place called Jove between Chasteaubrian and Nantes,
defeated a great band of Britains, led by Amaulry of la Mossay toward Nantes,
at the which time the King in person lay at Ancenix. After the taking of Vennes
the Kings army marched to Nantes, and laid the siege before the town the 19.
day of June in the said year 1487. Within the town were the Duke of Britain
and his two daughters Anne and Isabell, the Duke of Orleans, the Prince of
Orange, the Lady of Lauall and of Chasteaubrian, the Bishop of Nantes called du
Chaffault, a man of holy life, the Earl of Comminges, and diverse other Lords:
all the which dislodged out of the castle, and lodged in the town. And
because the company had some jealousy of the said bishop of Nantes, and the
Lady of Lauall that they were not thoroughly to be trusted: they were put in
guard into certain of the towns men's hands. At this siege were ten thousand
French men, and great store of artillery, wherewith the walls, towers, and
vaumures of the castle and town were thoroughly battered; but they without
were as well plied by them within, both with shot and with salies of valiant
men, where many a goodly feate of arms was done, both on the one side and the
other. Further, you shall understand, that the Earl of Dunois being in base
Britain there to embarke toward England to have aid from thence, and
perceiving that the wind would not suffer him so to do, brought with him to
succor the town of Nantes above fifty thousand of the commons of Britain,
which the French suffered to pass, supposing them not to be men of service.
But the King seeing the extreme heat of the weather, and perceiving that he
could do no good before the town, levied his siege the sixth day of August, and
departed. Then marched the Kings army before the town of Dolle, which they
took without resistance and spoiled, and all the Britains and soldiers that
were within it were taken prisoners. Further, the Kings army spoiled all the
country, slew the people, and drove away their cattle. But the Marshall of
Rieux and the greatest part of the banished nobles of Britain that were in the
Kings service, lamenting the miserable estate of their country, waxed weary of
the wars, and alleged that their league with the King was only to this end,
that they might recover their country, and the French that lived in Britain
be constrained to return home into theirs. Wherefore seeing the French nobles
being in Britain protested, that they would willingly return home if the King
would pardon their departure to the Duke; and that the Duke on the other side,
with the consent of all his subjects, had offered these banished nobles of
Britain pardon, and restitution to all their goods and lands, they saw no
cause why the wars should endure, but that each party should return home in
peace: but the French, and diverse also of the Britains themselves were little
moved with these allegations. Wherefore the said Marshal being Lord of
Ancenix, a town very commodious for the maintenance of the Kings wars, and the
which (notwithstanding that he held it for the King) he had manned with his
own tenants and servants: yielded the place to the Duke of Britain, and swear
the towns men to be true to him. And further, before the fame of his revolt
was spread abroad, he went with a great company to Chasteaubrian, which was
also held for the King, and being received into the town as a friend, he
placed a garrison of his own soldiers in it, and banished all that refused to
return to the obedience of the Duke. From thence he went and laid the siege
before Vennes the 25. day of February, which was held by If you begin the
year at Neweyeeres day here begins 1488.
the French under the government of Gilbert of Grassay, and Philip of Moulins
valiant captains, who yielded the place by composition the third day of March
following.

On the other side the Kings army slept not: for Ancenix they took by assault,
and rased the walls, towers, and houses by the Kings commandment, so that one
stone was not left upon another, which the King did in spite of the Marshall of
Rieux, whose the town was, and who was newly revolted from him as you have
heard. Chasteaubrian was also recovered by the Kings forces, and the castle
rased. From thence the Kings army marched to Frougiers, being a frontier town
strong and of good resistance, and laid the siege before the place, whereupon
the Duke of Britain being stricken with a new fear, determined to send the
Earl of Dunois in embassage to the King, whereof hereafter you shall hear.

About this time being the beginning of the year 1488. the Lord of Albret who
long had been resident in the Court of Spain, came by sea and landed in base
Britain with four thousand men of war: his men went to Rennes, but himself
to Nantes to the Duke of Britain, where at his first coming he demanded to
have the marriage between him and the Lady Anne the Dukes eldest daughter
accomplished. But the said Lady would not consent thereunto, greatly to her
fathers discontentation, who knew nothing that she had cast her fancy upon
the Duke of Orleans, by the practice and persuasion of the Earl of Dunois. For
the which cause the said Earl of Dunois (to save his honor) endeavored to
withdraw his seal given for the accomplishment of the said marriage, being in
the hands of the Lady Lauall sister to the said Alebert, among the seals of
all the other Britain Lords: which also in the end very cunningly he brought
to pass. For he gave the said Lady to understand that this marriage could
never be accomplished without the Duke of Britains seal could be obtained,
whereunto he (as he said) had moved the Duke, whose answer was that he would
willingly give his seal, provided that the instrument that he should seal,
were written word for word by that which the Earl of Dunois had already
sealed: wherefore if she would cause his writing to be delivered to him, he
would make his secretary to write that which should be presented to the Duke,
word for word by his, and so get the Dukes seal to it. The Lady of Lauall
supposing that he had meant good faith, delivered him the writing, which
afterward he never restored: for presently after (as you shall now hear) he
was sent with certain lawyers in embassage to Angiers to the King, to
understand what the King demanded in the Duchy of Britain, and why he
destroyed the castles and towns thereof.

The Duke of Britain as above is mentioned, being in great fear when he saw
the Kings army before Fougieres, sent the Earl of Dunois with the consent of
his nobles in embassage to Angiers to the K. The said Earl in his journey
thitherward, so preached in all places the great commodities that concord and
peace bring with them, that all men's eyes were fixed upon him. When he came to
the K. being then eighteen years of age, he very eloquently pleaded the cause
of the Duke of Britain, and of the other French noble men that were retired to
him, alleging that the Duke being worn with years, consumed with diseases,
having buried his wife, being destitute of issue male, his eldest daughter
being hardly twelve years of age, and his yoonger less; and lastly, being
forsaken of his nobility for the hatred they bare to Peter Landois, and not
for any evil desert of his own, began to languish in sorrow and grief: for
the which cause the noble men of France that were of kin and alied to him,
being moved with very natural affection, were retired to him to comfort him
in this distress. Among whom, none were nearer to him (his own children
excepted) than the Duke of Orleans, and the Prince of Orange, the one being his
uncles son, the other his sisters, and that these and others his near
kinsemen were yet with him, only to this end; adding that the Duke was not to
be accused because he forbad them not his countries, when they came to comfort
him in his miseries, or they for coming to relieve him in his distress. But
quoth he, it will be objected that there are besides these, diverse others with
him of the nobility of France, that have levied war against the King: but
what war? Forsooth, as the Britains marched with force to leuy the siege of
Ploermel, being advertised that they could not so do without a battle with the
French: the reverence they bare to the Kings Majesty was such, that willingly
they gave place, and forbear to fight, and rather suffered their towns to be
taken and spoiled, than they would encounter with the Kings troops. Further so
soon as the D. understood the K. desire to be, that the banished Nobles of
Britain should return home, he forthwith received them into his favor, and
restored them to their former estate. What offense then (said he) has the Duke
made? What cause of war against him? Truly none. But on the contrary side many
causes of commiseration, and many causes why the King should grant the Duke of
Britain peace. This was the effect of the speech he was commanded (as he said)
to deliver to the K. which charge he would not have taken upon him, but that he
knew the D. of Britain to carry a mind singularly well affected to the Kings
Majesty, and the French nobles that were in Britain to be the Kings devout
servants and subjects, and ready to shed their blood for the defense of him and
his estate. This the Earls speech moved the King to incline to peace, whereof
the treaty was already begun, when the sudden report of a batel whereof you
shall now hear as suddenly brak it off.

Of the battle of S. Albin, wherein the Duke of Orleance was taken prisoner,
of the treaty of peace between the King and the Duke of Britain, and of the
said Duke of Britains death. Chap. 5.
YOu have heard of the siege of Fougieres, which endured still, notwithstanding
the Earl of Dunois embassage in such sort, that the town began to be greatly
distressed: wherefore the Duke of Orleans and the rest of the noble men of
Britain fearing the loss of the town, departed from Nantes and went to
Rennes, where they assembled their forces to leuy the siege. Their men of arms
were four hundred, and their footmen of their own countries twelve
thousand, as some write; as others, but eight thousand, besides three hundred
English men, and eight hundred Swissers, and of artillery they had great
plenty. Then in very good order they encamped abroad in the fields. The names
of the noble men of the army were these: the D. of Orleans, the Lord of
Alebret, the Marshall of Rieux, the Lord of Chasteaubrian, the Lord of Scales
an Englishman, the Lord of Leon, the Lord of Rohans eldest son, the Lord of
Crenettes, the Lord of Pont l'Abbe, the Lord of Plessis, the Lord of Balynes,
the Lord of Montigny, the Lord of Montuet: all the which Lords with their
companies and whole forces encamped at a village called Andouille, the
wednesday being the 23. of July, the year 1488. above mentioned: in the night
there was an alarm among the Gascoins, whereof it was feared some quarrel
would have grown between the Duke of Orleans and the Lord of Alebret, but the
matter was soon pacified. In the mean time came news to these Lords at the
said village of Andouille the saturday the six and twenty of the said month
of July, that the French had taken Fongieres by composition, with these
conditions, that the soldiers should depart in safety with bag and baggage:
upon which news the Britains army determined to march to Saint Albin, hoping
easily to take the town because the French garrison within it was but small,
and that in the mean time the soldiers that were departed out of Fongieres,
should join with them and increase their forces. On the other side the French
army marched also toward Saint Albin meaning to be there before the Britains;
but it so fell out that neither of them entered the town, because before they
came thither they met and fought. For you shall understand that the same
saturday that the Britains received news of the taking of Fongieres, they
marched to a village called Orange two leagues from Saint Albin, where they
were advertised that the Kings army marched against them with a full resolution
to fight with them.

The sunday morning the Britains consulted of the order of their battle, and
because the footmen were jealous of the French horsemen that were in their
camp, and namely of the Duke of Orleans himself: it was thought good that he
and the Prince of Orange should leave their horses, and put themselves on foot
in the battle among the Swissers, and so they did. The vaward was lead by the
Marshall of Rieux, the battle by the Lord of Alebret, and the rereward by the
Lord of Chasteaubrian: upon one of their wings was placed their artillery and
their carriage. And the more to terrify the French with the great number of
English men, whereas there were in truth but three hundred English men lead by
the Lord Talbot, seauenteen hundred Britain footmen were joined to them, armed
with iacks and red cross^s English like: and the monday morning they raunged
themselves in battle in this order above rehearsed, hard by a grove of wood
attending the French army. The Kings army (whereof Master Lewis of Trimouille
Vicount of Touars, being five or six and twenty years of age, was general,)
departed out of Fongieres with a full resolution to fight with the Britains.
The vaward was lead by Adrian de l'hospitall, and Gabriell of Montfalzoys:
before the which, ten or twelve valiant French knights advanced themselves to
discover the Britains actions, whose good order when they had viewed, they
retired to their company, and the^ being in troop al close joined together
approached the Britains army, the artillery in the mean time playing on both
sides, and greatly endammaging both the parties. The French marched very
courageously, and charged the Britains vawarde, where the Marshall of Rieux
valiantly received them, and acquit himself so well both he and his company,
that the French left the vaward, and marched straight upon the Britains
battle, where the Britain horsemen recoiled, by means whereof their rereward
being discouraged fled. Then the French pursued them, and slew all the footmen
they could overtake: which disorder when the Britain vaward perceived, they
also disparkled and sought to save themselves. To conclude, the French obtained
the victory, and slew all those that bare the red cross, supposing they had
been all English men, together with twelve or thirteen hundred Britains as
well horsemen as footmen. The Duke of Orleans was taken by the footmen, and
likewise the Prince of Orange, who had pulled away his black cross from him,
and had laid himself flat upon the ground among the dead bodies, faining
himself to be slain; but he was known by a French archer, and both he and
the Duke of Orleans led prisoners to Saint Albin under sure guard. The Lord of
Alebret seeing all overthrown, fled away and escaped. The Marshall of Rieux
also saved himself, and retired to Dinan. The Lord of Leon, the Lord du Pont
l'Abbe, the Lord of Montfort, and diverse other noble men of Britain were
slain; and of other soldiers to the number of six thousand: of the Kings part
was slain James Galeot a valiant and a renowned captain, and to the number of
a thousand or twelve hundred common soldiers. This battle was fought upon
monday the 28. of July the year 1488. Soon after the Duke of Orleans was led
to the castle of Luzignen, and from thence to Poictiers, where he remained a
certain space, and lastly to the great tower of Bourges.

The second day after the battle, the Lord of Trimouille sent certain
heraults to Reims to summon the town to yield to the King: who after
consultation had answered the said heraults, that the King had no right to the
town, and that wrongfully and without cause he made war upon the country of
Britain, and that notwithstanding his great army, he could not ouerrun the
country as he hoped: for God who defended the Britains right, was able to do
as much to him as he did to King John before Poictiers, and to King Philip of
Valois at Crecy: adding further, that they would not yield the town, and that
if Monseur de la Trimouille came thither, he should find forty thousand men
in the town, whereof twenty thousand were men of defense. This answer was
reported to the said Trimouille, who stayed a long time without replying one
word thereunto, and afterward by the same heraults advertised the King thereof
being at Angiers. Whereupon the King assembled his Council to determine what
was to be done in this case. Some, yea almost all were of opinion that the
town should be besieged: but Master William of Rochfort Chauncellor of
France held the contrary opinion, grounding himself upon the Kings title to
the said Duchy of Britain, which was said to grow by means of a certain
conueiance that Master John of Brosse Lord of Boussac husband to dame Nicole of
Britain, daughter and heir to Charles of Blois Earl of Ponthieure, had made
to the Kings ancestors, together with diverse other titles, which were not yet
proved good: adding; that if the King had no right thereunto, it should be a
damnable and a tyrannous act to usurp another man's country that appertained
not to him. Wherefore his advice was, that according to the request of the
ambassadors of Britain being at Angiers, certain grave and learned men should
be appointed to examine the right of both sides. This opinion took place, and
according thereunto the King agreed with the ambassadors of Britain, that both
he and the Duke would appoint some grave men of their Council, who should
meet in some indifferent town, with the charters and writings of both sides,
to determine in conscience to whom the said Duchy did appertain; and that in
the mean time the King should hold all the places in the said Duchy that
already he possessed. The Duke of Britain liked this agreement well, and
because the plague was vehement at Nantes, he departed thence with his two
daughters, the Lady of Laval, the Lord of Alebret, the Earl of Dunoys, the
Marshall of Rieux, the Earl of Comminges, and diverse other Lords, to Coiron
upon the river of Loyer three leagues beneath Nantes; where soon after namely
upon wednesday the seventh of September in the same year 1488. he ended his
life through a sickness which he got by a fall, leaving the government both of
his Duchy of Britain, and of his two daughters to the Marshall of Rieux, to
whom he appointed the Earl of Comminges for assistant. His body was carried to
Nantes and buried in the Church of the Carmelites.

Of the Kings marriage with the Lady Anne of Britain, whereby Britain was
united to the crown of France. Chap. 6.
Soon after the Duke of Britains death, died also Isabell his 1489.
yoonger daughter, by reason whereof the Lady Anne remained his sole heir:
about whose marriage the nobles of Britain fell at great variance, for part of
them inclined to the Lord of Alebret a great Lord in Guienne, who also as it
was reported, (but falsely) was contracted to this young Princes with the Duke
her fathers consent, but the day before the Duke died; but this faction was
soon daunted, because the young Lady her self utterly refused this match:
part openly favored and furthered Maximilian the Emperor Fridericks son,
alleging that he would not only be a protector of the liberty of their
country, but also a strong rampire against all French attempts. Neither was
the King of France ignorant of this treaty, but knew right well that
ambassadors had passed to and fro between Maximilian and them, so far forth
that the said Maximilian supposing al matters to be thoroughly concluded and
agreed on, began to embrace al Britain in his mind, and thought no enterprise
too high for him if to his low countries obtained by his first marriage, he
could now join the Duchy of Britain by his second. Great consultation was had
in France how to repulse this terrible storm, but Maximilians own slacknes
most furthered their devises. The K. council in the end resolved that the King
should refuse his wife being Maximilians daughter, and seek with all
expedition the marriage of the Lady Anne of Britain, alleging that the
neighborhood of so mighty a Prince as Maximilian was, could not be but
dangerous to his estate, of whom he could hope for nothing but dissembled
friendship presently, and assured war in time to come, considering that the
said Maximilian forgetting already his league and affinity with the King,
stirred up continually one war after another against him, and by that means
professed himself an open enemy to him and his realm. Wherefore ambassadors
were presently sent to treat of this marriage with the Lady Anne. She at the
first woondered at the matter, and alleged that she had given her faith to
Maximilian, which she might not break: and further, that she had been
solemnly married to him (according to the accustomed manner of Princes) by
VVolfgangus Poleme of Austrich his proctor, purposely sent by him into Britain
to that end. But the Lady of Lauat and other noble women of Britain, whose
company and familiarity this young Princes used and greatly delighted in, being
corrupted with French rewards and promises, persuaded her that this French
match should be most for her safety and auancement; alleging that if she
married with Maximilian he should hardly be able to defend Britain, whereof
already they had good proof, considering that he had ever disappointed them of
the succors he had promised to send them. And as touching her scruple of
conscience, they said that the Pope who had power over all laws
Ecclesiastical, would easily be brought to dispense therewith, the rather
because this match should be best for her safety, and for the preservation of
her estate. The young Princess though she were of a singular wit and rare
virtues, yet being vanquished by these persuasions, yielded to their request,
and delivered both hirselfe and her country into the Kings hands, and soon
after was the marriage solemnly accomplished to the great reioicing of the
French. And thus received Britain the French yoke, to the great grief of all
the subjects, who desired to be governed by a particular Duke of their own, as
they had ever been in times past.

Not long after this marriage, the Earl of Dunois who had been the principal
instrument of the peace, and a great furtherer of the marriage, and thereby
thoroughly reconciled to the K. suddenly died as he was on horseback for want
of meat as it was said. When the K. had set all things in good order in
Britain, he returned into France and appointed that the Lady Margaret of
Flanders should remain, accompanied with the Princes of Tarent in the castle
of Melun upon the river of Seine.

Maximilian was forewarned of al these French practices, and seemed to make no
account of them; but when he perceived this marriage to be accomplished, it
doubled his hatred against the King, so far forth, that he openly railed upon
him and vowed himself to destroy France with fire and sword, and presently
invaded Picardie. But the Lord of Cords governor thereof, made head against
him, and valiantly defended the country, to his own honor and the profit of
France. Further, Maximilian meaning a through revenge upon this realm, stirred
up the English men the ancient enemies of the crown to pass into France,
promising them great aid both of men and money out of his dominions. Wherefore
I will here speak a word or two of the affairs of England, because the
Englishmen are our next neighbors, and both in peace and war have ever to do
with us, and we with them.

Of the troubles in England, and how the King of England passed the sea and
besieged Bolloin, and of the peace between the King and him, and of the
surprising of Arras and Saint Omers by the King of Romans men. Chap. 7.
KIng Edward the fourth, the same that met with King Lewis the eleventh at
Picquigny dying in the year 1483, left behind him two sons being very
young, and diverse daughters, the government of the which sons together with
the realm was committed to the Duke of Gloucester King Edvvaras brother: but he
most ^nnaturally murdered his two nephews, slew those of the nobility that
he thought would impugn his proceeding, and usurped the crown. In the end the
Duke of Buckingham (who had takerpart with the Duke of Gloucester, who entitled
himself King Richard) in all his actions, fell at variance with him, and
solicited Henry Earl of Richmond that had lived many years in Britain as a
banished man; to pass over into England, promising him a great army to join
with him so soon as he should be landed. The Earl communicated this matter
with Peter Landois, who wholly at that time governed the Duke of Britain. The
said Landois hoping that the Earl if by his means he obtained the realm of
England, would give him aid to revenge him of his enemies; persuaded the Duke
of Britain to succor him in his enterprise, who furnished him of three great
ships well manned with soldiers, which took sea and sailed toward England:
but when they were ready to land, the Earl was advertised that the Duke of
Buckingham was beheaded, his army defeated, and all his faction overthrown,
and that King Richard lay with a great army upon the sea coast attending his
landing. Upon which news the Earl of Richmond returned, thinking to recover
the coast of Britain from whence he was departed, but tempest drove him upon
the coast of Normandy, where he was forced to take land. The Lady of Beauieu
being advertised thereof, sent unto him, desiring him to come to speak with
the King, and so he did. The King courteously received him, and entertained him
well. Afterward he returned to Vannes in Britain there to remain as before,
attending some better opportunity. But Peter Laudois seeing himself
disappointed of his purpose, altered his mind, and practiced with King Richard
to deliver the Earl of Richmond into his hands: who being advertised thereof,
under color of going a hauking one morning with ten or twelve horses fled into
France to King Charles, who not long after furnished the Earl of ships, and a
good number of soldiers to accompany him into England, where by the help of
the French and of diverse of his own kinsmen, who had called him into England
and took part with him, he slew King Richard in the field, and was himself
crowned King in his place. This good turn of King Charles, together with the
desire the King of England had to live quietly at home in his country, and to
gather wealth, was the cause that King Henry during all the wars and troubles in
Britain above mentioned, had not passed his forces into France:
notwithstanding that he had been often earnestly solicited thereunto, both by
the Duke of Britain, and the Earl of Dunois and others of that faction. For
ordinarily when any troubles arise in France, our neighbors, especially the
Englishmen, within a year are bidden to the banquet, and so was King Henry
invited, and had come long ago, if the reasons above rehearsed together with
some other respects, namely fear of domestical troubles had not stayed him at
home.

But notwithstanding the K. of Engla^ds backwardnes heertofore to invade
France: yet in the year 1490. partly by the earnest solicitation of
Maximilian, who promised 1490.
him great aid in his wars, and yet performed nothing: partly to content his
own people, who began to account him as too much affectionate to the French in
that he had suffered them to the great prejudice of the realm of England, to
unite to the crown of France the Duchy of Britain: he passed over his army
to Calice, and from thence marched and laid his siege before Boloyne, whither
the Lord of Cords and the bastard of Cardonne Captain of Arras, with a small
army went to make resistance. Further, the King levied his forces to succor
the place, but because his army proceeded but slowly forward: the said de
Cords and Cardonne took upon them the defense of the tovne. The siege was
nothing whot, for the which cause a heraultsent into the English came to treat
of peace; from the which King Henry seemed nothing strange as well for the
affection that he bare to the King, who had aided him to obtain the realm of
England; as also for that he feared sedition at home, and durst not long be
absent out of his r^alme, because Maximilian had broken promise with him, and
lastly because he hoped by this peace to receive of the King a great sum of
money, which he loved as well as any Prince in his time. De Cords finding the
King of Englands inclination to peace, went and communed with him in his camp:
his demands were, first a great sum of money that he said he had lent the
late Duke of Britain: and secondarily, that the King should desraie all the
charges that he had been at in these wars. All the which the King yielded unto,
and order was given that the King of England should yearly receive a certain
sum of money, till all the sums by him demanded were clearly paid and
discharged, and thus returned the King of England home.

In the mean time while de Cords and Cardonne were at Bolloin treating with
the K. of England: the citizens of Arras knowing the garrison within the town
to be but weak, practiced to yield it into Maximilians hands, who sent
certain bands thither, the which in great diligence approached near to the
town. When all things were in a readiness, and the gates being so negligently
guarded, that the traitors with their counterfaited keys had opened them, they
began a song, whereby they willed the enemies to make haste, who presently
repaired to the gates, and were received into the town. Paul Carqueleuant a
Briton, governor of the townein the absence of the bastard of Cardonne, at the
enemies first entry retired himself with his soldiers into the castle; but
fearing least it should be taken by assault, he soon abandoned it, greatly to
his reproach: for if he had held it but till the next day, diverse French bands
had come thither to his relief. The town was spoiled, and many slain,
neither were the churches spared nor the traitors houses. The author of this
treason was a poor smith that dwelled upon the town wall, and had been the
only man that was suffered to remain in the town by Lewis the eleventh,
when he transported the towns men as a colonie into France. Carqueleuant the
governor, when the town was surprised lay fast a sleep, drowned in drink and
good cheer as it is said. The town was spoiled by the soldiers because
Maximilian was behind with them for certain months pay. Saint Omers was
also taken at the same time, though some refer it to an other time, but
whenever it was taken, this is most certain that the negligence of the watch
was the loss thereof. For the enemies being led by George Deberfin made show
at their first coming before the town, as though they would have scaled it,
at which time the French soldiers were ready to withstand them upon the walls,
being strong and very defensible both by nature and by Art: whereupon the
enemies under pretense of fear, retired into their camp; yea and further,
when the French issued forth to skirmish with them, they ever retired faining
the like fear, which dissimulation they used by the space of eight days, and
by this their policy, caused the French to remit much of their accustomed
industry and diligence: which when the Burgundians and Almaines perceived, they
with great expedition reared ladders against the walls and bulwarks of the town,
which they easily entered, the watch being fast a sleep, and in some place no
watch at all. Then brake they open the gates, slew the French soldiers and the
citizens, and so became Masters of the town.

At the same time was Amiens also attempted by the Burgundians in the night,
and like to have been surprised by the like negligence of the watch: but
Katherine de Liques (a woman of a manlike courage) awaked the watch out of
their dead sleep, by means whereof the alarm was sounded, and all the town
arose in arms, and part went to defend the walls, and the rest issued forth
and skirmished, and put to flight Maximilians bands, who plainly confessed that
the diligence and industry of one woman had wrong the victory out of their
hands.

Of the restitution of the Counties of Roussillon and Parpignan to the King of
Spain, of the Emperor Fridericks death, of the peace between the King of
Romans and the King, and of the Duke of Orleans delivery out of prison. Chap.
8.
FErdinand King of Arragon desired nothing more than to recover 1492
out of the Kings hands the counties of Roussillon and Parpignan, engaged by
him (as he said) to King Lewis the eleventh for fifty thousand crowns. But
the nobles of France would not condescend to this restitution, because the two
Counties were a rampire for the realm on that side toward Spain: adding that
they were not engaged to King Lewis, but absoulutely sold. And notwithstanding
that the King of Spain alleged that King Lewis by his last will and Testament
had commanded the said Counties to be restored, knowing that they were
wrongfully withheld: yet his persuasions and allegations little auailed.
Wherefore he perceiving that this way no good would be done, fell to practice
with men of religion, hoping by their preaching of conscience to King Charles
to win that of him that otherwise he saw no means to obtain. Wherefore he
corrupted with a great sum of money Oliver Maillard, or as others write John
de Mauleon, a friar Franciscane, confessor to the Lady of Beauieu the Kings
sister, who under his coule of religion cloking his hypocrisy and covetousness,
persuaded her, that except restitution were made of these territories to the
King of Spain, the King her brothers government could not prosper nor please
God. She being moved in conscience by this friars persuasions, brake this
matter to Lewis of Amboise bishop of Alby, the Kings schoolmaster, who together
with her so terrified the Kings conscience, that he did not only make
restitution of the said territories by the hands of the said bishop, whom he
sent thither to deliver them: but also freely released to the King of Arragon
all the money that King Lewis his father had paid for them; with these
conditions, that the said King of Arragon and his successors, should ever after
love and honor the realm of France, that he should make no war against it,
nor aid with money, victuals, or council any of the enemies thereof, nor
permit them to have passage through his dominions. And thus were these
countries restored, greatly to the French men's grief and damage; but in truth
the King the rather inclined to restore them, because he began already by the
persuasion of those that were about him to fancy a voyage into Italy, for
the recovery of the realm of Naples, which afterward took effect, though the
King both now and long after this, kept his purpose secret to himself, and one
or two more, which voyage I think was the principal cause that induced him to
restore the foresaid countries, thereby to tie the King of Spain to him, that
he should not trouble him in his enterprise; but he misreckoned himself, for
he was no sooner past the mountains, but the King of Spain forgot all his
kindness, and fell to practice a league with his enemies.

While these matters passed thus in France, Friderick the Emperor died, to The
Emperor Frederick died 19. of August 1493.
whom his son Maximilian succeeded, who notwithstanding was never crowned
neither greatly desired so to be, although with a small request he might have
obtaied it. The Emperor Maximilian purposing to quiet the state of the Empire
troubled by his fathers death, seemed more inclined to peace with the King than
heertofore he had been, which happened very fortunately for the Kings
affairs: for without Maximilian were pacified, his voyage into Italy must of
force have staide; but both the parties by this means inclining to concord,
the peace was soon concluded: the Emperors daughter was restored unto him, and
the county of Artois together with all the towns he quarrelled. And thus the
King being in peace with all his neighbors: namely, with the Emperor and the
Kings of England and Spain, and possessing the Duchy of Britain quietly by
his marriage, and by that means having no body to fear, began wholly to
dispose himself to his voyage into Italy, whereupon his mind was altogether
fixed.

Further, about this very time the King at the earnest suit and continual
tears of his sister Jane a Lady of singular piety and chastity, restored
not only to liberty, but also to his favor and familiarity, Lewis Duke of
Orleans (husband to the said Lady,) taken prisoner at the battle of Saint
Albin in Britain, as before you have heard: whereby as the King deserved great
commendations for his clemency in preserving his enemy taken in battle and
restoring him to his former dignity and honor: so did he also thereby provide
that no discontented subject at home should trouble his estate in his absence
in his voyage to Naples: whereunto the history of Commines now calls us,
which from the death of King Lewis the eleventh till this present, I have
supplied out of other good authors, because the said Commines being imprisoned,
or in disgrace almost ever sithence King Lewis his death till the said voyage
of Naples, (whereat he was present) was silent and left nothing in writing to
the posterity of all those years.

THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF PHILIP DE COMMINES, TREATING OF THE
PRINCIPAL ACTS OF KING CHARLES THE EIGHT, SON TO LEWIS THE ELEVENTH.
THE PROLOGVE OF THE AVTHOR, containing that which he minds to treat of in
this history following.
TO continue the History written by me Philip de Commines of the reign of
King Lewis the eleventh (whom God assoile,) I will now declare the occasion that
moved King Charles the eight his son to make his voyage into Italy, whereat
my self was present. The said King departed from Vienna in Daulphine the 23.
of August, the year 1494. and returned into his realm about October, the
year 1495. Before the enterprise was fully resolved on; the matter was often
debated whether he should go or not: for the voyage seemed very dangerous to
all men of wisdom and experience, neither did any allow thereof, but the King
himself, and one Stephen de Verse borne in Languedoc, a man of mean parentage,
and utterly unacquainted with the wars, and all things thereunto appertaining.
One other also being of the receipt was a furtherer thereof till his heart failed
him, namely the general Brissonnet, who afterward by occasion of this voyage,
was preferred to many goodly dignities and spiritual promotions, and created a
Cardinal. The former had already gotten goodly possessions, for he was
Seneschall of Beaucaire, and president of the Comptes at Paris: he had served
the King in his youth very faithfully, being a groom of his chamber, and by
his means the general was won to favor this voyage; so that they two were
the only authors thereof; for the which, few commended, but many blamed them:
for all things necessary for so great an enterprise were wanting. The King was
young, a weak body, wedded to his own will, slenderly accompanied with wise
men or good captains, and so utterly unfurnished of money: that before his
departure, he borrowed of the bank of Soly at Genua a hundred thousand franks
upon great enterest, from Mart to Mart 1. In diverse other places also he
borrowed money as hereafter you shall hear. His army was unprovided of tents
and pauillions, and winter was begun when he entered into Lombardy. One only
good thing he had, to wit, a courageous company of young gentlemen: yet not in
such obedience as was requisite. Wherefore we must of necessity conclude that
this voyage was governed by God alone, both at our going forth, and our
return home; for the wisdom of the authors thereof above mentioned, served to
no great purpose: notwithstanding they might justly vaunt themselves to be the
occasion of the great honor and renown their Master wan thereby.

The Notes.
1 The interest of this money, as he says in the end of the fourth Chapter,
amounted in four months to fovverteene thousand franks. Further, there are
at Genua certain Marts in the year, from the one of the which to the other,
they let out their money: it is betvveene every Mart four months.

How Rene Duke of Lorrain came into France to demand the Duchy of Bar, and
the Earldom of Prouence which King Charles held, and how he failed to enter
into the realm of Naples, whereunto he pretended title as the King did, and
what right both of them had thereunto. Chap. 1.
THe year of the Kings coronation 1 being the 14. or 15. of his age, the Duke
of Lorraine came into France, to demand the Duchy of Bar which King Lewis
the eleventh had withholden from him, and likewise the Earldom of Prouence,
left to the said King Lewis by the last will and Testament of King Charles of
Aniou his cosen german 2; who died without issue. The Duke of Lorraine
pretended title to it, as son and heir to the daughter of Rene King of
Sicilie, Duke of Aniou, and Earl of Prouence, alleging that the said King
Rene had done him wrong 3, in preferring King Charles of Aniou being but his
brother the Earl of Maines son, before him being his daughters son 4. The
other answered, that by their ancestors testaments Prouence could not descend
to the female. In the end Bar was yielded to him, for the which the King
demanded only a sum of money. Further, because the said Duke of Lorrain was
highly favored, and friended by diverse of great authority in France,
(especially by John Duke of Bourbon, who was old, and desirous to marry his
sister) it was agreed that during the space of four years, in the which his
title to the Earldom of Prouence should be examined, his estate should be
wholly defraied by the King, and that he should have charge of an hundred
lances, together with a yearly pension of six and thirty thousand franks
during the said four years. I my self was present at the debating and ending
of all these controversies, being one of the commissioners purposely chosen for
the determination thereof, both by the Kings nearest kinsmen, and by the three
estates of his realm: so was also Stephen de Verse above mentioned, who because
he had gotten certain possessions in Prouence, caused the King (as young as he
was) in the presence of his sister the Duchess of Bourbon, to say to Monseur
de Comminges, and to Monseur de Lau, (who were both also in the commission) and
to my self, that we should do our endeavor, that he might not lose the
Earldom of Prouence; which words he uttered before the agreement above
mentioned was made.

Before the four years expired, certain Lawyeres of Prouence brought forth
the testaments of King Charles the first, brother to Saint Lewis, and of other
Kings of Sicilie 5 of the house of France. These Lawyeres (among other
proofs) alleged that not only the Earldom of Prouence; but also the realm
of Sicilie, with all the house of Anious other possessions, appertained of
right to the King, and that the Duke of Lorrain had no right thereto
(notwithstanding) others maintained the contrary. All these Lawyers depended
wholly upon Stephen de Verse, who nourished his Master in this language, that
King Charles Earl of Prouence last deceased, son to Charles of Aniou Earl
of Maine, and nephew 6 to King Rene: left Prouence to King Lewis by his last
will and Testament, and that King Rene before his death made the said Charles
his heir, preferring him before the Duke of Lorraine his daughters son,
because of the testaments of King Charles the first and his wife Countess of
Prouence: wherein they had willed that the realm 7 and the county of Prouence
should not be severed nor descend to the heir female, so long as there was
issue male remaining. The like Testaments they alleged also to have been
made, by their next successors in the said realm, namely by Charles the
second. During these four years space, those that governed the King, that is
to say, the Duke and Duchess of Bourbon, and certain of the Kings chamber,
namely Monseur de Grauille 8 and others, who at that time bare great sway in
France; called to the Court to high authority and estimation, the said Duke
of Lorraine to have him for their support and aid: (for he was a hardy
gentleman and more than a courtier,) not doubting but easily to rid their hands
of him at their pleasure, as also they did when they found themselves strong
enough, and the force of the Duke of Orleans 9 and others (whom I need not
name) so weakened, that it was no more to be feared. But after the four years
expired they could no longer hold the Duke of Lorraine, unless they would put
him in possession of the county of Prouence, or assure him of it by writing at
a day, and continue still his pension of six and thirty thousand franks:
whereunto because they would not condescend, he departed the Court greatly
discontented.

Four or five months before his departure, a good ouerture was made unto him
if he would have embraced it: for the whole realm of Naples rebelled against
King Ferrande, because of his great tyranny and his childrens, so far forth
that all the nobles and the third part of the realm yielded themselves to the
Church. Notwithstanding King Ferrande being aided by the Florentines pressed
them sore: for the which cause the Pope and the said Nobles of the realm that
had rebelled, sent for the Duke of Lorraine purposing to crown him King, and
so forward the enterprise was, that the Galleys and the Cardinal Saint Peter
ad Vincula (who should have conueighed him thither,) stayed for him a long time
at Genua: during the which space he was busied with these broiles in Court, and
delaied his departure, notwithstanding that he had messengers with him from all
the Nobles of the said realm, earnestly pressing him to come with speed. To
be short, the King and his Council showed themselves willing by all means
they could to aid and succor him, and gave him sixty thousand franks,
(whereof he received twenty thousand but lost the rest,) and agreed also that
he should lead with him the hundred lances that were under his charge,
promising further to send ambassadors round about in his favor.
Notwithstanding the King was now nineteen years of age or more, and governed
by those above named, who daily beat into his head, that the realm of Naples
of right appertained to himself, which I write because diverse of mean estate
raised great contention about this matter: as I understood both by certain of
the ambassadors, sent to Rome, Florence, Genua, and other places in the Duke of
Lorraines favor; and also by the Duke himself, when he passed through Moulins
where I then lay with John Duke of Bourbon, because of the troubles in court.
But his enterprise was now half lost through his long delaie. I went
forthwith to recieue him, notwithstanding that he had deserved no such
courtesy at my hands: for he was one of those that chased me from the Court 10
with rough and discourteous words: yet now he made the most of me that might
be, lamenting much the government of the estate. He abode at Moulins two days
with John Duke of Bourbon, and then took his journey toward Lions.

To conclude, his friends were so wearied and weakened because of his long
delay, that the Pope made peace, and the nobles of the realm also, who under
surety thereof went to Naples where they were all taken prisoners:
notwithstanding that both the Pope, the Venetians, the King of Spain, and the
Florentines had undertaken to see the treaty kept and observed, and had sworn
and promised the Nobles safety. The Prince of Salerne escaped and came into
France, refusing to be comprehended in the treaty as one well acquainted with
King Ferrands humor: but the Duke of Lorraine returned into his country with
dishonor, and lost his credit with the King, lost his men of arms, and lost
also the pension of six and thirty thousand franks which he received for
Prouence: and even at this present being the year 1497. he lives yet in this
estate.

The Notes.
1 King Charles was crowned ann. 1484. in June.

2 This cousin german must be referred to King Lewis.

3 For King Rene made Charles his brothers son his heir, omitting this Duke
of Lorraine his daughters son.

4 The pedigree in the end of the work will make this title plain.

5 The author under the name of Sicilie comprehends the realm of Naples
also, because both the realms bare the name of Sicilie, the one beyond, the
other on this side the far.

6 By nephew he means brothers son.

7 Understand this of the realm of Sicilie and Naples.

8 This de Grauille was after Admiral of France.

9 Madam de Beauieu Duchess of Bourbon was appointed by King Lewis and the
three estates governor of King Charles her brother; but the Duke of Orleans,
called after Lewis the 12. withstood the decree, and was in arms with diverse
noble men, demanding the gouenrment as the first Prince of blood, as in my
Supply is mentioned at large, against these they here named, called the Duke
of Lorraine.

10 For Philip de Commines was a follower of the Duke of Orleans, as himself
writes in the last chapter of the last book.

How the Prince of Salerne in the realm of Naples came into France, and how
Lodouic Sforce surnamed the Moore and he, sought to persuade the King to make
war upon the King of Naples, and for what cause. Chap. 2.
THe Prince of Salerne fled to Venice (where he was well friended) accompanied
with three of his nephews, sons to the Prince of Bisignan 1. There they
asked counsel of the Seniorie, (as the Prince himself told me) whether it
would please them that they should retire to the Duke of Lorraine, the King of
France, or the King of Spain. They answered, that the Duke of Lorraine was a
dead man unable to do them good, and that the King of Spain should be too
strong, if to the isle of Sicilie and the other places which he held in the
Venetian gulf he should join the realm of Naples; adding, that he was
already mighty upon the sea: wherefore they advised him to go into France,
saying that with the Kings of France 2 that had held the said realm, they had
ever lived in perfect amity and friendship, and found them always good
neighbors. But I supose, they thought not the enterprise would have fallen out
as afterward it did. Thus these noble men above named came into France, where
they were courteously received, but their entertainment was small. They followed
their suit earnestly the space of two years, addressing themselves wholly to
Stephan de Verse then Seneschall of Beaucaire and of the Kings privy chamber.

One day they lived in hope, another in despair; but their friends used great
diligence in Italy, specially at Milan, whereof John Galeas was Duke, not the
great John Galeas that lies buried in the Charterhouse of Pauia, but he that
was son to Duke Galeas and the Duchess Bonne daughter to the Duke of Sauoy,
a man of no great sense. The said Duchess had the wardship of her children,
and my self have seen her there in great authority, being a widow, and
governed by one Cico a Secretary, and an ancient servant of that house. This
Cico had banished all Duke Galeas brethren for the said Ladies safety and her
childrens; and among the rest the Lord Lodouic (afterward Duke of Milan) whom
she revoked being her enemy, and in war against her, together with the Lord
Robert of Saint Seuerine a valiant captain, whom she had also banished by the
said Cicos persuasion. To be short, at the request of a young man that carved
before her called Anthony Thesin, being a Ferrarian of very mean parentage,
she called them all home through great simplicity, supposing they would do the
said Cico no harm, and the truth is that so they had sworn and promised. But
the third day after their return, they took him notwithstanding their oath,
and carried him in an empty caske through the town of Milan: he was allied by
marriage to one of the Viscomtes 3, and if the said Vicomt had been in the city
at that present, some say they durst not have taken him. Moreover the Lord
Lodcuic caused this matter so to be ordered, that the said Robert of S. Seuerin
coming that way, should meet with this Cico as he passed through the town in
this estate, because he hated him extremely. Thus was he led prisoner to the
castle of Pauie where he died.

They used this Lady very honorably in her judgment, seeking to content her
humor in all things; but all matters of importance they two dispatched, making
her privy but to what pleased them, and no greater pleasure could they do her,
than to communicate nothing with her.

They permitted her to give this Anthony Thesin what she would, they lodged him
hard by her chamber, he carried her on horseback behind him in the town, and
in her house was nothing but feasting and dancing; but this iollitie endured
but half a year. She gave many goodly things to this Thesin, and the couriers
packets were adressed to him, which bred great disdain in many, wherein the L.
Lodouic, uncle to the two children (aspiring to the Duchy, which afterward
also he obtained) nourished them as much as in him lay. One morning they took
her two sons from her, and lodged them in a great tower within the castle
called the rock, whereunto consented the said Lodouic, the Lord Robert of Saint
Seuerin, one called de Palleuoisin governor of the young Dukes person, and the
captain of the rock 4, who since Duke Galeas death had never departed out of
the place, neither did many years after this, till he was taken prisoner by
the Lord Lodouickes subtletie, and his masters folly, being of his mothers
disposition. After the above named had lodged these children in the rock, they
seized upon the treasure being at that time the richest in Christendom, and
made her yield account thereof. Moreover, they caused three keys thereof to be
made, one of the which she kept, but the treasure after that day she never
touched. They made her also to surrender the wardship of her children, and the
said Lodouic was chosen their guardian. Further, they sent letters into diverse
countries especially into France (which my self saw) written to her great
dishonor: for they charged her with this Anthony Thesin, whom notwithstanding
they sent away unharmed, for the Lord Robert saved both his life and goods.
These two great men entered not into the rock at their pleasure, for the
captain had his brother in it with a garrison of a hundred and fifty soldiers
or better, and when they entered, the gate was straightly kept, neither entered
they accompanied at any time with more than a man or two, and this endured a
long space.

In the mean time great variance arose between the Lord Lodouic and Robert of
S. Seuerin, (for usually two great men can not long agree:) but Lodouic wan the
garland, and the other departed to the Venetians service. Notwithstanding,
afterward two of his sons returned to the service of the said Lodouic, and
the state of Milan, (namely Master Galeas, and the Earl of Caiazze) some say
with their fathers consent, others say no: but howsoever it were, the said
Lodouic highly favored them, and both has been and yet is very faithfully
served by them. You shall understand that their father the Lord Robert of Saint
Seuerin was issued of a base daughter of the house of Saint Seuerin, but in
Italy they make no difference between a bastard and child legitimate. This I
write because they furthered our enterprise in Italy, as well in favor of the
Prince of Salerne chief of the said house of Saint Seuerin, as also for diverse
other respects, whereof hereafter you shall hear.

The Lord Lodouic declared immediately that he would by all means possible
maintain his authority, for he caused money to be coined, on the one side
whereof the Dukes image was stamped, and on the other his own, whereat many
murmured. This Duke was married to the daughter of Alfonse Duke of Calabria,
and King of Naples after his father King Ferrandes death. His said wife was a
Lady of a great courage, and would gladly have increased her husbands authority
if she could, but her husband lacked wit, and disclosed all her actions. The
captain also of the rock of Milan continued long in great authority, and
never departed out of the place; for many iealousies were now arisen, so far
forth that when one of the children went abroad, the other abode within. To be
short, a year or two before we entered into Italy, the Lord Lodouic having been
abroad with the Duke, and purposing some mischief, waited upon him at his
return home to the castle, according to his accustomed manner. The captain
came upon the draw bridge with his men about him, to kiss the Dukes hand as
their manner is. The Duke at this time was somewhat without the bridge, in such
sort that the captain was forced to step forth a pace or two, where these two
sons of Saint Seuerin, and others that were about them laid hold upon him.
They within drew up the bridge, but the Lord Lodouic caused an end of a wax
candle to be lighted, and swear that he would smite off their heads 5 if they
yielded not the place before the candle were burned out; whereupon they
delivered it, and then he furnished it well and surely for himself, but all in
the Dukes name. Further, he endited the captain of high treason, laying to his
charge that he would have put the place into the Emperors hands: and stayed
certain Almains, charging them as practisers with the captain about this
enterprise, yet afterward dismissed them without farther harm. He beheaded
also one of his own secretaries, charging him in like manner as a dealer in the
matter, and yet one other who he said had been a messenger 6 between them. The
captain he kept long in prison, yet in the end delivered him, pretending that
Duchess Bonne had once hired a brother of the captains to kill the said
Lodouic as he entered into the castle, whom the captain withheld from executing
the fact, for the which cause he now saved his life. Notwithstanding if he had
been guilty of so heinous a crime as a purpose to yield the place to the
Emperor, who might have laid claim to it, both as Emperor and Duke of Austrich
(for that house pretends some title thereunto:) I think he would not have
pardoned him; for it would have made a great alteration in Italy, and the
whole estate of Milain would have revolted in one day. For when they lived
under the Emperors, every household paid but half a ducat for tribute: but
now they are cruelly and tyrannouslie governed, both the Spirituality,
Nobility and Commons.

The Lord Lodouic seeing himself seized of the castle, and all the force of
the country at his commandment, determined to attempt further; for he that
possesses Milan possesses the whole estate, both because the chief of the
country be resident there, and also because those that have the charge and
government of the other places be all Milanois borne. Sure for the quantity of
this Duchy, I never saw a pleasanter nor plentifuller piece of ground. For if
the Prince would content himself with the yearly revenues of five hundred
thousand ducats; his subjects should be but too rich, and the Prince live in
surety: but he leuieth yearly six hundred and fifty thousand or seven
hundred thousand, which is great tyranny: and therefore the people desire
nothing more than change of their Prince. Which the L. Lodouic considering,
together with the other reasons above rehearsed, and being already married to
the Duke of Ferraraes daughter, by whom he had many children, determined to
accomplish his intent, and endeavored to win friends not only in the said
Duchy, but also abroad in Italy. Wherefore first he entered into league with
the Venetians for the preservation of their estate, whereunto he was great
friend to his father in laws prejudice, from whom the said Venetians not long
before had taken a little territory called the Polesan, environed with water,
and maruellously abounding with all kind of wealth. This country being distant
but half a league from Ferrara, the Venetians possess yet at this day. There
are in it two pretty towns, which I have been in my self, the one named
Rouigue, the other Labadie. The Duke of Ferrara lost it in the war that
himself first moved against the Venetians: for notwithstanding that before
the end of those wars, Alphonse Duke of Calabria (his father King Ferrande yet
living) the Lord Lodouic with the force of Milan, the Florentines, the Pope,
and the town of Bolonia came to his aid: by means whereof the Venetians were
brought altogether under foot, or at the least to great extremity, being
utterly unfurnished of money, and having lost diverse places: yet the said
Lodouic concluded a treaty to their honor and profit; for every man was
restored to his own save the poor Duke of Ferrara, who was forced to leave
unto them the Polesan (which they yet hold:) notwithstanding that he had moved
this war at the request of the Lord Lodouic, and of King Ferrande whose
daughter he had married. The report went that Lodouic received threescore
thousand ducats of the Venetians for making this treaty. Whether it were so or
no, I know not, but sure I am that the Duke of Ferrara was once persuaded that
it was so: for at that time the said Lodouic was not married to his daughter.
From that day forward amity ever continued between the Venetians and the said
Lodouic. No servant nor kinsman of John Galeas Duke of Milan sought to impeach
and stop the Lord Lodouic from seizing the Duchy into his own hands, save
only the Duchess his wife, who was young, but a very wise Lady. She was
daughter to Alfonse Duke of Calabria before mentioned, son and heir to
Ferrande King of Naples. In the year 1493. the said Lodouic sent to King
Charles the 8. now reigning, to persuade him to come into Italy to conquer the
realm of Naples, and to vanquish and subdue those that possessed it: for so
long as they flourished and were of force, he durst never attempt that which
afterward he accomplished. At that time the said Ferrande King of Naples and
Alphonse his son were puissant, rich, of great experience in the wars, and
accounted Princes of hautie courages, though afterward their actions declared
the contrary. The said Lodouic was also a very wise man, but marvelous
timorous, and humble when he stood in fear, and void of all faith, if the
breach thereof might turn to his profit. I speak as one that knew him
thoroughly well, because I have dealt with him in many matters. But to proceed,
in the year 1493. (as before I said) the Lord Lodouic began to tickle this
young King Charles, being but two and twenty years of age, with the ambition
and vaineglorie of Italy, showing him what right he had to this goodly realm
of Naples, which I warrant you he skilfully blazed and painted forth. In all
these negotiations he addressed himself to Stephan de Verse, then newly made
Seneschall of Beaucaire, and maruellously enriched though not satisfied, and to
the General Brissonet, a rich man, skillful in matters of the receipt, and
great friend at that time to the said Seneschall, by whose means the Lord
Lodouic persuaded the said Brissonet to become a priest, promising to make him
a Cardinal, but the Seneschall himself he promised to make a Duke. And to set
all these practices on foot, the said Lodouic sent in the same year to Paris
a goodly embassage to the King, the chief whereof was the Earl of Caiazze
son and heir to the above named Robert of Saint Seuerin, who found there the
Prince of Salerne his cousin: for the said Prince was chief of the house of
Saint Seuerin (as I have already made mention) and lived in France, being
banished by King Ferrande of Naples, as before you have heard, and therefore
traveled earnestly that this voyage to Naples might go forward. With the said
Earl of Caiazze came also Charles Earl of Belleioyeuse, and Master Galeas
Viscount of Milan, who were both in very good order and well accompanied, but
openly they used salutations only and general speeches. This was the first
great embassage that came from the Lord Lodouic to the King. True it is that he
had sent before this, one of his Secretaries to negotiate with the King, to
send his deputy into Italy to receive homage of his cousin the Duke of Milan
for Genua, which was granted him against all reason 8: notwithstanding I will
not deny, but that the King of especial favor might assign one to receive it
of him; for when this Duke Galeas was ward to his mother, I being then
ambassador for King Lewis the 11. received his homage in the castle of Milan,
having an express commission from the King so to do. But Genua was then out of
the Duke of Milans hands, and held by Master Baptist de Campefourgouse; but at
this present the Lord Lodouic had recovered it, and gave to certain of the
Kings chamber eight thousand ducats for the inuesture thereof, who by receiving
the money greatly prejudiced the King. For before the grant of the said
inuesture, they might have seized Genua to the Kings own use, if they had
would 9: but seeing they meant to take money for it, they ought to have
demanded more: for Duke Galeas paid at one time for it to King Lewis my Master
fifty thousand ducats, whereof the King (whose soul God pardon) gave me
thirty thousand crowns in reward. Notwithstanding they said they received
these eight thousand ducats with the Kings consent, and Stephan de Verse
Seneschall of Beaucaire was one of those that took the money, happily to
entertain the better the Lord Lodouic for this enterprise, which he so much
both favored and furthered. After audience given openly at Paris to the
ambassadors above mentioned, the Earl of Caiazze had secret communication with
the King. The said Earl was in great credit at Milan, but his brother Master
Galeas of Saint Seuerin in greater, especially in martial affairs. His Master
could now dispose of the estate of Milan as of his own: for the which cause he
offered the King great services and aid as well of men as money, affirming the
enterprise to be of no difficulty. This done, he and Master Galeas Viscount
took their leave and departed, leaving behind them the Earl Charles of
Belleioyeuse to entertain the suit, who incontinent put himself into French
apparel, and traveled so earnestly in this business, that many began to like
of the enterprise. The King sent into Italy to Pope Innocentius, to the
Venetians, and to the Florentines one named Peron of Basche, who had been
brought up in the house of Aniou under Duke John of Calabria, and was
maruellously affectioned to this voyage. These practices and runnings to and
fro continued the space of seven or eight months, and those that understood of
this enterprise, communed among themselves diversely of it, but none thought
that the King would go in person into Italy.

The Notes.
1 Antonel of Saint Seuerin Prince of Salerne, and Bernardin Prince of
Besignan, were brethren. Guicciar.

2 He means by Kings of France those Kings of the house of France, that had
held the realm of Naples, to wit, the Dukes of Aniou.

3 Viscomte in both these places, and diverse others, is a proper name, not a
name of honor, and signifies as much as Biscomte, that is, twice Earl,
because the Viscomti were Lords of Angiera and Milan.

4 This captain meant no treason to the children as the others did, but
consented to this deed, because he thought the children in more safety with
him than with their foolish mother.

5 The sense in mine opinion were better to read it qu'il luy feroit, then
qu'il leur feroit, that is, that he would smite off the captains head, if the
place were not yielded, for they within were out of Lodouics power.

6 The French had it in this sense. And another who said that he had been a
messenger betvveene them: but undoubtedly the place is corrupted and to be read
as I have amended it.

7 The Duke of Ferrara had married King Ferrandes daughter named Elenor.

8 Duke Galeas ought to have come into France to have done homage to the King
in person, but because Lodouic would not let him depart out of his custody,
he found means that it should be done to one sent thither by the King as his
deputy for that purpose.

9 Genua was forfeited, and under color thereof, the Lord Lodouic had
recovered it, but because it was held of the King (for the Genuois had given
themselves to Charles the sixth, anno 1394. who sent thither for governor John
de Maingre, and afterward to Charles the seventh, anno 1446.) it could be
forfeited to none but to the King, but by giving away this inuesture, he gave
away his right.

How King Charles the eight made peace with the King of Romans and the
Archduke of Austrich, restoring to them the Lady Margaret of Flaunders, before
he made his voyage to Naples. Chap. 3.
DVring this delaie above mentioned, peace was treated of at Senlis between
the King and the Archduke of Austriche, heir of the house of Burgundy: for
notwithstanding that they were in truce, yet a breach happened between them,
because the King refused the King of Romans daughter sister to the said
Archduke (being very young,) and married the daughter of Frauncis Duke of
Britain, to enioie peaceably thereby the Duchy of Britain: all the which at
the time of this treaty he held, save the town of Renes and the said daughter
being within in it; the which was governed by the Prince of Orange her uncle,
who had made a marriage between her and the King of Romans 1 and openly
solemnised it in the church by a Practor. All the which happened in the year
1492. To this treaty above mentioned came a great embassage in favor of the
Duke of Austriche from the Emperor Frederick, who offered to be a mediator for
the peace: the King of Romans sent thither also, 2 and so did the Palzgraue,
and the Swissers to pacify this controversy, being all of opinion that it
would kindle a great fire: for the King of Romans seemed above all measure to
be iniuried, having at one time her taken from him whom he accounted his wife,
and his daughter sent back to him which many years had been Queen of
France: but in the end the matter was quietly shut up, and peace concluded.
For all parties were weary of war, especially Duke Philips subjects, who had
sustained so many troubles, partly because of wars with this realm, and partly
through their own private divisions, that they could no more. The peace was
concluded but for four years, whereunto the King of Romans agreed, to the
end he might repose his subjects, and receive again his daughter: whom some
that were about the King and the said daughter, made difficulty to restore. At
this treaty I was present my self with the rest of the Kings Commissioners
being these, Peter Duke of Bourbon, the Prince of Orange, the Lord of Cords,
and diverse other noble personages, and promise was there made to restore to the
said Duke Philip all that the King held in Artois: for so was it agreed when
this marriage was treated of in the year 1482. that if it were not
accomplished, all the lands that were given with this Lady in maraige should
return again with her, or be restored to Duke Philip. But the said Archdukes
men had already surprised Arras and Saint Omer, so that only Hedin, Air, and
Betune remained to be restored: the possession and seniorie whereof were
presently delivered them, and they put officers into them: but the King held
still the castles, and might place garrisons in them till the four years were
expired, which ended at the feast of Saint John Baptist in the year 1498. at
which time he was bound to restore them also to the said Archduke, and so he
promised and swear to do.

Whether the alteration of these marriages agreed with the laws of holy Church
or no, let others judge: for many Doctors of divinity said yea, and many nay:
but were these lawful or unlawful; sure all these Ladies were unfortunate in
their issue. Our Queen had three sons successively one after another in
four years: one of them 3 lived almost three years and then died, and the
other two be dead also. The Lady Margaret of Austriche was afterward married to
the Prince of Castile only son to the King and Queen of Castile, and heir
both of Castile and diverse other realms. The said Prince died the first year
of his marriage in the year of our Lord 1497. leaving his wife great bellied
4, who immediately after her husbands death fell in travel before her time, and
was delivered of a dead borne child; which misfortune the King and Queen of
Castile and their whole realm lamented a long time. The King of Romans
immediately after this change above mentioned, married the daughter of Galeas
Duke of Milan, sister to Duke John Galeas before named, the which marriage was
made by the Lord Lodouics only procurement: but it displeased greatly both the
Princes of the Empire, and many also of the King of Romans friends, because
she was not of a house noble enough in their opinion to match with their
Emperor. For as touching the Viscounts of whom the Dukes of Milan are
descended, small nobility is in them, and less yet in the Sforces; for the
first of that house was Francis Sforce Duke of Milan, whose father was a
shoemaker 5 dwelling in a little town called Cotignoles, but a very valiant
man, though not so valiant as his son, who by means of the great favor the
people of Milan bare his wife, being bastard daughter to Duke Philip Marie,
made himself Duke, and conquered and governed the whole country not as a
tyrant, but as a good and just Prince: so that in woorthines and virtue, he was
comparable to the noblest Princes that lived in his days. Thus much I have
written to show what followed the change of these marriages, neither know I
what may yet hereafter ensue further thereof.

The Notes.
1 Annal. Burgund. write, with Philip the King of Romans son, but the
best vvriters agree with our author.

2 Maximilian was chosen King of Romans, anno 1486. Funccius.

3 Of this childs death he vvriteth, lib. 8. cap. 13.

4 Of this Princes death he vvriteth at large, lib. 8. cap. 17.

5 Francis Sforces father (as some write) was first a cook in the camp,
after he became a soldier, and lastly for his valor was made a captain and a
knight.

How the King sent to the Venetians to practice with them before he enterprised
his voyage to Naples, and of the preparation that was made for the said voyage.
Chap. 4.
NOw to return to the principal matter: you have heard of the Earl of
Caiazzes and the other ambassadors departure from the King at Paris, and of
diverse practices entertained in Italy, and how the King as young as he was,
greatly affected this voyage, notwithstanding that as yet he discovered his
meaning but to the Seneschall and general only. Further, he required the
Venetians to give him aid and counsel in this enterprise, who answered him
that he should be welcome into Italy: but that aid him they could not, because
they stood in doubt of the Turk, (yet were they in peace with him:) and as
touching counsel, it should be too great presumption in them to give counsel
to so wise a Prince, having so grave a counsel about him; but they promised
rather to help him than hinder him. This they took to be a wise answer, and
so was it I confess. But notwithstanding that, they govern their affairs
more circumspectly than any Prince or commonaltie in the world; yet God will
always have us to know that wisdom and forecast of man avail naught, when
he is purposed to strike the stroke. For he disposed of this enterprise far
otherwise than they imagined, for they thought not that the King would have
come in person into Italy, neither stood they in any fear of the Turk,
notwithstanding their forged excuse: for the Turk then reigning was a man of
no valor 1: but they hoped by this means to be revenged of the house of
Arragon, which they hated extremely, both the father and the son, because by
their persuasion (as they said) the Turk came to Scutary 2. I mean the father
of this Turk, called Mahumet Ottoman, who took Constantinople, and greatly
endammaged the said Venetians. But apart to Alphonse D. of Calabria they had
many other quarrels, for they charged him, first, as the only author of the
war the D. of Ferrara moved against them, wherein they consumed such infinite
treasure, that it had well near clean undone them (of the which war a word or
two has been spoken before.) Secondarily, that he had sent a man purposely to
Venice to poison their cesterns, at the least, as many as might be come unto,
for diverse of them be enclosed and locked. They use there none other water, for
they are environed with the sea, and sure that water is very good 3, as my
self can witness: for twice I have been at Venice, and in my last voyage drank
of it eight months together. But the chief cause of their hatred against this
house of Arragon was none of these above rehearsed; but for that the said house
kept them from growing great as well in Italy as Greece, on both the which
countries they had their eyes fixed: notwithstanding they had lately conquered
the I Will of Cyprus upon no title in the world 4. For all these considerations
the Venetians thought it their profit, that war should arise between the King
and the house of Arragon: but they supposed that it could not have ended so
soon as it did, and that it should but weaken their enemies, not utterly destroy
them: and further, that if the woorst fell, either the one party or the other
to have their help, would give them certain towns in Pouille, lying upon
their sea coast: as also in the end it happened, but they had well near
misreckoned themselves. Lastly, as touching the calling of the King into Italy,
they thought it could not be laid to their charge, seeing they had given him
neither counsel nor aid, as appeered by their answer to Peron of Basche.

In the year 1494. the King went to Lions to attend to his affairs, but no
man 1494.
thought he would pass the mountains. Thither came to him the above named
Master Galeas of Saint Seuerin, brother to the Earl of Caiazze with a goodly
train, sent from the Lord Lodouic, whose lieutenant and principal servant he
was. He brought with him a great number of brave horses and armours to run in,
and ran himself, and that very well, for he was a young and a gallant knight.
The King entertained him very honorably, feasted him sumptuously, and gave him
his order. This done, he returned into Italy. But the Earl of Belleioyeuse
remained still with the King to hasten the voyage. At Genua they began to arm
a great navy, whither the King sent the Lord of Vrfe Master of his horse, with
diverse others. In the end he removed to Vienna in Daulphine, about the
beginning of August in the same year, whither the nobles of Genua resorted
daily to him: wherefore to Genua he sent Lewis Duke of Orleans, now King of
this realm, a young gentleman of goodly personage, but much given to his
pleasures, of whom in this history ample mention shall be made. It was then
thought that the said Duke of Orleans should have led this army by sea to land
in the realm of Naples, by the conduct and direction of the above named
banished Princes of Salerne and Bisignan. The whole navy was fowerteene ships
of Genua, besides a great number of galleys and galleons, and the King was as
well obeyed there in this case, as he should have been at Paris: for Genua was
under the state of Milan, where the Lord Lodouic governed all, having none to
gainsay him, save only the Duchess his nephews wife, daughter to King
Alphonse, (for about this present his father King Ferrande died.) But the said
Lady prevailed little or nothing, both because men saw the King in a readiness
either to pass into Italy himself, or to send his forces, and also because
her husband was a very simple man, and disclosed all her doings to the Lord
Lodouic his uncle, who had already caused a messenger to be drowned sent by
her, to her father.

This navy did no service, notwithstanding that the charges thereof amounted
to three hundred thousand franks, for all the treasure that the K. could leuy
was employed that way, by means whereof he was unfurnished as before I said,
both of good counsel, of money, and of al things necessary for such an
enterprise: yet God of his mere grace (as manifestly he declared) gave it good
success. I mean not that the King was not wise of his age, but he was but two
and twenty years old, newly crept out of the shell. The two above named that
governed him in all this voyage, to wit Stephen de Verse Seneschall of
Beaucaire, and the general Brissonnet, now Cardinal of Saint Malo, were men
of mean estate, and of no experience, whereby so much the more appeered the
wonderful work of God: our enemies on the other side, were accounted wise,
of great experience in the wars, rich, accompanied with wise men and good
captains, and in possession of the realm. I mean King Alphonse (lately
crowned by Pope Alexander a Spaniard, borne in the realm of Arragon) who had
the Florentines joined with him, and great intelligence with the Turk. He had
also a son bearing arms, called Dom Ferrande, a courteous young gentleman, of
the age of two or three and twenty years, who was well-beloved in the realm,
and a brother also named Dom Frederic, who succeeded the said Ferrande in this
our age, and was a very wise man, and led their army upon the sea. He had been
long trained up on this side the mountains, and of him you had often assured
me my Lord of Vienna by your knowledge in Astrology, that he should be King,
so that he once promised me four thousand franks of yearly revenues in the
said realm, when that came to pass, which promise was made twenty years
before the prophecy took effect.

Now to proceed, the King altered his mind 5 through the Duke of Milans
earnest solicitation made both by letters by the Earl Charles of Belleioyeuse
his ambassador, and by the two above named. Notwithstanding the General in the
end began to draw back, seeing all men of wisdom and understanding to
mislike this voyage for many respects, and especially because the Kings forces
lay abroad in camp in August, unfurnished of money, and all other things
necessary: but the Seneschall alone carried the credit from them all, so far
forth that the King showed a countenance of displeasure to the General three
or four days, but he soon recovered his favor again. At this present died
one of the Seneschals servants of the plague, as men said; for the which cause
he durst not repair to the Kings presence to his great grief, for no man
solicited the voyage: but on the contrary side the D. and Duchess of Bourbon
were there, laboring all that in them lay to overthrow it, whereunto also the
said General encouraged them, by means whereof one day the voyage was dashed,
and another revived. In the end the King resolved to go, and I my self mounted
on horseback with the foremost, hoping to pass the mountains the more
commodiously with small company: but I received a countermand, whereby I was
advertised that all was altered again. The selfsame day were borrowed fifty
thousand ducats of a merchant of Milan; but the Lord Lodouic delivered the
money upon assurance made to the said merchant for the repaiment: my self
stood bound for six thousand, and others for the rest; but this money was lent
without interest. The King had borrowed before of the bank of Soly at Genua a
hundred thousand franks, the interest whereof amounted in four months to 14.
thousand franks 6. But some said that the two above named had part both in the
principal, and also in the interest.

The Notes.
1 This Turk was Bajazet the second.

2 Scodra in Latin a town in that part of Dalmatia, now called Albania.

3 This is rainewater he means.

4 Why they had no title appears by the Pedigree in the end of the work.

5 For he was not minded at the first to have gone in person.

6 That is after the rate of starling money, 14. pound in the hundred for four
months.

How King Charles departed from Vienna in Daulphin to conquer the realm of
Naples in person, and what his navy upon the sea did under the leading of the
Duke of Orleans. Chap. 5.
TO be short, the King departed from Vienna the 23. of August in the year
1494. and marched straight toward Ast 1. At Suze Master Galeas of S. Seuerin
came to him in post, from whence the King removed to Thurin, where he
borrowed all the Duchess of Sauoyes jewels, who was daughter to the late Lord
William Marquis of Montferrat, and Duke Charles of Sauoyes widow, the which
he engaged for twelve thousand ducats. A few days after, he went to Casall to
the Marquis of Montferrats widow, being a wise young Lady, daughter to the King
of Seruia. The Turk had conquered her country, and the Emperor, whose
kinswoman she was (having as I suppose, taken her into his protection) had
bestowed her in this house of Montferrat. She lent also her jewels, the which
were in like manner engaged for twelve thousand ducats. Hereby you may perceive
what success this voyage was like to have had, if God alone had not guided the
enterprise. The King abode at Ast a certain space 2. That year all the wines
of Italy were sower, which our men much misliked, neither could they away with
the great heat of the air. To Ast came the Lord Lodouic and his wife with a
goodly train to visit the King, where they abode two days: and then the said
Lodouic departed to a castle of the Duchy of Milan, a league from Ast called
Nom, whither the Kings Council repaired daily to him. King Alphonse had two
armies abroad in the country, the one in Roman 3 toward Ferrara, under the
leading of his son, accompanied with the Lord Virgill Vrsin, the Earl of
Petilhane, and the Lord John James of Trenoul, who is now become French.
Against these the King sent the Lord d'Aubigny 4 a valiant and wise Knight,
with two hundred men of arms French, and five hundred men of arms Italians,
being in the Kings service, under the leading of the Earl of Caiazze so often
before mentioned, who was there as the Lord Lodouics lieutenant, and feared
greatly the discomfiture of these forces: which if it had happened, we had
repaired homewards incontinent, and he should have had his enemies upon his
neck, whose intelligence was great in the Duchy of Milan.

The other army was upon the sea, under the leading of Dom Frederike King
Alphonses brother, and lay at Ligorne and at Pise; for the Florentines took
part as yet with the house of Arragon, and furnished them of certain galleys.
Moreover, with the said Dom Frederike was Breto de Flisco, and certain other
Genuois, by whose intelligence he hoped to cause Genua to revolt 5. And sure
they had almost obtained their purpose at Specie and Rapalo near to Genua,
where they landed a thousand of their faction, by means whereof they had
undoubtedly achieved their enterprise, if they had not been very speedily
assailed. But the selfsame day or the next day, Lewis Duke of Orleance arrived
there with certain ships, and a good number of galleys, and one great
galliasse being mine, the patron whereof was one Master Albert Mely, and it
carried the said Duke and the principal of the army, and many goodly pieces
of artillery; for it was very strong, and approached so near the shore, that
the very artillery almost discomfited the enemies, who before had never seen
the like: for artillery was at that time strange and new to the Italian
nation. The soldiers landed also that were in the other ships: and from Genua
where the whole army lay, came a band of Swissers by land led by the Bailife
of Digeon, who had joined with him certain of the Duke of Milans forces (under
the leading of Master John Lewis de Flisco brother to the forenamed Breto, and
of Master John Adorn:) the which (notwithstanding that they were not at the
skirmish) showed themselves valiant soldiers in defending a straight against
the enemies. To be short, because our men came to hand-strokes with the
enemies, they were discomfited and put to flight, and a hundred or sixscore
slain, and eight or ten taken prisoners: among the which was one Fourgousin
son to the Cardinal of Genua. Those prisoners that were dismissed, were all
stripped to their shirts by the Duke of Milans bands, and other harm had they
none, for such is the law of arms in Italy. I saw all the letters that were
sent both to the King and to the Duke of Milan making report of this skirmish.
Thus was the enemies Navy repulsed, which afterward approached no more so near.
At our men's return, the Genuois thought to have raised a tumult and slew
certain Almaines in the town, certain also of them were slain, but the
matter was soon pacified.

I must here speak a word or two of the Florentines, who had sent twice to
the King before his departure out of France meaning only to dissemble with
him, with their first ambassadors (being the Bishop of Arese 6, and one named
Peter Sonderin) the King commanded me, the Seneschall, and the General to
negotiate. Our demands were only these: First, to give the King passage
through their country: and secondarily, to serve him with a hundred men of
arms, paying them after the Italian intertainment, which was but ten thousand
ducats the year 7. These ambassadors depended wholly upon Peter of Medicis a
young man of small wisdom, son to Laurence of Medicis who was dead, and had
been one of the wisest men in his time, and had governed this city almost as
prince, as did also at this present his son: for their house had continued
thus already two men's ages, namely Laurence the father of this Peter, and Cosme
of Medicis the first root and founder of this house, a man worthy among the
woorthiest. And sure of their trade (being merchandise,) I think it has been
the greatest house that ever was in the world: for their servants and factors
have had so great credit under their name that it is wonderful. I my self
have seen the proof thereof both in Flaunders and England. For I knew one
called Gerard Quanuese by whose only help (in a manner) King Edward the
fowerth kept the crown on his head when civil wars were in the realm of
England: for he lent him at times more then sixscore thousand crowns, little
for his Masters profit, notwithstanding he recovered his principal in the
end. Another also I knew named Thomas Portunay, who was pledge at one time
between the said King Edward and Duke Charles of Burgundy for fifty thousand
crowns, and at an other time in another place for forwerscore thousand. I
commend not the wisdom of merchants in thus doing, but I commend Princes that
use merchants well and keep day with them, for they know not when they shall
need their help, and sometime a little money does great service.

It seems that this house of the Medicis fell to ruin as mighty houses do in
realms and Empires, for the great authority of this Peter of Medicis
predecessors did him harm: notwithstanding the government of Cosme the first
of this house was mild and gentle, such as was agreeable with a free state.
But Lavvrence this Peter's father (whom we now presently write of) because of
the great variance before mentioned in this history, that was between him and
them of Pisa and others (diverse of the Lib. 6. cap. 5.
which at that time were hanged;) took a guard of 20. men for the defense of
his person, by the commandment and leave of the Seniory, who commanded
nothing, but at his pleasure: notwithstanding he behaved himself in this great
authority very discreetly and soberly, for (as I before said) he was one of
the wisest men in his time. But this Peter who succeeded his father (supposing
the like authority to be due to him of right) became terrible by means of this
guard, and used great violence in the night, beating men as they went in the
streets, and abusing their common treasure, so had his father done also, but
so wisely, that they held themselves in manner contented therewith.

In the second embassage the said Peter sent to Lions, one called Peter Capon
with diverse others, by whom he excused himself, as before he had done, for not
accomplishing the Kings requests, saying that King Lewis the eleventh had
commanded the town of Florence, to enter into league with King Ferrande in the
time of Duke John of Aniou, and to depart from their league with the said Duke:
wherefore seeing by the Kings commandment they were entered into this league,
which endured yet certain years; they could not abandon nor forsake the house
of Arragon. But if the King happened to come into their country, they promised
to do him great services, which offer they made because they thought (as the
Venetians did) that the King would not come into Italy. In both these
ambassages there was some one enemy to the said de Medicis, especially in the
latter this Capon, who often advertised us by what means the city of Florence
might be brought to rebel against the said Peter, and delivered also his
message in far worse terms than indeed it was sent; and further, gave advise
to banish all the Florentines out of France, and so were they 8. Thus much
have I written, to the end you may the better understand that which afterward
ensued: for the King became mortal enemy to the said Peter, and the Seneschall
and general had great intelligence with his enemies in the city, especially
with this Capon, yea and with two also of the said Peter's cousin germans being
both of his own name.

The Notes.
1 The King came to Ast the 9. of September 1494. Guicciar.

2 The King abode at Ast till the 6. of October. Annal. Franc. and Aquit.

3 Alphonse in person levied men in Abruzzo to have fought with Duke Aubigny,
but in an assembly held between him and the Pope at Vicouare the third of July,
it was agreed that he should pass no further, but give the charge of the army
to his son. Guicciar.

4 This Duke Aubigny was a Scottish man and a Steward, and of him the now King
of Scots is by his father lineally descended.

5 Genua was ever divided into the factions of Fregosi (called here in many
places Fourgousi) Adorni, Dorei, and Spinoli.

6 The Italians have Aretio, which is a town between Florence and Perouse,
but Guazzo de Regio which is a little town near to Parma.

7 That was after the rate of one hundred ducats for every man of arms: for
the Italian men of arms have not their archers as the French, and therefore
their wages is less by the half.

8 They gave this counsel, to the end the Florentines being barred their
traffic in France, might murmur against Peter of Medicis: for what
misfortune soever happens, the Prince is always blamed as cause thereof.

How the King remaining yet in Ast, resolved to pass forth toward Naples at
the earnest suit of Lodouic Sforce. How Philip de Commines was sent ambassador
to Venice: of the Duke of Milans death; after whose decease the said Lodouic
seized upon the Duchy, to the prejudice of a son the said D. left behind
him. Chap. 6.
I Have told you already what happened upon the sea at Rapalo. Dom Frederike
retired to Pisa and Ligorne, leaving his footmen behind him whom he had
landed. The Florentines waxed marvelous weary of him; for they be and ever
have been better affected to the house of France, than to that of Arragon. Our
army that was in Roman (notwithstanding that it were the weaker) furthered
greatly our affairs; for it made Dom Ferrande D. of Calabria by little and
little to retire: which when the K. perceived, he resolved to pass forward,
being earnestly solicited thereunto by the Lord Lodouic, and the others above
named. The said Lodouic at his first meeting with the King spoke thus unto him:
Sir, fear not this enterprise, there are in Italy but three mighty estates,
one of the which takes part with you which is Milan; another moves not, to
wit, the Venetians, so that you have only to do with the force of Naples. But
diverse of your ancestors have overthrown us all three being joined together.
Sir, if you will credit me, I will help to make you greater than ever was
Charleman: for we will easily chase the Turk out of the Empire of
Constantinople, having subdued the realm of Naples. And sure he said true of
the Turk that now reigns 1, if all things had been well ordered on our side.
Then the King began to govern all his affairs by the order and direction of
the said Lodouic, wherewith certain of our men, I mean some of the Kings
chamber, and such like, were not a little discontented, which was great folly;
for without him we could do nothing: and this that they did, was only to
flatter the Duke of Orleance, who pretended title to the Duchy of Milan 2. But
the General especially was highly offended therewith; for now he thought
himself a great man, and some breach was happened between the Seneschall and
him: for the which cause the L. Lodouic moved both the K. and the said
Seneschall that the General might be sent home, which his words caused the
said General openly to babble against him, and to say that he would deceive
the whole company: but silence would better have becommed him. Notwithstanding
as touching him, never wise man made account of him in matter of estate, both
because he understood not what it meant, and also because he was light of
talk: but sure he was well affected to his Master. They concluded in the end
to send abroad diverse ambassadors, and my self among the rest was appointed to
go to Venice, but my dispatch was delaied awhile, because the King was sick of
the small pocks, and in danger of death: for an ague was joined with his
disease, but it endured not past six or seven days. Then I departed leaving
the King in Ast, and verily believing that he would pass no further: in six
days I went to Venice with my mules and carriage; for the way was marvelous
fair. But I departed from the said town of Ast in great fear, doubting the
Kings return home: notwithstanding God had otherwise disposed of this
enterprise, for he went straight to Pauie, and passed through Casall, where the
Marchioness of Montferrat lay, which was a good Lady, and great friend to us,
but deadly enemy to the Lord Lodouic, and he also to her. When the King
arrived at Pauie, some small jealousy began to arise; for they would have
lodged him in the town and not in the castle, but he would not lodge but in
the castle, and so he did. Those that were near about him have told me, that
he was there in some danger. Wherefore the selfsame night the watch was
r'enforced, whereat the Lord Lodouic marvelled greatly, so far forth that he
communed thereof with the King, demanding if he had conceived any suspicion of
him. To be short, their behavior was such on both sides, that their amity
could not long endure: but we babbled much more than they, not the King
himself, but certain of his nearest kinsmen 3. In this castle of Pauie was
John Galeas Duke of Milan, and his wife daughter to King Alphonse in very
pitious estate: for her husband being sick, was held in this castle as under
guard, and her son who is yet living, with a daughter or two. The child was
then about five years old, and him every man might see, but no man might see
the Duke: for my self passed that way three days before the King, and could
by no means be suffered to come to him. Every body said he was extreme sick:
notwithstanding the King spoke with him; for he was his cousin germane 4, and he
has told me that their communication was only general talk, because he
would in no wise offend the Lord Lodouic; notwithstanding that he were very
desirous to have advertised his said cousin of diverse matters. At the same time
the Duchess fell upon her knees before the said Lodouic, desiring him to have
pity upon her father and brother. He answered that it could not be. But to say
the truth, she might better have entreated for her husband and her self, being
at that time a goodly young Lady.

From thence the King removed to Plaisance, where the said Lodouic received
letters that his nephewe the Duke Milan lay at the point of death, wherefore he
took his leave of the King to go to him. The King desired him to return, and
so he promised to do. Before he came to Pauie the Duke died, whereupon he rid
incontinent, as it were in post to Milan. Al these news I understood by a
letter that the Venetian ambassador resident with the said Lodouic sent to
Venice, wherein also he advertised the Seniorie that he meant to make himself
Duke, whichboth the Duke of Venice and the Seniorie utterly misliked, so far
forth that they asked me whether the King would not defend the child; which
though reason required that he should: yet I made the matter doubtful,
considering how necessary an instrument the said Lord Lodouic was at that time
for the Kings affairs.

To be short, he made himself to be received at Milan as Duke, which was the
only end (as some said) why he had caused us to pass the mountains. Many
also charged him with his nephews death, whose kinsfolks and friends in Italy
were in arms to have taken the government from him, which they would easily
have done, had not the Kings coming stopped them. For they were already in
Roman (as you have heard.) But the Earl of Caiazze and the Lord of Aubigny
made them to retire. For the said Lord of Aubigny had with him a company of a
hundred and fifty or two hundred men of arms French, and a good band of
Swissers. Dom Ferrande and his forces retired toward their friends, dislodging
ever half a days journey before our men, and marched toward Furly 5, which
belonged to a Lady being a bastard of Milan, and widow of the Earl Hieronime,
nephew to Pope Sixtus 6. This Lady favored them as the report went;
notwithstanding after our men had taken by assault a little town of hirs,
being first beaten half a day with the canon: she revolted to us, being indeed
well affected to us before. Further, the people of Italy began in all places to
take heart and to desire change and alteration: for they saw that which before
they had never seen, I mean the feate of artillery, which they were
unacquainted with, and which in France was never more practiced than at that
time. The said Dom Ferrande approached still nearer and nearer to his realm,
and went to Sesenne, a fair city of the Popes in the Marque of Anconne; but
the people spoiled his carriage and stuff whenever they took his men at
advantage. And through all Italy they would have rebelled, if the wars had been
ordered on our side without spoil: but all was done clean contrary, to my
great grief, because of the honor and renown the French nation might have
obtained by this voyage. For at our first arrival the people honored us as
saints, supposing all faith and virtue to be in us: but their opinion endured
not long, partly because of the disorder and spoil our men used; and partly
because of the slanderous reports our enemies made of us in all places,
charging us that we forced women, and robbed and carried away money, and
whatsoever we could lay hands on, of heinouser crimes they could not have
accused us in Italy, for no nation is so ielous and covetous as the Italian. As
touching women they belied us, but the rest was not altogether untrue.

The Notes.
1 He means because he was a man of no virtue, as before is said.

2 What right the Duke of Orleans had to it, the petegree in the end of the
book will declare.

3 He means the Earl of Ligny, the King and who were sisters children.

4 King Charles his mother was Charlotte, and this Dukes mother Bonne, both
daughters to the Duke of Sauoy.

5 It was corruptly in the French Sorly for Furly, which the old Romans
called Forum liuii.

6 Octauian son to Hieronime of Riare, was Lord of Furly and Imola, with
title of Vicar of the Church, but he was under the government of Katherin
Sforce his mother here mentioned. Guicciar.

How Peter of Medices yielded four of the Florentines strongest places to the
King, and how the King restored Pisa being one of them to their ancient
liberty. Chap. 7.
THe King (as before you have heard) was at Plaisance, where he caused a
solemn funeral to be made for his cousin german the Duke of Milan; for other
thing wist he not what to do, the new Duke of Milan being departed from him.
They that best understood the course of these affairs, have told me that the
whole company desired to return home, as well for that they were unprovided of
all things necessary, as also because of diverse doubts that were arisen: for
certain that at the first seemed to have great good liking of this voyage,
began now utterly to disallow thereof, namely the Lord of Vrfe Master of the
horse, who was not with the King, but lay sick at Genua: whence he wrote him a
letter, giving him therein to understand of diverse doubts and iealousies
whereof he was advertised. But (as before I have said in diverse places) God
manifestly declared that he himself governed this enterprise. For suddenly in
the neck of this letter, news came to the King that the Duke of Milan would
shortly return, and that the Florentines began to favor us in hatred of Peter
de Medicis, who governed them as if he had been their Prince, to the great
discontentation both of many of his own near kinsmen, and of diverse also the
best citizens, namely the Capons, the Sonderini 1, the Nerly, and in manner the
whole city. Wherefore the King departed from Plaisance and marched toward the
Florentines territories, meaning either to cause them to declare themselves for
him, or to take their towns being unfortified, and lodge his men in them all
the winter, which was already begun. Diverse small places yielded unto him, so
did also the city of Luques enemy to the Florentines, showing him all
pleasure and service that in them lay. Now you shall understand that the Duke
of Milan had two purposes in his head; first he sought by all means possible
to stay the King from passing further that summer 2. Secondarily, he hoped to
obtain of him Pisa (a great and a fair city) together with Serzane, and
Petresancte, which two places had been subject to the Geneuois not long before,
and were won from them by the Florentines in Laurence de Medicis time.

The King passed through Pontreme one of the D. of Milans towns, and went to
besiege Serzane the strongest and the best castle the Florentines had, but
unfurnished because of their great division. To say the truth the Florentines
never bear arms willingly against the house of France: for they have ever
faithfully served it and taken part with it, both because of their great
traficke in France, and also because they have ever been of the Guelphes
faction 3. If this place had been well furnished the King must of necessity
have broken his army: for the country is very barren and full of hills, and
victuals there were none to be gotten: besides that the snow lay marvelous
deep upon the ground. After the Kings siege had lien before it three days,
the Duke of Milan came thither no composition being yet made between the
Florentines and the King 4, and passed through Pontreme, where the townsmen
and the soldiers of the garrison fell at such variance with our Almaines (led
by one Buser) that certain of the said Almaines were stain: of the which
braule sprang a great inconvenience, as hereafter you shall hear. For
although I were not my self present at the doing of these things: yet
understood I of them both by the King, the Duke, and diverse others. The
Florentines began now to practice, and appointed fifteen or sixteen to go to
the King, saying, that they would no longer continue in this great danger, nor
sustain the displeasure of the King and the Duke of Milan, who had continually
an ambassador resident at Florence. And Peter of Medices consented to the
sending of this embassage; for to say the truth, he could not remedy it,
considering upon what terms they stood: for if they had done otherwise, they
had been undone, being unprovided of all things, and utterly unacquainted with
the wars. When these ambassadors came to the Kings presence, they offered to
receive him into Florence and their other places, neither cared the greater
part of them how the world went, so that we would come to Florence to chase
away Peter of Medices; which matter they earnestly pressed, because they had
good intelligence with the above named that governed then the Kings affairs.

On the other side Peter of Medices practiced by a servant of his own named
Laurence Spinelly, who was his factor at Lions, and an honest man in his
vocation, and had lived long in France: but of the state of our Court he could
understand nothing, no hardly they that had been Courtiers all their lives,
because of the often changes and alterations. This Spinelly negotiated with
those that heretofore had borne all the sway, namely, the Lord of Bresse
afterward Duke of Sauoye, and the Lord of Miolans chamberlain to the King.
Soon after the above named ambassadors were returned to Florence, Peter of
Medices accompanied with certain of the city, came himself to the King to
make answer to our requests: for they within the city saw utter destruction
before their eyes, unless they yielded to all the Kings demands; whose favor
they hoped to obtain, by offering him some greater service than any of the
other towns that had already received him. At his arrival Monseur de Piennes
a Flemming borne, and Chamberlain to the King, and the general Brissonnet
were sent to treat with him, who required him to yield unto the King the
castle of Serzane, which presently he did. They required him further to lend
the King Pisa, Ligorne, Petresanct, and Librefacto: whereunto he also agreed
incontinent, never communicating the matter with his colleagues, who supposed
that the King should only have lodged in Pisa, and these other places to
refresh himself, but not have held them still: well, by this means they
yielded their whole estate and force into our hands. Those that negotiated with
the said Peter have told both me and others since, scoffing and jesting at him,
that they woondred to see him so lightly condescend to so weighty a matter,
granting more than they looked for. To conclude, the King entered into Pisa, and
the above named ambassadors returned to Florence, where the said Peter caused
the Kings lodging to be made in his own house, which was the goodliest of a
citizens or merchants house that ever I saw, and better furnished than any man's
house in the world of his estate.

I must here speak a word or two of the Duke of Milan, who now wished the
King with all his heart out of Italy, notwithstanding that both already he had
made his profit by him, and sought also still so to do: for he was in hope to
obtain of him, the places yielded by the Florentines, and pressed him
earnestly for Serzane, and Petresancte, which he said appertained to the
Genuois: he lent him also at that present 30. thousand ducats, and he has
since told both me and others, that these places were promised him. But when he
saw that he could not obtain them, he departed in great displeasure from the
King, pretending that earnest business called him home, which was the last time
the King saw him: notwithstanding, he left Master Galeas of Saint Seuerin
behind him, whom he joined in commission in all matters with the Earl Charles
of Belleioyeuse. The said Master Galeas while the King lay in Pisa, sent (by
his Masters advise) for the chief citizens of the town to his lodging, where
he persuaded them to rebel against the Florentines, and to desire the King to
restore them to their ancient liberty, trusting by this means that Pisa would
fall into the Duke of Milans claws, under whose obedience it had been 5 in the
time of John Galeas the first Duke of Milan of that name, (a great and wicked
tyrant though very honorable) whose body lies buried in the charterhouse of
Pauia by the park 6, so high above the high altar, that men go up to it by a
ladder: certain of the monks showed me it, at the least his bones, which
smelt, as naturally they should. Further, one of the said monks who was borne
at Bourges, called him Saint, as he talked with me; and I asked him in his ear
why he called him Saint, considering he might behold painted round about him
the arms of many cities which he had wrongfully usurped 7, and seeing the
image of him and his horse being of fine marble stood higher than the altar,
and yet his body lay under his horse feet. He answered me softly, Sir, in this
country we call all those Saints that have done us any good, and he built this
goodly charterhouse church, which in very deed is the fairest that ever I saw,
for it is all of fine marble. But to proceed, the said Master Galeas sought to
make himself great, and so I think did the Duke of Milan also, because he had
married his base daughter: for he manifestly declared that he would advance
him, as his own son, because at that time his own children were all very
young. The said Pisans were I confess cruelly handled by the Florentines, for
they used them like slaves. They had subdued them about a hundred years
before, even in the self same year that the Venetians conquered Padua, which
was the first victory that they obtained upon the firm land. And the fortune
of these two cities was almost alike, for they had been ancient enemies to
those whom now they served, many years before they were conquered, and almost
of equal force with them. These Pisans consulted together about this motion,
and seeing themselves counseled by so great a personage, and being also of
themselves desirous of liberty: a great number of them both men and women,
came crying to the King as he went to mass, Liberty, liberty, desiring him
with weeping eyes to grant it them. One of the Masters of the requests (who
was a counselor of the parliament in Daulphine named Robot) going before the
King, or executing his office said unto him, (were it because he had promised
the Pisans so to do: or because he understood not what they demanded) that it
was a lamemtable case, and that of right he ought to grant them their
petition, adding, that never men were so cruelly handled. The King not
understanding well what this word meant, but bewailing in his mind the
miserable estate of the Italian nation, and the cruelty that both Princes and
commonalties use toward their subjects (notwithstanding that in reason he
could not grant them their liberty, seeing the town was none of his, but lent
him upon friendship at his great need:) answered that he was contented to grant
their request, and so the counselor above named declared unto them: whereupon
the people incontinent began to proclaim holiday in token of joy, and went to
their bridge which is a very goodly one built over the river of Arne, and threw
down to the ground, and afterward into the river a great lion standing upon a
strong pillar of marble called mayor, representing the Seniorie of Florence:
upon the which pillar they caused to be erected the image of a K. of France
holding a naked sword in his hand, and treading the mayor or lion under his
horse feet. But after, when the K. of Romans entered the town, they did with
the Kings image as now with the lion: for such is the nature of the Italian
nation, to turn ever with the strongest. Notwithstanding these Pisans were
then and yet are so cruelly handled that they are to be holden for excused.

The Notes.
1 It was Fodormi in the French, but corruptly.

2 He means that the Duke of Milan found delays to cause the King to stay
all the winter in the Florentines territories, hoping that their towns would
yield unto him (as indeed they did) and that then he might obtain of the King
such as he would.

3 The factions of the Guelphes and Gibellines began in Italy under the
Emperor Frederike the second anno 1240. The Gibellines held for the Emperor,
the Guelphes for the Pope.

4 This composition he speaks of afterward in this chapter.

5 It was sold to this John Galeas, and he sold it over to the Florentines.

6 This park was made by the said John Galeas after he had conquered Pauia: it
was twenty miles in circuit, walled round about, and stored with all kind of
beasts, but now by means of the wars it is destroyed: by this park he built
also the castle. In this park was Francis the French King taken prisoner.

7 This Duke conquered in Italy 29. cities, among the which were Pauie,
Bolonia, Verona, Senes, Perouse, Luques, Verceil, etc.

How the King departed from Pisa to Florence, and of the flight and ruin of
Peter de Medices. Chap. 8.
AFter the King had soiourned at Pisa certain days, he departed to Florence,
where they declared unto him the great wrong he had done their estate, by
restoring the Pisans to liberty against his promise. Those that were appointed
to make answer heereunto excused the fact: saying, that the King had not well
understood with what conditions Pisa was delivered unto him, neither understood
he another treaty he made with the Florentines 1: whereof you shall hear
after I have spoken somewhat of Peter de Medicis ruin, and showed how the King
entered into Florence, leaving a garrison in Pisa, and the other places lent
him. The said Peter after he had yielded to the King the places above mentioned
with the consent of certain of the town, returned to the city, supposing
that the King would not hold them still, but restore them at his departute from
Pisa, where he would but repose himself three or four days. Yet am I of
opinion that if it had pleased him to winter there, they would willingly have
agreed thereunto, notwithstanding that Pisa be of greater importance to them
than Florence it self, save that their persons and goods be resident in
Florence 2. At the said Peter's return to Florence, every man frowned upon him,
and not without cause: for he had dispossessed them of their whole force, and
of all that they had conquered in a hundred years, so that their minds seemed
already to foretell them the evils that afterward fell upon them. Wherefore
partly for this cause (which I suppose to be the principal, though they never
uttered it) partly for the great hatred before rehearsed, which they bare him,
and partly also to recover their liberty, whereof they thought themselves
bereaved by him: they determined to banish him the town, forgetting all the
benefits of Cosmus and Laurence de Medicis his ancestors. The said Peter having
no certain intelligence of this their determination, yet doubting it, went to
the palace with his ordinary guard to advertise them of the Kings coming, who
was about three miles from the town: but when he came to the palace gate and
knocked, one of the house of Nerly (being the father and many sons whom my
self knew well, all of great wealth) refused to let him in, saying, that if he
would enter alone he should, otherwise not; and he that made him this refusal
was armed. The said Peter returned incontinent to his house, and armed both
himself and his servants, determining to make resistance against his enemies
in the town. Whereof he also advertised one Paul Vrsin, who was in pay with
the Florentines (for the said Peter was by his mother of the house of Vrsins,
and both his father and he had ever given entertainment to certain of them)
but immediately after, they heard the people cry, Liberty, liberty, and saw
them come toward his house in arms. Whereupon (following good advice) by the
help of Paul Vrsin he departed the town, which was a miserable departure to
him: for in power and wealth both he and his ancestors, since the time of
Cosmus de Medicis the first of that house, had been in manner equal with great
Princes: and this day fortune began to frown upon him, so that he lost both
honor and riches. At this present my self was at Venice, and by the ambassador
of Florence there resident, understood of all these news, which greatly
displeased me; for I had loved his father well. If the said Peter had followed
mine advice, all this had never happened: for immediately after my arrival at
Venice I wrote unto him, offering to make his peace with the King; for I had
commission by mouth both from the Seneschall of Beaucaire and the General so
to do: and I am well assured the King would have held himself contented with
passage through their country, at the most with Ligorne, and (that being
obtained) have agreed to all the said Peter's demands. But he by the persuasion
of the above named Peter Capon, answered me in manner with scoffs. The said
ambassador the next day delivered a letter to the Senate of Venice, the
contents whereof were, that the said Peter was banished the town, because he
sought to make himself Lord thereof by aid of the house of Arragon and the
Vrsins, and diverse other matters they charged him with that were untrue. But
such be the chances and changes of this world, that he that is in adversity,
has not only his enemies to pursue him, but his friends also become his foes,
as appeered by this ambassador named Paul Anthony Sonderin, (one of the wisest
men in Italy) who but the day before talked with me of this Peter as if he had
been his sovereign Lord, yet now declared himself his enemy. True it is that
it was by the Seniories commandment; for of himself particularly he made no
declaration. The next day I was advertised that the said Peter came to Venice,
and that the King in great triumph was entered into Florence. Moreover, the
Senate of Florence commanded their ambassador to take his leave of the Seniorie
of Venice, and return home with all speed. The letter himself showed me, and
then departed. Two days after his departure arrived Peter de Medicis in his
doublet and his hose, or in one of his servants clokes. The Venetians stood in
great doubt to receive him; so much feared they the Kings displeasure. And
notwithstanding that they could not of their honor refuse him, yet made they
him stay two days without the town, being very desirous to understand of me,
how the King would take it, if they received him. I for my part desired to do
him good, and the King had written nothing to me against him: wherefore I
answered them, that I thought he was fled for fear of the people, not of the
King. Whereupon he entered the town, and the next day after he had been with
the Seniorie, I went to visit him. They lodged him well, and permitted both
himself and fifteen or twenty of his servants that accompanied him, to wear
their weapons in the town 3. And notwithstanding that Cosmus above mentioned
had stopped them in times past from taking of Milan, yet used they him very
well, and reverenced him for the honor of his house, which had been of so
great estimation and renown through all Christendom. When I saw him me
thought he seemed a man of no great stuff, he discoursed to me at large of all
his misfortunes, and I, as well as I could, comforted him. Among other things,
he told me that he had lost all, and that above all his other mishaps this most
grieved him, that a factor of his in the town had refused to give him credit
for cloth but to the value of 100. ducats to apparel his brother and himself,
which was a strange thing, considering his estate and authority: for by the
space of threescore years the estimation of his house had been so great, that
greater it could not be. Soon after, by means of the Lord of Bresse afterward
Duke of Sauoye, the said Peter received good news; for the King wrote unto
him, willing him to repair to his presence. Notwithstanding the King was first
departed from Florence, as now you shall hear, but somewhat I was forced by the
way to speak of this Peter de Medicis.

The Notes.
1 This is ironice spoken, because the King brake this second treaty also,
mentioned in the very next chapter, notwithstanding that he understood it well
enough.

2 It stood them in such steed, because it was strong, and the key of their
country, and stands near the sea very commodiously for their traffic.

3 For through the Venetians dominions no man may wear his weapon without
leave.

How the King entered into Florence, and through what other towns he passed
till he came to Rome. Chap. 9.
THe next day the King entered into Florence where the said Peter had prepared
his own house to receive him, but the Lord of Ballassat who was sent thither
before to make the Kings lodging, understanding of the said Peter's departure:
fell to spoil all that he found in his house, pretending that his bank at
Lions ought him a great sum of money. Among other things he took one whole
Unicorns horn, valued at six or seven thousand ducats, and two great pieces
of another, with a number of other goodly things, which others seeing did the
like. Into another house in the town the said Peter had conveyed all his
goodliest stuff, but the people spoiled that also. The Seniorie had part of
his richest jewels, twenty thousand ducats in coin that lay in his bank in
the town, diverse fair pots of Agate, and such a number of goodly Camayeux
excellently well cut, (all the which my self once saw) as is wonderful,
together with three thousand medales of gold and silver weying 40. pound
weight, the number and goodness whereof I think all Italy could not match. All
that he lost that day in the city, amounted to a hundred thousand crowns and
better. The King being in Florence (as you have heard) made a treaty with the
citizens to their great good liking as I suppose. The conditions were these:
They gave him six score thousand ducats, whereof they paid him fifty
thousand presently, and the rest at two paiments very shortly after, they lent
him all the places above mentioned, they changed their arms being the red
flower deluce, and gave the Kings arms. And he for his part received them into
his safegarde and protection, and promised and swear upon the altar of Saint
John to restore their places unto them within four months after he should be
entered into Naples, or sooner, if sooner he returned into France. But the
matter fell otherwise out, as hereafter you shall hear.

The King stayed not long at Florence, but went to Senes, where he was
honorably received; and from thence to Viterbe, where Dom Ferrand (who as you
have heard retired toward Rome) was once minded to have lodged and fortified
his camp, and to have fought if he had seen his advantage, as I was
advertised both by King Alphonses ambassador, and also by the Popes legate
being at Venice. And sure I looked ever when King Alphonse being accounted a
valiant Prince, should have come thither in person, leaving his son in his
realm: for in mine opinion the place had been greatly for his advantage,
considering he should have had his own realm, the dition of the church, and
the places and territories of the Vrsins on his back. Wherefore I was
maruellously astonished when I received letters from the King that he was
entered the town of Viterbe, and likewise the castle, which soon after his
entry into the town a commander yielded unto him 1, by means of the
Cardinal Petri ad Vincula (who was governor thereof) and of the Colonnois. And
then began I to my self that God was fully purposed to accomplish this
enterprise, so far forth that I repented me that in my letters I had advised
the King not to refuse an honorable composition, for they offered him enough.
But to proceed, Aquependant, Monteflascon, and all the places round about
yielded before Viterbe, as I was advertised both by the Kings and also the
Seniories letters (who were daily informed by their ambassadors of all that
happened) diverse of the which they showed me, or caused one of their secretaries
to report unto me. From thence the K. marched to Rome, through the Vrsins
territories, which were all yielded to him by the Lord Charles Vrsin, who said
that he had commandment from his father 2 (notwithstanding that he were then
in K. Alphonses service) so to do, and that so long as Dom Ferrand should have
passage granted him through the dominions of the Church, and should be in the
said dominions; so long he would accompany him and no longer. Thus live they
in Italy both Princes and captains in continual practice with their enemies,
and turning ever as they see fortune incline. Further, the King was received
into Brachane, the said Virgile Vrsins principal castle, which was fair,
strong, and so well furnished of victuals, that I have heard the King
oftentimes commend both the place and the good entertainment he found there.
For his army was in such extremity and penury of victuals that in greater it
could not be. To be short, who so shall consider how often this army was upon
the point to return home since the time it first arrived at Vienna in
Daulphine, and by what means and ouuertures the journey was still continued: I
think he will confess that God was the leader thereof.

The Notes.
1 Un commandeur, is one that having Ecclesiastical livings may not marry,
and yet is not compelled to be a priest, as the Grandeprior in France, and all
the Knights of Saint John's of Jerusalem.

2 His father was Virgile Vrsine, of whom hereafter more mention is made.

How the King sent the Cardinal Petri ad Vincula to Ostie; what the Pope did
at Rome in the mean time, and how the King entered into Rome maugre all his
enemies. Chap. 10.
FRom Brachane the King sent the Cardinal Saint Peter ad Vincula to Ostie,
whereof he was Bishop: the place was of great importance, and held by the
Colonnois, who lately had recovered it from the Pope, whose forces not long
before had taken it from the said Cardinal. It was of no defense,
notwithstanding it has since held Rome in great subjection a long time by the
said Cardinals aid 1, being great friend to the Colonnois, who joined at that
time with us, partly by means of the Cardinal Ascanio brother to the D. of
Milan and Vicechancellor, and partly in hatred of the Vrsins whose enemies they
be and ever have been. These two factions breed great troubles in the Church
dominions, as do in France the factions of Luce and Grandmont, and in Holland
of Houc and Caballan 2: but were it not for this division, the said dominions
were the best country for the subjects in the world, for they pay no
subsidies, and other duties but few. Further, they are always well governed,
for the Popes are ever wise themselves, and have wise men about them: but
because of these factions many great and cruel murders are often committed,
as within these four years we have seen a number on both sides. For since
the time I now write of, the Coulonnois became our enemies, though to their
great dishonor: for they possessed of the Kings gift in the realm of Naples,
namely in the Earldom of Taillecouse, and other places which the Vrsins had
held before, 20000. ducats and better of yearly revenues 3. Further, all their
other demands were granted them, as well charge of men of arms as pensions.
Wherefore they fell from us very traiterouslie, and upon no occasion. But you
shall understand that they had ever been partakers with the house of Arragon
and other enemies of France, because they were Gibelins, and the Vrsins had
ever been friends to France because they were Guelphes. To Ostie the King sent
with Cardinal Saint Peter ad Vincula, Peron de la Basche steward of his house,
who landed but three days before at Plombin, and brought with him by sea
twenty thousand ducats, parcel of that money the Duke of Milan lent the King.
Upon the sea with the Kings army (being very small) remained the Prince of
Salerne, and one called the Lord of Sernon in Prouence whom tempest drove into
Corsique 4, with their navy all to rent and torn, where they stayed so long
in repairing it, that it did no service, notwithstanding the great treasure
employed thereon, for before it arrived at Naples, the King was entered the
town.

At Ostie with the said Cardinal were five hundred men of arms, and two
thousand Swissers led by the Earl of Ligny (the Kings cousin german by the
mother,) the Lord of Alegre, and diverse others, who thought to have passed the
river of Tybre there, and to have enclosed Dom Ferrand within Rome by aid of
the Coulonnois, the principal of the which house were at that time Prospere
and Fabrice Coulonne, and the Cardinal Coulonne, accompanied with two thousand
footmen, whom the King paid by the hands of the above named Basche. The said
footmen they had levied at their own pleasure, and mustred at Sannesonne, a
town of their own.

You shall understand, that many matters concur here, and of every one somewhat
is to be said. Before the King entered into Viterbe, he had sent to Rome Monseur
de la Trimoille his chamberlain, the president Ganay keeper of the seal, and
the general Bidaut, to enter into intelligence with the Pope, who practiced
continually after the manner of Italy. They being in Rome, the Pope in the
night received Dom Ferrand with his whole forces into the town, whereupon our
ambassadors and some few of their servants were stayed: but the self same day
the Pope dismissed them. Notwithstanding he held still in prison the Cardinal
Ascaigne his vicechauncellor, and brother to the Duke of Milan, and Prospere
Coulonne, some said by their own accord. Of all these accidents I was
advertised incontinent by the Kings letters, but the Seniorie more amply by
their ambassadors. All this happened before the King entered into Viterbe, for
neither party stayed above two days in a place. But as touching our affairs
they prospered better than we could wish, and no marvel: for the Lord of Lords
gave them success, as all men might manifestly perceive.

This army that lay in Ostie could do no service because of the foul weather;
further, you shall understand that the force which the Lord of Aubigny led, was
returned to the King, and himself also, neither had he further charge thereof.
The Italians were also dismissed that had been with him in Roman, under the
leading of the Lord Rodolph of Mantua, the Lord Galeot of Mirandula, and of
Fracasse brother to the L. Galeas of Saint Seuerin, the which with their said
company being to the number of five hundred men of arms, were well paid by
the King, for they served him as before you have heard. The King after his
departure from Viterbe, removed to Naples 5, which the Cardinal Ascaigne
held. Further, it is most certain that while our men lay in Ostie, above
twenty fathomes of Rome walls fell to the ground on the same side they should
have entered. The Pope seeing this young King come thus suddenly with such
success, agreed that he should enter the city, (for to say the truth he
could not otherwise choose) and desired a safe conduct 6, (which the King
willingly granted) for Dom Ferrand Duke of Calabria, and only son of K.
Alphonse, who in the night retired to Naples, the Cardinal Ascaigne conueying
him to the gate 7. Then the King entered the city in arms, as a Prince having
power to dispose of all things at his pleasure, and diverse Cardinals with the
governors and Senators of the town came forth to receive him. He lodged in
Saint Marks palace, which is the Culonnois quarter, who were his friends and
servants at that time. But the Pope retired into the castle of Saint Ange.

The Notes.
1 This Cardinal was afterward Pope Julius the second, and proved a deadly
enemy to the French. Further, this town of Ostie distressed Rome, by means
that being the very entry into the river of Tyber, it kept all victuals from
coming to Rome by water, for the which cause the old Romans called the
town Ostia, because it was the very door or mouth as it were of the river.

2 The factions of Houc and Caballan began in Holland 1444. Berlandus. Read
Meyer lib. 16. fol. 300. page 2.

3 The King gave to Fabrice Colonne the country of Albe and Taillecousse,
which were before Virginio Vrsins, and to Prosper the Duchy of Tracette, and
the city of Fondi.

4 This Corsique being corrupted in the French, we have restored according to
Panlus Iouius. Guicciar. has Corse.

5 This is not the city of Naples, but a little town called in the Annals
of France Neple, in Latin Nepesum, of the Italians Nepi.

6 Ferdinande Duke of Calabria refused the pasport. Guicciar.

7 Ferdinande was son to Hypolitie sister to Duke Galeas of Milan, to the
Lord Lodouic, and to this Cardinal.

How King Alphonse caused his son Ferrande to be crowned King, and then fled
himself into Sicilie: with a discourse of the evil life that his father the
old Ferrande and he had led. Chap. 11.
WHo would have thought that this proud King Alphonse (having been trained up
all the days of his life in martial affairs) that his son and al these
Vrsins, whose faction was so great in Rome, would thus have abandoned the city
through cowardice, especially seeing they knew and understood perfectly, that
the Duke of Milan began to waver, and the Venetians to stir and to treat of a
league, which had then been concluded (as I was certainly informed) if they had
made any resistance at Viterbe or Rome, to stay the King but a few days: but
God meant to show that all these proceedings, passed far the reach and compass
of man's brain. And here note by the way, that as the city wall fell down,
so did fifteen fathoms also of the vaumure of the castle of Saint Ange, as I
have been advertised by diverse, especially by two Cardinals there present. Now
I must return to speak a word or two of King Alphonse.

So soon as the Duke of Calabria called the young Ferrande, was returned to
Naples, his father King Alphonse judged himself unworthy longer to reign,
because of the evils he had committed, and the manifold cruelties he had used
against diverse barons and Princes of his realm. For you shall understand, that
whereas his father King Ferrande and he had taken (notwithstanding their safe
conduct) to the number of 24. of them, and had held them in prison from the
time of their rebellion against the said Ferrande 1 till the hour of his
death: this Alphonse immediately after his fathers decease for a surplusage of
all cruelty, caused them miserably to be murdered, and with them two other
whom his father had also taken under safe conduct, the one Duke of Sesse 2 a
man of great authority, and the other Prince of Rosane, who had married the
said Ferrandes sister, and had issue by her a son, a very goodly gentleman.
True it is that the said Prince had wrought great treason against him, for the
which he had well deserved death, if he had not been taken under safe conduct:
but King Ferrande to rid himself of all fear, took him (that
notwithstanding) being come to him by his commandment, and laid him in a
marvelous stinking prison, and afterward his said son also being between
fifteen and sixteen years of age. Thus had the Prince of Rosane lived a
prisoner when King Alphonse came to the state, about four and thirty years.
But the said Alphonse immediately after his coronation, commanded these
prisoners to be led into an Island near to Naples called Iscle 3 (whereof
hereafter more mention shall be made) and there villanously to be slain, all
save one or two whom he held still in the castle of Naples, namely, the said
Prince of Rosans son, and the noble Earl of Popoli. I have diligently
inquired after what sort he caused them thus cruelly to be murdered; (for many
supposed they had been yet living, when the King entered into the good town and
city of Naples) and diverse of their principal servants have informed me, that
he caused them villanously and horribly to be slain by a Moore of Afrike, not
sparing these ancient Princes: some of the which had been prisoners about
four or five and thirty years. Further, the said Moore immediately after the
execution done, departed into Barbary, to the end no man should know what was
become of them. To be short, never was man more cruel than this King Alphonse,
more wicked, more vicious, more filthy, nor a greater glutton. Notwithstanding
his father had been the more dangerous: for no man could be acquainted with his
humor, nor know when he was pleased or displeased; so that at feasts and
bankets he took and betrayed men: as for example, the Earl James son to
Nicholas Picinio, whom after that sort he took and murdered villanously,
being ambassador to him from Duke Francis of Milan, whose base daughter he had
married. True it is that the said Francis was consenting to the murder
(notwithstanding he were his father in law) for they both feared the said Earl
James, because the Braciques 4 in Italy were wholly at his devotion. After the
like manner also took this Ferrande the Princes of his realm above mentioned,
and as touching pardon or mercy never was any to be obtained at his hands, as
diverse of his nearest kinsmen and friends have often told me; neither had he at
any time pity or compassion upon his poor people, to ease them of paiments
and subsidies. Moreover, he used within his realm all trade of merchandise
himself, so far forth that he delivered swine to his people to feed, which
they were constrained to fat to further their sale: and if any of them happened
to die, they were forced to make them good. In those places where the oil
olive grows (namely in Pouille) he and his son bought it all up at their
own price: and in like manner the corn yet green upon the ground, which they
sold again as dear as was possible; and if the price thereof happened to
fall, they constrained their subjects to buie it: besides that, during the time
of their sale, all other were forbidden to sell. If any of their noblemen were
a good husband, and thought to spare some good thing for himself, they would
forthwith desire to borrow it; and if he made refusal, he was constrained to
deliver it perforce: so that they used to take from them the races of their
horses (wherewith that country abounds) and to cause them to be broken and
kept to their own use: yea and that such numbers as well of horses as of mares
and colts, that they were esteemed many thousands, which also they sent to
feed in diverse places in the pastures of their noble men and other their
subjects to their great loss and damage. Both of them had forced many women;
and as touching the Church, they had it in no reverence, neither would obey the
laws thereof, so far forth that they sold Bishoprikes for money; as for
example, the Bishoprike of Tarente sold to a Jew by King Ferrande for thirteen
thousand ducats, to bestow upon his son, who (he said) was a Christian.
Abbeies they gave to faulconers and others, to bestow upon their children, with
this condition, that some of them should enter them a certain number of hauks,
and keep them flying to their use, and other some entertain a number of
soldiers, at their own proper costs and charges. The son never observed
Lent, neither seemed to think there was any, and many years together never
confessed himself, neither received the holy sacrament. To conclude, it was
impossible for any man to commit more heinous crimes than both they had done;
yet some reported the young Ferrande to be worse than them both,
notwithstanding that he were humble and courteous at his death; and no marvel,
for he was then in great distress.

The readers may happily think that I utter all this of some private hatred
against them, which in good sooth I do not, but rehearse it only to continue
my history, in the very beginning whereof I have declared, that this
enterprise could never have been achieved by those that were the chief
managers thereof, had not God alone governed it, and given it good success, to
the end he might make this good young King being so slenderly provided both of
good counsel and all other things necessary: his deputy to chastise these
Princes so wise, so rich, of so great experience, so well accompanied with wise
and noble personages whom the defense of the realm touched as near as
themselves, so allied and friended; yea and the which saw the storm a far off,
and yet never could provide for it, nor make resistance in any place. For out
of the castle of Naples there was not one man that stayed the King a day and a
night: whereupon Pope Alexander now living said, that the French men came
thither with wooden spurs, and chalk in their harbingers hands to make their
lodgings without further trouble: which similitude of wooden spurs he used,
because yet at this day, when the young gentlemen of this realm rid about the
streets on horseback, their Pages thrust little sticks into their shows or
pantofles, wherewith they prick forward their mules. And to confess the truth,
this was so easy a conquest, that our men very seldom armed themselves in all
this voyage. Besides that, from the Kings departure out of Ast, till his entry
into Naples, it was but four months and ninteene days. An ambassador would
almost have been as long in iourneying thither. I conclude therefore agreeably
to the opinion of diverse holy religious men, and others, and to the voice of
the people (which is Gods voice) that God meant to punish these Princes so
visibly that every man might behold it, to warn thereby all other Princes to
live well, and according to his commandments. For these Princes of Arragon
lost both honor and realm, with great riches and goodly furniture of diverse
and sundry sorts, the which is so dispersed here and there, that a man can
hardly tell what is become thereof: besides that, they ended their lives three
in a years space or little more (but I trust their souls be in Paradise.) For
you shall understand that this old Ferrande (bastard to King Alphonse, a wise,
virtuous and honorable Prince) was maruellously disquieted when he saw this
French war first moved against him, which he could find no means to pacify.
For he was wise and knew that he and his son had lived ill, and were
maruellously hated in their realm: diverse also of those that were nearest
about him have informed me, that as he raced a certain chapel, he found a
book whereon these words were written; Truth with her secret counsel 5; the
which contained all the evils that afterward fell upon him. There were but
three that saw the book, for immediately after he had read it, he threw it
into the fire. Another thing that greatly troubled him was this, his son
Alphonse and Ferrand his sons son, could never be persuaded that the King
would come into Italy. Wherefore they used proud and threatening words against
him, and spoke very contemptuously of him, saying, they would go as far as the
mountains to meet him. But one that stood by, wished that never King of
France might come into Italy, for he had seen a poor man of the house of
Aniou scourge it shrewdly, meaning Duke John son to King Rene. King Ferrand
had traveled very earnestly the year before, by his ambassador called Camillo
Pendolfo, to stay the King in France, offering to pay him yearly a tribute of
fifty thousand ducats, and to hold the realm of him by homage and fealty.
But when he saw that he could by no means obtain peace, nor pacify the
estate of Milan, he fell into the disease whereof he died: notwithstanding in
the midst of his pangues he confessed himself, and as I trust repented him of
his sins. His son Alphonse who had been so terrible a Prince, so cruel,
and so long trained up in the wars, before the King departed from Rome,
resigned his crown, and was stricken with such fear, that in the night he
never ceased to cry, That he heard the French men coming, and that the trees
and stones sounded France. He never was so hardy as once to issue forth of
Naples, but upon his sons return from Rome, put him in possession of the
realm, and caused him to be crowned, and to ride about the streets of the
city accompanied with the nobliest personages that were there, namely, with
Dom Frederick his brother, and the Cardinal of Genua (between whom the new K.
rode) and with the ambassadors there resident. He caused also all other
solemnities belonging to the coronation to be accomplished, and then fled
himself and sailed into Sicily with his mother in law (sister to K. Ferrand of
castile now reigning, to whom the said realm of Sicily was in subjection) to a
house that she had there: which was strange news through the whole world,
especially at Venice where I then was. Some said he went to the Turk; others
thought his departure to be, to the end his son who was not hated in the
realm, might the better win the hearts of the people. But mine opinion was ever
that he fled for very cowardice: for a cruel man was never hardy, as appears
in histories by Nero and others, who before their death fell into great fear
and desperation. To be short, this Alphonse made such haste to be gone, that he
said to his mother in law the self same day that they departed (as diverse of
his servants have told me,) that unless she would depart with speed, he would
leave her behind him. And when she desired him to stay but three days only,
to the end she 6 might be a whole year in his realm: he answered that rather
than he would tarry any longer he would throw himself headlong out at the
windows, asking her if she heard not how every man cried France. Thus he
embarked in his Galleys with his said mother in law and departed, carieng with
him all sorts of wines, (whereunto he was maruellously given,) and of all kinds
of seeds for gardens. But as touching his mooueables and goods he left no order
for them, but the greatest part remained in the castle of Naples:
notwithstanding certain jewels he carried also with him, and a little money.
And in this estate sailed he and his mother in law to her said house in
Sicilie, whence he departed and went to Messine, whither he called and led with
him diverse religious men, vowing himself to be no more of this world. Above
all other orders of religion he loved especially those of the Mount Oliuet (who
are clad in white) as they themselves told me at Venice, where the body of
Saint Heleine lies in their cloister. Moreover, he began to lead a marvelous
holy life, and to serve God howerly both day and night with the said
religious men as they do in their couents. He used also great feasting,
abstinence, and alms, and soon after fell into a sharp sickness of
excoriation and the stone, in such sort that the said religious men reported
that they never saw man so tormented. Notwithstanding he endured patiently all
these pangues, being fully resolved to have spent the rest of his life in an
Abbey at Valence the great in Spain, and there to have registered himself a
religious man. But he was so tormented with this disease, that he died soon
after: and it is to be hoped because of his great repentance, that his soul is
ioifull in Paradise: his son also died soon after him of an ague joined with
a flux, and I trust they are both in better case then they were in this world.
But mark here by the way that in less than two years space, five wore the
crown of Naples, to with the three above named, Charles the 8. King of
France, and Dom Frederick (brother to the said Alphonse) now reigning.

The Notes.
1 That is since the time that they rebelled, when they sent for the Duke of
Lorraine, whereof mention is made in the first chapter of this seventh book.

2 Iouian Pontan in the wars between Duke John of Aniou, and this old
Ferrand, makes the Duke of Sesse and prince of Rosane but one.

3 The Italians have Ischia, whereof Pliny vvriteth thus, lib. 3. cap. 7.
Ischia insula est e Regione Veliae alio nomine aenotris dicta: others write
that it was first named Aenaria. Iouius vvriteth that the I Will is named
Aenacia, and that Ischle is the name of the castle in the I Will: it is thirty
miles from Naples, Guicciar. Sabellicus says Procyta alias Ischla, but Pliny
makes Procyta and Ischia tvvaine.

4 These were soldiers so named of Bracio de Fortibraci, a great captain in
his time.

5 How this book was strangely revealed by a vision of one Cataldus (who had
been bishop of Tarente more than a thousand years before) to a young child,
who thereof informed the King, read Alexander in diebus genialibus, lib. 3.
cap. 15.

5 This she, Guicciar. understands he, meaning that she desired Alphonse to
tarry three or four days, to the end he might have been King a whole year.

How the young Ferrand after he was crowned King of Naples, went and encamped
at Saint Germain, to resist the Kings coming, and of the treaty that King
Charles made with the Pope at Rome. Chap. 12.
NOw to the end all these things may be plain and evident: you shall
understand that K. Ferrand being crowned, became as it were a new man,
supposing all old injuries and offenses to be forgotten by his fathers flight:
wherefore he levied all the force he could, as well horsemen as footmen, and
came to Saint Germain, which is the very entry into his realm, and a strong
place, and of great defense, through the which the Frenchmen had passed twice
before 1. There he encamped and manned the town, and then his friends began
somewhat to recover their spirits. The town is strong, both because of a little
river 2 which sometime is passable on foot, sometime not, and also because of
the hill hanging over it.

The King was yet at Rome, where he remained about twenty days busied with a
number of matters. He had with him at the least eighteen Cardinals, besides
diverse others that repaired to the city from all parts. The names of these
Cardinals were the Cardinal Ascaigne, the Popes vicechauncellor, and brother
to the Duke of Milan, the Cardinal Petri-ad-Vincula (the which two were deadly
enemies to the Pope, and great friends each to other) the Cardinals of Guese 3,
Saint Denis, Saint Seuerin, Sauelli, Coulonne, and diverse others, all the which
would needs have proceeded to a new election, and deposed the Pope, being
within the castle of Saint Ange, against the which the artillery was twice
bent, as I have heard the noblest personages there present report, but the King
of his goodness ever withstood it. The place was not of defense, for the seat
thereof is upon a little hill made by force of man: besides that, these
Cardinals alleged that the walls thereof were fallen down by miracle, and
charged the Pope that he had obtained this holy dignity by simonie, and they
said true; but Cardinal Ascaigne himself was the chief merchaunt that sold
it, and received a great sum of money for his part, together with the Popes
house where he lodged before he was Pope, being then Vicechauncellor, and all
the furniture thereof, and his said office of Vicechauncellor, with diverse
places of the patrimony of the Church. For there had been great controversy
between them two for the said dignity 4. Notwithstanding I think they would
both willingly have agreede to choose a new Pope of the Kings naming, yea and a
French man; so that I know not whether the King did well or evil in concluding
peace, though all things considered I suppose he took the best course: for
himself was young, and unprovided of men sufficient to manage so weighty a
matter as the reformation of the Church, though I confess his power to have
been sufficient thereunto. Sure if he could have reformed it, I think al men
of wisdom and understanding would have accounted it a good, a worthy, and a
holy work. But there were too many things requisite to so high an enterprise,
notwithstanding the Kings will was good, and yet is if he had good assistance.

The King being in Rome made a treaty with the Pope, which could not long
endure, for it was unreasonable in some points, and served for the chief
color of the league, whereof hereafter you shall hear. By the said treaty
peace was concluded between the Pope and his Cardinals, and all other their
adherents and partakers. And it was agreed that the Cardinals should receive
all rights and duties belonging to their Cardinals hat as well absent as
present: and that the Pope should lend the King four places, to wit,
Terracine, Ciuita-vechia, Viterbe (which the King already held) and Spolete,
but this last he never delivered notwithstanding his promise. All the which
places the King swear to restore at his return from Naples, as also he did
notwithstanding that the Pope had abused him. By this treaty he delivered also
into the Kings hands the Truks brother: for the safe keeping of whom he
received yearly of the Turk sixty thousand ducats, and held him also by
means of his said brother in great fear 5. He promised further to put no
Legate into any fortified place or town of the Church without the Kings
consent. Certain other articles there were touching the consistory or college
of Cardinals which I ouerpasse. For the performance of all these conditions,
the Pope delivered his son the Cardinal of Valence in hostage to the King,
who accompanied him as his Legate, and the King did unto the Pope the duty of
a son, with all humility and obedience. Further, the Pope created two
Cardinals at his request, the one the general Brissonnet, so often before
named, lately made bishop of Saint Malo, and the other the bishop of Man's, of
the house of Luxembourg, who was here in France.

The Notes.
1 He means in their voiages to Naples under the house of Aniou.

2 This river is called Liris or Gariliano.

3 Gurcense Gazzo, and I suppose our author write it Gurse, but the letters of
the ancient copy being defaced, the unskillful corrector at the first Printing
gessing but at the word, changed R into E. Guicciar. has Gurce.

4 The Pope before his papacy had been Vicechauncellor. Ascanio and he strove
for the dignity, but in the end Ascanio relented, being recompensed as here
is mentioned. Notvvithstanding, seeing an occasion against the Pope offered by
the Kings coming, his rancor brake forth a new.

5 Gemes or Gemin Ottoman here mentioned, brother to Bajazet the second,
rebelling against his brother fled to the Sultan of Egypt for aid, but being
vanquished he fled to Rhodes, from whence he was sent into France to King
Lewis the eleventh, to the end he might not escape; for the Turk for his safe
keeping paid yearly to the knights of the Rhodes, 40000. crowns. K. Lewis
gave him to Pope Innocent the 8. So her remained till this present, that he was
delivered to K. Charles, at Rome in the Popes hands.

How the King departed from Rome toward Naples, what happened in the mean time
in diverse parts of the said realm: and through what places he passed till he
came to Naples. Chap. 13.
THese matters being thus ended, the King removed from Rome, in great amity
and friendship with the Pope in appearance, at which time eight Cardinals
departed also out of the city highly displeased with this treaty, namely the
said Vicechauncellor Ascaigne, and the Cardinal S. Peter-ad-Vincula, with six
of their faction. But many thought that Ascaigne did but dissemble, and that in
deed he was in good amity with the Pope; notwithstanding I am able to affirm
nothing thereof, for his brother had not as yet declared himself our enemy.
From Rome the King removed to Iannesanne, and from thence to Belistre, where
the Cardinal of Valence escaped away.

The next day the King took Chastelfortin by assault and put all that were
with in it to the sword, because the place belonged to James Comte who was
revolted from the King, notwithstanding that he had taken his pay: for the
Comtes have ever been partakers with the Vrsins. From thence he marched to
Valmonton a town of the Colonnois, and from thence removed and lodged about
four miles from mont Saint Iehan, which is a town held of the Church, but
belonging to the Marquis of Pescaire and very well fortified: notwithstanding
after it had been beaten seven or eight hours with the cannon; it was taken
by assault, and all that were within it or the greatest partslaine, and there
the Kings whole force joined together 1. Then he marched toward Saint Germain
sixteen miles thence, where this new King Ferrande (as you have heard) lay in
camp with all the force he could leuy. And indeed this was his only refuge,
and the place where he must fight or never, because it was the very keie as it
were of his realm, and a place much for his advantage as well because of the
river as of the mountain. Further, he had sent men to defend the straight of
Cancello, lying among the mountains six miles from Saint Germain: yet
notwithstanding all this preparation before the Kings arrival at S. Germain,
he raised his camp and departed in great disorder abandoning both the town
and the passage.

Our vaward was led that day by the L. of Guise, the L. of Rieux was sent to
this strait of Cancello against the Arragonnois, but they also before his
coming abandoned the place: and then entered the King into S. Germain. K.
Ferrande rid straight to Capoua, where they refused to give his soldiers
entrance, but received his person with a few that attended upon him; he stayed
not there, but desired them to continue true and faithful subjects to him,
promising the next day to return, and so departed toward Naples fearing the
rebellion that afterward happened. All his force or the greatest part should
have tarried him at Capoua: but the next day when he returned he found them
all departed. The Lord Virgile Vrsin with his cousin the Earl of Petillane,
went to Nola, where they and all their company were taken prisoners by our men.
They alleged that they had a safe conduct and that we did them wrong, so had
they indeed, but their safe conduct was not yet in their hands: notwithstanding
they paid no ransom, but much they lost when they were taken, and sure in
mine opinion they had wrong done them.

From Saint Germain the King removed to Mingamer, and to Triague, and lodged
at Calui, two miles from Capoua, whither they of Capoua came and yielded
themselves by composition, and the King entered into the town with his whole
army. From Capoua the next day he marched to Auersa, being in the midway
between Capoua and Naples, and five miles distant from each of them. Thither
came they of Naples and yielded themselves in like manner by composition, having
received assurance of the King that their ancient liberties should not be
infringed nor empaired. The King sent thither before him the Marshall Gie, the
Seneschall of Beaucaire, the president Ganay keeper of the Seal, and certain
Secretaries: whereof King Ferrande being advertised, and seeing the people and
Nobles of his realm in arms against him (who also at his first arrival
thither had spoiled his stable being marvelous great) took sea and sailed
into Iscle, an Island eighteen miles from Naples 2: then the King was received
into the town with great joy and triumph. For all the people came forth to
meet him, yea, and those first that were most bound to the house of Arragon,
namely all the Carraffes, who held of the said house of Arragon to the value
of forty thousand ducats of yearly revenues, partly of inheritance, and partly
of gift from the Prince; for the Kings of Naples may give away their crown
lands, so do they also other men's, and I think there are not three in the
realm whose lands be not crown lands or other men's.

Never people showed so great affection to Prince or nation as they showed to
the King: the reason whereof was, because now they thought themselves delivered
from all tyranny, so that they voluntarily yielded unto us. For all Calabria
became French incontinent, whither Monseur d'Aubigny and Peron of Basche were
sent themselves alone without any force. All the country of Abrousso 3 yielded
likewise, the town of Aquila (which has ever been great friend to the French)
being the first beginner. In like manner all Pouille turned saving the castle of
Brandis, which was strong and well manned, and Gallipoli which had a garrison
in it, otherwise the people would have turned also. In Calabria three places
held for King Ferrand, two of them were Mantie and Turpie (ancient partakers
with the house of Aniou) the which at the first had set up the arms of
France, but because the K. gave them to the L. of Persi, and would not receive
them as percell of the demaines of his crown 4, they reared up again the
arms of Arragon. The third was the castle of Reges, which held also for King
Ferrande. But it was our own fault that ought held, for we sent no forces
thither: no, I am well assured that into Pouille and Calabria, there went not
men sufficient to have defended one castle for the King. Tarente yeeded both
castle and town, so did also Otrante 5, Monopoli, Trani, Manfredonne, Barle,
and all the other places, the above named only excepted. Moreover the people
came from their cities three days journey to meet our men and to yield
themselves. To be short, the whole realm sent to Naples, and all the Princes
and noble men repaired thither to do homage to the King, saving the Marquis of
Pescaire 6 whose brethren and nephews came notwithstanding. The Earl of Acri,
and the Marquis of Squillazo, fled into Sicilie because the King had given
their lands to the Lord of Aubigny. At Naples also arrived the Prince of
Salerne newely come from the sea, but having done no service. Thither came also
his brother the Prince of Bisignan and his sons, being accompanied with the
Dukes of Melfe, of Grauine, and the old Duke of Sora, who not long before had
sold his Duchy to the Cardinal Petriad Vincula, whose brother yet at this
day possesses it 7. To Naples also repaired the Earls of Montorio, of Fondi,
of Tripalda and of Celano (who had long been banished out of the realm, and
was now newely returned with the King.) The Earl of Troy was there in like
manner (who was a young gentleman of Scotland, brought up in France) and the
Earl of Popoli whom we found prisoner at Naples. The young Prince of Rosane
before mentioned, after his long imprisonment with his father (who had lien in
prison four and thirty years) was at the length delivered and went with King
Ferrand, whether willingly or by constrain I know not. To Naples came also
besides these above named, the Marquis of Guefron with all the Caldoresques,
and the Earls of Matalon and Merillano, the which had, both they and their
ancestors, ever governed the house of Arragon. To conclude, thither repaired
all the nobles of the realm, the three above named only excepted.

The Notes.
1 For the Coulonnois and certain of the Kings captains had been sent about
to come upon King Ferrandes back. These took the town of Aquila, and all
those parts, and here joined again with the King, because they looked for
the battle.

2 Guicciar. says thirty miles.

3 Samnium or Samnites.

4 These were lands held in Capite of the King of Naples.

5 Hydruntum first yielded to the French, then revolted again. Guicciar.

6 Alphonse Daualo, Marquis of Pescare. Guicciar.

7 John de Rouuere prefect of Rome was the cardinals brother, and he it was
that held this Duchy.

How King Charles was crowned King of Naples, of the faults he committed in the
defense of the realm, and how an enterprise attempted on his behalf against
the Turk, was discovered by the Venetians. Chap. 14.
KIng Ferrand at his departure from Naples, left the Marquis of Pescare with
certain Almains to defend the castle 1, and sailed himself for aid into
Sicilie to his father. Dom Frederic lay still upon the sea with a few galleys,
and came twice to parle with the King under safe conduct. His demands were that
some part of the realm might remain to his nephew with the title of King 2,
and that he himself might enjoy all his own lands and his wives. His request
in respect of himself was not great, for his partage was small. The King
offered him possessions in France both for him and his nephew, and I think
would willingly have given them a good and a great Duchy: but they would not
accept this offer, neither would he grant their demands. For what treaty
soever had been made, they would have broken it, when they had seen their
advantage, being still resident in the realm. The Kings artillery was bent
and shot against the castle of Naples, within the which were only the
Almaines, for the Marquis of Pescare was departed thence. And if we had sent
but four cannons to the I Will of Iscle 3 we had taken it, and then al had been
ours: for from thence returned all the mischief 4; but if that had been once
won, all the other places they held, being not past four or five, would have
yielded. But our men fell to feasting, to iusts and banketing, and were so
puffed up with pride, that they accountcd the Italians no men. Moreover, the
King was crowned and lodged in Capouane, and went sometime to Mont Imperial 5.
True it is that he showed great grace and favor to the subjects of the realm,
for he abated their charges. And I think verily the people of themselves would
not have revolted from us (notwithstanding their great inconstancy) if we had
contented a few of the nobles: but them no man regarded; besides that they
were very roughly used at the gates. Those that were best dealt with, were the
Carraffes the house of Arragons greatest friends, for their estates were but
somewhat diminished: but the offices and pensions of the rest clean taken away;
yea the partakers with the house of Aniou worse handled than the Arragonois.
Further, into the county of Merillano a commandment was sent, for the which
the president Ganaye, and the Seneschall newly created Duke of Nola, and Lord
great cchamberlaine of the realm, were burdened to have taken money. By the
said commandment every man was confirmed in his possession, and the partakers
with the house of Aniou barred from their lands, unless they could recover
them by process. Further, as touching such as had made entries upon their own
head, (as for example the Earl of Celano) aid was given to the parties
grieved, to dispossess them again by force. All estates and offices were
bestowed upon two or three Frenchmen, and all the provision of victuales within
the castle of Naples 6, when it yielded (being marvelous great) given to
every man that demanded it, at the least all that the King knew of.

In the mean time the Almaines by practice yielded the castle 7, in the which
they obtained infinite riches, the castle of Oeuf 8 was also taken by battery.
By these faults above rehearsed a man may manifestly perceive that this great
conquest was achieved by the mere grace of God, and not by their wisdom that
governed the enterprise: but these foul faults were the works of men puffed up
with pride and vainglorie, and not understanding from whence all this their
honor and good success sprang. Wherefore they proceeded according to their
nature and experience, by means whereof their good fortune changed as suddenly
and as visibly, as men may see the day spring in Island or Norway 9, where the
days in summer are of greater length than in any other place, in such sort,
that within a quarter of an hour after the one days shutting in, the next day
light begins to appear. Even so in as short space did every wise man
perceive the alteration of our good and prosperous success, whereof all
Christendom should have reaped great profit and honor if we had acknowledged
it to proceed from him, who was indeed the giver thereof. For the Turk then
reigning (and yet living) might as easily have been chased out of Europe, as
King Alphonse was out of his realm, both for that he was a man of no valor,
and also because the King had with him the said Turks brother, whom he feared
above all men living. But his said brother died soon after the Cardinal of
Valences escape: whereupon the report went that he was poisoned when the Pope
delivered him to the King. Further, there were so many thousand Christians in
Greece ready to rebel, as a man would hardly believe, for from Otrante to
Valonne 10 are but 60. miles 11, and from Valonne to Constantinople but
eighteen reasonable days iourneies, as diverse that have traveled the way
have informed me. Between them are no strong places, at the most not above two
or three, for all the rest be razed. Those countries are marvelous populous,
and they that inhabit them be Albanois, Sclauons and Greeks, who understood
of our Kings good success by their friends that were at Venice and in Pouille,
unto whom also they sent letters, and looked daily, but for messengers to move
them to rebel. Whereupon the King sent thither the Archbishop of Duras 12 an
Albanois borne, who found a marvelous number ready to revolt, being sons or
nephews of many noble and valiant men of those parts, namely the sons of
Scanderbeg, the nephews of the Emperor of Constantinople, and the nephews of
the Lord Constantine, (now governor of Montferrat) who were also Nephews or
cosins to the King of Seruia. In Thessalia more than five thousand would have
rebelled, yea and Scutary should have been surprised by intelligence that the
Lord Constantine had within it, as himself advertised me at Venice, where he
lay hidden many days in my lodging. And sure he would easily have achieved
his enterprise: for Macedonie and Thessaly were his inheritance 13, which was
the patrimony of Alexander the great, Valonne also is part thereof, and upon
his dominions Scutary and Croye 14 border, the which in his youth his father 15
or uncle engaged to the Venetians, who lost Croye, and yielded Scutary to the
Turk by treaty. The said Lord Constantine lay himself within three leagues
of Scutarie, and the enterprise had been executed, had not the said Archbishop
of Duras stayed at Venice too long after the Lord Constantines departure. I
daily pressed him very earnestly to depart, for he was a man light of talk,
and vaunted in all places, that he would do some feate worthy of immortal
fame and renown. But as the devil would, the self same day that the
Venetians were advertised of the Turks brothers death, whom the Pope had
delivered to the King: they determined to send word thereof to the Turk by one
of their Secretaries. And because they knew well that he should be highly
rewarded that first brought this news to the Turk: they commanded that no
ship should pass that night between the two castles, which make the very
entry into the gulf of Venice 16, where also they caused watch and ward to be
kept, because they feared the departure of some of the small boats, as gripes
and such like, whereof there were a great number of the ports of Albany, and of
their Isles adioining to Greece. But the self same night this poor Archbishop
would needs depart to this enterprise of the Lord Constantine, (who tarried his
coming) conueighing with him great store of swords, bucklers, and iauelins, to
furnish those with whom he had intelligence (for they are not permitted to have
weapons in those countries:) but as he passed between the two castles above
mentioned, he was taken and put into one of them, both he and his men:
notwithstanding the ship that carried him was suffered to pass. Letters were
found about him which discovered the enterprise, and the L. Constantine has
told me since, that the Venetians advertised thereof both the Turks garrisons
that lay in those parts, and the Turk himself also, and had it not been for
the gripe that was permitted to pass (the patron whereof was an Albanois, who
informed him of all that was happened) he had himself been taken, but he escaped
by sea, and fled into Pouille.

The Notes.
1 He means Castelnouo: for there are in Naples four castles. The castle of
Capoana where the King lodged: Castle nouo situate partly in the sea, partly on
the land with a citadelle by it: Castle del ouo situate on a rock in the sea
with a great tower called of the French Prince faulay, and between the castles
Nouo and Del ouo is a fort upon a rock in the sea with a strong tower. The
fourth is castle S. Ermo, and above Naples is an abbey that looks into the
town called S. Martin, in manner of a castle.

2 Guicciar. says he desired Calabria for his nephew without title of King.

3 The King sent to Iscle, but the Frenchmen finding the town desolate through
negligence never assaulted the castle.

4 He means because all Ferrandes party was retired thither.

5 The French Corrector supposes that this should be en mantean Imperial,
because some write that he was crowned Emperor of Constantinople at Rome: but I
think rather he means Mont de la Crote, or the hill Vesuuius, whither the
King often walked for recreation, and per adventure because of the
singularities which he saw there, named one of these hills Mont Imperial.

6 He means Castle nouo.

7 The Almaines yielded the castle under condition, that they might have King
Ferrandes mooueables that were within it.

8 This castle was so named, because it was built in form of an egg.

9 For Island and Norway, the unskillful corrector had chopped in Holland and
Auuergne, making the author report a mere untruth.

10 Oricum in Latin as some write, as others Apollonia.

11 Others write but 55.

12 Dyrrachium.

13 But the Turk held them from him.

14 Troy in times past the strongest town in Epirus.

15 His fathers name was Commenus.

16 He means two castles standing at the entry into the calm sea, which is
within the natural bank that defends the town from the rage of the sea
without the bank, the said castles be hard by Venice.

A discourse somewhat out of the course of the history, wherein Philip de
Commines author of this present work, treats amply of the estate and
government of the Seniorie of Venice, and of those things that he saw there,
and were done there during the time of his embassage to the said Seniorie for
the King. Chap. 15.
I Will now leave the King in Naples, having achieved his enterprise, and will
speak somewhat of the Venetians, and the cause of mine embassage thither. My
departure from Ast to Venice was, partly to thank them for the good answers
they had made to two of the Kings ambassadors sent thither, and partly to keep
them still his friends, if it were possible by any means: for because of their
great forces, wisdom, and good government, they might easily have mated his
enterprise in Italy; but they being his friends, none in the country were to
be feared. The Duke of Milan helped to dispatch me, and wrote to his ambassador
there resident (for he has one there continually) to accompany me, and to
give me instructions to whom I should address my self. His said ambassador
received monthly of the Seniorie an hundred ducats, and had his house well
furnished, and three barges (at their charge) to convey him up and down the
town. Their ambassador has the like allowance at Milan, save that he has no
barge; for at Milan men ride altogether on horseback, but at Venice they are
carried by bote. In my journey thitherward, I passed through their cities,
namely Bresse, Veronne, Vincense, and Padua, with diverse others; at every one
of the which I was very honorably entertained, because of the personage I
represented: for always either the potestate or the captain came to receive
me, accompanied with a goodly train: but they both issued never forth of the
town; for the captain used to come no further than the gate. After I was
entered the town, they conuaied me to my lodging, commanding the host that I
should be plentifully served, and all my charges they defraied, entertaining me
with very honorable words. But if a man consider what he must bestow upon
drums and trumpets, he saves not much though he lie upon free cost,
notwithstanding the entertainment is very honorable. The same day I entered into
Venice, they sent as far as Chafousine 1 to receive me, which is a place five
miles from the town, where men leave the botes that convey them down the
river from Padua 2, and enter into other little botes very proper and neat,
covered with tapestrie, and furnished within, with goodly hangings and velvet
cushions to sit upon. Thus far the sea flows, and this is the nearest passage
from the firm land to Venice: but their sea is marvelous calm (unless a
tempest happen to arise) which is the cause that so great plenty of all kind
of fish is taken there. I woondred to behold the seat of this city, so many
steeples, so many religious houses, and so much building, and all in the water;
but especially that the people had none other passage to and fro in the town
but by botes, whereof I think there are to the number of 30000. but they be
very small. Further, about the city (I mean within the compass round about of
less than half a French league) are 70. houses of religion, as well of men as
women, all in Islands sumptuously built, richly furnished within, and having
goodly gardens belonging to them. Those within the city I comprehend not in
this number; for within, there are, besides these, the four orders of friars,
and threescore and twelve parishes, besides a number of chapels of the
companies of occupations, commonly called Confrairies 3. And sure it is a
strange sight to behold so many great and goodly churches built in the sea. To
the said place of Chafousine came five and twenty gentlemen to receive me,
sumptuously apparelled in silk and scarlet, the which welcomed me with an
oration, and conuaied me to the church of Saint Andrew near to the town,
where as many other gentlemen met me, being accompanied with the ambassadors of
Milan and Ferrara: and here also they received me with an oration, and
afterward led me into other botes which they call flat, being much greater
than the former, two of them were covered with crimosin satin, and decked
within with arras, each of them being large enough to have received 40. persons.
They placed me between these two ambassadors, (for the midst in Italy is the
honorablest place) and conuaied me along through the great street called the
great channel 4, which is so large that the galleys pass to and fro through
it, yea I have seen hard by the houses ships of four hundred tun and above.
Sure in mine opinion it is the goodliest street in the world and the best
built, and reaches in length from the one end of the town to the other. Their
buildings are high and stately, and all of fine stone 5. The ancient houses be
all painted; but the rest that have been built within these hundred years,
have their front all of white marble, brought thither out of Istria an hundred
miles thence, and are beautified with many great pieces of Porphire 6 and
Sarpentine 7. In the most part of them are at the least two chambers, the
seeling whereof is gilded, the mantletrees of the chimneies very rich, to wit,
of graven marble, the bedsteds gilded, the presses painted and vermiled with
gold, and marvelous well furnished with stuff. To be short, it is the most
triumphant city that ever I saw, and where ambassadors and strangers are most
honorably entertained, the commonwealth best governed, and God most devoutly
served; so far forth, that notwithstanding they have diverse imperfections, yet
think I verily that God prospers them, because of the reverence they bear
to the service of the Church. In the company of these fifty gentlemen I
passed to Saint Georges, which is an abbey of reformed black monks where I
lodged. The next day they returned again to me, and led me to the Seniorie,
where I delivered my letters to the Duke, who presideth in all their
assemblies, being honored as a King 8, and all letters are directed to him, but
of himself he cannot do much. Notwithanding this Duke is of great authority,
yea greater than ever was any of his predecessors 9; and no marvel, for he
has been Duke these twelve years 10: and for my part I ever found him a
virtuous and a wise man, of great experience in the affairs of Italy, and a
courteous and gentle person. This was all that I did the first day, save that
they led me into the palace, and showed me three or four chambers, the
feelings whereof were richly gilded, and likewise the beds and presses: and
sure it is a very stately and sumptuous building for the greatness thereof: for
it is all of square marble, and all the front vermiled with gold, and likewise
the edges and borders of the angles, about the breadth of an inch. There are
moreover four goodly hals within it richly gilded, and a number of fair
lodgings, but the court is very small. The Duke out of his chamber may hear
mass at the high altar of the chapel of Saint Mark 11, which is the
goodliest and richest church in the world, bearing but the name of a chapel:
for it is built throughout of the curious work called Musaique, or Marqueterie
12; the art also whereof they vaunt themselves to be authors of: and sure they
have diverse workmen thereof, as I my self can testify. In this chapel is
their treasure so famous through the world, being only things appointed for
the furniture of the church; among the which are twelve or fowerteene Rubie
ballais, the greatest that ever I saw: for two of them weigh the one above
seven hundred, and the other above eight hundred carrets, but they are
unpolished. There are twelve other stones like to little pillars set in gold,
and garnished and bordred with excellent good stone. Moreover, twelve crowns
there are of gold, wherewith in times past at certain feasts in the year
twelve women decked themselves (whom they called Queens) the which went about
these ylands and churches: but the said Queens, and the greatest part of the
women of the city, were stolen and carried away perforce by thieves that came
out of Istria or Friole 13, being borderers upon the Venetians, the which
lurked privily behind these yles: but their husbands pursued these thieves,
and recovered their women, and offered all these crowns to Saint Mark, and
built also a chapel upon the place, whither the Seniorie resorteth yearly
the same day they obtained this victory. Sure this is a goodly furniture for
the church: for besides these things above rehearsed, there are diverse other
jewels of gold, and a suit of Amethists and Agates, and a few Emeraulds. But
this is no such treasure to make account of as ready money; and yet of money
they have no treasure: for the Duke himself told me before the Seniorie, that
it is among them a capital crime to make mention of treasure in coin. And
sure in mine opinion they do therein very wisely, for fear of division that
thereby might arise among them. Afterward they showed me their treasure, namely
their Arsenal 14, where they arm their galleys, and prepare all other
furniture necessary for their navy, which undoubtedly is the goodliest thing
at this day in the world, and the best in order for that purpose.

To be short, I abode there eight months upon their charge, as did all the
other ambassadors there resident. And sure thus much I dare boldly say of them,
that they are men of such wisdom, and so inclined to enlarge their dominions,
that unless they be looked to in time, all their neighbors shall repent it too
late: for the Kings coming into Italy, and the wars that have been between
him and them since that time (which yet endure) have made them much skilfuller
in fortification and defense of places ever they were before. Besides that,
they have of late enlarged their Seniorie, for they have seven or eight cities
engaged to them in Pouille, which I doubt me they will never restore. At the
Kings first coming into Italy they could not be persuaded that places might be
taken so easily, and in so short space: for they made not war with such
expedition 15; but both they and diverse others have fortified since, and do
daily fortify many places in Italy. They cannot grow mighty upon a sudden as
the Romans did, for their bodies cannot endure such labor and travel as
theirs could, because they are unaccustomed thereunto, by reason that none of
them go into their wars upon the firm land 16 (as the Romans did) save their
prouisors and paimasters which accompanied their general 17; assist him with
their counsel, and provide all things necessary for their army. True it is
that their armies upon the sea are led 18 by their gentlemen, who are captains
of their galleys and ships; and consist wholly of their own subjects. Moreover,
another good order have they as touching these prouisors whom they send in
person with their armies upon the land, whichis, that they imploie in that
service no man of such courage and virtue as may seem worthy to be their
Prince (as the Romans did) whereby they avoid all factions in the city,
which sure is a great point of wisdom. And undoubtedly against civil
contention they have maruellously well provided diverse and sundry other ways,
for they have no Tribunes of the people, as they had in Rome, which partly were
cause of their ruin. But the people at Venice bear no swaie, neither are
called to counsel in any matter 19: for all their officers 20 be gentlemen,
save their secretaries 21. And the greatest part of their people be strangers.
Moreover, they understand by T. Liuius what imperfections were in the state of
Rome; for they have his history, and his body lies buried in their palace at
Padua. For these reasons and diverse others which I could allege, I say yet
once again, that they are in the way to be great Lords in time to come.

I must now declare the cause of mine embassage to them, which was, to thank
them for the good answers they had made to two ambassadors sent thither by the
King: and for the good comfort they had given him, in willing him upon their
word to proceed with his enterprise. All the which was done before he departed
out of Ast. At my arrival I discoursed unto them of the ancient league that
had been between the Kings of France and them. And further, I offered them
Brandis and the town of Orante, under this condition, that when we delivered
them better towns in Greece, they should be bound to restore these. They used
very honorable terms both of the King and his affairs, supposing that he
could not enter far into Italy. And as touching the offer I made, they
answered that they were his friends and servants, and would not sell him their
friendship, (and in deed as yet we had not the places offered.) Further they
said, that they had force sufficient in a readiness to move war against him, if
they were so disposed, but they would not so do; notwithstanding that the
ambassador of Naples daily solicited them thereunto, and offered them in
consideration thereof, whatsoever they would demand. Moreover, King Alphonse
(who then reigned) confessed that he had many ways misbehaued himself toward
them, and declared unto them the great danger themselves should be in, if the
King obtained his purpose. The Turk on the other side sent an ambassador to
them with all speed, (whom I my self saw diverse times) the which at the Popes
request threatened them, unless they declared themselves the Kings enemies.
They gave every one of these good answers, notwithstanding at the first they
stood in no fear of us, but laughed at our voyage: and the rather because the
Duke of Milan sent them word by his ambassador, that they should not trouble
themselves about this enterprise: for he would find means to send the King
home with empty hands. The like message sent he also to Peter of Medicis, as
himself told me. But when both they and the Duke of Milan saw all the
Florentines places, especially Pisa in the Kings hands, they began to fear and
to consult how to stop him from passing further: but their matters were long in
debating, and in the mean time while ambassadors passed to and fro between
them, the King marched forward. The King of Spain in like manner began to
fear, because of the yles of Sicilie and Sardinia. And the King of Romans
envied our Kings good success: for diverse there were that put him in doubt of
the crown imperial, saying, that the King would take it, and had required the
Pope to give him leave so to do, but this was most untrue. Notwithstanding for
these doubts, these two Kings sent honorable ambassages to Venice, I being
there, as you have heard. The King of Romans, because he was their neighbor,
sent first: the principal of his embassage was the Bishop of Trente,
accompanied with two knights and a doctor of the law: they were very honorably
and solemnly received, and their lodgings made and furnished as mine. Moreover,
they had ten ducats a day allowed them for their diet, and their horses which
they had left behind them at Treuis, were kept upon the Seniories charge.
Soon after arrived also a worshipful knight of Spain 22 well accompanied and
well apparelled, who was in like manner honorably received, and his charges
defraied. The Duke of Milan, besides his ambassador there resident, sent
thither the bishop of Come, and Master Francis Bernardin Viscount, all the
which began at the first to negotiate together covertly and in the night by
their Secretaries: for they durst not as yet openly discover themselves against
the King, especially the Duke of Milan and the Venetians, because they doubted
what success the league which was in communication should have. These
ambassadors of Milan came to visit me, and brought me letters from their
Master, pretending that they were come, because the Venetians had sent two
ambassadors to Milan, whereas they were wont to have but one resident there:
no more had they in the end; and this was but a color of their lying, deceit,
and false dealing: for they were all assembled together to conclude a league
against the good King, but so many strings could not be tuned on a sudden. They
desired me afterward (if I could) to inform them what the cause was of the
King of Spaines and the King of Romans ambassadors arrival, to the end they
might advertise their Master thereof. But I had intelligence already from
diverse places, both by the said ambassadors servants and others, that the
ambassador of Spain had passed through Milan disguised, that the Almaines
governed their affairs wholly by the Duke of Milans counsel and advice, and
that the ambassador of Naples delivered howerly packets of letters from his
Master. For you must understand, that the treaty of their league was begun
before the King departed from Florence, and I spent money largely to have
intelligence of all their doings, and wrought by good instruments, so that I
knew already all their articles, which were propounded but not agreed upon: for
the Venetians are very long in their resolutions. For these causes I seeing the
league in such forwardnes, would no longer pretend ignorance therein, but
answered these ambassadors of Milan, that since they used such strange terms to
me, I thought good to say thus much unto them, that the King would not lose the
D. of Milans friendship if by any means it might be kept, and that I as his
servant would do my duty to my Master, and excuse him of the evil reports
which peradventure had been made of him to the Duke their Master, who I thought
was misinformed: saying further, that he ought well to bethink himself,
before he lost the recompense of the great service he had done the King: for
the Kings of France were never ingrate; adding also, that the speaking of a
foolish word ought not to dissolve their friendship, the continuance whereof
was so necessary for them both. Wherefore I desired them to open unto me their
griefs, that I might advertise the King thereof before they proceeded further:
they swear all unto me and protested, that there was no such matter as I
imagined; but they lied, for they were come thither to treat of the said league.

The next day I went to the Seniorie to commune with them about their league,
and to tell them my opinion thereof. Among other things I alleged, that by the
league concluded between the King and them, and the late King Lewis his father
and them, they might not maintain the one the others enemies: wherefore they
could not conclude the league now treated of without breach of their promise.
Then they caused me to withdraw my self a little, and at my return the Duke
said unto me, that I must not believe all that I heard in the town: for all
men lived there in liberty, and might speak what them listed; and that as
touching them they never meant to enter into league against the King, neither
heard ever of any such matter: but on the contrary side they sought to
conclude a league between the King, and these two other Kings and all Italy,
against the Turk, at the common charges of them all, and that if any in Italy
refused to pay that he should be rated at, the King and they would constrain
him thereunto by force. Moreover, they said that they traveled to conclude a
good peace for the King, to wit, that he should receive of Dom Ferrand
presently a sum of money, which they offered to lend, so that they might have
engaged for it, those places in Pouille which now they possess, and that the
realm should be held of the King by the Popes consent 23, and pay him yearly
a certain tribute. And further, that he should hold in it three places, and I
would to God the King would then have given ear to this offer: but I answered
them that I durst not deal therein, because I had no commission nor authority
so to do. Moreover, I desired them not to be hasty in concluding this league,
because I would advertise the King of these their ouertures. I required them
also (as I had done the others) to open unto me their griefs, and not to
dissemble them as they of Milan had done. Then they told me plainly that they
were grieved because the King held certain of the Popes towns, but much more
because of the Florentines places, especially Pisa, saying, that the King
himself had written both unto them and diverse others, that he would take
nothing in Italy, but the realm of Naples only, and afterward go against the
Turk: but now it plainly appeered that he would conquer all that he could in
Italy, and leave the Turk in peace. They said further, that the Duke of
Orleans (whom the King had left behind him in Ast) put the D. of Milan in
great doubt and fear, and that his servants used marvelous threatening words
against him. Notwithstanding they promised to conclude nothing before they
received answer from the King, at the least not before a convenient time to
receive answer were expired, and they dealt more honorably with me than they of
Milan had done 24. Of all these matters I advertised the King, and received a
cold answer from him: from that day forward they began daily to assemble
together, because they knew their enterprise to be discovered. The King was yet
at Florence, and if he had found any resistance at Viterbe (as they thought he
should) they would have sent men to defend Rome: yea or if King Ferrand had not
abandoned Rome, as they thought undoubtedly he would never have done: but when
they heard of his departure thence they began to fear. Notwithstanding the
ambassadors of these two Kings pressed them earnestly to conclude, saying, that
otherwise they would depart, for they had been there four months daily
negotiating with the Seniorie. In the mean time I labored all that might be to
overthrow their league.

But when the Venetians saw all these places yielded, and were also advertised,
that the King was entered into Naples, they sent for me, and told me these
news, seeming greatly to rejoice thereat: notwithstanding they said that the
castle was very well furnished, and I perceived by them, that they hoped
assuredly it would have held good. Moreover, they licensed the ambassador of
Naples to levy men at Venice to send to Brandis; and they were even upon the
point to have concluded their league, when suddenly they received letters from
their ambassadors, that the castle was yielded also to the King. Then they
sent for me again in a morning, and I found fifty or sixty of them assembled
together in the Dukes chamber, who lay sick of the collicke. He told me these
news with a cheerful countenance, but none of the rest could dissemble so
cunningly as himself: for some of them sat upon a low bench leaning upon
their elbowes, other some after one sort, and others after another; their
outward countenances bewraying their inward grief. And I think verily when
word came to Rome of the battle lost at Cannas against Hannibal, that the
Senators which remained in the city, were not more astonished nor troubled
than these: for none of them once looked upon me, none of them gave me one word
but the Duke alone; so that I woondred to behold them. The Duke asked me if the
King would perform that which he had always promised both by his letters and
by me: I assured him that he would, and opened certain ouertures of peace, and
offered my self to travel therein, trusting to put them out of all doubt, and
so departed.

Their league was as yet neither fully concluded, nor fully broken off; for the
which cause the Almaines would needs have departed in great heat. The Duke of
Milan would not yet condescend I wot not to which of their articles:
notwithstanding in the end he sent word to his ambassadors to seal with speed
to all; and thus at the length was their league concluded. During the space
that these practices were thus entertained among them, I had from time to time
advertised the King of them all, pressing him earnestly to resolve either to
tarry in the realm, and to make provision of greater forces of footmen and
money; or in time to retire homeward before his enemies were all assembled,
leaving the principal places well manned. I advertised also the D. of Orleans
(who lay in Ast with his household servants only, for his company was with the
King) of all that was done, willing him to put men into the town, and assuring
him that they would incontinent assail him. I wrote also to the Duke of
Bourbon (whom the King had left regent in France) to send men to Ast with all
speed possible to defend the town, because that place being lost, no aid
could come to the King. In like manner I advertised the Marchioness of
Montferrat of all these proceedings (who was a great friend to us, and deadly
enemy to the Duke of Milan) to the end she might aid the Duke of Orleans with
men, if need so required: for Ast being lost, the Marquisats of Montferrat and
Saluces were also lost.

Their league was concluded one night very late 25. The next morning the
Seniorie sent for me earlier then they were accustomed. And when I was come and
set down, the Duke told me, that in the honor of the holy Trinity, there was
a league concluded between our holy father the Pope, the Kings of Romans and
Castile, them, and the Duke of Milan, for three purposes. The first, for the
defense of the estate of Christendom against the Turk; the second, for the
defense of Italy; and the third for the preservation of their own estates,
whereof he willed me to advertise the King. They were assembled to the number
of a hundred or more, and looked up with cheerful countenances, and sat not
as they did the day they advertised me of the taking of the castle of Naples.
The Duke told me moreover that they had written to their ambassadors that were
with the King, to take their leave and to return home, their names were Master
Dominic Loredan, and Master Dominic Treuisan. I was maruellously troubled with
this news, for I stood in doubt both of the Kings person, and of all his
company, supposing their army to have been readier than in deed it was, as
did themselves also. I feared further least the Almaines had been at hand; and
not without cause; for if they had, undoubtedly the King had never departed out
of Italy. I was resolved not to speak much in this heat; but they so provoked
me that I was forced to change my mind; and then I said unto them, that both
the night before and diverse other times, I had advertised the King of their
league, and that he also had sent me word that he had intelligence thereof both
from Rome and from Milan. They looked all marvelous strangely upon me, when I
said that I had advertised the King thereof the night before: for there is no
nation under the sun so suspicious as they, nor so secret in their affairs,
so that oftentimes they banish men upon suspicion only, for the which cause I
said thus much unto them. I told them moreover that I had sent word thereof
both to the Duke of Orleans and to the Duke of Bourbon, to the end they might
put men into Ast: which words I uttered hoping to delay their going thither.
For if they had indeed been as ready as they vaunted and supposed themselves to
have been: they must needs have taken the town, for it was vnmanned both then
and long after. Then they told me that they meant not to attempt ought against
the King, but only to defend themselves, adding that they would not have him
thus to abuse the world with words, in saying that he would nothing but the
realm of Naples, and afterward go against the Turk: and yet do clean
contrary, and seek to destroy the Duke of Milan, and the Florentines, and hold
also the places of the Church. Whereunto I answered that the Kings of France
had ever enlarged and augmented the dition of the church, and defended it, and
that the King my Master would rather do the like than the contrary. Wherefore
these (I said) were not the reasons that moved them to enter into this war,
but that they desired to trouble the estate of Italy, thereby to make their
own profit, as in the end I thought they would; which words they took in
evil part as afterward I was advertised: notwithstanding it appears by those
towns in Pouile which they have in gage of King Ferrand to aid him against
us, that I said true. At this instant I would have risen to depart, but they
caused me to sit down again, and then the Duke asked me if I would make any
ouerture of peace, because the day before I had offered so to do, but that was
under condition that they should have staid the conclusion of their league
fifteen days, to the end I might advertise the King thereof, and receive his
answer thereunto. Our communication being ended, I returned to my lodging, and
then they sent for the ambassadors of the league one after another, and as I
came forth from them I met with the ambassador of Naples, who ware a fair new
gown and showed a cheerful countenance, so had he great cause to do, for
these were good news for him. After dinner all the ambassadors of the league
accompanied with their servants met together, at the charges of the Seniory,
upon the water (which is all the pastime of Venice) I think they were in all
forty boats, every ambassador having his boat garnished with a flagge of his
Masters arms. I saw all this company pass underneath my window with goodly
melody. And the ambassadors of Milan (at the least one of them) who had been
wont very often before to bear me company; made a countenance now as though
he knew me no more. By the space of three days I never stirred out of my
lodging, neither any of my servants: notwithstanding that, not one man in the
town gave me or any of mine a foul word at any time. The same night they made
great pastime with squibs, which were set on fire a high in the steeples and
turrets of the town, and a number of torches were lighted in the top of these
ambassadors houses, and diverse pieces of artillery discharged. I was in a
covered barge upon the water to behold all this triumph, about ten of the
clock at night, especially before these ambassadors lodgings, where was
banketting and great cheer: notwithstanding this was not the great festival
day, on the which their league was proclaimed: for the Pope had given
commandment that the proclamation thereof should be deferred till Palmsunday,
and that every one of the confederated Princes when it should be proclaimed,
and the ambassadors that should be present thereat, should bear in their hands
an olive branch in token of peace and confederacy as he said. He commanded
further, that upon that day it should be proclaimed both in Spain and in
Almaine. Moreover, at Venice they made a scaffold of wood, which they raised a
great height from the ground, as they use to do upon Corpus Christi day, and it
was richly hanged, and reached from the palace to the end of the market place
of Saint Mark. Upon this scaffold (after the Popes ambassador had soong mass,
and given full absolution to all men that should be present at the said
proclamation) they went on procession, the Senators and the ambassadors being
all very well apparelled: for unto diverse of the said ambassadors the seniorie
had given crimosin velvet gowns, especially to the Almaines, and new gowns
also to all their servants, but they were very short. After their return from
procession, a great number of pageants and devises were showed, representing
first Italy, and then all these Kings and Princes, and the Queen of Spain.
And as they returned from beholding the said pageants, at a Porphire stone
where all their proclamations are made, they proclaimed the said league, and
the Turks ambassador hard it, standing close at a window, and having his
dispatch, save that they stayed him to behold this triumph. At night he came to
talk with me by means of a certain Greek, and was with me four hours in
my chamber, being very desirous that his Prince and the King my Master might
enter together into amity. I was twice invited to this feast, but I excused my
self. I remained in the town about a month after this proclamation, being
as well entertained as at my first arrival. Afterward the King sent for me, and
I took my leave and departed, being safely conveyed by them, and upon their
charges to Ferrara, where the Duke came forth and received me, and feasted me
two days, and defraied me. The like did Master John de Bentiuole at Bolonia,
whither the Florentines sent for me. Wherefore I departed thence and went to
Florence there to abide the Kings coming, of whom I will now return to speak.

The Notes.
1 Liccia or Lizafusina Italians.

2 The river is called Brenta.

3 I think he means not the Confrairiez des Sainctz which be but five, as
Contaren. writes lib. 5. but rather I suppose, because our author says many
Confrairies, that every company in Venice has a chapel, as in London they
have hals.

4 I suppose it to be that which they call Riuo alto.

5 There are in Venice 200. palaces able to lodge Kings.

6 A kind of red marble full of white spots called Leucosticos or Porphyrites:
it is known to every man.

7 A green stone, I suppose it to be also a kind of marble, which is green
as Porphire is, red and spotted also with white for the most part as that is:
it is called Ophytes.

8 Of the Dukes office read Contaren. lib. 2.

9 This Dukes name was Augustinus Barbaricus or Barbadicus, he was chosen anno
1486. and was after some the 77. after others the 74. Duke.

10 Reckon these twelve years not at the time that the author was at Venice,
but at the time that he wrote this history: for at his being there, he had
been Duke but eight years.

11 Saint Marks church is described by Contaren in the very end of the fourth
book.

12 Mousaique or Marqueterie, Musaea, Musaica, or Musina in Latin, works
wrought of stones of diverse colors and diverse mettels into knots and devises
so curiously, that they seem all one, and not to be wrought in together by art.

13 Forum Iulii.

14 This Arsenall is described by Contaren lib. 4.

15 He means, because they understood not the feate of artillery.

16 The Venetians armies upon the land are all strangers. Contaren. lib. 5.

17 Their General upon the land is also a stranger.

18 Contaren. ibidem.

19 Understand any matter of weight.

20 Understand their principal officers.

21 Their Chauncellor also is no gentleman, neither may a gentleman be
Chauncellor or Secretary. Contaren. lib. 5.

22 The King of Spain used this color for breach of his league with King
Charles, because there was a clause that they should not be bound to any thing
prejudicial to the Church, and the realm of Naples was held of the Church.
Further, another clause there was, that he should not resist King Charles his
conquest, if it appeered by law the crown of Naples to appertain to him,
which he sought not to prove, but proceeded by force.

23 This is added, because the realm of Naples was held of the Church.

24 He means, because they dealt plainly with him, but they of Milan had
dissembled. Notvvithstanding the French had it thus: They showed greater honor
to me than to them of Milan: but in mine opinion it was the Printers fault,
who for que ceulx de Milan, had put qu'a ceulx de Milan: for sure the sense is
much better thus.

25 Their league was concluded in April. Guicciar.

THE EIGHT BOOK CONTINVING THE DISCOVRSE OF THE PRINCIPAL ACTS OF KING
CHARLES THE EIGHT.
Of the order and provision the King left in the realm of Naples at his
return into France. Chap. 1.
TO continue the better this my history, and to inform you of all that
happened, I must now return to speak of the King, who from the time he entered
into Naples till his departure thence, thought only upon sports and pleasures,
and those that were about him upon their own private profit and gain:
notwithstanding his young years excused him; but on their behalf, no just
excuse can be made: for he committed all his affairs to their government. And
if they had advised him to leave well furnished in the country at his
departure but three or four castles only, namely that of Caietta, and one or
two more; yea but the castle of Naples alone (the provision whereof he had
given away as already you have heard) the realm had never been lost: for if
the castle of Naples had been kept, the town had never revolted. So soon as
he understood the league above mentioned to be concluded, he commanded his
whole forces to repair to him, and appointed five hundred men of arms French
and 2500. Swissers 1, and a few French footmen for the defense of the realm,
determining with the rest to return home the same way he came; but the
confederates made preparation to stop his passage. The King of Spain had sent
and daily did send certain Carauels 2 into Sicilie, the which notwithstanding
that they were but slenderly manned, had before the Kings departure, put men
into Reges in Calabria near to Sicilie. I had eftsoons advertised the King
that there they would land; for the ambassador of Naples had so informed me
himself, supposing they had already been landed: but if the King had sent
thither in time, he had taken the castle; for the town held for him. Out of
Sicilie came certain bands also to Mantia and to Turpia, all through our own
fault, because we had sent no forces thither. In like manner the town of
Otrante in Pouille (which had once set up the arms of France) seeing the
league concluded, and themselves seated near to Brandis and Gallipoli, and no
means possible to levy men to put into their town, reared up again the
arms of Arragon; and Dom Frederick being at Brandis, sent a garrison thither.
To be short, fortune began now to frown upon us, which but two months before
so highly had favored us, in such sort, that through the whole realm they
began to revolt, as well because of the league, as also of the Kings departure,
and the small forces he left behind him, which was nothing in respect of the
number of soldiers, though diverse of the captains were of great valor. He
appointed for his lieutenant general in the said realm, the Lord of
Montpensier of the house of Bourbon, a valiant and a hardy knight, but of no
great sense, and so careless, that he kept his bed every day til noone. In
Calabria he left the Lord of Aubigny a Scottish man borne, a virtuous, wise,
honorable, and a valiant knight, him he created high Constable of the realm,
and gave him (as before you have heard) the Earldome of Acri, and the Marquisat
of Squillazzo. He had made Lord great Chamberlain of the realm at his first
coming thither, the Seneschall of Beaucaire, called Stephan de Verse, who was
also captain of Caietta, Duke of Nola, and Lord of diverse other seniories.
Further, all the treasure of the realm passed through his hands, so that his
charge was much too weighty for him; but sure he was well affected to the
defense of the realm. He created the Lord Don Julian Lorrain a Duke, and left
him in the town of Saint Angelo, where he behaved himself passing well. He
left in Manfredonia Master Gabriell of Montfaulcon, a man of whom he made great
account; and to all these he gave goodly possessions: but this Gabriell behaved
himself very childishly; for at four days end he yielded the town for lack
of victuals: notwithstanding that at his entry into it he found it very well
furnished; besides that it was seated in a country abounding with all kind of
grain. Diverse sold all the provision they found in the castles, and the report
went that this Gabriell fled himself, and left William of Vilneufue for
defense of the town, whom his own servants sold to Dom Frederick, who put him
into the galleys, where he remained a long time. At Tarente the King left
George of Suilly, who carried himself there very gallantly, and died of the
plague: and this city held for the King, till famine forced it to yield. In
Aquila he left the bailife of Vitry, where he did great service: and in Abruzzo
master Gracian des guerres, who likewise made good proof of his valor there.
They were all left unfurnished of money: for order was given that they should
receive their pay there, of the revenues of the crown, but all was too little.
Notwithstanding the K. left the Princes of Salerne and Bisignan very well
appointed, who did him good service as long as they were able. He dealt also
very bountifully with the Coulonnois: for he granted them al their demands,
and put above thirty places into their hands and their friends, which if they
would have defended for him, as both by duty and oath they were bound, they had
don him great service, and purchased to themselves both honor and profit. For I
think they were not so highly advanced these hundred years, as by the King at
that time: yet notwithstanding before his departure they began to practice with
his enemies. True it is that they served him in favor only of the Duke of
Milan, because they have ever been of the faction Gibilin, but they ought not
in respect thereof, to have dealt faithlesly with him, who so highly had
advanced and pleasured them, not only this way but diverse others. For in their
favor he had prisoners with him under guard, the Lord Virgill Vrsin, and the
Earl of Petillane 3, with diverse others of the Vrsines their enemies, yea and
that against all right and reason: for notwithstanding that they were taken
prisoners, yet knew the King right well that they had a safe conduct, the
benefit also whereof he meant they should enjoy, as himself well declared: for
he was determined to lead them no further than Ast, and there to release them.
All this did he at the Coulonnois request, and yet before his return to Ast
they shrunk from him, yea they were the very first that revolted, though they
could allege no cause that moved them thereunto.

The Notes.
1 Guicciar. says, the King left behind him half his Swissers, part of his
French footmen, 800. French lances, and 500. Italian men of arms.

2 These are certain ships having both sail and ore, the which are very much
used in the meridionall seas.

3 Virginio Vrsin and the Earl of Petillane followed the King only upon their
word not to depart without leave.

How the King departed from Naples, and passed again through Rome, whereupon
the Pope fled to Oruiette: of the communication the King had with Monseur
D'Argenton at his return from Venice: how he took advise whether he should
restore the Florentines places to them or not: and of the Sermons worthy of
memory of Friar Ierom of Florence. Chap. 2.
THe King having given order for his affairs, as he thought good, put himself
upon the way homeward with the rest of his forces, 1 being (as I suppose) nine
hundred men of arms at the least (comprehending therein the ordinary retinue
of his house) two thousand and five hundred Swissers, so that I think the
whole army contained seven thousand men taking pay, besides the train of the
Court being to the number of fifteen hundred able to do service 2. The Earl of
Petillane who took the just muster of them, told me after the battle (whereof
you shall hear) that the whole force was nine thousand men. The King marched
straight to Rome, where the Pope would not tarry his coming, but was first
determined to have gone to Padua into the Venetians dominions, so far forth
that his lodging was made there. But afterward he altered his mind: for both
the Venetians and the Duke of Milan sent him certain bands of men to Rome,
where (though they arrived in time) yet durst he not abide; notwithstanding
that the King meant him no harm, but would have done him all honor and
service, and had also sent an ambassador thither purposely to desire him to
stay. But he retired to Oruiette, and thence to Perouse, leaving the Cardinals
at Rome to receive the King, who staide not there 3 neither harmed any man. The
K. wrote unto me that I should meet him at Seen, whither I repaired
accordingly, he received me of his goodness very graciously, and asked me
(somewhat merrily) whether the Venetians would send to stop him upon the way:
for his army consisted altogether of young men who thought none in the world
comparable to them. I answered, that the seniorie told me at my departure in
the presence of one of his secretaries named Lourdin, that they and the Duke of
Milan would put forty thousand men into the field, not to offend him, but to
defend themselves: adding further that they advertised me the day I departed
from Padua by one of their prouisors, who came with their army that they sent
against us, that their force should not pass a certain river in their
dominions near to Parma 4 called (as I remember) Olye, unless he invaded the
Duke of Milan. The said Prouisor and I gave secret tokens each to other, by the
which messengers might pass to and fro between us, if need should so require
to treat of some good end: for I would break off no ouuerture of peace,
because I knew not what might happen to the King my Master. At this our
communication was present one Master Lewis Marcell, who by the seniories
appointment accompained me out of their dominions, and governed for that year
the Motz viere 5, which is a certain treasure they have: in like manner
certain of the Marquis of Mantuas men, who carried money to their Master, were
also present at it, but they heard not our talk. From these or from some others
I brought the K. in writing the number of their horsemen, footmen, and
Estradiots 6, and the names of their captains: but few of those that were
nearest about him credited my words.

After the King had reposed himself two days at Seen, and well refreshed his
horses and his company, I earnestly pressed him to depart: for his enemies were
not yet assembled, and I feared only the Almaines arrival, of whom the King
of Romans mustered great force, and levied great sums of money for their
paiement. But notwithstanding all my solicitation, the King put forth two
matters to his council which were soon debated: the one, whether he should
restore the Florentines places to them and accept the offers they made for the
restitution of them, being these, to pay him the thirty thousand ducats
remaining yet unpaid of the sum they gave him 7; to lend him besides, seven
tie thousand, and to serve him as he passed out of Italy with three hundred
men of arms, and two thousand footmen under the leading of Master Frauncis
Secco, a valiant knight and in good credit with the King. My self and diverse
others were of opinion that he should accept these conditions, retaining only
Ligorne in his hands till his return to Ast. And if he had so done, he might
have paid his soldiers, and reserved money enough to have withdrawn part of
his enemies forces, and then have fought with them. But this resolution took
no place; for Monseur de Ligny a young man cousin german to the King overthrew
it, not alleging any reason to the contrary, but only for pity of the
Pisans. The other point debated was a matter that Monseur de Ligny himself
caused to be propounded by Gaucher of Tinteuille, and by one of the factions of
the Senois, the which desired the said Monseur de Ligny for their captain. For
you shall understand that these Senois are ever in division, and govern their
common wealth more fondly than any other town in Italy 8. I being first
asked mine advise said, that I thought it best for the King to march forward,
and not to busy himself with these foolish offers which could not stand him in
steed one week to an end: alleging further that because this was an imperial
town, we should by this means provoke the whole Empire against us. All the
rest were of the same opinion, yet was the clean contrary done: for the
Senois received Monseur de Ligny for their Captain, and promised him yearly a
certain sum of money, whereof he never received penny. This foolish matter
stayed the King there six or seven days, during the which space he solaced
himself with the Dames. Further, he left there three hundred of his men
diminishing his force by so much, and then removed to Pisa passing by
Poggibonzia a castle of the Florentines. But they whom he left at Seen were
chased thence within a month after.

I had forgotten to tell you how I being at Florence iourneying toward the
King, went with one of the stewards of his house named John Francois a wise and
discreet person, to visit a Friar Iacobin called Friar Hieronime 9, a man of
holy life (as all men reported) abiding in a reformed covent where he had
remained fifteen years. The cause why I went to commune with him was, for that
he had ever preached very favorably on the Kings behalf, so far forth that
his words had staide the Florentines from reuolting from us, for never preacher
carried so great credit in any city: he had ever assured them of the Kings
coming, whatsoever was said or written to the contrary; affirming that he was
sent of God to chastise the tyrants of Italy, and that no force should be able
to withstand him. He preached further that the King should come to Pisa and
enter into the town, and that the self same day the estate of Florence
should be altered as also it happened: for the same day was Peter of Medicis
banished the town. Diverse other things also foretold he long before they
happened, namely, the death of Laurence of Medicis: all the which he said he
understood by revelation. He preached yet further that the estate of the church
should be reformed by the sword. This is not yet come to pass, but was very
near, and he auoweth still that it shall be. Many found great fault with him
because he said that God revealed these things to him, but some believed him:
sure I for my part take him for a holy man. I asked him whether the K. should
pass out of Italy without danger of his person, seeing the great preparation
the Venetia^s made against him, whereof he discoursed perfectlier than my self
that came from thence. He answered me that the K. should have some troble upon
the way, but that the honor thereof should be his, though he were accompanied
but with an hundred men, and that God who had guided him at his coming, would
also protect him at his return. Adding notwithstanding that because he had not
done his duty in the reformation of the Church, but had suffered his men to
spoil and rob the people, as well those that took his part, voluntarily
received him into their cities, as his enemies: God had pronounced sentence
against him, and would shortly scourge him. Nevertheless he bad me tell him
that if he would have compassion one the poor people, and endeavor himself to
keep his men from doing evil, and punish the offenders (as he was bound by
his office to do,) that then God would revoke his sentence, at the least
mittigate it: adding thereunto that he ought not to think it a sufficient
excuse, that he in his own person did no harm. He said moreover that himself
would go and tell the King thus much, and so indeed he did, and persuaded with
him to restore the Florentines places to them. When he spoke thus of Gods
sentence, the death of my Lord the Daulphin came suddenly to my mind, for I
saw no other thing that could greatly trouble the King. Thus much I have
written to the end it may yet more manifestly appear, that this voyage was in
deed a mere miracle of God.

The Notes.
1 He departed from Naples the 20. of May. Annal. Franc. Guicciar.

2 The King departed Naples with 800. French lances, two hundred gentlemen of
his guard, a hundred lances under Triuulce, three thousand footmen Swissers, a
thousand French, and a thousand Gascoines. Guicciar.

3 He arrived at Rome the first of June, and a bode there two days. Annal.
Franc.

4 For Parma it is better to read Creme or Bergame: for the Venetians
dominions lay not near to Parma; besides that the river Olio is not near
Parma: for the Pau runs between Parma and it, so that the Venetians must
have passed the Pau after they had passed Olie, before they could have come to
Parma.

5 The French Corrector reads it Montvieil, called in Italian Monte Vechio,
which is a certain treasure the Venetians have to pay the interests due unto
the ancientest creditors of their commonwealth, as appears in the book of
Donato Giannotti.

6 What these Estradiottes were look after Cap. 5.

7 They had given the King 120000. ducats, as mention is made Cap. 9. lib. 7.

8 The people of Seen were divided against the order of Montenoue, which held a
guard of soldiers in the palace. The citizens promised de Ligny 20000. ducats a
year, to protect them against the said Montenoue, but forthwith after the
Kings departure the faction of Montenoue chased Ligny and his men out of the
town. Guicciar.

9 This Friars surname was Sauanarola, who has written many goodly homilies
and sermons: he was borne at Ferrara.

How the King retained in his hands the town of Pisa, and certain other of
the Florentines places: and how in the mean time the Duke of Orleans entered on
the other side into Nouarre, a town of the Duchy of Milan. Chap. 3.
AFter the King was entered into Pisa, (as you have heard) all the Pisans both
men and women besought their guests for Gods love to make intercession to the
King, that they might no more return under the Florentines tyranny, who in
truth handled them extremely; but diverse cities in Italy that be in subjection
to others, are as evil entreated as they: besides that, the Pisans and
Florentines had been in wars together the space of three hundred years before
the Florentines subdued them. These lamentable words before mentioned joined
with tears moved our men to pity, and caused them so far forth to forget
the Kings promise and oath made upon the altar of Saint John at Florence, that
all sorts of men busied themselves in this matter, even the poor archers and
the Swissers, who also threatened those that they thought persuaded the King to
perform his promise, namely the Cardinal Saint Malo, so often before named
general of Languedoc, whom I my self heard an archer threaten. There were in
like manner that gave very rough language to the Marshall of Gie. The president
Gannay by the space of three days and more, durst not lie in his lodging. But
the Earl of Ligny above all the rest favored the Pisans cause, who came in
troops weeping and lamenting to the King, in such sort, that we all pitied
them, and would willingly have relieved them, if it had lien in us so to do.
One day after dinner, forty or fiftic gentlemen of the Kings house assembled
themselves together, and went with their partisans into the Kings chamber,
where he was playing at tables with Monseur de Pienncs, accompanied only with
two grooms of his chamber. One of these gentlemen son to Sallezard the
elder, spoke as mouth of the rest to the King, desiring him to be gracious Lord
to the Pisans, and accusing certain of those lately named as traitors to him.
But the King with so stout language commanded them to depart, that after, the
like never happened. The King spent six or seven days needlessly in the town of
Pisa, and then changed the garrison, and made captain of the Citadelle one
Entragues, a man of lewd conditions, servant to the D. of Orleans, whom he thus
preferred by Monseur de Lignis suit, and left with him in the said Citadelle
certain footmen of the Duchy of Berrie. Further, the said Entragues procured
such friendship (I suppose by his money) that he was also made captain of
Petrosancte, and of another place near to it called Mortron 1, and in like
manner of Librefacto, which is near to Lugues. The castle of Serzane being very
strong, was put at the request of the said Earl of Ligny, into the hands of a
bastard of Roussi, and an other place called Serzanelle, into the hands of
another, being both his own servants. In these places the King left a great
part of his forces: notwithstanding that he shall never have such need of men,
as he had at that time. Moreover, he refused the Florentines aid and offers
above mentioned, and drove them into utter despair. Yet was he advertised
before his departure from Seen, that the Duke of Orleans (whom he had left
behind him in Ast) 2 had taken the city of Navarre in the Duchy of Milan, and
therefore was well assured that the Venetians would declare themselves his
enemies: for they sent him word that if he invaded the Duke of Milan, they
would aid the Duke with their whole force, according to their league lately
made, and their force was great and in a readiness. Now you shall understand
that presently upon the conclusion of their league, the Duke of Milan thought
to have surprised Ast, supposing to find it utterly vnmanned: but my letters
had hastened the forces that the Duke of Bourbon sent thither, and the first
that arrived were about forty lances of the Marshall of Gies company, which
had tarried behind in France, and came thither in good time. Soon after them
arrived also five hundred footmen, sent thither by the Marquis of Saluce. The
coming of the which stayed the Duke of Milans forces led by Master Galeas of
Saint Seuerin, who hearing these news retired to Nom, a castle of the Duchy
of Milan, two miles from Ast. In the neck of these arrived also three hundred
and fifty men of arms, and certain gentlemen of Daulphine, and two thousand
Swissers, with certain frank archers of the said country of Daulphine, so
that their whole number was 7500. men taking pay. But they lingered so long
upon the way that they served not to the purpose they were sent for. For the K.
sent for them to come and succor him, but instead of aiding him he was forced
to aid them. The K. had also given commandment to the D. of Orleans and his
captains not to attempt any thing against the Duke of Milan, but only to
defend the town of Ast, and to meet him at the river of Thesin to help to
convey him over it, for that was the only river to trouble him. But
notwithstanding all that the King writ to the Duke of Orleans, this enterprise
of Nouarre (which is but ten leagues from Milan) liked him so well, that he was
contented to give ear thereunto, and was received into the city in great
triumph both of the Guelphes and Gibelines, which his exploit the Marchioness
of Monferrat greatly furthered. The castle held two or three days and then
yielded also. But if in the mean time, the Duke had gone or sent to Milan
(where he had good intelligence) he had been received into the town with
greater joy, than ever he was into his castle of Blois, as diverse of the
noblest men of the country have informed me. And the three first days he
might have gone thither in safety, for when Nouarre was taken, the Duke of
Milans whole force lay yet at Nom near to Ast, and returned not to Milan till
the fourth day after. But I suppose the Duke believed not all the intelligence
he received thence.

The Notes.
1 The French corrector supposes it should be Motron, but the author himself
afterward chap. 14. calls it again Mortron. Guicciar. has it Mutron.

2 The Duke of Orleans immediately after the skirmish upon the sea at Rapalo,
fell sick of an ague, and returned to Ast: and passed no further with the
King, two gentlemen called Opizins brought the Duke of Orleans into Nouarre.
Guicci.

How King Charles passed diverse dangerous straights in the mountains between
Pisa and Serzane: how the town of Pontreme was burned by his Almaines, and how
the Duke of Orleans behaved himself in the mean time at Nouarre. Chap. 4.
YOu have heard already of the Kings departure from Seen to Pisa, and of all that he did at Pisa. Thence he removed to Luques where the citizens honorably
received him, and there he abode two days. Afterward he marched to Petrosancte
(which Entragues held) making no account of his enemies, neither himself nor
those that carried all the credit with him. He passed marvelous straights in
the mountains between Luques and Petrosancte, which a handful of footmen
might easily have defended against him: but our enemies were not yet assembled.
Near to the said Petrosancte is the straight of Seire on the one side, and the
straight of Roctaille on the other, being great deep salt marshes, where we
were forced to pass over a narrow way, like to a causey in a standing poole:
and this was the straight that between Pisa and Pontreme I most feared, and
which was reported to be most dangerous: for one cart set overthwart the way
with two good pieces of artillery, and but a handful of men, might have
stopped our passage, had our force been never so great. From Petrosancte the
King removed to Serzane, where the Cardinal Saint Peter ad vincula offered to
make Genua revolt, and desired to have some part of the Kings forces sent
thither. The matter was debated by the Kings Council, my self being present
at it in the company of a great many wise men and good captains: all the
which concluded, that no ear should be given to this enterprise, because if
the King obtained the victory, Genua would yield of it self; and if he were
overthrown, it could do him no service: and this was the first time that I
perceived any of them to doubt the battle. Report was made to the King of our
resolution; yet notwithstanding thither he sent the Lord of Bresse afterward
Duke of Sauoy, the Lord of Beaumont, the Lord of Polignac my brother in law,
and the Lord of Ambeiou of the house of Amboise, with six score men of arms,
and five hundred crossebowe men newly come out of France by sea. But I
woondred that so young a Prince had no trusty servants about him, that durst
boldly tell him into how great danger he put himself by diminishing his force
after this sort: for as touching me, me thought he believed not all that I said.

We had a small army upon the sea returning from Naples, under the leading of
the Lord of Myolens governor of Daulphin, and one Stephan de Neues of
Montpellier. They were in all about eight galleys, and sailed to Specie and
Repalo, where at this present they were all defeated and led prisoners to
Genua, in the selfsame place where we had vanquished King Alphonses forces at
the beginning of this voyage, and by the selfsame men that took part with us
at that battle, namely Master John Lewis de Flisco, and Master John Adorn:
but if the matter had been well ordered, they should have been with the King,
and all little enough. The Lord of Bresse and the Cardinal above mentioned
went and lodged in the suburbs of Genua, thinking that their faction within
the town would have risen in their favor. But the Duke of Milan and the
Adornes that governed the town, and Master John Lewis de Flisco (a wise
knight) had given so good order to prevent this mischief, that our men were in
great danger to be defeated here also, as the others were before upon the sea:
for their number was small, and had it not been because the faction that ruled
at Genua durst not issue forth of the town, for fear least the Fourgouses
should rebel and shut the gates upon them, undoubtedly they had all been
slain; for this notwithstanding they were in great distress upon the way as
they retired to Ast: besides that, they were not at the battle with the King,
where their service might have stood him in good stead. From Serzane the King
marched to Pontreme, through the which he was forced to pass, because it is
the very entry into the mountains. The town and castle were well fortified,
and the seat of them marvelous strong, but within them were not past three or
four hundred footmen; for if they had been well manned, they had been
impregnable. Wherefore Friar Ieroms prophecy proved true, which was, that God
would lead the King by the hand, till he were out of danger: for it seemed
that his enemies were blinded and bereft of their wits, in that they defended
not this straight. To the said place of Pontreme the King sent his vaward led
by the Marshall Gie, accompanied with Master John James of Treuoul, whom the
King had received into his service at Naples after King Ferrandes departure
thence, with whom he was them in pay: he was a gentleman of Milan of a good
house, a good captain, a very valiant man, and a great enemy to the Duke of
Milan: for he was banished by him when King Ferrande received him into his
service. By the said Master John James his means, the place yielded
immediately without battery, and the garrison that was within it departed. But
a great inconvenience happened there: for (as before is mentioned) when the
Duke of Milan passed last that way, they of the town and certain of our
Swissers fell at variance (of whom about forty at that time were slain) for
revenge whereof, the said Swissers at this present (notwithstanding the
composition) slew all the men they found in the town, spoiled it and burnt
both victuals and all that was within it, and above ten also of themselves
being drunk, neither could the Marshall Gie by any means make them to retire.
They besieged the castle also, meaning to have done the like to those that were
within it, being the said Master John James of Treuoules servants, whom he had
put into it when the garrison of the enemies yielded it, neither would the said
Almaines depart thence till the King himself sent to them. It was great pity
that the town was thus destroyed, both because of the dishonor we received
thereby, and also because there was great plenty of victuals within it,
whereof we were already in great distress 1, notwithstanding that the people
were no where against us, save only the people of the country near to
Pontreme, because of the harms we did there. Now to proceed, if the King
would have followed the said Master John James his advise, diverse places of the
Duchy of Milan would have yielded, and diverse gentlemen of the country have
revolted to him: for he gave him counsel to rear up in every place the young
Dukes arms, whom the Lord Lodouic held in his hands, being son to John
Galeas the Duke that last died at Pauia, as before you have heard. But the King
refused so to do, for the favor he bare to the Duke of Orleans, who pretended
and does yet pretend title to the said Duchy. Thus marched the King beyond
Pontreme, and lodged in a little valley near to a village that had not ten
houses in it; the name whereof I know not. There he abode five days upon no
occasion, his army being almost famished, and his battle lying thirty miles
behind his vaward in the midst of huge and sharp mountains, over the which
such great cannons and culuerins passed then, as never had passed before. For
Duke Galeas in his time conveyed over but four faulcons, waying not past five
hundred pound a piece, which was a great wonder in those days.

I must now return to the Duke of Orleans, who after he had taken the castle
of Nouarre, staid there a few days to no purpose, and then went to Vigesue,
near to the which were two little towns that sent unto him, offering to
receive him, but by wise advise he refused their offer. They of Pauia sent also
twice to him to the same end, and them he should not have refused. Moreover, he
marched in order of battle before the said town of Vigesne, where the Duke of
Milans whole force lay, being led by the two brethren of Saint Seuerin, so
often above named. The town is hardly so good as Saint Martin-de-Cande, which
is not worth six pence. I my self arrived there not long after, at which
time the Duke of Milan being there with certain of his captains, showed me
the place where both the armies had stood in order of battle hard by the town
and within the town. And if the Duke of Orleans had marched but an hundred
paces further, they had retired beyond the river of Thesin, for they stood hard
by the river side, and had built a great bridge of boats over it. Moreover, I
saw them at my being there, beat down a great bulwark of earth which they had
made on the other side of the river to defend the passage; whereby it appeered
that they were fully minded if the Duke had marched forward, to abandon both
the town and castle, which had been much to their disadvantage. This is the
place where the Duke of Milan uses most to be resident, and sure it is
situate in the pleasantest country for all kind of pastimes, especially
hauking and hunting, that ever I saw. But peradventure the Duke of Orleans
thought the place strong where his enemies lodged, and himself to have passed
far enough: wherefore he retired to Trecas, the Lord whereof (who had charge
under the Duke of Milan) and my self communed together of these affairs a
few days after. To the said town of Trecas certain of the principal of
Milan sent to the Duke of Orleans, promising to receive him into the town, and
offering for performance thereof, to deliver their children in hostage. Which
their enterprise they might easily have executed, as diverse of great authority
being then within the town and acquainted with all their practices have
advertised me: saying that the Duke of Milan could not have found men ynow to
have defended the castle of Milan for him, because both nobles and people
desired the destruction of this house of Sforce. The Duke of Orleans also and
his men have informed me of these practices above mentioned, but they had no
great affiance in those that negotiated with them, and they lacked a man that
understood these affairs better than themselves: whereunto I also add, that
the said Dukes captains were not all of one opinion as touching this
enterprise. With the Duke of Milans forces joined two thousand Almains, whom
the King of Romans sent thither, and a thousand Dutch horsemen under the
leading of master Frederic Capelare, borne in the county of Ferrette. Their
arrival so much encouraged Master Galeas and his company, that they went
before Trecas to present the battle to the Duke of Orleans, who refused it
(notwithstanding that his force were greater then theirs,) because his
captains as I suppose would not hazard the battle, fearing least the loss
thereof should be the Kings destruction, of whom they could hear no news,
because the passages were all stopped: wherefore they retired to Nouarre,
giving no order for their provision of victuals, no not for the preservation of
the store they had within the town already, much less for any new supply,
whereof notwithstanding they might plentifully have been furnished at that time
in the country about without money, whereas afterward they were greatly
distressed through their own folly. To conclude, their enemies came and
lodged within half a league of them.

The Notes.
1 The cause of their lack was the barrennes of the country.

How the Kings great artillery passed the mounts Appenines by the Almains
help, of the danger the Marshall of Gie was in with his vaward, and how the
King arrived at Fornoue. Chap. 5.
YOu have heard how the King upon no occasion lay in a valley on this side
Pontreme five days together, in great distress of victuals. Our Almains did
there one great piece of service: for those that committed this foul fault at
Pontreme, fearing that they had thereby procured themselves the Kings
indignation for ever; came and offered to pass the artillery over these
monstrous ways in the mountains, for so may I well term them, because they
were so high and steep that there lay no beaten way over them. I have seen
all the highest mountains both of Italy and Spain, which undoubtedly are not
comparable to these. The Almains made this offer upon condition that the K
would pardon their fault, which he promised to do. We had fowerteene great and
massy pieces of artillery, and immediately after we were out of the valley, we
mounted up such a marvelous steep and upright hill, that our mules could
hardly clime up to it. But these Almaines coupled themselves two and two
together with strong cords, and drew a hundred or two at a time, and when one
company was wearied, a fresh succeeded. Besides this, all the horses appointed
for conueiance of the artillery helped them, and every man of the Kings house
that had any train, lent a horse to conueigh it over with the more speed: but
had it not been for the Almaines, the horses would never have passed it over.
To say the truth they conueighed over not the artillery only, but the whole
army, for had it not been for them there could not a man have passed. But it is
no marvel if they drew with good courages, because thereby they passed as well
themselves as us, whereof they were no less desirous than we. They did much
harm I confess, but their good service far surmounted their evil deeds. The
greatest difficulty was not to draw up the artillery, for when they were at
the top of the mountain, they might behold a great deep valley underneath,
for the way is such as nature has made, and by Art it was never helped.
Wherefore undoubtedly the difficulty was much greater in conueighing the
artillery down than in drawing it up; for both horses and men were forced to
draw countermount at the tail of every piece: besides that, carpenters or
smiths were continually working upon them, for when a piece fell, great trouble
it was to hoise it up again. Many gave advise to break all the great
artillery, but the King would in no wise agree thereunto.

The Marshal of Gie who lay with our vaward thirty miles before us, pressed
the King to make haste: but it was three days before we could join with him.
The enemies camp lay directly in his face within half a league of him, who in
mine opinion should have had a good booty if they had assailed him. Afterward
he lodged in the village of Fornoue to keep them from assailing us in the
mountains, for the which purpose the village served well, because it is at the
foot of the mountains, and the very entry into the plain. Notwithstanding we
had a better protector than him, I mean God, who put an other conceit into our
enemies heads: for so great was their covetousness that they resolved to tarry
us in the plain, to the end none of us should escape, supposing if they had
assailed us in the mountains, that we would retire to Pisa and the Florentines
places that we held. But therein they were much deceived, for we were too far
from those places; besides that, if our force and theirs had joined and fought,
they might have pursued as fast as we could have fled, especially knowing the
country better then we did: hither to in all this voyage we had no war 1, but
now it began. For the Marshall of Gie advertised the King that he was past the
mountains, and had sent forty light horse to give an alarm to the enemies
camp thereby to discover their actions, who were incontinent encountered by
the Estradiots 2, the which slew a gentleman of ours named le Beuf, and cut off
his head and hung it at one of their lances, and carried it to their prouisors
to receive a ducat for it. These Estradiots are soldiers like to the Turks
Ianizaries, and attired both on foot and horseback like to the Turks, save
that they wear not upon their head such a great roll of linen as the Turks
do called Tolliban. They are rough soldiers, for both they and their horses
keep the fields winter and summer. They were all Greeks come from the places
that the Venetians hold there, some from Naples 3 in the country of Morea,
some out of Albain, and some from Duras. Their horses are excellent good, for
they are all Turkish. The Venetians use their service much and trust them well.
I saw them all when they landed at Venice, and mustered in an I Will wherein the
Abbey of Saint Nicholas stands: they were to the number of fifteen hundred,
and are valiant men, and trouble an army exceedingly with their alarmes when
they are so disposed to do. These Estradiots followed the chase even to the
Marshals lodging, and entered into our Almaines camp, of whom they slew three
or four, and carried their heads away with them, for such is their manner.
Because when the Venetians were in war with the Turk Mahomet Otthoman this
Turks father that now reigns: he commanded his men to take no prisoners, but
gave them a ducat for every head, and the Venetians did the like, which manner I
think they now used, the more to terrify us, as indeed they did. But the said
Estradiots were no less daunted themselves with our artillery: for one
faulken shot slew one of their horses, whereupon they retired incontinent, for
they understood not the feat of artillery: but in their retract, they took a
Captain of our Almaines prisoner, who was mounted on horseback to see if they
retired. He was stricken through the body with a lance, for he was unarmed. He
was a wise fellow, and they led him to the Marquis of Mantua General of the
Venetians army, being then accompanied with his uncle the Lord Rodolphe of
Mantua, and the Earl of Caiazze Captain of the Duke of Milans forces, who
knew this Captain that was taken very well. Now you shall understand that our
enemies whole force was abroad in order of battle 4, at the least all that was
assembled: for all their forces were not yet come together, notwithstanding
that they had lien there eight days making their musters, so that the King had
leisure enough to have returned into France without all danger, had it not
been for the long abode he made to no purpose in the places above rehearsed.
But God had otherwise disposed of this business.

The said Marshall fearing to be assailed, encamped upon the mountain, having
with him only eight score men of arms and eight hundred Almaines as he told
me himself: and as touching us we could not have succored him, for it was a
day and a half after before we could join with him because of our artillery
5. The King lodged by the way at two young Marquesses houses. Our vaward lay
upon the hill in great fear waiting howerly when their enemies (who stood in
order of battle, a pretty way from them in the plain) would assail them. But
God who always manifestly declared that he would preserve the company, took
away our enemies senses from them* for the Earl of Caiazze asked our Almaine
who it was that led this vaward, and how great the force was, for he knew our
number as well as our selves, because he had been with us all the summer. The
Almaine made the force great, and reported them to be three hundred men of
arms, and fifteen hundred Swissers: whereunto the Earl answered that he lied,
alleging that in the whole army were but three thousand Swissers, and that it
was unlike we would send the half before with the vaward. Then this Almaine
was sent prisoner to the Marquis of Mantuas pauilion, and they consulted
whether they should assail the Marshall or no. But the Marquis crediting the
Almaines report, alleged that their footmen were not able to match our
Almaines, and that part of their force was yet vncome, without the which they
should do wrong to fight. And further, that if they should happen to be
discomfited, the seniorie might justly be displeased: wherefore he liked better
to tarry us in the plain, seeing we could pass no way but just before them:
of which opinion were also the two prouisors, against whose advise they durst
not fight: but others said that if this vaward were defeated, the King must of
necessity be taken: notwithstanding in the end they agreed all to tarry us in
the plain, trusting that not one of us should escape. All this I understood by
the parties themselves above named: for after the battle we and they met
together, and the Marshal of Gie and my self had great communication with them
about these affairs. Thus they retired into their camp, being well assured
that within a day or two the King would pass the mountains and lodge in the
village of Fornoue. In the mean time all the rest of their forces arrived, and
we could not pass but hard before them: so straight and narrow was the way.
When we came down the mountains we beheld the champaigne country of
Lombardy, which is the pleasantest, best, and fruitfullest soil in the world.
But notwithstanding I call it champaigne; yet is it very troublesome for
horsemen, because it is full of ditches like to Flaunders, yea fuller I think:
but withal it is much pleasanter and plentifuller both of good corn, good
wines, and fruits, for their grounds bear every year. We were right glad to
behold it, because of the great famine and penury we had sustained in our
journey ever since our departure from Luques. But our artillery tired us
exceedingly as we came down the hill, so steep and painful was the way. Our
enemies camp was well furnished of tents and pauilions, which made it show
marvelous great, and sure so was it: for the Venetians had performed their
promise made to the King by me, which was that they and the Duke of Milan would
put forty thousand men into the field, at the least if they performed it not
fully, they failed not much thereof: for in this army were five and thirty
thousand taking pay, four parts of five being of Saint Mark 6.

They were at the least two thousand men of arms barded, every one of them
accompanied with four men on horse back, bearing cross bows or some other
weapons 7, their Estradiots and light horse men, were to the number of five
thousand, the rest were footmen, and they lodged in a strong place well
fortified, and well furnished with artillery.

The King came down the mountain about noone, and lodged in the village of
Fornoue, upon sunday being the fifth of July, the year 1495. We found in the
village great plenty of meal, wine, and prouender for horses, brought thither
by the people 1495.
of the country, who received us friendly every where (for no honest man did
them harm) and victualed us with bread and wine and some fruit, whereby they
somewhat eased the army: but their bread was little and black, and they sold
it dear, and three parts of their wine was water. I my self caused some of
their victuals to be bought for me, which notwithstanding I durst not taste of,
because we suspected they meant to poison us, so that at the first no man durst
adventure to eat of them; and the suspicion increased, because two Swissers
were found dead in a seller, having drunk themselves to death, or taken cold
after they had drunk. But before midnight the horses began first to feed, and
afterward the men, and then we refreshed our selves well. I must here speak
somewhat in the honor of the Italian nation, because we never found in all this
voyage that they sought by poison to do us harm, yet if they would we could
hardly have avoided it. We arrived at Fornoue (as you have heard) upon sunday
at noone: the King lighted and ate and drank, a little to refresh himself,
but a number of gentlemen there were that hardly could get a morsel of bread,
for there was small store of other victuals than such as we found in the place,
whereof till midnight (as before you have heard) none of us durst taste.

Immediately after dinner, certain of their Estradiots came and gave us a hot
alarm even within our camp. Our men were as yet unacquainted with them, for
the which cause all our army came forth into the field in very good order,
and in three battles, vaward, battle, and rereward, the one being not above a
bowls cast from the other, so that each of them might with speed have succored
other: but in the end this hot alarm proved nothing, wherefore we returned to
our lodging. We had a few tents and pauilions, and our camp lay in length
auauncing it self toward theirs: besides that, there was a wood through the
which the enemies might come under covert almost to us 8, by means whereof
twenty of their Estradiots might easily give us an alarm at all times, and so
I warrant you they did, for they lay continually at the end of our camp. We
encamped in a valley, between two little hills 9, through the which ran a
river, that a man may easily pass over on foot, unless it happen to arise,
as it does often upon the sudden in that country, but the waters tarry not
long, the rivers name is Tarro. All the said valley is gravel and great stone,
very troublesome for horsemen, and not above a quarter of a league broad. Upon
the hill on the right hand lay our enemies (hardly half a league from us) so
that we were forced to pass just before them, the river running between us:
for notwithstanding that on the back side of the hill on the left hand
(underneath the which we encamped) there lay another way that we might have
taken; yet would we not so do, least we should seem to fly, but encamped in
the valley at the foot of the said hill, in the face of our enemies. Those in
our camp that were of the wiser sort began now to fear, in such sort, that
about two days before, they had desired me to go and parle with the enemies,
taking one with me to view them, and to number how great their force was. I was
loath to take this iourny upon me, because without safe conduct I could not go
in safety. Wherefore I answered that both at my departure from Venice, and the
same night also that I arrived at Padua, I was entered into good intelligence
with their prouisors, so that I thought they would not refuse to commune with
me in the midway between both the armies: but if I should offer my self to go
to them I should thereby too much encourage them; adding further, that this
matter was moved too late. Notwithstanding, the self same sunday that the
King arrived at Fornoue, I writ to their prouisors (one of the which was named
Master Luques Pisan, and the other Master Melchior Treuisan) desiring them that
under safe conduct, one of them would come and parle with me, according to
their offer made at our departure from Padua, (as before you have heard.) They
answered that they would willingly have satisfied my request, if the war had
not been begun upon the Duke of Milan: notwithstanding, they promised that one
of them (whether of the twain should be appointed) would come into some place
in the midway to commune with me if we so thought good; which answer I received
the same sunday at night: but those that had all the credit with the King, made
no account thereof. As touching my self, I durst not take too much upon me,
nor press the matter too earnestly, least they should charge me with
cowardice: wherefore I waded no further in it that night; notwithstanding, that
I would with all my heart have helped the King and his army out of that
straight, if I might have done it without danger.

About midnight the Cardinal of Saint Malo, whose pauilion was hard by mine,
told me as he came from the King, that we should depart the next morning by
break of day, and that the King would command a cannon to be shot into the
enemies camp as we passed along by them, to signify that he was there ready to
present them battle, and so march forward without any more ado. And I suppose
that this advise proceeded from the Cardinal himself, as a man unable to
talk of the wars, neither understanding what they meant. But it had been
requisite that the King should have assembled the wisest men and best captains
in his army, to debate so weighty a matter as this was. And yet perhaps that
should have been but to small purpose neither; for I saw many matters debated
in this voyage, the which were executed clean contrary to the resolution. I
answered the Cardinal that if we approached so near them, as to shoot into
their camp, undoubtedly men would issue forth on both sides to the skirmish,
the which could never be retired without battle: alleging further, that this
was clean contrary to that I had already begun with their prouisors, and it
grieved me, that we should take this course: but such had mine estate been ever
since the beginning of the Kings reign, that I durst not wade too far in any
matter, least I should have procured my self the displeasure of them that were
in authority about him, which was so great where he liked, that it was but too
great.

The selfsame night we had two other great alarmes all through our own fault,
because we had given no order against their Estradiots as we ought to have
done, and the use is to do in the wars against light horsemen: for twenty of
our men of arms with their archers would have matched two hundred of them; but
they were as yet strange to us. There fell also this night a terrible rain,
and such lightening and thundering as was never since the world began; so that
heaven and earth seemed to go together, or that this foreshewed some great
inconvenience to ensue. For notwithstanding that we knew well, that the
reuerberation of these great mountains (at the foot of the which we lay) made
this thunder seem greater than indeed it was; and further, that thunder and
lightening be natural in a hot country, especially in summer: yet seemed they
at that present the more dreadful and terrible to us, because we saw so many
enemies encamped before us, we having none other means to pass through them
but by battle, our force being so small as it was; for we were not above nine
thousand able men good and bad: of the which two thousand were noble men's
servants of the camp; but I comprehend not in this number pages nor straglers,
nor such kind or people.

The Notes.
1 For you heard before how easily without blows they entered into Naples.

2 It seems that this word is derived of the Greek, for (...) in Greek
signifies a soldior.

3 This Naples is a town in Morea or Peloponnesus under the Venetians
government, called in times past Nauplia, and now Neapolis Romanie.

4 For they were come forth of their camp with intent to have assailed the
Marshall.

5 Understand this day and a half after he lodged upon the mountain, not
after his first arrival there: for from his first coming, it was three days
before the King joined with him, as he said a little before.

6 That is to say, of the Seniorie of Venice, which have Saint Mark for their
patron.

7 He said Lib. 7. cap. 5. and says also again in this book cap. 15. that
the Italian men of arms were allowed no archers: but note that this that the
Venetians did here, was contrary to the ancient manner of Italy, and that
they did it to imitate the French.

8 The Kings camp lay among sallowes and willowes. Annal. Franc. and Aquit.

9 Of the seat of both the camps read Guicciar. fol. 38. page 2.

Of the battle of Fornoue, wherein the enemies of France were put to flight,
and how the Earl of Petillane, who the same day brake the Kings prison, relied
them together again. Chap. 6.
THe monday morning about seven of the clock, being the sixth day of July, the
year of our Lord 1495. the noble King mounted on horseback calling often for
me. At my coming to him I found him armed at all pieces, and mounted upon the
brauest horse that ever I saw, called Sauoy, which some said was a horse of
Bresse. Duke Charles of Sauoy gave him to the King: he was black, and had but
one eye, and of a mean stature, but tall enough for him he carried. This young
Prince seemed that day altogether another man than either his nature, person,
or complexion would bear: for naturally he was, and yet is very fearful in
speech, because he had ever been brought up in great awe, and with men of mean
estate: but this horse made him seem great, and he had a good countenance and
a good color, and his talk was stout and wise: whereby appeered (as I then
called to mind) that Friar Ierom told me truth, when he said that God would
lead him by the hand, and that he should have somewhat to do upon the way, but
that the honor thereof should be his. His words to me were these; if these men
will parliament, go and commune with them, and because the Cardinal was there
present, he named him to accompany me, and the Marshall of Gie, who was out of
patience because of a broile that had happened between the Earls 1 of
Narbonne and Guise, the which Guise sometime had led certain bands, and ought
of right to have led the vaward 2, as all men said. I answered the King, that I
would do his commandment, but that I never saw two so great forces so near
together, depart without battle.

Our whole army marched forth upon the plain in good order, the one battle
near to the other as the day before: but as touching the force, it seemed but
a handful to that I had seen with Duke Charles of Burgundy, and King Lewis
this Kings father. Upon the said plain the Cardinal and I withdrew our selves
aside, and endited a letter to the two Prouisors above named, the which was
written by one Master Robertet a Secretary of the Kings, and in good credit.
The contents of our letter were, that it appertained to the estate and office
of the Cardinal to procure peace, and unto me also having so lately been
ambassador at Venice; for the which cause I might as yet take upon me the
office of mediator between the King and them. We signified further to them on
the Kings behalf, that he would but pass forth his way without doing harm
to any man: wherefore if they minded to parliament, according to the order taken
the day before, we for our parts were willing thereunto, and would employ our
selves to do all the good we could. The skirmishes were already begun round
about us, and after our army had marched awhile, softly passing along before
them, the river running between them and us (as you have heard) we approached
so near to them, that we came within a quarter of a league of their camp,
within the which they stood all in martial array: for their manner is to make
their camp so large, that they may all stand in order of battle within it.

They sent forth incontinent part of their Estradiots and crossebowe men on
horseback, and certain men of arms, the which came along upon the way almost
under covert, toward the village of Fornoue (out of the which we were
departed) meaning there to pass this little river, and to assail our
carriage, which was so great, that I think it laded above 6000. mules, horses,
and asses. They had set their battles in such order many days before they
fought, that better they could not be ordered: for they were so placed, that
their great number half assured them of the victory, because they assailed the
K. and his army on every side, in such sort that not one of us could have
escaped if we had been broken, considering the straight we were in. Those above
mentioned came and assailed our carriage, and on the left hand came the
Marquess of Mantua, the Lord Rodolph his uncle, and the Earl Bernardin of
Dalmouton, with all the flower of their army, being to the number of six
hundred men of arms, as they themselves afterward confessed, all the which
entered into the plain directly behind us. Their men of arms were all barded,
and furnished with brave plumes and goodly bourdonasses 3, and well accompanied
with crossebowe men on horseback, Estradiots, and footmen. Against the
Marshall of Gie and our vaward, marched the Earl of Caiazze with four hundred
men of arms (accompanied as the others above mentioned) and with a great band
of footmen: with him also was another company of two hundred men of arms,
led by Master John de Bentiuoille of Bolonia his son, a young man, who before
had never seen the wars, for they were as slenderly provided of good captains
as we. This young Bentiuoille was placed there, to give a new charge upon our
vaward immediately after the Earl of Caiazze. With the Marquess of Mantua was
also a like company of men of arms for the same purpose, under the leading of
Master Anthony of Vrbin bastard to the late Duke of Vrbin. Besides these there
remained yet in their camp two great troops of men of arms, as I understood
the next day by themselves when they and I communed together, and I saw them
also with mine eyes. And this they did because the Ven^tians would not hazard
all at once, nor unfurnish their camp. Notwithwanding in mine opinion it had
been better for them to have adventured their whole force, seeing they meant
to fight.

I will now tell you what became of the letter, the Cardinal and I sent to
their camp by a trumpeter. The Prouisors received it, and immediately after
they had read it, brast forth the first piece of our artillery, then shot
theirs which was not so good as ours. The said Prouisors incontinent sent back
our trumpeter, accompanied with a trumpeter of the Marquesses, who brought word
that they were content to parliament, if we would cause our artillery to cease,
saying, that they on their side would do the like. I was then a great way from
the King, who rid about here and there, and sent back these two trumpeters
with answer, that he would make the artillery to cease, and gave commandment
to the Master of the ordinance to stay the shot, and so all ceased awhile on
both sides. But soon after upon a sudden they discharged one of their pieces,
and then shot ours again freshlier than before, and we approached three of our
pieces nearer to them. After the two trumpeters were arrived at their camp,
they took ours and sent him to the Marquesses pauilion, resolving to fight.
For the Earl of Caiazze (as those that were present have informed me) said
that it was now no time to parliament, seeing that we were half vanquished
already; and one of their Prouisors was of his opinion, and agreed to fight (as
I have heard himself report) but the other would not consent thereunto. The
Marquess in like manner desired the battle, but his uncle, who was a virtuous
and a wise gentleman, and loved us well, and bare arms against us with an
evil will, withstood it to the uttermost of his power; but in the end they
agreed all to fight.

Now you shall understand, that the King had put his whole force into his
vaward, in the which were three hundred and fifty men of arms, and three
thousand Swissers (the only hope of our army) with whom he commanded three
hundred archers of his guard to join themselves on foot, and likewise
certain crossebowe men on horseback of the two hundredth that were also of his
guard, which was a great diminishing of the safety of his person. In our army
were but few footmen besides these, for all that we had were placed in the
vaward. On foot with our Almaines were the Lord Engelbert brother to the Duke
of Cleues, Lornay, and the bailife of Digeon, the said Almains captain, and
before them marched our artillery. Here they whom we left in the Florentines
places, and those that were sent to Genua would have don good service, contrary
to the opinion of all men. Our vaward had now marched almost as far as their
camp, so that all men thought they should have begun the battle: but our two
other battles were not so near it, nor so well placed to have succored it as
the day before. Further, because the Marquis of Mantua (who was entered into the
plain and past the river) was directly upon our back, about a quarter of a
league behind our rereward, marching with his force softly and close together,
which was a marvelous pleasant sight to behold; the King was forced to turn
his back to his vawarde, and his face toward his enemies, and so to approach
nearer to his rereward, and retire from his vaward. I was then with the
Cardinal attending an answer of our letter, but I told him I perceived it was
no time to stay any longer there; wherefore I departed being hard by the
Swissers, and went to the King. But before I could come to him, I lost a page
who was my cousin german, and a groom of my chamber, and a lackey which
followed a pretty way behind me, so that I saw not when they were slain.

I had not riden above a hundred paces, when suddenly a cry began to arise in
the self same place from whence I was departed, or but little beyond. For you
shall understand that their Estradiots at this very instant came to our
carriage, an^ entered into the Kings lodging where were three or four houses,
in the which they slew or hurt four or five soldiers, but the rest escaped,
they slew also about an hundred of our straglers, and put our carriage in great
disorder. When I came to the King, I found him dubbing of knights, but because
the enemies were at hand, we caused him to cease, and then I hard the bastard
of Bourbon named Matthew (who was in good credit with the King) and one Philip
de Moulin (a poor gentleman but very valiant) call the King, saying, pass
forth sir, pass forth: whereupon he went into the forefront of his battle,
and placed himself before his standard, so that (the bastard of Bourbon
excepted) I saw none nearer the enemies then himself. Our enemies marched
lustely forward, in such sort that within less than a quarter of an hour
after my arrival, they were come within a hundred paces of the King, who was
as evil guarded and as evil waited on, as ever was Prince or noble man; but
mauger the devil, he is well defended whom God defends. And sure the prophecy
of the reverend father friar Hierom proved true, who told me (as before you
have heard) that God led him by the hand. His rereward stood upon his right
hand, being recoiled somewhat from him; and the nearest company to him on that
side was the D. of Orleans company, being to the number of 80. lances led by
Robinet of Frainezelles, and Monseur de la Trimoilles company, being about
forty lances, and the hundred Scottish archers of his guard, who thrust
themselves into the press as men of arms. I my self stood upon the left hand
with the gentlemen, pensioners, and servants of the Kings house. This rereward
was led by the Earl of Foix: but as touching the names of the other captains,
I pass them over for brevity.

Within a quarter of an hour after my arrival, the enemies being so near the
King, as you have heard, charged their staves, and began a soft gallop. They
were divided into two troops; one of the which charged the two companies of
our horsemen, and the Scottish archers standing on the Kings right hand; and
the other, the King himself; so that both they and the King were charged
almost at one instant: we that stood upon the left hand charged them upon the
flank greatly to our advantage; and undoubtedly it is impossible for men to
meet roughlier than we met. But the Estradiots that accompanied them, seeing
our mules and carriage fly toward our vaward, and their companions 4 get all
the booty, turned their horses that way, and forsook their men of arms, who
by means thereof were vnfollowed; whereby it manifestly appeered, that God
meant to preserve us: for if these fifteen hundred light horsemen had broken
in amongst us with their Cimeterres (which are terrible swords like to the
Turks) undoubtedly we had been defeated, our number being so small. The
Italian men of arms, immediately after they had broken their staves fled, and
their footmen or the greatest part shrunk aside, and fled also. At the
selfsame time that they charged us, the Earl of Caiazze gave a charge also
upon our vaward, but they met not so roughly as we: for at the very instant
that they should have couched their staves, they began to faint, and disordered
themselves in such sort, that fifteen or twenty of them being scattered
amongst our bands, were taken and slain by our Almaines; the rest were but
easily pursued: for the Marshall of Gie endeavored to keep his forces together,
because he saw yet a great troop of enemies not far from him. Notwithstanding
part of his men followed the chase, and part of the Earl of Caiazzes men that
fled, passed over the place where the Marquis and we had fought, with their
swords in their hands; for they had thrown away their staves. But they that
assailed the King fled immediately after they had charged, and were marvelous
swiftly pursued, for we all followed the chase: part of them took ^way to the
village from whence we were departed, the rest fled the next way to their
camp, we all pursuing them, save the King who staid behind with a few men,
and put himself in great danger, because he followed not after them with us.
One of the first that was slain of their side, was the Lord Rodolph of Mantua,
uncle to the Marquis, who should have sent word to the above named Master
Anthony of Vrbin, when he should march; for they thought that this battle
would have endured as their battles in Italy do; which their error served the
said Master Anthony for a good excuse: but to say the truth, I think he saw
enough to stay him from marching. We had a great number of straglers and
servants following us, all the which flocked about the Italian men of arms
being overthrown, and slew the most of them. For the greatest part of the said
straglers had their hatchets in their hands, wherewith they used to cut wood to
make our lodgings, with the which hatchets they brake the visards of their head
pieces, and then claue their heads, for otherwise they could hardly have been
slain, they were so surely armed; so that there were ever three or four about
one of them. Moreover, the long swords that our archers and servants had, did
that day a great execution. The King tarried upon the place where the charge
was given, accompanied with seven or eight young gentlemen, whom he had
appointed to attend upon him, for neither would he follow the chase, neither
retire to his vaward because it was somewhat far off. He escaped well at the
first encounter, considering that he was one of the foremost, for the bastard
of Bourbon was taken within less then twenty paces of him 5, and led prisoner
to the enemies camp.

The King abode in the said place marvelous weakly accompanied: for he had
with him not a man more than one groom of his chamber called Anthony des
Ambus, a little fellow and evil armed: the rest were scattered here and
there, as himself told me at night even in the presence of those that were
appointed to wait upon him, who deserved great reproach for leaving their
Prince in such estate. Notwithstanding they arrived in time, for a certain
small broken troop of Italian men of arms passing along upon the plain
(where they saw no man stirring) came and assailed the King and this groom of
his chamber: but the King being mounted upon the brauest horse in the world for
a man of his stature, removed to and fro, and desended himself valiantly: and
at that very instant certain of the rest of his men being not far from him
arrived, whereupon the Italians fled, and then the King followed good advise
and retired to his vaward, which had never moved out of their first place.
Thus the King with his battle had good success: and if his vaward had marched
but one hundred paces farther, our enemies whole army had fled. Some said they
ought so to have done, but others held opinion that they did best to stay.

Our company that followed the chase pursued the enemies hard to their camp,
which lay in length almost as far as Fornoue, and not one of us received a blow
save Iulien Bourgneuf, whom I saw fall dead to the ground with a stroke that an
Italian gave him as he passed by (for he was evil armed:) whereupon certain
of us stayed, sayieng, let us return to the King, and with that word all the
whole troop stood still to give their horses breath, which were very weary
because they had chased a great way, and all upon sharp stones. Hard by us
fled a troop of thirty men of arms, whom we let pass quietly fearing to
assail them. When we had brethed our horses, we rid forth a fast trot toward
the King, not knowing what was become of him, but after a while we descried him
a far off. Then caused we our servants to light on foot, and gather up the
lances wherewith the place lay strawed, especially with Bourdonasses, which
were not much worth, for they were hollow and hardly so weighty as a iauelin,
but trimly painted, and by this means we were better furnished of lances than
in the morning. Thus as we rid toward the King, by the way we met a broken
band of the enemies footmen crossing over the field, being of those that had
lien hid among the hills, and had led the Marquis of Mantua upon the King back:
many of them were slain, and the rest escaped, and waded through the river,
and we stayed not long about them. Diverse of our men cried often during the
whole conflict, remember Guynegate, which was a battle lost in Picardie in the
time of K. Lewis the eleventh, against the K. of Romanies 6, through the folly
of our men, who fell to spoil the enemies carriage: notwithstanding in that
battle no whit of their carriage was taken nor spoiled: but in this, their
Estradiots took all our carriage horses, of which notwithstanding they led
away but five and fifty being the best and best covered, namely all the Kings,
and all his chamberlains. They took also a groom of the Kings chamber called
Gabriell, who had about him the ancient jewels of the Kings of France, which
he then carried with him, because the King was there in person. True it is that
a number of coffers were also lost, but they were overthrown and spoiled by
our own men, for we had in our camp a great many varlets and harlots that
stripped the dead bodies, and spoiled all that they could come by, but as
touching the enemies they took only those above rehearsed. There were slain
on both sides (as I have been credibly informed both by them and certain of
our own men) to this number. We lost Julian Bourgneuf, the sergeant porter of
the Kings house, a gentleman of the Kings house, and nine Scottish archers, of
horsemen of our vaward to the number of twenty, and about our carriage three or
four score horse-keepers. And they lost three hundred and fifty men of arms,
slain upon the place: but not one of them was taken prisoner, which chance I
think never happened before in any battle. Of their Estradiots few were slain,
for they turned al to the spoil as you have heard. There died of them in all
three thousand and five hundred men, as diverse of the best of their army have
informed me: others have told me more, but sure they lost many gentlemen: for I
saw my self a role wherein were the names of eighteen gentlemen of good
houses, and among them four or five of the Marquis own name which was
Gonzague, besides the which, the Marquis lost also at the least three score
gentlemen of his own dominions, all the which were horsemen, and not one
footeman among them. It is strange that so many were slain with hand strokes;
for as touching the artillery, I think it slew not ten on both sides. The
fight endured not a quarter of an hour, for so soon as they had broken or
thrown away their lances they fled all: the chase continued about three
quarters of an hour. Their battles in Italy are not fought after this sort,
for they fight squadron after squadron, so that a battle endures there
sometime a whole day, neither party obteining victory.

The flight on their side was great, for three hundred of their men of arms
and the greatest part of their Estradiots fled, some to Rege 7 (being far
thence) and others to Parma, being about eight leagues off 8. In the morning
the very same hour that the two armies joined, the Earl of Petillane and the
Lord Virgile Vrsin escaped from us. The said Virgile went but to a gentleman's
house thereby, where he remained upon his word, but the Earl fled straight to
our enemies, and to say the truth, we did them both great wrong to lead them
with us after this sort. The Earl being a man well known among the soldiers
(for he had always had charge both under the Florentines and under King
Ferrand) began to cry Petillane Petillane, and ran after them that fled above
three leagues, saying that al was theirs, and calling them to the spoil, by
the which means he brought back the greatest part of them, and put them out
of all fear, assuring them upon his word that there was no danger, so that had
it not been for him alone, their whole army had fled: for the word of such a
man newly departed from us was no small stay to them. The said Earl (as
himself has since told me) gave advise to assail us again the same night,
but they would not harken thereunto. The Marquis has also since communed with
me of these affairs chalenging this advise as his: but to say the truth had it
not been for the Earl alone they had all fled the same night.

When we were come to the King, we discovered a great number of men of arms
and footmen standing yet in order of battle without their camp, whose heads
and lances only we could descrie. They had stood there all the day, and never
moved from that place, notwithstanding they were further from us than they
seemed: for they and we could not have joined without passing the river, which
was risen and arose howerly, because all the day it had thundered, lightened,
and rained terribly, especially during the battle and the chase. The K.
debated with his captains whether we should assail these new discovered
enemies or not: with him were three Italian knights, one named Master John
James of Treuoul, who is yet living, and behaved himself that day like a
worthy gentleman; another Master Francis Secco a valiant knight, in pay with
his Florentines, and of the age of 72. years; and the third Master Camillo
Vitelly, who with his three brethren was in service with the King, and came
unsent for from Ciuita de Castello, as far as Serzane (which is a great
journey) to be at this battle: but perceiving that he could not overtake the
King with his company, he came himself alone. These two latter gave advice to
march against these enemies newly discovered: but the Frenchmen were of a
contrary opinion, saying, that they had done enough, and that it was late, and
time to make their lodgings. But the said Master Francis Secco maintained
stoutly his opinion, showing people that passed to and fro upon the high way
that leads to Parma (the nearest town that the enemies could retire into)
whom he affirmed to be enemies flying thither or returning thence, and indeed
he said true, as we understood afterward; and sure both his words and
countenance showed him to be a hardy and a wise knight. For all their captains
confessed to me (yea some of them before the Duke of Milan himself) that if we
had marched forward, they had all fled; by means whereof we should have
obtained the goodliest, honorablest, and profitablest victory that happened in
ten years before: for if a man could have used it well, have made his profit
of it, have behaved himself wisely, and entreated the people gently; the Duke
of Milan by the space of eight days after, should not have had any one place
to hold for him in his country, except the castle of Milan, yea and I doubt
of that too: so desirous were his subjects to rebel. The like would also have
happened to the Venetians, so that the King should not have needed to take care
for Naples: for the Venetians should not have been able to levy a man out of
Venice, Bressa, and Cremone, which is but a small town, because all the rest
that they held in Italy would have revolted. But God had performed that which
Friar Ierom promised, to wit, that the honor of the field should be ours; for
considering our small experience and evil government, we were unworthy of
this good success that God gave us, because we could not then tell how to use
it: but I think if at this present, which is the year of our Lord 1497. the
like victory should happen to the King; he could tell better how to make his
profit thereof.

While we stood debating this matter, the night approached, and the band of our
enemies, which we saw before us, retired into their camp, and we for our part
went and lodged about a quarter of a league from the place of the battle. The
King himself lay in a farm house, being an old beggarly thing;
notwithstanding the barnes about it were full of corn vnthreshed, which I
warrant you our army quickly found. Certain other old houses there were also,
which stood us but in small stead: every man lodged himself as commodiously as
he could; for we had no lodgings made. As touching my self I lay upon the bare
ground under a vine, in a very straight room, having nothing under me, no not
my cloak: for the K. had borrowed mine in the morning, and my carriage was far
off, and it was too late to seek it. He that had meat ate it, but few there
were that had any, unless it were a morsel of bread, snatched out of some of
their servants bosoms: I waited upon the King to his chamber, where he found
certain that were hurt, namely the Seneschall of Lions and others, whom he
caused to be dressed. Himself was merry and made good cheer, and each man
thought himself happy that he was so well escaped: neither were we puffed up
with pride and vaineglorie, as before the battle, because we saw our enemies
encamped so near us. The same night all our Almaines kept the watch, and the
King gave them three hundred crowns; whereupon they kept the watch very
diligently, and struck up their drums bravely.

The Notes.
2 Vicount of Narbonne. Ferron.

2 Rereward after the French corrector, the leading whereof Iouius gives to
two that straue for it. Ferron and our author to Narbonne (otherwise called
Earl of Foix) alone. Annal. Franc. to Monseur de la Trimoille Vicount de
Touars and to Monseur de Guise: but it appears lib. 7. cap. 13. when the K.
thought to have fought with Dom Ferrand at Saint Germain that Monseur de Guise
led the vaward, so that I know not how it is best here to be read.

3 Bourdonasses were holow horsemens staves used in Italy, cunningly painted:
our author himself in this Chapter describes them at large.

4 By their companions he means the Estradiots that had assailed the Kings
corriage at the first.

5 Annal. Franc. write that this bastard Matthew, Monseur de Ligny and Monseur
de Piennes were armed like to the King and continually about him.

6 Of this battle he writes lib. 6. cap. 6.

7 Understand not Rege in Calabria, but Rege near to Parma called in Latin
Regium Lepedi, and I doubt me the unskillful corrector at the first printing of
the work chopped in this parenthesis, supposing the author to mean Rege in
Calabria, wherefore I had rather leave the parenthesis out.

8 The French corrector supposes this number to be also corrupted.

How the Lord of Argenton went himself alone to parle with the enemies when he
saw that those that were appointed to go with him would not go: and how the
King returned safe and sound with his army to the town of Ast. Chap. 7.
THe next morning I determined to continue our treaty of peace, desiring
nothing more than the Kings safe passage. But I could get never a Trumpeter to
go to the enemies camp, partly because nine of theirs were slain in the
battle being unknown, and partly because they had taken one of ours, and
slain another, whom the King (as you have hard) sent to them a little before
the battle began: notwithstanding in the end one went and carried the Kings
safe conduct with him, and brought me one from them to commune in the midway
between both the armies, which me thought was a hard matter to be brought to
pass, but I would not seem to draw back nor make difficulty therein. The
King named the Cardinal of Saint Malo, the Lord of Gie Marshall of France,
and the Lord of Piennes his Chamberlain to accompany me: and they named for
them, the Marquis of Mantua General of the Venetians army, the Earl of
Caiazze (who not long before had taken part with us, and was captain of the
forces the Duke of Milan had there) and Master Luques Pisan, and Master
Melchior Treuisan prouisors of the seniorie of Venice. We approached so near
them, that we might easily descry them four upon the plain. The river ran
between us and them, which was risen exceedingly since the day before: on their
side there was not one man without their camp but themselves only, neither
any on ours, but only we and our watch which stood over against them. We sent
a herault to them to know whether they would pass the river, whereunto me
thought it a hard matter to persuade either party, for I supposed both parties
would make difficulty therein as well appeered by them: for they answered that
the place of communication was appointed in the midway between both the
armies, and that they were come already more than the half way: wherefore they
would not pass the river, nor put themselves in such danger being all the
principal of their army. They also of our side alleged the like doubts,
making no less account of their persons than the others. Wherefore they willed
me to go to them, giving me no instructions for my direction: I answered that I
would not go alone, but would have some body with me to testify of all that
should be done. Wherefore being accompanied with one Master Robertet the Kings
Secretary, and a servant of mine own, and an herault, I passed the river: for
notwithstanding that I well perceived I should do no good, yet thought I by this
means to acquit my self toward them, being come thither by my procurement.
When I came to them, I told them they were not come half the way according to
their promise, wherefore I desired them, at the least to come to the rivers
side, assuring my self that if we were once so high together, we should not
depart without communication. They answered, that the river was so broad, and
ran with so great violence and noise, that no talk could be heard from the one
side to the other; wherefore they would go no nearer to parliament, neither
could I by any means bring them one foot further: but they willed me to make
some ouerture, which I had no commission to do. Wherefore I answered, that
alone I could do nothing; but if they would propound any conditions of peace, I
would make report thereof to the King. While we were in this communication, one
of our heraults arrived, who brought me word that the Lords above named that
had accompanied me, were ready to depart, and willed me to make what ouerture I
thought good; which I refused to do, because they understood further of the
Kings pleasure than I did: for they were nearer him than I was, and had also
talked with him in his ear at our departure: notwithstanding as touching these
affairs which I now speak of, I understood what was to be done in them as
well as the best of them. The Marquess of Mantua entered into great
communication with me of the battle, and asked me (if he had been taken)
whether the King would have slain him. I answered, no; but have entertained
him well, alleging that he had good cause to love him, seeing the honor he had
won by his assailing him. Then he recommended unto me the prisoners we had,
especially his uncle the Lord Rodolph, whom he supposed to be yet living: but I
knew well the contrary; notwithstanding I answered, that all the prisoners
should be well entreated, and recommended in like manner to him the bastard of
Bourbon whom they had taken. Small entertainment would serve all the prisoners
we had; for we had none, which I suppose never happened before in any battle.
But the said Marquess lost there of his kinsmen to the number of seven or
eight, and of his own company at the least sixscore men of arms. This talk
being ended, I took my leave of them, saying, that before night I would
return again; whereupon we made truce till night.

At my return to the King with the said Secretary, they asked me what news,
and the King sat in counsel in a poor chamber where nothing was concluded,
but each man beheld other. The King talked with the Cardinal in his ear, and
afterward bad me return again to the enemies to see what they would say. But
because this communication of peace proceeded of me, the enemies looked that I
should make some ouerture and not they. Afterward the Cardinal bad me conclude
nothing, but that speech was needless, for I was not like to conclude any
thing, because they gave me no direction: notwithstanding I would not reply to
the Kings commandment, nor break off my journey; for besides that I was sure
to do no harm, I was in some hope to gather somewhat by our enemies
countenances, who undoubtedly were more afraid than we, and happily might pass
some speeches that would turn both the parties to good. Wherefore I took my
journey thitherward, and came to the rivers side almost at night, where one of
their trumpeters met me, and advertised me that the four above named sent me
word to pass no further that night, because their watch was already set, being
altogether of Estradiots, who knew not one man from another, wherefore I might
happily endanger my self, if I passed further: notwithstanding the trumpeter
offered to tarry with me all night, to the end he might convey me thither the
next morning: but I sent him back again, saying that the next morning I would
return to the rivers side where I willed him to tarry me, or if the K. should
otherwise determine, I promised to send thither a herald to advertise them
thereof; for I would not bring this trumpeter into our camp, partly because I
would not have him privy to our actions there that night: and partly because I
knew not what the King meant to do, for I saw whispering in his ear, which
put me in some doubt, wherefore I returned to advertise the King what I had
done.

Every man supped with that he could get, and slept upon the ground. Soon
after midnight I repaired to the Kings chamber, where I found his chamberlaines
ready to mount on horseback, who told me that the King would depart with all
speed toward Ast, and the Marchioness of Montferrates territories, willing me
to stay behind, to hold the Parliament according to my promise: but I made my
excuse, saying, that I would not willingly kill my self, but be on horseback
with the foremost. Soon after the King arose and heard mass, and mounted on
horseback. Not past an hour before day, a trumpeter sounded Bon guet, but at
our dislodging nothing was sounded, neither needed it, for every man was in a
readiness. Notwithstanding this was sufficient to have put the whole army in
fear, at the least those that were acquainted with the wars: for besides this
we turned our backs to our enemies, seeking wholly our own saftety, which is
a dangerous matter in an army. Further, the ways at our departure from our
lodging were very cumbersome, in such sort that we were forced to march over
mountains, and through woods, and by-waies, for we had no guides to lead us:
my self heard the soldiers ask the ensign bearers, and him that executed the
office of Master of the horse, where the guides were, who answered that there
were none. To say the truth we needed none, for as God alone had guided the
army at our going forth: even so (according to Friar Hieromes prophecy)
meant he to do at our return: otherwise it is not to be thought that such a
prince would have ridden in the night without a guide, in a place where ynow
might have been had. But God showed yet a manifester token that he meant to
preserve us, for our enemies understood nothing of our departure till the
afternoon, but waited for this parlamenting I had begun: besides that, the
river was risen so high, that it was four of the clock at after noone before
any man durst adventure over to follow us, and then passed the Earl of Caiazze
with two hundred Italian light horse, in such danger because of the force of
the water, that one or two of his men were drowned, as himself afterward
confessed. We traveled over hills and through woods, and were constrained by
the space of six miles to march one by one after another in the narrow ways,
and then came we to a goodly large plain, where our vaward, artillery, and
carriage lay, which seemed so great a band a far off, that at the first we
stood in fear of them, because Master John James of Trenoules ensign was
square and white, like to the Marquis of Mantuas the day of the battle. The
said vaward was in like manner afeard of our rereward, which they saw a far
off forsake the high way to come the next way to them, whereupon both they and
we set our selves in order of battle: but this fear soon ended, for the
scoutes issued forth on both sides, and discried one an other incontinent.
From thence we went to refresh us at Bourg Saint Denis, where we our selves
made an alarm of purpose to retire our Almains out of the town, least they
should have spoiled it. Thence we removed and lodged all night at Florensole,
the second night we encamped near to Plaisance, and passed the river of
Trebia, leaving on the other side of the river two hundred lances, all our
Swissers, and all the artillery except six pieces, which the King passed over
with him. For he had given this order, to the end he might be the better and
more commodiously lodged, thinking to command them to pass at his pleasure,
because the river is commonly very shallow, especially at that time of the
year: notwithstanding about ten of the clock at night, it arose so high that
no man could pass over it, neither on horseback nor on foot, neither could
the one company have succored the other, which was a great danger, considering
how near our enemies were to us. All that night both they and we sought to
remedy this mischief, but no help could be found till the water fell of it
self, which was about five of the clock in the morning, and then we stretched
coardes from the one side to the other to help over the footmen, who waded in
the water up to their necks: immediately after them passed also our horsemen
and our artillery. This was a sudden and dangerous adventure, considering the
place where we were, for our enemies lay hard by us, I mean the garrison of
Plaisance, and the Earl of Caiazze, who was entered in thither, because
certain of the citizens practiced to put the town into the Kings hands, under
the title of the young Duke son to John Galeas, Duke of Milan that last died,
as before you have heard. And undoubtedly if the King would have given ear to
this practice, a great number of towns and noble men would have revolted by
Master John James of Treuoules means: but he refused so to do, because of the
favor he bare the D. of Orleans his cousin, who was already entered into
Nouarre, although to say the truth on the other side he desired not greatly to
see his said cousin so mighty, wherefore he was well content to let this matter
pass as it came. The third day after our departure from the place of the
battle the K. dined at the castle S. John and lodged all night in a wood. The
fourth day he dined at Voghera, and lay that night at Pontcuron. The fifth day
he lodged near to Tortone and passed the river of Scriuia which Fracasse
defended with the garrison of Tortone, being under his charge for the D. of
Milan. But when he understood by those that made the K. lodging that he would
only pass without doing harm to any man, he retired again into the town, and
sent us word that we should have as great plenty of victuals as we would; which
promise he also performed: for all our army passed hard by the gate of
Tortone, where the said Fracasse came forth to welcome the King, being armed,
but accompanied only with two men: he excused himself very humbly to the
King, that he lodged him not in the town, and sent out great store of
victuals, which refreshed well our army, and at night came also himself to the
Kings lodging. For you shall understand, that he was of the house of S. Seuerin,
brother to the Earl of Caiazze and Master Galeas, and had not long before been
in the Kings service in Romania, as you have heard. From thence the King
removed to Nice de la Paille in the Marquisat of Montferrat, whereof we were
right glad, because we were then in safety, and in our friends country. For
these light horsemen that the Earl of Caiazze led, were continually at our
back, and traueiled us maruellously the three or four first days, because
our horsemen would not put themselves behind to make resistance: for the
nearer we approached to the place of safety, the more unwilling were our men to
fight; and some say, such is the nature of us French men. Wherefore the
Italians write in their histories, that the French men at their arrival are
better than men; but at their return worse than women. The first point
undoubtedly is true: for they are the roughest men to encounter with in the
world, I mean the horsemen: but all men at their return from an enterprise
are less courageous than at their departure from their houses. Now to
proceed, our backs were defended by three hundred Almaines, having among them
a great band of harquebusiers on foot, with whom also a number of
harquebusiers on horseback were joined: these made their Estradiots, being but
few in number, to retire. Further, notwithstanding that their whole army which
had fought with us, marched after us as fast as they might, yet could they not
overtake us, both because they were departed from the place of the battle a
day after us; and also because of their barded horses, so that we lost not one
man upon the way. The said army never came within a mile of us; wherefore
seeing they could not overtake us, and peradventure not greatly desirous so to
do, they marched straight toward Nouarre, whither both the Duke of Milan and
the Venetians had already sent certain bands, as before you have heard. But if
they could have overtaken us near to the places of our retrait, peradventure
they might have sped better than in the valley of Fornoue.

I have showed before sufficiently in diverse places how God guided this
enterprise, but yet for further proof thereof, a word or two more. You shall
understand therefore, that notwithstanding that from the day of the battle
till our arrival at the said place of Nice de la Paille, the lodgings were
unorderly and unequally made; yet every man lodged with patience as
commodiously as he could, without strife or contention. Of victuals we had
great lack: notwithstanding they of the country brought us some, who might
easily have poisoned us if they would, both in their meats and wines, and also
in their wels and waters, which were dried up sometimes in a moment, because
they were but small springs. If they had minded to have poisoned them, they
would sure have done it; but because they did it not, it is to be thought that
our Savior and redeemer Jesus Christ took from them all desire to do it. I
saw such thirst in our army, that a number of footmen drank of stinking
puddles in the villages through the which we passed. Our iourneies were long,
and our drink foul standing water, which notwithstanding our men were so
greedy of, that they ran into the pooles up to the girdlestead to drink. For
you shall understand, that a number of people followed us, being no men of war,
because our carriage was marvelous great. The King departed from his lodging
every morning before day, and I remember not that ever he had guide. Moreover,
he rode till noone before he baited; and every man made provision for himself,
and looked to his own horse, and was forced to provide prouender for him, and
to bear it to him in his arms, as my self did twice; and two days I ate
nothing but naughty black bread: yet was I none of those that stood in most
need. Sure one thing was especially to be commended in this army, to wit,
that never man complained of necessity, yet was this the miserablest voyage
that ever I saw; notwithstanding that I have been in diverse sharp and hard
voiages with Charles Duke of Burgundy. We marched no faster than the great
artillery, the mending whereof often troubled us: besides that, we lacked
horses to draw it; but at all times when we stood in need, we borrowed of the
gentlemen in our army, who willingly lent theirs; so that there was not one
piece nor one pound of powder lost. And I think never man saw artillery of
such greatness pass so speedily over such places as this did. All this disorder
both in our lodgings and all other things, happened not for lack of wise and
expert men in the camp, but it was their chance to have least credit at that
time; for the King was young and wedded to his own will, as before you have
heard. To conclude therefore, it seemed that our Lord Jesus Christ would, that
the honor of this voyage should be attributed wholly to him. The seventh day
after our departure from the place of the battle, we marched from Nice de la
Paille, and encamped all together hard by Alexandria; our watch that night
being very strong. The next morning before day we departed and went to Ast: the
King and his household lodged in the town, but the soldiers encamped without:
we found the said town of Ast furnished of all kind of victuals, wherewith the
whole army was well refreshed, which undoubtedly stood in great need thereof,
because they had endured great hunger, thirst and heat, and lacked sleep;
besides that, their apparel was all tottered and torn. Immediately after the
Kings arrival thither, before I slept, I sent a gentleman called Philip de la
Coudre (who sometime had been my servant, and served then the Duke of Orleans)
to Nouarre, where the said Duke was besieged by his enemies, as you may
understand by that which is above rehearsed: but the siege was not yet so
straight but that men might pass in and out, because the enemies only endeavor
was to famish the town. I advertised the Duke by this gentleman, of diverse
treaties that were entertained between the King and the Duke of Milan, in one
of the which my self negotiated by the Duke of Ferraraes means; wherefore I
advised him to repair to the King, having first assured his men whom he should
leave behind him, either shortly to return, or bring force to levy the
siege. Within the said town were with him to the number of 7500. soldiers both
French and Swissers, being as goodly a band, so many for so many, as ever was
seen. The King the next day after his arrival, was advertised both by the
said Duke of Orleans and others, that the two armies were joined together
before Nouarre: wherefore the said Duke desired aid, because his victuals
daily diminished; for the which they had given no order at their first entry
into the town. For they might then have recovered ynow in the towns about,
especially corn; and if their provision had been made in time, and well looked
to, they should never have been forced to yield the town: for if they could
have held it but one month longer, they had come forth with honor, and their
enemies departed with shame.

How the King sent ships to the sea to succor the castles of Naples, and why
the said castles could not be succored. Chap. 8.
AFter the King had reposed himself a few days in Ast, he removed to
Thurin, dispatching at his departure from Ast one of the stewards of his house
called Peron de Bache with a commission to arm certain ships to the sea 1, to
succor the castles of Naples which held yet for us. The said Peron did as he
was commanded, and appointed monseur d'Arban Admiral of the Fleet, which
sailed as far as the city of Pruce: 2 where (our men being within the view of
our enemies:) a sudden tempest arose which would not suffer the two armies to
join, by means whereof this Navy did no service: for the said d' Arban
returned to Ligorne 3, where the most part of his men fled to land and
abandoned their ships. But the enemies many came to the haven of Bougen 4 near
to Plambin, whence it departed not the space of two months, so that our men
might without all danger have succored the said castles: for the nature of
this haven of Bougen is such, that a ship cannot come forth of it but with one
wind which blows seldom in winter. The said Arban was a valiant soldier and
a very good sea man 5.

While the King lay at Thurin, diverse treaties were entertained between him and
the Duke of Milan: in one of the which the Duches of Sauoy was a dealer, she
was daughter to the Marquis of Montferratte, and a widow, and mother to the
young Duke of Sauoy then living. Others negotiated also as well as she: and
among the rest my self labored for conclusion of the peace as before I have
made mention; and the confederats, that is to say, the captains that were in
the enemies camp before Nouarre, desired to deal with me, and sent me a safe
conduct. But envy ever reigns in Princes courts; for the Cardinal so often
above named, overthrew all that I did, and would that the Duches of Sauois
negotiation should go forward, which was committed to the said Cardinals host,
who was Treasurer of Sauoy, a wise man and a faithful servant to his Mistres.
This treaty endured so long without effect that in the end all hope of peace
ceasing, the Bailife of Digeon was sent ambassador into Swisserland to leuy
there five thousand men.

I have made mention already how the Kings Navy that departed from Nice in
prouence to succor the castles of Naples, could not succor them for the
reasons there rehearsed. Wherefore the Lord of Montpensier and the other
gentlemen that were with him in the castles understanding of this misfortune,
espied a convenient time when the army that the King left behind him in diverse
parts of the realm lay near to the said castles, and by help thereof salied
forth (leaving within force sufficient for their defense according to the
proportion of their victuals which was very small) and departed themselves with
two thousand and five hundred soldiers, appointing Ognas and two other
gentlemen captains of the castles. The said L. of Montpensier, the Prince of
Salerne, the Seneschall of Beaucaire, and the rest that were with them departed
to Salerne, for the which cause King Ferrand said, that he might lawfully put
to death the hostages delivered to him a few days before, whose names were
these, the Lord of Alegre, one called de la Marche-d' Ardaine, the Lord de la
Chapelle d'Aniou, one named Roquebertin Catelin, and one Genly: for you shall
understand that not past three months before, the said King Ferrand was entered
into Naples by intelligence, or rather through the negligence of our men, who
understood of all their practices in the town, and yet never sought to
countermine them. But hereof I will write no farther, because I speak but
upon report: for notwithstanding that I had mine intelligence from the
principal of those that were there, yet do I not willingly discourse long of
any matter, that I have not been present at my self. The said K. Ferrand being
in Naples, was advertised that the King was slain at the battle of Fornoue,
as were our men also within the castle by the Duke of Milans letters, to the
which credit was given: notwithstanding that they reported no thing but lies.
And thereupon the Coulonnois (whose manner is, always to turn with the
strongest) revolted incontinent from us, though sundry ways bound to the King,
as before you have heard. Wherefore our men (partly through these untrue
reports, but especially because a great number of them were retired into the
castle, being utterly unfurnished of victuals, and partly also because they
had lost their horses, and all their goods within the town:) made a
composition, the sixth day of October in the year 1495. after they had been
besieged three months and fowerteen days, promising if they were not
succored within a certain space, to depart into Prouence, and yield the
castles without making further war, either by sea or land upon the realm of
Naples; for the performance of which conditions they delivered these hostages
above named; and yet within twenty days after the composition, departed as
you have heard: for the which cause King Ferrand said that they had broken the
composition in that they departed without leave: and notwithstanding that our
men maintained the contrary, yet were the hostages in great danger and not
without cause. For although I will not deny but that our men did wisely to
depart notwithstanding the composition; yet had they done much better if the
day of their departure they had yielded the castles for their hostages safety,
and received again the said hostages. For the castles held but twenty days
after they were departed, partly for lack of victuals; and partly because they
despaired of succors. To conclude, the loss of the castle of Naples, was the
loss of the whole realm.

The Notes.
1 This Peron was sent to Nice, being a haven town in Prouence to prepare
this navy.

2 I suppose this to be some haven town not far from Naples, or rather think
it should be read the I Will of Prusse, whereof mention is made cap. 14. which
Guicciar. calls the I Will of Poreze.

3 To the I Will of Elbe, Guicciar.

4 The place is corrupted, for this haven is afterward called Bengon:
wherefore the French Corrector reads it (as Blondus and the description of
Italy lead him) Porto Barato pres Piombino.

5 Guicciar. says, Arban was unskillful on the sea, and I doubt this place be
corrupted here.

Of the great famine and misery the Duke of Orleans and his men were in at
Nouarre: of the Marchiones of Montferrats death, and likewise of Monseur de
Vendosmes: and how after long deliberation the King inclined to peace, to save
those that were besieged. Chap. 9.
THe King being at Thurin (as you have heard) and at Quiers, (whither he went
sometime to solace himself) attended daily for news of the Almains whom he
had sent for, and traveled to recover the Duke of Milan, whose freindship he
much desired, neither cared he greatly for the Duke of Orleans success, who
began now to be sore distressed for victuals, and wrote daily for succors
because the enemies were approached nearer the town. Besides that their force
was increased with a thousand Almain horsemen, and eleven thousand footmen
called lance Knights, levied in the King of Romans dominions: the horsemen
being led by Master Frederic Capelare of the county of Ferrette (a valiant
knight who long had been trained up both in France and Italy,) and the
footmen by a courageous knight of Austriche called Master George d'Abecfin 1,
the self same that took Saint Omer for the King of Romans. The King
therefore seeing his enemies forces daily to increase, and that no honorable
end could be made, was advised to remove to Verceil, there to devise some way
to save the Duke of Orleans and his company, who (as before you have heard) had
given no order at all for their victuals at their first entry into Nouarre.
And sure the Duke should have done much better, in following the advice I gave
him at the Kings return to Ast, as before is mentioned; which was to depart
out of Nouarre, putting all that were unable to do service out of the town,
and to repair himself to the King: for his presence would much have furthered
his affairs, at the least those that he had left behind him, should not have
suffered such extreme famine as they did: for he would have made a composition
sooner, when he had seen no remedy. But the Archbishop of Rouen, who had been
with him in Nouarre from the very beginning; and for the furtherance of his
affairs was come to the King, and present at the debating of all matters; sent
him word daily not to depart, because shortly he should be succored, grounding
himself wholly upon the Cardinal of Saint Malos promise, who had all the
credit with the King. Good affection caused him to write thus, but I was well
assured of the contrary. For no man would return to the battle, unless the
King went in person; and as touching him he desired nothing less: for this was
but a private quarrel for one town which the Duke of Orleans would needs
retain, and the Duke of Milan needs have restored, because it is but ten
leagues from Milan; so that of necessity one of them must have had all. For
there are in the Duchy of Milan nine or ten great cities, the one near to the
other. Further, the Duke of Milan said, that in restoring Nouarre, and not
demanding Genua, he would do any thing for the King. We sent meal oftentimes
to Nouarre, whereof the half was ever lost upon the way; and once sixty men
of arms were defeated going thither, being led by a young gentleman of the
Kings house, named Chastillon: some of them were taken, some entered the town,
and the rest hardly escaped. It is impossible to express the great misery of
our men within Nouarre; for every day some died of famine, and two parts of
them were sick, so that pitious letters came from thence in cipher, though
with great difficulty. They received ever fair promises, and all was but
abuse. But those that governed the Kings affairs desired the battle, not
considering that no man was of that opinion but themselves: for all the best
men of war in the army, namely, the Prince of Orange lately arrived, and to
whom the K. gave great credit in martial affairs, and all the other captains,
desired to make a good end by treaty. For winter approached, we were
unfurnished of money, the number of the French was small, and many of them
sick; so that they departed daily, some with the Kings leave, and some without
leave: but notwithstanding all these inconveniences, all the wise men in the
camp could not dissuade those above mentioned, from sending word to the Duke
of Orleans not to depart the town; whereby undoubtedly they greatly endangered
him. And this they did, because they trusted upon the great force of Almaines,
whereof the Bailife of Digeon assured them; to whom also certain of them sent
word to bring as many as he could levy. To be short, their company was
divided, and every man said and writ what him listed.

Those that would have no peace, nor meeting to treat thereof, alleged that
the enemies ought to make the first ouuerture, and not the K. but they on the
other side said, that they would not first begin: in the mean time the misery
of our men in Nouarre daily increased, in such sort, that now their letters
made mention only of those that died daily for hunger, and that they could hold
the town but ten days, and afterward eight days, yea and once they came to
three days, but they had first passed their day before prefixed. To be short,
so great extremity has not been seen of long time, no I am sure that a
hundred years before we were borne, never men sustained so great famine as
they.

In the mean time died the Marchioness of Montferrat (a great friend to the
French,) whereupon some strife arose in that country for the government, the
which on the one side the Marquis of Saluce demanded, and on the other the Lord
Constantine uncle to the said Marchioness, who was a Greek, and she a
Greekesse, daughter to the King of Seruia, but the Turk had destroyed them
both. The said Lord Constantine had fortified himself in the castle of Casal,
and had in his hands the late Marquis his two sons, begotten of this wise and
beautiful Lady, the which died the 29. year of her age, her eldest son being
but nine years old. Other particular men also aspired to the government, so
that great part taking arose about that matter in our camp. The King commanded
me to to thither, and determine the controversy for the childrens safety, and
to the contentation of the greatest part of the people. For he feared that this
variance would make them call the Duke of Milan into their country, greatly to
our coffeehouse: for the friendship of this house of Montferrat stood us in
great stead. I was loath to depart before I had brought into better tune those
that contraried the peace: for I considered both the inconveniences above
rehearsed, and also that winter approached, and feared least these Prelates
should persuade the King to adventure another battle, whose power was small,
unless great force of Swissers happened to come, and though so many came as they
vaunted of, yet seemed it to me a dangerous case to put the King and his estate
into their hands. Further, our enemies were mighty, and lodged in a strong
place, and well fortified. Wherefore all these points being well weighed, I
adventured to persuade the King not to hazard his person and estate for a
trifle. I desired him to remember the great danger he was in at Fornoue, which
could not then be avoided because necessity forced him to fight: but now (I
said) there was no such necessity. I advised him further, not to refuse a good
end, because of this fond objection, that he ought not first to break the ice,
for if it so pleased him, I would find means that ouuertures should be made
in such sort, that the honor of both parties should be saved. He bad me repair
to the Cardinal; and so I did: but the Cardinal gave me strange answers, and
desired the battle, assuring himself of the victory: and further alleging
that the Duke of Orleans had promised him ten thousand ducats of yearly
revenues for one of his sons, if he obtained the Duchy of Milan. The next
day, as I went to take my leave of the King to depart to Casal (being distant
from thence about a days journey and a half) I met with Monseur de la
Trimoille by the way, whom I advertised of my communication had with the King:
and because he was near about him, I asked his advise whether I should press
forward the matter, whereunto he earnestly persuaded me, for all men desired to
repair home. The King was in a garden, and when I came to him, I began to
persuade with him (as the day before) in presence of the Cardinal, who
answered me that it appertained to him being a church man, to be the first
moouer of the King to peace: whereunto I replied that if he would not, I would.
For I perceived well that both the King and those that were nearest about him
desired to return home. Then I took my leave, and at my departure told the
Prince of Orange (who had the principal charge of the army) that if I entered
into any communication of peace, I would address my self wholly to him. This
being done I took my journey toward Casall, where I was well received by the
whole kindred of this house of Montferrat, and found the greatest part of them
inclined to the Lord Constantine, whose government was thought by them all most
convenient for the childrens safety, because he could pretend no title to the
succession as the Marquis of Saluce did. I assembled by the space of certain
days both the Nobles of the country, the Spiritual men, and the Burgesses of
the good towns, and at the request of them, at the least the greatest part of
them, declared the Kings pleasure to be, that the Lord Constantine should
remain governor. For I was sure they would not withstand the Kings
commandment, both because of the force he had then on that side the
mountains, and also because of the good affection the whole country bears
to the house of France.

About three days after my arrival at Casal, the Marquess of Mantua the
Venetians General, sent the steward of his house thither to condole the late
deceased Marchioness death: for the said Marquess was of kin to this house of
Montferrat. The same Steward and I entered into communication how we might
agree these two armies without battle: for both the parties disposed
themselves to fight, and the King lay in camp near to Verceil, but to say the
truth he did but pass the river only 2 and lodge his camp, which was utterly
unprovided of tents and pauilions: for our men had brought forth but few with
them, and those few also were lost. Moreover the ground was wet, both because
winter approached, and because the country lies low. The King lodged in his
camp but one night, and the next day returned to the town: but the Prince of
Orange abode still with the army, so did also the Earl of Foix, and the Earl
of Vendosme, who fell into a flux there whereof he died, which sure was great
pity: for he was a goodly gentleman, young, and wise, and was come thither in
post, because the brute ran that there we should fight. For you shall
understand that he had not been with the King in this voyage into Italy.
Besides these the Marshall of Gie abode also in the camp and diverse other
captains, but the greatest force were the Almaines that had been with the
King in this voyage: for the French men would by no means lodge abroad, the
town being so near; besides that, diverse of them were sick, and many
returned home some with leave, and some without leave. Nouarre was distant from
our camp ten great Italian miles, containing six French leagues at the lest,
the way is cumbersome: for the ground is tough and soft as in Flaunders,
because of ditches that are on both sides of the way, much deeper than the
ditches of Flaunders. In winter the ways there are very foul, and in summer
marvelous dustie. Moreover, between our camp and Nouarre, there was a little
place which we held, called Bourg, about a league from us, and another that
they held about a league from their camp, called Camarian. But the waters were
risen so high, that a man could hardly pass between us and them.

The Marquess of Mantuas steward above mentioned that was come to Casall and
I, continued still our communication of peace, and diverse reasons I alleged to
him to persuade his Master to shun the battle. First, I put him in mind of
the great danger he had been in at Fornoue: secondarily, I told him that he
fought for them that never had advanced him, notwithstanding the great
services he had done them: wherefore his best way should be to incline to
peace, which I for my part promised to further on our side as much as in me
lay. He answered, that his Master desired nothing more than peace, but that we
must make the first motion thereof, as word had been sent me heertofore,
considering that their league, that is to say, the Pope, the Kings of Romans
and Spain, the Venetians, and the Duke of Milan were more worthy than the
King alone. I answered, that to make such a ceremony about so small a trifle,
was mere folly: notwithstanding if any ceremony were to be observed, that
the King ought to have the pre-eminence and honor thereof, considering that
himself was there in person, and the others had but their lieutenants there.
But to avoid all such fond cauillation, I offered that he and I jointly as
mediators (if he so thought good) would break the ice, so that I were sure his
Master the Marquess of Mantua would agree thereunto, and proceeded accordingly.
Whereupon we concluded, that the next day I should send a trumpeter to their
camp, by whom I should write to Master Lucas Pisan, and Master Melchior
Treuisan the two Venetian Prouisors, the which are officers appointed to
consult with their captains, and to provide things necessary for their army.
According to the which resolution, the next morning I writ unto them the effect
of that I had said before to the steward: for I had good color to continue
still a mediator, because I had promised so to do at my departure from Venice.
Besides that, I was sure the King desired peace, and me thought that also our
affairs required it. Lastly, there are ever men ynow to break off a good
appointment, but few that have skill and will withal to travel for the pacifying
of so great a controversy, nor that will endure so many hard speeches as are
used of them that deal in such affairs; for in great armies all are not of
one humor. The said Prouisors were glad of these news, and promised that I
should shortly have answer of my letter: whereof forthwith they sent word to
Venice in post, and received answer with great expedition from the Seniorie,
and not long after, sent an Earl that served the Duke of Ferrara, to our
camp. The said Duke had men in their army; for his eldest son was in pay
with the Duke of Milan 3, but another of his sons with the King our Master.
This Earls name was Albertin, and he pretended openly, that the occasion of
his arrival was to visit Master John James of Treuoul, with whom he had a
son in service 4. He addressed himself to the Prince of Orange, according to
the stewards agreement and mine at our departure from Casal, and advertised him
that he had a commission from the Marquess of Mantua, the Prouisors, and the
other captains of their army, to demand a safe conduct for the said
Marquess and others, to the number of fifty horses, to come and treat with
such as it should please the King to appoint; for they acknowledged that it was
reason they should first come to the King and his Commissioners, and declared
also that they would do him that honor. Afterward the said Earl desired to
commune with the King apart: which his request being granted; he then
counseled him not to make peace, reporting our enemies army to be in so great
fear, that shortly they would raise their siege and depart: by which words he
seemed rather desirous to break off the treaty than to further it;
notwithstanding that his commission openly were such as you have heard. At this
communication M. John James of Treuoul was present, who because he was great
enemy to the Duke of Milan, would also gladly have broken off the treaty. But
above all others, the Duke of Ferrara the said Earl Albertins Master (being
newly arrived at the Duke of Milans camp, who had married his daughter)
desired war; for he was great enemy to the Venetians, because they withheld
from him diverse countries, namely, the Polesan and others. After the King had
communed with this Earl, he sent for me, and debated with his Counsel,
whether he should grant this safe conduct or not. Those that would gladly have
broken off the treaty, as Master John James, and others (who spoke in favor of
the Duke of Orleans, as they pretended) desired the battle, saying, that they
were sure the enemies would shortly dislodge because they starued for hunger:
but the greatest part of those that gave this advise were clergy men, who
would not have been at the battle themselves. Diverse others, and my self
among the rest, were of the contrary opinion, saying, that we should sooner
starve for hunger than they, being in their own country. And as touching
their dislodging we answered, that their force was too great to fly for fear
of us, and by that means to cast themselves away. Wherefore these words (we
said) proceeded of men that would have us fight and hazard our lives for their
particular quarrels. To be short, the safe conduct was granted and sent, and
promise made, that the next day by two of the clock at after noone, the Prince
of Orange, the Marshall of Gie, the Lord of Piennes, and my self should meet
the said Marquess and his colleagues between Bourg and Camarian, near to a
town where they kept their watch, to the end we might there commune together.
According to the which appointment the next day thither we went, accompanied
with a good band of soldiers: and there the said Marquess of Mantua and a
Venetian that had the charge of their Estradiots met us 5, and gave us very
courteous language, saying, that for their parts they desired peace. Further,
we there concluded, that to the end we might the more conveniently commune
together, they should send certain Commissioners to our camp, and afterward
the King certain of his to them: whereunto they agreed, and sent unto us the
next day on the Duke of Milans behalf Master Francisco Bernardin Viscomte, and
with him one of the Marquess of Mantuas Secretaries; with whom we above named,
and the Cardinal of S. Malo began to negotiate. They demanded Nouarre where
the Duke of Orleans was besieged, and we Genua, saying, that it was held of the
King by homage, and that the Duke of Milan had taken it by confiscation 6. Then
they made their excuses, saying, that they had attempted nothing against the
King, but only in their own defense, that the Duke of Orleans had taken the
said city of Nouarre with the Kings forces, and had first moved this war: and
further, that they thought their Masters would never agree to such conditions,
but willingly do any other thing to content the King. They were with us two
days and afterward returned again to their camp, whither the Marshall of
Gie, Monseur de Piennes and I, were sent after them, to demand the said city
of Genua; and as touching Nouarre, we offered to deliver it to the King of
Romans men that were in their camp, under the leading of Master George de
Pietreplane, and Master Frederick Capelare, and one named Master Haunce. For we
could not succor it but by battle, and that we desired not: wherefore this
offer we made to discharge our selves of it with honor; for the Duchy of Milan
is held by homage of the Emperor. Diverse messengers ran to and fro between our
camp and theirs, but nothing was concluded. Notwithstanding I lodged every
night in their camp; for the Kings pleasure was that I should so do, because
he would break off no ouerture. In the end all we above named returned again
to them, being accompanied with the President of Gannay, and Moruillier Bailife
of Amiens, which two went with us to pen the articles in Latin; for hitherto I
had negotiated with them in such bad Italian as I had. Our order of proceeding
was this. When we arrived at the Dukes lodging, he and the Duchess came forth
to receive us at the end of a gallerie, and then we entered all before him into
his chamber, where we found two long ranks of chaires, set near together the
one before the other; in the one of the which they sat down, and we in the
other. They sat in this order; first one for the King of Romans, then the
ambassador of Spain, then the Marquess of Mantua, and the two Prouisors of
Venice, and an ambassador of Venice, then the Duke of Milan and his wife, and
last of all the ambassador of Ferrara: of their side none spoke but the Duke
alone, and of our side but one. But our manner is not to proceed so calmly nor
so orderly as they: for we spoke sometimes two or three together; but then the
Duke used to reclaim us, saying ho, one to one. When we came to pen our
articles, all that was agreed upon, was written by one of our Secretaries, and
likewise by one of theirs, which also at our departure the two Secretaries
read, the one in Italian and the other in French, and likewise at our next
meeting, as well to the end that nothing should be altered, as also for the more
expedition: and sure it is a good manner of proceeding in great and weighty
affairs. This treaty endured about fifteen days or more: but it was agreed
the first day, that the Duke of Orleans might depart out of the town, and the
selfsame day we made truce, which continued from day to day till the peace was
concluded. Moreover, the Marquess of Mantua put himself in hostage into the
Earl of Foix his hands, rather for his own pleasure, than for any doubt we
had of the Duke of Orleans person. But they made us first swear that we would
proceed in the treaty of peace uprightly and sincerely without dissimulation,
only to deliver the said Duke.

The Notes.
1 All the Italians name him Georgio di Pietrapiana. The author himself also
afterward names him Petreplane, which variance arises, because the one is his
surname, the other the name of his seniorie.

2 This river is called Seruo, Guicciar. names it Stesie.

3 His eldest sons name was Alfonse. Guicciar.

4 He used this color openly, because the Venetians would not seem first to
seek peace.

5 This Venetians name was Bernarde Contaren. Guicciar.

6 Seeing it was forfeited, it ought of right to have been forfeited into the
Kings hands, of whom it was held, but not to the Duke of Milan.

7 The Marquess of Mantua put himself in hostage, because the Duke of Orleans
was to pass through the Italians camp. Guicciar.

How the Duke of Orleans and his company were delivered by composition out of
their great misery in Nouarre where they were besieged: and of the Swissers
arrival that came to succor the King and the said Duke of Orleans. Chap. 10.
THe Marshall of Gie accompanied with certain of the Duke of Milans servants,
went to Nouarre, and caused the Duke of Orleans with a small train to come
forth of the town, whereof he was right glad. They within the town were so
miserably persecuted with famine and sickness, that the said Marshall was forced
to leave his nephew called Monseur de Romefort in hostage with them, promising
that within three days they should all come forth. You have heard already how
the Bailife of Digeon was sent into Swisserland to leauy five thousand men
among their Cantons, the which were not yet arrived when the D. of Orleans came
forth of Nouarre: for if they had, undoubtedly in mine opinion we had fought.
But notwithstanding that we were certainly advertised that there came a much
greater number than we sent for: yet could we not tarry their coming because
of our men's great distress in Nouarre, where there died at the least two
thousand of famine and sickness: the rest also being so poor and miserable that
they seemed rather dead carcasses than living creatures. And I think verily
(setting the siege of Jerusalem aside) that never men sustained such hunger as
they did. But if at their first entry into the town they had made good
provision of Corn, (whereof the might have recovered plenty in the villages
there about) they should never have been brought to such extremity: but on
the other side, their enemies have been forced to depart with great dishonor.

Three or four days after the Duke of Orleans departure out of Nouarre, it
was agreed by both the parties that all the soldiers should likewise be
permitted to come forth, and the Marquis of Mantua, and Master Galeas of Saint
Seuerin, Captains, the one of the Venetians, the other of the Duke of Milans
forces, were appointed to conueigh them in safety, and so they did. Further,
as touching the town of Nouarre it was put into the citizens hands, who were
sworn to receive into it neither French nor Italian, before the treaty of
peace were fully concluded. Moreover, thirty of our men remained still in the
castle, whom the Duke of Milan permitted to have victuals for their money from
day to day. Undoubtedly a man would never believe the great misery they were
in that came forth of the town, unless he had seen them. Horses they
brought forth but few, for they were in manner all eaten, and there were
hardly six hundred men among them able to do service, notwithstanding that
there came forth 5500. A great number lay by the ways whom the enemies
themselves relieved. I for my part for the value of a crown saved fifty of
them, as they lay succourlesse in a garden near to a little castle that the
enemies held called Camarian, where I caused porrige to be given them, which so
well refreshed them that in the said garden there died but one, and afterward
upon the way about four, for it was ten miles from Nouarre to Verceil; whither
when they arrived, the King bestowed his charity upon them, and commanded eight
hundred francks to be divided among them, and paid them also their wages, as
well the dead as the living, and the Swissers in like manner, of whom about
four hundred died in Nouarre: but notwithstanding all this their good
cheerishing three hundred of them died at Verceil after their return, some by
feeding too greedily after their long famine, and some by sickness, so that a
great number lay dead upon the dunghils of the town. About this present, after
all our men were come forth of the town, except thirty that remained in the
castle: (some of the which also daily sallied forth) arrived the Swissers,
eight or ten thousand of the which came and lodged with us in our camp, where
were already two thousand that had been with the King in this voyage of
Naples: the rest of their company being to the number of ten thousand encamped
near to Verceil. The King was advised not to suffer these two bands to join
together, in the which were to the number of twenty and two thousand men: so
that I think so many soldiers of their country were never together before.
For the opinion of all those that knew their country was, that they left but
few able men behind them, and sure the greatest part of these came whether we
would or not, in such sort that their wives and children would have come with
them, had not the straights at the entry into Piemont been defended to stop
them. A man may doubt whether this their coming proceeded of good affection or
no, because the late King Lewis had bestowed great benefits upon them, and was
the cause of the great honor and renown they have won in the world. True it is
that there were some old men among them, that had borne great good will to King
Lewis: for there came a number of Captains above seauentie two years of age,
the which had served against Duke Charles of Burgundy: but the chief cause of
their coming was couuetousnes and poverty. To say the truth all the able men
that they could levy came, and such a number of tall fellows they were, and
so goodly a band, that me thought it impossible to discomfite them, otherwise
than by famine or cold, or some such distress.

Let us now return to the principal matter, to wit the treaty. The Duke of
Orleans (after he had well refreshed himself eight or ten days, being
accompanied with men of all sorts) supposing his honor to be stained, because
such a number of men as were with him in Nouarre, had suffered themselves
through mere folly to be brought to so great extremity, began to wish that we
might fight, and talked very stoutly of the battle, and one or two more of
his followers. Further, Monseur de Ligny, and the Archbishop of Rouen (who
governed the said Dukes affairs) and two or three other mean personages,
suborned certain Swissers to come and offer themselves to fight. But no reason
could be alleged why we should so do: for the Duke of Orleans had no men in
the town more than the thirty remaining in the castle, so that there was no
cause why we should adventure the battle; for the King had no quarrel,
neither meant to fight but only for saving the said Dukes person and his
servants. Besides this, our enemies were mighty, and it was impossible to
assail them in their camp, as well because they were entrenched round about,
and their trenches full of water, as also because of the strong seat thereof.
Moreover, they had no enemies to invade them but us only, for they stood now
in no more fear of the town. They were above 2800. men of arms barded, and
five thousand light horsemen, and 11500. Almaines led by good captains, to
wit, Master George of Pietreplane, Master Frederick Capelare, and Master
Haunce, besides great force of footmen of their own countries; so that they
seemed to speak but upon a bravery, that said we might take them in their
camp, or that they would fly. Besides all this, another thing there was
greatly to be feared, to wit, least these Swissers if they joined all together,
should take the King and the noble men of the army, being but a handful in
respect of them, and lead them prisoners into their country; for some
appearance there was that they meant so to do, as you shall hear at the
conclusion of the peace.

How the peace was concluded between the King and the Duke of Orleans on the
one side, and the enemies on the other: and of the conditions and articles
thereof. Chap. 11.
WHile these matters were thus debated to and fro among us, in such heat that
the Duke of Orleans and the Prince of Orange fell at variance about them, so
far forth that the Duke gave him the lie: the Marshall of Gie, the Lord of
Piennes, the President Gannay, the Lord Moruillier, the Vidasme of Chartres,
and my self returned to the enemies camp and concluded peace 1: which
notwithstanding that we perceived by manifest tokens to be unlike long to
endure; yet necessity forced us to conclude it, both because of diverse reasons
above alleged, because the winter constrained us thereunto, because we lacked
money: and also to the end we might depart with an honorable peace, the which
should be sent abroad into the world in writing, as the King had concluded with
his Council, the Duke of Orleans being there present. The articles of the
peace were these. That the Duke of Milan should bear the King his faith for
Genua against all men: and that in respect thereof, he should arm two ships to
the sea at his own proper costs and charges, to succor the castles of Naples
which held yet for the King. And further, that the next year he should furnish
the King of three ships, and serve him in person in the conquest of the said
realm, if the King himself happened to return to conquer it again. That he
should give passage to the Kings forces. And if the Venetians would not accept
the peace within two months, but continue to defend the house of Arragon; that
then he should take part with the King against them, and employ his person and
subjects for the Kings service, under this condition, that all that should be
conquered of their dominions should be his. That he should release to the King
fowerscore thousand ducats of the hundred and four and twenty thousand that he
had lent him in this voyage. That for performance of these conditions, he
should deliver to the King two hostages of Genua. That the castle of Genua
should be put into the Duke of Ferraraes hands, as neuter for two years, and
that the Duke of Milan should pay the one half of the garrison within it, and
the King the other: and further, if the said Duke of Milan should refuse to do
such services to the King for Genua, as he was bound to do by this treaty;
that then it should be lawful for the Duke of Ferrara to put the said castle
into the Kings hands. Last of all, that the said Duke of Milan should deliver
to the King two other hostages of Milan. These he delivered, and so would he
also the others of Genua, if the King had not departed so suddenly; but so
soon as he saw him gone, he made delays.

After we were returned from the enemies camp, and had advertised the King
that the Duke of Milan had sworn the treaty, and the Venetians taken two
months respit to accept or refuse it (for more they would not condescend unto)
the King swear it also, and the second day after determined to depart, being
very desirous both he and all the company to return into France: but the
selfsame night the Swissers that were in our camp assembled together each
Canton apart, and struck up their drums, standing in order of battle by their
ensigns, as their manner is in their consultations. All the which I write upon
the report of Lornay, who was then, and long time before had been one of their
captains, and understands well their language, and lodged that night in
their camp, and came and advertised the King of all these their actions.

Some of these Swissers gave advise to take the King and all his company, that
is to say, the principal of the army; others would not agree thereunto, but
gave counsel to demand payment for three months, saying, that the King his
father had promised them this payment as often as they should depart out of
their country with ensign displaied: others were of opinion to take the
principal of the army, not touching the Kings person. This last opinion took
place, so far forth that they began to dispose themselves to execute it, a
great number of their men being already within the town: but before they had
fully concluded, the King departed and went to Trin, a town in the Marquisat
of Montferrat. Sure they did us great wrong, to demand three months payment
(whereas K. Lewis had promised them but one;) especially having done no service.
To be short, in the end we made an agreement with them, but they that had been
with us at Naples, had first taken the Bailife of Digeon and Lornay (who had
ever been their captains) demanding payment of 15. days for their departure.
But the others had three months pay, amounting to five hundred thousand
franks; for the which sum, they were contented to take pledges and hostages.
All this disorder happened by practice of certain of our own men, who moved
them thus to do, because they misliked the peace, as one of their captains
came and told the Prince of Orange, who advertised the King thereof.

When the King arrived at Trin, he sent the Marshall of Gie, the President
Gannay and me, to the Duke of Milan, to desire him to come and speak with him.
We alleged many reasons to persuade him thereunto, saying, that by this means
the peace should be fully confirmed: but he gave forth diverse reasons to the
contrary, and refused so to do; excusing himself upon certain speeches
uttered by Monseur de Ligny (who had advised to take him prisoner when he was
with the King at Pauia) and likewise by the Cardinal, who had all the credit
with the King. But notwithstanding that many foolish words were indeed spoken,
I know not by whom; yet sure I am that at this present the King greatly desired
his friendship. He was in a place called Bolie, and agreed to speak with the
King, so that a grate might be between them built upon a bridge over a river.
Upon receipt of which answer the King departed to Quiers, where he stayed but a
night or two, and then took his journey to pass over the mountains, and sent
me again to Venice, and others to Genua to cause the two ships to be manned 2,
which the Duke of Milan was bound to lend him: but he performed no whit of
that he promised; for after the King had been at great charges in arming of
men to the said ships, the Duke would not let them depart; but on the contrary
side sent two to our enemies.

The Notes.
1 This treaty of Verceil was concluded the 9. of October.

2 The Duke was bound to arm these ships, but the King would have manned them
with his own men.

How the King sent the Lord of Argenton to Venice with certain conditions of
peace which they refused: and of the Duke of Milans false dealings. Chap. 12.
MY embassage to the Venetians was to know whether they would accept the peace,
and agree to these three articles. First, to restore Monopoly to the King,
which they had lately won from us 1. Secondarily, to revoke the Marquess of
Mantua, and the forces they had in the realm of Naples, from King Ferrandes
service. Lastly, to declare King Ferrande to be none of their confederates,
because none were comprehended in their league but the Pope, the King of
Romans, the King of Spain, and the Duke of Milan. When I arrived at Venice,
they received me very honorably, though not so honorably as at my former being
there, and no marvel; for then we were in peace, but now in hostility. I did
my message to the Duke, who welcomed me, and told me that shortly I should
receive mine answer, but that he would first consult with the Senate. Three
days they commanded general processions and public sermons, and dealt great
alms, desiring God of his grace to direct them into the wisest course; which
manner of proceeding (as I was there informed) they use ordinarily in such like
cases. Wherefore I must needs confess, that this city seemed to me the most
devout, as touching matters of religion, that ever I came in, and their
Churches the best decked and trimmed; so that heerin I account them equal with
the ancient Romans, and amfully persuaded, that thereof springs the greatness
of their Seniorie: which sure is worthy rather to increase than diminish. But
to return to mine embassage, I abode there fifteen days before I was
dispatched. The answer I received was a refusal of all my demands, with this
excuse that they were not in war with the King, neither had done any thing but
in defense of their confederate the Duke of Milan, whom the King sought to
destroy. Afterward they caused the Duke to commune with me apart, who offered
me a good composition, to wit, that King Ferrande by the Popes consent should
hold the realm of Naples of the King by homage, and pay him yearly fifty
thousand ducats for tribute, and a certain sum of money presently, the which
they offered to lend, meaning to have in gage for it the places which they now
hold in Pouille, namely Brandis, Otrante, Trani, and the rest. And further,
that for performance of these conditions, the said Dom Ferrande should deliver
to the King, or leave in his hands certain towns in Pouille, they meant
Tarente which the King yet held, and one or two more that the said Ferrande
should have delivered, which towns they offered us on that side of Italy,
because it was the furthest from us, notwithstanding that they pretended the
offer to be, because they stood commodiously to invade the Turk: whereof the
King had put men in great hope at his first entry into Italy, saying, that he
attempted this conquest of Naples, to the end he might with the more expedition
transport his forces against the said Turk, which was a wicked device, and a
mere lie; for he meant nothing less, but from God no man can hide his
thoughts. Moreover, the Duke of Venice offered me, that if the King would
attempt any thing against the Turk, he should have free access to these
places above named, that all Italy should be contributors to the wars; that the
King of Romans should invade also on the other side, and that the King and
they would govern Italy in such sort, that no man should refuse to pay that
he should be rated at; and further, that they for their part would aid him
upon their own proper costs and charges with an hundred galleys upon the sea,
and five thousand horses upon the land.

I took my leave of the Duke and the Seniorie, saying, that I would make
report of their answer to the King. Then returned I to Milan, and found the
Duke at Vigesue, and the Kings ambassador with him, who was one of the Stewards
of his house named Rigaut Dorelles. The Duke came forth himself to meet me,
under color of going a hunting: for they use there to receive ambassadors with
great reverence, and lodged me in his castle very honorably. I desired to
commune with him apart, and he promised that I should so do, though half
against his will as it seemed. The castle of Naples held yet for the King:
wherefore I meant earnestly to press him for the two ships promised us by the
treaty of Verceil, the which were ready to depart, he in outward appearance
seeming-willing thereunto: But Peron of Basche Steward of the Kings house, and
Stephen de Neues (who were at Genua for the King) so soon as they understood
of my arrival at Vigesue, wrote unto me, complaining of the Duke of Milans
falsehood, who would not suffer the two ships to depart which he had promised
us, but on the contrary side had sent two to aid our enemies. They advertised
me further, that one day the governor of Genua made them answer that he would
not suffer the said ships to be manned with any French men, and another day
that he would put into each of them but five and twenty at the most, with
diverse such like dissimulations, dalliyng and delaying the time till the castle
of Naples were yielded, which the Duke knew well to be victualled but for a
month or little more. And as touching the army that the King levied in
Prouence, it was not able to succor the castle without these two ships: for
the enemies lay before it with a great Navy, as well of their own, as of the
Venetians, and the King of Spaines. Three days I abode with the Duke, and one
day he sat in counsel with me, seeming to be disco^tented that I misliked his
answer touching the said ships, and alleged that by the treaty of Verceil he
had promised to serve the King with two ships, but not that they should be
manned with French men. Whereunto I answered that this seemed to me a very
slender excuse: for if he should lend me a good mule to pass the mountains
withal, and afterward make me lead her in my hand and not to ride upon her,
but look upon her only, what pleasure did he me? After much debating, he and
I withdrew our selves into a gallery, where I declared unto him what great
pains, both I and others had taken to conclude this treaty of Verceil, and
into how great danger he brought us by contrariyng thus his promise, and
causing the King by that means to lose these castles, and consequently the
whole realm, whereby he should also engender perpetual hatred between the
King and him. Further, I offered him the Princedome of Tarente and the Duchy
of Bary, the which Duchy he held already. Lastly, I showed him the danger he
put both himself and the whole estate of Italy into, by suffering the
Venetians to hold these places in Pouille 2. And he confessed I said true,
especially touching the Venetians: but his last resolution was that he could
find no faith nor assurance with the King.

After this communication I took my leave of him, he accompaning me upon the
way about a league. But even at our very departure he devised yet a cunningerly
than all the rest (if a man may use such terms of a Prince,) for because I
seemed to depart sad and Melancholic: he said unto me (as a man suddenly
altered) that he would do me a friendly turn to the end the King might have
good cause to welcome me: for the next day he would send Master Galeas to Genua
(more I could not wish when he named him to me) to cause the two ships to
depart, and join with our army, by means whereof he would save the King the
castle of Naples, and consequently the whole realm, as he should indeed if he
had done as he promised. He said further, that immediately after their
departure he would advertise me thereof with his own hand, to the end I might
be the first man that should bring news to the King, of this great service
that I had done him, adding also that the Courrier should overtake me with his
letters before my arrival at Lions. In this good hope departed I and took my
journey to pass the mountains, thinking every Post that came after me to be
the same that should have brought me these letters. Notwithstanding I doubted
somewhat thereof, knowing the nature of the man so well as I did. But to
proceed in my voyage, I came to Chambery where I found the Duke of Sauoy who
honorably entreated me, and stayed me with him a day. Afterward I arrived at
Lions (without my Courrier) to make report to the King of all that I had done,
whom I found banketting and iusting, and wholly given to sport and pastime.
Those that had misliked this treaty of Verceil were glad that the Duke of
Milan had thus deluded us: for their credit increased thereby, but me they
potted at, as in such cases is usual in Princes courts, greatly to my grief
and coffeehouse.

I made report to the King by mouth, and showed him also in writing the
Venetians offers above rehearsed, whereof he made small account, and the
Cardinal who governed all, much less. But that notwithstanding I moved it to
him afterward again: for me thought it better to accept this offer then to
lose all. Besides that, the King had no men about him able to deal in so
weighty an enterprise 3: for those that were able and of experience, they that
had all the credit never or very seldom called to counsel in any matter. The
King would gladly they should oftener have been called, but he feared to
displease those that were of authority about him, especially those that
governed his treasure, namely the said Cardinal and his brethren and kinsmen.
Wherefore let all other Princes learn by the example of this, how fit and
convenient it is for themselves to take pains in the governing of their own
affairs; at the least sometimes, how requisite it is to call more than one or
two to counsel, according to the variety of the matters that are debated; and
how necessary it is to hold their counselors almost in equal authority: for
if one of them be so great, that the rest fear him (as one was both then and
ever since about King Charles) he is King and Lord in effect, and the Prince
himself is evil served, as this King was by his governors, who sought only
their own profit and little regarded his, whereby himself was the less
esteemed and the worse thought of.

The Notes.
1 The Venetians having sent aid to King Ferrand had won Monopoly and
Pulignane. Guicciar.

2 For King Ferrand since King Charles his departure had in engaged to the
Venetians 6. towns in Pouille under certain conditions which are rehearsed
hereafter. cap. 14.

3 He means the enterprise of succouring the castle of Naples.

How the King after his return into France forgot those that he left behind
him in the realm of Naples: and how the Daulphin died, whose death the King
and Queen much lamented. Chap. 13.
I Returned to Lions the year 1495. the twelfe of December, where the King was
already arrived with his army a year and two months after his departure out
of his realm. The castles of Naples held yet for him as before you have heard,
and Monseur de Montpensier his lieutenant there, was yet at Salerne in the
realm of Naples with the Prince of Salerne: likewise Monseur de Aubigny was
yet in Calabria where he had done great service: notwithstanding that he had
been sick almost ever since the Kings departure. Master Gracien des Guerres
was yet also in l' Abruzzo, Dom Julian at Montsaint-Ange, and George of Suly at
Tarente: but they were all so distressed as a man would not believe. Besides
that, they could hardly receive any news or letters out of France, and those
few they did receive, were but lies and fair promises without effect. For the
K. as you have heard they dispatched nothing himself: and if it had been
furnished in time but of the sixte part of the money that was spent afterward,
they had never lost the realm. But in the end when all was yielded, they
received forty thousand ducats only, for part of a years pay already passed:
and yet if this small sum had come but a month sooner, the miseries and
divisions they afterward fell into, and the dishonor they received, had never
chanced. All the which inconveniences happened because the King dispatched
nothing himself, neither would give the messengers audience that came from
them. And as touching his servants to whom he committed the government of his
affairs: they were men of small experience, idle, and negligent, and some of
them I think had intelligence with the Pope, whereby it manifestly appeered,
that God had now altogether withdrawn his grace from the King, which at his
going to Naples he had poured down so plentifully upon him.

After the King had soiourned at Lions about two months, word was brought him
that the Daulphin his son lay at the point of death, and within three days
after that he was dead, which news he took heavily as nature would:
notwithstanding his sorrow soon ended. But the Queen of France and Duchess
of Britain called Anne, lamented the death of her son, and that a long time,
as much as was possible for a woman to do. And I think verily that besides the
natural grief that women use to conceive in such cases, her mind gave her
that some greater evil hung over her head. The King her husband (as I have
said) mourned not long, but sought to comfort her, by causing certain young
gentlemen to dance before her, of the which the Duke of Orleans was one, being
of the age of four and thirty years, who seemed to rejoice at the Daulphins
death, because he was heir apparent to the crown next after the King: for the
which cause the K. and he saw not one another in a long time after. The
Daulphin was about three years old, a goodly child, bold in speech, and no
whit fearing those things that commonly children use to fear. Wherefore (to be
plain with you) his fathers sorrow soon ended: for he began already to doubt
if this child grew to years, and continued in his noble conditions, that
happily he might diminish his estimation and authority: for the King himself
was a man of very small stature and no great sense, but of so good a nature,
that it was impossible to find a gentler creature.

Heerby you may perceive in how miserable estate Kings and Princes live, who
stand in fear of their own children. King Lewis the eleventh who was so wise
and virtuous a Prince, stood in fear of this King Charles his son, but he
provided well for it, and afterward died, leaving his said son King, being
but fowerteene years of age. The said King Lewis also had put King Charles the
seven his father in fear of him: for being but thirteen years of age, he
moved war against him with certain noble men and gentlemen of the realm,
that misliked those that bare the sway in Court, and governed the estate, as K.
Lewis himself has eftsoons told me: but this broile soon ended. Afterward
also being come to man's estate, he fell at great variance with his father, and
retired himself into Daulphine, and from thence into Flaunders, leaving the
country of Daulphin to the said King his father, as I have made mention about
the beginning of this history written of King Lewis the 11. Wherefore it is
manifest that no creature is exempt from trouble, but that all men eat their
bread in travel and sorrow, as God promised us that we should soon after he
had created man, the which promise he has truly performed to all sorts of men.
But great diversity there is of troubles and sorrows: for those of the body
are the less, and those of the mind the greater: the sorrows of wise men are
of one sort, and the sorrows of fools of another; but much greater grief and
passion endures the fool than the wise man, and less comfort receives he in
his sorrows, though many suppose otherwise. The poor man that trauelleth and
toileth his body to get food to sustain himself and his children, and paieth
customs and subsidies to his Prince, should live in too great descomfort and
despair, if Princes and great men had nothing but pleasure in this world, and
he nothing on the contrary side but travel and misery. But God has
otherwise disposed thereof; for if I should take upon me to rehearse the
sundry griefs, sorrows, and passions that I have seen diverse great
personages sustain, as well men as women within these thirty years only, a
great volume would hardly contain them. I mean not such great persosonages as
Bocace writes of in his book 1, but such as we see abound with wealth, and
live in health and prosperity; yea such as those that have not been
conversant with them as I have been, would account in all respects happy: b^^
I have often s^^ne their sorrows and griefs arise of so small occasions, that
they that were unacquainted with them would hardly believe it, the most part
being grounded upon ielousies and reports, which is a disease that lurketh
secretly in great Princes Courts, and traineth with it infinite mischiefs both
to their own persons, their servants, and all their subjects, and so much
shorteneth their lives, that hardly any King of France since Charles the great
has passed the age of sixty years. For the which cause, when King Lewis the
eleventh approached near to that age (being sick of this disease) he accounted
himself a dead man. His father King Charles the seventh, who had done so many
noble acts in France, conceived an imagination in his sickness, that his
servants went about to poison him, and therefore refused to receive sustenance.
Likewise his father King Charles the sixth was troubled with so many suspicions,
that he lost his wits, and all by reports. And sure this is a fault greatly to
be blamed in Princes, that in these cases they cause not such matters as
concern themselves (be they of never so small importance) to be ripped up:
which if they did, they should not so often be troubled with false tales. For
if they would examine the parties the one before the other, I mean the
accuser, and him that is accused, no man durst report any thing to them that
were untrue. But some Princes there are of so doltish disposition, that they
will promise and swear to the accusers never to disclose their reports,
whereby they are often troubled with these anguishes before mentioned, and hate
and injury their trustiest and faithfullest servants and subjects, at the
pleasure and upon the complaint many times of lewd and naughty persons.

The Notes.
1 Of unfortunate noble men.

How the King was advertised of the loss of the castle of Naples: and how the
Florentines places were sold to diverse men: of the treaty of Atelle in
Pouille, to the great damage of the French: and of the death of King Ferrande
of Naples. Chap. 14.
THe Daulphin the Kings only son died about the beginning of the year 1496.
which was the greatest misfortune that ever happened or could happen to the
King: for he never had child after, that lived. But this mischeife came not
without company, for at the very same time received he news that the castle of
Naples was yielded by those that the Lord of Montpensier left within it, who
were forced thereunto, partly by famine, and partly to recover the hostages
delivered by the said Montpensier to King Ferrande, whose names were Monseur
d'Alegre, one of the house de la Marche-d'Ardaine, one called de la Capelle de
Loudonnois 1, and one named John Roquebertin, Catelan. They that were within
the castle returned by sea into France. Another great dishonor and loss
received the King also at the same time which was this. Entragues, who held the
Citadelle of Pisa (being the fort that keeps the town in subjection,)
delivered the said Citadelle to the Pisans contrary to the Kings oath 2, who
had twice sworn to the Florentines to restore unto them the said Citadelle and
their other places, namely Serzane, Serzanelle, Pietresancte, Librefacto, and
Mortron, which they had lent him in his great necessity at his first coming
into Italy: at which time they gave him also sixescore thousand ducats, whereof
there remained unpaid to us but thirty thousand at our return home, as before
you have heard. To be short, all these the Florentines places above named were
sold: the Genuois bought Serzane and Serzanelle of a bastard of Saint Paul 3,
Pietresancte Entragues sold to the Luquois 4, and Librefacto to the Venetians
5, to the great dishonor both of the King and all his subjects, and to the
utter loss of the realm of Naples. The first oath the King swear for the
restitution of these places (as before you have heard) was at Florence upon the
high altar of the cathedral Church of Saint John: the second in Ast at his
return, at which time the Florentines lent him thirty thousand ducats (in his
great need) under condition that if Pisa were restored to them, he should
repaie no part nor parcel of this sum: but they would make restitution of
the jewels engaged to them for it, and lend him 60000. ducats more, which they
promised to cause to be paid then presently in the realm of Naples, to the
Kings forces there. They offered further, to entertain continually in the
said realm at their proper costs and charges, three hundred men of arms to
do the King service till the said conquest were fully achieved, of the which
conditions none were performed, because of this evil dealing above mentioned.
Besides that, we were forced to restore the thirty thousand ducats that they
lent us, all the which inconveniences happened through disobedience and privy
whispering in the Kings ear, for some of those that were nearest about him,
encouraged Entragues to sell these places.

At the self same time within two months over or under, in the beginning of
this year 1496. the Lord of Montpensier, the Lord Virgill Vrsin 6, M. Camille
Vitelly, and the rest of the French captains, seeing all thus lost: put
themselves into the field, and took certain small places. But King Ferrande
son of King Alphonse, who was entered into religion (as before you have heard)
accompanied with the Marquess of Mantua, brother to the said Montpensiers
wife, and General of the Venetians, marched against them. They found the said
Montpensier lodged in a town called Atelle, a place very commodious for their
provision of victuals, and seated on a hill, upon the which our enemies
fortified their camp as men fearing the battle, because the said King Ferrand
and his forces had been discomfited in all places, as was also the Marquis of
Mantua at Fornoua where we fought with him. The said Marquis the Venetians had
lent to K. Ferrand with a certain sum of money, but of small value in
respect of the places they had in gage for it, which were these six towns in
Pouille of great importance, Brandis, Trani, Galipoli, Crana, Otrante, and
Monopoly, the last of the which since the Kings departure they had won from
us. Moreover in the said sum of money they comprehended the wages of their
soldiers that served the said Ferrand, so that they hold these places for two
hundred thousand ducats; yea, and now they require the charges they have been
at in the fortification and defense of them, so that I am fully persuaded they
mind never to restore them: for they use not so to do, when towns lie
commodiously for them, as these do, being situate upon the Adriatike gulf, so
that by means of them they are Lords of the said gulf, which is one of the
things they chiefly desire; and no marvel, for it is from Otrante (which is
the very point of the said gulf) to Venice at the least nine hundred miles.
And notwithstanding that the Pope held certain places also upon the said gulf
intermingled among these Venetian towns: yet were all passengers forced to
pay custom to Venice: wherefore the possession of these places is more
beneficial to them than the world weeneth: for they receive yearly from
thence great plenty of corn and oil, which are two necessary things for
their provision.

At the said place of Atelle above mentioned, our men fell at variance as well
for their victuals which began now to diminish, as also for their pay, the
soldiers were unpaid for eighteen months and more, by means whereof they had
lived in great misery. To the Almains also much was due, but not so much: for
all the money that Monseur de Montpensier could leuy in the realm was paid to
them, yet notwithstanding they were unpaid for a year and more, but they had
spoiled diverse small towns whereby they were maruellously enriched. If the
forty thousand ducats promised them had been sent in time, or if they had
known they should have received them at Florence, this variance had never
happened, but now they remained altogether in despair: diverse of our captains
have informed me that if our men would have agreed to fight, they were like
enough to have obtained the victory: and if they had been discomfited, yet
should not their loss have been so great, as by the shameful composition they
made. Montpensier and Virgile Vrsin, who were the best men of war among them
would have fought, and evil hap it was to them that they did not: for King
Ferrand brake the composition, and put them both in prison, where they
miserably ended their lives. They laid the blame that they fought not upon
Monseur de Persi a young gentleman of Auuergne, whom they accused as a mutinous
knight, and disobedient to his captain. You shall understand that in this
army were two sorts of Almaines, the first were Swissers to the number of
fifteen hundred, whom the King left there at his departure from Naples, the
which served faithfully even til the hour of death, so that it was impossible
for men to serve more valiantly than they did. The other sort were those whom
we call commonly Lance knights (that is to say, servants of the country) the
which hate naturally the Swissers. They are of all parts of Germany, as for
example, of the countries lying upon the Rhine, and of Swobland, some there
were also of the country of Vaulx in Senonie 7, and some of Gelderland. These
were to the number of eight hundred newly sent thither with two months pay,
the which being spent before they came thither, and at their arrival there no
new pay being found: they seeing themselves in this distress, declared that
they bare us no such good will as the Swissers do; for they practiced with our
enemies, and turned to King Ferrande, for the which cause partly, and partly
for the division that was among our captains, our men made a shameful
appointment with their enemies, the which King Ferrande swear to keep and
observe, being forced so to do by the Marquess of Mantua, who thought thereby
to assure the person of his brother in law Monseur de Montpensier, yet
notwithstanding the said Ferrande brake the treaty, as afterward mention shall
be made more at large.

By the said composition they yielded both themselves and all the Kings
artillery to their enemies, promising further, to cause to be rendered all the
places that the King held in the realm, as well in Calabria where Monseur
d'Aubigny was, as in L'Abruzzo where Master Gracian des Guerres was together,
with the towns of Caietta and Tarente; under this condition, that King
Ferrande should send them by sea into Prouence with bag and baggage, which was
not much worth: but notwithstanding the composition King Ferrande commanded
them all to be led to Naples, being to the number of five or six thousand
persons or more. So shameful a composition has not been made in our time,
neither do I remember that ever I read of the like, save that which the two
consuls of Rome made (as rehearses Titus Liuius 8) with the Samnites (whom I
suppose to be those of Beneuent) at a place called then Furculae Caudinae,
which is a certain straight in the mountains: notwithstanding the Romans
would not agree to the composition, but sent the two Consuls prisoners to their
enemies.

If our force had fought and been discomfited, yet should not their loss have
been so great; as by this composition: for two parts of them died either of
famine, or of the plague in their ships in the isle of Prusse 9, whither they
were sent from Naples by King Ferrande: and namely, there died Monseur de
Montpensier himself, some say of poison, others of an ague, which I rather
believe. And I think verily that of all this company never returned fifteen
hundred: for of the Swissers which were thirteen hundred, returned but three
hundred and fifty all extreme sick. Their faith and loyalty was greatly to be
commended: for they all chose rather to die than to serve King Ferrande, and so
a number of them died in the said isle of Prusse, some of heat, some of
sickness, and some of famine: for they were held there a long time in their
ships, in such penury and lack of victuals, as is almost incredible. I saw
them all that returned, especially the Swissers, who brought back with the^
all their ensigns: and sure it well appeered that they had endured great
misery; for they were all so extreme sick, that when they came forth of
their ships to take the air, they were feign to be stayed up from falling. It
was also agreed by the said composition, that the Lord Virgill Vrsin should
return home to his country in safety, and his son, and all the Italians that
served the King: yet notwithstanding the enemies detained him still, and his
said legitimate son also; for he had but one: and as touching his base son
called the Lord Charles (who was a very valiant gentleman) certain Italians of
their company spoiled him as he repaired homeward. If this misery had fallen
but upon them only that made this composition, they had notbeen greatly to be
moned. Immediately after King Ferrande had received this honor above mentioned,
and married King Ferrande his grandfathers daughter, being a young maid of
thirteen or fowerteene years of age, begotten of the King of Castiles sister
that now reigns (so that his wife was sister to his own father King Alfonse)
he fell into a continual ague, whereof soon after he died, and the crown of
the realm descended to King Frederick (the said King Ferrandes uncle) now
presently reigning. It abhors me to write of such a marriage as this,
notwithstanding diverse such have been contracted in this house of Arragon
within these thirty years. King Ferrande died immediately after the
composition above mentioned made in the town of Ate^^e, the year of our Lord
1496. The said Ferrande during his life, and Dom Frederick also after he came
to the crown, excused the breach of this composition, because Monseur de
Montpensier had not performed the conditions thereof, nor rendered the places
promised, which he could not to say the truth, Caietta and diverse others being
out of his power. For notwithstanding that he were the Kings lieutenant, yet
were not they that held these places for the King, bound to yield them at his
commandment. Although all things well considered, the King should have
sustained no great loss, if they had then been yielded; for he spent
afterward great treasure in defending and victualling them, and yet lost them
in the end. I my self was present three or four times at the dispatch of
those that were sent to victual and succor, first the castles of Naples, and
thrice after the town of Caietta. And I think I should not lie, if I said
that these four voiages cost the King above three hundred thousand franks: and
yet all to no purpose.

The Notes.
1 Before cap. 8. he named him de la Chappelle d'Aniou, but if Loudonnois be in
Aniou the places be reconciled.

2 The Venetians paid the money, for the Pisans were not able to redeem it:
but after the Citadelle delivered, the Pisans put themselves into the Venetians
protection, who razed the Citadelle. Guicciar.

3 This bastards name was de Bienne. Guicciar.

4 Mutron was also sold to the Luquois. Guicciar.

5 Librefacto was sold to the Pisans, but the Venetians paid the money.
Guicciar.

6 This Virgill Vrsin is he above mentioned, who after the Coulonnois revolt
from King Charles, turned to him, and of his foe became his friend and servant.

7 The French corrector reads it Sionnie, meaning the country called in
Latin Valesia Sedusiorum, whereof Sedunum called in French Sion, is the chief
town: or else he supposes it should be Vaulx in Sauoy, whereof our author
makes mention lib. 5. cap. 1.

8 Decad. 1. lib. 9.

9 Procida it is named by Colleuntius, other Italians name it Ponze. I suppose
it to be that, which Pliny lib. 3. cap. 6. calls Proclita or Prochita,
saying that it lies in Sinu Puteolano not far from Naples, nor from the isle of
Ischia. Boccace also Decame 2, novel. 6. reports both Procida and Ponze to
be near to Naples. Guicciar. has Pozzuole.

How certain practices entertained by diverse noble men of Italy on the Kings
behalf, as well for the conquest of Naples, as of the Duchy of Milan, failed
for lack of sending thither: and how another enterprise against Genua sped
evil also. Chap. 15.
THe King after his return from Naples abode at Lions a long time (as before
you have heard) holding iusts and turneies. It grieved him to lose the places
in Italy above mentioned which he yet held, neither cared he what treasure he
spent in defense of them, but he would take no pains himself in governing his
own affairs. Moreover, he was advertised daily of diverse practices
entertained on his behalf in Italy, which notwithstanding that they were both
dangerous and chargeable: yet was he of power sufficient to have achieved them
because his realm is populous, and plentiful of grain in Prouence and
Languedoc, and has also a number of other wealthy countries, where money
might have been levied. But if any other Prince besides the King of France
should attend to these Italian practices and adventure to entermebdle in their
enterprises, he should but undo himself, spend his treasure, and bring
nothing to effect. For the Italians neither do nor can serve but for money,
except it be a Duke of Milan, or one of the greatest Seniories: but a poor
captain be he never so well affectioned to the service of a King of France
pretending title to the realm of Naples, or the Duchy of Milan, be he never
so faithful and trusty, yet shall he not be able to do him service any long
time after his payment fails, because his men will forsake him, and the poor
captain shall be utterly undone: for the greatest part of them live only upon
the credit they win by the service of their soldiors, who are paid by their
captain, and he of him whom he serves, which is the cause why they desire in
Italy nothing but factions and civil wars. But as touching the practices above
mentioned, you shall understand that they began before the town of Caietta was
lost, to wit, immediately after the King perceived that the Duke of Milan would
not perform the conditions of the treaty of Verceil, and continued after the
loss of the said town, the whole space of two years after the Kings return
home. As touching the said Duke of Milan, he brake not his promise altogether
upon malice and treachery, but partly for fear: for he doubted that the King
would destroy him if he obtained the realm of Naples: besides that, he
accounted the King to be a Prince in whom was no constancy nor assurance. But
to proceed, one of these enterprises above mentioned was to invade the Duchy
of Milan after this sort. Order was given that the Duke of Orleans should go to
Ast to enter with a good band of men on that side, whom I saw once so near
his departure, that his train was already gone. We were sure of the Duke of
Ferrareas friendship, for he had promised to aid us (notwithstanding that he
were the Duke of Milans father in law) with five hundred men of arms, and two
thousand footmen, which his promise undoubtedly he would have performed, to
the end he might have rid himself of the danger he was in, lying just in the
midst between the Venetians and the said Duke: for not long before (as I have
already made mention) the Venetians had taken from him the Polesan, and sought
wholly his destruction: wherefore he would have preferred his own safety and
his childrens, before his son in laws friendship; yea, and peradventure he
thought that the Duke of Milan seeing himself in this extremity would make
some appointment with the King 1. Moreover, by the said D. of Ferraraes means,
the Marquis of Mantua was become our friend, who lately had been and yet was
general of the Venetians, but in great jealousy with them, and he likewise
being discontented with them, soiourned with three hundred men of arms with
his father in law the Duke of Ferrare: for you shall understand that he then
had, and yet has to wife the Duches of Milans sister, daughter to the said
Duke of Ferrara. Master John Bentiuoille who governs Bolonia, and is as it
were Lord thereof, promised to aid us with a hundred and fifty men of arms,
and a good band of footmen, and to send to the Kings service two of his
son^^s, who were captains of certain companies of horsemen, and such was the
seat (...) country that he might have done great service against the Duke of
Milan. The ^^orentines who saw themselves utterly undone (unless by large
expenses they recovered their losses) fearing to be disseased of Pisa and the
other places above mentioned 2; would have furnished eight hundred men of
arms, and five thousand footmen upon their own proper costs and charges,
and had already provided their paiments for six months. The Vrsins and the
Prefect of Rome brother to the Cardinal Saint Peter ad Vincula (so often
before named,) being in pay with the King, would have furnished a thousand men
of arms: but you shall understand that their men of arms are not accompanied
with archers as ours be, but their wages and ours are much a like: for a years
pay of one of their men of arms amounts to a hundredth ducats, and the wages
of one of ours is double as much because of his archers. These mercenary
soldiers the King should have paid, but as touching the Florentines they should
have paid their forces themselves. The Duke of Ferrara also, the Marquis of
Mantua and Bentiuoille, offered this aid upon their own charge, for they
hoped to conquer in the Duchy of Milan as much as should counteruaile their
cost. And if the Duke of Milan had been suddenly invaded by the Duke of
Orleans, and all these above rehearsed at one instant, his confederates (namely
the Venetians) could not have succored him (though they would have spent all
their treasure in his defense) before he must have been forced to revolt to the
K, who would have kept these Italians in the field a long time. And the Duchy
of Milan being once won, the realm of Naples would have yielded of it self.

The stay of this goodly enterprise proceeded of the Duke of Orleans, who
suddenly altered his mind the night before he should have departed: for he had
already sent before him all things necessary for his person, and none remained
to depart but himself only: for the army was in a readiness, their wages paid
them, and they all gone before to Ast, being to the number of eight hundred men
of arms French, and six thousand footmen: among the which were four hundred
Swissers. But the said Duke of Orleans being thus suddenly altered, besought
the King twice to propound this matter again to his counsel, and so he did, I
my self was present at the debating of it both the times, and the whole
Counsel concluded that he should go, not one man speaking to the contrary:
notwithstanding that there were present at each time ten or twelve Counselors
at the least. And sure so had it been most convenient, considering that we had
thereof assured our friends in Italy above named: all the which had been at
great charges, and were in a readiness. But the Duke of Orleans being present at
the debating of this matter himself, made answer (either by the advice of some
one, or for that he shunned this enterprise because he saw the King evil
disposed of his body, whose heir he should be if he died) that he would never
take upon him this voyage for his own particular quarrel, but willingly by
the Kings commandment as his lieutenant, with the which answer the counsel
arose. The next day and many days after, the ambassadors of Florence and
diverse others, pressed the King earnestly to command the Duke to depart.
Whereunto the King answered, that he would never force him to the wars against
his will. Thus was this voyage dashed to the Kings great grief, both because
of the great charges he had sustained; and also because he was in good hope (if
it had proceeded) to have been revenged of the Duke of Milan, considering what
intelligences he had already, and what other intelligences he might have had at
that time; by means of Master John James of Treuoul, lieutenant general for
him and the D. of Orleans in these Italian wars, who was a Milanois borne, and
very well beloved and friended in his country, where he had good intelligence
with many both of his kinsemen and others. This enterprise thus failing,
another succeeded, yea two or three at a clap against Genua: where the people
are ever inclined to division; one of these enterprises was managed by Master
Baptiste de Campefourgouse, who was chief of one of the factions in the town,
but banished, and his faction of no authority at that time, neither yet the
house of Orie, who are gentlemen, and they of Fourgousi none. The said D'Ories
take part with the Fourgouses, but none of them may be Duke, because they are
gentlemen, for no gentlemen may be Duke of Genua: but this Baptiste had been
Duke not long before, and lost the government by the treachery of his uncle
the Cardinal of Genua, who of late years put the Seniorie of Genua into the
Duke of Milans hands. So that at this present the Adornes governed Genua, who
in like manner are not gentlemen, but have often been Dukes by help of the
Spinoles who are gentlemen; so that the gentlemen make the Duke of Genua, but
cannot be Dukes themselves. This Baptista trusted that his faction would arise
in his favor, both in the town and country, and that the town being
recovered, the sovereignty thereof should remain to the King, but he and his
faction govern and banish their enemies. The other enterprise was this, diverse
of Sauonne addressed themselves to the Cardinal Saint Peter ad Vincula 3, and
promised to yield the town to him, hoping thereby to recover their liberty;
for they are under the Genuois government, and pay tribute to them. If we had
entered into this place, Genua should have been greatly distressed, the country
of Prouence being in subjection to the King, and Sauoy wholly at his devotion.
Wherefore the King being advertised of all these enterprises, wrote to Master
John James of Treuoul to aid Master Baptist de Campefourgouse with force to
conueigh him to the gates of Genua, to see whether his faction would arise in
his favor. And on the other side he was so earnestly pressed by the Cardinal
S. Peter ad Vincula, that he sent other letters at the self same time to the
said M. John James, comanding him to lend the said Cardinal men to conueie him
to Sauonne: and the like commandment sent he him also by mouth by the Lord of
Sernon in Prouence, who was great friend to the said Cardinal and a stout
talker. Besides these two commandments, came yet a third, which was, that the
said Master John James should retire into some place where he might
conveniently aid both these parties above mentioned, and yet attempt nothing
against the Duke of Milan, nor the treaty of peace made the summer before with
him, which commandment was clean contrary to the two former.

Thus you see how great Princes affairs are governed when they understand them
not themselves, but command letters and dispatch men upon a sudden before they
hear matters well debated. For as touching the demands of Master Baptist de
Campeforgouse and the said Cardinal, it was impossible to satisfy them both at
once, for Baptist durst not go to the walls of Genua without great force,
because the town is very populous, and the people well armed, and hardy and
valiant soldiers: wherefore if Master John James should at the same time have
lent men also to the Cardinal, his army had been divided into three
companies; for part of the force must have remained with himself. In the mean
time diverse bands arrived at Genua and at Sauonne, sent thither by the Duke of
Milan and the Venetians, who both feared greatly the revolt of Genua, as did
also Dom Frederick and the Pope.

Besides these two enterprises, the said Master John James had yet a third in
his head, devised of his own brain, which was this, he would have broken off
both these other enterprises, and have marched with the whole force straight
against the Duke of Milan, and undoubtedly if he had not been countermaunded,
he would have done some great exploit. His enterprise he was already entered
into, and had advertised the King thereof, pretending that he could not
otherwise aid them that should go to Genua or Sauonne to the enterprises above
mentioned. Wherefore under color thereof, he led his army into the high way
between Alexandria and Genua (which was the only way the Duke of Milan could
send to invade our bands that should go to Genua and Sauonne) and three or
four small towns he took, which voluntarily received him, aduertising the
King that this notwithstanding, he made no war upon the Duke of Milan, seeing
he was forced of necessity (for the safety of those that should go to the
other enterprises) to do as he did: adding, that the King could not be said to
make war upon the Duke of Milan, for seeking to conquer Genua or Sauonne,
because they were held of him and forfaited to him; but this enterprise was
dashed by the Kings commandment. Further, to satisfy the Cardinal, the said
Master John James lent him part of the army to convey him to Sauonne, but he
found the place manned, and thereupon gave over his enterprise and returned. He
lent men also to Master Baptist to convey him to Genua, who assured him that
his enterprise should take effect: but when he was three or four leagues upon
the way, they that accompanied him began to be ielous of him, as well the
Almaines as the French, wherein notwithstanding that they did him wrong, yet
sure their company being but small, should have put themselves in great
danger, if they had gone to Genua, and his faction had not happened to arise.
Thus all these enterprises sped evil, and the Duke of Milan, who had been
greatly distressed, if Master John James had been suffered to invade him with
the whole force, was now strong; for the Venetians had sent diverse bands to his
aid. Whereupon our army retired, our footmen were dismissed, and these
little towns that were taken abandoned: and thus ended these wars, finally to
the Kings profit, who consumed infinite treasure in them.

The Notes.
1 Understand against the Venetians, by the which means he might have
recovered the Polesan, and the rest that they withheld from him.

2 For you must understand that these practices began before their places were
sold.

3 This Cardinal was borne at Sauonne.

Of certain controversies between King Charles and Ferrande King of Castile,
and of the ambassadors that were sent to and fro to pacify them. Chap. 16.
WHat happened from the Kings return out of Italy (which was about 3. or 4.
months before the end of the year 1495.) till the beginning of the year 1498.
I have already rehearsed: for all that space I was resident in the Court, and
present at the dispatch of most part of those affairs. The King rode about
from Lions to Moulins, and from Moulins to Tours, holding tourneies and iusts
in all places, and minding nothing else. Those that were of the greatest
authority about him, were so divided, that more they could not be; for some of
them would that the conquest of Naples should still continue, because their
profit and credit depended thereupon, namely, the Cardinal 1, and the
Seneschall 2, who governed all the Kings affairs: on the otherside the
Admiral, who before this voyage had borne all the sway with the young King,
would in any wise that these Italian enterprises should cease, and traveled to
overthrow them, knowing that the quailing of them would turn greatly to his
profit, and be a means whereby he might recover his former credit and
authority, and the others fall into disgrace.

Thus passed the Kings affairs about a year and a half, during the which
space he sent ambassadors to the King and Queen of Castile, who were in war
with him, and whose friendship he greatly desired, because they were mighty
both by sea and land. And notwithstanding that they did no great exploit upon
the land, yet had they sent great aid by sea to King Ferrande and King
Frederick of Naples: for the isle of Sicilie is distant from Reges in Calabria
but a league and a half, so that some hold opinion it was once firm land with
Italy 3, and that the sea breaking in, made this straight 4 now named the Far
5 of Messine. The said isle of Sicilie was then and yet is, in subjection to the
King and Queen of Castile, who sent from thence great aid to Naples, as well
of great ships called Carauels that came out of Spain, as also of men.
Moreover, in the isle of Sicilie itself a company of men of arms was levied,
the which passed into Calabria with a certain number of genetarios 6, and made
war upon the Kings forces there. Besides this, their ships were continually
with the confederates navy, by means whereof, when all their forces were
together, the King was much too weak for his enemies upon the sea, but
otherwise the King of Castile endammaged him not much. True it is that once a
great company of horsemen entered into Languedock, and spoiled the country,
and lodged in it three or four days; but other exploit did they none. Then
the Lord of Saint Andre in Bourbonnois, who defended those frontiers for the
Duke of Bourbon the Kings lieutenant in Languedock, attempted to take Sausses a
little town in the country of Roussillon, because on that side they had
invaded the Kings dominions about two years before. For you shall understand,
that the King had restored unto them the said country of Roussillon 7, whereof
the territory of Parpignan is parcel, in the which this little town of
Sausses is situate. His enterprise was great and dangerous; for the town was
well manned though it were but small, and a great number of gentlemen of the
King of Castiles house were within it; besides that, their army being stronger
than ours lay abroad in the fields encamped within a league of the place: yet
notwithstanding the said Lord of Saint Andre so wisely and closely guided his
enterprise that within ten hours he took the town by assault, as my self
can witness, and at the breach were slain thirty or forty Spanish gentlemen
of mark, among whom was the Archbishop of Saint James his son, besides three
or four hundred common soldiers. They thought not that the town could have
been taken so suddenly; for they understood not the feate of our artillery,
which undoubtedly is the best in the world.

This is all the exploit that was done between these two Princes, whereof
though the effects were but small yet great was the shame and dishonor the King
of Castile received thereby, his army being so strong as it was: but where God
is disposed to punish, commonly such small scoruges run before. For the said
King and Queen of Castile were shortly after otherwise punished, and so were we
also. But sure as touching them they much stained their honor in violating
their oath given to the King, who had dealt so bountifully with them, by
restoring them the country of Rousillon, the fortification and defense whereof
had been so chargeable to his father, who had it in pawn for three hundred
thousand crowns, which sum also the King forgave them, all to the end they
should not impeach nor hinder his voyage to Naples. Moreover, they renewed the
ancient league between France and Castile, which is between King and King,
realm and realm, and man and man of their subjects, and promised not to
hinder his said conquest, nor marie any of their daughters into Naples, England
or Flanders, which straight offer of marriage proceeded of themselves: for a
Friar Franciscan called Friar John de Mauleon made this ounerture on the Queen
of Castiles behalf. Yet all this notwithstanding so soon as they saw the war
begun, and heard that the King was at Rome, they sent ambassadors round about
to enter into league against him, and namely to Venice, I being there present,
where the league above mentioned was concluded between the Pope, the King of
Romans, them, the Seniore of Venice, and the Duke of Milan: immediately
whereupon they invaded the Kings dominions, alleging that such a promise was
not to be performed, meaning the marriage of their children (being four
daughters and one son) into the houses above mentioned, which ouuerture
notwithstanding proceeded of themselves, as before you have heard.

But to return to the matter. After these wars in Italy were ended, and all
lost in the realm of Naples save Caietta, which the K. yet held when these
treaties of peace began between him and the King and Queen of Castile: but
soon after lost also, and the wars in the country of Roussillon being in like
manner ended, so that none sought to endammage other, but each party to defend
their own. They sent to King Charles a gentleman accompanied with certain
Monks of Montferrat, for all their affairs they governed by such men, either
to save charges thereby, or to dissemble by such instruments with the less
suspicion, as for example they did by John de Mauleon the Friar Franciscan
above named, who persuaded the King to restore unto them the country of
Roussillon. These ambassadors at their first audience, besought the King to
forget the great wrong the King and the Queen had done him. I name always the
Queen because the crown of Castile moved by her, and because her authority
was greater there than her husbands: and undoubtedly this was a very honorable
marriage between the King her husband and her. Then these ambassadors began to
treat of truce, desiring to have all their league comprehended therein. The
ouuertures they made were these: that the King should keep the possession of
Caietta, and the other places he yet held in the realm of Naples, and that
during the truce he might victual them at his pleasure. Further, that there
should be a place assigned whither all the Princes of the league should send
their ambassadors (at the least, as many as would) to treat of peace, the which
being concluded: the said King and Queen meant to continue their conquest or
enterprise against the Moors, and to pass the sea out of Granado into Africa,
there to invade the King of Fessa who was their next neighbor on that side.
Notwithstanding some were of opinion that they meant rather to hold themselves
contented with that they had already conquered, I mean the realm of Granado,
which undoubtedly was the greatest and honorablest conquest that has been
obtained in our time 8; yea such as their predecessors were never able to
atchieue. And I wish with all my heart for the honor I bear them, that they had
never moved other war than this, but had faithfully performed their promise to
the King. The King sent the Lord of Clerieux in Daulphine back into Castile
with their ambassadors, and sought to conclude a peace or truce wherein their
confederates should not be comprehended: notwithstanding if he had accepted
their offer made by these their ambassadors, he had saved Caietta, which had
been sufficient for the recovery of the whole realm of Naples, considering
the great favor he had there. The said de Clerieux at his return brought a
new ouuerture (for Caietta was lost before he entered into Castile) which was,
that the King and they should renew their former ancient league, and attempt
between them at equal charges the conquest of all Italy, whereat the two
Kings should be together in person: but they said they would first conclude a
general truce, wherein all their league should be comprehended, and then
assign a diet at some place in Piemont, whither every of their confederates
should send their ambassadors, to the end they might honorably depart from
their said league. All this ouuerture as we suspected then and understood
perfectly afterward, was but mere dissimulation to win time, to the end King
Ferrand while he lived, and afterward Dom Frederic newly crowned King might
repose themselves: notwithstanding I think they wished with all their hearts
the said realm of Naples to be their own, and sure they had better title to
it, than they that possessed it 9. But undoubtedly the house of Anious right
which the King had was the best, although to say the truth considering both the
seat of the country, and the disposition of the people that inhabit it, me
think he has best right to it that can get it, for they desire nothing but
alteration. The King afterward sent the above named de Clericux back again
into Castile and one Michaell of Grammont with him, with certain other
ouertures. This de Clerieux bare some affection to these Princes of Arragon,
and hoped to obtain of them the Marquisat of Cotron in Calabria, which the
King of Spain conquered in the last voyage that his men made thither. The said
de Clerieux pretended title to it, and he is a good plain dealing man, and one
that will easily give credit, especially to such personages as these were. At
his second return he brought with him an ambassador from the King and Queen,
and made his report to the King, which was, that they would hold themselves
contented with that part of the realm of Naples that lies next to Sicilie (to
wit, Calabria) for the right that they pretended to the said realm, and that
the King should hold the rest: and farther that the said King of Castile would
be in person at this conquest, and bear equal charges in all things with the
King, and indeed he held then and yet holds four or five strong places in
Calabria, whereof Cotron is one, which is a good and a well fortified city. I
was present at this report, which seemed unto most of us but mere abuse and
dissimulation. Wherefore it was determined that some wise man should be sent to
them to sound the bottom of this ouuerture, and thereupon the Lord of Bouchage
was joined in commission with the former ambassadors: he was a man of deep
judgment, and one that had been in great credit with King Lewis, and so is he
also at this present with King Charles his son. The Spanish ambassador that
came with de Clerieux would never auow his report, but answered that he thought
the said de Clerieux would not make the report, if the King his Master and the
Queen had not willed him so to do; which answer caused us so much the more to
suspect their dissimulation: besides that, no man would believe that the King
of Castile would go in person into Italy, or that he either would or could
bear equal charges with the King.

After the said Lords of Bouchage, Clerieux, and Michaell of Grammont with the
rest of their colleagues were come to the K. and Queen of Castiles court, they
lodged them in a place where no man could com to commune with them, for the
which purpose also certain were appointed to watch their lodgings. But they
themselves spoke thrice with them: and when the said du Bouchage advertised
them of the report above mentioned made to the King by de Clerieux and Michaell
of Grammont: they answered that they would willingly endeavor themselves to
conclude a peace for the Kings honor and profit. And as touching the said
report, they confessed that indeed such speech had passed them by way of
communication but not otherwise, with the which answer de Clerieux being
discontented and not without cause, aduowed his report to be true before them
both, in the presence of the said Lord of Bouchage, who with the rest of his
companions concluded a truce, (the King having two months respit to accept it
or refuse it) wherein their confederates were not comprehended, but their sons
in law, and the fathers of their sons in law, namely the Kings of Romans
and England 10 (for the Prince of Wales was at that time very young) were
comprehended therein, they had four daughters, the eldest of the which was a
widow, and had been married to the King of Portugales son that last died, who
brake his neck before her as he passed a carrier upon a ginnet within three
months after their marriage. The second and the third were married the one in
Flaunders, and the other in England, and the fourth is yet to marry. After the
Lord of Bouchage was returned, and had made his report, the King perceived that
de Clerieux had been too credulous, and that he had done wisely in sending du
Bouchage thither, because he was now assured of that which before he stood in
doubt of. The said de Bouchage advertised him further, that he could effect
nothing but the conclusion of the truce, the which he had liberty either to
accept or refuse at his pleasure. The King accepted it, and sure it served him
to good purpose: for it was the breach of their league which so much had
troubled his affairs, and which hitherto he could by no means dissolve,
notwithstanding that he had attempted all ways possible. Thirdly, the said de
Bouchage informed the King, that the King and Queen of Castile had promised
him at his departure to send ambassadors immediately after him (...)

cause of their attainture was for that they had attempted to make him King of
Portugale that now reigns. These Lords therefore and gentlemen were by means
of this marriage recompensed in Castile by the King and Queen, and their lands
which they had forfaited in Portugale by attainture, assigned to the Queen of
Portugale (now mentioned) daughter to the said K. and Queen of Castile. But
notwithstanding all these considerations, the said K. and Queen repented them
of this marriage: for you shall understand that there is no nation in the world
that the Spaniards hate more than the Portugales, so far forth that they
disdain and scorn them: wherefore the said King and Queen lamented much that
they had bestowed their daughter upon a man that should not be beloved in the
realm of Castile and their other dominions: and if the marriage had been then
unmade, they would never have made it, which undoubtedly was a great corrosiue
to them, yet nothing so great as this, that she should depart from them.
Notwithstanding, after all their sorrows ended, they led their said daughter
and son in law through all the chief cities of their realm, and made the
said King of Portugale to be received for Prince, and their daughter for
Princess, and proclaimed them their successors after their death. Some comfort
they received after all these sorrows, for they were advertised that the said
Lady Princess of Castile and Queen of Portugale, was great with child; but
this joy proved in the end double grief, so that I think they wished
themselves out of the world: for this Lady whom they so tenderly loved and so
much esteemed, died in travel of the said child, not past a month agone, and
we are now in October in the year 1498. but the child lives 4 and is called
Emanuell after his fathers name. All these greatmisfortunes happened to them in
the space of three months.

Now to return to the estate of France. You shall understand that about four
or five months before the said Ladies death, a great misfortune happened also
in this realm: I mean the death of King Charles the eight whereof hereafter
you shall hear at large. It seemed therefore that God beheld both these houses
with an angry countenance, and would not that the one realm should scorn the
other. For although the death of a Prince seem but a trifle to many, yet is it
sure far otherwise: for change of the Prince never happens in any realm, but
it traineth with it great sorrows and troubles; and notwithstanding that some
gain by it, yet an hundred fold more lose, because at an alteration men are
forced to change their manner and form of living: for that that pleases one
Prince, displeases another. Wherefore (as before I have said) if a man well
consider the sharp and sudden punishments that God has laid upon great
Princes within these thirty years, in France, Castile, Portugale, England,
Naples, Flaunders, and Britain, he shall find that they have been heavier
and greeuouser than happened in two hundred years before: and whosoever would
take in hand to discourse upon all the particular misfortunes that I my self
have seen, and in a manner known all the persons as well men as women to whom
they happened, should make thereof a huge volume and that of great admiration,
yea though it contained only such as have chanced within these ten years. By
these punishments, the power of God ought to be the better known, for the
plagues he powers down upon great personages are sharper, grieuouser, and
endure longer than those he sends to the poorer sort. To conclude therefore,
me think all things well waied, that Princes are in no better estate in this
world than other men, if they consider by the miseries they see happen to their
neighbors what may happen to themselves. For as touching them they chastise
their subjects at their pleasures, and God disposes of them at his pleasure,
because other than him they have none over them: but happy is the realm that
is governed by a Prince that is wise and fears God and his commandments.

I have briefly rehearsed the misfortunes that happened in three months space
to these two great and mighty realms, which not long before were so inflamed
the one against the other, so busied in enlarging their dominions, and so
little contented with that they already possessed. And notwithstanding that
always some (as before I said) rejoice at changes, and gain by them: yet at
the first (even to them) the death, especially the sudden death of their Prince
is very dreadful and dangerous.

The Notes.
1 This he seems to add, because the empire was greater, but it was not the
Emperors inheritance.

2 Understand the two first murders, of his wives father and brother: for his
son was dead before he slew his own brother.

3 Understand her dowry for her first marriage.

4 But the child died also afterward, and the crown of Spain descended to
Jane the second daughter wife to Philip Duke of Austrich, and mother to the
Emperor Charles the fifth. Further, you shall understand that our authors
memory failed him here: for this Princes name was not Emanuel as Commines
here writes, but Michael, according to all good authors and pedegrees both of
Spain and Portugale.

Of the sumptuous building King Charles began a little before his death, of the
great desire he had to reform the Church and himself, to diminish his
revenues, and to redress the processes of the law: and how he died suddenly in
this good mind in his castle of Amboise. Chap. 18.
I Will here cease further to discourse of the affairs of Italy and Castile,
and return to our own particular sorrows and troubles in France, which
notwithstanding were pleasant news happily to those that gained by them. I
will write of the sudden death of King Charles the 8. who being in his castle
of Amboise, had begun the sumptuousest building, both in the castle and the
town, that any King took in hand these hundred years, as appears by the
towers, up to the which men ride on horseback, and by the founda^tion laid in
the town, the platformes whereof were drawn of such exquisitenes, that they
well declared it to be a work of marvelous charge, and that could not have
been finished in long time. For you shall understand, that the King had
brought with him from Naples, many excellent workmen in all kind of arts,
especially grauers and painters, and sure it seemed by the foundation, an
enterprise of a young King that thought not to die, but hoped of long life: for
he joined, together all the goodly things that were commended to him, were they
in France Italy, or Flaunders. Further, he continued still desirous to
return into Italy, and confessed that he had committed many errors in his
voyage thither, and oftentimes rehearsed them, determining if his fortune were
to return again and recover his losses; to give better order for the defense
of the country. The recovery also whereof (because he had great intelligence
in all places) he purposed to attempt, and to send thither fifteen hundred men
of arms, Italians, under the leading of the Marquess of Mantua, the Vrsins,
the Vitellies, and the Prefect of Rome brother to the Cardinal Saint Peter ad
Vincula. Moreover, Monseur d' Aubigny who had done him so great service in
Calabria, was ready to take his journey toward Florence; for the Florentines
offered to bear the half of these charges for six months, to the end the
King with these forces above mentioned, might first take Pisa 1, at the least
the small places about it, and then all together enter into the realm of
Naples, from whence messengers came daily to him. Alexander the Pope that now
is, practiced with him, and offered to become his perfect friend; for there was
a breach between him and the Venetians, so far forth that he sent a secret
messenger into France, whom myself conveyed into the Kings chamber a little
before his death. The Venetians were ready to practice against Milan: as
touching Spain, you have heard how it was affected to him. The King of Romans
desired nothing so much as his friendship, and that they two might join their
forces together, to recover that which appertained to them in Italy: for the
said Maximilian was great enemy to the Venetians, because they withhold diverse
things both from the house of Austrich (whereof he is heir) and also from the
empire 2.

Moreover, the King was well disposed a little before his death to lead his life
according to the commandments of God, to reform al abuses in the law and the
Church, and to diminish his receipts and revenues, purposing to leuy of his
people only twelve hundred thousand franks over and above his demains, which
sum the three estates granted him by way of subsidy at Towers at his first
coming to the crown, and this money he meant to employ upon the defense of
the realm. But as touching himself he would have lived upon his demaines,
according to the manner of the ancient Kings of France, and so might he well
have done: for the demaines are great, yea so great, if they were well ordered,
that they surmount a million of franks, certain customs and subsidies being
annexed to them. If this his determination had taken effect, he should thereby
much have eased his people, who pay at this present above two millions and a
half of franks by way of subsidy. Moreover, he took great pains in reforming
the abuses of the order of Saint Benet, and other orders of religion: he called
near about him holy religious men, and often heard them preach: he would
willingly have brought to pass if he could, that a Bishop should have had but
one bishopric, and a Cardinal but two, and that the clergy should have
been resident upon their benefices: but it had been a hard matter to reform
the church men. He gave great alms to poor people a little before his death,
as his confessor the Bishop of Angers (who was a worthy prelate) informed me.
Lastly, he had built a public audience where himself heard the suits of all
men, especially of the poor, and dispatched many matters: I my self saw him
in this place two hours together but eight days before his death, which was
the last time that ever I saw him: no matters of great importance were
dispatched there, but by this means he held men in fear, especially his
officers, some also of the which he displaced for extortion and briberie.

But the eight day of April, the year 1498. upon Palm sunday even, the King
being in this glory as touching the world, and in this good mind toward God:
departed out of the chamber of Queen Anne Duches of Britain his wife, leading
her with him to see the tennice plaiers in the trenches of the castle, whither
he had never led her before, and they two entered together into a gallery,
called Haquelebacs gallerie, because the said Haquelebac had in times past held
watch and ward in it. It was the vncleanest place about the castle, for every
man made water there, and the entry into it was broken down: moreover, the
King as he entered, knocked his browe against the door; notwithstanding that he
were of very small stature. Afterward he beheld a great while the tennice
playing, talking familiarly with all men. I my self was not present there, but
his said confessor the Bishop of Angers, and those of his chamber that were
nearest about him, have informed me of this I write: for as touching my self,
I was gone home eight days before to my house. The last word he spoke being in
health was, that he hoped never after to commit deadly sin, nor venial if he
could: in uttering the which words he fell backward and lost his speech, about
two of the clock at afternoon, and abode in this gallerie till eleven of the
clock at night. Thrice he recovered his speech, but it continued not with him,
as the said confessor told me, who had shriuen him twice that week, once of
ordinary, and once for those that came to be cured of the Kings evil. Every
man that listed entered into the gallerie, where he lay upon an old mattresse
of straw, from the which he never arose till he gave up the ghost, so that
nine hours he continued upon it. The said confessor who was continually by
him told me, that all the three times he recovered his speech he cried; My
God, and the glorious virgin Marie, Saint Claude, and Saint Blase help me.
Thus departed out of this world this mighty puissant Prince in this miserable
place, not being able to recover one poor chamber to die in: notwithstanding
that he had so many goodly houses, and built one so sumptuous at that present.
These two examples above rehearsed declare the greatness of Gods power, and the
shortness and misery of man's life, which traineth with it great cares, for the
purchasing of worldly goods and honors, and show withal that death is common
to all men, the which a Prince can no more avoid than a poor plowman.

The Notes.
1. Understand, to the end he might deliver it to the Florentines.

2 They withhold from the house of Austrich a part of Istria and Furly, and
from the empire Padoa and Veronne.

How the holy man Friar Hierom was burned at Florence by the procurement of the
Pope, and of diverse Florentines and Venetians his enemies. Chap. 19.
I Have told you before in this discourse of our voyage to Naples, that there
was at Florence a Friar Iacobin called Hierome, who had been resident there the
space of fifteen years, being a man famous for his holy life, and whom my
self saw and communed with in the year of our Lord 1495. The said Friar as
above is mentioned foretold diverse things, and affirmed always that the King
should pass over the mountains into Italy, and preached so openly, saying,
that he understood both this and all the other things whereof he spoke by
revelation. He said further, that the King was chosen of God to reform the
estate of the Church with the sword, and to chastise Tyrants. But because he
affirmed that he understood these things by revelation, many murmured against
him, and he procured himself the displeasure of the Pope and of diverse others
in the town of Florence. He led the holiest life that any man could lead, as
appeered both by his conversation, and also by his sermons, wherein he preached
against all kind of vice, so that he reformed the loose lives of many in the
said city. But in this year 1498. about the self same time that King Charles
ended his life, died also this Friar Hierom, within four or five days the one
of the other. The cause why I write this unto you, is for that he preached
always openly that the K. should return again into Italy, to execute the
commission that God had given him, which was to reform the Church by the
sword, and to chase tyrants out of the country; and that in case he did it
not, God would punish him cruelly; and all his former sermons, and all that he
made at this present he put forth in print, and are to be sold. This
threatening that he used against the King, saying that God would punish him
cruelly unless he returned: the said Friar writ also diverse times to him
before his death, and the like told he me with his own mouth, when I spoke
with him at our return out of Italy, saying that God had pronounced sentence
against the King in heaven, unless he executed that which he had commanded
him, and restrained his men from spoil. Now you shall understand, that about
the time of the Kings death, the Florentines were at great variance within the
city: some desired the Kings return, and waited daily for it, because of the
great hope Friar Hierom gave them thereof: but in the mean time they consumed
themselves and waxed marvelous poor, by reason of the great charges they
sustained in hope to recover Pisa, and the other places that they had put into
the K. hands, whereof the Venetians held Pisa. But other some gave advice to
take part with the league, and utterly to abandon the King, saying that they
were abused, that it was folly to look for his return, and that Friar Hierom
was an heretic, and a whoormaster, and that it were alms to put him into a
sack, and throw him into the river; but he was so friended in the town, that
they durst not attempt it. The Pope also and the Duke of Milan writ often
against this Friar, offering the Florentines to cause Pisa and their other
places to be restored them, if they would depart from their league with the
King, and take Friar Hierom and punish him. And by chance at that present a new
Seniorie was chosen in Florence, whereof many were enemies to this Friar. For
you shall understand that the said Seniorie changes at every two months end.
Wherefore the said Hieroms enemies suborned a Friar Franciscan to pick a
quarrel to him and call him heretic, affirming that he abused the people, in
saying he understood any thing by revelation: for proof whereof he offered
himself to the fire, and these words he spoke before the Seniorie. Friar
Hierom would not present himself to the fire, but a companion of his said,
that he would enter into the fire for him: and then another companion of the
Friar Franciscans presented himself on the other side: whereupon a day was
assigned when they should enter into the fire. Upon the which they both came
accordingly, accompanied each of them with his covent; but the Iacobine brought
the sacrament in his hand, which the Friar Franciscans and the Seniorie also
commanded him to lay down, which he refused to do: wherefore they returned
again to their couents. Then the people moved by the said Friar Hieroms
enemies, went with the Seniories commission and took him, with two others of
his companions in his convent, and at the very first racked him cruelly; they
slew also the chiefest citizen in the town called Francis Vallorie, because he
was the said Friars great friend. Moreover, the Pope sent his commission,
whereby he authorized them to make their process; and in the end they burned
them all three. They charged him with these two points only; first, that he
raised discord in the town: and secondarily, that he understood by his friends
of the council, all that he vaunted to know by revelation. For my part I will
neither accuse them, nor excuse them for this deed; neither know I whether they
did well or evil, in putting him to death: but sure he told many things that
proved true, which he could not receive from the council of Florence. And as
touching the King, and the evils he said should happen to him, they came to
pass as he prophesied: for first he told him, of the Doulphin his sons
death, and after of his own, as my self can witness, for I have seen the
letters he writ thereof to the King.

Of the obsequies and funerals of King Charles the eight, and of the coronation
of King Lewis the 12. his successor, with the genealogies of the Kings of
France continuing to the said Lewis. Chap. 20.
THe Kings disease was a Catarre or an Apoplexy: his Physicians hoped it would
have fallen down into one of his arms, the loss whereof they somewhat doubted,
but feared no whit any danger of death: notwithstanding the contrary to their
expectation happened. He had four Physicians, but gave credit only to the
woorst of them, and that so great, that the others durst not utter their minds:
for they would gladly have purged him four days before he died, because they
saw in his body the occasions of his death. Every man ran to the Duke of
Orleans, who was to succeed him as next heir to the crown. But King Charles
his chamberlains caused him to be richly buried, and immediately after his
death began solemn service for him, which continued both day and night: for
when the canons ended, the friars Franciscans began; and when they ended the
Bons-hommes 1, which was an order founded by himself: his body remained at
Amboise eight days, partly in his chamber, which was richly hanged, and partly
in the church. All solemnities belonging to his funerals, were more sumptuous
than ever were any K. of France: for his chamberlains, officers, and those
that were near about him, never departed from his body till it was laid in the
ground, which was about a month after his death, all the which space this
solemn service continued; so that the charges of his funerals amounted to five
and forty thousand franks, as diverse of the receipt have informed me. I arrived
at Amboise two days after his death, and went to say my prayers over his body,
where I abode five or six hours. And to say the truth, I never saw so great
mourning, and lamentation, nor that continued so long for any Prince as for
him: and no marvel; for he had bestowed upon those that were near about him,
namely his chamberlaines, and ten or twelve gentlemen of his privy chamber,
greater offices and gifts than ever did King of France, yea, too great to say
the truth. Besides that, he was the mildest and courteousest Prince that ever
lived; for I think he never gave foul word to any man: wherefore in better
hour could he not die, both to leave his fame behind him in histories, and to
be bewailed of those that served him. And I think verily, that my self am the
man whom of all other he used roughliest, but because I knew it to be the fault
of his youth and not to proceed of himself, I could never love him the worse
for it.

After I had stayed one night at Amboise, I went to the new King, with whom I
had been more familiar than any man: and further, for his sake had sustained
all my troubles and losses, which now he seemed little to remember:
notwithstanding with great wisdom he took possession of the crown, for he
changed no pensions that year, though half the year were yet to come,
neither displaced many officers, but said that he would maintain every man in
his estate; whereby he wan great honor. Moreover, with all speed possible he
went to his coronation, whereat my self was present. And these that follow
represented the peers of France. The first was the Duke of Alencon, who
represented the Duke of Burgundy; the second the Duke of Bourbon, who
represented the Duke of Normandy; the third the Duke of Lorraine, who
represented the D, of Guienne. The first Earl was Philip L. of Rauastaine, who
represented the Earl of Flaunders; the second Engilbert of Cleues, who
represented the Earl of Champaigne; the third the Earl of Foix, who
represented the Earl of Tholouze. And the said King Lewis the twelfth now
reigning, was crowned at Reims the 27. of May, the year 1498. and is the
fourth that has come to the crown by collateral line. The two first were
Charles Martell, or Pepin his son, and Hugh Capet, who were both of them
Masters of the palace or governors of those Kings, whom they deposed from the
crown, which afterward themselves usurped; the third was King Philip of
Valois; and the fourth the King that now reigns: but these two latter came to
the crown by just and lawful title. The first genealogy of the Kings of
France begins at Meronee: two Kings had reigned in France before the said
Meronee, namely Pharamond, who was first chosen King of France (for his
predecessors were called Dukes or Kings of Gaul) and his son Claudio. The
said Pharamond was chosen King the year of grace 420. and reigned ten years,
and his son Claudio eighteen, so that these two Kings reigned eight and
twenty years: and Meronee who succeeded next after, was not son, but cosen
to the said Claudio. Wherefore it seems that the right line of the Kings of
France has failed five times: notwithstanding (as before I said) men begin
the first line at Meronee, who was crowned King in the year of our Lord 448.
from the which time to the coronation of King Lewis the twelfth are numbered
1050. years. But if you reckon from Pharamond, you must add eight and twenty
more, which make 1078. years since there was first King of France. From
Meronee to the reign of Pepin (when the line of the said Meronee failed) are
numbered 333. years. From Pepin to Hugh Capet reigned the true line of the said
Pepin, and Charlemaine his son, the space of 237. years. The right line of
Hugh Capet reigned 339. years, and ended in King Philip of Valois: and the
right line of the said King Philip of Valois continued till the death of King
Charles the eight, which happened in the year of our Lord 1498. The said King
Charles was the last of this line, the which had continued 169. years, during
the which space, these seven Kings reigned in France, Philip of Valois, King
John, Charles the fifth, Charles the sixth, Charles the seventh, Lewis the 11.
and Charles the eight, in whom the right line of Philip of Valois ended.

The Notes.
1 This was an order of religion devised by the King.

How Charles Duke of Burgundy was of the house of Lancaster as Commines
mentions lib. 1. cap. 5. and in other places.
John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster. -- m. Blaunch daughter and heir of Henry
Duke of Lancaster and Darby. Philippa. -- m. John the tenth King of Portugale,
bastard to King Ferrande of Portugale. Isabella. -- m. Philip Duke of
Burgundy. Charles Duke of Burgundy, of whose wars and death this history
treats.








How Elizabeth wife to King Edward the fourth, was niece to the Constable of
France, as mentions Commines lib. 4. cap. 5.
Peter of Luxembourg. -- m. Margaret Countess of Saint Paul, Conuersane,
Briane, Lignac, etc. Petrus Earl of Saint Paul, etc. -- m. Margaret daughter
to William D. of Andre in Prouence. Iaquelna, or Iaquette. -- m. John Duke of
Bedford. -- m. Richard Wooduile Earl of Rivers. Elizabeth. -- m. Sir John
Gray. Thomas Marquis Dorset.
-- m. Edward the fourth King of England. Edwardus quintus R. Ang.



Lewis of Luxembourg, Earl of Saint Paul, Constable of France. -- m. Jane
daughter and heir to Robert Earl of Marle, etc. Anthony Earl of Roussv
mentioned by Commines lib. 2. cap. 11. and lib. 4. ca. 4. John Earl of Marle
slain at the battle of Morat. Peter Earl of Saint Paul and Brienne. -- m.
Margaret daughter to Lewis D. of Sauoye. Marie. Francis.


-- m. Marie daughter to Lewis Duke of Sauoye. Lewis Ea^^ of Ligny.








How Brabant, Lambourg, Luxembourg and Namurs came to Philip Duke of Burgundy,
as mentions Commines lib. 4. cap. 13.
Brabant. Lambourg. John the first of that name Duke of Brabant and Lambourg.
Lambourg was erected into a Duchy 1172. and Henry the last Duke thereof (who
died without issue 1293.) sold it to John the first of that name Duke of
Brabant. But Henry Earl of Luxembourg father to Henry the Emperor, the
Bishop of Colyn, and one called the Earl Ghelric invaded the Duchy of
Lambourg, with them Duke John fought near to the castle of Voronc, and took
the Earl Ghelric (who pretended title to Lambourg) and the Bishop of Colin
prisoners: the Earl of Luxembourg with two of his brethren was slain, the
castle of Voronc razed, since the which time, Lambourg has remained quiet
under the Dukes of Brabant.
-- m. Margaret daughter to Guy Earl of Flaunders. John Duke of Brabant and
Lambourg. -- m. Margaret daughter to Edward the first King of England. John
Duke of Brabant and Lambourg. -- m. Marie daughter to Philip of Valois King of
France. Jane the eldest daughter died 1397. -- m. Wenceslaus son to John King
of Boheme Wenceslaus succeeded John Duke of Brabant, but he died 1383. without
issue, and after his wife dying anno 1393. left Brabant and Lambourg to
Anthony second son to Philip the Hardy, the said Ianes grand nephew by
Margaret her yoonger sister, after whose death and his two sons John and
Philip, Brabant and Lambourg descended to Philip Duke of Burgundy, as
mentions Commines in the place above rehearsed.
died 1383.
Margaret. -- m. Lewis Malea^^^ Earl of Flaundres. Margaret. -- m. Philip the
hardy. Margaret wife to William Earl of Haynault. Anthony slain in the battle
of Agincourt. -- m. Jane daughter to Walleran Earl of Saint Paul and Ligny,
the first wife. John succeeded his father in Brabant and Lambourg. Philip
succeeded his brother.
-- m. Elizabeth second wife to Anthony Duke of Brabant, was daughter to John
Duke of Gorlic, brother to the Emperors Wenceslaus and Sigismundus, who partly
in respect of this marriage, partly for money gave to Duke Anthony the Duchy
of Luxembourg, but after his death, they and William Duke of Saxony, who had
married Sigismundus daughters daughter, sought to dispossess her of it: but
Duke Philip of Burgundy ever defended her, and after her death succeeded her
as well by her gift as also as heir to Duke Anthony, (his two sons being
dead) who had paid money to VVenceslaus and Sigismundus for it: afterward also
Charles Duke of Burgundy bought the title of Isabella (wife to Cassimirus King
of Polonia, and niece to the Emperor Sigismund) to the Duchy of Luxembourg to
hold it without quarrel.
Elizabeth the second wife.
Luxembourg. John Duke of Burgundy. -- m. Margaret siste^ to William Earl of
Haynault and Holland. Namurs. Philip Duke of Burgundy. As touching Namurs Duke
Philip bought it for his money of diverse that pretended title to it, especially
of John Earl of Namur, who sold it to Duke Philip under condition to hold it
during his life, which happened anno 1428.















How Holland, Hainault, and Zeland came to Duke Philip, as mentions Commines
lib. 4. cap. 13. where also the Queens Majesty's title to the said countries
is somewhat touched.
Holland, Hainault, Zeland. William Earl of Holland, Hainault, and Zeland. --
m. Jane sister to Philip of Valois after K. of France. Philippa the eldest
daughter, wife to Edward the third King of England. William declared by the
Emperor ann. 1337. Earl of Holland, Zeland, Hainault, and Lord of Friseland,
slain by the Frizons 1345. Margaret, daughter as some write, to William, This
Margaret Guicchiardin writes to have been daughter to William the yoonger
Earl of Hainault, Holland and Zeland, but Annals Genealogiques Franciae say
that she was sister not daughter to William, as do also other most approved
Authors. And if she were but sister, then the Queens Majesty being descended
of Philippa the said Williams eldest sister, is right heir of all these
countries. Meyerus lib, 12. fol. 140. page 2. and fol. 147. page 1. says, that
Margaret was sister not daughter to Duke William, which also is the more
manifestly proved, because the wife of this William was Jane the eldest
daughter to John Duke of Brabant, who ouerliued her husband, and after married
VVenceslaus brother to the Emperor Charles the fourth: which woman never had
issue, yet find we no mention of any other wife that William the yoonger
Earl of Hainault had.
as others, sister. -- m. Lewis of Bauier^ Emperor. William the eldest brother
died without issue. Albert succeeded his brother. -- m. Margaret daughter to
the Duke of Brida. William succeeded his father. -- m. Margaret daughter to
Philip the Hardy. Iaqueline daughter and heir had four husbands, but died
without issue, and to her succeeded Philip D. of Burgundy.

Margaret. -- m. John Duke of Burgundy son to Philip the Hardy. Philip Duke
of Burgundy succeeded Iaqueline in all these Seniories, as here mentions
Commines.






A daughter married to the Duke of Iuliers.




How Margaret of Flaunders was heir of Flaunders, Neuers and Rethel, as
mentions Commines lib. 4. cap. 13. and lib. 5. cap. 11. the which Margaret
married with Philip the Hardy, yoongest son to John King of France.
Ottho yoonger son to Hugh the fourth of that name Duke of Burgundy. -- m.
Isabella daughter and heir of Arnulfe Earl of Neuers, which Arnulfe died anno
1243. Neuers. Yolande. Flaunders. -- m. Robert of Bethune the 22. Earl of
Flaunders died 1323. Lewis Earl of Neuers, Baron of Douzy, died before his
father ann. 1322. Rethel. -- m. Mary daughter and heir of James ^ of Rethel.
Lewis Earl of Flaunders, Neuers, Rethel, slain at the battle of Crecy 1346.
-- m. Margaret yoongest daughter to Philip le Longue, King of France. Lewis
Earl of Flanders, surnamed of Malain, slain by John Duke of Berry brother to
Charles the fifth anno 1383. -- m. Margaret daughter to John the 3. Duke of
Brabant. Margaret daughter and heir here mentioned married two Dukes of
Burgundy, as in the next leaf more at large shall appear. -- m. Philip Duke
and Earl of Burgundy the first husband. -- m. Philip the Hardy yoongest son
to John K. of France.












How Arthois and the County of Burgundy descended to the said Lady Margaret
above mentioned, and how she married two Dukes of Burgundy, and how Philip the
Hardy her second husband obtained the Duchy of Burgundy after the death of
Philip Duke of Burgundy her first husband.
Burgundy Duchy. Robert Duke of Burgundy died 1308. -- m. Agnes daughter to
King Saint Lewis. Margaret the eldest daughter. -- m. Lewis Huttin King of
France. Jane wife to Phillip Earl of Eureux.

Jane. -- m. Philip of Valois King of France. John King of France. Touching
the Duchy of Burgundy, note that after the death of Philip Duke of Burgundy,
nephew to Ottho the 16. Duke of Burgundy, King John of France being son to
Jane the said Otthos yoonger sister, seized the Duchy of Burgundy into his
hands, excluding Jane daughter to Margaret the elder sister as suspected of
bastardie, and after gave the said Duchy to his yoongest son Philip the
hardy for his advancement in marriage with the Lady Margaret of Flaunders.
Philip the hardy second husband to the Lady Margaret.


Ottho the 16. Duke of Burgundy. -- m. Jane the eldest daughter. Philip died
before his father anno 1346. -- m. Jane daughter to William Earl of Boloin and
Auuergne. Philip Duke and Earl of Burgundy succeeded his grandfather, died
1361. -- m. Margaret daughter and heir, her second husband was Philip the
hardy.







Burgundy County. Othelin Earl of Burgundy died 1303. Arthois. -- m. Maude
daughter to Robert Earl of Arthois. Touching the title of Arthois this is to
be observed, that Robert Earl of Arthois father to Maude, had a son named
Philip, who died before his father, and left behind him a son named Robert
Earl of Beumont, who after his grandfathers death demanded the Country of
Arthois: but this Maude by favor of the French King obtained it, because she
was adjudged nearer heir to the Earl Robert being his daughter, than the
Earl of Beumont being his sons son: for spite whereof, the Earl of
Beumont revolted to the King of England, of him are descended the Earls of Eu.
Jane succeeded her mother in her widowhood, and was poisoned immediately after
her mothers death. -- m. Philip the long King of France Jane the eldest
daughter. -- m. Ottho the 16. Duke of Burgundy. Philip died before his father
anno 1346. -- m. Jane daughter to William Earl of Boloin and Auuergne. Philip
Duke and Earl of Burgundy succeeded his grandfather, died 1361. -- m.
Margaret daughter and heir, her second husband was Philip the hardy.




Margaret. This Margaret being in her widdowhood, succeeded in Arthois and the
County of Burgundy of Philip her sister Ianes sons son, and husband to
Margaret her sons daughter, to whom after her death the said Seigniories
descended.
-- m. Lewis Earl of Flaunders Lewis of Malain Earl of Flaunders. -- m.
Margaret daughter to John D. of Brabant. Margaret daughter and heir, her
second husband was Philip the hardy. -- m. Philip Duke and Earl of Burgundy
succeeded his grandfather, died 1361.






Blaunch. -- m. Charles le bell K. of France.





How the King of Portugale was cousin germane to the Duke of Burgundy, as is
mentioned Lib. 5. cap. 7.
Ferdinand the ninth King of Portugale. John a bastard, but King of Portugale.
-- m. Philippa daughter to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster Isabella. -- m.
Philip Duke of Burgundy. Charles Duke of Burgundy. Mary daughter and heir to
D. Charles. -- m. Maximilian Emperor.



Edward King of Portugale. -- m. Jane sister to Alfonse King of Arragon,
Naples, and Sicile. Leonora. -- m. Frideric the third Emperor. Maximilian
Emperor. -- m. Mary daughter and heir to D. Charles.


Alfonsus King of Portugale, the same that came into France for succors.







How the Duke of Cleues was the Lady of Burgundies nearest kinsman by his
mother, as is mentioned Lib. 5. cap. 16.
John Duke of Burgundy. -- m. Margaret sister to William Earl of Hainault and
Holland. Mary. -- m. Adolf the first D. of Cleues. Adolfe Lord of Rauastain. --
m. Betrice daughter to John Duke of Cuymbria in Portugale. Philip Lord of
Rauastain mentioned in many places of this history. -- m. Mary base daughter
to Philip Duke of Burgundy.


John Duke of Cleues the D. here mentioned. -- m. Isabella daughter to John E.
of Neuers. John duke of Cleues the Dukes son, for whom the marriage with the
Lady Mary should have been made.



Philip Duke of Burgundy. -- m. Isabella daughter to John K. of Portugale.
Charles Duke of Burgundy. -- m. Isabella daughter to Charles Duke of Bourbon.
Mary Duchess of Austrich, so often mentioeed in this history. -- m.
Maximilian Emperor.









How King Henry the 7. was right heir of the house of Lancaster, contrary to
Commines who affirms the contrary Lib. 5. cap. 18. together with the excuse
of Commines error.
Edward the third King of England. John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster. -- m.
Blaunch daughter and heir to Henry D. of Lancaster. John Duke of Bedford Henry
the 4. Rex Angliae. Henry the 5. Rex Angliae. Henry the 6. Rex Angliae. Edward
Prince of Wales.


Thomas D. of Clare^ce Humfrey Duke of Gloucester.
-- m. Katharine the third wife. John Earl of Sommerset. John Duke of
Sommerset the eldest son. Margaret countess of Richmond. Henry the 7

Edmund made D of Sommerset, because his brother died without issue male. Henry
Duke of Sommerset beheaded by K Edward the fourth. Edmund Duke of Sommerset
beheaded also by K. Edward the fourth. A daughter married Humfrey Duke of
Buckingham
John slain at the battle of Teukesbury.







The excuse of Commines error.
The line of Henry the fourth being failed in Prince Edward, the right of the
house of Lancaster came to the house of Sommerset, as here is set forth: but
after the d^^th of John Duke of Sommerset, who died without heir male, Edmund
his brother was made Duke of Sommerset. Wherefore Commines knowing Henry the 7.
to claim the right of the house of Lancaster as heir of the house of
Sommerset, and seeing others to be Dukes of Sommerset and not him: supposed
them to be of the elder house to him; yet notwithstanding was Henry the 7.
nearer heir than they, being by his mother descended of the elder brother,
though they being of the male line obtained the title of Sommerset before him.
But this in my fancy bred Commines error, and thus much in his excuse.

The title the Duke of Lorraine had to the realm of Sicilie, county of
Prouence, and Duchy of Bar, mentioned by Commines Lib. 7. cap. 1. and the Kings
title thereto: together with the whole quarrel between the house of Arragon
and Aniou: and why the house of Aniou had the best title, as mentions
Commines Lib. 8. Cap. 16.
Naples Charles Earl of Aniou and Main brother to King S. Lewis, King of
Naples and Sicilie. Prouence. -- m. Betrice heir of Prouence. 2 Charles
surnamed the Boiteux, King of Naples. Hungary. -- m. Mary daughter and heir
to Stephen King of Hungary. Charles Martell King of Hungary the eldest
brother. Cornumbert King of Hungary. Lewis King of Hungary. Andrew strangled
by Queen Jane his wife. 4 -- m. Jane succeeded Robert her grandfather.


3 Robert King of Naples the yoonger brother. Charles sans terre died before
his father. 4 Jane succeeded Robert her grandfather. -- m. Andrew strangled by
Queen Jane his wife.
Mary. Boccace his Conc. Margaret 5 -- m. Charles King of Naples and Hungary.
7 Jane succeeded Ladislaus her brother, died anno 1433. 6 Ladislaus King of
Naples died 1414.



Lewis D. of Durazzo. Charles of Durazzo executed by Lewis King of Hungary. 5
Charles King of Naples and Hungary. -- m. Margaret 7 Jane succeeded Ladislaus
her brother, died anno 1433. 6 Ladislaus King of Naples died 1414.



Clementia. -- m. Charles Earl of Valois. Philip of Valois King of France.
John King of France. Lewis of Aniou adopted by Q. Jane the first, slain an.
1385. Lewis of Aniou troubled K. Ladislaus, died anno 1417. Bar. Yoland heir
of Bar by Yoland her mother. Marie. -- m. Charles the 7 K. of France. Lewis the
11 K. of France Charles the 8. K. of France


Reave so often mentioned in this history, adopted by the last Qu. Jane, after
Lewis his brothers death. Lorraine. -- m. Isabella daughter and heir to
Charles D. of Lorraine. John Duke of Calabria died before his father. Nicholas
died before his grandfather.
Yoland wife to Frederic of Vandemonne. Rene. This is he that claimed Prouence
and Bar of K. Charles.


Charles Earl, of Maine mentioned Lib. 1. cap. 3. Charles, whom king Rene made
his heir of Naples, Prouence, and Bar, and he after made King Lewis his heir
lib. 7. c. 1.
Lewis the third of Aniou Duke, adopted by Jane the second, died anno 1433.











Hereby appears that the Duke of Lorraine had the best title to Prouence, as
heir to Lewis the first of that name Duke of Aniou, to whom Queen Jane gave
it: to Naples likewise as heir to the house of Aniou, by being daughters son
to Rene, to whom Queen Jane the second left it by her last will and testament,
of Bar he was heir as heir to Yolande his great grandmother: and as touching
the testaments of the two first Charles kings of Naples, who, as it is
alleged, so united Prouence, that it could not be severed from the realm of
Naples, nor descend to the heir female as long as a male was living. First,
the example of Queen Jane who succeeded Robert her grandfather diverse males
living, proves there was never any such testament: besides that, king Charles
was no more heir male to those kings than the Duke of Lorraine, for they both
descended of them by a woman, namely Clementia, wife to Charles of Valois. So
that the King had no color to Naples or Prouence, but at this da^e the whole
title of the house of Aniou thereto, rests in the now Duke of Lorraine, who
is lineally descended of king Rene. Lastly, the reason whereupon Commines
groundeth the house of Anious title to the realm of Naples to be best: is
only because Lewis of Aniou was made heir thereof by Queen Ianes last
testament, which reuoketh all former testaments.

The story of this pedigree of Naples and Sicilie.
1. Charles brother to Saint Lewis King of France obtained Prouence by
marriage of Betrice daughter to Raymond, or Robert, or Berengarius Earl of
Prouence, who made her his heir, though she were his yoonger daughter, after
Vrbanus the fourth Pope of Rome called him into Italy against Manfredus King
of Naples and Sicilie, whom Charles slew in battle, and after beheaded
Conradinus also, who quarreled the realms of Naples and Sicilie: but soon
after Peter King of Arragon, who had married King Mansridus daughter, revolted
Sicilie from him, flew all the French men in an evening, and possessed Sicilie,
as his posterity namely King Philip does yet at this day. Charles was crowned
King of Naples by Vrbane the fourth, anno 1255. and after confirmed by Clement
the fourth, and died anno 1274.

2. Charles his son in his fathers time seeking to recover Sicilie, was taken
prisoner by King Peter's forces. and carried into Arragon, where he should have
been executed in revenge of Conradinus death (as 200. gentlemen and nobles
taken with him were) had not Constance king Peter's wife saved his life: after
he was restored to Naples, paying for his ransom 30000. marks, and married
the daughter and heir of Stephen king of Hungary, by whom he had nine sons
and five daughters, whose offspring look in Onufrius page 309. he died anno
1319. These two kings are they that our author mentions lib. 7. cap. 1. that
were said to have made testaments that Prouence could not be severed from the
realm of Naples, nor descend to the female as long as there was an heir male
living, which appears to be false in the example of Queen Jane.

3. Robert king of N^ples crowned by Clement the fifth, died without issue male
anno 1342. and left his realm to Jane his sons daughter, under condition
that she should marry Andrew yoonger son to Cornumbere king of Hungary her
cousin germain removed: here is to be observed that this Robert was yoonger
son to king Charles, but the said king gave to Charles his eldest son his
realm of Hungary, and Naples to this Robert. In his time lived Petrarcha and
Boccace.

4. Jane daughter to Charles sans terre succeeded her grandfather Robert, and
married Andrew son to the king of Hungary as her said grandfather had
appointed, whom within three years she strangled: whereupon Lewis king of
Hungary his brother came into Italy, chased Q. Jane out of Naples, executed
Charles of Durazzo as consenting to his brothers death, and carried Charles his
son with him into Hungary; after whose departure, Jane by help of Pope
Clement returned and recovered Naples, but after she fell out with Pope Vrbanus
the sixth, who chased her into Prouence, where she adopted Lewis of Aniou son
to King John of France, and so returned to Naples, against whom the Pope
called out of Hungary Charles son to Charles of Durazzo, who recovered
Naples, but Prouence Lewis enioied: she was hanged ann. 1381.

5. Charles (son to Charles of Durazzo beheaded) was led prisoner into
Hungary by king Lewis, as before is mentioned, after whose death, he succeeded
him in Hungary as his next heir male: he was invested King of Naples by
Vrbane the sixth against Queen Jane, whom he took prisoner anno 1381. and hung
at the same window she had hung her husband, and beheaded also Marie Queen
Ianes sister (whom Boccace was enamored of) as consenting to her sisters
husbands death: he slew in battle anno 1385. Lewis of Aniou, adopted by Queen
Jane, after he fell at variance with Pope Vrbane. He was slain in Hungary by
the treason of the old Queen king Lewis his wife and her daughter at a feast,
anno 1386 his wife was Margaret Queen Ianes sister.

6 Ladislaus lost Hungary by his fathers murder, but was at length received
and crowned king of Naples by Pope Boneface the ninth, anno 1, 90. and then he
chased Lewis the second out of Italy, who after his fathers death was come
thither and had got some part of the realm. After Ladislaus fell out with
Alexander the fifth, and took Rome, whereupon the Pope gave the realm of
Naples to Lewis of Aniou, who returned and vanquished Ladislaus and recovered
Rome, but not knowing how to use the victory, Ladislaus recovered himself,
forced Lewis to retire into France, and then again took Rome, and died anno
14^4.

7. Jane the second succeeded her brother Ladislaus, after she fell out with
the Pope, who called Lewis of Aniou the third of that name against her, then
she adopted Alfonse of Arragon, who chased Lewis out of Italy, but Alfonse and
she falling at variance, she adopted Lewis of Aniou her enemy, who recovered
Naples, anno 1424. and reigned with her till anno 1432. or 1433. when they both
died: and then she made Rene brother to Lewis her heir: but he being then
prisoner with Philip Duke of Burgundy, could not come to Naples, and then
Alfonse being dismissed out of prison by Philip Maria Duke of Milan, where he
was also prisoner at the same time, prevailed and conquered Naples, and was
invested by Pope Eugenius. Since the which time the Aniouins have but quarelled
Naples, and as for the succession of this Alfonse, you shall see it in the last
pedigree in the end of this work.

Why the Venetians had no right to the realm of Cyprus, as Commines writes
Lib. 7. cap. 4.
1 Peter taken prisoner by the Genuois, but delivered under condition to pay
them a yearly tribute. 2 Ianus so named, because he was born at Genua, which
was founded by Ianus. Anne married Lewis Duke of Sauoy. John. Amadis Duke of
Sauoy right heir of Cyprus by his mother after Charlotte was dead. Philip Duke
of Sauoy. Charles Duke of Sauoy. Phibbert Duke of Sauoy.

4 Lewis married Charlotte: he was crowned King, but was chased away by James
the bastard. He died sans issue -- m. Charlotte married first John King of
Portugale, who was poisoned, and then this Lewis. She died sans issue.

3 John lived like Sardanapalus. Charlotte married first John King of Portugale,
who was poisoned, and then this Lewis. She died sans issue. 4 -- m. Lewis
married Charlotte: he was crowned King, but was chased away by James the
bastard. He died sans issue
5 James a bastard, by the Sultan of Aegypts help chased Lewis his sisters
husband out of Cyprus, and made himself King. -- m. Katharine daughter to
Mark Comaire Senator of Venice: the Venetians adopted her, and under that
color conquered Cyprus, her husband and son being dead. 6A son borne after
his fathers death, of whom the Venetians were tutors, but was poisoned, as some
write, by them as his father had been. After his death the Venetians conquered
Cyprus, under color of adoption ann. 1473. or as Meyer says fol. 349. anno
1470.







Hereby appears that the Duke of Sauoy has the right to Cyprus, not the
Venetians: for James husband to their adopted daughter was a bastard and an
usurper: and their adopted daughter a stranger to the crown, and could pretend
no title to it, Sed male parta, male dilabuntur.

The house of Medices, whereof so ample mention is made Lib. 7. Cap. 5.
John of Medices. Cosmus mentioned Lib. 7. cap. 5. died anno 1464. the ^8.
year of his age. Countessin^ of Bardy. Peter. Commines seems to ouerpasse
this man. -- m. Lucretia Tornaboni Julian slain in Florence, Commines Lib. 6.
c. 5. Julius called Pope Clement the seventh.
Laurence so often mentioned in Commines. -- m. Clarice Vrsine. John called
Pope Leo the tenth. Peter fled out of Florence when K. Charles came thither. --
m. Alfonsine Vrsine. Clarice married Philip S^rozzi. Laurence made Duke of
Vrbin by Pope Leo the tenth. -- m. Maudeleine daughter and heir to the Earl
of Boloine. Alexander D. of Florence slain by his cousin Laurence of Medices.
-- m. Margaret base daughter to Charles the Emperor. -- m. Octauio Farnese Pope
Paulus nephew, second husband to Margaret.

These were both bastards.
Iulia married Restagno Canteline a gentleman in L'Abruzzo. Julius married a
Lady of the county of Piombi. Alexander. Julian.

Katharine Q. mother of France.



Julian Duke of Nemours married Philibert sister to Louyse King Francis mother
Duches of Nemours. Hippolitus a Cardinal but a bastard.






Laurence. Peter Francis. John. -- m. Katharine Sforce. John the valiant
soldier. -- m. Maria Salu^^ti. Cosmus chosen Duke of Florence after Alexanders
death, and confirmed by Charles the Emperor. -- m. Leonor of Toledo daughter to
Peter Duke of Alua. Isabella Duches of Ferrara, and two other daughters.
Francis D. of Florence died 1584. Ferdinand. John a Cardinal Gracian. Peter











How Lewis Duke of Orleans, called after King Lewis the 12. pretended title to
the Duchy of Milan, as Commines mentions Lib. 7. cap. 6. and in diverse other
places.
1 John Galeas made first Duke of Milan by the Emperor Wenceslaus. This is he
that lies buried at Pauia, Commines Lib. 7. cap. 7 died anno 1402. -- m.
Elizabeth daughter to the King of Boheme the first wife. Valentine. -- m. Lewis
Duke of Orleans brother to Charles the sixth. Ian^^. John Duke of Angoulesme.
Charles Duke of Angoulesme Francis King of France -- m. Claude the eldest
daughter. Francis died before his father. Henry the second King of France,
etc. Charles died before his father.



Orleans. Charles Duke of Orleans. Lewis the 12. K. of France. Claude the
eldest daughter. -- m. Francis King of France Francis died before his father.
Henry the second King of France, etc. Charles died before his father.

Renee married Hercules Duke of Ferrara.

Philip Earl of Virtue. Margaret wife to Richard Earl of Estampes.


-- m. Katharine Visconti the second wife. 2 John Maria succeeded his father:
died sans issue, he was slain by his people. 3 Philip Maria succeeded his
brother: died without lawful issue. Appointed by Testament King Alfonse of
Naples his heir. Blaunche a bastard Sforce. 4 -- m. Francis Sforce,
notwithstanding Philips Testament usurped the Duchy by favor of the people.
Hyppolita married Alfonse King of Naples. 5 Galeas slain in the Church of
Milan. -- m. Bo^^^ daught^^ to the Duke of Sauoy. Blaunche married Maximilian
the Emperor. 6 John Galeas died when K. Charles came into Italy. -- m.
Isabella daughter to Alfonso King of Naples. Francis led into France by Lewis
the 12. Bonne married Sigismund K. of Poland.

Katharine married John de Medices. John the valiant soldier in Charles the
fifts time. Cosmus Duke of Florence.



Ascanio a Cardinal. 7 Lodouic called King Charles into Italy. Died prisoner
in France under Lewis the twelfth. -- m. Betrice daughter to Hercules Duke of
Ferrara. 8 Maximilian recovered the Duchy from Lewis the 12. after carried
away prisoner by King Francis. 9 Francis restored by Charles the Emperor: died
sans issue.

Philip. Octauian.







The French King claims from Valentine, who ought to have succeeded her
brother Philip Maria, before Blaunche being his base daughter.

After this Duke Francis death, the Emperor Charles seized the Duchy, partly
by composition with Duke Francis at his restitution, which was to make the
Emperor his heir if he died without issue, and partly by gift from Philip
Maria, who by his ^estament gave it to Alfonse king of Naples, whose heir the
Emperor was: and partly in right of the house of Austrich, which pretended
title to it, as writes Commines Lib. 7. cap. 2.

The pedigree of Hercules Duke of Ferrara, of whom so often mention is made in
this history.
The family of Este ancestors of this Nicholas governed Ferrara from the year
1202. or not long after, it is held of the Pope.

Nicholas Lord or Marquis as some call him of Ferrara. Obizone was made
general of the church, and had therefore a pension of ten thousand ducats.
Nicholas vanquished Bernabo Visconti. Succeeded his father. Albertus succeeded
his brother. Nicholas a bastard, under him was a council at Ferrara, whereat
the Emperor of Greece was present. Lionello a bastard succeeded his father. --
m. Daughter to John Francesco Gonzaga. 2 Nicholas succeeded Borso, but his
uncle Hercules right heir expelled him, and seeking to recover the state, he
was taken and beheaded by Sigismundus his other uncle.

1 Borso a bastard succeeded his brother, because his brothers son was young,
he was created the first Duke of Ferrara by the Emperor Frederic. 3 Hercules
expelled Nicholas his nephew he was general to the Florentines, Venetians, and
Milanois. This is he so often mentioned in this history. -- m. Leonora
daughter to Ferdinand King of Naples. Betrice married Lodouic Sforce Duke of
Milan. Alfonse. -- m. Lucretia daughter to Alexander the 6. Bi^^op of Rome.
Franciscus. Hippolitus a Cardinal. 5 Hercules. -- m. Renee daughter to Lewis
the 12. King of France. 6 Alfonsus D. of Ferrara. Luigi Cardinal of Este.


-- m. Laura. Alfonsus. Alfonsinus.

^ Elizabeth married Francis Gonzaga the Marquess of Mantua mentioned in this
story.

Sigismundus.






The pedigree of Francis Marquis of Mantua, so often mentioned in this history.
The family of Gonzagua had governed Mantua before this Francis, from the year
1328. under this Francis John Galliazzo besieged Mantua a year, but prevailed
not: this Francis served the Duke of Milan and the Venetians.

Francis died anno 1407. John Francis first Marquis of Ma^tua made by the
Emperor Sigismundus, was thrice general to the Venetians, died anno 1443. --
m. Paola daughter to Malatesta, Lord of Rimini. Luigi lived in the time of
Frederick the third. -- m. Barbara daughter to the Marquis of Brandenburg.
Luigi. Francis a cardinal. Frederick was general to the Duke of Milan and the
Venetians. -- m. Margarita Tedesca. Francis in the age of 38. years fought
with Charles the 8. at Laro, died 1520. -- m. Elizabeth daughter to Hercules
Duke of Ferrara. Hercules a Cardinal. Frederick made general of the Church by
Pope Leo, and so confirmed by his successors, made D. by Charles the fifth, he
died 1539. Montferrat. -- m. Margaret daughter and heir of William Paleologus,
marquis of Montferrat. William. Francis. Lewis. Frederick.

Ferdinandus general of Milan to the Emperor Charles the fifth.



John Francis. Rodolfe.
-- m. Margaret daughter to the Duke of Bauiera.
Charles troubled his brother, but was chased away by him, and died in very
poor estate. Lucedus was misshapen. Alexander crooked backed was a monk.





How Ferdinand King of Arragon had more right to the realm of Naples than the
Kings of the house of Arragon that possessed it, as writes Commines Lib. 8.
cap. 17.
1 John the first of that name, King of Castile. -- m. Daughter to Ferdinand
the first, King of Portugale. Castile. 2 Henry the third, King of Castile and
Leon. Mary wife to Alfonse King of Arragon and Naples. 3 John the second. 4
Henry the fourth married a daughter of the King of Portugale. Elizabeth put
from the crown by her aunt, Commin. Lib. 5. cap. 7.
5 Elizabeth succeeded her brother, putting her niece from the crown as a
bastard. Castile and Arragon united. 4 -- m. Ferrand King of Arragon, and
Castile by his wife, so often mentioned in these Italian wars. Katharine wife
to Henry the eight, King of England. Jane married Philip Archduke of Austrich.
6 Charles the fifth Emperor.
John married Margaret daughter to Maximilian the Emperor, died before his
father.




-- m. Elenor daughter to Peter King of Arragon. Arragon. 1. Ferrand Earl of
Medina del Campo K. of Arragon.




This Ferrande obtained the realm of Arragon anno 1407. because his mother was
daughter to king Peter, whose heir male failed in Martin his nephew, and
notwithstanding that Martin had a daughter, yet Ferrande obtained the crown to
her prejudice.

3 John succeeded his brother in Arragon, but in Naples Ferrand his brothers
bastard succeeded. Ferrand King of Arragon, and Castile by his wife, so often
mentioned in these Italian wars. Castile and Arragon united. 4 -- m. 5
Elizabeth succeeded her brother, putting her niece from the crown as a
bastard. Katharine wife to Henry the eight, King of England. Jane married
Philip Archduke of Austrich. 6 Charles the fifth Emperor.
John married Margaret daughter to Maximilian the Emperor, died before his
father.

Charles King of Navarre sans issue.
Jane Queen of Portugale. Mary married John the second K. of Castile. 2 1
Naples Alfonse adopted by Jane Queen of Naples, who after adopted Lewis Duke
of Aniou. 2 Ferrande the bastard succeeded his father in the realm of Naples,
died a little before King Charles came into Italy. 5 Frederick succeeded his
nephew Ferdinand, led after into France by Lewis the 12. Ferdinand married
Germain widow to King Ferdinand of Arragon.
3 Alfonse fled when K. Charles came into Italy. 4 Ferdinand chased from Naples
by King Charles, but after recovered the realm, died sans issue. Isabella wife
to John Galeas, Duke of Milan.
Elizabeth wife to Hercules Duke of Ferrara.




The King of Spain had better right to Naples, than Alfonse that possessed it
when King Charles came into Italy, because Alfonses father was a bastard, and
King Ferrands father being the first Alfonses brother, ought to have succeeded
him before his base son. Further, you shall understand, that after Frederick
was led into France by Lewis the 12. the said K* Lewis enioied Naples, but
within four years Ferrande King of Arragon by the great captain Consaluo
chased King Lewis out of the realm, and left it to his nephew Charles the
Emperor, from whom the French K. could never recover it: but at this day it is
in the possession of the King of Spain son to the said Emperor Charles.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 3. line 1. read to wit, a page 7. lin. 13. r. army. Of ead. lin. dele:
lin. 28. r. Seniories page 8. l. 9. dele and ead. p. l. vlt. r. of Coulches, p.
11. l. 28. r. with them, p. 13. l. 22. r. the best ead. p. l. vlt. r. Seniories
p. 14. l. 41. r. and La March, p. 17. l. 8. r. flying: p. 18. l. 12. r. them
not ead. p. l. 13. r. before. My ead. p. l. 32. r. advise p. 19. l. 21. r. and
in a p. 24. l. 46. r. of Aniou p. 27. l. 4. r. 6. of September. ead. p. l. 38.
r. quirace p. 28. l. 32. r. this company, p. 29. l. 5. r. scouts p. 31. l. 43.
r. ditch, notwithstanding the truce. No p. 38. l. 5. r. florens ead. p. l. 26.
r. cordingly: p. 39. l. 31. dele with p. 40. l. 2. r. his camp p. 46. l. 9. r.
the canon ead. p. l. 44. r. Noone drew p. 47. l. 8. r. stayning ead. p. l. 31.
r. 6 ead. p. l. 32. r. 5 p. 49. l. 7. r. upon our ead. p. l. 38. r. After these
p. 50. l. 4. r. of the which p. 54. l. 32. r. goodly p. 59. l. 2. r. rased
their walls but ead. p. l. 35. r. Romont: p. 61. l. 36. r. Angien, p. 63. l. 42.
r. or Herbart, p. 64. l. 38. r. Estelle p. 66. l. 5. r. Ferrette, p. 68. l. 34.
r. have had but ead. lin. r. sixty thousand p. 69. l. 25. r. hardiness, ead.
p. l. 43. r. bounds of p. 74. l. 47. r. forthwith p. 77. l. 1. r. touching the
p. 78. l. 23. r. and Desmeries p. 79. l. 9. r. Polence, p. 80. l. 13. r. bounds
p. 82. l. 4. r. to Gaunt p. 83. l. 9. r. his principal ead. p. l. 24. r. to
repair: p. 84. l. 41. r. and received p. 85. l. 48. r. in fear. p. 87. l. 44.
r. forth on foot, p. 91. l. 24. r. the very p. 94. l. 13. r. what port the
ead. p. l. 38. r. three thousand p. 98. l. 35. r. the others p. 106. l. 20. r.
cause p. 107. l. 2. r. foade p. 109. l. vlt. r. six score soldiers p. 111. l.
12. r. the only p. 117. l. 17. r. these Dutch p. 118. l. 5. r. than in any p.
120. l. 2. r. church. Then ead. p. l. 7. r. 1474. Meyer. p. 127. l. 2 r. is it
p. 134. l. 2. r. stoutly denied. p. 138. l. 43. r. a marrish p. 139. l. 32. r.
whereof p. 150. l. 23. r. debebant, p. 154. l. 21. r. preparation p. 155. l.
38. r. most of the which p. 16^. (...) p. 164. (...) p. 165. l. 32. r. great p.
176. l. vlt. r. Burgund. pa. 988. p. 179. l. 13. r. ride p. 186. l. 36. r. had
good p. 196. l. 33. r. begin. p. 201. l. 39. r. to the king his p. 205. l. 40.
r. Burgundish p. 208. l. 21. dele had p. 224 l. 6. r. This second p. 227. l.
23. r. in the town p. 240. l. 16. r. to proceed, p. 243. l. 18. r. a number
ead. p. l. 37. r. which is called p. 253. l. 33. r. vantmures p. 254. l. 25. r.
Fougieres, p. 260. l. 45. r. was sent p. 261. l. 30. r. Dabecsin p. 263. l. 16.
r. commendation p. 267. l. vlt. r. forth to p. 274. l. 17. r. Proctor. ead. p.
l. vlt. r. they lawful p. 276. l. 21. r. first voyage p. 278. l. 41. r.
Treu^ul, p. 280. l. vlt. dele Duke p. 281. l. 3. dele Duke p. 284. l. 21. r.
also of the p. 291. l. 16. r. Caballiau p. 292 l. 40. r. Caballiau p. 293. l.
19. r. vantmure ead. p. l. 43. r. Rosanes p. 294. l. 9. r. Picinino, p. 295. l.
12. r. ride about p. 296. l. 14. r. for cruel p. 297. l. 4. r. Aenaria, p 306.
l 38. r. their other ead. p. l. 48. r. places than they p. 307. l. 8. r.
accompany ead. p. l 31. r. Otrante, p. 313. l. 4. r. or Musiua p. 316. l. 17.
r. and two p. 318. l. 16 r. and voluntarily p. 319. l. 39. r. Luques. p. 325.
l. 18 r. Albanie, p. 335. l. 7. r. the Florentines, p. 342. l. 4. r. enemies
navy p. 350. l. 3. r. they might p. 380. r. Jane daughter and heir to Robart
of Bar E. of Marle, p. 391. r. Cosmus died the 80. year of his age.


We must entreat the Readers patience for these faults escaped, and that he
will amend the book according to this table, before he enter into the reading
thereof.


