A PLEASANT conceited Comedy, Wherein is showed how a man may choose a good
Wife from a bad. As it has been sundry times Acted by the Earl of Worcesters
Servants.



LONDON Printed for Matthew Law, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, near unto S. Augustines gate, at the sign of the Fox. 1602.

A pleasant conceited Comedy, wherein is showed how a man may choose a good
Wife from a bad.
Enter as upon the Exchange, young Master Arthur, and Master Lusam. Arthur.
I Tell you true Sir, but to every man
I would not be so lavish of my speech,
Only to you my dear and private friend,
Although my wife in every eye, be held
Of beauty and of grace sufficient,
Of honest birth and good behavior,
Able to win the strongest thoughts to her,
Yet in my mind I hold her the most hated
And loathed object that the world can yield.

Lusam. Oh M. Arthur, bear a better thought
Of your chaste wife, whose modesty has won
The good opinion and report of all:
By heaven you wrong her beauty, she is fair.

Ar. Not in mine eye.

Lu. O you are cloyed with dainties M. Arthur
And too much sweetness glutted has your taste,
And makes you loath them: At the first
You did admire her beauty, praisde her face,
Were proud to have her follow at your heels
Through the broad streets, when all censuring tongues
Found themselves busied as she past along,
To extol her in the hearing of you both,
Tell me I pray you and dissemble not,
Have you not in the time of your first love,
Hugd such new popular and vulgar talk,
And glorified still to see her bravely decked?
But now a kind of loathing has quite changde
Your shape of love into a form of hate,
But on what reason ground you this hate?

Ar. My reason is my mind, my ground my will,
I will not love her: If you ask me why
I cannot love her, let that answer you.

Lu. Be judge all eyes, her face deserves it not,
Then on what root grows this hie branch of hate
Is she not loyal, constant, loving, chaste,
Obedient, apt to please, loath to displease,
Careful to live, chary of her good name,
And jealous of your reputation?
Is she not virtuous, wise, religious?
How should you wrong her to deny all this?
Good M. Arthur let me argue with you.

They walk and talk Enter walking and talking, M.Ansc^^^e, and Master
Futter. Full. Oh M. Anselme, grown a Lover, fie,
What might she be, on whom your hopes rely?

An. What fools they are that seem most wise in love,
How wise they are, that are but fools in love:
Before I was a Lover, I had reason
To judge of matters, censure of all sorts,
Nay I had wit to call a Lover fool,
And look into his folly with bright eyes,
But now intruding Love dwells in my brain,
And frantickly has shouldered reason thence,
I am not old, and yet alas I doat:
I have not lost my sight, and yet am blind,
No bondsman, yet have lost my liberty,
No natural fool, and yet I want my wit.
What am I then, let me define my self,
A doatar young, a blind man that can see,
A witty fool, a bondman that is free.

Full. Good aged youth, blind seer, and wise fool,
Loose your free bonds, and set your thoughts to school.

Enter old M. Arthur, and old M. Lusam. Old Ar. It Is told me M. Lusam, that my
son
And your chaste daughter whom we matched together,
Wrangle and fall at odds, and brawle, and chide.

Old Lu. Nay I think so, I never looked for better;
This it is to marry children when they are young,
I said as much at first, that such young brats
Would gree together, even like dogs and cats.

Old Ar. Nay pray you M. Lusam say not so,
There was great hope, though they were matched but young
Their virtues would have made then simpathise,
And live together like two quiet Saints,

Old Lu. You say true, there was great hope indeed
They would have lived like Saints, but where is the fault?

Old Ar. If fame be true, the most fault's in my son.

Old. Lu. You say true M. Arthur, it is so indeed.

Old Ar. Nay sir, I do not altogether excuse
Your daughter, many lay the blame on her,

Old Lu. Ha say you so, bithmasse it is like enough,
For from her childhood she has been a shrowe.

Old Ar A shrow, you wrong her, all the towhe admires her,
For mildness, chastnesse, and humility.

Old Lu. Fore God you say well, she is so indeed.
The City does admire her for these virtues.

Old Ar. O sir, you praise your child too palpably,
She Is mild and chaste, but not admired so much.

Old Lu. I so I say, I did not mean admired.

Old Ar. Yes if a man do well consider her,
Your daughter is the wonder of her sex.

Old Lu. Are you aduisde of that, I cannot tell
What it is you call the wonder of her sex,
But she is, is she, I indeed she is.

Old Ar. What is she?

Old Lu. Even what you will, you know best what she is.

Anselme. Yon is her husband, let us leave this walk,
How full are bad thoughts of suspicion;
I love, but loath my self for loving so,
Yet cannot change my disposition.

Fuller. Med^e cure teipsum.

Ansel. Hei mihi quod mellis amor est medicabilis her ^is.

Young Ar. All your persuasions are to no effect,
Never allege her virtues nor her beauty,
My settled unkindness has begot
A resolution to be unkind still,
My raunging pleasures love variety.

Yon. Lu. Oh too unkind unto so kind a wife,
Too vritules to one so virtuous,
And too unchaste unto so chaste a matron.

Yon. Ar. But soft sir, see where my two fathers are
Busily talking, let us shrink aside,
For if they see me, they are bent to chide.

Exeunt. Old Ar. I think it is best to go straight to the house
And make them friends again: what think you sir?

Old Lu. I think so too.

Old Arth. Now I remember too, that is not so good,
For diverse reasons I think best stay here,
And leave them to their wrangling, what think you?

Old Lu. I think so too.

Old Arth. Nay we will go that is certain.

Old Lu. I it is best, it is best in sooth: there is no way but to go.

Old Arth. Yet if our going should breed more unrest,
More discord, more dissension, more debate,
More wrangling where there is enough already,
Twere better stay then go.

Old Lu. Fore God it is true,
Our going may perhaps breed more debate,
And then we may too late wish we had staid:
And therefore if you will be ruled by me,
We will not go that is flat: Nay if we love
Our credits, or our quiets, lets not go.

Old Ar. But if we love their credits or their quiets we must go
And reconcile them to their former love:
Where there is strife betwixt a man and wife it is hell,
And mutual love may be compared to heaven:
For then their souls and spirits are at peace.
Come M. Lusam, now it is dinner time,
When we have dinde, the first work we will make,
Is to decide their iarres for pity sake.

Old Lu. Welfare a good heart, yet are you advise,
Go said you M. Arthur, I will run,
To end these broils that discord has begun.

Exeunt. Enter Mistress Arthur, and her man Pipkin. Mist. Ar. Come hither
Pipkin, how chance you tread so softly?

Pip. For fear of breaking Mistress.

Mist. Ar. Art thou afraid of breaking, how so?

Pip. Can you blame me Mistress, I am cracked already.

Mist. Cracked Pipkin, how, has any cracked your crown?

Pip. No Mistress, I thank God my crown is current, but.

Mis. Ar. But what?

Pip. The maid gave me not my supper yesternight, so that indeed my belly
wambled; and standing near the great sea-coale fire in the hall, and not being
full, on the sudden I cracked, and you know Mistress a Pipkin is soon broken.


Mis. Ar. Sir run to the Exchange, and if you there
Can find my husband, pray him to come home.
Tell him I will not eat a bit of bread
Until I see him: prithee Pipkin run.

Pip. But Lady Mistress, if I should tell him so, it may be he would not come,
were it for no other cause but to save charges, I Will rather tell him, if he come
not quickly, you will eat up all the meat in the house, and then if he be of
my stomach he will run every foot, and make the more have to dinner.


Mis. Ar. I thou may jest, my heart is not so light,
It can digest the least conceit of joy:
Entreat him fairly, though I think he loves
All places worse that he beholds me in,
Will thou be gone?

Pip. Whither Mistress, to the Change?

Mis Ar. I to the Change.

Pip. I will Mistress, hoping my M. will go so often to the Change, that at
length he will change his mind, and use you more kindly, o it were brave if
my Master could meet with a Merchant of ill ventures to bargain with him for
all his bad conditions, and he sell them outright, you should have a quieter
heart, and we all a quieter house: but hoping Mistress you will pass over all
these Iar^es and squabels in good health, as my Master was at the making the
(...) I commit you.


Mis. Ar. Make haste again I prithee, till I see him
My heart will never be at rest within me:
My husband has of late so much estranged
His words, his deeds, his heart from me,
That I can sildome have his company:
And even that sildome with such discontent,
Such frowns, such chidings, such impatience,
That did not truth and virtue arm my thoughts,
They would confound me with despair and hate,
And make me run into extremities.
Had I deserved the least bad look from him,
I should account my self too bad to live,
But honoring him in love and chastity,
All judgments censure freely of my wrongs.

Enter young Arthur, Master Lusam, Pipkin. Yon. Ar. Pipkin what said she when
she sent for me?

Pip. Faith master she said little, but she thought more,
For she was very melancholy.

Yon. Ar. Did I not tell you she was melancholy?
For nothing else but that she sent for me,
And fearing I would come to dine with her.

Yon. Lus. O you mistake her even upon my soul,
I durst affirm you wrong her chastity.
See where she does attend your coming home.

Mis. Ar. Come master Arthur, shall we in to dinner?
Sir be gone, and see it served in.

Yon. Lus. Will you not speak unto her?

Yon. Ar. No not I, will you go in sir?

Mis. Ar. Not speak to me, nor once look toward me?
It is my duty to begin I know,
And I will break this Ice of courtesy.
You are welcome home sir.

Yon. Ar. Hark master Lusam, if she mock me not,
You are welcome home sir, am I welcome home,
Good faith I care not if I be or no.

Yon. Lu. Thus you misconster all things M. Arthur,
Look if her true love melt not into tears.

Yon. Ar. She weeps, but why? that I am come so soon
To hinder her of some appointed guests,
That in my absence revels in my house:
She weeps to see me in her company,
And were I absent, she would laugh with joy.
She weeps to make me weary of the house,
Knowing my heart cannot away with grife.

Mist. Ar. Knew I that mirth would make you love my bed,
I would enforce my heart to be more merry.

Yon. Ar. Do you not hear, she would enforce her heart,
All mirth is forct that she can make with me.

Young Lu. O misconceit, how bitter is thy taste?
Sweet M. Arthur, Mistress Arthur too,
Let me entreat you reconcile these iarres,
Odious to heaven, and most abhord of men.

Mist. Ar. You are a stranger sir, but by your words
You do appear an honest Gentleman:
If you profess to be my husbands friend,
Persist in these persuasions: and be Judge
With all indifference in these discontents.
Sweet husband, if I be not fair enough
To please your eye, range where you list abroad,
Only at coming home speak me but fair:
If you delight to change, change when you please,
So that you will not change your love to me.
If you delight to see me drudge and toil,
I Will be your drudge, because it is your delight.
Or if you think me unworthy of the name
Of your chaste wife, I will become your maid,
Your slave, your servant, any thing you will,
If for that name of servant, and of slave,
You will but smile upon me now and then.
Or if as I well think you cannot love me,
Love where you list, only say but you love me:
I Will feed on shadows let the substance go.
Will you deny me such a small request?
What will you neither love nor flatter me?
O then I see your hate here does but wound me,
And with that hate it is your frowns confound me.

Yon. Lu. Wonder of women: why hark you M. Arthur,
What is your wife a woman or a Saint?
A wife, or some bright Angel come from heaven?
Are you not moved at this strange spectacle?
This day I have beheld a miracle.
When I attempt this sacred nuptial life,
I beg of heaven to find me such a wife.

Yon. Ar. Ha, ha, a miracle, a progedie,
To see a woman weep is as much pity
As to see Foxes digd out of their holes:
If thou will pleasure me, let me see thee less,
Grieve much: they say grief often shortens life,
Come not too near me, till I call he wife.
And that will be but sildome, I will tell thee
How thou shall win my heart, die suddenly,
And I Will become a lusty widower:
The longer thy life lasts the more my hate,
And loathing still increases toward thee.
When I come home and find thee cold as earth,
The^ will I love thee: thus thou know my mind.
Come M. Lusam, let us in to dine.

(Exeunt. Yon. Lu. O sir, you too much affect this evil,
Pore Saint, why were thou yoakt thus with a devil.

Exit. Mis. Ar. If thou will win my heart, die suddenly,
But that my soul was bought at such a rate,
At such a high price as my Saviors blood,
I would not stick to loose it with a stab.
But virtue banish all such fantasies.
He is my husband, and I love him well,
Next to my own souls health I tender him:
And would give all the pleasures of the world,
To buy his love if I might purchase it.
I Will follow him, and like a servant wait,
And strive by all means to prevent his hate.

Exit. Enter old Arthur, and old Lusam. Old Ar. This is my sons house, were
it best go in,
How say you master Lusam?

Old Lus. How go in, how say you sir?

Old Ar. I say it is best.

Old Lus. I sir, say you so, so say I too.

Old Ar. Nay, nay, it is not best, I Will tell you why,
Happily the fire of hate is quite extinct
From the dead embers, now to rake them up,
Should the least spark of discontent appear,
To make the flame of hatred burn a fresh,
The heat of this dissension might scorch us,
Which in his own cold ashes smothered up,
May dye in silence, and revive no more:
And therefore tell me, is it best or no?

Old Lus. How say you sir?

Old Ar. I say it is not best.

Old. Lus. Mass you say well sir, and so say I too.

Old Ar. But shall we loose our labor to come hither,
And without sight of our two children?
Go back again, nay we will in that is certain.

Old Lu. In quotha, do you make a doubt of that?
Shall we come thus far, and in such post have,
And have our children here and both within,
And not behold them ere our back return?
It were unfriendly, and vnfatherly:
Come M. Arthur, pray you follow me.

Old Ar. Nay but hark you sir, will you not knock?

Old Lu. Is It best to knock?

Old. Ar. I knock in any case.

Old Lu. It Was well you put it in mind to knock,
I had forgotten it else I promise you.

Old Ar. Tush, is it not my sons and your daughters door,
And shall we two stand knocking? Lead the way.

Old Lu. Knock at our childrens doors, that were a Jest,
Are we such fools to make our selves so strange
Where we should still be boldest? In for shame.
We will not stand upon such ceremonies.

(Exeunt. Enter Anselme and Fuller. Full. Speak in what cue sir do you find
your heart,
Now thou have slept a little on thy love?

Ans. Like one that strives to shun a little plash
Of shallow water, and avoiding it,
Plunges into a River past his depth.
Like one that from a small spark steps aside,
And falls in headlong to a greater flame:

Full. But in such fires scorch not thy self for shame.
If she be fire, thou art so far from burning,
That thou have scarce yet warmd thee at her face
But list to me, I Will turn thy heart from love,
And make thee loath all of the feminine sex.
They that have known me, knew me once of name
To be a perfect wencher: I have tried
All sorts, all sects, all states, and find them still
Inconstant, fickle, always variable.
Attend me man, I will prescribea method
How thou shall win her without al peradventure,

Ansel. That would I gladly hear.

Full. I was once like thee,
A fighter, melancholy, humorist,
Crosser of arms, a goer without garters,
A hatband-hater, and a busk-point wearer,
One that did use much bracelets made of hair,
Rings on my fingers, Jewels in mine ears,
And now and then a wenches Carkanet,
That had two letters for her name in Pearl:
Skarfes, garters, bands, wrought wastcoats, gold, stitcht caps,
A thousand of those female fooleries,
But when I looked into the glass of Reason, strait I began
To loath that femall bravery, and henceforth
Study to cry peccaui to the world.

Ans. I pray you to your former argument,
Prescribe a means to win my best beloved.

Full. First be not bashful, bar all blushing tricks,
Be not too apish female, do not come
With foolish Sonets to present her with,
With legs, with courtesies, congies, and such like:
Nor with pend speeches, or too far fetched sighs,
I hate such antic queint formalitie.

Ans. Oh but I cannot watch occasion,
She dashes every profer with a frown.

Full. A frown, a fool art thou afraid of frowns?
He that will leave occasion for a frown,
Were I his Judge (all you his case bemone)
His doom should be, ever to lie alone.

Ans. I cannot choose but when a wench says nay,
To take her at her word and leave my suit.

Full. Continue that opinion, and be sure
To die a virgin chaste, a maiden pure.
It was my chance once in my wanton days
To Court a wench, hark and I Will tell thee how:
I came unto my Love, and she looked coy,
I spoke unto my Love, she turned aside,
I tucht my Love, and began with her to toy,
But she sat mute for anger, or for pride:
I strived and kissed my Love, she cried away:
Thou woulst have left her thus, I made her stay.
I caught my Love, and wrung her by the hand,
I took my Love and set her on my knee,
And pulled her to me, o you spoil my band,
You hurt me sir, pray let me go quoth she.
I am glad quoth I, that you have found your tongue,
And still my Love I by the finger wroong.
I asked her if she loved me, she said no,
I bad her swear, she strait calls for a book:
Nay then thought I, it is time to let her go,
I easde my knee, and from her cast a look,
She leaves me wondering at these strange affairs,
And like the wind she trips me up the stairs.
I left the room below and up I went,
Finding her thrown upon her wanton bed:
I asked the cause of her sad discontent,
Further she lies, and making room she sed,
Now sweeting kiss me, having time and place:
So clings me too her with a sweet embrace.

Ans. Is It possible, I had not thought till now
That women could dissemble. M. Fuller
Here dwells the sacred mistress of my heart,
Before her door I Will frame a frivolous walk,
And spying her, with her devise some talk.

Enter as out of the house, M. Arthur, Mistress Arthur, old Arthur, old Lusam,
young Lusan, Pipkin, and the rest. Full. What stir is this, lets step but out the
way
And hear the utmost what these people say.

Old Ar. Thou art a knave, although thou be my son,
Have I with care and trouble brought thee up,
To be a staff and comfort to my age,
A Pillar to support me, and a Crutch
To lean on in my second infancy,
And do thou use me thus? thou art a knave.

Old Lu. A knave, I mary, and an arrant knave:
And sir, by old M. Arthurs leave,
Though I be weak and old, I Will prove thee one.

Young Ar. Sir, though it be my fathers pleasure thus
To wrong me with the scorned name of knave,
I will not have you so familiar,
Nor so presume upon my patience.

Old Lu. Speak M. Arthur, is he not a knave?

Old Ar. I say he is a knave.

Old Lu. Then so say I.

Young Ar. My Father may command my patience,
But you sir that are but my Father in law,
Shall not so mock my reputation,
Sir you shall find I am an honest man.

Old Lu. An honest man.

Young Ar. I sir, so I say.

Old Lu. Nay if you say so, I Will not be against it;
But sir you might have used my daughter better,
Then to have beat her, spurnd her, raild at her
Before our faces.

Old Ar. I therein son Arthur,
Thou shewdst thy self no better then a knave.

Old Lu. I mary did he, I will stand to it,
To use my honest daughter in such sort,
He showed himself no better then a knave.

Young Ar. I say again I am an honest man,
He wrongs me that shall say the contrary.

Old Lu. I grant sir that you are an honest man,
Nor will I say unto the contray.
But wherefore do you use my daughter thus?
Can you accuse her of inchastitie,
Of loose demeanor, disobedience, or disloialtie?
Speak what thou can thou object against my daughter.

Old Ar. Accuse her, here she stands, spit in her face
If she be guilty in the least of these.

Mis. Ar. O Father be more patient, if you wrong
My honest husband, all the blame be mine,
Because you do it only for my sake.
I am his handmaid, since it is his pleasure
To use me thus, I am content therewith,
And bear his checks and crosses patiently.

Young Ar. If in mine own house I can have no place,
I Will seek it elsewhere, and frequent it less,
Father I am now past one and twenty years,
I am past my Fathers pampring, I suck not:
Nor am I dandled on my mothers knee:
Then if you were my Father twenty times,
You shall not choose but let me be my self.
Do I come home so sildome, and that sildome
Am I thus baited? Wife remember this.
Father farewell, and Father in law adieu:
Your son had rather fast, then feast with you.

(Exit. Old Ar. Well go too wild oats, spend thrift, prodigal,
I Will cross thy name quite from my reckoning book:
For these accounts, faith it shall skathe thee somewhat,
I will not say what somewhat it shall be.

Old Lu. And it shall skathe him somewhat of my purse,
And daughter I will take thee home again,
Since thus he hates thy fellowship,
Be such an eyesore to his sight no more,
I tell thee thou no more shall trouble him.

Mis. Ar. Will you divorce whom God has tied together?
Or break that knot the sacred hand of heaven
Made fast betwixt us? Have you never read
What a great curse was laid upon his head
That breaks the holy band of marriage,
Diuorsing husbands from their chosen wives?
Father I will not leave my Arther so,
Not all my friends can make me prove his foe.

Old Ar. I could say somewhat in my sons reproof,

Old Lu. Faith so could I.

Old Ar. But till I meet him I will let it pass.

Old Lu. Faith so will I.

Old Ar. Daughter farewell, with weeping eyes I part,
Witness these tears, thy griete sus near my heart.

Old Lu. Weeps M. Arthur, nay then let me cry:
His cheeks shall not be wet, and mine be dry.

(Exeunt. Mist. Ar. Fathers farewell, spend not a tear for me:
But for my husbands sake let these woes be.
For when I weep, it is not for my own care,
But fear least folly bring him to despair.

Yon. Lu. Sweet Saint continue still this patience,
For time will bring him to true penitence.
Mirror of virtue, thanks for my good cheer,
A thousand thanks.

Mist. Ar. It is so much too dear,
But you are welcome for my husbands sake,
His guests shall have best welcome I can make.

Yon. Lu. Then marriage, nothing in the world more common,
Nothing more rare then such a virtuous woman.

(Exit. Mis. Ar. My husband in this humor, well I know
Plays but the unthrift, therefore it behoues me
To be the better huswife here at home,
To save and get, whilst he does laugh and spend:
Though for himself he rio^s it anlarge,
My needle shall defray my households charge.

Full. Now M. Anselme to her, step not back,
Buslle your self, see where she sits at work:
Be not afraid man, she is but a woman,
And women, the most Cowards sildome fear:
Think but upon my former principles,
And twenty pound to a dream you speed.

Ans. I, say you so?

Full. Beware of blushing sir,
Offeare and too much eloquence:
Rail on her husband his misvsing her,
And make that serve thee as an argument,
That she may sooner yield to do him wrong:
Were it my case, my Love and I to plead,
I hau't at singers ends, who could miss the clout
Having so fair a white, such steady aim,
This is the vpshot, now bid for the game.

Ans. Fair Mistress God save you.

Full. What a circustance does he begin with, what an Ass is he
To tell her at the first that she was fair?
The only means to make her to be coy:
He should have rather told her she was foul,
And brought her out of love quite with her self:
And being so, she would the less have cared
Upon whose secrets she had laid her love:
He has almost mard all with that word fair.

Ans. Mistress God save you.

Full. What a block is that
To say God save you, is the fellow mad,
Once to name God in his ungodly suit?

Mis. Ar. You are welcome sir. Come you to speak with me,
Or with my husband, pray you what is your will?

Full. She answers to the purpose, what is your will?
O zoanes that I were there to answer her.

Ans. Mistress my will is not so soon expressed,
Without your special favor, and the promise
Ofloue and pardon if I speak amiss.

Full. O Ass, o Duns, o blockhead that has left
The plain broad hie way, and the readiest path
To travel round about by circumstance:
He might have told his meaning in a word,
And now has lost his opportunity:
Never was such a trewant in Loves school,
I am ashamed that ere I was his Tutor.

Mis. Ar. Sir you may freely speak what ere it be,
So that your speech suteth with modesty.

Full. To this now could I answer passing well.

Ans. Mistress I pitying that so fair a creature.

Full. Still fair, and yet I warnd the contrary.

Ans. Should by a villen be so fowly used as you have been.

Full. I that was well put in,
If time and place were both convenient.

Ans. Have made this bold intrusion to present
My love and service to your sacred self.

Full. Indifferent, that was not much amiss.

Mis. Ar. Sir, what you mean by service and by love
I will not know: but what you mean by villain
I feign would know.

Ans. That villain is your husband:
Whose wro^gs toward you, are bruted through the land.
O can you suffer at a Peasants hands
Unworthy once to tuch this silken skin,
To be so rudely beat and buffeted?
Can you endure from such infectuous breath
Able to blast your beauty, to have names
Of such impoisoned hate flung in your face?

Full. O that was good, nothing was good but that:
That was the lesson that I taught him last.

Ans. O can you hear your never tainted fame
Wounded with words of shame and infamy?
O can you see your pleasures dealt away,
And you to be debard all part of them,
And bury it in deep oblivion?
Shall your true right be still contributed
Among hungry Bawds, insatiable Curtizans?
And can you love that villain by whose deed
Your soul does sigh, and your distressed heart bleed?

Full. All this as well as I could wish my self.

Mis. Ar. Sir I have heard thus long with patience,
If it be me you term a villains wife,
Insooth you have mistook me all this while,
And neither know my husband nor my self,
Or else you know not man and wife is one:
If he be called a villain, what is she
Whose heart, and love, and soul, is one with him?
It Is pity that so fair a Gentleman
Should fall into such villains company.
Oh sir take heed, if you regard your life,
Meddle not with a villain, or his wife.

Exit. Full. O that same word villain has mard all.

An. Now where is your instruction? where is the wench?
Where are my hopes? where your directions?

Full. Why man, in that word villain you mard all.
To come unto an gonest wife and call
Her husband villain, were she nere so bad,
Thou might well think she would not brook that name
For her own credit, though no love to him.
But leave not thus, but try some other mean,
Let not one way thy hopes make frustrate clean.

Ans. I must persist my Love against my will,
He that knows all things, knows I prove this ill.

(Exeu^t. Enter Aminadab with a rod in his hand, and two or three Boys with
their books in their hands. Ami. Come boys, come boys, rehearse your part^
And then ad prandium tamiam incipe.

1. Boy. Forsooth my lessons torn out of my book.

Ami. Que caceris Chartis deseruisse decat,
Torn from your book, I Will tear it from your breech,
How say you Mistress Virga, will you suffer
Hic puer bone indolu, to tear
His Lessons, eaues and Lectures from his book?

1. Boy. Truly forsooth I laid it in my seat
While Robin Glade and I went into Campis:
And when I came again my book was torn.

Ami. O mus a Mouse, was ever heard the like?

1. Boy. O domus a house, M. I could not mend it.

2. Boy. O pediculus a Louse, I knew not how it came.

Ami. All toward boys, good scholars of their times,
The least of these is past his Accidence,
Some at Qui mihi, here is not a boy
But he can conster all the Gramer Rules,
Sed vbi sunt soledes, not yet come:
Those tarde vementes, shall be whipped.
Vbi est Pikin, where is that laizie knave?
He plays the Truant every Saturday:
But Mistress Vi^ga, Lady Willowby
Shall teach him that Dilucoli surgere,
Est saluberrimum, here comes the knave.

Enter Pipkin. 1. Boy. Tarde, tarde, tarde.

2. Boy. Tarde, tarde, tarde.

Ami. Huc ades Pipkin, reach a better rod,
Cur tam tarde vemo, speak, where have you bin?
Is this a time of day to come to school?
Vbi finisti, speak, where have thou bin?

Pip. Magister, quomodo vales.

Ami. Is that responsio fitting my demand?

Pip. Etiam certe, you ask me where I have bin, and I say Quomodo vales, as
much to say, come out of the alehouse.


Ami. Untruss, untruss, nay help him, help him.

Pip. Queso preceptor, queso? for Gods sake do not whip me:
Quidest gramatica?

Ami. Not whip you, Quidest gramatica, what is that?

Pip. Gramatica est, that if I untrust, you must needs whip me upon them,
quidest gramatica.


Ami. Why then dic mihi, speak, where have thou bin?

Pip. Forsooth my mistress sent me of an errant to fetch my M. from the
Exchange, we had strangers at home at dinner, and but for them I had not come
tarde queso preceptor.


Ami. Conster your lesson, pearce it, ad vngem Et condemnato, to I Will pardon
thee.


Pip. That I will M. and if you will give me leave.

Ami. Propriaabque; maribus tribuuntur Mascula dicas expone, expone.

Pip. Co^ster it M. I will, Dicas they say, Propria the proper man, que maribus,
that loves mary-bones, mascula, miscald me.


Ami. A pretty queint and new construction.

Pip. I warrant you M. if there be mary bones in my lesson, I am an old dog at
them. How conster you this M. Rostra disertus amat?


Ami. Disertus a disert, amat does love, rostra, rostmeat.

Pip. A good construction on an empty stomach, M. now I have consterd my
lesson, my mistrisse would pray you to let me come home to go of an errand.


Ami. Your tres sequntur, and away.

Pip. Canis a hog, ra^a a dog, Porcus a Frog,
Abeundum est mihi.

M^^^^ a (...) and Exit. Ami. Yours s^^ra to then, and ad prandium.

1. Boy. Apis a bed, ge^^ k^ee, ^^leanus Doctor De^? Figinti minus vsus est
(...).


Ami. By Iu^os lip, and (...) thumb
It was bonus, bona, bonum.

2. Bay. Vitrum glass, spica grass, tu es Asinus, you are an Ass, Precor
tibi felicem noctem.


Ami. Claudite iam libros pueri sat prate bibistis,
Look when you come again, you tell me Vbi fuistis.
He that minds trish trash, and will not have care of his rodix,
He I will be lish lash, and have a fling at his podix.

Enter young Arthur. Young Ar. A pretty wench, a passing pretty wench,
A sweeter duck all London cannot yield,
She cast a glaunce on me as I past by,
Not Hellen had so rauishing an eye.
Here is the Pedant Sir Aminadab,
I will enquire of him if he can tell
By any circumstance whose wife she:
Such fellows commonly have intercourse
Without suspicion, where we are debard.
God save you gentle Sir Aminadab.

Ami. Salve tu quoabque;, would you speak with me?
You are I take it, and let me not lie,
For as you know, Mentirinon est meum,
Young M. Arthur, quid vis, what will you?

Young Ar. You are a man I much rely upon:
There is a pretty wench dwells in this street,
That keeps no shop, nor is not public known:
At the two posts, next turning of the Lane,
I saw her from a window looking out:
O could you tell me how to come acquainted
With that sweet Less, you should command me sir,
Even to the utmost of my life and power.

Ami. Dij boni, boni, it is my Love he means,
But I will keep it from this Gentleman,
And so I hope make trial of my Love.

Yon. Ar. If I obtain her, thou shall win thereby,
More then at this time I will promise thee.

Ami. Quando venis aput, I shall have two horns on my Caput.

Yon. Ar. What if her husband come and find one there?

Ami. Nuncquam, time never fear,
She is unmarried I swear.
But if I help you to the deed,
Tu vis narrare, how you speed.

Young Ar. Tell how I speed, I sir I will to you:
Then presently about it. Many thanks
For this great kindness Sir Aminadab.

Ami. If my Puella prove a drab
I Will be reuengd on both: ambo shall die,
Shall die by what, for ego I
Have never handled I thank God,
Other weapon then a rod:
I dare not fight for all my speeches,
Sed cave, if I take him thus
Ego sum expers at untruss.

(Extunt. Enter Justice Reason, old Arthur, old Lusam, Mistress Arthur, young
Lusam, and Hugh. Old Ar. We Master Justice Reason come about
A serious matter that concerns us near.

Old Lu. I mary does it sir concern us near:
Would God sir you would take some order for it.

Old Ar. Why look ye M. Lusam, you are such another
You will be talking, what concerns us near,
And know not why we come to M. Justice.

Old Lu. How, know not I?

Old Ar. No sir not you.

Old Lu. Well I know somewhat, though I know not that,
Then on I pray you.

^Iust. Forward I pray, yet the case is plain.

Old Ar. Why sir as yet you do not know the case.

Old Lu. Well he knows somewhat, forward M. Arthur.

Old Ar. And as I told you, my unruly son
Once having bid his wife home to my house,
There took occasion to be much agreeu'd
About some household matters of his own,
And in plain terms they fell in controversy.

Ol. Lu. It Is true sir, I was there the selfsame time,
And I remember many of the words.

Old Ar. Lord what a man are you, you were not there
That time, as I remember you were rid
Down to the North, to see some friends of yours.

Old Lu. Well I was somewhere, forward M. Arthur.

Just. All this is well, no fault is to be found
In either of the parties, pray say on.

Old Ar. Why sir I have not named the parties yet,
Nor tucht the fault that is complaind upon.

Old Lu. Well you tucht somewhat: forward M. Arthur.

Old Ar. And as I said, they fell in controversy:
My son not like a husband gave her words
Of great reproof, despite, and contumely.
Which she poor soul disgested patiently:
This was the first time of their falling out.
As I remember at the self same time
One Thomas the Earl of Surreys gentleman
Dinde at my table.

Old Lu. O I knew him well.

Old Ar. You are the strangest man, this gentleman
That I speak of, I am sure you never faw,
He came but lately from beyond the sea.

Old Lu. I am sure I know one Thomas, forward sir.

Just. And is this all? make me a M^^^imus,
And fend the offender straitwaies to the gaile.

Old Ar. First know the offender, how began the strife
Betwixt this gentlewoman and my son,
Since when sir he has used her not like one
That should partake his bed, but like a slave.
My coming was, that you being in office
And in authority, should call before you
My unthrift son, to give him some advise,
Which he will take better srom you, then me
That am his Father. Here Is the gentlewoman
Wife to my son, and daughter to this man,
Whom I perforce compeld to live with us.

Just. All this is well, here is your son you say,
But she that is his wife you cannot find.

Young Lu. You do mistake sir, here is the gentlewoman,
It is her husband that will not be found.

Just. Well all is one, for man and wife are one:
But is this all?

Young Lu. I all that you can say,
And much more then you can well put off.

Just. Nay if the case appear thus evident,
Give me a cup of wine, what man and wife
To disagree, I prithee fill my cup:
I could say somewhat, tut, tut, by this wine,
I promise you, it is good Canary Sack.

Mis. Ar. Fathers you do me open violence
To bring my name in question, and produce
This gentleman and others here to witness
My husbands shame in open audience:
What may my husband think when he shall know
I went unto the Justice to complain:
But M. Justice here more wise then you,
Says little to the matter, knowing well
His office is no whit concernd herein:
Therefore with favor I will take my leave.

Just. The woman says but reason M. Arthur,
And therefore give her license to depart.

Old Lu. Here is dry Justice not to bid us drink,
Hark thee my friend, I pretheelend thy cup:
Now M. Justice hear me but one word,
You think this woman has had little wrong?
But by this wine which I intend to drink.

Just. Nay save your oath, I pray you do not swear,
Or if you swear, take not too deep an oath.

Old Lu. Content you, I may take a lawful oath
Before a Justice: therefore by this wine.

Yon. Lu. A profound oath, well sworn, and deeply took,
It Is better thus, then swearing on a book.

Old Lu. My daughter has bin wronged exceedingly.

Just. O sir, I would have credited these words
Without this oath: but bring your daughter hither,
That I may give her counsel ere you go.

Old Lu. Mary Gods blessing on your heart for that,
Daughter give ear to Justice Reasons words.

Just. Good woman, or good wife, or Mistress, if you have done amiss, it
should seem you have done a fault; and making a fault, there is no question but
you have done amiss: but if you walk uprightly, and neither lead to the right
hand nor the left, no question but you have neither led to the right hand nor
the left, but as a man should fay, walked uprightly: but it should appear by
these plaintiffes, that you have had some wrong, If you love your spouse
intierly, it should seem you affect him fervently; and if he hate you
monstrously, it should seem he loathes you most exceedingly: and there is the
point, at which I will leave, for the time passes away: therefore to conclude,
this is my best counsel, look that thy husband so fall in, that hereafter you
never fall out.


Old Lu. Good counsel, passing good instruction,
Follow it daughter. Now I promise you,
I have not heard such an Oration
This many a day: what remains to do?

Yon. Lu. Sir I was called as witness to this matter,
I may be gone for ought that I can see.

Just. Nay stay my friend, we must examine you,
What can you say concerning this debate
Betwixt young M. Arthur and his wife?

Young Lu. Faith just as much I think as you can say
And that's just nothing.

Just. How nothing? come depose him, take his oath,
Swear him I say, take his confession.

Old Ar. What can you say sir in this doubtful case?

Young Lu. Why nothing sir.

Just. We cannot take him in contrary tales,
For he says nothing still, and that same nothing
Is that which we have stood on all this while:
He has confessed even all, for all is nothing.
This is your witness, he has witnest nothing.
Since nothing then so plainly is confessed,
And we by cunning answers and by wit
Have wrought him to confess nothing to us,
Write his confession.

Old Ar. Why what should we write?

Just. Why nothing: heard you not as well as I
What he confessed? I say write nothing down.
Mistress we have dismissed you, love your husband,
Which whilst you do, you shall not hate your husband.
Bring him before me, I will urge him with
This Gentleman's express confession
Against you: send him to me, I Will not fail
To keep just nothing in my memory.
And sir now that we have examined you,
We likewise here discharge you with good leave.
Now M. Arthur, and M. Lusam too,
Come in with me, unless the man were here
Whom most especially the cause concerns,
We cannot end this quarrel: but come near,
And we will taste a glass of our March beer.

(Exeunt. Enter Mistress Mary, Mistress Splay and Brabo. Ma. I prithee tell me
Brabo, what Planet think thou gouernd at my conception, that I live thus
openly to the world?


Bra. Two Planets raind at once, Venus that's you,
And Mars that's I, were in conjunction.

Splay. Prithee, prithee, in faith that conjunction copulative, is that part of
speech that I live by.


Bra. Ha, ha, to see the world, we swaggerers
That live by oaths and big-mouth'd menaces,
Are now reputed for the tallest men:
He that has now a black muchato
Reaching from ear to ear, or turning up
Puncto reuerso, bristling toward the eye:
He that can hang two hansom tools at his side,
Go in disguisde attire, wear Iron enough,
Is held a tall man and a soldier.
He that with greatest grace can swear gogs zounds,
Or in a Tavern make a drunken fray,
Can cheat at Dice, swagger in bawdie houses,
Wear velvet on his face, and with a grace
Can face it out with as I am a soldier.
He that can clap his sword upon the board
He Is a brave man, and such a man am I.

Ma. She that with kisses can both kill and cure,
That lives by love, that swears by nothing else
But by a kiss, which is no common oath:
That lives by lying, and yet often tells truth;
That takes most pleasure when she takes most pains:
She Is a good wench my boy, and such am I.

Splay. She that is past it, and prays for them that may.

Bra. Is an old Bawd as you are Mistress Splay.

Splay. O do not name that name, do you not know
That I could never endure to hear that name.
But if your man would leave us, I would read
The lesson that last night I promised you.

Ma. I prithee leave us, we would be alone.

Bra. And will and must: if you bid me be gone,
I will withdraw, and draw on any he
That in the worlds wide round dare cope with me.
Mistress farewell, to none I never speak
So kind a word. My saluations are,
Farewell and be hanged, or in the devils name.
What they have been my many fraies can tell,
You cannot fight therefore to you farewell.

(Exit. Ma. O this same swaggerer is the bulwark of my reputation
But Mistress Splay, now to your lecture that you promised me:

Splay. Daughter attend, for I will tell thee now
What in my young days I my self have tried:
Be ruled by me and I will make thee rich.
You God be praisde are fair, and as they say
Full of good parts, you have been often tried
To be a woman of good carriage,
Which in my mind is very commendable.

Ma. It is indeed. Forward good mother Splay.

Splay. And as I told you, being fair, I wish
Sweet daughter you were as fortunate.
When any suitor comes to ask thy love,
Look not into his words, but into his sleeue.
If thou can learn what language his purse speaks,
Be ruled by that, that's golden eloquence.
Money can make a slauering tongue speak plain.
If he that loves thee be deformed and rich,
Accept his love, gold hides deformity.
Gold can make limping Vulcan walk upright,
Make squint eyes look strait, a crabd face look smooth,
Guilds Copernoses, makes them look like gold.
Fills ages wrinkles up and makes a face
As old as Nestors, look as young as Cupids.
If thou will arm thy self against all shifts,
Regard all men according to their gifts.
This if thou practice, thou when I am dead
Wilt say old mother Splay soft laid thy head.

Enter young Arthur. Ma. Soft who comes here? begone good Mistress Splay,
Of thy rules practice this is my first day.

Splay. God for thy passion what a beast am I,
To scar the bird that to the net would fly.

Exit. Young Ar. By your leave Mistress.

Ma. What to do Master?

Young Ar. To give me leave to love you.

Ma. I had rather afford you some love to leave me.

Yon. Ar. I would you would as soon love me, as I could leave you.

Ma. I pray you what are you sir?

Yon. Ar. A man I Will assure you.

Ma. How should I know that?

Young Ar. Try me by my word, for I say I am a man,
Or by my deed, I Will prove my self a man.

Ma. Are you not Master Arthur?

Yon. Ar. Not M. Arthur, but Arthur, and your servant sweet Mistress Mary.

Ma. Not Mistress Mary, but Mary and your handmaid, sweet Master Arthur.

Young Ar. That I love you, let my face tell you: that I love you more then
ordinarily, let this kiss testify: and that I love you fernently and
entierly, ask this gift, and see what it will answer you. My self, my purse,
and all being wholly at your service.


Ma. That I take your love in good part, my thanks shall speak for me: that I
am pleased with your kiss, this interest of an other shall certify you: and
that I accept your gift, my prostrate service and self shall witness with me.
My love, my lips, and sweet self, are at your service: wilt please you to come
near sir?


Yon. Lu. O that my wife were dead, here would I make
My second choice, would she were buried,
From out her grave this Marigold should grow,
Which in my nuptials I would wear with pride.
Die shall she, I have doomed her destenie.

Ma. It Is news M. Arthur to see you in such a place,
How does your wife?

Young Ar. Faith Mistress Mary at the point of death,
And long she cannot live, she shall not live
To trouble me in this my second choice.

Enter Aminadab with a bill and head-peece. Ma. I pray forbear sir, for here
comes my Love,
Good sir for this time leave me: by this kiss
You cannot ask the question at my hands
I will deny you: pray you get you gone.

Young Ar. Farewell sweet Mistress Mary.

(Exit. Ma. Sweet adieu:

Ami. Stand to me bill, and head-peece sit thou close,
I hear my Love, my wench, my duck, my dear,
Is sought by many suitors, but with this
I Will keep the door, and enter he that dare.
Virga be gone, thy twigs I Will turn to steel,
These fingers that were expert in the Ierke,
In steed of lashing of the trembling podes,
Must learn pash and knock, and beat and mall,
Cleave pates, and caputs he that enters here
Comes on his death, mors mort, is he shall taste.

Ma. Alas poor fool, the Pedants mad for love,
Thinks me more mad that I would marry him:
He Is come to watch me with a rustie bill,
To keep my friends away by force of arms,
I will not see him but stand still aside,
And here observe him what he means to do.

Ami. O vtinam, that he that loves her best
Durst offer but to tuch her in this place.
Per Iehoua, and Iunonem hoc,
Shall pash his Coxcombe such a knock,
As that his soul his course shall take
To Limbo, and Auernus lake.
In vain I watch in this dark hole,
Would any living durst my manhood try,
And offer to come up the stairs this way.

Ma. O we should see you make a goodly fray.

Ami. The wench I here watch with my bill,
Amo, amas, amaui still.
Qui audet let him come that dare,
Death, hell, and Limbo be his share.

Enter Brabo. Bra. Where Is mistress Mary, never a post here,
A bar of Iron against which to try my sword?
Now by my beard a dainty piece of steel.

Ami. O Jove what a qualme is this I feel?

Bra. Come hither Mall, is none here but we two?
When did thou see the starueling Schoole-maister?
That Rat, that shrimp, that spindleshanck, that Wren, that sheep-biter, that
lean chittiface, that famine, that lean Envy, that all bones, that bare
Anatomy, that Jack a Lent, that ghost, that shadow, that Moon in the waine.


Ami. I wail in woe, I plunge in pain.

Bra. When next I find him here I Will hang him up
Like a dried Sawsedge, in the Chimnies top:
That Stock Fish, that poor John, that gut of men.

Ami. O that I were at home again.

Bra. When he comes next turn him into the streets,
Now come lets dance the shaking of the sheets.

Exeunt. Ami. Qui que quod, hence boystrous bill, come gentle Rod.
Had not grim Malkin stamped and star'd,
Aminadab had little cared:
Or if in stead of this brown bill,
I had kept my mistress Virga still,
And he upon an others back,
His points untrust, his breeches slack:
My countenance he should not dash,
For I am expert in the lash.
But my sweet Less my love does fly,
Which shall make me by poison die.
Perfidem, I will rid my life,
Either by poison, sword, or knife.

Exit. Enter Mistress Arthur, and Pipkin. Mis. Ar. Sir when saw you your
Master?

Pip. Faith Mistress when I last looked upon him.

Mis. Ar. And when was that?

Pip. When I beheld him.

Mist. Ar. And when was that?

Pip. Mary when he was in my sight, and that was yesterday, since when I saw
not my master, nor looked on my M. nor beheld my master, nor had any sight of
my M.


Mis. Ar. Was he not at my father in laws?

Pip. Yes mary was he.

Mis. Ar. Did thou not entreat him to come home?

Pip. How should I mistress, he came not there to day.

Mis. Ar. Did not thou say he was there?

Pip. True mistress he was there, but I did not tell ye when,
He has bin there diverse times, but not of late.

Mis. Ar. About your business, here I Will sit and wait
His coming home, though it be nere so late.
Now once again go look him at the Change,
Or at the Church with Sir Aminadab,
It Is told me they use often conference:
When that is done, get you to school again.

Pip. I had rather play the trewant at home, then go seek my M. at school:
let me see what age am I, some four and twenty, and how have I profited, I
was five year learning to crish Cross from great A. and five year longer
coming to F. I there I stuck some three year before I could come to q. and
so in process of time I came to e perce e, and comperce, and tittle, then I
got to a. e. i. o. u. after to our Father, and in the sixteenth year of my
age, and the fifteenth of my going to school, I am in good time gotten to a
Nowne, by the same token there my hose went down: then I got to a Verb, there
I began first to have a beard: the^ I came to Iste, ista, istud, there my M.
whipped me till he fetched the blood, and so forth: so that now I am come the
greatest scholar in the school: for I am bigger then two or three of them.
But I am gone, farewell mistress.


Exit. Enter Anselme and Euller. Full. Love none at all, they will forswear
themselves,
And when you urge them with it, their replies
Are, that Jove laughes at Lovers periuries.

Ans. You told me of a Jest concerning that,
I prithee let me hear it.

Full. That thou shall.
My mistress in an humor had protested,
That above all the world she loved me best,
Saying with suitors she was often molested,
And she had lodged her heart within my breast:
And swear (but me) both by her mask and fan,
She never would so much as name a man.
Not name a man quoth I, yet be aduisde,
Not love a man but me, let it be so:
You shall not think quoth she my thoughts disguisde,
In flattring language, or dissembling show:
I say again, and I know what I do,
I will not name a man alive but you.
Into her house I came at unaware,
Her back was to me and I was not seen,
I stole behind her till I had her fair,
Then with my hands I closed both her eyne,
She blinded thus, begins to bethink her
Which of her Loves it was that did hood-winck her,
First she begins to guess and name a man
That I well knew, but she had known far better.
The next I never did suspect till than:
Still of my name I could not hear a letter,
Then mad, she did name Robin, and then James,
Till she had reckoned up some twenty names,
At length when she had counted up her score,
As one among the rest she hit on me:
I asked her if she could not reckon more,
And plucked away my hands to let her see.
But when she looked back and saw me behind her
She blushed, and asked if it were I did blind her?
And since I swear both by her mask and fan,
To trust no she tongue, that can name a man.

Ans. Your great oath has some exceptions:
But to our former purpose, you is Mistress Arthur,
We will attempt another kind of wooing,
And make her hate her husband if we can.

Full. But not a word of passion or of love.
Have at her now to try her patience,
God save you mistress.

Mis. Ar. You are welcome sir.

Full. I pray you where is your husband?

Yon. Ar. Not within.

Ans. Who M. Arthur? him I saw even now
At mistress Mary's the brave Curtizans.

Mis. Ar. Wrong not my husbands reputation so,
I neither can nor will believe you sir.

Full. Poor gentlewoman how much I pity you,
Your husband is become her only guest:
He lodges there, and daily diets there,
He riots, revels, and does all things,
Nay he is held the M. of misrule,
Among a most loathed and abhorred Crew:
And can you being a woman suffer this?

Mis. Ar. Sir, sir, I understand you well enough,
Admit my husband does frequent that house
Of such dishonest usage, I suppose
He does it but in zeal to bring them home
By his good counsel, from that course of sin:
And like a Christian, seeing them astray
In the broad path that to damnation leads,
He uses thither to direct their feet
Into the narrow way that guides to heaven.

Ans. Was ever woman guld so palpably?
But Mistress Arthur think you as you say?

Mis. Ar. Sir what I think I think, and what I say
I would I could enjoin you to believe.

Ans. Faith mistress Arthur I am sorry for you,
And in good sooth, I wish it lay in me
To remedy the least part of these wrongs
Your unkind husband daily profers you.

Mis. Ar. You are deceived he is not unkind,
Although he bear an outward face of hate,
His heart and soul are both assured mine.

Ans. Fie mistress Arthur, take a better spirit,
Be not so timorous to rehearse your wrongs,
I say your husband haunts bad company,
Swaggerers, cheaters, wanton Curtizans.
There he defiles his body, stains his soul,
Consumes his wealth, undoes himself and you,
In danger of diseases, whose vilde names
Are not for any honest mouths to speak,
Nor any chaste ears to receive and hear.
O he will bring that face admired for beauty,
To be more loathed then a leaprous skin:
Divorce your self now whilst the clouds grow black,
Prepare your self a shelter for the storm,
Abandon his most loathed fellowship:
You are young mistress, will you loose your youth?

Mis. Ar. Tempt no more devil, thy deformity
Has chaung'd it self into an angels shape,
But yet I know thee by thy course of speech:
Thou gets an apple to betray poor Eve,
Whose outside bears a show of pleasant fruit,
But the vilde branch on which this apple grew,
Was that which drew poor Eve from Paradise.
Thy Sirens song could make me drown my self,
But I am tied unto the mast of truth.
Admit my husband be inclined to vice,
My virtues may in time recall him home,
But if we both should desperate run to sin,
We should abide certain destruction.
But he is like one that over a sweet face
Puts a deformed vizard for his soul,
Is free from any such intents of ill:
Only to try my patience, he puts on
An ugly shape of black intemperance.
Therefore this blot of shame which he now wears,
I with my prayers will purge, wash with tears.

Exit. Ans. Fuller.

Full. Anselme.

Ans. How like thou this?

Full. As schoole-boyes Ierkes, Apes whips, as Lions Cocks,
As Furies do fasting days, and devils crosses,
As maids to have their marriage days put off:
I like it as the thing I most do loath,
What will thou do? for shame persist no more
In this extremity of frivolous love.
I see my doctrine moves no precise ears,
But such as are professed inamoratos.

Ans. O I shall die.

Full. Tush live to laugh a little,
Here Is the best subject that thy love affords,
Listen a while and hear this: hoboy speak.

Ami. As in ptesenti, thou loath'st the gift I sent thee,
Nolo plus tarry but die, for the beauteous marry,
Fain would I die by a sword, but what sword shall I die by?
Or by a stone, what stone? nullus lapis iacet ibi.
Knife I have none to sheath in my breast, or empty my full veins,
Here is no wall or post which I can soil within my brus'd brains.
First will I therefore say 2. or 3. Creedes and Auemaries,
And after go buy a poison at the Apothecaries.

Full. I prithee Anselme but observe this fellow,
Do not hear him? he would die for love,
That mishapt love thou would condemn in him,
I see in thee, I prithee note him well.

Ans. Were I assurs'd that I were such a Lover,
I should be with my self quite out of love:
I prithee lets persuade him still to live.

Full. That were a dangerous case, perhaps the fellow
In desperation would to sooth us up,
Promise repentant recantation,
And after fall into that desperate course,
Both which I will prevent with policy.

Ami. O death come with thy dart, come death when I bthe
Mors vem veni mors, and from this misery rid me.
She whom I loved, whom I loved, eue^ she my sweet pret Mar
Does but flout and mock, and Jest, and dissimulary.

Full. I Will fit him finely: in this paper is
The Juice of Mandrake, by a Doctor made
To cast a man whose leg should be cut off,
Into a deep, a cold and senceles sleep,
Of such approved operation,
That who so takes it, is for twice twelve hours
Breathless, and to all men's judgments past all sense:
This will I give the pedant but in sport,
For when it is known to take effect in him,
The world will but esteem it as a Jest:
Besides it may be a means to save his life,
For being perfect poison as it seems,
His meaning is, some covetous slave for coin
Will sell it him, though it be held by law
To be no better then flat felony.

Ans. Uphold the Jest, but he has spied us, peace.

Ami. Gentiles God save you,
Here is a man I have noted often, most learned in Physic,
One man he helped of the Cough, another he heald of the tisick:
And I will board him thus: Salve o Salve Magister.

Full. Gratus mihi aduenis quid me cum vis.

Ami. Optatum venis paucis to volo.

Full. Si quid industria nostra tibi faciet dic queso.

Ami. Attend me sir, I have a simple house,
But as the learned Diogenes says
In his Epistle to Tertullian,
It is extremely troubled with great Ratts,
I have no mus pusse nor gray eyde Cat
To hunt them out. O could your learned Art
Show me a means how I might poison them:
T^^s dum suus, sir Aminadab.

Full. With all my heart, I am no Rat-catcher,
But if you need a poison, here is that
Will pepper both your Dogs and Rats and Cats:
Nay spare your purse, I give this in good will,
And as it proves I pray you send to me,
And let me know, would you ought else with me?

Ami. Minime quidem, here is that you say will take them?
A thousand thanks sweet sir, I say to you
As Tully in his Aesops Fables said,
Ag^tibi gratias, so farewell, vale.

Exit. Full. A diew. Come let us go, I long to see
What the event of this new Jest will be.

Enter young Arthur. Young Ar. Good morrow gentlemen, saw you not this way
As you were walking, Sir Aminadab?

Ans. M. Arthur as I take it.

Yon. Ar. Sir the same.

Ans. Sir I desire you more familiar love,
Would I could bid my self unto your house,
For I have wished for your acquaintance long.

Yon. Ar. Sweet M. Anselme I desire yours too:
Will you come dine with me at home to morrow,
You shall be welcome I assure you sir.

Ans. I fear sir I shall prove too bold a guest.

Yon. Ar. You shall be welcome if you bring your friend.

Full. O Lord sir, we shall be too troublesome.

Young Ar. Nay now I will enforce a promise from you,
Shall I expect you?

Full. Yes with all my heart.

Ans. A thousand thanks. Yonder Is the schoolemaister.
So till to morrow twenty times farewell.

Young Ar. I double all your farewels twenty fold.

Ans. O this acquaintance was well scrapte of me,
By this my Love to morrow I shall see.

Exit. Ami. This poison shall by force expel,
Amorem love, Infernum hell.
Per hoc venenum ego I,
For my sweet lovely Less will die.

Yon. Ar. What do I hear of poison, which sweet means
Must make me a brave frolic widower?
It seems the doting fool being forlorn
Has got some compound mixture, in despair
To end his desperate fortunes and his life:
I Will get it from him, and with this make way
To my wives night, and to my Loves fair day.

Ami. In nomine domine, friends farewell:
I know death comes here is such a smell.
Pater and matter, father and mother,
Frater and soror, sister and brother,
And my sweet Mary, not these drugges,
Do send me to the Infernal bugges,
But thy unkindness, so adieu,
Hob-goblins now I come to you.

Yon. Ar. Hold man I say, what will the mad mad do?
I have I got thee, thou shall go with me:
No more of that, fie Sir Minadab
Destroy your self: If I but hear hereafter
You practice such revenge upon your self,
All your friends shall know that for a wench,
A paltry wench, you would have killed your self.

Ami. O tace queso, do not name
This frantic deed of mine for shame:
My sweet magister not a word,
I Will neither drown me in a ford
Nor give my neck such a scope,
To embrace it with a hempen rope;
I Will die no way till nature will me,
And death come with his dart and kill me.
If what is past you will conceal,
And nothing to the world reveal,
Nay as Quintillian said of yore,
I Will strive to kill my self no more.

Young Ar. On that condition I Will conceal this deed,
To morrow pray come and dine with me:
For I have many strangers, among the rest,
Some are desirous of your company.
You will not fail me?

Ami. No in sooth, I Will try the sharpnes of my tooth,
In steed of poison, I will eat
Rabets, Capons, and such meat:
And so as Pithagor as says,
With wholesome fare prolong my days.
But Sir will Mistress Mall be there?

Yon. Ar. She shall, she shall man never fear.

Ami. Then my spirit becomes stronger,
And I will live and stretch longer:
For Ovid said, and did not lie,
That poisoned men do often die.
But poison henceforth I Will not eat,
Whilst I can other victuals get:
To morrow if you make a feast,
Be sure sir I will be your guest.
But keep my counsel, vale tu,
And till to morrow sir adieu:
At your Table I will prove
If I can eat away my love.

Exit. Yon. Ar. O I am glad I have thee, now devise
A way how to bestow it cunningly:
It shall be thus: to morrow I Will pretend
A recocilement twixt my wife and me,
And to that end I will inuit thus many:
First Justice Reason, as the chief man there.
My Father Arther, old Lusam, young Lusam, M. Fuller,
And M. Anselme I have bid already.
Then will I have my lovely Mary too,
Be it but to spite my wife before she die:
For die she shall before to morrow night.
The operation of this poison is
Not suddenly to kill, they that take it
Fall in a sleep, and then it is past recure,
And this will I put in her Cup to morrow.

Enter Pipkin running. Pip. This it is to have such a Master, I have sought him
at the Change, at the school, at every place, but I cannot find him no where.
O cry mercy, my Mistress would entreat you to come home.


Yon. Ar. I cannot come to night, some urgent business
Will all this night employ me otherwise.

Pip. I believe my Mistress would con you as much thank to do that business
at home as abroad.


Yon. Ar. Here take my purse, and bid my wife provide
Good cheer against to morrow, there will be
Two or three strangers of my late acquaintance.
Sir go you to Justice Reasons house,
Inuit him first with all solemnity.
Go to my Fathers, and my Father in laws,
Here take this note.
The rest that come I will inuit my self,
About it with what quick dispatch thou can.

Pip. I warrant you Master I Will dispatch this business with more honesty,
then you will dispatch yours. But Master will the gentlewoman be there?


Young Ar. What gentlewoman?

Pip. The gentlewoman of the old house, that is as well known by the color
she lays of her chees, as an Alehouse by the painting is laid of his Lettice:
she that is like Homo, Common to all men: she that is beholding to no Trade,
but lives of her self.


Yon. Ar. Sir be gone, or I will send you hence.

Pip. I Will go, but by this hand I Will tell my Mistress as soon as I come home,
that Mistress light-heeles comes to dinner to morrow.


Yon. Ar. Sweet Mistress Mary I Will inuit my self:
And there I Will frolic, sup, and spend the night.
My Plot is current, here it is in my hand
Will make me happy in my second choice,
And I may freely challenge as mine own,
What I am how infore't to seek by stealth.
Love is not much unlike Ambition,
For in them both all lets must be removed
Twixt every Crown and him that would aspire,
And he that will attempt to win the same,
Must plundge up to the depth ore head and ears,
And hazard drowning in that purple sea.
So he that loves, must needs through blood and fire,
And do all things to compass his desire.

Enter Mistress Arthur and her Maid. Mis. Ar. Come spread the Table: Is the
hall well rubd,
The cushions in the windows neatly laid,
The Cupboord of plate set out, the Casements stuck
With Rosemary and Flowers, the Carpets brusht?

Maid. I forsooth Mistress.

Mis. Look to the kitchen Maid, and bid the Cook take down the Oven stone,
the pies be burnt: here take my keys and give him out more spice.


Maid. Yes forsooth Mistress.

Mis. Ar. Where Is that knave Pipkin, bid him spread the cloth,
Fetch the clean diaper napkins from my chest,
Set out the gilded salt, and bid the fellow
Make himself handsome, get him a clean band.

Maid. Indeed forsooth Mistress he is such a slouen
That nothing will sit handsome about him,
He had a pound of soap to scowre his face,
And yet his brow looks like the chimney stock.

Mis. Ar. Heel be a slouen still: Maid take this Apron,
And bring me one of Linen, quickly Maid.

Maid. I go forsooth.

Exit Maid. Mis. Ar. There was a curtsie, let me see it again.
I that was well. I fear my guests will come
Ere we be ready, what a spite is this.

Within. Mistress.

Mis. Ar. What Is the matter?

Within. Mistress I pray take Pipkin from the fire,
We cannot keep his fingers from the roast.

Mis. Ar. Bid him come hither, what a knave is that.
Fie, fie, never out of the kitchen,
Still broyling by the fire.

Enter Pipkin. Pip. I hope you will not take Pipkin from the fire
Till the broth be enough.

Enter Maid with an Apron. Mis. Ar. Well sir get a Napkin and a Trencher
And wait to day. So let me see my Apron.

Pip. Mistress I can tell ye one thing, my M. wench
Will come home to day to dinner.

Enter Justice Reason and his man. Mis. Ar. She shall be welcome if she be his
guest.
But here is some of our guests are come already,
A Chair for Justice Reason sir.

Just. Good morrow Mistress Arthur, you are like a good huswife,
At your request I am come home, what a Chair!
Thus age seeks ease: where is your husband Mistress?
What a cushion too!

Pip. I pray you ease your tail Sir.

Just. Mary and will good fellow, twenty thanks.

Pip. M. Hue as welcome as heart can tell, or tongue can think.

Hu. I thank you M. Pipkin, I have got many a good dish of broth by your means.

Pip. According to the aunciet Courtesy you are welcome: according to the time
and place, you are heartily welcome: when they are busied at the board, we will
find our selves busied in the Buttrie: and so sweet Hugh according to our
scholars phrase, Gratulor aduentum tuum.


Hu. I will answer you with the like sweet Pipkin, gratias.

Pip. As much grace as you will, but as little of it as you can good Hugh. But
here comes more guests.


Enter old Arthur, and old Lusam. Mis. Ar. More stools and cushions for these
gentlemen.

Old Ar. What M. Justice Reason, are you here?
Who would have thought to have met you in this place?

Old Lu. What say mine eyes, is Justice Reason here?
Mountains may meet, and so I see may we.

Just. Well when men meet they meet,
And when they part, they often leave one another company:
So we being met, are met.

Old Lu. Truly you say true:
And M. Justice Reason speaks but reason.
To hear how wisely men of law will speak.

Enter Anselme and Fuller. Ans. Good morrow gentlemen.

Mis. Ar. What are you there?

A^. Good morrow Mistress, and good morrow all.

Just. If I may be so bold in a strange place,
I say good morrow, and as much to you.
I pray gentlemen will you sit down?
We have been young like you, and if you live
Unto our age, you will be old like us.

Full. Be ruled by reason, but whose here?

Enter Aminadab. Ami. Saluete omnes, and good day
To all at once, as I may say,
First Master Justice, next old Arthur,
That gives me pension by the quarter:
To my good Mistress, and the rest,
That are the founders of this feast.
In brief I speak to omnes all,
That to their meat intend to fall.

Just. Welcome Sir Aminadab, o my son
Has profited exceeding well with you,
Sit down, sit down, by Mistress Arthurs leave.

Enter young Arthur, young Lusam, and Mistress Marie. Yon. Ar. Gentlemen,
welcome all, whilst I deliver
Their private welcomes, Wife be it your charge,
To give this Gentlewoman entertainment.

Mis. Ar. Husband, I will: o this is she usurps
The precious interest of my Husbands love:
Though as I am a woman, I could well
Thrust such a leaud companion out of doors,
Yet as I am a true obedient Wife,
I Would kiss her feet to do my Husbands will.
You are entirely welcome Gentlewoman,
Indeed you are, pray do not doubt of it.

Mary. I thank you Mistress Arthur, now by my little honesty,
It much repents me to wrong so chaste a woman.

Yon. Ar. Gentles, put ore your legs, first M. Justice,
Here you shall sit.

Just. And here shall mistress Arthur sit by me.

Yon. Ar. Pardon me sir, she shall have my wifes place.

Mis. Ar. Indeed you shall, for he will have it so.

Mary. If you will needs, but I shall do you wrong to take your place.


Old Lu. I by my faith you should.

Mis. Ar. That is no wrong which we impute no wrong, I pray you sit.


Young Ar. Gentlemen all, I pray you seat your selves:
What sir Aminadab, I know where your heart is.

Ami. Mum not a word, Pax vobis, peace:
Come gentiles I Will be of this mess.

Young Ar. So, who gives thanks?

Ami. Sir that will I.

Young Ar. I pray you too it by and by, where is Pipkin,
Wait at the board, let M. Reasons man
Be had into the buttry, but first give him
A napkin and a trencher. Well said Hugh,
Wait at your Masters elbow, now say grace.

Ami. Gloria deo, sirs proface,
Attend me now whilst I say grace.
For bread and salt, for grapes and malt,
For flesh and fish, and every dish:
Mutton and beef, of all meats chief:
For Cow-heels, chitterlings, tripes and sowse,
And other meat that's in the house:
For racks, for breasts, for legs, for loins,
For pies with raisons, and with proines:
For fritters, pancakes, and for frayes,
For venison pasties and minct pies:
Sheephead and garlic, brawne and mustard,
Wafers, spiced cakes, tart and custard,
For capons, rabets, pigges and geese,
For apples, carawaies and cheese:
For all these and many more,
Benidicanus domino.

All. Amen.

Just. I con you thanks, but sir Aminadab,
Is that your scholar? now I promise you
He is a toward stripling of his age.

Pip. Who I forsooth, yes indeed forsooth I am his scholar, I would you should
well think I have profited under him too, you shall hear if he will pose me.


Old Ar. I pray you lets hear him.

Ami. Huc ades Pipkin.
Adsum.

Ami. Quot Casus sunt, how many Cases are there?

Pip. Mary a great many:

Ami. Well answered a great many, there are six,
Six a great many, it is well answered,
And which be they?

Pip. A Bow-case, a Cap-case, a Combe-case, a Lutecase, a Fidle-case, and a
Candle-case.


Just: I know them all, again well answered:
Pray God my youngest boy profit no worse.

An. How many parsons are there?

Pip. I Will tell you as many as I know, if you will give me leave to reckon them.


Ansel. I prithee do.

Pip. The Parson of Fanchurch, the Parson of Pancridge, and the Parson of.


Young Ar. Well sir about your business: now will I
Temper the Cup my loathed wife shall drink:

Exit. Old Ar. Daughter me thinks you are exceeding sad:

Old Lu. Faith daughter so thou art exceeding sad:

Mis: Ar: It Is but my countenance, for my heart is merry,
Mistress were you as merry as you are welcome,
You should not sit so sadly as you do.

Ma: It Is but because I am seated in your place,
Which is frequented seldom with true mirth.

Mis: Ar. The fault is neither in the place nor me.

Ami. How say you Lady to him you last did lie by?
All this is no more prebibo tibi.

Mary. I thank you sir, Mistress this draught shall be
To him that loves both you and me.

Mist. Ar. I know your meaning.

Ans. Now to me;
If she have either love or charity.

Mis. Ar. Hear M. Justice, this to your grave years,
A mournful draught God wot, half wine, half tears.

Just. Let come my wench, here youngsters, to you all,
You are silent, here is that will make you talk.
Wenches, me think you sit like Puritants,
Never a Jest abroad to make them laugh?

Full. Sir, since you move speech of a Puritant,
If you will give me audience I will tell ye
As good a Jest as ever you did hear.

Old Ar. A Jest, that's excellent.

Just. Before hand lets prepare our selves to laugh,
A Jest is nothing if it be not graced:
Now, now, I pray you when begins this Jest?

Full. I came unto a Puritant to woo her,
And roughly did salute her with a kiss:
Away quoth she, and rudely pusht mefro her,
Brother, by yea and nay I like not this,
And still with amorous talk she was saluted,
My artlesse speech with scripture was confuted.

Old Lu. Good, good indeed, the best that ere I heard.

Old Ar. I promise you it was exceeding good.

Full. Often I frequented her abroad by night,
And courted her, and spoke her wondrous fair,
But ever somewhat did offend her sight,
Either my double ruff, or my long hair:
My skarfe was vain, my garments hung too low,
My Spanish shoe was cut too broad at toe.

All. Ha, ha, the best that ever I heard.

Full. I parted for that time, and came again,
Seeming to be conformd in look and speech,
My shoes were sharp toed, and my band was plain,
Close to my thigh my metamorphis'd breech:
My cloak was narrow Capte, my hair cut shorter,
Off went my Skarfe, thus marched I to the Porter.

All. Ha, ha, was ever heard the like?

Full. The Porter spying me, did lead me in,
Where his fair mistress sat reading on a chapter:
Peace to this house quoth I, and those within,
Which holy speech with admiration wrapped her,
And ever as I spoke, and came her nie,
Seeming divine, turned up the white of eye.

Inst. So, so, what then, what then?

Old Lu. Forward, I pray forward sir.

Full. I spoke divinely, and I called her sister,
And by this means we were acquainted well:
By yea and nay, I will quoth I and kissed her,
She blushed and said that long tongued men would tell,
I seemed to be as secret as the night,
And said, on sooth I would put out the light.

Old Ar. In sooth he would, a passing passing Jest.

Full. O do not swear quoth she, yet put it out,
Because I would not have you break your oath.
I felt a bed there as I groapt about,
In troath quoth I, here will we rest us both.
Swear you in troth quoth she, had you not sworn
I had not don't, but took it in foul scorn,
Then you will come quoth I; though I be loath,
I Will come quoth she, be it but to keep your oath.

Just. It Is very pretty, but now whens the Jest?

Old Ar. O forward to the Jest in any case.

Old Lu I would not for angel loose the Jest.

Full. Here Is right the dunghill Cock that finds a pearl,
To talk of wit to these, is as a man
Should cast out Jewels to a heard of swine,
Why in the last words did consist the Jest.

Old Lus. I, in the last words? ha, ha, ha,
It was an excellent admired jest,
To them that understood it.

Enter young Arthur, with a Cup of Wine. Just. It was indeed, I must for
fashions sake
Say as they say, but otherwise, o God.
Good M. Arthur thanks for our good cheer.

Yon. Ar. Gentlemen, welcome all, now hear me speak;
One special cause that moved me lead you hither,
Is for ancient grudge that has long since
Continued twixt my modest wife and me,
The wrongs that I have done her, I recant.
In either hand I hold a several Cup,
This in the right hand, Wife I drink to thee,
This in the left hand pledge me in this draught,
Burying all former hatred, so have to thee.

He drinks. Mis. Ar. The welcom'st pledge that yet I ever took:
Were this wine poison, or did taste like gall,
The honey sweet condition of your draught,
Would make it drink like Nectar, I will pledge you,
Were it the last that'I should ever drink.

Yon. Ar. Make that account; thus Gentlemen you see,
Our late discord brought to a unity.

Ami. Ecce quam bonum and quam iucundum,
Est habitare featres in vnum.

Old Ar. My heart does taste the sweetness of your pledge,
And I am glad to see this sweet accord.

Old Lus. Glad quotha, there is not one amongst us,
But may be exceeding glad.

Just. I am, I marry am I, that I am.

Yon. Lus. The best accord that could betide their loves.

Ans. The worst accord that could betide my love.

All about to rise. Ami. What rising Gentles, keep your places,
I Will close up your stomachs with a grace.
O Domine and Chare puter,
That give us wine in stead of water,
And from the Pond and River clear,
Make nappie Ale and good March Beer,
That send'st us sundry sorts of meat,
And every thing we drink or eat,
To maids, to wives, to boys, to men,
Laus Deo sancte Amen.

Yon. Ar. So much good do ye all, and Gentlemen,
Accept your welcomes better then your cheer.

Old Lus. Nay so we do, I Will give you thanks for all.
Come M. Justice, you do walk our way,
And M. Arthur, and old Hugh your man,
We Will be the first will strain courtesy.

Just. God be with you all.

Exeunt old Arthur, Lusam, and Justice. Ami. Propimus ego sum, I Will be the next,
And man you home, how say you Lady?

Yon. Ar. I pray you do, good sir Aminadab.

Mary. Sir, if it be not too much trouble to you,
Let me entreat that kindness at your hands.

Amina. Entreat; fie, no sweet Less command.
Sic so nunc, now take the upper hand.

He man's her away. Yon. Ar. Come wife, this meeting was all for our sakes,
I long to see the force my poison takes.

Mis. Ar. My dear, dear husband, in exchange of hate,
My love and heart shall on your service wait.

Exeunt Arthur his Wife. Ans. So does my love on thee, but long no more,
To her rich love, thy service is too poor.

Full. For shame no more, you had best expostulate
Your love with every stranger, leave these sighs,
And change them to familiar conference.

Yon. Lus. Trust me the virtues of young Arthurs wife,
Her constancy, modest humility,
Her patience, and admired temperance,
Have made me love all women kind the better.

Enter Pipkin. Pip. O my mistress, my mistress, she is dead, she is gone, she is
dead, she is gone.

Ans. What Is that he says?

Pip. Out of my way, stand back I say, all joy from earth is fled,
She is this day as cold as clay, my Mistress she is dead:
O Lord, my mistress, my mistress.

Exit. Ans. What mistress Arhur dead? my soul is vanished,
And the worlds wonder from the world quite banished:
O I am sick, my pain grows worse and worse,
I am quite struck through with this late discourse.

Full. What faints thou man? I Will lead thee hence for shame,
Sound at the tidings of a woman's death?
Intolerable, and beyond all thought,
Come my loves fool, give me thy hand to lead,
This day one body and two hearts are dead.

Exeunt. Young Lus. But now she was as well as well might be,
And on the sudden dead; joy in excess
Has ouerrunne her poor disturbed soul.
I Will after and see how Master Arthur takes it.
His former hate far more suspicious makes it.

Exit. Enter Hugh. Hu. My M. has left his gloves behind where he sat in his
chair, and has sent me to fetch them, it is such an old snudge, he will not
loose the dropping of his nose.


Enter Pipkin. Pip. O Mistress, o Hugh, o Hugh, o Mistress, Hugh I must needs
beat thee, I am mad, I am lunatike, I must fall upon thee, my Mistress is dead.


Hu. O M. Pipkin, what do you mean, what do you mean M. Pipkin?


Pip. O Hue, o Mistress, o Mistress, o Hue.

Hu. O Pipkin, o God, o God, o Pipkin.

Pip. O Hue, I am mad, bear with me, I cannot choose, o death, o Mistress, o
Mistress, o death.


Exit. Hu. Death quotha, he has almost made me dead with beating.


Enter Reason, old Arthur, and old Lusam. Just. I wonder why the knave my man
stays thus,
And comes not back, see where the villain loyters.

Enter Pipkin. Bra. O M. Justice, M. Arthur, M. Lusam, wonder not why I thus
blow and bluster, my Mistress is dead, dead is my Mistress, and therefore hang
your selves, o^ my Mistress, my Mistress.


Exit. Old Ar. My sons wife dead?

Old Lus. My daughter.

Enter young Arthur mourning. Just. Mistress Arthur, here comes her husband.

Young Ar. O here the wofuls husband comes alive,
No husband now, the wight that did uphold
That name of husband is now quite orethrowne,
And I am left a hapless Widower.

Old Ar. Feign would I speak, if grief would suffer me.

Old Lus. As Master Arthur says, so say I,
If grief would let me, I would weeping die,
To be thus hapless in my aged years,
O I would speak, but my words melt to tears.

Young Ar. Go in, go in, and view the sweetest Course
That ere was laid upon a mournful room,
You cannot speak for weeping sorrows doom.
Badnewes are rife, good tidings sildome come.

Exeunt. Enter Anselme. An. What frantike humor does thus haunt my sense,
Striving to breed destruction in my spirit?
When I would sleep, the ghost of my sweet love,
Appears unto me in an Angels shape,
When I am wake, my fantasy presents
As in a glass, the shadow of my love:
When I would speak, her name intrudes it self
Into the perfect echoes of my speech.
And though my thought beget some other word,
Yet will my tongue speak nothing but her name:
If I do meditate it is on her,
If dream on her, or if discourse on her,
I think her ghost does haunt me, as in times
Of former darkness old wives tales report,
Enter Fuller. Here comes my bitter Genius, whose advice
Directs me still in all my actions.
How now, from whence come you?

Full. Faith from the street, in which as I past by,
I met the modest Mistress Arthurs Course:
And after her as mourners, first her husband,
Next Justice Reason, then old M. Arthur,
Old M. Lusam, and young Lusam too,
With many other kinsfolks, neighbors, friends,
And others that lament her Funeral,
Her body is by this laid in the vault.

Ans. And in that vault my body I will lay,
I prithee leave me, thither is my way.

Full. I am sure you jest, you mean not as you say.

Ans. No, no, I Will but go to the Church and pray.

Full. Nay then we shall be troubled with your humor.

Ans. As ever thou did love me, or as ever
Thou did delight in my society,
By all the rights of friendship, and of love,
Let me entreat thy absence but one hour,
And at the hours end I will come to thee.

Full. Nay if you will be foolish, and past reason,
I Will wash my hands like Pilate, from thy folly,
And suffer thee in these extremities.

Exit. Ans. Now it is night, and the bright lamps of heaven
Are half burnt out, now bright Adelbora
Welcomes the cheerful Day Star to the Fast,
And harmless stillness has possessed the world.
This is the Church, this hollow is the Vault,
Where the dead body of my Saint remains,
And this the Coffin that inshrines her body,
For her bright soul is now in paradise.
My coming is with no intent of sin,
Or to defile the body of the dead,
But rather take my last farewell of her,
Or languishing and dying by her side.
My ayrie soul post after hers to heaven,
First with this latest kiss I seal my love.
Her lips are warm, and I am much deceived
If that she stir not: and this Golgotha,
This place of dead men's bones is terrible,
Presenting fearful apparitions.
Mistress Arthur in the Tomb. It is some spirit that in the Coffin lies,
And makes my hair start up an end with fear,
Come to thy self faint heart, she sits upright,
O I would hide me, but I know not where;
Tush if it be a spirit, it is a good spirit,
For with her body living, ill she knew not,
And with her body dead, ill cannot meddle.

Mis. Ar. Who am I? or where am I?

Ans. O she speaks, and by her language now I know she lives.

Mi. Ar. O who can tell me where I am become?
For in this darkness I have lost my self,
I am not dead, for I have sense and life,
How come I then in this Coffin buried?

Ans. Anselme be bold she lives, and Destiny
Has traind thee hither to redeem her life.

Mis. Ar. Lives any among these dead? none but my self.

Ans. O yes, a man whose heart till now was dead,
Lives and suruiues at your return to life:
Nay start not, I am Anselme, one who long
Has doted on your fair perfection,
And loving you more then became me well,
Was hither sent by some strange providence,
To bring you from these hollow vaults below,
To be a liver in the world again.

Mis Ar. I understand you, and I thank the heavens,
That sent you to revive me from this fear,
And I embrace my safety with good will.

Enter Aminadab witv h two or three boys. Ami. Mane Citus lectum fuge mollem
discute somnum,
Templa pet as supplex and venerarum deum.
Shake off thy sleep, get up betimes, go to the church and pray,
And never fear, God will thee hear, and keep thee all the day.
Good counsel boys, observe it, mark it well,
This early rising, this diliculo,
Is good both for your bodies and your minds.
It Is not yet day, give me my Tinder-box,
Mean time unloose your sachels and your books,
Draw, draw, and take you to your lessons boys.

I. Boy. O Lord M. what is that in the white sheet?

Ami. In the white sheet my boy, Dic vbi, where?

Boy. Vide Master, vide illic there.

Ami. O Domine, Domine, keep us from evil,
A charm from flesh, the world, and the devil.

Exeunt running. Mis. Ar. O tell me not my husband was ingrate,
Or that he did attempt to poison me,
Or that he laid me here, and I was dead,
These are no means at all to win my love.

Ans. Sweet Mistress, he be quath'd you to the earth,
You promised him to be his wife till death,
And you have kept your promise, but now since
The world, your husband, and your friends suppose
That you are dead, grant me but one request,
And I will swear never to solicit more,
Your sacred thoughts to my dishonest love.

Mis. Ar. So your demand may be no preiudise
To my chaste name, no wrong unto my husband,
No suit that may concern my Wedlock breach,
I yield unto it, but to pass the bands of modesty and chastity,
First will I be queath my self again
Unto this grave, and never part from hence,
Then taint my soul with black impuritie.

An. Take here my hand and faithful heart to gage,
That I will never tempt you more to sin:
This my request is, since your husband doates
Upon a leaud lascivious Curtezan,
Since he has broke the bands of your chaste bed,
And like a murderer sent you to your grave,
Do but go with me to my mothers house,
There shall you live in secret for a space,
Only to see the end of such leaud lust,
And know the difference of a chaste wifes bed,
And one whose life is in all looseness led.

Mis Ar. Your mother is a vertuouus Matron held,

Her counsel, conference, and company,
May much avail me, there a space I Will stay,
Upon condition as you said betore,
You never will move your unchaste suit more.

An. My faith is pawnd, o never had chaste wife,
A husband of so leaud and unchaste life.

Exeunt. Enter Marie Brabo, and Splay. Bra. Mistress I long have served you,
even since
These brisled hayres upon my grave like chin
Were all unborn: when I first came to you
These Infant feathers of these ravens wings,
Were not once begun.

Spl. No indeed they were not.

Bra. Now in my two Muchatoes for a need,
Wanting a rope, I well could hang my self:
I prithee Mistress, for all my long service,
For all the love that I have borne thee long,
Do me this favor now to marry me.

Enter young Arthur. Ma. Marry come up you blockhead, you great ass,
What would thou have me marie with a devil,
But peace, no more, here comes the silly fool
That we so long have set our lime-twigs for,
Be gone, and leave me to entangle him.

Young Ar. What Mistress Mary!

Ma. O good master Arthur, where have you been this week, this month, this
year?
This year said I? where have you been this age?
Unto a Lover every minute seems time out of mind.
How should I think you love me,
That can endure to stay so long from me?

Young Ar. In faith sweet heart I saw thee yesternight.

Ma. I true, you did, but since you saw me not,
At twelve a clock you parted from my house,
And now it is morning, and new stricken seven.
Seven hours thou staidst from me, why did thou so?
They are my seven years Prentiship of woe.

Young Ar. I prithee be patient, I had some occasion
That did enforce me from thee yesternight.

Ma. I you are soon enforced, fool that I am,
To dote on one that naught respects me:
It Is but my fortune, I am borne to bear it,
And every one shall have their destiny.

Young Ar. Nay weep not wench, thou woundst me with thy tears.

Mary. I am a fool, and so you make me too,
These tears were better kept, then spent in waste,
On one that neither tenders them nor me:
What remedy, but if I chance to die,
Or to miscarrie with that I go withal,
I Will take my death that thou art cause thereof.
You told me, that when your wife was dead,
You would forsake all others, and take me.

Young Ar. I told thee so, and I will keep my word,
And for that end I came thus early to thee:
I have procured a license, and this night:
We will be married in a lawless Church.

Ma. These news revive me, and do somewhat ease
The thought that was new gotten to my heart.
But shall it be to night?

Young Ar. I wench, to night.
A senne^ and odd days since my wife died
Is past already, and her timelesse death,
Is but a nine days talk, come go with me,
And it shall be dispatched presently.

Ma. Nay then I see thou love me, and I find
By this last motion, thou art grown more kind.

Young Ar. My love and kindness like my age shall grow,
And with the (...) increase, and thou shall see,
The older I grow, the kinder I will be.

Ma. I so I hope it will but as for mine,
That with my age shall day by day decline.
Come shall we go?

Young Ar. With thee to the worlds end.
Whose beauty most admire, and all commend.

Exeunt. Enter Anselme and Fuller. An. It Is true as I relate the circumstance,
And she is with my mother safe at home,
But yet for all the hate I can allege
Against her husband, nor for all the love
That on my own part I can urge her too,
Will she be won to gratify my love.

Full. All things are full of ambiguitie,
And I admire this wondrous accident.
But Anselme, Arthur's about a new wife, a bona raba,
How will she take it when she hears this news?

An. I think even as a virtuous Matron should;
It may be that report may from thy mouth
Beget some pity from her ^^intie heart,
And I will urge her with it presently.

Full. Unless report be false, they are linkt already,
They are fast as words can tie them: I will tell thee
How I by chance did meet him the last night.
One said to me, this Arthur did intend
To have a wife, and presently to marry:
Amidst the street I met him as my friend,
And to his Love a present he did carry.
It was some ring, some stomacher, or toy,
I spoke to him, and bad God glue him joy.
God give me joy quoth he, of what I pray?
Marry quoth I, your wedding that is toward.
It Is false quoth he, and would have gone his way.
Come, come, quoth I, so near it, and so froward:
I urged him hard by our familiar loves,
Prayed him withal not to forget my gloves.
Then he began, your kindness has been great,
Your courtesy great, and your love not common,
Yet so much favor pray let me entreat,
To be excused from marrying any woman.
I knew the wench that is become his Bride,
And smiled to think how deeply he had lide,
For first he swore he did not court a maid,
A wife he could not, she was elsewhere tied,
And as for such as widows were, he said,
And deeply swore, none such should be his bride,
Widow, nor wife, nor maid, I asked no more,
Knowing he was betrothed unto a whore.

Enter Mistress Arthur. Ans. Is it not Mistress Mary that you mean,
She that did dine with us at Arthurs house?

Full. The same, the same, here comes the Gentle woman,
Oh Mistress Arthur, I am of your counsel,
Welcome from death to life.

Ans. Mistress, this gentleman has news to tell ye,
And as you like of it, so think of me.

Full. Your husband has already got a wife,
A huffing wench in faith, whose rufflng silks,
Make with their motion, music unto love,
And you are quite forgotten.

Ans. I have sworn to move this my unchaste demand no more.

Full. When does your color change?
When does your eyes Sparkle with fire to revenge these wrongs?
When does your tongue break into rage and wra^^^
Against that scum of manhood, your vile husband,
He first misvde you.

Ans. And yet can you love him?

Full. He left your chaste bed, to defile the bed
Ofsacred marriage with a Curtezan.

Ans. Yet can you love him?

Full. And not content with this,
Abused your honest name with staundrous words,
And filled your hushed house with unquietness.

Ansel. And can you love him yet?

Full. Nay did he not with his rude fingers dash you on the face,
And double dye your Corrall lips with blood?
Has he not torn those Gold wyers from your head,
Wherewith Apollo would have strung his Harp,
And kept them to play music to the Gods?
Has he not beat you, and with his rude fists,
Upon that Crimzon temperature of your cheeks,
Laid a lead color with his boystrous blows.

Ansel. And can you love him yet?

Full. Then did he not
Either by poison, or some other plot,
Send you to death, where by his Providence,
God has preserved you by wondrous miracle?
Nay after death has he not scandalized
Your place, with an immodest Curtizan?

Ans. And can you love him yet?

Mis. Ar. And yet, and yet, and still, and ever whilst I breathe this air:
Nay after death my vnsubstantiall soul,
Like a good Angel shall attend on him,
And keep him from all harm.
^^t is he married, much good do his heart,
(...) God she may content him better far
Then I have done: long may they live in peace,
Till I disturb their solace; but because
I fear some mischief does hangore his head,
I Will weep mine eyes dry with my present care,
And for their healths make hoarce my tongue with prayer.

Exit. Full. Art sure she is a woman? if she be,
She is create of Natures purity.

Ans. O yes, I too well know she is a woman,
Henceforth my virtue shall my love withstand,
And on my striving thoughts get the upper hand.

Full. Then thus resolved, I straight will drink to thee,
A health thus deep, to drown thy melancholy.

Exeunt. Enter Mary, young Arthur, Brabo, and Splay. Ma. Not have my will, yes I
will have my will,
Shall I not go abroad but when you please?
Can I not now and then meet with my friends,
But at my coming home you will controwle me?
Marry come up.

Young Ar. Where are thou patience?
Nay rather where is become my former spleen?
I had a wife would not have used me so.

Ma. Why you Jack sauce, you Cuckold, you what not,
What am not I of age sufficient
To go and come still when my pleasure serves,
But must I have you sir to question me?
Not have my will? yes I will have my will.

Young Ar. I had a wife would not have used me so,
But she is dead.

Bra. Not have her will, sir she shall have her will,
She says she will, and sir I say she shall.
Not have her will? that were a Jest indeed.
Who says she shall not, if I be disposde
To man her forth, who shall find fault with it?
What Is he that dare say black's her eye?
Though you be married sir, yet you must know
That she was ever borne to have her will.

Splay. Not have her will, Gods passion I say still,
A woman's no body that wants her will.

Young Ar. Where is my spirit, what shall I maintain
A strumpet with a Brabo and her bawd,
To beard me out of my authortie.
What am I from a master made a slave?

Ma. A slave? nay worse, do thou maintain my man,
And this my maid? it is I maintain them both.
I am thy wife, I will not be dressed so
While thy Gold lasts, but then most willingly
I will bequeath thee to flat beggerie.
I do already hate thee, do thy worst,
Nay touch me if thou dare: what shall he beat me?

Bra. I Will make him seek his fingers among the dogs,
That dares to touch my Mistress: never fear,
My sword shall smooth the wrinckles of his brows
That bends a frown upon my Mistress.

Young Ar. I had a wife would not have used me so,
But God is just.

Ma. Now Arthur, if I knew
What in this world would most torment thy soul,
That I would do: would all my evil usage
Could make thee straight despair, and hang thy self.
Now I remember, where is Arthurs man
Pipkin, that slave? go turn him out of doors,
None that loves Arthur, shall have house-roome here.
Enter Pipkin. Yonder he comes, Brabo discard the fellow.

Young Ar. Shall I be ouermaistred in my own?
Be thy self Arthur, strumpet he shall stay.

Mary. What shall he Brabo, shall he Mistress Splay?

Bra. Shall he? he shall not: breathes there any living,
Dares say he shall, when Brabo says he shall not?

Young Ar. Is there no law for this? she is my wife,
Should I complain, I should be rather mocked:
I am content, keep by thee whom thou list.
Discharge whom thou think good, do what thou will,
Rise, go to bed, stay at home, or go abroad
At thy good pleasure keep all companies:
So that for all this, I may have but peace.
Be unto me as I was to my wife,
Only give me what I denied her then,
A little love, and some small quietness.
If he displease thee, turn him out of doors.

Pip. Who me? turn me out of doors? is this all the wages I shall have at the
years end, to be turned outof doors? you Mistress, you are a.


Splay. A what? speak, a what? touch her, and touch me; taint her, and taint
me, speak, speak, a what?


Pip. Marry a woman that is kin to the frost.

Splay. How do you mean that?

Pip. And you are a kin to the Latin word, tovnderstand.

Splay. And what is that?

Pip. Subaudi, subaudi: and sir, do you not use to pinke doublets?

Splay. And why?

Pip. I took you for a cutter, you are of a great kindred; you are a common
couzener, every body calls you cosen: besides, they say you are a very good
Warrener, you have been an old Coney catcher: but if I be turned a begging,
as I know not what I am borne too, and that you ever come to the said Trade, as
nothing is impossible, I Will set all the Commonwealth of beggars on your back,
and all the Congregation of vermin shall be put to your keeping, and then if
you be not more bitten then all the Compaine of beggars besides, I Will not have
my will: zounds turned out of doors, I Will go and set up my Trade, a dish to
drink in that I have within, a wallet that I Will make of an old shirt, then my
speech for the Lords sake, I beseech your worship, then I must have a lame
leg, I Will go to footeball and break my shinnes, and I am provided for that.


Bra. What stands the villain prating, hence you slave.

Exit Pipkin. Yon. Ar. Art thou yet pleased?

Ma. When I have had my humor.

Yon. Ar. Good friends for manners sake a while withdraw.

Bra. It is our pleasure sir to stand aside.

Young Ar. Mary what cause have thou to use me thus?
From nothing I have raisd thee to much wealth,
It Was more then I did owe thee: many a pound,
Nay many a hundred pound I spent on thee
In my wives time, and once but by my means
Thou hads bin in much danger, but in all things
My purse and credit ever bare thee out:
I did not owe thee this, I had a wife
That would have laid her self beneath my feet
To do me service, her I set at naught
For the entire affection I bare thee.
To show that I have loved thee, have I not
Above all women made chief choice of thee?
An argument sufficient of my love,
What reason then have thou to wrong me thus?

Ma. It is my humor.

Yon. Ar. O but such humors honest wives should purge:
He show thee a far greater instance yet
Of the true love that I have borne to thee,
(...) knew my brothers wife, was she not fair?

^^^y. So so.

Young Ar. But more then fair, was she not vertuos
Endued with the beauty of the mind?

Yon. Ar. Faith so they said.

Young Ar. Hark in thine ear, I Will trust thee with my life,
Then which what greater instance of my love:
Thou knew full well how suddenly she died,
To enjoy thy love even then I poysonder her.

Ma. How poisoned her! accursed murderer,
I Will ring this fatal larum in all ears,
Then which what greater instance of my hate.

Young Ar. Will thou not keep my counsel?

Ma. Villain no, thoult poison me as thou have poisoned her.

Young. Ar. Do thou reward me thus for all my love?
Then Arthur fly and seek to save thy life,
O difference twixt a chaste and unchaste wife.

Exit. Ma. Pursue the murderer, apprehend him strait.

Bra. Why what is the matter Mistress?

Ma. This villain Arthur poisoned his first wife,
Which he in secret has confessed to me:
Go and fetch war^^nts from the Justices
To attach the murderer, he once hanged and dead,
His wealth is mine: pursue the slave that's dead.

Bra. Mistress I will, he shall not pass this land
But I will bring him bound with this strong hand.

Exeunt. Enter Mistress Arthur. Mis: Ar. O what are the vain pleasures of the
world,
That in their actions we affect them so?
Had I been borne a servant, my low life
Had stedie stood from all these miseries:
The wauing reeds stand free from every gust,
When the tall oaks are rent up by the roots:
What is vain beauty but an Idle breath?
Why are we proud of that which so soon changes?
But rather wish the beauty of the mind,
Which neither time can alter, sickness change,
Violence deface, nor the black hand of envy,
Smudge and disgrace, or spoil, or make deformd.
O had my riotous husband borne this mind,
He had been happy, I had been more blessed,
And peace had prought our quiet souls to rest.

Enter young Arthur poorly. Young Ar. O whither shall I fly to save my life,
When murder and despair dogs at my heels?
O misery, thou never foundst a friend,
All friends forsake men in adversity:
My brother has denied to succor me,
Vpbraiding me with name of murderer.
My uncles double bar their doors against me;
My father has denied to shelter me,
And cursed me worse then Adam did vile Eve.
I that within these two days had more friends
Then I could number with Arithmatike,
Have now no more then one poor Cipher is,
And that poor Cipher I supply my self.
All that I durst commit my fortunes too,
I have tried, and find none to relieve my wants,
My sudden flight, and fear of future shame,
Left me unfurnished of all necessaries,
And these three days I have not tasted food.

Mis: Ar: It is my husband, o how just is heaven!
Poorly disguised, and almost hunger-staru'd.
How comes this change?

Yon. Ar. Does no man follow me?
O how suspicious guilty murder is,
I starve for hunger, and I die for thirst:
Had I a kingdom I would sell my Crown
For a small bit of bread: I shame to beg,
And yet perforce I must or beg or starve.
This house belike longs to some gentlewoman,
And here is a woman, I will beg of her:
Good mistress look upon a proore man's wants.
Whom do I see? tush Arthur she is dead:
But that I saw her dead and buried,
I would have sworn it had been Arthurs wife:
But I will leave her, shame forbids me beg
On one so much resembles her.

Mis. Ar. Come hither fellow, wherefore do thou turn
Thy guilty looks and blushing face aside?
It seems thou have not been brought up to this.

Young Ar. You say true mistress: then for charity,
And for her sake whom you resemble most,
Pity my present want and misery.

Mis. Ar. It seems thou have been in some better plight,
Sit down I prithee, men though they be poor,
Should not be scorned: to ease thy hunger, first
Eat these Conserues: and now I prithee tell me,
What thou have been, thy fortunes, thy estate,
And what she was that I resemble most?

Young Ar. First look that no man see, or ouerheare us,
I think that shape was borne to do me good.

Mis. Ar. Have thou known one that did resemble me?

Young. Ar. I Mistress, I cannot choose but weep
To call to mind the fortunes of her youth.

Mis. Ar. Tell me, of what estate or birth was she?

Young Ar. Borne of good parents, and as well brought up.
Most fair, but not so fair as virtuous,
Happy in all things but her marriage.
Her riotous husband, which I weep to think,
By his leaud life made them both miscarrie.

Mis. Ar. Why do thou grieve at their adversities?

Young Ar. O blame me not, that man my kinsman was,
Nearer to me a kinsman could not be,
As near allied was that chaste woman too,
Nearer was never husband to his wife:
He whom I termed my friend, no friend of mine,
Proving both mine and his own enemy,
Poisoned his wife, o the time he did so,
Ioyed at her death, inhumane slave to do so,
Exchanged her love for a base strumpets lust;
Foul wretch, accursed villain, to exchange so.

Mis. Ar. You are wise, and blessed, and happy to repent so,
But what became of him and his new wife?

Young Ar. O hear the justice of the highest heaven,
This strumpet in reward of all his love,
Pursues him for the death of his first wife,
And now the woeful husband languisheth,
Flies upon pursued by her fierce hate,
And now too late he does repent her sin,
Ready to perish in his own despair,
Having no means but death to rid his care.

Mis. Ar. I can endure no more but I must weep,
My blabbing tears cannot my counsel keep.

Young Ar. Why weep you Mistress? if you had the heart
Of her whom you resemble in your face,
But she is dead, and for her death,
The spuage of either eye,
Shall weep red tears till every vain is dry.

Mis. Ar. Why weep you friend, your rainie drops keep
Repentance wipes away the drops of sin.
Yet tell me friend, he did exceeding ill,
A wife that loved and hononr'd him, to kill.
Yet say one like her, far more chaste then fair,
Bids him be of good comfort, not despair.
Her soul's appeasd with her repentant tears,
Wishing he may survive her many years.
Feign would I give him money to supply
His present wants, but fearing he should fly,
And getting over to some foreign shore,
These rainy eyes should never see him more.
My heart is full, I can no longer stay,
But what I am my love must needs bewray.
Farewell good fellow, and take this to spend,
Say one like her commends her to your friend.

Exit. Young Ar. No friend of mine, I was my own souls foe
To murder my chaste wife, that loved me so.
In life she loved me dearer then her life,
What husband here, but would wish such a wife.
I hear the Officers with hue and cry,
She saved my life but now, and now I die.
And welcome death, I will not stir from hence,
Death I deserved, I Will die for this offense.

Enter Brabo with Officers, Splay and Hugh. Bra. Here is the murderer, and
Reasons man
You have the warrant: Sirs lay hands on him,
Attach the slave, and lead him bound to death.

Hu. No by my faith M. Brabo, you have the better heart, at least you should
have: I am sure you have more Iron and steel, then I have, do you lay hands
upon him, I promise you I dare not.


Bra. Constables forward, forward Officers,
I will not thrust my finger in the fire.
Lay hands on him I say, why step you back?
I mean to be the hindmost, least that any
Should run away and leave the rest in peril:
Stand forward, are you not ashamed to fear?

Yon. Ar. Nay never strive, behold I yield my self,
I must commend your resolution,
That being so many and so weapond,
Dare not adventure on a man unarmed.
Now lead me to what prison you think best,
Yet use me well, I am a Gentleman.

Hue. Truly M. Arthur we will use you as well as heart can think, the Justices
sit to day, and my Mistress is chiefo, you shall command me.


Bra. What has he yielded? if he had withstood us,
This Curtelax of mine had cleft his head:
Resist he durst not when he once spied me.
Come lead him hence, how likest thou this sweet witch?
This fellows death will make our mistress is rich.

Splay. I say I care not whose dead or alive,
So by their lives or deaths, we two may thrive.

Hue. Come bear him away.

Enter Justice Reason, old Arthur, old Lusam. Just. Old M. Arthur and M. Lusam,
so it is, that I have heard both your complaints, but understood neither, for
you know Legere and non intelligere negligere est.


Old Ar. I come for favor, as a father should,
Pitying the fall and ruin of his son.

Old Lus. I come for justice, as a father should,
That has by violent murder lost his daughter.

Just. You come for favor, and you come for justice,
Justice with favor is not partial,
And using that, I hope to please you both.

Old Ar. Good M. Justice think upon my son.

Old Lus. Good M. Justice think upon my daughter.

Just. Why so I do, I think upon them both,
But can do neither of you good:
For he that lives must die, and she that's dead,
Cannot be revived.

Old Ar. Lusam, thou seekst to rob me of my son, my only son.

Old Lus. He robbed me of my daughter, my only daughter.

Just. And robbers are flat fellons by the law.

Old Ar. Lusam, I say thou art a blood-sucker,
A tyrant, a remorslesse Caniball:
Old as I am I Will prove it on thy bones.

Old Lu. Am I a blood-sucker or Caniball?
Am I a tyrant that do thirst for blood?

Old Ar. I if thou seekst the ruin of my son,
Thou art a tyrant and a blood-sucker.

Old Lu. I if I seek the ruin of thy son I am indeed.

Old Ar. Nay more thou art a dotard.
And in the right of my accursed son,
I chalendge thee the field, meet me I say
To morrow morning besides Islington,
And bring thy sword and buckler if thou dare.

Old Lu. Meet thee with my sword and buckler, there is my glove,
I Will meet thee to revenge my daughters death.
Callst thou me dotard, though these threescore years,
I never handled weapon but a knife
To cut my meat, yet will I meet thee there.
Gods precious call me dotard.

Old Arthur. I have cause,
Just cause to call thee dotard, have I not?

Old Lu. Nay that's another matter have you cause,
Then God forbid that I should take exceptions
To be called dotard of one that has cause.

Just. My Masters you must leave this quarrelling, for quarrellers are never
at peace, and me^ of peace while they are at quiet are never quarrelling; so
you whilst you fall into brawles, you cannot choose but Iar. Here comes your
son accused, and your wife the accuser: stand forth both. Hugh be ready with
your pen and Ink to take their examinations and confessions.


Enter Mary, Splay, Brabo, young Arthur, Hue, and Officers. Young Ar. It shall
not need, I do confess the deed,
Of which this woman here accuses me:
I poisoned my first wife, and for that deed
I yield me to the mercy of the law.

Old Lus. Villain, thou meanst my only daughter,
And in her death depriuedst me of all joys.

Young Ar. I mean her, I do confess the deed,
And though my body taste the force of Law,
Like an offender, on my knee I begges,
Your angry soul will pardon me her death.

Old Lus. Nay if he kneeling do confess the deed,
No reason but I should forgive her death.

Just. But so the law must not be satisfied,
Blood must have blood, and men must have death,
I think that cannot be dispensed withal.

Ma. If all the world else would forgive the deed,
Yet would I earnestly putsue the law.

Young Ar. I had a wife would not have used me so,
The wealth of Europe could not hire her tongue,
To be offensive to my patient ears,
But in exchanging her, I did prefer
A devil before a Saint, night before day,
Hell before heaven, and dross before tried gold,
Never was bargain with such damage sold.

Bra. If you want witness to confirm the deed,
I heard him speak it, and that to his face
Before this presence I will justify,
I will not part hence till I see him swing.

Splay. I heard him too, pity but he should die,
And like a murderer be sent to hell,
To poison her, and make her belly swell.

Ma. Why stay you then, give judgment on the slave,
Whose shameless life deserves a shameful grave.

Young Ar. Deaths bitter pangs are not so full of grief,
As this unkindness: every word thou speakst,
Is a sharp dagger thrust quite through my heart.
As little I deserve this at thy hands,
As my kind patient wife deserved of me,
I was her torment, God has made thee mine,
Then wherefore at just plagues should I repine?

Just. Where did thou buy this poison? for such drugs
Are felony for any man to sell.

Young Ar. I had the poison of Aminadab,
But innocent man, he was not accessarie
To my wifes death, I clear him of the deed.

Just. No matter, fetch him, fetch him, bring him
To answer to this matter at the bar:
Hue, take these Officers and apprehend him.

Bar. I Will aid him too, the schoolemaister I see
Perhaps may hang with him for company.

Enter Anselme and Fuller. Ans. This is the day of Arthurs examination
And trial for the murder of his wife:
Lets hear how Justice Reason will proceed,
In censuring of his strickt punishment.

Full. Anselme content, lets thrust in among the throng.

Enier Aminadab, brought in with Officers. Ami. O Domine, what mean these
knaves,
To lead me thus with bills and glaues?
O what example would it be,
To all my pupills for to see,
To tread their steps all after me:
If for some fault I hanged be:
Somewhat surely I shall mar,
If you bring me to the bar.
But peace, betake thee to thy wits,
For yonder Justice Reason sits.

Just. Sir Dad, Sir Dab, here is one accuses you
To give him poison being ill employed,
Speak how in this case you can clear your self.

Ami. Hei mihi, what should I say, the poison given I denay:
He took it perforce from my hands, and domine why not I
Got it of a gentleman, he most frecly gave it,
Ask he knew me, a means was only to have it.

Young Ar. It Is true I took it from this man perforce,
And snatched it from his hand by rude constraint,
Which proves him in this act not culpable.

Just. I but who sold the poison unto him?
That must be likewise known, speak schoole-maister.

Ami. A man verbosus, that was a fine generosus,
He was a great guller, his name I take to be Fuller:
See where he stands that unto my hands conueyeda powder,
And like a knave sen her to her grave obscurely to shroud her.

Just. Lay hands on him, are you a poison seller?
Bring him before us, sir what say you,
Sold you a poison to this honest man?

Full. I sold no poison, but I gave him one
To kill his Rats.

Just. Ha, ha, I smell a Rat.
You sold him poison then to kill his Rats?
The word to kill, argues a murdrous mind:
And you are brought in compass of the murder:
So set him by we will not hear him speak.
That Arthur Fuller and the schoole-maister
Shall by the Judges be examined.

Ans. Sir if my friend may not speak for himself
Yet let me his proceedings justify.

Just. What Is he that will a murder justify?
Lay hands on him, lay hands on him I say,
For iustifiers are all accessaries,
And accessaries have deserved to die.
A way with him, we will not hear him speak,
They all shall to the high Commissioners.

Enter Mistress Arthur. Mis. Ar. Nay stay them, stay them yet a little while,
I bring a warrant to the contrary,
And I will please all parties presently.

Young Ar. I think my wives ghost haunts me to my death,
Wretch that I was to shorten her lives breath.

Old Ar. Whom do I see my sons wife?

Old Lus. What my daughter?

Just. Is it not Mistress Arthur that we see,
That long since buried we supposde to be.

Mis. Ar. This man is co^demd for poisoning of his wife,
His poisoned wife yet lives, and I am she:
And therefore justly I release his bands.
This man for suffering him these drugs to take,
Is likewise bound, release him for my sake.
This gentleman that first the poison gave,
And this his friend to be releasd I crave.
Murder there cannot be where none is killed,
Her blood is saved whom you supposed was spild.
Father in law I give you here your son,
The act's to do, which you supposed was done.
And father now joy in your daughters life,
Whom heaven has still kept to be Arthurs wife.

Old Ar. O welcome, welcome, daughter now I see,
God by his power has preserved thee.

Old Lu. And it is my wench whom I supposed was dead,
My joy reuiues, and my sad woe is fled.

Young Ar. I know not what I am, nor where I am,
My souls transported to an ecstasy,
For hope and joy confound my memory.

Ma. What do I see, lives Arthurs wife again?
Nay then I labor for his death in vain.

Bra. What seeret force did in nature lurk;
That in her soul the poison would not work?

Splay. How can it be the poysan took no force?
She lives with that which would have killed a horse.

Mis. Ar. Nay shun me not, be not ashamed at all,
To heaven not me, for grace and pardon fall.
Look on me Arthur, blush not at my wrongs.

Young Ar. Still fear and hope my grief and woe prolongs.
But tell me by what power thou did survive?
with my own hands I temperd that vild draught
That sent thee breathles to thy grandsires grave,
If that were poison I received from him.

Ami. That egonescio, but this dram
Received I of this gentleman.
The color was to kill my Rats,
But it was my own life to dispatch.

Full. Is it even so, then this ambignous doubt
No man can better then my self decide.
That compound powder was of Poppie made and Mandrakes,
Of purpose to cast one into a sleep,
To ease the deadly pain of him whose leg
Should be sawd off, that powder gave I to the school master.

Ami. And that same powder, even that idem,
You took from me the same per sidem:

Young Ar. And that same powder I comixt with wine,
Our godly knot of wedlock to untwine.

Old Ar. But daughter who did take thee from thy grave?

Old Lu. Discourse it daughter.

Ans. Nay that labor save.
Pardon me M. Arthur, I will now
Confess the former frailty of my love.
Your modest wife with words I tempted often,
But neither ill I could report of you,
Nor any good I could forge for my self
Would win her to attend to my request:
Nay after death I loved her, in so much
That to the vault where she was buried,
My constant love did lead me through the dark,
There ready to have taken my last farewell,
The parting kiss I gave her I felt warm,
Briefly, I bare her to my mothers house,
Where she has since lived the most chaste and true,
That since the worlds creation eye did view.

Young Ar. My first wife stand you here, my second there,
And in the midst my self: he that will choose
A good wife from a bad, come other of me
That have tried both, in wealth and misery.
A good wife will be careful of her fame,
Her husbands credit, and her own good name:
And such art thou. A bad wife will respect
Her pride, her lust, and her good name neglect,
And such art thou. A good wife will be still
In dustrious, apt to do her husbands will.
But a bad wife, cross, spightfull and madding,
Never keep home, but always be a gadding:
And such art thou. A good wife will conceal
Her husbands dangers, and nothing reveal
That may procure him harm, and such art thou.
But a bad wife corrupts chaste wedlocks vow.
On this hand virtue, and on this hand sin,
This who would strive to loose, or this to win?
Here lives perpetual joy, here burning woe,
Now husbands choose on which hand you will go.
Seek virtuous wives, all husbands will be blessed,
Fair wives are good, but virtuous wives are best,
They that my fortunes will pervse, shall find
No beauties like the beauty of the mind.

FINIS.

