A right fruitful monicion, concerning the order of a good christen man's
life, very profitable for all manner of estates, and other, to behold and look
upon: Made by the famous doctor Colet, sometime Deane of Paul's.

Cum priuilegio Regali.

Johan Byddell.



Remember first of all (vertu^us reder) that it is high ^oysed on^e and great
perfection to know thy self / and than to despise thy self. As to know thou
haste nothing yt (...) good of thy self, but all together of ^od. For the
gifts of nature, and all other temporal gifts of this world ^hiche ben
laufully and truly oprey^ed (well considered) ben comen to ^he by the infinite
goodness and grace ^f god, and not of thy self. And most (...) especial it is
necessary for the to ^nowe how that god of his greatte ^race has made the
like to his own ^m^^tude or image, having regard (...) thy memory,
understanding, and ^re^yll. And to know how god is thy ^aker, and thou his
wretched creature. and to know how thou art redeemed (...) god by the passion
of Christ Jesus, ^ and know how god is thy helper, thy re^ge and thy deliverer
from all yuell. And consider and to know the goodly order, which god of his
infynyte wisdom has ordained the to be ordered by. As to have these temporal
goods for the necessytie of the body / the body and sensual appetytes to be
ordered by thy soul / thy soul to be ordered by reason and grace / by reason
and grace, to know thy duty to god and to thy neighbor. And by all comune
reason, if thou keep this convenient order to god and his creatures, they shall
keep their order to the: But if thou break thine order to them, of lykelyhood
they shall break their order to the. For how should thy wife, children,
servants, and other creatures with whom thou haste doings, do their
duties, and keep their order to the, if thou do not so to god and to them?
And also think thou of a surety, that if thy sensual appetite be not ordered
by reason and grace, thou art worse ordered than a be / for tha^ thou lyuest
out of order, and so does not a be / which is a great shame and rebuke to
the a reasonable creature / and without the great mercy of god, it sha^ be to
thine eternal dampnacion. And therefore think and thank god, and utterly
despise thy self, and think thy self a great wretch in that, that god has
done so much for the / and thou haste so often offended his highness, and also
done him so little service. Surely it is also great wisdom to think, that if it
had pleased god for to have given to all other men (as well beggars as other)
like grace as he has given to the, that they would have served his goodness
better tha^ thy self have don: wherefore, think thy self a wretch of all
wretches, without the mercy of god. And therefore by his infinite mercy and
grace, call unto thy remembrau^c^ the degree or dignytie the which almighty
god of his goodness has called the unto / and according thereunto, yield thy
det, and do thy duty.

First and principally, honor god as thy maker / love him as thy redemer /
fear him, as thy judge. Seconeyly, thy neighbor which is thy superior, obey.
Have concord and peace with them which ben even with the in degree / and have
mercy and pity on thine inferiors* Thirdly, provide the to have a clean heart,
and a good custody of thy tongue. Pray and take labor by grace to have wisdom
and cunning to do thy duty to god and to thy neighbor. And in all thy
words and deeds, have ever in mind that god and his angels hereth and sees
every thinge^ and that nothing is so privily done, but it shall be made open.
And in especyall have in mind that thou shalt dye shortly / and how Christ
dyed for the / the subtyltie and falsnes of this temporal world / the joys of
heaven, and the pains of hell. And every morning among other thy meditacions
and prayers / pray unto thy lord god that the day following / thou (according
to the degree / the which of his infynyte goodness and mercy has called the
unto) may use this temporal wretched world in thy thoughts / words / and
deeds, that by them / and the merit of Christis passion / thou may eschew
the pains of hell / and come to the joy everlasting. And in executyng
thereof, keep truth in words and deeds. Defend no man / nor no matter
against the truth. In all things think and trust in god / and he shall
dyrecte thy ways. Trust not to thine own wit, but fear god / and he will
keep the from yuell. If thou trust more in thine own wit than in the grace
of god / thy polycye shall be soon subverted. Be content to here good
counsel, though it be contrary to thy will, for he is a very fool, that
will here nothing gladly / but that is according to his mind. Do thou no man
harm, lest thou suffrest the same. As thou willest be done unto the, so do
thou unto an other. Be such to other, as thou desyreste they should be to the.
If thou be religious remember that the due execution of true religion, is not
in wearyng of the habyte, but with a clean mind in very deed to execute the
rules and ordinances of religion. For so it is, yt to wear the habit / and
not to execute the rule and order of religion, is rather to be demed ypocrysy
or apostasy, than other wise. If thou be lay and unmarried, keep the clean unto
the time thou be married. And remember the sore and terrible punysshement of
Noes flood, and of the terryble fire and brymstone, and sore punysshment of
Sodom and Gomor, don to man for misusyng of the flesh. And in especyall, call
to remembrance the marvelous and horrible punysshment of the abominable
great pockes, daily apperynge to our sightes, growing in and upon man's
flesh / the which soore punysshement (every thing well remembered) can not
be thought, but principally for the inordinate misuse of the flesh. And if
thou intend to marye, or being married, and haste a good wife, thank our
lord therefore, for she is of his sendynge.

And remember that three things in especyall ben pleasant to the spyrite of
god / that is to say, concord between brethren, love and charity between
neighbors, and a man and his wife well agreynge. And if thou have an evil
wife, take patience, and thank god, for all is for the best, well taken / how
beit, thou art bounden to do and pray for her ame^dement, ^eest she go to the
devil, from whom she came. And have in remembrance that the intent of marriage
is not in the beestly apperyte or pleasure in the thing: but the intent
thereof, is to eschew the sin of the flesh, or else to have children.

And if thou have children, as much as thou may, bring them forth in
virtue to be the servants of god.

For it is better for the, and them not to be borne, than otherwise. In thine
authority, busy the rather to be beloved of thine inferiors, than to be dred.
Let thy subjects and servants rather serve and obey the for love, than for
dread or need. with such a sovereign goodness govern thy subjects, that they
may be glad to serve the both in punysshynge, and also in cherysshyng. Keep a
manerly mean / and be not to strait / forgive not to soon / keep a convenient
measure in all thy works.

Go not to meat as a be, but as a reasonable man, say thy grace / and than
remember that mo ben sick and dye by superfluities of meats / than otherwise,
wherefore eat with measure; to live in health. At thy (...), have none other
but honest communication / and such as is according to thy connyng. Backebyre
no man / be me^y in honest. for sorrow and care has killed many* and no
profit therein, An no wise swear, without compulsyon of the law. For where
as is great sweryng, from thens is never the plage of god. In no wise braule ne
chyde without an urgent cause. For Solomon says, better is a little with joy,
tha^ a house full of vitayle with brawling. Also he says, an yuell person is
ever chiding, and therefore the angel of god shall be sent against him. Be
content at thy dinner, and also at other times to give part of that which god
has sent the / for he that will not here the cry of a poor man, he shall
cry to god, and not be hard. After thy meat, thank god of that he has
sent the, or else thou doste not as a reasonable man, but like a be, which
in eating remembers nothing but his meat. with good providence and
discretionle the time where, when, how, why, or wherefore thou spekest, do,
or byddest any thing to be done. when thou iudgeste any, be he poor or rich,
behold and consider the cause, and not the person. Be as meke in other men's
causes and offenses, as in thyn own. Sit never in dome and judgment without
pity or mercy. for while thou have pity, and art merciful to other m^s
offenses, thou have mercy on thy self. For in what measure thou measuresi, it
shall be measured to the. yet thou must execute judgment, but it must be with
pity or mercy. For (of a surety) to do mercy and justice, is more pleasant to
god, than to pray or do sacrifice unto him. Deem no man by light suspections.
First prove, and than deem. In doubles, reie^ue the sentence to gods might.
That thou know not, commyt it unto god. Hauelyttell or none affection and
p^l^^e love to these erthely and te^porall thiges. For blessed be the rich
manne. that trustethe not in his money and treasure. And remember, as a man
loves, so he is / for the lover is in the thing loved more properly, than in
him self: wherefore, if a man love erthely things, he may be called an erthely
man. And if he love principally heavenly things or god, he may be called an
heavenly or a godly man: And therefore love god and heavenly things / for
undoubted, that is best, and most assured love / for they be, and ever shall,
permanent / and all erthely things ben soon vanysshed and ended / and so the
love of them is in vain. Also it is wysdom to fear god / for as he says him
self: Fear not him that may kill the body, and can not hurt the soul: but
fear him that can kill the body and also the soul, and commyt them to
everlasting pain / wherefore, every evening ere thou goo to bed, call to
remembrance (as much as thou can) thy thoughts, words, and deeds, said
and done that day / and if any have been to thine own profit, and to the
pleasure of god, hertely thank him / for by his grace it was done: And if any
have been contrary to his pleasure, ask hertely mercy, and reco^cile thy self
shortly by repentance to eschew the everlasting and terrible pains of hell.
For (as saint Augustyn says) there is not a greater madness, than for a little
temporal delectacion (which is soon done) to lose the eternal joy, and to
be bound to everlasting pain. From the which the almighty father of heaven,
by his infynyt power and mercy, and bitter passion, and infynyte wisdom of
Jesus Christ, and by the infinite goodness and charity of the holy gooste, keep
us. Amen. Deo gratias.

Use well temporal things.
Desire eternalll things.
Finis.
Imprinted at London in Fleet street by John^ Byddell other wise called
Salysbury at the sign of our lady of pity next Flet-brydge, the year of our
lord. M. D. xxxiiii. the.xxvii. day of March.


