THE PALINOD OF JOHN COLVILL, WHEREIN HE DOES PEnitently recant his former
proud offenses, specially that treasonable discourse lately made by him
against The undoubted and indeniable title of his dread Sovereign Lord, King
JAMES the sixth, unto the crown of England, after decease of her Majesty
present.

EDINBVRGH Printed by Robert Charteris. 1600.

TO THE READER.
BEhold here (gentle Reader) a strange spectacle of a man tormented with the
rack of his own conscience, who as he was not affrayed to spevv out of his
knowledge and vvilfullie, the gall and venom of a malicious heart, against
his sacred Prince, of whom he had in most bountiful manner receivedmanie
Princely favors, so now does he not stick resolutelie to proclaim before the
heavens and the earth, that he is forced to eat up that same filthy vomit, and
to speak more bitterly a thousand fold against himself, then any man else
could: and so much the more, as he was more privy to the faults, and
anguishes of his own soul, then any others could be. The work I have
published as it came to my hands, without adding any thing there to, or
diminishing ought therfrom, or altering any part thereof presuming that the same
should neither be offensive to his Majesty, for whose private satisfaction it
was first penned, or displeasing to M. John Coluill the author thereof: whom
thou may assure thy self upon the credit both of honorable and honest
persons to have purposelie written and signed the same with his own hand
and most humbly upon his knees, in the presence of the Earls of Argyle and
Craufurd to have delivered it to the L. Archbishop of Glasgovv, his May.
Ambassador in France, most earnestly craving, that his Lordship (without any
intercession for him) would only vouchsafe to present it to his Majesty's
view, not in any hope that in reason he could conceive of any favor or pardon
from his highness thereby, but rather to disbur then his own fraughted
conscience, pressed down with a weight of sorrovv, heavier than the mountain
Aethna. Which reasonable petition what stony heart could deny to him, who
seems to think no shame to be a sufficient revenge taken of himself, who
with so high a hand, had reuyled the anointed of the Lord* and does now by
this, as with a loud trumpet proclaim to all subjects,

Discite Iustitiam moniti. etc.

And truly (good Reader) notvvithstanding hypocrisy is of all sins the
most close and secret, and most hardly removed, and that (as he does
confess of himself) that he has had a most subtle and indiscernable veil of
it: yet remember the common saying, that the man runs far who never
returns, and that in charity we are to conceive and hope his repentance to be
unfeigned, which we may boldly and confide^tly affirm, if to this good
beginning he shall add of his fervent zeal, to bear testimony to the truth,
a plain and perfect discovery of all manner of plots and treacheries,
intended against the Kings Majesty, by himself or others to his knowledge,
which the great King of Kings would never have to be concealed: and lykevvise
of all manner of persons subjects or aliens, who has either of malice to his
Majesty, or love to himself, been contriuers, entysers, prouokers, counselors,
adoers, or assisters to any such mischeuous enterprises, as directly or
indirectly could subvert, or any wise harm his Majesty's Royal person,
croun, title, honor, state, or dignity, and by consequence might dravv with
them the confusion and ruin both of the Kirk and Common weal. To which, no
doubt, all his honest friends will earnestly incite him, and his conscience
(if it be sinceare) will prick him, and for which all good and religious
persons will highly commend him, seeing heerby God shall be glorified, his
Majesty's safety and honor continued, his country preserved, and the Kirk
fully satisfied in his hearty conversion and repentance.

Farevvell. A. C.

THE PALINOD OF JOHN COLVILL, Wherein he does penitentlie recant his former
proud offenses, specially that treasonable discourse lately made by him,
against the undoubted, and indenyable title of his dread sovereign Lord, King
JAMES the sixth, unto the crown of England, after decease of her Majesty
present.
IF my only name mentioned in the inscription of this my recantation shall
make my discourse odious, I can not meruell, seeing I am becum for my
treasonable naughtiness loathsome and odious to my self, my conscience not
only standing up as a thousand witnesses against me, testifying the
heynousnesse of my transgression, but also furnishing within my self, against
my self, all other necessary members of a lawful court to condemn me, she
being my actor, assise, Judge, dempster and burreau, ieaning and tormenting me
with unspeakable terrors, whereof I never could find rest or quietness, till
God of his infinite mercy knowing my weakness and imbecillitie to be such, as
without help I could never rise, did send unto me a Nathan, whereas I lay
lethargicke in my former desperation, without sense or feeling of the dangerous
estate I was into, who letting me see and feall the deep and dolor of my
Aposteme (which of before as a blind and leprous person I did neither see nor
feel) incontinent I waxed exstatick and astonished, as if without my knowledge
I had found a snake hid in my bosom not knowing the means how to be ridd
thereof. So remaining some days in this inquietude the foresaid Nathan, or
rather Eliseus appointed by God to cure my leprosy, finding me in this
perplexity, began to comfort me in manner following: saying, My friend, I
have let you see and feel an hid and horrible Aposteme, the dolor whereof, if
you have an soul, must needs torment you in pitiful manner. Now to ease you
of this dolor, I will minister unto you an unexpected medecin, for the
inexspected wound that I have opened up unto you: letting you understand that
as your proud enormity is threefold, so must you make a threefold
satisfaction: one to God whom against your conscience, as you your self
confess* you have offended, in offending his anointed your Lord and
Sovereign, and in this point I remit you to your own private meditation,
wishing you to bewar of hypocrisy, as you would incur or escape eternal
damnation. Another satisfaction is due to your Prince, wherein you cannot
better declare your unfeigned repentance, than to bless with the same tongue
that hes blasphemed: and with the same hand that did write against the verity,
to publish your own lewdnes and vnloyaltie, to his Majesty's honor, and your
own turpitude. And this form of doing by all appearance shall also satisfy
the third party whom you have exasperate, to wit, all good subjects
scandalized by your presumpteous and arrogant misbehauiour: the rather when as
they shall see your repentance voluntare, and not constrained, and your self
free and no prisoner. The Olive branche was not more welcome to Noah, nor to
the creple, Toll grabatum tuum and ambula, then this advyse was unto me, for
fulfilling whereof my very secreat tears, (requiring neither vaunting nor
witness, Ille dolet vere, qui sine test dolet) and this my publict recantation
shall bear testimony to the world. In which recantation, I will not go about
to declare what pretended necessities may move men unto: but setting aside all
excuses, I acknowledge in humility that no such occasion can be offered by a
Prince, as can make a good subject declyne, as I have done. For the Prince is
the immediate Lord of our bodies, and of all our worldly fortunes, having power
to dispo^e thereupon at his pleasure, as Saint Ambrose does confess, Epist. 33.
ad Marcellinam sororem. Whereof Samuel in the original institution of a King
hes left to all posterities an indenyable testimony: So Princes being as it
were Gods of the earth, they are not answerable to earthly men, bot to the
supreme Godhead allanerlie: and we their Vassals, do as they list to us, can
have no warrant to go further, nor Samuel did go, viz. to pray for them till
God forbid: and if he should forbid, yet never to loose our tongue, nor lift
our heart nor hand, or animat the people against them, more nor Samuel and David
the anointed successor did against Saul, and Elias against Achab. And to this
effect are pronounced all those golden sentences, Omnis anima potestatibus
superioribus subdita sit. Reddite Caesari quod Caesaris est Obedite Principibus
etiam discolis. Together with the louable example of some Prophets that did
pray for the felicity of infidel Princes, obeying and exhorting others to obey
them. I am not then to extenuat, but to aggrauat my offenses, accusing, not
excusing my self: And in one word, Christian Reader (unto whose hands, this
Recantation witness of my unworthiness, may come) I pray thee read it with
patience and pity, and judge with thy self, if I have not just occasion to
lament my estate, since neither at God, nor my Princes hands I can look for
any thing, but just deserved punition, both here and hence, except of grace
they have pity on me. Take me for an example of unhappiness, and as a Mirror
wherein thou may see what is deforme and unseemly to them that would remain
in honest reputation, and how easily it may be lost, that is most difficill
to be found. Of one thing I may assure thee (as is before said) that my
behauior cannot seem half so detestable to thee, as it is to my self, whereof
thou may in thy own person have experience, in case (which God forbid) thou
fall as I have done. Wherefore I pray Almighty God of his mercy, that as my
actions have been offensive to many, so my repentance may not only be
acceptabil to many, but also a caveat for all to flee such dangerous and
disloyal courses, wherein skarce one of a thousand ca escape. That same
Almighty God grant unto thee a better mind and better fortune, and unto me
a better answer, and end, nor my former life hes deserved.

AS the wounded Vrse or wyldegoat seeking his Origane, does with his filthy
some and breath infect all other herbs: and as the Waspe of good and bad
flowrs gathers no thing but poison: Even so a man wounded with malice and
curiosity, does vitiat and wrest whatsoever subject he takes in hand,
delyting more to defend lies nor truth, improbabilities nor probabilities,
paradoxes and shadows in stead of Orthodoxe and substance: and hereupon hes
proceeded so many idle and absurd opinions, sum impugning the snow to be
white, or the Sun hoar, some praising folly, Cupid, and many other far more
ridiculous toys, yea some presuming to deny Gods providence and God him self.
Like as out of this same puddle of malice and curiosity, did flow my late
inuectiue against the King my sovereigns just title to the crown of England,
wherein by Elenches, and by no good arguments, by sophistry, and no formal
Syllogismes, I labor, to my eternal discredit, to make white black, and
light darkness. But as the Sun cannot always be obscured with clouds, and as
the gemme or precious stone does not loss his virtue, though he be covered
with filth and villainy: no more can my partial cavillations impeshe his
Majesty's possibilities, or diminish any thing of his grandeur. For as the
steill the more it is used the less it does rouste: a valiant knight the
more he be assailed, the more appears his valor: and the more gold be tried
in the fire the more it is purified: Even so the more his Majesty's title be
oppugned with frivolous sophistique contradiction: the equity and justness
thereof is but the more manifested, as by this refutation of my former
naughtiness, shall evidently appear.

Then to come to the purpose, the scope of al my venomous satyr, was to prove
that his Majesty had no just title to the crown of England, neither by divyne
nor humane Law, drawing my first Sophisme from the Law of nature in this sort.

By right or law of nature nothing is mine nor thine: but all be common,
nothing proper, and no proprietare: Ergo, be law of nature no propriety can be
acclaimed.

Hereunto is answered, that in the liberty usurped by me in confounding Ius
and Legem, that is to say. Right and Law, (it being genus, and this species:) I
hyde my self in many starting holes, whereof by distinction of these two words
I am easily cut off. Next the antecedent is false. For in the original creation
of all natural things, when as there could be no other Law but Ius naturae,
no Ius gentium nor civil, because there was neither nation nor city at that
time, Adam was Lord and proprietar of that original place, and of al natural
things therein contained: as in Genesis the first and most ancient history is
expressed. So the antecedent being false, the consequent can infer no verity.

My second caption is grounded upon the Etymology or definition of the Law of
Nations in this sort.

The right of Nations is that which equally is observed among all Nations: but
the right whereby his Majesty would possess the crown of England is not
equally observed among all Nations: Ergo, etc.

By distinguishing or explaining the assumption the subtility of this caption
is elided: for although the Law of proximitie of blood (whereupon his Majesty's
title is grounded) be not equally observed in all Nations, yet all Nations
admit the general: that is to say, to have Magistrates and superior powers,
confessing therwithal that these Magistrates or powers have just titles either
by succession, election, or by some other form aggreable to the nature of the
country where they are: so the particular diversity of customs in succession
proceeding from the diversity of civil and municipall Laws in every Realm,
does not seclude the general uniformity of all Nations which (saving in such
as be altogether barbarous, and quae pro beluis habendae sunt) do all hold
that Magistrates have just titles to such kingdoms or Republiques as they be
called unto. And therefore his Majesty's title does not disaccord, but accord
with the right of Nations ingenere.

My third captioun grounded on the civil Law is so confused and cautelous,
that it cannot well be reduced to any form: I will therefore with this
clear demonstration open up and impugn the same. As for the civil Law, if we
mean the Roman or Imperial to the Emperors, their selves have confirmed and
observed Iura sanguinis, following Edicta Praetorum, vnde Liberi, vnde
Legitimi, vnde Cognati. And if thereby we shall understand the Municipall or
common Law of cuerie Realm: then may it be evidentlie proved that every
Realm hes provided and established fundamental Laws for maintayning the
blood Royal in the right line. Whereby it is evident, that by the Law Civil,
in what sense soever it be taken, his Majesty has a most just claim and
competition.

As to the Law Divine, by the history of Jacob and Esau may appear, what
respect and preferment was given to Primogenitur, or first-birth, seeing Jacob,
though he was elected, did pretend no right thereto, until his elder brother
did renounce and abjure the same. And in Numeri the same prerogative is
confirmed to the eldest: and every one ordained to succeed according to
proximitie of blood. Heerewithall the lineal succession of the Kings of Judah,
from father to children, and failing thereof, to nearest kinsmen, does
manifestly prove this Ius sanguinis to have been autorized as well in the
Pallice, as amongst the people.

Neither can that of Moises in Deuteronom. be omitted: vbi Odiosae Filius
primogenitus dilectae Filio praeferri iubetur, such was the respect of
primogenitur. And albeit this right of primogenitur was altered in Jacob,
Joseph, Solomon, and some others: yet such few particular exceptions, done at
the special command of God, (whose pleasure is reason, and whose power hes no
limitation) does not abolish the general Law more nor the particular fact of
Phineas does abolish the general Law against homicide: or the Polygamy and
incest of the Patriarchs, destroy the Law against Incest and Adultery. Then
the Law of God, (howsoever I have wrested the same in my former partiality)
does not derogate, but corroborate the title of my Sovereign Lord, unto the
Realm foresaid.

But the chief question wherein I do most cavil, and calumniat is this, If a
Prince having Ius sanguinis to an other Realm, (as this present King of
France, Henry the 4. being but King of Navarre had to the Realm of France,
and as my sovereign Lord has to that of England) if any Positive Law of that
Realm where he should succeed, can justly seclude him? Whereunto my answer
is negative: impugning my former affirmation first in Thesi, syne in Hypothesi,
by these urgent reasons and examples following. In Thesi.

First, Princes having no superior power but the supreme Godhead, they be
only subject to his laws and omnibus alijs legibus humanis soluti dicuntur,
and if of their natural piety or goodness they shall humble them self to be
subject thereunto, (as Theodosius and Valentinian seemed to advyse them,
saying, Digna vox Principe Legibus se subditum esse fateri) that subjection or
rather moderation est voluntatis, non necessitatis officium. Which assertion is
founded upon good reason: for if foreign Laws should bind them, then were
they vassals and no Princes: if domestic laws, then should they be astricted
to punition, in case of transgression, and to be astricted to punition, is a
manifest subjection, no soveraignitie.

Next, although it may be said that the Prince in his (...)
Fisque, and in many other things quae sunt privati iuris, is subject to the
Law: yet neither may he nor his crown be bound in ijs quae sunt iuris
publici.* Atqui ius Regiae successionis publicum est, cum omnes ^^uitates sint
publicae. As also the same may be verefied by all the titles of the Law
conceived of Dignities and Magistrates, both in the Digestes and Code.

Thirdly, if any Law may be extended to the crown or Prince, they should be
expreshe mentioned therein: specially, where the Law is exclusive, dinisiue,
or obligatorie: and for this cause the Law excluding the femals a feudis, the
Law of division of heritage inter fratres and sorores the Law oblishing the
successor with the goods of the defunct to pay his debts, binds not the crown,
when the crown is not expressed, and per rationis sdentitatem, the Law contra
peregrinos conceived simply without mention of the crown may not be extended
thereunto. To affirm the contrary heerof, and to allege that Iura
successionis and haereditaria which be made in any Realm should bind the Prince
as well as the people, because they be made within the Realm which he hes or
pretends to have is to stir up sedition: yea it is as absurd and inept as to
persew a Shiref or a whole Province for fulfilling all contracts made within
his jurifdiction, or within the precinct of the said Province, or as who should
think the Schoole-maister subject to the order appointed by him self for ruling
his Disciples.

Perdlie, to this hour there can be no example exhibit where any having the
title of blood to the crown of England, with power and courage to bear out the
same, that any Positive law has barred them. For proof whereof, I will use
only such examples as be most recent. The Positive laws made in Henry the
sixth his time, against Edward Duke of York, did not impeshe him, nor his race,
from the crown, nor the bitter statuts made by Richard the usurper against
that most magnanime Prince of worthy memory, Henry the 7. did not seclude
him from the right which he had both by God and nature. Yea in our days the
manifold Laws, and libels defamatours made against the most christian King
present, could not impesh him from the crown of France.

Now in Hypothesi: I cum to examine such Positive Laws as be objected against
the King my sovereigns title, of which kind there be specially two: One
ancient, an other later. To impugn the ancient I take my first argument from
the Rubricke, or Intitulation thereof, bearing these words: De ceux qui sont
nez outre ou de la mer. i. De trans mare natis. By which Rubricke or argument,
it is very probable that this stature in the original thereof, did not
contain this word Peregrinis: for the tenor of a Law should not exceed the
nature or substance of the title, and so it should not preiudge his Majesty,
who is borne within the said Yland. As also to them that will indifferently
mark the drift and intention of that statute, they shall find ittend only
against children borne without the four seas which compass the said yland:
whereby Scotland is no more secluded nor Wales and Cornwall. And so it is not
improbable, (which some allege) that the Rubrique foresaid should be De
Peregrinis trans mare natis, non De Peregrinis and trans mare natis.

Secondly, because the said Law was proponed in the 25* year of the reign of
Edward the 3. upon a question moved, If children borne out of his allegiance
might possess heritage within England. Whereunto was answered and enacted,
that all children borne ouersea, having their Parents at the time of their
birth at the faith and obedience of the croun of England, should enjoy alike
benefit and privilege as other heirs borne within the Realm: so the statute
is a general affirmative for that particular: and the argument objected
thereupon, is a contrario sensu, which kind of argument proves nothing. For if
I should say, Omnis homo est animal: Ergo quod non est homo non est animal the
consequent were false and therefore is the decision of the Law, Argumentum a
contrario sensu no^ procedit (...)
in verbis narratiuis Legis. Nec etiam in verbis dispositiuis Legis, when that
argument is inferred to correct or reform the common Law (like as in this case
it does by drawing the Law contra trans mare natos in a specialitie contrair
the common Law, to the prejudice of higher powers, which be not under the
power or compass of humane laws) and for this cause the other ancient
decision is contrair to their intention, wherein (...)
is said. Argumentum a contrario sensu non procedit vbi sequitur correctio
Iuris co^munis in specie:. Thirdly the words of the said statute running upon,
and so often expressing heirs and inheritance, declares the meaning thereof only
to be directed for private persons, who must succeed to their antecessors Iure
haereditario: for Princes succeed as well Iure familiae, as Iure haereditario,
and ordinis (...)
naturae beneficio non hominis, and are not as private me^ astricted to enter
cum onere debitoru^, but they enter as pleases them, the one or the other way,
to the end their crowns be not exhaust and exsorbed: so the said statute
being conceived for the use of private men allanerly, that must enter as
heirs and no other way: it cannot preiudge his Majesty who may enter an other
way, viz. per Ius familiae, apperteining to all Princes Sovereign.

Ferdlie, seeing this Law against strangers was founded upon two respects which
pertain only to private men and not to Princes, it can no way strike upon
them. The first respect was grounded upon the consideration of loyalty Quia
duorum Principum summorum vnus subditus esse non potest, agreeable unto that of
the Evangell, Nemo potest duobus dominis seruire. The other respect was to save
transport of gold and silver, and other defended commodities, and to cut off
the occasion of private intelligence and practices. For which cause in France
was made Ius albinatus, as the practisians testify. Now in the person of a
Royal successor (...)
these considerations of loyalty, transport, and intelligence are not to be
feared.

Fiftlie, in Realms where most strait Laws be kept against strangers, as in
France, that Ius albinatus forsaid, by which of necessity all strangers that
would* testate or succeed, they must be naturalized with this clause (modo sint
Regnicolae) yet Princes have succeeded and do succeed to great lands and
Dignities within that Realm without any benefit of naturalization, as the
old Kings of Navarre borne out of France, to many fair lands in Guyen and
Languedok. The D. of Lorane to the Dukerie of Bar: yea of old the kings of
England to the ample Dukeries of Aquitane, Aniou, Normandy, and Britaignie,
and that because sovereigns are presumed every one to be brethren to other:
and being brethren, it were indigne to esteem them externe or strangers, and
inept to make them subject to Laws of allegiance, which be only proper to
subjects and vassals.

Sixtlie, the clause contained in the said pretended act, excepting Les Enfans
du Roy, does exeeme the king my sovereign out of the compass thereof: for
that word Enfans is in the Latin Liberi: and be Liberi in the (...)
original and right signification, is not only meaned children in primogradu,
but also Nepotes and pronepotes and natinatorum, and qui nascentur ab illis. Et
^os omnes qui ex nepotibus descendunt, lex duodecim tabularum filiorum nomine
comprehendit.

Seuenthlie this Law foresaid de albinatu, although conceived generally, yet
could it not be extended to the crown as well as to the subject: and therefore
the wise and learned did devise the Law Salique for the succession Royal.

Last, if this statute against foreign birth take place, then shall many
absurd inconuenients follow thereupon. First Princes (the ornament, beauty, and
light of the world, without whom were nothing but darkness, disorder, and
confusion) they should be in worse condition nor the most ignoble subject of
their Realm: for by that Law subjects may ever succeed, having their parents
subjects: but Princes cannot have that immunitie, because their Parents were
never subjects. Again, if a Prince for honor of his Realm, or for security or
enlarging thereof, shall match him self or his children with a foreign nation
where he or they beget children: what barbarous iniquity were it to preiudge
the parents remaining abroad for so honorable causes, or to hurt the innocent
children for a matter which lay not in their power to mend.

Now for particular examples to illustrate these arguments, I allege but a
few both before and after the conquest, to show that foreign birth makes not
incapabilitie to the crown of England. Edward the King and Confessor before
the conquest, did call home out of Hungary his Nevoy, Edward surnamed Vdislae
borne in Hungary, who deing before the king his Uncle, the same King Edward
declared Edgar Athelin son to the said Vdislae borne also in Hungary, to be
just heritor, albeit he was afterward defrauded thereof. And after the
Conquest, Richard the first going to conqueis Jerusalem, institute his Nevoy
Arthur, who was borne in Britaignie, and young Duke thereof, to be his
successor. Like as king Stephan and King Henry the 2. were both borne in
France, their Parents not being of the allegiance of England, and yet they
were capable of the crown of England.

The other argument wherewith they impugn his Majesty's title, is grounded
upon a statute made in the 28. year of the reign of Henry the 8. of worthy
memory, wherein by consent of his Estates in Parliament is granted unto him
full power by his letters Patents, or by his Testament signed with his hand, to
declair, determine, and design the successor of the crown in case his own
children should fail, without issue of their own bodies, and the said crown
to be established in the person of the said successor by way of reversion or
retour, as they call it. By virtue of this authority or arrest of Parliament
given to the said noble Prince, our aduersares do allege that by his latter
Will or Testament, he did institute and ordain the succession of Francoyse
Countess of Suffolk, his Neice by Marie his youngest sister to succeed,
secluding altogether Margaret Queen of Scotland his eldest Sister and her
desce^t. Whereunto I reply shortly, first by conjectures, next by peremptory
answers.

It is not probable that a Prince so righteous, so wise, so kind, as King
Henry the eight was known to be, that he should so unkindly and
vnrighteouslie deal with his eldest sister germane, as to spoil and degrade
her and her innocent succession of all honor and exspectation that God and
nature had provided for them.

Next, he could not forget the commendable answer of Henry the seventh, his
most prudent father, who at the contract of marriage made betwixt King James
the fourth of worthy memory, and Lady Margaret eldest daughter to the said
King Henry the seventh: sundry of his counsel laboring to empesh that
marriage, said unto him, that it might come to the great dishonor and
discommoditie of the realm, in case, which was very possible, that England
should fall to be subject to the Kings of Scotland: Whereunto the said noble
Prince answered, that in case it fell out so, there was no inconvenient to
England: for as William the Conqueror atteining to the crown of England, did
join and subject Normandy to England, and not England to Normandy, so
Scotland being the least of the two Realms should be subjected to England, if
any such accident should arrive, because the lesser must cede and give place to
the greater. By which answer the said noble Prince Henry the eight knew full
well it was not his Fathers meaning to defraud his eldest daughter, nor her
succession. And therefore it is altogether improbable that he should have
forget the mind and intention of his magnanime Father, in a matter so recentlie
and righteouslie done: and that with his own special consent and good lyking.

Thirdly, the said noble King, knowing what torte and wrong his Father had
received of Richard the 3. by such partial exceptions made against his title,
and publishing so bitter laws against him, he could not be so obliuious, much
less injurious, as to fall in the same error, which both he himself, and all
just men did so much abhor in the person of the said usurper.

Ferdlie in respect that about the same time when the said pretended Testament
is alleged to be made it is certainly known that the said noble King Henry
the eight, did treat a marriage betwixt Prince Edward his son and Mary of
Scotland his petite Niece, for which cause it were out of all purpose to think
that he should at one time deal so kindly and vnkindelie: as under pretext
of such new affinity to preiudge his nearest Niece, of all her lawful
esperances.

Last, shall we believe that King Henry the 8. who was a miracle, yea a
mirror in his age of all magnificence appertaining to a Christian Prince,
should have been inferior in justice and piety to John Galeas Duke of
Millaine, who shall be for ever praised for his equity in preserving the
prerogative of birthright. For going to depart, he called his children, and
said: O dura Lex, o dura natalitij iuris praerogativa, quae aequales genere, ac
natalibus inaequali sort seiungis? Dolebat enim Iani fily stolidioris annos,
virtuti Philippi Mariae anteferri.

My peremptory answers be these.

The first is grounded upon this decision. Nec vero si aliquis Rex consensum
statuum haberet, vt priuaret regno filiu^ aut proximum, posset tamen id iure
facere: quia qui priuare non poterit, non debet id facere cuius praetextu per
Legem inducatur privatio. For it is so clear as the Sun at mid day, and all
the Doctors both of the Canon and Civil Law, in one voice agree thereunto,
that no Prince nor estate separatim vel coniunctim, hes power to transfer the
crown from one to an other, namely, where the crown is successiue. For if it
were lawful to reject one, and make choice of an other, then should succession
be turned in election, which were absurd. And heerevpon is there many
decisions of the Doctors, whereof I repeat a few. One of Jason saying, Quod
regna (...)
deferantur lege Diuina, naturali, consuetudinaria and Canonica, primogenito:
per rationem huius textus, Nemo potest disponere regna, nisi secundum Legis
dispositionem. Idem Felinus asserit and Ioannes Andreas Cap. licet De voto,
Abbas cap. intellecto, de Iureiurando. Vbi dicit Reges non possepriuare
consanguineos spe regni, and * secundum Innocentium. Nec patres Reges (...)
possunt primogenitos exharedare aut minuere iura primogeniturae. Benedictus in
cap. Reynutius in verbo, in eodem testamento, Quia Regna deferuntur iure
sanguinis and quae naturae beneficio competunt liberis exhaeredatione paterna
tolli non possunt, nec etiam statuum Regni ministerio in remotiorem transferri.
Denique, cum Dominus non tulerit Israclitas, imo dederit illos in direptionem,
quod spreta domo David, sibi Regem Jeroboam filium Nabath constituissent,
negari nequit quantum partiales Regnorum translationes a propinquioribus ad
remotiores, non solum legibus humanis, ver^metiam voluntati Diuinae repugnent.

Secondly, the said pretended Testament was supposititious, and contrived by
such as meant to defraud both the heirs female of the said king Henry the 8.
as well as these of his eldest sister, which did manifestly appear immediately
after the death of the said young Prince Edward, when as the Lord Gilford
eldest son to the Duke of Northumberland did marie with Lady Ieane, eldest
daughter to the foresaid Lady Francoyse Duchess of Suffolk, to whom the
said Testament designed the succession: the meaning of which marriage was to
erect the said Lady Ieane, and to deject the two innocent and most illuster
Enfantes of Henry the eight, Queen Marie, and Queen Elizabeth.

Thirdly, of the witness that had signed the said pretended Testament, three
of the most honest and famous thereof, upon remorse of conscience before
Queen Marie their Sovereign Lady and her honorable Counsel, did depone,
confess, and swear, that the said Testament was never signed by the said king
Henry, but was sealed by one William Clerk with the kings seal, when as the
king was either dead, or in the last article or agony of death, having no
sense, knowledge, or remembrance: and these three witnesses were the Lord
Paget, Sir Edmond Montague Knight cheef Justice, and the said William Clerk
affixer of the seal as is aforesaid. Upon which testification the same being
duly tried, by all circumstances requisite, that it was not by corruption,
suborning, nor menaces exhibit by the said witnesses: the said Queen Marie,
to the honor of God and her Realm, for defense of the verity, justice, and
dignity of the succession Royal, and for avoiding of many inconuenients that
thereof might have ensued by the partiality of the said pretended Testament,
caused the examplar, memorial thereof, which was in the Cha^cellarie, to be
cancellat, lacerate, and destroyed as a thing indigne to have place amongst the
true and authentic registers of so noble a Realm. By which genereux and just
act, she merits no less praise nor the Romans and Ephesians, the one
defacing the name of the Tarquins for the meshant act of Tarquinius Superbus:
the other making a Law prohibitiue to all historians, never to mention the name
of Impius Erostratus within their commentaries.

But fearing least prolixitie make me tedious, I retranche and omit many
pithie allegations that might be pertinentlie opponed to the aduersare,
reserring a more ample discourse upon this subject, to more leisure: or rather,
to one more versed in Laws and histories, nor I am: closing this section of my
Palinod with a double admiration.

In the one I cannot enough marvel how our adversaries can object so
confidently against us this law positive against strangers, seeing they think
the positive Law salique should have no place nor power against their
proximitie of blood in France. Et si identitatis ratio sequenda est, aequalium
aequalis esse debet consideratio, and quod sibi fieri nolunt, alteri facere non
debent. And so they should in reason think their law transmarine, or peregrine,
to have no more authority against his Majesty, nor they would wish the Law
Salique to have against their self according to old decisions. Patiendae sunt
Leges quas ipsi tulimus, and, Quod quisque iuris in alios statuit, ipse eodem
iure teneatur.

My other admiration is, that a Nation so wise, politic and prudent, should
not for-see the inquencheable combustion that may be kindled within their own
bowels by establishing, or maintaining Laws unjustly made against just
successors to their crown: which kind of partiality as it hes ever been the
pest and perdition of all common wealths using the same, specially of such as
have been most famous and glorious, so can it not in this age produce any
better effects, but to distract the people upon diversity of respects, to
follow diverse and dangerous factions.

Which inconvenient no other Christian Nation had more need to prevent nor the
flourishing Realm of England: for as they are wealthy, so are they much envied
for their felicity, whereby it cannot fail if any debate be for their crown
betwixt contrair competitors, but their Realm shall be a stage or playing
field to all Nations: the one pairtie inuyting some forainers to his aid, and
his aduersare doing the like: knowing that no stranger shall be unwilling
thereunto, some upon avarice, some upon malice, some for both: every one
already attending to set up their rest upon hope to repair their adverse or
base fortunes, with the ruin of that most noble, famous, and virtuous Realm,
which of old for the fertility of the soil, and rare beauty of the
inhabitants was called the Realm of God, whom of his great mercy with arde^t
vows and humble supplication I implore, long (yea ever) to preserve them from
such destanie, dysaster, and desolation.

As to that where I most irreuerentlie and injuriously allege his Majesty
to be made incapable by reason of a clause contained in the act of
Association, made at Westminster, Anno (...) which his Majesty's mother of good
memory did sign (as is alleged.) In this iniust allegation, I confess a
malicious and impudent error: for no such clause is contained in the
Association, and though it were contained, yet what her Majesty did consent or
yield unto in her captivity (and propter metum qui potest cadere insexum
constantiorem) is not obligatorie to her self, much less to her innocent
successor, whose title is Mayor omni exceptione: For probation whereof, I will
not reckon his ancient descent from the Royal blood of England, (as that of
Malcolme the 3, called Canmore with the Niece of Edward the Confessor before
the conquest, nor that of King James the first, with the petite Niece of John
of Gant Duke of Lancaster) but I hold me at a probation so patent and recent,
as no man can pretend ignorance or oblivion thereof, affirming (as the truth
is) that his Majesty hes the just title ex vtroque Parente: For being the
undoubted heir of Margaret eldest daughter to King Henry the 7. he must also
be-he undoubted heritour of the crown, after the death of Queen Elizabeth her
Majesty present, who is the only graff or branche remaining of the masculine
descent, or of the sons of the said Henry the 7. In whose person by virtue of
his marriage with the righteous heir of the house of York, like as he was the
undoubted heir of the house of Lancaster, the crown of England was infallibly
established, and the two roses united. And the cleernesse of this Pedigree
joined with the knowledge I had thereof, makes my offense so much the more
inexcusable, I being a co^scienceles contradictor to my own knowledge,
committing thereby not only an civil heresy, but eue^ a sin against the holy
spreit in oppugning the known verity, God most justly punishing my pride, and
adding un to the multitude of my other sins, this most capital and damnable
consort of desperatio^, which by no means I had escaped, if I had obstinatly
perseuered in my former induration, yea notwithstanding my vnfenzeit repentance
I should yet doubt of Gods mercy, if former examples did not assure me. But
when I see a chief Apost. against his knowledge denying his Master, repenting,
confiding, and receiving pardon, I begin to think that it is natural to sin,
brutall to persevere, Christian to repent, and devilish to despair, and quia
peccantium partus optimus poenitentia, and poenitentium statio tutissima
confidentia. Sed quia veram poenitentiam pudor peccati commissi pracedit, I
will with Miriam be ashamed of myself as if my father had spitted in my face, I
will be humbled with the Publican, confess my insolence with the forlorn son,
repent and weep bitterly with Peter, and confide with the faithful Brigand.
Knowing there is no sin can exceed the mercy of God, who descended from
heaven to earth, and from thence did again ascend to heaven, to save the
sinners and not the just, the Publican and not the Pharisie, leaving behind him
many pithy arguments unto such as would be called his Disciples, persuading
them to mercy after his example. Whereunto the most noble both fidell and
infidel Princes have ever been inclyned, according to that of the Poet, Quo
mayor quisque est magis est placabilisirae, Et faciles motus men's generosa
capit, etc, The great Monarch Julius Caesar culd forget nothing but injuries:
and Titus called delitiae generis humani, thought the day evil spe^ded, wherein
he had not done some work of compassion. And the Royal Prophet says, Ne
tradas bestijs animam confitentem tibi: whereby is meant, as the learned affirm,
that confessing penitents should not be deuourcd nor driven to desperate
courses. By which clement moderation this present most christian King has so
honored, enriched and strengthened him self with the hearts of the people, as
is incredible: who when they were most * opinatre against him, his Majesty
laked (...)
not * bontifeus to animate him to fire and sword, (...)
and to all violent vindications upon his inobedient towns and subjects, yet
his answer ever was, Voulez vous que ie ne soy que Roy des cendres and des
Cemiters.

But his patience above all toward George L'apostre (a man both learned and
eloquent) is remarkable: for not withstanding the said George had written many
injurious and irreuerent pamphlets against his person and title, yet his
Majesty received him graciously without recital of any offense past. For
which benigntie the said George hes changed his style, and has already begun
in a treatise moss exquisitelie written, to confer, yea, to prefer his
Sovereign in prowess, pity, and in all other Princely parts to Julius
Caesar, and some day will serve him for a Virgill and Homer.

To this same purpose of clemency Clemens Romanus in constitutionibus
Apostolicis lib. 1. inquit, Aequum est vt in iudicando Dei sententiam sequamur,
and vt ille iudicat peccatores, modo poenitentes, ita and tu iudices. Nonne
Dauidem inpuluere stratum, Ionam in ventre Balenae lugentem, Ezechia^
lachrymantem, Manassem in vinculis languentem, etc. crimine liberauit?
Publicani, Petri, Magdalenae, Filij perditi, Ovis errantis exempla and
parabolae misericordiam diuinam abunde praedicant. Asceleribus peccantium, non
ab eorum consortie abstinendum Christi cum Publicanis conuersatio indicat. Sed
hic iudicio opus est, quibus parcendum, quibus non. Hactenus Clemens. Cui non
inepte respondere videtur Citero, 2. de natura Deorum dicens: Sipoenitentibus
grates habendae sunt, illis fiant qui voluntary, non necessario, liberi, non
captiui, resipiscunt.

Of which number although I may without ostentation affirm my self, yet
vnflattering my self I must also confess, that no satisfaction, no expiation,
no merit of mine present or future, can deserve mercy, without his Majesty's
extraordinar grace: for in all degrees that a passionat liar, calumniator,
blasphemer, yea an Atheist could in thought, word, or write offend his Prince,
I have offended: and in such sort, as if his Majesty shall think my crime
irremissible, he neither ceases to be merciful, nor no other offender should
take occasion to doubt thereof, because none hes or can offend so desperately
as I have done. The remorse and sorrow whereof has so cauterized my wounded
conscience, that I protest before God and his holy Angels, never to pardon my
self, howsoever his Majesty's pleasure be to accept of my penitencie. But to
close this digression, since the practice of this mercy and benignity (which
is the visible image of God) was never more lively expressed in any Prince nor
in my sovereign Lord, to perswad him unto that which he daily practices,
were superstuous, or to bring any other example but himself (the examplar and
pattern thereof) were a matter injurious. For what is the man of account within
his Realm, that has not tasted of his mercy? Or who vnfenzetlie repenting,
needed ever to doubt of reconciliation, and not only of reconciliation, but of
reward? as one not delyting in the blood of his people, but in their
benevolence, a father to orphelings, a warrant to wedowes, a fortress to
forlorn, a refuge to all that have recourse unto him: and in one word,

Est piger ad poenac Princeps, ad praemia praeceps:
Qutque dolet quotics cogitur esse ferox.
O miserable unhappy wretch that Iam in offending so beastly a Majesty so
bening, and yet neither miserable nor unhappy in respect of his natural
humanity which holds me in hope against hope.

Nam mihispes superest cumte mitissime Princeps,
Spesmihi, respicio cum mea facta, cadit.
Ipselicet sperare vetes, sperabimns, atque
Hoc vnum, liceat te prohibente, fore.
Sed redeunt abeuntque mihi variantque timores,
Et spem placandi dantque, negantque tui.
Parceprecor fulmenque tuum and fera tela reconde,
Heu nimium misero cognita tela mihi.
Parce pater Patriae, nec nominis immemor huius.
Tandem placandi spem mihi read tui.
Now for Catastrophe of this my recantation, since I have refelled my former
cauillations so penitently and pithyly as I could: First I humbly implore the
benevolence and pity of the Reader, and of all others skandalized by my lewd
example, seeing my deplorable estate is more to be pitied, nor envied: as also
though I have most worthelie procured the ire of all honest men, yet my misery
makes me unworthy thereof. For what am I but a dead Dog, stipula sicca, and
folium quod vento rapitur. To eik affliction to my affliction, est cum larvis
luctari,

Quid iuvat extinctos ferrum dimittere in artus,
Non habet in nobis iam nova plaga locum.
Next if any thing be omitted herein that may be thought necessary for his
Majesty's satisfaction, being advertised thereof I shall indelaitlie add and
enlarge the same: Protesting notwithstanding, that if I have forget any
material point, it is of no fraud or malice, but for lack of better knowledge,
as by the original invectiue all written with my own hand, and delivered to
an honorable person his Majesty's most loyal subject will in the own time
appear. Moreover, if by any malicious person any thing be added or put out
in my name, more nor I have said, I shall Godwilling disburthen my self
dewtifullie, and charge the authors thereof in such sort, as perhaps shall be
to his Majesty's contentment, and little to their credit, and that indelaitly
after the same shall come to my knowledge.

Thirdly, since God of his infinite mercy hes blessed our poor Realm of
Scotland with a Prince so learned, so wise, so clement, so godly: my
exhortation is that no offender his present subject, or that may be hereafter,
doubt of his benignity and grace, seeing the daily experience we have of the
same: specially, whosoever hes priuatlie or opinlie participate with me of my
lewdnes or rebellion, I beseech them also for safety both of soul and body,
to join with me in my rescipiscence: for they may be well assured that the
hand of the Omnipotent (if not his Majesty's hand) will find them out some
day, either by sea or land to their confusion, if they incline not to speedy
and penitent conversion. And heerewithall I would wish such as have been so
happy as not to offend, that they may remain constant and loyal to the end,
to the effect that all may vnanimelie concur to incres his Majesty's
greatness, and to advance his most equitable possibilities, burying their own
particular querrels, and abstaining upon whatsoever respect to make *Remuemens
or commotio^s within his Realm, much ^urres
less against him self. For if the most inward and irreprehensible servants of
God in ages past (as is before said) did for conscience sake without
murmuration or mutinerie, obey idolatrons and infidel Princes, what reason can
we have that be corrupted, and in a corrupted age, to trouble or inquiet the
Christian and moderate estate and government of a Prince so moderate, so
Christian, and one so accomplist with all virtues necessary for his Royal
vocation ( Pietatis and Iustitiae prototocus.

Last of all my obleist duty binding me in all leasome manner to wish and
procure the felicity of the Realm of England, for manifold courtesies there
received: (which with great fullness according to my meannesse I shall always
remember) I cannot omit to present unto them this friendly remonstrance,
wherein the captious interpretations of cunning persons whereunto I shall be
subject, cannot impeshe me to utter the sincerity of a well affected friend,
affirming that the cheef worldly mean to continue their long enjoyed
prosperity, is, tymouslie to set their mind upon the King my Sovereign
(their undoubted second person) by giving unto him some certain signification
of his due, and of their duty. For their silence is not without probable
suspicion that their minds be inclined and directed some other way, whereby
his Majesty may take just occasion to establish his pairtie by some other
foreign course. It is not yet so long ago since the calamity procured by the
doubtful succession of the houses of York and Lancaster, distracting that
nation in contrair factions, but that the deplorable memory thereof, may yet
serve for a present caveat and instruction. To prevent such dangerous
inconuenients, God hes offered unto them a mean and way, which they may (or
rather should) with reason, policy, and save conscience use and embrace, as a
singular blessing provided to incresse their happiness, and to continue them
in their former security. For reason and good conscience does reco^mend unto
them the King of Scotland, because he is the righteous successor: and policy
will persuade his preferment, because he is a Prince, and all other Co^petitors
within the Island be but subjects: he hes an ancient Realm to join unto
theirs: he hes a princely power to maintain them against their enemies: He
hes the universal love and amity of all Christian Princes, by virtue whereof,
if they were once known to be his subjects, their merchands might traffic
alwhere, without danger: and their Realm needed not to fear any foraine
invasion. But if confiding in positive Laws, and in their own power, they
mind to bar him, notwithstanding his just title, and all other commodities
which he might import unto them, let them at least be terrified from such
desperate induration, by example of such as heretofore have attempted, and
repented such like machinations. For God Almighty is the author and autorizer
of all right, specially in Realms. For defense whereof amongst his own
people, he hes not only raised up extraordinarlie both men and women, as
Iosue, Sampson, Debora, and the rest of the Judges to be his champions: but he
hes used spiritual powers, yea sometime dumb elements, to execute his
vengeance upon unjust usurpers with their consorts and accomplices. His Angel
destroyed the host of Sennacherib. The red sea devoured Pharao and all his
chariots. The fire was a fortress, and the clouds a cabinet sor his people,
til they were brought in possession of their promised inheritance: from which no
might, no slight, could seclude them. All histories be full of such examples,
but for avoiding tediousness, I content me with that only of the present
King of France (the ornament of this age) because it is most recent, and
remarkable. What leagues? what proiects? what * monopoles? (...)
what Machiauelian machinations was made against him? But all in vain. Lapidem
quem reprobauerunt aedificantes, hic factus est in caput anguli. Mirabile est
in oculis nostris, sed hoc factum est* Domino, contra quem no^ est potest as,
non est virtus, non est consilium.

By this my remonstrance my meaning is not seditiouslie to stir up any
faction or pairtie against her gracious Majesty of England during her time:
For with my heart I wish unto her a long, peaceable, and prosperous reign,
knowing that her natural inclination to justice, kindness, and equity, will
not suffer her to be unkind to her nearest neighbor, Cousing and most
faithful confederate, nor so improuident for the security of her people,
(amongst whom she hes so long lived like the loving Pelican) as to leave them
in such incertitude after her death, that they shall not know whom to obey:
much less that she shall establish any Law to the prejudice of the lawful
successor, whose patience should be a great persuasion to rander unto him such
arles and assurance of his possibility: Quia vt intrantes egredientium moram,
quaentumuis prolixam, patienter far debent: ita egredientes aus possessores
successoribus certa intrandi argumenta prastare tene^tur: ^e hi vanaspe, illi
quotidianis expostulationibus fatigat^, querantur. And as all loving the
prosperity of the Island do wish this mutual correspondence to be betwixt
their Majesty's: so no doubt the reciproque practice thereof, should produce
great love and contentment betwixt them, with no small felicity present and
future to the said Island. And this is the only scope and mark that I aim at:
as one now abhorring all ambition, unfit for any preferment, scorning all
flattery, fearing no temporal fear, nor establishing my felicity upon
fragill worldly esperances. For my foot is already in the grave. Choreae,
baluea, symphoniaci, symposia, fell, and absynthium. Cibus nauseam, potus
vomitum prouocat. Dies noctibus, diebus noctes grauiores* Appropinquant anni in
quibus dicam, non placent. Commouentur custodes domus, otiosae sunt molentes in
minuto numero, tenebrescunt videntes per foraminae, consurgitur ad vocem
volucris. Amygdalus florere incipit, locusta inpinguari, dissipari cappar^,
funiculus argenteus conteri, and hydria aurearumpi. Age and sickness the
sergeants of death already charges me, personally apprehended, (least I should
pretend ignorance) to pay the due of nature. Et somni breues, insomnijsque
perturbati Sororem pro foribus praestolari indicant. Dies mei praeterierunt,
cogitationes meae dissipatae sunt, torque^tes animam meam. Sicut arcus aut
arator incuruatus sum. Itaque vado dicere putredini pater meuses, matter mea and
soror mea vermibus, In this last period of my lothsom life, these te^ porall
tru^peries of fortune can yield me no profit.

Non domus aut fundus, non aeris aceruus and auri,
Aegroto Domini deducunt corpore febres.
Neither can they pleasure me any more

Quam lippum pictae tabulae, fomenta podagram,
Auriculas cythara collecta sorde dolentes:
So since I am inutile to the world, and the world uncouth to me, my pleasure
shall be a private and reteered life, if I can attain thereunto, and I will
study to hind up all my treasure where roust cannot rotte, nor theefrobbe. To
this effect as Elias ascending did willingly let his mantle fall, that it
should not empesh his transumption, so will I not be ashamed to quite the
mantle of hypocrisy wherewith to this hour I have covered a multitude of
grievous vices, which (alla^e) with long habitude have so possessed and
ouerruled me, that the more I should live, the more I should offend God and my
neighbor. Propterea tadet me vitae meae, and cupio dissolui and esse cum
Christo. I have too long remained in the Tents of Kedar, and in diuersorijs
Mesech, where I have been a soiourner, no Citizen, a Pilgrim, no Proprietare.
Now it is high time for me after so long exile and peregrination in this
worldly desert and wilderness, to seek out my promised inheritance from which
my long abode, nor great vnloyaltie (God assisting me with his grace) cannot
seclude me. For by example of the forlorn Son and Publicane, I fear
neither my insolence nor unworthiness. By example of the laborers I hope to
be rewarded as soon, (if not before them) as them that have traveled from the
break of day, notwithstanding my latenes. And by example of the faithful
Brigand I expect in the last article of my life, that joyful verdite and
sentence that was pronounced unto him:

Hodie me cum eris in Paradiso.

Io. Coluille.


