A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLES-CROSSE, UPON THE 1. OF NOVEMBER, BEING ALL SAINTS
DAY, ANNO 1607.

By Sa: Collins, Batchelour in Divinity, and fellow of the Kings College in
Cambridge.

LVC. 7.35. Wisdom is justified of all her children.

GREG. MAG. in Ezechiel. Nihil ad defendendum honestate tutius: nihil ad
dicendum veritate facilius.

AT LONDON, Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for Richard Bonian, dwelling at the
sign of the spread Eagle, right over against the great North door of S. Paul's
Church. 1607.

To the most Reverend Father in God, Richard, the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury his Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, one of his
Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
THe excellency of the calling (most Reverend Father) that God has promoted
your Grace unto, by the vn-erring hand of his sacred Deputy, to be their
Agent, in causis maioribus, to the Churches of this Kingdom, may justly
challenge the labors of as many as handle the pen with discretion in our
days; but mine (if J be ought) after a more especial manner: whom, the
continuance of your favor, for no few years, shining upon my poor studies,
has made wholly pledged to your service; and some employments also vouchsafed
from your Grace, have kept from being altogether idle. So that if my meannesse
should ever be exalted to bring forth any thing worthy publication (which your
Grace rather construeth ouer-fauourably of this Pamphlet, than it any way
deserves) J have long since consecrated it to the honor of your Grace, as one
that has both countenanced always mine endeauours, and also directed, after a
sort, my courses. Howbeit, this small work, such as it is J now present unto
your Grace, not so much in lieu of received kindness (which you have
multiplied upon me and mine, even when your name has been concealed) as
inuoking patronage against the oppugners. For, lata porta, but aduersarij
multi, as S. Paul said to his; 1. Cor. 16.9. and As concerning this way, we
know nothing, but that it is every where spoken against; as they said to S.
Paul, Act. 28.22.

J speak the truth in Christ (most Reverend Father) I lie not, the holy Ghost
also bearing witness with my conscience; that J grieve unspeakably, night and
day, whithersoeuer J chance to look, at the malice of Satan (how transformed
soever) and the disaster of our times. And as our Savior sometimes, in the
days of his flesh, wept in compassion over the great City, divining the
ruins of it: so mine eyes gush out with water, to see there is no religion
amongst men for the most part, but that which is tainted with a spice of
faction.

But to let-go complaints, and to leave that to him which will purge his floor
in a due time, as one that has his fan already in his hand, and lets the
yellow weeds to shoot up but in a policy, to exercise our patience, and to
magnify his wisdom in the latter end: as for the Book, my comfort is, that
whom the reverence of your Graces mildness and temper, most befitting Moses,
and the advancement of his chair, shall not repress for shame; him the edge
of your judgment, long since tried and renowned for the most accurate perusal
of these causes and controversies, above all the Churchmen of our Nation,
shall daunt perforce.

And with that very hope J end for this time; humbly recommending the
prosperities of your Grace, and the good estate of the Church Christian, to the
Lord Christ: that under your auspicious and happy government (which God of
his mercy grant may be most most long) our Nazarites may be whiter than the
snow, and our Priests purer than the Sapphires.

Your Graces most humble Chaplain and Servant,SAMVEL COLLINS.

A SERMON PREAched at Paules-Crosse.
1. TIMOTH. 6.3.4.5. If any man teach otherwise, and consents not to the
wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according
unto godliness, he is puffed up, and knows nothing, but languisheth about
questions, and strife of words, whereof comes envy, strife, raylings, evil
surmises, froward disputations of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
truth, which think that gain is godliness: from such separate thy self.


IN 1. Sam. 13.17. thus we read, that upon a day there came, out of the host
of the Philistines, three garrisons of Champions, all minded to destroy; but,
each turning several ways, one to Ophrah, another to Bethoron, and a third to
Zeboim. This was a picture of the Churches condition, not only bodily then
wasted, and afflicted for the time, but spiritually assaulted to the ends of
the world: whom a trebble squadron of conspiring enemies all bent to murder
and destroy, yet all attempting sundry means to mischief, do molest
continually; the heretic by his poisonous and corrupt doctrines, the evil
liver by his scandalous and wicked examples, the schismatique by his turbulent
and unchristian separations.

And, against these, the Ionathans of God with their Captain Saul, higher by
the head than all the children of Israel, that is the king and his Clergy,
must always have their weapons in readiness to suppress their furies. We, the
weakest of ten thousand, do it as we may to the utmost of our power, and have
done it often heretofore in diverse places, encountering them and coping with
them, as the occasion guided us, either jointly all at once, or diuidedly by
themselves.

This day we will single out the Schismatic from his fellows, as in a stage
of renown, the greatest disturber (if my mind do not misgiue me) that our
Church has complained under, these many years. And yet we will pursue him nor
chase him no further, than S. Paul himself shall give us leave to do, nay aim
and scope how to do, in the Text now propounded.

The parts whereof are in effect these six; please you to peruse them with
me. The first is, The indifferency of the parties offending, in these words,
If any man, (...); Jf any, be he who he will be, high or low, rich or poor,
great or small, learned or lay, famous or of no reputation, If any. The second
is the Quality of the fact; consents not, agrees not, accords not, I had
almost said subscribeth not. The third is the degree of the fault; teach
otherwise: not only think, but teach, publish his fancies, proclaim his
conceits, draw Disciples after him, make a Sect, and blow a trumpet to
sedition with Siba the son of Bichri, Every man to his Tents, O Jsrael, the
2. of Sam. 20.1. The fourth is the rule of trial for this matter, the square
of truth to discern and judge by: It self two-folde; either the wholesome
words of CHRIST and of godliness, or every doctrine according thereto.

So I say, not only the written word of God, but every doctrine that is not
dissenting or swaruing therefrom; not only that which is expressed, but that
which is inferred, and by interposition of lawful authority deducted, not
only that which is originally good, but even that which is consequentially
sound, the wholesome words and the doctrine according; that is the fourth part
as I said. The fifth is the Censure, and this is somewhat intricate: I pray you
mark it the better, to save my labor. First, privative, he knows nothing, he
is an Idiot, an ignaro, a very child inwardly, whatsoever he pretend and vaunt
for outwardly. Secondly, positive, and that either Causal in the first place
and radical, he is puffed up: for, Radix omnis peccati superbia, Pride is the
root of every sin, but especially of this sin, Schism and separation in
the Church. Secondly, formal, (...)
languisheth about questions: He languisheth indeed, and spends his strength
in contention and brabble. Hippocrates himself could say no more to discover
the nature of the disease. It is a head pain, that I say not a heady; and Caput
dolet, caput dolet, as the child complained, 2. King. 4.19. But the fathers
answer is very wise and good, Carry him to his mother, Let the Church censure
him and correct him: That, if any thing, may chance to heal him. Thirdly,
Euentuall or effectiue, of which comes envy, strife, raylings, evil
surmises: you may say they are Legion, they are so many, or here comes a
company, they are so thick; as Leab said at the birth of Gad, Genesis 30.11. And
yet ye have not al, but last of all disputations, disputations, I say, or at
least offers and challenges to disputations: let the times interpret me.
Fourthly, qualitatiue, from the dispositions of the persons themselves, and
that threefolde; In regard of their judgment, in regard of their affection,
and in regard of their practice. In regard of their judgment, destitute of the
truth, and therefore blind. In regard of their affection, corruptly minded,
partially minded, and therefore crooked; pretending one thing, intending and
aiming at another. Thirdly, and lastly in regard of their practice, thinking
gain to be godliness, or placing their godliness in gain, as the Prophet
DAVID says of them in the Psalm, Therefore do the people fall unto them, and
therout suck they no small advantage. This was the fifth mayn part, the Censure.
The sixth and last still remains: which you may call the Caution or the
Jnhibition; From such separate thy self. So have you, to make short, the
indifferency of the parties, the quality of the fact, the degree of the
fault, the rule of trial or the square of truth, the Censure and the
Inhibition: For I omit the several branches of amplification, til I com to the
handling. And of al these, or of some of these, as God shall give utterance, you
patience, and the time allowance.

I have propounded the parts, I must confess, somewhat otherwise than they ly
in the Text (as preferring order of matter before order of words in the
Apostles writings); and yet I see I must handle them somewhat otherwise than I
propounded them: but all shall be directed to the easier apprehensio^ of you
that are the Auditors, and no force offered to holy scripture.

To begin therefore first with the quality of the fact, in those words, If any
consent not; the Pelagian as soon as he hears of this Consent, presently
dreams a dream of his dearling Freewil, as if all sheaues bowed to her sheaue,
and imagines we may do this by the power of Nature, I mean yield assent to the
heavenly revelation.

But if the natural man perceive not the things of God, 1. Cor. 2.14. much
less can he consent to them out of his powers natural, after once he
perceiues them. For, consenting is the harder, perceiving is the easier of the
two. As for example, I can make a man that has but an ordinary capacity, by
my pithie declaration, to perceive what we mean by the mystery of the
Trinity, folded up in reverend obscurity, by the incarnation of Christ that
swallows up the sense both of men and Angels: but I cannot make him assent to
it nor agree to it; digitus Dei hic est, this point surpasses our skill, and
it is Gods finger alone that can import a consent, though we can imprint a
conceit: he bows the neck of the inner man, and puts our feet into wisdoms
fetters, our hands into her links and chains, mollifies and intenerates that
same neruum ferreum (as Manasses calls it) the iron synew of our unbelief.
Nemo pugnauit in valle Terebinthi (says S. Sermon. de Temp.
Augustine most sweetly) donec David veniret ad praelium, spoken by the
history of David and Goliath; that is, no man fought in the valleie of
Turpentine trees, till David came and undertook the challenge. So, no man is of
force in this dale of mortality to act any point of ghostly chivalry, till
the spirit of Christ which is the truer David shall come upon him, and the
power of the most high shall ouershadow him: of Christ I say, who is therefore
called, (...) Hebrews. 12.2. The beginner and the ender, the founder and the
finisher, the Alpha and Omega of our faith. For, as he begins it in obiecto,
so he ends it in causa: as he did what we might believe, so he helps us to
believe what he has done for us, shining in the darkness (if at least any
will comprehend him) and illightning every man that comes into this world.
We read how Hiram was famous for his working and caruing in brass. 1. King.
7.14. But the truer praise hereof (if you mark it well) belongs to him, who only
writes his Laws in our hearts, and gives us heart for heart, Cor carneumpro
lapideo, a heart of flesh for a heart of stone, supple and gentle for rough and
intractable, and renewes a right spirit within us in the midst of our
bowelles. Anatomize if you please with me the parts of Christian perfection:
what are they? I suppose these; Thought, Faith, Will, Deed, Perseverance,
Martyrdom. What more easy then to think? yet we cannot so much as think a
good thought of our selves, as of our selves, says the Apostle. What, next
thinking, more easy then believing? yet ye are saved by faith: which faith is
not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Ephe. 2.8. What then like willing
and affecting? yet it is he that works in us both to will and to do,
according to his good pleasure. But at least we perfect and accomplish his
onsets after he has once begun them in us: No, but he which has begunue
the good work in you will fulfill it unto the end. Much less then can we
suffer but by his supportance, if we cannot do without his assistance: yea
verily; for so we read, to you it is given, (mark the word given) not only to
believe in him, but to suffer for him. Thus you see, nothing so easy that he
disdaineth for us; nothing again so hard, but he effects it by us. As to the
one kind we are more than weak and feeble, without him: so of the other kind
we are more than Conquerors, through him. For, as Christ says by us, Without
me you can do nothing: so we say by him, that in Christ which enableth us, we
can do all things. And, in one word, my dear brethren, whatsoever progress we
make, whatsoever step we set forward upon this Jacobs ladder, the way of grace
and virtue which conducteth our souls to bliss; still Dominus super scalam (as
S. Sermon. de Temp.
Augustine has observed out of Genesis 28.13.) still the Lord is above the
Ladder, still Christ the Angel is conspicuous at the top.

And yet we read, says the Pelagian, Esa. 1.19 Jf you consent and obey, you
shall eat the good things of the earth: but do we not read again; It is not
of the willer, nor yet of the runner, but of God that shows mercy. And yet we
read, says the Pelagian, I have inclined my heart to keep thy righteous
judgments: but do we not read again, in the same Psalm; O Lord do thou
incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness. And yet we read,
says the Pelagian, My son, keep thy heart with all diligence; as if he were
his hearts keeper: but do we not read again, The peace of God, which passes
al understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus. Lastly, and yet
we read says the Pelag. Make you strait steps unto your feet, least that which
is halting be turned out of the way. Heb. 12.13: but do we not read again, say
I, Order (O Lord) my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slide not; and Take
thou from me the way of lying, but lead me in the way everlasting.

How then is it, my dear brethren? for, I may seem to have led you into a maze
of wa^drings: or how may these contradictions so great in show, be knit up in
any substantial accordance? yes doubtless, very well: neither delights in the
others overthrow, but both espouse friendship in the kiss of peace. Free Will
eats not up grace, as Pharaohs lean kine eat up the fat, nor grace deuours not
Free Will ( Adolet non abolet natural gratia, says S. Prosper) as Moses
serpents devoured the Inchanters: but the sword of the Lord and the sword of
Gedeon, Gods finger and humane endeavor, may both stand together very well. And
in one word, to finish this, because the time spends so fast; As in the case
of the person of our glorious Savior, we search the Scriptures to see what he
was, and to redeem him from the slanderous deprauation of toongs, some denying
him to be God, some denying him to be man; we (I say) search the Scriptures
about this point, go into the sanctuary, and finding him weary sitting at a
Well, finding him hungry, finding him thirsty, sleeping, bleeding mourning,
dying, and such like, we conclude a man; but considering him on the other side,
trampling the waters, quieting the winds, calming the tempests, rebuking
fevers, taming the devils, whipping out the Simoniacall bargainers of the
Temple, we infer a God: So in this doubtful diversity, where some deny
grace, some abolish Nature and Free Will, we turn the book, the book of
decision for the weighty causes and controversies of God; and if propension on
the one side make for liberty, grace on the other side appears in victory,
neither defacing nor demolishing the other, like Dagon, and the Arc; but each
countenancing and establishing, like the 2. Cherubins that beheld one thing,
and yet looked both sundry ways.

For, if any man consent not, as you have it in the Text, If he consent not,
implies not a consenting power in us. No, though he had said, see that you
consent, look that you consent; yet, that proves no ability of doing so:
neither supposition, nor imposition, neither si, nor sic can euicte any such
conclusion at our hands: but, Lex imperat, fides impetrat; the Law indeed was
given by Moses to the end that it should drive us to the grace that comes by
Christ: and commandment may extend farther than strength. As when we read
Psalm. 119. Ver. 4. Tupraecepisti, thou have charged that we should diligently
keep thy commandments, he adds not, nor collects not, Therefore I can, or,
therefore I will, as the Pelagian would do in all the haste; but, O that my
ways were made so direct that I might keep thy statutes. The Imperative begets
an Optatiue, not a Potential with him: for, Da Domine quod iubes, and iube quod
vis, Lord help me but to perform, and then I care not what thou require. And
so much might suffice to have spoken, of Consent; but that the age, which we
are fallen into, craves a word more by way of this discourse at my hands. I
will obey the times, and yet not neglect the time.

Consent, is of three sorts, even as it may be performed by three distinct
Organs; the heart, the mouth, the hand. The Consent of the heart is called
Faith, of the mouth is termed Confession, of the hand is Subscription. For, so
says S. Paul; not content with one without the other, Romans 10.10. With the
heart we believe to righteousness, that is but one step: and, with the mouth
we confess to salvation, that is another step: and he might add a third, yea
he adds it here in effect (or at least, for so many as shall be required and
called upon) with the hand we subscribe, to maintain good order and keep all
from running into endless confusion. Or, if you will have one speak plainer
for this third kind of Consent, than S. Paul here does; take but the Prophet
Esaias to you, who in his 44. and 5, foretelling of our times, the times of the
new testament, makes subscription of the hand, in direct terms, one a
principal mark of our honorable Christendom; They shall subscribe (says he)
with their hand.

But alas! what should I say more in this behalf, if neither the Parallel of
Scripture, nor the precedent of story, nor the manifest necessity of the
thing it self, nor your own practice of common life can persuade you? J will
briefly touch them all.

First, the Parallel of Scripture: The Magistrates generally brought their
people to make a covenant with Almighty GOD, that they would continue in his
service, and in obedience to his laws as concerning Religion.

First, Josua, 24.25. I will make short. The place was Shechem; the Act was,
writing the peoples words of Consent, and vvriting them in the book of the law
of God; the ceremony was a stone rolled under an Oak that was in the
Sanctuary: which stone was to be a vvitness of their promised conformity.

Secondly, Josiah, 2. King. 23.3. He renewed the like covenant again between
God and the people, and established uniformity of worship by a vovv. And
though there be no mention, in that place, of vvriting, and taking names as in
the former; yet either we must understand it so by conference of places
(though for brevity sake it be omitted in the one) or at least it has the
same force: and I doubt not but as Job says of his words, O that my words were
written in a book; so, none there professed but could well be content to have
it registered, and the honor of that days Act to remain with Zebulun the
handler of the pen, Judges, 5, 14. as well as with Napthali, the delicate
Hind, smooth of language, and giving goodly words. Genesis 49.21.

Thirdly, and lastly Nehemiah in his 9. and 38. where, in few words you have
this, a sure Covenant as Josiah made; and the writing of it, as in Josuah we
saw; and yet, beside that, the seal put to it: which was more then in any of
the former: So much briefly for Parallel of scripture. As for the precedent of
story, infinite might be alleged: but J will insist in only one, so famous as
it cannot be denied, and so pregnant as it may by no means be despised. Arius
( J speak no more than almost all of you know) who driving ambitiously at a
Bishopwrick, Theod. Ecclesiast. hist. lib. 1. cap. 2
was prevented therein by Alexander his Competitor, the worthier man, though
perhaps not esteemed his equal for heat of zeal, missing his suit, pursued
his spite by broaching an heresy as derogatorie to the head, as these of our
days are to the body ( J mean to Christ, as these be to his Church) that
he might seem somebody, for all the repulse, and dravve a world of malcontents
after him. The Council of Nice gathered for that purpose by the holy Ghost, to
quench the fire that had kindled so far, and yet was like to spread a great
deal farther, sent for this Arius, conferred with him, debated the cause,
drove him to conform, and demanded Subscription of him: which in the end he
denied not. So ancient is the custom of requiring subscription at the hands of
Churchmen, to prevent faction once a-foot. Now, if Arius subscribed but
haltingly, and dissemblingly, retaining the poison of his opinion at heart,
which he covered so cunningly with the sugar of terms, as many do now adays
(with whom it is, not as with Pilate, quod scripsi, scripsi, what J have
written, J have written; but, the Chapman inuerted, of whom Salonion speaks,
It is good, it is good, and afterward falls to dispraise it again) J say, if
this be so, yet that detracts not from subscription, as if less lawful and
laudable for that cause; but shows in truth, that some stronger cords would
be provided, if it were possible, to hamper these colts (that snuff the wind,
as Jeremy says, and whiske it in the wilderness of their own boundless and
transported fancy) from straying and breaking forth of the limits again.
Yea verily, let Shimei be confined to the River Kidron for gadding, 1. King.
2.42. and make Renegates constant even against their will.

The third head was from the manifest necessity of the thing it self: wherein,
J shall need to say the less, because your own senses may be your own
Judges, and experience yields her plentiful testimony. The heart of man
(says the Prophet Jeremy) is like a great sea, huge, and bottomless; who can
fadome it? and Solomon, This one thing yet have J found, that GOD has made man
righteous, but be has begotten to himself many inventions: Many, many,
whereof there is no number; and yet more would, were there no restraint.
Certainly, my dear Brethren, if Order be a thing so much to be desired (
Let all things be done comely and in good order. 1. Corinthians, 14.40.) And
if God be the God, not of confusion, but of peace, and so J teach in all the
Churches (says the Apostle) and if Order be ranked with Faith in another
place, for the excellency of it (as Colossians, 2.5, J delight to see your
Order, and your stablished Faith) and, if the Church be termed terrible like
an Army with banners, only because of the goodly arraie that she marches in;
then think, what you must needs think of subscriptio^, unless you will needs
think amiss: without which, we should have (I tremble to speak it) so many
parishes, so many part-takings, so many companies, so many rents in Christ's
coat, so many congregations, so many distractions, so many Churches, so
many sects; yea, more than so, quot capita, tot schismata, as S. Jerome says;
so many men, so many minds: and consequently, so many schisms, growing, and
budding out of them; Gods inheritance being like Jeremies bird, a bird of
diverse colors. Ier. 12.9. and faction multiplying without all measure, like
Anacreons fond loves, some perfect, some pipient, some hatched, some half
hatched, some peering out of the egg, some riper in the chick; while others had
the strength to fly nimbly away. Seneca reports, that the wise Senators of
ancient Rome were content for a time to let the slaves go distinguished from
the freeborn in apparel; the wearing of the cappe making the difference
between them and the Citizen: till at last they espied, there was this
inconvenience in it, that the slaves might happily fall to numbering of their
own side, and so to presume upon their own strength, till in the end it
should break out into open rebellion. Let this be but practiced here a
little amongst us, in the Church of GOD, every congregation doing as they list,
and assuming to themselves what fashion they list, till it begin to be
considered, who have the most of their side; and we shall not need to be
threatened Jsmaels fist, though the time was when we were threatened it, as you
know; their boldness, no doubt, springing out of some such obseruacion: we
should have felt it, J warrant you, walking about our ears even by this time.

The fourth, and the last, is your own practice in common life. I confess, I
am loath to descend to such specialties, that J may not say to such triuialties:
but you must be convicted by your own proceedings; who, for substantial
assurance, use the Scriuener, and the Indenture, almost to every thing. (...),
says Saint Chrysostom of old, that is, you bind us in, with writings,
stronger than any iron chains. So as S. Paul himself writing to Philemon,
but about a matter of debt, between him and Onesimus his run. away servant,
was feign to descend to your terms, and to your conditions, though he were an
Apostle; and, after promise of repayment made, thus to say, Ego subscripsimanu
mea, I have subscribed it with mine own hand, fear not: in the Epistle to
Philem. Ver. 19.

Yea, the Naule was used in former times, by Gods own appointment, to
bore-through the ear of him, that would not depart from his first service:
Deuteronomy. 15.17. And do you think much, if they be put to the pen, to keep them
from back sliding, and from Apostasy, that serve indeed, and serve not at the
Tabernacle (which was but the pattern and shadow of heavenly things. Heb. 8.5)
but are the immediate Ministers of the truth of the living God?

But, Subscription they will say, they all allow of, and no body takes
exception against the use of the thing; they refuse to subscribe to such, and
such Articles. What Articles I pray you? Some dangerous ones, I warrant you,
that our Church obtrudeth, that stern stepmother, and much of kin to those
that Jobs Wife commenced to him; Blaspheame GOD and dye. It were tedious to go
over all that is controuerted, and which has been justified upon our side,
over and over again, as clear as it were written with the brightest
Sunne-beam upon a wall of glass as Lactantius speaks. And, if so much ink,
as has been already spent in the causes, cannot cease the Ring-worme of
creeping contention; how then may J think, that my tongue, will be so
sovereign and so medicinable (lick it never so cunningly nor so cleanly) as to
cure the Lazar of such an inueterate sore? Christ alone must be inuoked, and
his good spirit implored, that shall staunch the wound, and dry up the issue
of festered blood, that has vexed our Syrophaenissian woman, the Church of the
Gentiles in these Northern parts of the world, now more than these 8 years.

Unless you look I should defend our Orders, and Hierarchies; which they say
are Antichristian, we know to be Apostolic: our habit and vestments; which,
they think, are so far off from the Camels skin, that they are made of the
Dragons tail: the imperfections of our prayer book; which they have made to
stink in the nostrils of men, as much as ever it smelt sweet in the nostrils
of God: our praying for all men; which, they say, is against particular
election: for all that travail by Land, or by water; which, they say, is for
Thieves and Pirates: against lightning and tempests; which, they say, is against
sparrow-blasting, unless it be at a certain time of the year only: that our
Fathers sins sit not heavy upon our shoulders; which, they say, is to
acknowledge Purgatory: that we be hurt by no persecutions; as much in effect,
as that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life; the very words of S. Paul. 1.
Tim. 2.2: Our entreating Christ by his agony, and bloody passion; which they
call coniuring: our Ministerial absolution; which to them sauors of a Popes
pardon: and lastly, our Cross in holy Baptism, so scandalous, that same
Lignum iuxta aquas, Sermon. de Temp.
as S. Austine sweetly calls it, the Tree of the Cross that is planted by the
waters of Baptism; which these good men, for want of other matter, call
idolatry.

I pass by many things: these that I have metioned, are too too unsavory; and
I am loath to give you a surfeit of distaste. If wise men be not deceived, they
are more offended with our seruice-booke, for that which it has not, than for
that which it has.

As for these that I have mentioned, what should I say? there are some things
so clear, as they refuse trial; some slanders so lewd and so base, as they
abhor purgation. Your good apprehension must be our best persuasion, and your
capacity our Oratorie.

So much for the first point, The quality of the fact; If he consent not. The
2. follows, which is, the degree of the fault; If he teach otherwise.

I must be short in that behind is; this 1. has devoured so much good time
already.

ALl faults are not of one and the same degree: some are smaller, some greater,
some lighter, some more heinous. There is a mote and a beam, there is stubble
and Lead, there is judgment, or council, or hell fire proportionable. If he
consent not, that is Ianua mortis, to speak with Origin; but, If he teach
otherwise, that is limen inferni. Our Savior himself distinguishes these so:
Math. 5.19. Whosoever shall break one of these least commandments (and yet
they count some so little and so petite, as they are not worth the keeping; the
ceremonies being no better with these men, than a Cupbord of glasses, that they
may dash at their pleasure, forsooth): but, as I was saying, Our Savior makes
a difference between whosoever breaks, and breaking teaches so, one even of
the least commandments: or rather he couples them, and ioynes them together;
to show they seldom go asunder. Which is the cause, that S. Paul also reckons
them for one here in this place, If he consent not, and, If he teach
otherwise. For, serpit vt Cancer, as the same Apostle said of old, such
Doctrine still creepes like a Gangrene, frets, proceeds, stays not; it has a
power infecting like the eye of a Basiliske: and if Archytas take no pleasure
in vicuing heaven, with all the heavenly beauties thereof, unless he may have
one to tell it to again, the Devil (says S. Cyprian) eases his
condemnation, and so do his agents, with this, if they can draw as many after
them, as possibly may be, into the same pit of error.

It is most true, Hoc font deriuata clades, and I may well add the rest, in
patriam populumque fluxit: this is the original of all our woe, the desperate
licentiousness of the Teacher. As when a wellspring is poisoned, the
trauailer must needs die for it, that drinks thereof, and all the beasts of
the Forest, and all the birds among the branches, and the wild Asses that
quench their thirst there; as the Psalmist speaks: so from the mouth of the
Teacher spreads this venom into the veins of the body, till it leave no place
void of a mortal contagion. But execrabilis ille qui minxit in torrentem,
according to the old saying; accursed be he that has thus poisoned our
Current. If Ahab must be deceived, there is no fitter means to deceive him by,
than for spiritus mendacij, a lying spirit, to get into the mouth of one of his
Prophets, and from that Pulpit to preach as it pleases him 1. Kings 22.22. All the aberrations and corruptions of the people, both Israel and Judah, are
generally fathered throughout the Bible, upon the tongues of the Prophets, that
taught partially: and God himself acknowledges, that their sour grape set
the peoples teeth on edge; the Serpent gave it them, and they gave it the
people. For, whereas they should have been like an Oracle responsall, without
any Philippizing, to the whole Kingdom, their lips preserving knowledge with
indifferency, and the Law being to be required and rendered at their mouth;
they on the contrary preached: what? Visionem cordis, and non ex ore Domini, a
vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord: which, to
interpret by our times, were a dream of their own brain, begotten of choler
and a hungry stomach, foretelling the downfall of the Prelates and the
Clergy, with an imaginary scambling after the reuenews of Bishoprics.

And if it please you but to hear a little what may be said in this behalf
for condemning of the Teachers, acquitting and releasing the poor ignorant
people; you (may they say, turning to their Teachers) taught us to abandon the
congregation, where prayers were but read out of a book: you to fling out of
the Church in a fume, where any thing sounded but canonical Scripture, though
never so wholesome else to be hearkened to you to damn Homilies to the pit of
hell, which contained the kernel of salvation more lively, than all your
vocal Sermons could ever amount to: you to measure Baptism by the person that
administered it, as if no Preacher were no sufficient baptizer; a thing so
contrary to all the rules of Divinity, that the principal Apostle says of
himself, He was sent to the one and not to the other: you to ^et the Baptism
of our new born babes, like a thing indifferent at six and seauens; as if the
righteousness of the Parents made them perfect before God, that were borne in
sin and in damnation, and the saving Sacrament were now but a complement: You
to bite the lip, and hang the head, at Supremacy of princes, in each kind of
causes, mentioned in prayers; as if that were but flattery, being cast upon
kings, and the truer right thereof in Ecclesiastical menages belonged to the
Presbiters. You to fly from the Surplice and the Cap, as from a she Bear
robbed of her whelps in the wilderness, whereas that defiles not that goes
into a man, much less that which comes upon him, says our Savior, and Romans
14.14
there is nothing unclean, but to him that thinks so. And how shall we reckon
up al your other mysteries, that you were wont to incomber us with? You, to put
great holiness, in not bending at Communion; high religion, in refraining from
solemn thanksgiving after childbirth: main discretion in withholding our
children from the most godly confirmation; deep judgment in abhorring the ring
as a civil pledge at Marriage. This may the people say of their Teachers, and
this must their excuse be, in the last day, when they shall be charged to have
wakened the spouse of Christ, and troubled her rest before she would. Oues aute^
istae quid meruerunt? as for these poor sheep, that have bin thus beguiled,
what alas have they deserved?

Howbeit, here I cannot excuse the people altogether, of this our Land, so as
fain I would, but that a great part of the fault still rests on the^; who,
though at first they were angled with the enticing words of their new Prophets,
yet afterward so played upon the hook, as in the end they could not be beaten
fro it and the prophets now, if they would please them, might cast no other
bait before the but that. So as a man may say, that if at first they were
credited because they spoke it, now they were to speak it, because they would
be credited: a very ball of faction being thus tossed in a manner, to and fro,
what between the politic drifts of the Teacher, at his first entrance; and
the licorousnesse of the Auditors, now, not only easy to be taken, but
jealous, if the taker applied any means, but those wherewith they were first
taken. And yet even this again is no more, than the Church of the Israelites
saw in old times, and had experience of; that we might be like them both
ways, as well in our people, as in our Priests. For, even there Venite
praedicate, was the common saying of the people to their Prophets, Come and
preach to us such and such things, not as you should, but as we would have
you, and like best to hear of. O my dear brethren, it was never well, since
either the people durst presume to give aim to their Ministers, though never
so secretly; or the Minister stoopt at the Pulpit door, to take measure of the
peoples feet.

But to return to the Teachers, because they without controversy are the
principal in this condemnation, and our Text leads me by the hand to tax
them most directly; it will be said (perhaps) that such and such false
Teachers there were, in old time, under Achab and the rest, but none now
a-daies in the time of the new Testament. That indeed were to imagine a pretty
popish Commonwealth, where truth had clipther wings, as they say, and could no
more fly away; the spirit being as fast bound to the Desk, as ever they
imagined it was to the Chair. But, besides S. Paul's here If any teach
otherwise, if any, which extends to all times; besides that, I say, S. John
tells us, that even now many spirits are gone abroad into the world, that
would be tried before they be trusted, examined before they be believed. S.
Peter tells us, Erant Pseudo-prophetae, and erunt. 2. Pet. 2.1. (I name the
place, because it is most obseruable) that is, there shall be false preachers,
even as there were false prophets, and that in populo, among the people: what
think you of that? Will you have any more notes of them? that shall privily
bring in damnable Sects, and many shall follow their destructions, and shall
make the way of truth to be evil spoken of. And through covetousness, they
shall make merchandise of you with fained words, walkers after the flesh,
despisers of government, bold, standing in their own conceit, speaking evil
of them that are ^n dignity; or if they admire them, it is but for advantage
sake, contradicting the things, that in very truth they know not, beguiling
the unstable, forsakers of the right way, and turners aside to a balke of their
own, after Balam the son of Bosor, that loved the wages of unrighteousness,
who^, because he should not boast too much in his gift of tongue, his own Ass
spoke under him, and a dumb beast rebuked the madness of a speaking Prophet.
Haec Petri sunt fere, these are all out of S. Peter for the most part,
foretelling the disastrous event of our times.

And I might add yet more, collected out of the same place, which place is so
worthy for discovery of the ages that were then to come, and are now
undoubtedly come upon us, that S. Jude has thought good to repeat almost the
same, in the self same words, after S. Peter, adding moreover a most famous
and memorable mark, one or two, of his own, that S. Peter had omitted, to
demonstrate the men, and to decide the question, if it may be, at once,
between us and them; Murmurers, Complainers, and yet Mockers too, when they
think good, and last of all separators. Quod si haec picta videretis, non
dicta audiretis, now if some painter had but drawn these things with a coal,
not an Apostle described them in colors, as he has, could you doubt by which
side they were to be understood?

It was our wish a long time, as you may remember, vtinam omnis populus, O that
all the people did prophecy, not only Eldad and Medad, but all the people.
Such desire there was of that holy increase. But since we have learned, by a
costly experience, what hurt a Neophytus does by speaking in an assembly,
because we would not believe S. Paul's aduertisements: every stripling, nay
every boy, being flabellum concionis, and flagellum optimatism, an instrument
to set the mutinous a gog; and making this his first admittance to popular
commendation, if he could declaim most lewdly, and yet most loudly, against
them that scorned, and had good cause to scorn, to set his fathers, or his
fathers fathers, with the curres of their flock, as Job says. The truth is,
now we might spare some of that seed, which has abounded so much to our woeful
decay, and Iuie-like eaten up the Tree that supported it. Take back, take
back, may we say with Moses, not your stipends, but your Laborers, unless
they could labor any better amongst us. Let go Churchmen, and give up your
Church-liuings, that you have withheld an injustice from us. For, not only the
people perish there, where prophecy fails, which is a sentence that these
me^ have never out of their mouths; but pastores multi, and indeed stulti, many
shepherds, many, indeed too many to be good, Ier. 12.10
diripuerunt vineam meam (it is Gods own complaint by Jeremie) are the cause
that our vine lies so waste and so defaced, as it does at this day.

Wherefore, in the name of God, if any teach hereafter, let them teach; but not
otherwise: otherwise they were as good not teach at all. Let the old saying of
the Chaldees be verified among us Christians, Mel. Canus in locis.
Homo quidam ex Iudaeis renit, Sacerdos, neutiquam decipiet nos: there is a
certain stranger come to Town, a priest I trow, he will not deceive us at any
hand. Such opinion they had of the preachers sincerity. Let the pulpits be no
Pasquils; nor the Mosaicall trumpet, a trunk to shoot pellets at government
and good order: Let no slanderous Characters be drawn in the oil of the
Tabernacle, which no water can cleanse or wash away; and let a man take heed
how he come there to clawe sides, where no good man enters without quaking. For
my own part, I say, with Jacob, Haecest Bethel, this is Gods house: and let
the stone out of the wall witness against me, if I decline to partiality, or
embrace untruth.

But to return to our Text, If a man teach, Si quis docet, splendidum est: but
if he teach otherwise, Si quis diuersum docet, lubricum est: teaching is
honorable, but otherwise is tempting; teaching profits, but this otherwise
marreth and overthrows all. Yet, Auia Pteridum lustro loca, nullius ante
Trita solo; I would this were a Poets affectation only, and not a Prophets:
but self-love, they say, looks over Pulpits, as well as over meaner places,
and private glory is made the purchase of public decay. Abner calls it play,
to have the young men skirmish and flourish before him, though it be with edge
tools: Samsons Foxes make a sport to toss fire-brandes, though it be to
burn corn fields: the skittish Kine care not what become of the Arc, which
they carry, so they may be frisking: and the very confusion of tongues and
languages, is sweet meat to some, though Babel miss of her aspiring purpose.
Well, I say no more but so; In teaching is not so much good, but this otherwise
brings as much evil with it: like the good Figgs and the bad Figs, Jer. 24.2.
none better than the good, none worser than the bad: so the Teachers of old
times, when religion was first restored in this our Land, to those that put an
otherwise to their teaching in our days, and fill all full of singularities.

But to break off this point, and pass on to the next: The sum of all is,
my dear brethren, that you make a difference hereafter between Teachers and
false Teachers, not honoring all promiscuously that bear the name, nor
yielding your ears like a Lute, to be played upon by every finger; but
distinguishing wisely between the Teacher otherwise (as the Text here has
it, Jf any teach otherwise) and the Teacher according to the wholesome words,
or according to that which is according thereto. For, as many as walk after
this rule (I pray you mark the rule, for it is worth your marking) Gal. 6.16.
That Circumcision is nothing, nor uncircumcision is nothing, that is, Ceremony
nor no Ceremony; but the substantial a new Creature, I say, as many as walk
after this rule, Peace be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Jsrael of God.
But if any teach otherwise, opposing indifferency, and oppugning authority,
Let no man trouble me benceforth, says our Church: for, I bear in my body
the marks of the Lord Jesus; and am known to be his by the evident prints of
his adversaries in my flesh, whom lately they would have blown up with
hell-powder at once. And is it a small thing for them, thus to fight against me
from my youth up, to vex me thus continually: but you, even you, must set to
your hands, and make heavy my yoke, the children of the household, and my
own mothers sons?

I Come to the third point, with all the speed I can, though I am feign to
pass by some things of moment, vnspoken-to here; chiefly of the Conjunction
of the two first parts between themselves, Consent not, and, teach otherwise.
For, the door to false teaching, is, the not consenting, or not subscribing at
the first. Therefore, S. Paul puts one with another, Jf he consent, and, Jf
he teach otherwise. And yet again he puts one before another, as namely,
false teaching before refusing to consent, because some first teach otherwise,
and then have no reason to deny Subscription, but only because they have
otherwise taught. They are loath that a woman should be said to brain
Abimelech with a millstone from the wall, loath that lawful authority should
correct and curb their stubborn fancy.

THe third point is, The Rule of Trial, the Square of truth, for judging of
matters that depend in controversy. A most lively one, and a most absolute
one, that the Apostle here gives, if I misdeeme not; consisting of 2. parts;
one, the wholesome words of Christ or of godliness, the other, The Doctrine
that is according thereto.

And first, to speak of the wholesome words; I cannot here discourse in the
praise of Theology, as gladly I would have done at another time, how that it
is the only wholesome science, when all is done; others are but for gloss and
for ornament, hanging gold and jewels upon our apparel, as Saul did upon the
Israelites garments. Abillis enim salubritas quaedam, or not so much as that;
but ingenua animi delectatiotantum: ab hac sanitas and vita ipsa petitur: they
put blood into our face, like the Aliptae, amend our color and our complexion
a little; but this like the Physician cherishes our spark, maintains our
life, whom therefore necessity her self compels us to honor.

And surely, without these wholesome words, all that grows abroad in the green
fields of Philosophy, it is but toxicum, but even mere poison, and mors in
olla, mors in olla, death is in the pott, we may say, where that but enters.
Elisaeus his salt only sweetens the broth, which a strange root has made
distastable, while the young scholars, and children of the Prophets do not
discern what they gather: and Moses his wood, that is the Gospel of Christ
Jesus, lignum vitae, and lignum crucis, relishes the Marah of Gentile learning,
whose waters are bitter, and end in desperation, without such mixture. Therefore
S. Hierome was buffited by an Angel, for studying heathen Authors too much;
but, an Angel made S. John not give over the book of wholesome words, that
he brought him, till he had eaten and swallowed it down.

But, as J said, I may not stand hereupon; no, nor yet upon the 1. part of this
rule, The words of Christ, and that same hunc audite, hear you him; which was
spoken when all the rest were vanished and disappeared out of the Mount, both
Moses, and Peter, and Elias; that we might know his singular prerogative over
the Church, wherein neither Moses, nor Elias, nor Peter nor any communicate
with him. Howbeit, still we must remember, that there is another audite left
for somebody else too, another hear you him, though in their rank and in their
place, as, qui vos audit, etc. he that hears you hears me, spoken of the
Prelates and Pastors of the Church, that shall succeed continually to the end of
the World; and si non audit ecclesiam, if he hear not the Church in in her
determinations, let him be counted among the heathen, and the Infidels, let him
lose the very right that he has of his Christendom. For so says the second
part of this rule here in my Text, And the doctrine according to godliness.

For persuading whereof the better, and that we seem not to open a floodgate to
popery, to rush in upon us all amain, it may please you to distinguish two
kinds of Verities, which holy scripture has distinguished long before us, in
the Ep to the Col. 2.5. Some of Faith, some of Order. Now the verities of faith
are so plentifully set down in the Old and New Testaments, as he adds to
his own plagues, that shall presume to add one jot thereto. For the will of an or
dinary man, that dead is; no man dares to enterline (says the Apostle) how
much less then his, that witnessed a good confession under Po^tius Pilate and
sealed his Covenant with his own blood? Yet some do, it cannot be denied. In
this net sticks the Boar of Rome at this day, and is gored with more Anathemaes
for his presumption, than Absolon was with darts hanging between heaven and
earth in the tree: though the beagels of the sect, mistaking their sent, leave
him to pursue us with open volly and cry. The books of the two Testaments they
are all in all, for evidence of our faith and demonstration impregnable; the
two pillars to conduct us out of Egypt into Canaan, one of smoke, dark like the
Old Testament, another of fire, bright like the New; the two great lights, that
God reared in the firmament and advanced, and yet the sun to rule the day, the
moon the night, so much clearer is our planet than was the Fathers; the two
Cherubins that face the Mercy seat with mutual counterview, now the Mercy
seat is Christ, whom the two Testaments equally argue and demonstrate; the two
spies loaded with a cluster of grapes most delicious to ghostly taste; the two
Olive branches that stand before the Lord of the whole earth; the two milstones
that never Tyrant yet took to pawn from the poor church; the two dugges of
the Spouse, the 2. sticks of the widow, the 2. wings of the Eagle, the two
mites of Gods treasurehouse, exceeding all that was cast in before or besides,
the bagg that has both old and new in it, able to make a Scribe learned
toward the heavenly Kingdom. O bevvare how you disparage the sufficiency of
scripture for matters of faith. O bevvare how you detracte from the fullness
thereof, cuius plenitudinem adoro (says Tertullian) whose absolute perfection
I admire at my very heart, and worship with my face bovved down to the
ground.

But, there are other matters of Order beside those, which though they be far
less in valuation than the former, yet their littleness is not to be drowned
in the others greatness. Et haec facere oportuit, and illa non negligere (says
our Savior) these things you ought to do, and yet not despise those. Faith,
Faith (I say) as great as she is, cannot maintain her self, without the rules
of good Order, in any state or ctedit, no more than the king can consist
without the field that is tilled, as Solomon says, And these things are not
expressed in scriplure; they are not. For neither need they, neither could
they; they need not, because so obuious; and they could not, because so
numbrous: but, Reliqua cum venero ordinabo, says the Apostle, Other things J
will set in order when J come, these things must be ordered, as they may be, by
occasion. David did not all things during his life, as he meant should be done
in process of time; but he gave order to Solomon to see to the execution of
them by leisure, because he was a wise man; as himself says, thou art wise and
know what is fit to be done: therefore, after my departure, see that thou
do thus and thus, etc. So, the Christian Magistrate and Regent of the Church,
whom God has endued with the spirit of wisdom, and with whom he is
assistant, to the consummation of the world, supplies in this case, that which
was no imperfection for the scripture to leave out, but rather an
impossibility for the scripture to comprehend. I dare be bold to say it, the
scripture which is Christ's letter of of love, penned to his Church, as S.
Austine sweetly calls it, must have exceeded not only mensuram Epistolae, the
measure of so small a composition, which should never fill more than the left
hand of the Reader, if we believe Seneca; but even swollen in quantity above
the Popes Decretals, which LVTHER of zeal burnt in the market place, (they
were so irksome and so tedious) if all things of this nature had been to be
registered and engrossed in them. Fonts, plates, pewes, belles, deskes, can you
want them? can you spare them? yea Churches and Chapels too, by your leave,
which the Apostles had none, nor diverse successio^s after the Apostles; and
therefore the Brownists like good honest fellows pull them down, as fast as
they can, by virtue of this principle, and never dissemble for the matter.

If al things were written that our Savior did, says S. John, I suppose the
world would not contain the books: but I may say, if all things were written,
that are lawfully incident to the particular worship and service of God, a
world of worlds would not contain the books, that should contain them. Yet
are not our Ceremonies therefore so many, that they should oppress us with their
multitude and load, as they unjustly cauil at us; they are in number as few as
possibly can be in a Church, in substance as grave, in choice as discreet, in
sight as comely, in observation as easy, in significance as natural and
correspondent: but though we have confined our selves to paucitie for good
respects, yet the thing it self in nature is wonderful broad.

Now let the scoffers of this our doctrine appear in their likeness, and show
their faces, if they dare for shame. They traduce our champions, and blaze them
to the world for blasphemers: one because he says Christ is not the sole
Lawe-giuer of his Church, In their Challenge to Disputat.
another about the rawenesse of the primitive times compared with ours; though
it cannot be denied but in many respects the church has bin bettered as well
as empaired by continuance. Separate awhile your selves from prejudice, and let
not the captiousness of terms trouble you, consider if you can the naked
truth. Why should this seem strange in your ears, that Christ is not the only
Lawgiuer of his Church, in the sense that we deny it, or how can it ever be
avowed for true in the sense that they obtrude it? Are there no laws, think
you, to be observed among christian men and women, touching matters of church
and of Religion, but such as Christ has established and promulged with his own
mouth? Certainly, I will produce no hidden arguments, certainly I will not
search the depths, as they say, nor scowr the bottoms for this matter; I will
allege no more than you all know, and are all able to judge of, and yet I will
conclude the thing in question; that you may see the difference between the
wholesome words of Christ the Lord, as our Text here has it, and the doctrine
which is according to godliness.

If any of you should command your servant, or your son, to carry a Bible with
them to Church upon the Sondaies, under pain of your heavy displeasure if
they did not, do you think it were a law that might be broken, or no? A law
doubtless it were, as being taxed with punishment upon the offender. Your
selves would think it fit to be kept, not fit to be broken. And yet it is in
matter of Gods service and Religion. For, let no man deceive himself my dear
brethren, not willingly misconster us; there was none of us ever placed so much
Religion in a garment, as you do in a Book. And yet CHRIST never badde it,
and it is left free; for all sin not, you must think, that come to Church
without their Bibles, though they can read.

Wind your selves now out of this net, as well as you can, which is no net,
but a sound and substantial confutation, specially you that delight in ambush,
as the twelve reasons, and intorteled Syllogismes. Or, if you say that Christ
commanded us to search the Scriptures; well, though that does not enforce, that
we should carry them to the Church, to every Lecture, or sermon, with us;
yet, let the former supposition hold, but in Lidleyes prayer Book, or
Bradfords Meditations, or some such like, and then see what you can say to it;
whether you will allow your servant or your son to cross your commandment
in such a respect or not. Neither again may you except that the bringing of
the Bible helps to edify, the ceremonies not: for the ceremonies edify too
in their place and order (I will not now compare them with a lay man's Bible)
and the question is not so much touching edification (if you mark it) as
whether they may be urged upon the consciences of believers by law, though
they be never so apt in themselves to edify.

How then is it my dear Brethren and sisters of this City? may your
prentises be constrained, your children compelled, by your private law-giuing
authority, thus and thus to demean themselves in Gods service and worship,
without any disparagement to the supreme Lawgiver, and may not they whose
jurisdiction is so far greater than yours, attempt the same over them that
they govern? May the Householder do this in his house, and not the king in his
kingdoms? May the father and the mother, and not Gods Lieftenaunt and Deputy
general? Naie, may the Paedant in his flock and not the Prince?

For to say the father commands but a few, and the master a few, the King all
the Ministers and Preachers of the Land, is an opposition more fit for you to
make than for me to remove, or rather so unfit for me to remove, that indeed it
is not fit for you to make: the kings authority justly stretching farther,
why? because the limits of his Realms are wider; and if he allow you to be
kings in your households, you must allow him to be a householder in his kingdom,
at the least.

Again, to say that the one are Ministers and Preachers, the other but children
and servants, is as vain. For, if christian liberty must not be infringed in
binding ministers and preachers, no more may it be infringed in binding
children, and servants; and if Ecclesiastical Canons wrong the privilege that
came by Christ's blood, so do domestical: we know no such prerogative of one
above another in these kind of causes, every man's conscience is as free and as
vntouchable as another before God, Coloss. 3.11
one price was paid for all.

I omit many things, that might be alleged, to make this fort not only
strong but invincible. The Church we say, may make laws, and not Christ
only. She that may repeal them, she may make them: Act. 15
The Church repealed the law of abstinence from strangled and blood, when she
saw fit time, and cancelled that which the Apostles by the instinct of the
h^ghost had enacted, but enacted without any limitation of time. The same I
might say of the kiss of Charity used in Church, and commanded in Scripture,
2. Cor. 13.12
Greet ye one another with an holy kiss; now laid aside with as much
maturitie as at first it was brought in with advise. The same of widows to be
fedd by the Church, an Apostolic sanction, and yet now not so much as called
for once, by them that profess the restoration of the golden age to the
quick, so as we shall not have a pinn nor a pegge missing, as they say, in the
great work of their second Tabernacle.

I might proceed to more. Calv. Instit. l. 2. c. 8. sect. 32. et 34. Chemn. in
loc. Com. p. 2. de 3. praec. Vrsin. in catech. in 4. pra^. Bellarm. de ^magin.
Sanct. l. 2 c 7. vbi. August. Irena^et Thomam citat in eandem sent. Catechis.
Romans et Chapeaville in eum locum Cat.
The Sabbath that we celebrate every seventh day, is it not of the Church
and her constitution mere? The discourse were impertinent but the * consent of
writers may go for proof in the mean time, and the places are very pregnant,
Romans 14.5. Colossi. 2.14. Matthew. 6.5. with the like, besides a troop of
reasons that persuade that way.

Judas Maccabaeus instituted a Feast, by virtue of his place, and of his
authority among the Jews, and increased the number of Feasts that God had
appointed to his people. Yet our Savior sanctified it by his blessed presence;
thought it no disparagement to his sole law-giuing. John. 10.22.

The Music of the Temple, that David brought in, we read it approved, we
never read it commanded. What some think they may gather out of obscure
consequences, I regard not a rush: If ever it come to trial I can say as
much, why David should do it of his own head, as by any special
commandment, for ought that appears by Scripture: Yet, the high Lawe-giuer
was not displeased with it. And, if happily these men had been by the same
David, when he danced naked before the Arc, they would have greatly blamed
him, for bringing a new service into the Church, for so much as dancing was no
where prescribed; and chid him for affecting nakedness in Gods worship: which,
they might do with better color than they can chide us for our apparel. So
is our case one with the Fathers: so are the actions of the greatest
Patriarchs subject to the same reprehension of the scornful, that our
practices are here at home; and the Land is not yet rid of her Micholls.

Ionadab the son of Rechab interdicted his sons the use of wine, for all
their life time; and God commended his severe Law-giuing. Yet, Jonadabs
authority came short of the royal, and we have no such strictness enioined us,
as is the abstinence of wine for a man's whole life time. The brazen Serpent was
Gods own ordinance; Ezechias as King brake it in pieces, when he savv cause.
No direction from God, no intercourse of the Prophets moving him thereto: yet,
his fact is famous throughout all posterities. Lo, the weapon that they thrust
at us so often in vain, mortally retorted upon their own breasts. Lastly, the K.
of Nineueh clothed cattle in sackcloth, a thing more monstrous and uncouth to
behold, than any surplice upon a man's back; Yea further, made children and
beasts refrain from meat, a fasting for which he had no foundation in
scripture. Was it therefore ever a-whit the less accepted? J trow not: God was
appeased with it, God turned away his wrath upon it: we put no such confidence
in our constitutions, albeit the ceremonies have their use.

The ancient Fathers, S. Austin in his 5. book de Baptismo. 9. chap. and
Tertullian in his book of the same argument, agree in this that God gave no
direction to S. John Baptist of baptizing in particular, but only in general
appointed him to baptize; the rites and the fashions he was to add himself at
his own pleasure. And therefore it is called, say they, the Baptism of John,
as being his own for the most part. Yet here was no injury to Christ the sole
Lawgiver, or else he should have been sure to have heard of it. To conclude in
a word, we never read in all the Scripture, that Christ is the only Lawgiver
of his church: and yet if we should, we have that small understanding with us,
as to co^ster it no otherwise tha^ the only Teacher, and yet other Teachers;
the only Magistrate, and yet other Magistrates; (for we must desire the^ now
that we may have no Anabaptism to trouble us in our arg. whatsoer they think,
or whatsoer they would do at another time:) so the only Clauiger of the house of
David, and yet the Church has her keys too of no small consequence; the only
foster-father of his flock, and yet many nursing fathers and many nursing
mothers (God inrease the number) of his poor Church; whose milk is discipline,
whose diet is ce^sure, whose norishment is nurture and good laws. No doubt the
soueraign drownes not the subordinate, in all these and the like insta^ces. But
simple folks may be blear'd with terms, and the one eied man ruffles it they
say among the stark blind. Forgery ceases in the wise man's presence. So much
therefore concerning that. Another thing they carpe at in the doctrine of our
men: which because it belo^gs to the place that I now handle, I will speak a
word or twain unto, and so an end. It is for saying the Church cannot er in
defining about ceremonies, or any such matter of order arbitrary, and
indifferent, define she how she will. Truly to enquire what the Church may do,
in utmost extent, without possibility of sliding into error, is a thing more
meet for schools than pulpits, and to exercise great judgments than to tickle
curious ears. Yet thus much as a schoolman I will be bold to undertake to
determine by the way, that for so much as things indifferent are exceeding diverse
in their own nature, and many lawful that are not expedient, according to the
Apostls saying; yet supposing the assistance of the spirit of God in ruling his
Church, which is rather Christian to believe than to deride or to deny, the
church cannot er, define she howsoever in such cases: and again, not supposing
so, yet she cannot er dangerously, howsoever she determine touching such
matters. I say determine; for in preferring the ceremonies before the
substantialls by way of observation she may err, as the Church of the Jews
did, who^ God often reprehends eo nomine; and again I say the Church, for if
the Papists have erred even in devising some of their ceremonies, yet that is
since their synagogue lost indeed the honor of that title. So much also
briefly may serve for that.

The last thing that I will note out of our adversaries exceptions compared
with the doctrine of this present place, is that which the author of the
challenge to disputation has set down in a certain place, much (as I
remember) to this purpose;

That, if we in our opinions, which we maintain about Ceremonies, used in the
Church of England, as they are at this day, be right, then our departure from
the papists cannot be justified, and the Pope with his adherents, nay Christ
the Son of God, and his heavenly truth in them, has had great injury to be
so long now relinquished upon no other grounds.

Yea they farther profess, that themselves will become papists, and Jesuits (and
what not?) if we can but quit our selves in the controversy. O speech worthy
the authors of it! O speech most unworthy the ears of any christian ma^lo
speech than which the devil of hell could never have roared out a more
viperous, nor a more detestable one, above ground. Let it be noted, I would
wish you, and noted again, with a pen of Diamond, in tables of brass, to show
the disposition of the sect for ever, that, when they would revoke it, they may
not be able. For, what think you my dear brethren and Countrymen of this
place? Is it matter of Order that we have left Rome for, or matter of Faith? Is
it matter of ceremony, or matter of substance? Is it a straw, or a block, nay a
great beam? Is it a gap and a bush, or a countermure of stone, and trench
impassable, that diuides us from them? so great, as we cannot imagine that was
ever greater, which sometime divided Abraham from the rich man in hell.

And yet behold; worshipping of Images, adoring of relics, inuoking of
Angels, building Churches to Saints, sacrificing for the sins of quick and
dead with a Wafer-cake, treading down Kings, the Deputies of God, from their
throne of Majesty, to set up a foxie Intruder in their room, whom all ages
have acknowledged their vassal; taking away Bibles, mangling of Sacraments,
licensing Stews, condemning marriage, vvrapping up your service, and the
obsequies of your conscience in the strange liuorie of an unknown tongue,
selling pardons for six pence, soule-ease for money, heaven at pleasure,
opposing the flax of our transitory deeds to the impartial fire of the
heavenly righteousness, mingling the blood of Martyrs, that I say not of
Traitors, with the blood of the Lamb of God, spotless and immaculate, which
only takes away the sins of the world, which only quenches the rage of
the wrath to come, which only abateth the edge of his fathers justice, and the
sword Cherubicall that glitters before Paradise, these things are now no cause
to leave Rome for, by our men's doctrine; or at least no more cause, then
surplice or no surplice, gesture or no gesture, ceremony or no ceremony,
presbytery or Bishopdome amount to here at home between our selves. But as I
said before, so I say once again: Let it be noted, J would wish you, and
noted most heedefully, to show the disposition of the sect for ever, that when
they would revoke it upon better deliberation, they may not be able. So much
also concerning that. For J doubt not, I, but your knowledge is satisfied, and
their phrenzie discovered sufficiently heerewith.

J should proceed from hence, to some of their objections, as weak as water,
and as vain as vanity it self upon the weights: As, Mardocheus his refusing
to rise to Haman, though the King commanded it, will-worships, man's
ordinances, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin; therefore we must have
express Scripture for all that we do, shows of evil would be abandoned,
Relics of Idolatry laid aside, no conformity with unbelievers, and the
like. For, who ever rose up in contradiction against the Church, but had a
scriptum est of his side, and somewhat to say for himself? Yet with such
stuff as these (a thing lamentable to be spoken) they usually suck the blood
of your souls, and pervert many from the right way. But I must make haste to
that which is behind: and to say truth, whom the former positive confirmations
will not satisfy, he will be little the better for dissoluing these and the
like their cobweb-obiections. I have done it often, most often, in other
places; I pray you once give me leave to pass them over here.

So much of the third point, The rule of trial, or, the square of truth: which
consists not only in the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ; but in the
Doctrines, that are commenced and framed according thereto. Contra Psychicos.
For, as Tertullian says most sweetly, Non tantum seruire debeo Domino meo,
sed adulari; we must not do all that we do of Iniunction, but we may honor
God with our freest invention. And S. Paul's limitation is very large, and no
way thralled to the narrowness of those precincts that they imagine,
Philippians, 4.8. Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things pertain to love, and are well
reported of, those do, and the GOD of peace shall be with you. Do you but
mark the promise that the God of peace shall be with us? whom these men
would so feign keep out of our Land, and banish, as they say, by head and
shoulders. O the sweet mask of Peace to appear in! O the gracious form of
peace to mask in! Let him always appear to me in that form: let him always
present himself to me in that shape. Not in fire nor in tempest: for, in them
the Lord was not, says the Scripture: but in the soft and still vvinde. The
God of peace shall be with you. This was the promise: but now mark the precept
also, I pray you: Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things pertain to love, and are well
reported of, those do. Jf there be any virtue, if there be any praise. O
notable accommodation of the Apostles pen to our times! For, what more honest,
than that which can be charged with no crime, but only jealousy and suspicion
refuses! So are our Ceremonies. What more just, than that which lawful
authority has established, and those lips that harbor an oracle, ratified
and approved? Yet so are our ceremonies. What more pure, than that which is
refined in the furnace, and purged from the dregs of all ancient superstition?
yet so are our ceremonies. What more pertainining to love, than the pledges of
combination between the Ministers of one Kingdom, likely also to draw the
adversaries to an union? yet this is the very nature and scope of our
ceremonies. As for praise, and virtue, and good report, and such like, the
best, and the best-iudgmented will easily allow it them: the worst I know
deprave them, whose judgment makes them never the worse for all that. And where
the former titles go before, as honesty, purity, and the like; these latter
must needs follow of their own accord, they may not be parted. Wherefore, if
your delight be in the God of peace, strive not against such things: as for
those that put them from them so violently, they show plainly that peace is
not their seeking. But, so much shall serve, as I said, for the third point
general of the Text.

THe fourth point remains, which is, the indifferency of the parties,
offending against that which we have formerly delivered, of consenting to the
words that are according to godliness, and, not teaching otherwise. If any
man; be he who he will be, learned or lewd, Clarke or Layman, spiritual or
temporal, holy or profane, one or many, For there is no rising up against
Justice for respects, and Salomons sword strikes impartial where it hits;
Ulysses must not swerve for Telemachus in the furrow, and a Judge must have
ears to scanne the causes, but no eyes to discern the persons. If any.

Yet the multitude cries out; The good men, the purer sort, the preciser sort,
of great parts, of great pains, they are silenced, they are deprived. Parumne
Sanctus Paulus, was S. Paul, think you, an Apostle, or no? Did he speak by
the instinct of the holy Ghost, or no? that has so damped the clamours of the
iniudiciall multitude, and checked their fond exceptions long aforehand, with
his If any, if any man; be he who he will be, look not to his person, trust
not to thine eye, make no difference, remember the Church, and the peace of the
Church, the coat of Christ, nay the body of Christ, Pereat vnus potius quam
vnitas, and, Nulla charitas ad eam charitatem qua obstringimur Ecclesiae: Let
Saul take heed how he spare Agag for pretexts, and slay the meagrer and the
wretcheder of the Kine and Cattle, passing by the fairer for his own lusts
sake.

But because they do so aggrauate the matter against us, in regard of their
worth; we will way the respects that they most trust to, in due balance, and
see what in extreamitie they may challenge at our hands. I am loath, I
confess, to enter into this kind of comparatiue conflict. For, I have learned
of Aristotle not to be (...): Ethic. 4.
but the importance of the cause, and Saint Paul's If any, ouer-rules my
disposition for this once.

Three things they most beard us with, their life, their learning, their
labors. For they are honest men, as they say, painful men, and profound men.
And if we go to levy them now by the Tribes and the families, and at last by
the head and the poll, to see if they be all aunswerable to this report that
goes of them, or no; we are told aforehand very mannerly forsooth, not all
without exception for life, but some; not all so deeply learned, but some; not
all so painful nor industrious in their vocation, but some. And so we have
here in effect bestiam pharmacopolae, that Julian the Pelagian vpbraided S.
Austine with, the beast that the Apothecarie promised his patient of wonderful
virtue, which, before morning was com, had eaten up her self. For, if only
some be thus approved for life amongst themselves, what then shall we say of the
other more obnoxious? and yet behold, they all cry out to have the vices, and
the scandalls of the Clergy reformed. And if only some be thus esteemed for
learning among themselves, what then shall we say of the other sort of
insufficient? and yet they all require a learned Ministry. And if only some
be so famous for pains taking amongst themselves, what then shall we say of
the other idle Drones? and yet all cry out against lazy laborers, and would
have Hiue, and Bees, and honey, and all, given over to them to suck.

Do you not see, beloved, by these things most clearly, the beginning, the
proceedings, and the end of the whole faction? Set on foot no doubt, by some,
that thought well of themselves, and perhaps had cause so to do, if they could
have done it, within any good measure, or compass; afterward helped forward by
others, that had no such desert of their own to raise them; yet thought they
would be followers of the Camp, lending their hands, and their names with the
foremost, partly for company, and partly for hope of spoil and booty? at last
the poor people carried away with hobubs and imaginations, hearing them not
only to vaunt of their virtues, but to crake of their forces, and that by the
hundreds now and the thousands? Whereas, of all these things there is no one
true, as I have showed, or that they dare stand to, in strict terms; and yet
if all were as true as they make show for, yet number preuailes not against
the right, as S. Paul here has it, If any man, whosoever he be, or how many
soever they be; and excellent gifts bind to excellent modesty, give no leave
to men to be mutinous.

You see beloved, by these delays, how loath I am to come to the stricter
scanning of their three-folde Comparatiue, their life, their learning, their
labors, that they bear down ours so mightily withal, as they think. Yet
somewhat must be said, I cannot dwell long upon it, because I come to it against
my will.

First, for their life, that they magnify so much. Howbeit, I would counsel
them to spare this plea, or let some other speak it for them. Alienus laudet
te non os tuum, it would sound better in their neighbors mouths. Surely,
virtue never dwelt at this sign; surely she is no Dinah that romes abroad to
see, and to be seen of the daughters of the Country; but rather an Elizabeth
that hides her self six months together breeding child, and that so famous
a child as S. John Baptist was; neither ever did religion write upon her
posts, My house is the house of prayer. It is no speech of a contrite heart,
Stand farther from me, J am purer than thou; but, depart from me Lord, for J am
a sinner.

Besides, this is most certain, no vice ever showed her face without a vizard
yet, in public, if she could hide it; hypocrisy must lead in heresy by the
hand, and usher it, and make way for it, like the Damsel that led S. Peter
into the high Priests Hall, every body so abhorres it, if it appear as it is.
But, Speculum consulitur, says S. Cyprian, cur? nisi quia timet ne sit ipsa,
she consults with her looking-glass, till that at least say she is fair.
Boys with nuts, like the Jndians with rattles, or such pretty toys; and men
many times are carried away with shows, with gloses, and professions. As if
Judas kissed not where he meant to kill, or old shoes transformed a Gibeonite,
or Jezabels paint were any better then the plaster of a leaprous countenance,
that lurketh underneath. Therefore we read of Woolues that shall come in
Sheep cleathinges, therefore we read of Satan, dressed like an Angel of
light. False Prephets have worn rough garments next their flesh, as well as
the good, and Pelagius, was as strict a man for life, as he was reprobate
concerning the faith. Did not devout women resist S. Paul? so J say, de^^^^
women, Acts 13.15. and we hear th^^ these have the like on their side: no
marvel. Neither are the Monks of later times yet out of our minds, with all
their painted holiness and goodly shows, whose souls, if it were not an
error of Pythagorisme, I would not stick to say had come to take up their
mansions once more in these men's bodies. Pardon us, pardon us, if we yield not
to a second gull, specially served upon us so freshlie in the same kind, and
give us leave to distinguish between Samuel, and the Devil, whom the Witch of
Endor has suborned in his mantle; so far forth like him, if you will, but
that he is known by his ascending out of the earth.

I am loath, I protest, to discover Noah, wallowing in his shame, and drunken
fits, though their boisterous enormities cannot make them to judge mildly of
others infirmities. But what think you? shall we call that mortification,
which we are sure to find, not in the Monastery embracing the dust, nor yet
with the Doctors disputing in the Temple; but sitting upper most at belly
cheer, and at Feasts? shall we call that austeritie, which fawnes, and
crouches, and tells news for a meal? courage and fortitude, that reiects
tithes and properties, to graze upon a benevolence? contentment with a little,
which has a hook in the end of it like a Harpago, and picks as many purses by
day, as a thief takes prays in the night season? humility, that shaking of
the Bishops Jurisdiction, would now be the only Pope in the Parish? I pass
by many things: patience, which passes over the miseries of prison, with such
manner of delicacies and store, that Quails are no meat with them? chastity,
which placing all perfection in wedlock, is found many times not to stay
there? Charity, modesty, purity, they are but names, as Brutus complained
when he was a-dying, that virtue her self was no better; and sacrifice has
turned mercy quite out of doors. Why does Coniah break down my Cedar work
(says almighty God in Jeremie) and then paint it over with vermillion? so why
do the fair shows of worship, and the first table, gild over the monstrous
breaches of the second? But I stand upon thorns, while I stand upon
comparisons. Nos nec pugnas narramus nec cicatrices nostras, though Thraso may;
it is enough for us, if we may be found one day amongst them, Jn quorum ore
no^ est inuentus dolus, in whose mouth there was found no guile, that is as
Saint Austine sweetly expounds it, which confessed meekelie that they were
sinners, and built their glory upon humility: So much of their life.

Follows their Learning: which if Quintilian might have had his wish, Soli vt
artifices de artibus iudicarent, that the people should not presume to judge of
faculties, they would not once have dared so much as to mention: They being
so far off from attaining to the first three, as I may call it, or to any
superlatiue perfection in that kind, that they have devised many ways how to
rid the World of such a combersome employment, as cunning is; and put all
their commendations in this, If they could put all Learning quite out of
countenance.

Who of us knows not, what they have done in Schools for payring and nimming
of the Arts, till they have made them more bare than the King of Ammon sent
David's messengers away, and grubd not only their beards but their chinnes?
And who of you know not, how they have declamed against them in pulpits, as if
the Captive Woman were to be slain and not to be shome, as if AGAR stood
ABRAHAM in no use for procreation, and all Philosophy were now but cosenage?
Let us believe that they can have reached to the top, that scorned to climb
by the middle stairs: let us believe that they are such mighty men in
Divinity, that profess not only strangeness, but war to philosophy.
Though, who sees not what a divinity they have coined us? more ignorant, or more
petulant I can hardly say whether. Once; they will teach their Nurse to suck,
with shame enough, and correct Magnificat before they know quid significat, a
Proverb so fit, as if it had been made by them: while they impute those errors
to the Church of England, both in their teachings, and in their writings, as is
a tickling to the adversaries to hear counted for errors; to us not so
lamentable to be charged by them, as charged for those things, or not so much
for those things as by those men for those things, while the common enemy
stands by and laughs. And if it were not in a Theater of such conspicuity,
where whatsoer is spoken one way, is sure to be detorted, and wrested another
way, thereafter as is the humor of the Consterer; I would not stick to say it,
that they have more errors in their doctrine, than they have hairs on their
head: and Saint PAVLS verdite is herein also veresied of them, that he that
consents not, but teaches otherwise, knows nothing, nothing, at least as he
should do. A just judgment of God to light upon them, that thought it nothing
worth to be counted wise, unless all the world were fools besides: whereas we
stand not so much now to boast our selves, as to keep off scand all from the
Church of Christ, and slander from the army of the living GOD; which has not
her better under the sun (let not envy hear me) for all the glory of Arts
and Sciences, howsoever these demilaunces and these Dwarfs (only big in their
own conceits) proudly defy her.

But to finish this point, and to grant them their asking for this once; let
them be as wise as all the children of the East, as Hethan, as Chalcol, as
Derda, or as Daniel; yet what get they by it, what gain they by it, to the
purpose now in hand? The stronger wit the stronger heretic, said Vincentius of
old, and Origin proved it true by his example Never mean parts set traiterous
plots abroach, neither in church against Christ, nor against King in the
commonwealth. Were not Core, Dathan, and Abiram, the 3. resisters of Moses
their Governor (as these are of the government, at this day) the famosest and
the eminentest men in the congregation? I am sure the Text says so. And let no
man think I do them wrong to rank them with Core, or his fellovv-conspirators:
For as I have often said, so J will say it once more, that as for the sin of
Core and these men's, but a pair of sheeres went between. Wherefore, once
again, let me enforce S. Paul's Jf any; if any, be he who he will be; and let
Saul take heed how he spare Agag for pretexts, and slay etc. when all are a
like faulty, and liable to censure. So much also have I spoken unto their
learning, with no other intent (God is my witness) quam vt ista ilia quae sunt
inflat a rumpantur, then to prick the bladder and let out the wind.

The 3. point only remains; their labor, their diligence, and their travel.
Wherein I will use no dissembling, nor hafting: they have bin but eve too too
diligent, running with Chuzi before they were sent, and yet again, with
Ahimaaz out running Chuzi because they have run by the way of the plain. A way
of such plainness most af them (God help them) as J think the like was never
in use before, and I hope shall never be in practice again. But to speak to
their pains: what marvel, if the children of light be not always the
forwardest in their generation? the Pharisees compass sea and land to make one
proselite, though they make him doubly more damned than themselves. While the
good man sleeps the enemy is not idle, but sowes his tares very industriously.
Mischance is nimble, and one Ate outstrips they say a hundred Litae. I could
wish, our men would imitate their diligence; but by all means they must beware
of their pestilence. Who knows not what has bin the wonted argument of their
sermons? railing against our service book, and defacing prayer, to take up the
time forsooth in preaching; like the hedgehog that drove his Host out of
doors. For so prayer lets in preaching: and by it we can do, if we can do any
thing. Yet as Caesar drowned Bibulus his Co^sulship, so they make one of them
to live by the spoil and wrack of another, preaching by praying; though the
Chapter be the house of praying nor of preaching, properly so instiled by God
himself. Then their squibbing at the Prelacie, yea and glancing sometimes at
the soueraign authority: which I have heard, to my great grief, with mine own
ears in this City, when time was; not without the great applause of the
seduced multitude. And now no dumb dogs I warrant you, but (which is worse)
barking before they epsy a thief, yea biting true men that com in their way:
whose legs would be broken or their hamstrings cut, by the custom of old Rome,
for being so fierce by day; whereas they are set to watch the night, and the
Capitol to give the^ maintenance for such a service only, and no otherwise.
They tell us of rigor, and persecution, and hard measure: but it is they with
their tongue, not the church with her hand, that is the persecutor. Hagar beats
Sara, and not Sara Hagar, though you would think it otherwise when you read the
story; because Hagar is the malepart, as having gotten a great bell ly (these
being full and desirus to vent, like a vessel stuffed with new wine, as Job
says): Sara does but as a mistress should (and so the Church) striking when
she is provoked. And shall these pains be mentioned to their praise, which a
mean severity will not serve to chastise? They delighted in bitterness, let it
come unto them; their theme was cursing, let them inherit it; be it as water
unto their bowels, and as the girdle to their loins, that they are girt
withal. Preface to the challenge.
They tell us, they have laid their axe to the Prelacie to hew it down: but if
it chance to swerue and hit the striker, let such a man know that it coms of
the Lord. This I have spoken of the matter of their sermons: but now if I
should enter to entreat of their form, the day would fail me. Be it conceived
in a word, The most of them have made Gods offerings to stink, like the sons
of Eli, and the pulpits to lose much of their ancient estimation and credit,
that they held in former times, by the indiscreet handling of their business.
Aristot. was wont to say, it was the reward of a lier not to be believed when
he told truth: so, many men of worth are the worse thought on for their
unworthiness. To omit other faults, so retchless and so dissolute they are in
their preaching, that now it is become a law among the^, as it was among the
Tarentines, nemo de nobis, let him be no body in the faction, that brings a
studied or a premeditate sermon. That were to tithe H. Ghost to an inkhorn,
turn the cock and it will run well enough of it self, (I think I speak their
own Proverbs:) and there are some worse, as when they say they bring sermons of
Gods own making, because they took no pains in the penning; with others mo,
that for honesty sake must be concealed. Thus they tell us of labor, and labor,
in their preaching; and when all comes to all, they hold it no preaching, if it
be laborious. Alex. would be painted by none but Apelles, graven by none but
Lysippus, one an excellent painter the other an excellent caruer: these can
allow any to handle the word, to touch the mystery with unwashed hands, (...)
as S. Basil says, base fellows, and (more then so) a degree below baseness it
self. And therefore no marvel, if any thing accounted good enough for our
Order, when they have counted any body fit enough for the labor.

But to let go this, because they will say this is to preach in the evidence
of the spirit, and in all demonstration of power and authority (though God
knows there is great difference between the two) what think you of that, that
they challenge to themselves a converting power, (I speak no more than I know
by good proof) and deny to others a converting ministration? In the latter
whereof they are not so injurious against charity toward men, as in the former
heinous in excess of pride and impiety toward God. Certainly, my dear
brethren, if we could convert others, we would first begin with the conversion
of our selves: but because no man conuerteth himself; therefore, it is most
true, he cannot convert another. Turn us Lord and we shall be turned, says the
Prophet himself, though he could preach no doubt sufficiently: and our Savior
likewise, You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, spoken not to the
multitudes but to the Apostles themselves; above which level the Church men of
our times, and the men Apostolic that live yet, may not seek to soar by any
means. The heart of the King is the hand of God, as are the waters in the
South; that we read in the Proverbs: but we never read, the heart of the
people is in the hand of the Minister to turn it which way he will; But, Paul
is nothing, and Apollos is nothing, and, We are not Lords over your Faith, and
again, Why gaze you at us, as if we by our Virtue had made this Creeple
whole? Yet, as the Fly that you have heard of, which riding upon a coach-wheel
at the games of Olympus, gave forth that it was she that made so glorius a
dust; so these as vainglorious, but in a higher kind, arrogate to themselves
the manage of that service, whereunto it is enough if they may be reputed but
the meanest accessaries.

And now we are not angry with them, for denying us the fellowship of such a
prerogative as cannot be held without Gods highest dishonor: but leaving them
this blasphemy to adorn their head withal, we think it worth the noting that
they have excluded us from being so much as instruments, as well as invested
themselves in the principals. For, thither no doubt tends that speech of
theirs, Preface to their Petition first offered to his Majesty.
which you may all well remember, it was so famous, That all the flower is of
their bolting, throughout the land, the bran and the chafe (if any be in the
Church) is theirs that have labored in a different kind from them. Ruth could
not glean so much as a ha^dful, these mowers have so carried all into their
barn; and the Amnons of the people could not be persuaded to let any cakes go
down, but only those of Thamars baking. All this night have we fisht (may we
say with good S. Peter) and caught nothing, because we have not fisht with the
worm that they have. New Palaemons in the school of divinity, that say of
themselves, nobiscum nata, nobiscu^ peritura, with us it was born, and with us
it must die, as wisdom should do with Jobs friends. I could wish yet that
Philip had left somewhat for young Alexander to conquer: but the frantike
Merchant cries aloud from the key, the ships are all mine. And if one of us
do but look out of a pulpit, presently they have for him, as for Paul, Quid
vult hic semini verbius dice re? It is possible for a co^sormer to make a good
sermon? (Let the guilty confcience acknowledge his own speech) and again, as
for Saul, nu^quid Saul inter Prophetas? is Saul also among the Proph.? To who^
our Apology must be, as then it was, Quis pater eoru^, who is their father?
and, has not he abou^dance of spirit? or is all enclosed in your breast? and,
did the word of God come to you only, or may it come from no body now
effectually but you? Doubtless, as I have heard some Divines reason, that they
had rather be Publicans, than Pharisees, and do no good works than grow proud
or censorious after their doing, which is the dangerousest temptation that a
man can fall into, and which most separateth from Christ: So, it had been
better for these men, to have kept silence, even from good words, than out of
their labors to have grown into such a spirit, as either to intrude into Gods
rights by ouerweening, or excluded us as unworthy by disdain.

Howbeit, because they magnify so their pains in preaching, and think they
bear us down so mightily that way, we will end this point, if first we
desire them, not to censure all over sharply that shall not ply the pulpit as
they do. For mine own part, J say with the holy Apostle, vae mihi nisi
Euangelizauero, woe to me unless I preach the Gospel, and with Bishop Jewel,
stantem me inueniat Christus and praedicantem, let Christ find me in the
pulpit, if it be his will, when he comes to judgment. Yet, preaching is no
necessary annexum of Orders (as shall be defended if ever it be doubted) but
that it may yield to a more vvaighty dispensation; as the Pilot does no small
good in the Ship, though he sit still at the helm, stir not as other
Mariners and as the gally-boies stir about. In a word, as Demosthenes said
to one of his fellow-Lawyers, that bragged he had received a talent for his
pleading, tush fool, I had more for holding my peace; So it cannot be denied,
but some men's silence profits the Church of Christ more than all their
tonguinesse can do it hurt. And so much also, concerning their labors.

I had verelie thought I had done with this fourth part, The indifferency of
offenders; when an objection presented it self to my considetation, which
before was not thought upon, but now must be cleared in any case, because
every mouth is so full of it. For, if the green tree be thus punished, why not
then the dry? and if the puritan smart for it (say they) why not the papist
much more? for so has our Text, Jf any. I cannot be so long as the answers
are plentiful, and yet I will point you to much in a word.

One would think the Papist were borne like a flower, in the bosoms of us
English men, that heard these men take exceptio^s so stranglie; and again, one
would think that our State had very simple Steers-men in it, that heard these
Phormiohs reprove them so boldly. But, if the perpetual government of our
English nation, since religion began first to hold up the head, be rather a
matter of wonder among our selves than of repine, of envy to our neighbors
than scandal and reproach, of thanksgiving to God, inconceivable,
unspeakable, then of expostulatio^ never so little; then think what credit is
to be given to these exceptours, or what weight their words ought in due to
carry with them, which can find no place of entertainment in our minds, til Gods
mercies be undervalued, our nations praise stained, and the very truth and
evidence of so long proceedings shamefully denied. As for the affairs of State,
I shall speak another time, and show what reverence belongs unto them, the ark
that may not be pried into, the mou^tain that a beast may not presume to touch,
the sun that dazels curious beholders, the sea that swallows profane venturers,
the way of an Eagle in the air, and the way of a Ship in the waters, whose
tracte may not be espied nor enquired, but admired and adored a-farre of. For
even of them has God pronounced an O homo, tu quis es? and none may say unto a
king, Cur sic facis? Why do thou so? Ecclesiast. 8.4. or to the Princes, you
are unjust, as Job has it: Least of all they, that know not so much as the
way into the City, says Solomon, but leese themselves in seeking for their
own Fathers house; a house, which, of all other houses, might well be the
most conspicuous to them at this day, the Church of God in their own Land.

And how then, if the Magistrate, upon great considerations, should alter his
hand in proceeding against papists, as S. Paul does change his voice among the
Galath? how if he should turn sternnesse into mildness, as before mildness
gave place to sternness; suspendens verbera, and producens vbera, as the
Fathers speak, and preferring suffusion of blood before effusion, shame
before smart with Tertullian? Petilianus a^ pud Augus^
Since this is most certain that not only Christianitas (as that author said)
but even haeresis mortibus crescit, the more they are pruned the more they
grovve; and whom the horror of their own late unnatural proceedings,
specially illustrated with the Commentaries of our patience, cannot read a
Lecture to, of a better mind, them no bondage nor hard measure can ever be
thought able to suppress or reclaim.

This I might say in defense of the State, if it had been partial, and to
this I might allege that out of the psalm; Jf it had been mine enemy J could
have borne it, but now my fellow and mine own familiar friend, that walked,
that talked, and took sweet counsel together, etc. Could this be passed over
without a check? Nevertheless, the truth is, and experience shows to them
that have but half an eye, that the Papists (God be thanked) enioie no such
impunitie among us, and Justice has not let fall the balance, nor Censure yet
put up her sword. Jndeed they are not taxed with the same kinds of punishments,
because they are not capable of being so punished, as those to whom more
favor has been always showed. They are not silenced; for they never had bin
licensed to preach among us; they are not deprived nor put besides their
benefices; for they were never suffered to enioie any. But in the mean time,
they are so curbed and so restrained (as truly fit is) that if the troubles and
incommodities of the two factions popish and puritan were laid upon a heap,
and every man allowed to share equal, J doubt not but the puritanes would
greatly refuse it. It was time the wheel of administration should turn
about, and the Law begin to prick them a little, that had not felt it, but
laughed at it a long time, and through conniuence slid into contempt. If it had
come any later, the evil had been almost vnredressable, and even now we may
say to the most of them, as Christ did to the man of Bethesda, that had layne
diseased 38. years, Visne sanari, will thou be reformed, yea or no? The short
of it is, my dear brethren, though the Papists be troublesome, yet the
Puritans must not look to go uncontrolled. As when the enemies assault a
City or a Town, the children may not be allowed to keep what rule they will in
the house in the mean time, but rather live so much the more orderly. Or else
we shall think there is a co^federacie, and that they reap more advantage by
the thriuing of Popery, then they pretend for, and favor the spreading of
Antichrists Kingdom with all their heart, if the tyranny of the one be the
liberty of the other, and as they shall have increased, so these must be
excused.

To conclude, I might urge them with this dilemma; If the Papists be not so bad
as they make show for, when they exaggerate their pestilence so much above
their own; why are they so eager to have them punished? and if they be so bad,
what praise is it for them, or why do they place their defense in that, that
they come somewhat short of enormious Malefactors? So much may serve to have
spoken to that objection: and so much also generally of the parties
indifferency.

You would not think how glad I am, having passed these rocks, and escaped
these quick sands. Now we shall sail in a gentle stream: now we shall go
forward with tide and wind. Or rather once again behold a whirlpoole. For,
the fifth part follows, which is the Censure, full of dangerous and devouring
waters, He is puffed up, he knows nothing, he languisheth about questions, of
which comes envy, strife, raylings, evil surmises, etc. Almost there is no
bottom in it. Is the sixth any better then (the Inhibition, or the Caution)
from such separate thy self? We might speak here J confess of
excommunication administered by one person, as by Timothy himself. For, this
in effect is nothing else. We might speak of certain separators and
stragglers from us here at home, erecting Church against Church, Altar against
Altar, Paul against Peter, and Christ against Jesus, insomuch as they call
themselves the brethren of the separation, and openly delight now in that
title; though in truth they deserve that we should separate first from them.
We might in one word increase the punishment by handling the two latter parts,
as we have laid open the fault by discoursing the four former. But J am not
wont to insult over their infirmittes more then needs J must, whose errors
and evil courses J cannot choose but pity from my very heart. Only I had
thought to have given a touch touching languishing away, as Saint Paul here
calls it, and hanging their Harpes upon the wilful trees, that might make good
melody to the recovering of souls, if they would apply them rightly, and
welcomming home of the prodigal son again.

For, let them not tell us, they would do it, but for conditions: It is too
nice in them of conscience, not to reach the cup, but after a service of their
own; when we that are ready to perish for thirst, are content to drink the
wine out of any hand. Remember, I pray you, the Lamentation of David over Abner
being slain, and see if it fit not more than ordinary to our purpose. How
died Abner, says David, how died he? his hands were not bound, nor his
feet tied with setters of brass, and yet he fell down at the foot of the
Conqueror Yesterday a man, to day a coarse. No body compelled him, no body
constrained him, no body forced him, but his own will was his own overthrow,
his own outstanding his own undoing, and the battle was fought between him
and himself. What will thou answer to the Lord in that day, what shall thy
excuse be to him, for slacking thy hand, which thou had put so manfully unto
the plough, and smothering the talent that he lent thee of his good grace, not
in a napkin of unprofitable modesty, but (which is worse) in snuff, and
pelting discontent?

Is this to stir up the gift of God that is in thee, as S. Paul bids Timothy
to do in this Epistle? is this to become all to all, that thou might gain
some? which thou should do by his example; whereas thou stand upon such
strictness, as thou will be like none but thy self. Is this not to iangle
about words to no profit, but only to the subversion of the hearers? Is this
not to offend thy Christian brother, which offendest the whole congregation of
Christ, for fear of offense? Nay, is not this to be delivered over, bound hand
and foot to perpetual doing nothing, before the sentence of the last Judge?

Why might not thy wit be as well occupied henceforth, in explaining the
ceremonies, as thy tongue has been violent heretofore in traducing them? why
should thou not do as much for true peace, as thou have done for erroneous
truth? what shame is there with wise men in recanting an oversight? or who ever
lived but had his error? and, what greater conquest than in ouercomming thy
self? For, Lib. vlt. in Iul. Pelag.
Cum animositatem viceris qua teneris, veritatem poteris tenere qua vinceris,
as S. Austine said to the lofty Julian. Yea, this were fit news to be told
in Gath, this would sound terriblie in the streets of Ashkelon, that the
English nation had voyded her faction, that Pisistratus and his sons were
made friends, linked in the pledge of a long desired, and never to be
disannulled conformity. This, I say, and much more I had thought to have
spoken, and prosecuted against the wilful languisher of our times, the cutter
off of himself from the sacred Ministry without cause; That lets his days
consume in vanity, his years and beauty in trouble: whose waters are turned
into blood, so that no man may drink of their rivers, their fruit is given to
the caterpiller, and their labors unto the Grasshopper, their vines are
destroyed with haile-stones, and their Mulberie trees with the frost. Yea, the
fire consumes their young men, and their maidens are not given in marriage
(Imagine you by the loss of all their principal studies and endeavors) Nay
lastly, their Priests themselves they are slain, but not with the sword, and
there are no widows (or but one at the most) to make lamentation. For the
wretchedness of the cause drowneth and banisheth all the compassion of the
case.

But another theme expects my handling: which I will not seek how to apply to
the Text (though perhaps I could tell how, if I would) it self is Text enough
to the handler; And give leave I pray you once, for deeds to beget words
amongst you, since so many words of ours have brought forth so few good deeds
abroad in the world.

We must speak therefore a word or two, of the worthy contributers to the
performers of the duty, that is weekly here accomplished throughout the
year, and I for my part have now labored to discharge. First, the reverend
Father and sometime Bish. of this Sea, John Ailmer (how well does it become a
Clergy man to stand first, holding out the candle of direction to others,
that might in time imitate his good example? and how well does this charitable
ointment of expe^ce trickling from the beard of old Aaron the high Priest, till
it wet the very neathermost skirts of his clothing?) First therefore, as I
said, that reverend Bishop, as much esteemed by me, as sometimes perhaps
distasted by the world of the malepert and malignant. Next the right honorable
Lady Eliza. Countess of Shrewsburie, that forgetting her ornaments and costly
tyres, which the Scripture says a woman cannot forget (they are so wedded and
addicted to them) bequeathed her blew-s^ke and her purple to the decking of the
Tabernacle. Last of all, one Thomas Russell Citizen of this City. But I might
have spared that note, for the name it self was much, and yet you may know
him to be your fellowe-Citizen by his liberal intention. The deed shows the
mind, the mind shows the man, the man shows the Cities temper and
disposition that he lived in. They were wont, says the old proverb of the
Hebrews, to ask counsel in Abel: for there dwelt the wits: But we may say,
they were wont to do deeds of charity in London; which praise (God be thanked)
is not worn away, but remains and lasts to this day.

All these that J have mentioned, had this care and this respect, that the feet
of the Saints should not be unwashed with Abraham, specially those Saints that
bring with them the glad tidings of peace, and fly unto the vvindowes with
their doue-like murmurings, as Esai speaks; that the fighters of the Lords
battles, should be refreshed with a competencie of bread and wine, meeting
them in the half way, as Melchisedech did; that the Prophets, and men of God,
should not want a chamber, and more than so, a table; and more yet, a
candlestick, not empty of a light in it (says Saint Chrysostom) but all
well and conveniently furnished, with Heliseus his hostess; that vvho^ the
Innes shut out as too cutting for them, the manger might not receive without a
glistering oblation, which is Myrrh and Frankincense in the nostrils of GOD,
with the wise men (not so much vvorldly wise) that came from the East to
worship Christ: Lastly, that the keeper of the holy Passe-ouer should not
lack for a room to celebrate his mysteries in, nor a beast to ride upon into
Jerusalem, having none of his own, with them that did our Lord the like favor
and courtesy; I mean they have all provided, that (...) as the Apostle says,
that your gain should not be our loss, your profit our hinderance and
thanklesse vexation both of body and purse: but they have advanced and
improoued the spiritualls of other men, with the loss and flinging away of
their own carnalls as a gage.

Let their own works praise them in the gates, let their own actions rise up
to them, and call them blessed. Let the garments of purple be brought forth,
and showed unto the people, that these Dorcasses have wrought with their own
hands for the use of the poor; and let them say to them in this wise, Many
have wished, and many have talked, and many have meant charitably to this
purpose; but you in doing it, you in effecting it, you in preventing their slow
and lingering determinations, have surmounted them all. Chiefly, and before all,
let the God only wise, immortal, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is
to be blessed both now and for ever, have his due honor out of their
proceedings: Who first gave such gifts unto men that they might be liberal,
and then gave such minds to men, that out of their guiftes they were content
to be beneficial. O how well does his name sounding among their praises! O
how well do his titles amiddest their style? and O how dead, and dismal, and
discomfortable is all, where, virtue being commended, the Welspring of virtue
(which is Christ the Lord) is forgot to be honored? Let him be magnified, let
them be mentioned, and be you excited to the emulation of the like religious
practice. Redeem your sins, cancel your bonds, break off your
unrighteousness, trauerse your inditements, defeat Gods judgments, provoke his
mercies, purchase his rewards, enlarge your bowels of compassion toward all.
And when you have done all this, and all that you can do, or all that you
should do, put no confidence in your own works, trust not in your own merits,
but let them be to you as dross and dongue to gain Christ, and the shining
Robes of his alone incomparable righteousness. So shall your work of Charity be
accepted, so shall your labor in the Lord be recompensed, so shall your mite be
prized above all that is cast in by the hand of the swelling Iusticiaries, so
shall the seed of your alms deeds shoot into the ripeness of a perfect blade,
so shall your cup of cold water spring into a fountain of everlasting bliss.
For let no man deceive himself my dear Brethren, the fruit of righteousness is
sown in peace of them that seek peace. Here we end for this time.

Desiring Almighty God, etc.

FINIS.

