EPPHATA to F. T. OR, THE DEFENSE of the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord
Bishop of ELIE, Lord High-Almoner and Privy Counselor to the KINGS MOST
EXCELLENT MAJESTY. CONCERNING HIS ANSWER to Cardinal BELLARMINES Apology:
Against the slanderous cauills of a namelesse Adioyner; entitling his Book in
every page of it, A Discovery of many foul absurdities, falsities, lies, etc.
Wherein THESE THINGS CHEIFELY are discussed, (besides many other incident.) 1.
The Popes false Primacie, clayming by Peter. 2. Invocation of Saints, with
Worship of creatures, and Faith in them. 3. The Supremacy of Kings both in
Temporal and Ecclesiastical matters and causes, over all states and persons,
etc. within their Realms and Dominions.


By Dr. Collins, chapleine to HIS MAJESTY.

Apoc. 18. 7. Give her Torture.

PRINTED BY CANTRELL LEG, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1629

TO HIS MOST SACRED MAJESTY, JAMES By the grace of GOD King of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, our most Sovereign Lord, of God
beloved, etc.
MOST GRACIOUS and DREAD SOVEREIGN,
MAY it please Your MAJESTY, out of your Princely Clemency, which exceeding
all things, yet enclaspes the least, to vouchsafe to these poor labors (true
Benoni-es, the sons of my sorrow, so many disasters have annoyed them from
the womb, and some with the peril of their parents life) the skirt of your
royal clothing, or but the shadow of your skirt, Acceptance with Patronage:
Undertaken at first by your MAJESTY'S commandment, for the repulsing of the
lewd slanders of a namelesse Papist, and to redeem the credit of a renowned
Bishop; but continued to the confirmation of Your MAJESTY'S liege people, in
their Reiligion to GOD, and their Obedience to your MAJESTY, with all
subjection. In quibus duobus, vniuersa Lex pendet, and Prophetae, (to speak it
in his words, whose doctrine it was most, yea whose only errand it was, as
Hegesippus testifies) I mean, in seeking the face of GOD, and his JACOB, as
some even Papists have noted upon that Psalm, that they are distinguished
there not without cause, and the one is consequent, or to be consequent, to the
other.

But not so the Cardinal (the more too blame he) a maine stickler in these
Controversies (after the Pope and the Pioners) that encomber the world; and I
know not by what luck, though Ceruini generis animal, yet Your MAJESTY'S
audacious concurrent in the cause. Who if he were younger, perhaps he might be
borne with, either fancying his superstitions, or fostering his seditions: As
the Stoicke Philosopher was wont to say, that a young man at Sea, if he
abandon the Ship to walk ashoare a while, and either dig some root, or
gather some shell which the Sea casts forth, there is no danger in it; but in
an old man it is dangerous, whom death, and sickness, and sundry casualties
may prevent, from ever recovering ship again. Yet he in his deuoutest
meditations of all other, his book last set forth de Aeterna Faelicitate, will
not excuse Kings from being murdered de iure, (not only de facto) only he
passes it over as a casus omissus, happily because anouched in his other
Volumes more peremptorily.

Of another mind was his Uncle, of whom he brags in one place, contesting
with your MAJESTY, (though S. Chrysostom note, that S. Paul's sisters son,
of whom there is mention in the Acts, was never a whit the blesseder for his
Uncles virtue, and as it may seem never any good came of him; save only that
he revealed the Jews conspiracy against Paul, which this man would rather
defend the concealing of) but Marcellus secundus, of whom I was saying,
(witness the Historian that alleadges friendship (for more faith) and some
intimitie wit^d^im) In animo habuerat omnem militiam a se prorsus abigere,
ipsos etiam corporis custodes exauctorare (whereas Bellarmine lately urged this
Pope to draw the sword, if fame say true; his Uncle not admitting of
necessary Defense, if it were forcible;) cum illud saepe repeteret, multos
principes viros, non tam armis defensos, quam signo Crucis, etc. (himself
having been lately Cardinal Sanctae Crucis.) And in particular of the Pope,
Pontificem maximum neutiquam indigere, aut scutis, aut gladijs (indeed
Athanasius remooues all iron from the Apostles, and S. Austen will not have
them strike, though they may carry weapons, far ferrum, but not ferire)
satiusque esse ipsum si res ferat occidi, quam tam indecorum exemplum praeberi
Ecclesiae, namely as for the Pope either to handle a sword, or give allowance
to others, at his direction, so to do.

So as no marvel, if the same man, considering the practices of such as were
Popes in his time, clapped his hand once upon the table, protesting in great
earnestnes, that it seemed impossible for a Pope (as things then went) to be
saved. And another says, it was the voice of almost all men in those days,
that a Pope could not be saved, when this Marcellus came to it. I know not what
co^tentment the Cardinal may take in his new skarlet-additions, which they
would make us believe he accepted of so lothly; but for my part, I should
think one day of his Uncles, (as Tullie says of Antonie, compared with his
grandfather) were more to be desired, then a whole age of the Cardinals,
lending his pen and bending his wit to the defense of such trumperies, and,
which is worse, of such treacheries, as are now in ure with them; the dislike
whereof, and only intended Reformation, cost his Uncle his life, and that in
very short space, after he came to the Popedom.

Of whom, because I have said so much, almost before I was aware, I will not
(...), trouble Your Royal ear (as that Council speaks, which forbids Clerks
to disturb Kings, not only in their states, or lives, (as now the fashion
is,) but so much as in their leisures:) only this it may please Your MAJESTY
give me leave to add, That the Pope whom I speak of (as Onu^us testifies)
OMNEM ECCLESIASTICAM IVRISDICTIONEM, viris profanis, and nullis sacris
initiatis, demandare cogitaverat; had a purpose to translate all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to mere Laymen: he calls them profane; but the
more vehemently he expresses it, the more it makes for us, and against
themselves: the Papists all so storming at the thing this day, and the
Adioynder by name (with whom therefore I have a dealing about this point
somewhat at large) in Your MAJESTY'S high Prerogative, and iustest Title;
allowing You, by no means, Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: (if happily You
should ever fulfill their suspicion of owning it:) Though KINGS were so far
from being counted profane, by the ancient Synods of CHRIST'S Church, that
their letters were holy to them, their syllables holy, their palace holy, their
very bedchamber holy, and all that was about them, or belonged to them, sacred
and holy, in the style of those godly times, and Fathers.

Where I cannot but observe, the providence of GOD, that requites humane
actions, and how even a course it keeps with our courses. For as the intents
were good, which Marcellus fostered, but no effects followed, nay rather his
Nephew draws now back most of all, and mainly opposes his Uncles
determinations: So we read, that the Cardinals in favor of his person
(because reputed honest, and well be loved amongst them) decreed to have his
charges of the direption of his house and household stuff, (a grave custom no
doubt, and worthy of Christ's Vicar, to have all rifled, and ransackt, that the
people can but lay hands of, when he is chosen Pope) to be repaid him of the
public; but it was never done (says the Historian) till this day.

But to leave the Uncle (since our question is not whether the Popes may keep
guards about their persons, but whether Kings crowns, or (if that be more
dear) their lives are to be wholly at the Popes disposing) and to return to
the Nephew; He is peremptory, as I said, in his most mortified Treatise, and
the forerunner of his end (as he would have it thought at least) that Kings
are subject to murder, at best: First, de facto; though the Scripture as it
flatters not, nor no where diuerts us from the consideration of our mortality,
so it leads us to speak of KINGS and Princes in another strain; as if they
that ought not to be violated by any mortal hand, could not die at all, or at
least not die, till God himself assoild them of the bands of this body. How
was he slain (says David of Saul) as if he had not been anointed with oil?
And, O King, live for ever, says the Prophet Daniel, not any courtly
flatterer. The Kings soul is bound up with God in the bundle of life, as it
were Gero in sinu, nec discingor; fast bound, and not to shed out. The period
of their government, is cum Sole and Luna, as long as the Sun and Moon
endures. And though they die like men, (that is, quatenus homines, non
quatenus Reges) yet we are to remember, that they fall like one of the
PRINCIPES, that is, one of the Angels (says the Cardinal himself, among
others, upon that Psalm) who we know are not judged, till GOD judges them:
though, no doubt but that aggrauates their judgment so much the forer.

And whereas the Scripture so often, entitles the constitution of Kings to GOD,
it may be it is to show, that their authority is inabrogable; as the
Platoniques hold opinion, that whatsoever is mortal, was produced by some
mediation of the vile creature, as man of the dust, most things of the materia
prima, etc. but that which immediately proceeds of God himself, as the souls
of men, and the Angels, and the heavens, they are immortal. So of Princes.

Yet the Cardinal not content with a death de facto, implies that they may be
slain de iure too, though he affirm upon the other only, which belike was
enough to serve his turn in that place. No more Ceruinus now, nor of the
mothers breed (which was the better of the two) but (...) -- as Constantine
bespake Arius in the Nicene Council, somewhat merrily; for the one has Mars,
the other war, and weapons, and threats in his name; and as the one opposed
the natural, so the other the mystical Christ, he in his person, this in his
offices and principal officers; but each of the^ to the most lamentable
embroyling of Chrsts Church. And as the one of them was quelled by the
Imperial Constantine, iudicially proceeding, and Synodically sentencing him,
with his band of three hundred and eighteen Bishops; So against the other, God
has excited Your most excellent MAJESTY, but without the trouble or labor of
an Ecclesiastique Synod, to overthrow him by YOUR pen, and the pen of one
only Bishop of Your many; yet worth many, where all most worthy.

And albeit Your MAJESTY needs no Defender, abounding with so many
continually about Your Person, guarding the bed, and girding to them the sword
(as the Spouse speaks) (besides Your own inherent puissance invincible) yet
because what I have now uttered concerning the Cardinal and his mortified
propositions (crossing with Your MAJESTY'S both State and Honor, as much as
may be) I have uttered it with the priuitie of many of Your liege people,
(whom I confess, as before, that my especial care has been to confirm, and
whereof some perhaps will not disdain to cast their eyes upon these papers, if
at least they may pass with Your MAJESTY'S approbation) it were worth the
considering, what correspondence such grounds have with the ancient doctrine,
which the Cardinal and his followers would seem so close to follow. Of
Chrysostom, for one, That a Sovereign King is accountable to none (not only
to his Subjects, but) not so much as to his Successor, (as David said even now,
that he is to be judged like the Angels, that is, by God, and by God only, and
neither living nor dead by any other:) The same Chrysostom again noting in
another place, that where as the Psalmist passes over other miracles of the
wilderness in deep silence, he insists only upon the death of Og and Sehon,
two mighty Monarchs; because Kings lives are so wholly in Gods hands, and the
disposition of them is always miraculous, reserved and appropriated to God
himself. Of Basil, That a King is subject to no Judge: Of Ambrose, that nullis
tenetur legibus, not only the King of Israel, but not the King of Egypt: Or
(because the Papists make his case the worse of the two, that should be the
better in all reason,) not only the King of Egypt, but not the King of Israel;
for he says it of both of the^, and in two several places. Of that Pope in
Theodoret (Anastasius I take it) who persecuting Flauian (as his Predecessors
had done for a long time before) Theodosius that was their arbiter, bid the
Pope let go Flauian (because he saw there was malice) and argue against
himself, as if he were Flauian, giving him good leave to say what he could.
To whom that Pope most submissely; We may not do so, if please your Majesty,
it is not lawful for us to implead a King; not only in his person, but not
personating another, not fictione iuris, as the Lawyers say. Yea the very
heathen Poet, and one of the wretchedest, yet he had so much grace in him, as
to make servants themselves safe under a Crown (though worn not for
Sovereignty, but for Solemnity only, as was the fashion in their festiuals)
(...). As for that which follows, (...), etc. it is right the doctrine of our
modern Jesuits concerning Kings, that if first they be decrowned, then they
may be used, no longer as Kings, but as private men, that is, abused at
pleasure. Even the Cardinal himself opens his eyes at last, (the case is so
clear) and acknowledges as much. The STEWARD of a house (says he) may be
deposed by none, but only by the grand-master of the Family: which is God in
the world, as the Steward in the State is the King, by analogy. Not but that
his meaning is as traiterous as ever (for he understands it of his Pope) but I
suppose Your MAJESTY'S name was partly fatal to give him light (which is the
character of Supremacy engraven in you by God) and partly it confirms my
opinion of him, that if Your MAIESTES Books and rare travails in this cause
(out of which we all take, that now write any thing) had been but read of him
when he was young, and before he was embondaged in this damnable prejudice, he
would have yielded to the spirit and power which they are fraught with,
acknowledged your proofs, submitted to your reasons, admired Your MAJESTY'S
and cor and linguam; and finally thanked God for him his conuerter, whom now he
is feign to endure his confuter. But, longa dies quid non captiuat? making us,
as S. Chrysostom says, (...), to prefer even garlic before Ambrosia.

But although not he (froward as he is) yet there are others infinite both
forreiners and domestics, that profit by Your MAJESTY'S peerless writings
daily; not only to the enlarging of their skill and knowledge (whereof your
Works may seem to be an Universal Seminary) but to their redeeming from
ruin (which Vn-subiection draws to) and building them up to everlasting
salvation in the world to come, with quiet minds and content in this present,
which before they wanted. And truly our hope is, that the Rights which Your
MAJESTY shall transmitt to your posterity, as nobly cleared by Your pen, as
ever they were won by your Ancestors swords, will both breed much peace to
the Land in general, and great security to Your royal offspring the
inheritours, confusion to the adversaries, and barkers against Sovereignty;
even as long as either learning shall be held in price, or a man shall be left
alive to reuolue books.

Whereof because this work pursues the remainders, and treads the same way,
though in a most improportionable distance, once again imploring Your
MAJESTY'S sacred Patronage, worthy to be a Sanctuary to a greater trespasser)
both out of Your love to the cause, and out of Your love to the coat, (which
is so great and so gracious, as no fame will be so niggard, but to record it to
the furthest ensuing ages,) I beseech the GOD of ALL things, even for his dear
SONS sake, (which is our hope, and our glory, defending Your MAJESTY, and
by Your MAJESTY defended) to accomplish his rare Graces upon Your MAJESTY'S
Royal Head: Or, in stead of augmenting them, to add but this one more
blessing, to the many that he has multiplied, super virum dextrae suae, super
Regem (...), eundemque Phil-ecclesiasticum, (in whom no body could ever
discern any cause of doubt, save only whether Your zeal to the Church, or to
the Clergy, were greater) even PERPETVITIE and AETERNITIE, the Imperial
style, and patrimony of Kingdoms, in the most Orthodoxe language.

Your MAJESTY'S most humbly-bounden, and devoted servant, in all dutiful and
grateful subjection, S. COLLINS.

TO THE READER.
BEfore I come to the maine matter, I think it not unfit (Courteous Reader) to
acquaint thee a little with the conditions of the man, against whom this is
intended, for intending against one so much better the^ himself, to use no
more then David's 1. King. 2.
phrase, about the murdering of Abner, by unmanly violence, and butcherly
force; which base circumstances, no doubt, increased the tragedy of that
worthy Champion, in the opinion of David. And surely so it is. A noble hand
eases much a grievous stroke, insomuch Hoc etiam turpius a^ ctatur Respub.
quod ne ab co quide vexatur, vt tanquam fortis in pugna vir, acceptis a forti
aduersario vulneribus, etc. Lament. 5. (...).
as Tullie bemoanes the Commonwealth of Rome in one place, that she was not
so happy as to be borne down by valiant adversaries, but cowards gored her,
and sotts insulted over her, and foxes, and recreants, ran upon the battlements
of her, as the Prophet complains; Serui dominati sunt nostri, says Jeremy,
Slaves have ridden over our heads. Not that I would have the glorious Faith of
our LORD JESUS CHRIST to be held in the partial respect of persons, which Iam.
2. 1. Baron. tom. 1. ad annum 34. number. 79. Et tamen alibi, multus est in co, vt
aureas bracteas quasda^, sieve bullas, and Iacobo ipsi, and Apostolis ommibus;
ad colla circundet. Ex Eu^^b. Clem Epiph. and alijs. Satin' vt sibi conste^^
Eodem Tom number.: 93.
S. James forbids, (where Baronius says Kings are secretly nipt at, and why
forsooth? but for the description of the man with the gold ring, whereas now we
may find pearls upon the Popes shoes: S. James being so far from nipping
Kings in that Epistle, that as if he had foreseen that one of his own name
should lead the field in time to come, against the impugners of Sovereignty,
he gives the onset so well, as to call that (...), which he means (...), the
Kingly, or the royal Law, understanding vbi supra. v. 8.
the Divine; not so then.) Nor that I would not have all to open their mouths,
of what sort soever, in the cause of God, and his holy truth: it is not we that
exclude Eldad from prophecy, or Medad from consultation, but Bellarmine that
blesses them, with, Populus qui extra est. non De verb. Dei. l. 2. c. 15.
nouit legem, and therefore maledictus; The people which is without, they are
accursed. But yet me thinks some decorum would be observed in these conflicts,
and though all cannot be coped with by their matches in worth, as Kings by
Kings, as Alexander said, (for the sword deuoures now one, now another) and so
Bishops by Bishops, which the ancient Canons have a special care of, that
every rakeshame should not challenge a Bishop, no not a Priest, says S. Paul,
under 1. Tim. 5. 19.
some store of witnesses: yet modesty might be kept, and fair dealing
maintaind, and respective war of both sides nourished, that which wants in
other points, to make even the encounters, being supplied by humility, and
courtesy, and moderation (as the Masters of the prizes are wont to equal the
weapons of the combatants, before they begin.) From which this man is so far,
that like the Orators in Tullie, who the worse they spoke, the louder they
cried, and whom therefore he compares to lame riders, that not able to go on
foot, would needs be prauncing on horseback; so he mends his stature by a
false shoe, as it were, and as another Publican after Matthaeus Tortus,
climbes the sycomore of his own wild fancies, to ouerlooke the croudes: or
like the painters boy, that being to paint Helen, cum pulchram pingere non
posset, pinxit diuitem; so what he lacks in learning, he lays on load in lies,
in taunts, in terms, and in abominable raylings. Which for my part, I cannot
see what effect it is like to have, with the judicious Readers, if at least any
such cast their eyes upon these pamphlets, (for we are not ignorant to what
kind of people they are consecrated) then to strippe them quite of all credit,
and even pitch them over the bar, like forlorn lawyers, for not caring what
they say, nor of whom they affirm: as the Scripture prophecies of such like
fellows in one place, that their own tongue shall make them fall. So as
henceforth it will be no shame for others, to be miscalled by them, and
thundered upon with all the vile terms that may be, after such a Reverence
could not escape their bad usage, and a person besides exception, was depraved
and disgraced by them beyond all reason, as Hamans gallows was the last that
ever he set up, because erected for Mordecai, a virtuous man, and the waspe
(says Athanasius) Citatur a Dadraeo.
shooting his sting but once against a rock, looses his power of annoying for
ever after.

But to do as I promised, gentle Reader, to give thee a taste of this fellows
conditions, not Etenim si vnu^ hominem deterrimu^ poeta praestanti aliquis
ingenio fictis conquisitisque vicijs deformatu^ vellet inducere, etc. de Arusp.
Resp.
by feigning a man in the forge of Poetry, compounded of all vices, (as the
Orator says,) which perhaps if I would do, I could lack no matter, nor yet
following the sent of every light report, though a Johannes 21. apud Papyr.
Masson.
Pope of theirs was so addicted to news, as he cared not what it were, so it
tickled his ear, and digested false, as well as true, (whom the Cardinal it
seems, imitates, for all the world, believing whatsoever our runnagates bring
him concerning English affairs, having quite lost his common sense, and not
able to distinguish between several objects, if any whit semblable;) I say, to
give thee a taste of this man's spirit, we will go no further then his own
writings, and among them, then this book, that we presently deal with, shall
affoard instruction. Whereby his Vanity, his Virulencie, his Ignorance, and
his Circumstance, being sufficiently discovered, though we leave no part of
the whole unexamined, (even contrary to iniunction, as our Saviors example
was not to answer Pilate to every Contra Celsum in initio. 2. King. 18.
question, as Origin well notes, and so Ezechias to say nothing to Rabsace, but
to let him go as he came with a flea in his ear, for all his flaunting) yet
perhaps this Preface might either satisfy the cause without thy farther
labor, or at least so settle thy judgment in reading, as to conceive hereby
the better, of that which is answered in due place, to his barbarous
imputations.

Vanity: it is worth the considering, how every where he couples himself with
the Cardinal, and sometimes iets before him, sometimes behind him, like the
fantastic wooer that Ovid describes, Et modo praecedit, sequitur modo --
Places (says he) alleged by the Cardinal and my self. p. 68. The Law inter
Claras alleged both by the Cardinal and by me. p. 38. Twelve Fathers
alleged by the Cardinal and me. p. 356. The like you may see, p. 112. p.
245. and diverse more, for I spare. Another time, as dividing the praise
between them two, partly by the Cardinal, and partly by me, says he, p. 304.
But most ridiculous, where he goes before him, nothing ashamed, yea and enters
into comparison with him too, very deftly. First, for action. Objected (says
he) as well by me, as by Page 1. And in the very front and titlepage of his
book, Pl^ and authorities alleged as well by him, as by the Cardinal, etc.
the Cardinal, as if he could follow an argument, as well as the Cardinal.
Again a passive. Page 39.
The Bishops answer to S. Cyprian (says he) makes as much against me, as
against the Cardinal. And many such like feathers of his frantique ambition,
every where scattered throughout the work. Which had been uncouth in any, to
have associated himself with another writer of fame, especially the Cardinal,
where no need was, and in a treatise no way depending on his, though happily
falling The Cardinal himself, has taken as much into his Controversies, out
of other men's writings, as any: and yet is wiser then to appeal them, or to
make words of the^. But no doubt the Adioynder would have us think that good
wits iumpt, the Cardinal, and his, about the invention of the same argument.
into diverse the same points, which he had handled before, (as what is there in
Divinity, which some author or other has not forestalled? and yet we do not
name them, nor rank our selves with them, when we prosecute the same
argument:) but more strange in F. T. a man no way known, no way heard of, much
less bearing any such reputation, patched up (as they say) lately out of
father Parsons his relliques, his leaden standish, and his wodden cansticke,
(another Pseud-Epictetus) and perhaps some old notes of his mustie
paper-booke, otherwise among a thousand the unlikeliest that could be guest at,
to bear a head with the Cardinal, or to succeed him, as his Yet F. Parsons
bought skarlet in hope to be a Cardinal, as the Seculars write of him. And
this man would be known to succeed F. Parsons.
former flourishes import to be his own conceit of himself. I might add
hereto his craking every where of his Supplement, whereof this is but a ribbe,
an Eve taken out of the others side, as our Prometheus intimates, As I have
noted in my Supplement, says he, p. 15. and, As I have showed in my
Supplement, p. 36. I have produced in my Supplement, p. 39. Having occasion in
my Supplement, p. 98. So 139. 415. 417. So in many other places we are told of
the Supplement, that is, by himself of his own work, (another quality
somewhat unusual among writers, that are not stark mad, to beat upon their
own, especially so often) which you may think how good a Supplement, or how
answerable to the title, when we should not have known it to be at all, but
for this frequent supply of his own mouth. And yet for my part I never saw
it, I consesse, neither know I any that look after it. If it be like this, no
force: here is enough to make Catullus sick, or his horse either, and once
again to bethink him, how he may recure his surfeit with purgative herbs,
ocymoque and vrtica: in the mean time crying out, O librum horribilem, atque
pestilentem. Et haec hactenus. I speak of his Vanity, as you may remember,
which appears by these two points, his marching with the Cardinal in such 1 2
wanton equipage, as has been showed, and his calling out upon his
Supplement, though this also be a fruit of his most hateful Tediousnes to come
in it with so often; of which anon.

Virulency, which you may take up by handfulls. I will not draine the fenne, or
stand casting the ponde, I mean ransacke his book by quoting the pages; but
his Table of principal matters shall declare what I say, which himself has
adjoined to the end of his Adioynder; the fourth principal in the table. I
omit how he strippes the Bishop of his title; And (not to say how due in all
other men's judgments, the most judicious themselves thinking that they honor
their judgments most, when they express the honor that they bear to him) it
was not denied to Dioscorus (I forbear the rest, how unsuitable a man) yet
drawing near, (as he best knows that cites the Council Adioynd. cap. 2.
toto. Act 3. Council. Calched.
at large) upon the point of degradation, to be termed Reuerendissimus, and
Deo charissimus, Episcopus, the most Reverend Bishop, and most beloved of God,
at every word. But what style does he give him, in liew of the other, which he
takes from him? Let it be viewed, where I now quoted, (like Tertullians
Ononychites, that he tells us of in his Apologeticus, set up by the Heathen, in
despite of the Christians, or if ever any imagination crossed the original more
fowly.) His vain bragges, His cogging the dice, his inclining to Iudaisme, A
man prodigal of his Rhetorique, etc. Yea, a wronger of his MAJESTY, turned
plains Puritan, no friend to the Supremacy. And then over again with the
same notes, not only in the book, but in the Index twice, so well they please
him. Fools bolts, Shuttlecocks, dull head, etc. Finally, will you hear an
heinous crime? He tryes how near he can corn to Popery, and yet miss it:
that is, graunts to the Papists as much as may be granted, though by no means
betraying the Palladium of Gods cause, multiplyes not controversies, where no
need is, abstaines from brabbles, and (...), as should the servant of God (if
S. Paul 2. Tim. 2. 23.
say true) that is, the Minister (...), keeps the depositum in precise terms,
(...), breaks not the rope with unreasonable stretching, (...), as S. Basile
forewarnes; but joining Charity with Piety, discretion with resolution,
imitates the driuers at the Olympian games, whose praise was to come near, and
yet not to touch.

Now truly having described to you, his description of the Bishop, wherein,
besides his Virulency, (of which I now entreat,) both his Vanity and Tautology,
and almost all appears, that before I charged him with, even Ignorance it
self in the highest degree (for what more gross ignorance, then to be
ignorant of the person (not only of the general, or of the cause) whom the
farthest parts know, far other then so? unless purposely he would decypher
him like Arbos inuersa, as the Philosophers say of man, or by negagations and
abstractions, as we do the Genij in Metaphysiques) me thinks he has given you
a description of a Jesuit, such as a better could not be wished, that shows
you the world clean turned in a glass, and presumes he can alter the very
nature of things, with his poisonous breath, and partial censure: not unlike
to their late scholar, the parricide of France, that conceited the king to be
an Aethiop Peter Mathieu. in the life of Henry 4. Reg. Gall.
in a Triangle, whom all the water in the sea could not wash clean, and so
detesting him by degrees, at last intoxicated, slew him.

Ignorance, and I mean only in the Latin tongue; for I will not search now
his more hidden schollership; I am content to be judged by his knowledge in the
entry, in the very portall (for so is that to learning, prima de dotibus, or,
prima de cotibus.) (And as for the Greek, we were not best say much of that,
though his (...) is a great argument of it, p. 234. and (...), accepit genua,
(for, he took her by the kneees,) in the same place: Also, (...) for aequalis,
p. 44. the very same stone that his Reverend Father Hudaem. Parall. p. 151.
had tript at before: It will go well with the Bishop, if he can escape his
chasticements, for spending any part of his younger days, in the study of
that, which helps him to discover the Cardinals fallacies, or false
quotations.) id est, cap. 2. number. 3. because the Bishop had said, Legate canone
inustum, ne maiora, sed aequalia, sint priuilegia, etc. he thus; Whereas he
says, that the Council of Calchedon, did by that Canon give to the Bishop of
Constantinople, ne maiora, sed aequalia priuilegia, etc. Which though it be the
preserving of the word ne in both places, yet every mean Latinist easily sees,
that ne should have been turned into non in the latter place, if he meant any
sense should be in his sentence, as he began it. And therefore, I can impure it
to nothing, but his lack of skill in the rudiments. But let this go for
nothing, if I make it not appear yet plainer, that he is minus habens, and all
too light, as he speaks of the Bishop in an other place, (for such reverence
he bears him.) Page 42. cap. 2. number. 6. thus we have. It is said expressly of
the Church of Constantinople, that it should be magnified and extolled as old
Rome was, secundam post illam existentem. Which is the letter, I grant, in the
Council of Calchedon, but almost killing Priscian, as he sets it down, for
secunda post illam existens; the Church of Constantinople (to which that
referres) being ecclesia, not ecclesiam, in his period, and so to be
translated, if it were to be put into Latin, Austens words, simply God knows,
p. 149. Componit salutem membrorum in capite, which he englishes by compounded;
compounding of healths, being a phrase scarce fit to be used by Apothecaries,
or their boys, much less by Physicians, but least of all by him, that would
seem to know the Latin, and to english S. Austen. Bishops Latin with his
addle corruptions, Concludit testas suos cum Augustine, says he, p. 145. as
quoting his words, which in the book is some what otherwise, Concludit testes
suos Augustino. And so again, cap. 9. number. 53. Scrutabitur page 404. Adioynd.
Jerusalem cum lucernis, etc. Zeph. 1. (for, in lucernis;) either adding to
the Scripture, or correcting his old Translators Latin, or both. Though the
one be impious, the other very ridiculous, in him especially, to confront the
Translator, whose Latin is not afraid of a far nicer test. Chap. 7. numb.
33. representare Th^^dosium in liberis, is to give the children grace that they
may be like their father. Repraesentare stands for Likeness only, at another
time for Government, for Monarchy, and for Rule. But, repraesentare defunctu^,
is to supply the loss of the dead Theodosius, by yiedling another in his
room; which S. Austen wishes may be of the posterity. Does not this also
argue him a solid Latinist? Bishops words, (...) id loquuntur Ambrosius and
Augustinus quam vt obstrepere possint nouitij nostri: They speak it louder, or
clearer, then that our nouices can contradict it. Whereas it should be, then
that our nouices can drown it. For a man may contradict that which is never so
clearly spoken, drown it or suppress it he cannot. But because he knew not
the other sense of the word obstrepo, (as in Tully pro Marcello, obstrepi
videntur militum clamore and tubarum sono) therefore he commits this solaecisme
in translating. And nouitij with him, be none but newly vpstart; for which
cause he maruells that the Papists should be so called, though neither is
their petegre^ so very ancient (Gibeonites rather) and rawnes in ones faculty
makes the oldest man to go for a nouice. (...). But by this you see the cause
why he answers the Latin book with his English, because he thinks the Bishop
is not his crafts master in the Latin, and so he will take no advantage
against him, but deals with him in English, as one Englishman should with
another, the unknown tongue being better for devotion, not for disputation.

Bishop speaks of Peter's disease, which S. Austen had first touched upon,
namely of confidence in himself, and too much ouerweening, so as he stuck not
to say, Et si omnes non ego; to which the Bishop adds for explication sake, id
est, plus ego quam omnes, (which is the very thing that they attribute to S.
Peter at this day, to be the (...) of the Apostles, and worth them all: as
also it follows out of his own words, for, if though all not he, then he is
of more worth or force then they all) this lither fellow, this exos asinus, not
so good as Issachar, an ass without bones, without proof, without metal,
construes it thus, out of the fullness of his Latin, That, though all other
Divines Vbi supra.
would give over attempting the Popes cure, yet so would not the Bishop; et si
omnes non ego. A likely speech to be uttered by that grave Prelate, concerning
himself, especially with the disparagement of the rest of our Divines, for so
is his disposition, as they know that know him. But how do you think he
falls upon this sense? what pucke lead him out of the way? Because the Bishop
had said a little before, Praesertim cum eundem morbum in capite vestro
notarint diu iam medicorum filij; Medicorum filij; says he, are Beza, and
Calvin; for the old heretics were the medici, as the Donatists, etc. (whom
the Papists nothing resemble, neither restraining Kings from meddling with
Church Matters, nor shutting up the Church within a corner of the world, etc.)
and these their sons. Then follows, Etsi omnes, non ego, ^1. plus ego quam
omnes: which in the Bishops book referres to the morbum before spoken of, S.
Peter's disease consisting in these words, a disease of pride. But what does our
Gentleman? He diuides etsi into two words, and and si, and then makes an
interrogatiue at ego, construing it thus, Et si omnes, non ego? And if all do,
shall not I? if all physic the Pope, shall not I? To which you may think now
how handsomely that suites which follows, id est, plus ego quam omnes: as if
the Bishop when he had asked that question by way of challenge, should express
himself, for more perspicuitie sake, by an id est, that is to say, I am more
worth then they all. These are the fopperies of this great gull. And you see
how profound an understander of the Latin, that is feign to point the Bishops
words anew, with his senseless interrogatiues, before he can construe them, or
misconstrue them rather; as likewise to divide them, and to clip them, by
turning etsi into et si; but lastly, to devise a difference, between medici,
and medicorum filij, a most palpable demonstration of his unmatchable dunserie,
and not unlike the boys in the Grammar school, that construed pullus equinus,
a horsechicken. Now cry for Elleboron Sir, now prescribe Catholicon, The
Adioynders prescript of Receipts to the Bishop.
like a Doctor in your faculty; which if it be the name of a Dictionarie, or
of a Grammar, or some such like, may stand you in good stead, for ought I know.
As for the drug Catholicon, that intoxicates the brain, and pricks on to
murder, and to combustion in States, it is a drug for your self, and for your
fellows, if they have not too much already. Bishops words (referring to S.
Peter) plus ego quam omnes, as if S. Peter had been more scandalized then they
all, cap. 4. number. 33. Yet this is his Latin, plus scandalizatus, for more
scandalized. Which though by the rules of his Caetholicon, may pass for
current, not so by the touchstone of the more accurate Gra^marians, who happily
would no more say plus scandalizatus, for more scandalized, then plus
illiteratus, for more unlearned.

Tediousness and his Talkatiuenes, in very truth unsupportable. Cruditando
ortygometram, vsque ad nauscam. Tertull.
I mean his lazy, and heavy, and dull repetitions of the same thing often;
(the very Mathematicians do not resume their grounds, I think, oftener then
he) and yet all with such a confidence, or Thrasonicall boldness, as makes it
much more odious. Thou may remember good Reader (says Vide cap. 10. numb.
30. item Numb. 47. and 43. maxin (...) per totum libium.
he,) And, I have done this good Reader. Then, In such a chapter this; And, In
another chapter this; As if all were so impregnable and impossible to be
reuersed forsooth, that he had once dealt in. Is there no (...), as Demades
said of Phocion? No Sponge to wipe out a malicious crimination, as one tear of
Olympias was able to deface, whatsoever lying tell-tales had conveyed into
Alexanders ears, against her? But especially he triumphs in that, which above
all others should not only dye his cheeks in grain, but make him call for
his hood, or rather his (...), as Homer calls it, to protect him from rebuke;
yea almost wish the mountains to cover him, but at least not to endure ever to
look a man in the face again; as the Poet says of the like,

Et contra magnum potes hos attollere Solemn: He accuses the Bishop, for
corrupting the Fathers, by name S. Ambrose, and reiterates this crime again
and again. Yea he has never done with it. But what crime think you? or how
likely to be true? The Bishop to turn corrupter of the Fathers? S. Chrysostom
being accused (as himself reports (...). inter Sau^.
in his Epistle ad Cyriacum) of a detestable crime, and such a one as his
manners abhorred from most, offered to clear himself without speaking a word,
by showing of his body. The case in hand is as clear as there, and nothing so
ready as the Bishops integrity to be viewed of all men, while the Adioynder is
guilty even of his own imputations. See Chap. 1. p. 44. where of fifteen
editions that we have perused of S. Ambrose, partly printed, and partly
manuscript, (all of them of the auncientest, and farthest from suspect) there
is not one but cites those controuerted words, as the Bishop does, Sixtus
quintus being the first (then a private Also Ioh. Viguerius (a notable Papist)
rehearses them for S. Ambroses. Vide Tabul.
man, after Pope) that presumed to cut them out, and to corrupt the Copyes;
which this good fellow would feign charge now upon the Bishop of Ely, for
retayning them.

And as they that tell lies, till they believe them for true themselves, though
at first they knew the^ to be clean otherwise; or hoping to prevail (...)
after the fashion of the heathen, or as Cap. 9. number. 30. p. 384. Adioynd.
himself speaks (the flower of Eloquence) Matthew. 6.
after the Gentilicall fashion, thus he furbushes it over and over. Adioyn. p
418. and similia 419. id est, cap. 9. number. 71. 72. 73. etc.
Thou may remember good Reader, (says he) what poor stuff he produced (so
he speaks of the Bishop) to prove that S. Peter had nothing peculiar to
himself, by his pastoral commission, etc. when nevertheless to make good his
idle conceit, he was feign to use great fraud and corruption, in the allegation
of those two Fathers (Austen and Ambrose) corrupting the text of S. Ambrose, as
I have amply declared in the first chapter of this Adioynder, Numb. 3. and
sequent. ad 12. etc. Whereas no such corrupter on the otherside as himself.
And indeed what marvel if he corrupt the Fathers, and wring their noses, till
he fetch out blood, as Solomon says (such bloody positions as they foster now
in their schools, with the danger of whole states) when he abuses the Bishops
words so before his face, as I even now declared, cutting Etsi into Et and Si,
and to show you how punctual he is in his recitings, marring and monstrifying
another directest meaning, with his own most prodigious interpunctions. You
would say he were a Procrustes, with his bed of tyrannies (worse then Ogs iron
bed) to crucify his strangers. But is this all? does he not corrupt the
Fathers also most grossly himself? Augustine, Cuius ecclesiae ille agnoscitur
gessisse personam, page 6. of the Adioynder, which in S. Austen is not so, but
thus rather, Cuius ecclesiae ille agnoscitur in figura gestasse personam:
gestasse being of less force to serve his turn then gessisse by much, and in
figura being left out, which serves to turn all clean another away. Again
S. Cyprian, de vnitate ecclesiae: To show an unity, he ordained one chair. As
if that were the chair of the universal Bishop, that is, the Pope. But in S.
Cyprians words there is no mention of chairs, either one or more. The words are
only these, Vt vnitatem Morel. edit Paris. 1564. sed and aliae editiones
Pontificiae non dissentiunt, praeter Pamel.
manifestaret, vnitatis eiusdem originem, ab vno incipientem, sua auctoritate
disposuit. And yet professing to english them, he couches very handsomely into
the heart of them, I know not what about the appointing of one chair, belike
for the Pope to sit down in, and rest himself, whom S. Vide Cypr. l. 1. Ep.
3. and Ep. 4. Nisi pancis desperatis and perditis, minor videtur esse
authoritas Episco porum Africae [quam Romae.] Item ad Pomp. contra Epist.
Stephani. Stephanus (says he) maintains the cause of heretics against the
Church of God. Haeresin contra Ecclesiam vindicat etc.
Cyprian had not the manners to entertain so kindly, as his sundry scufflings
with him may testify. Is not this to crave leave, once again, to build a
tabernacle more then Christ allows? vnum mihi, one for Peter, etc. As for the
Cambron copy, and Pamelius the finder, they are too light of credit, to
outface so many, so ancient, and so uncontrollable. Shall the Bishop be
censured, for alleging that which all have save one, and it so justly
suspected, as sauouring of Sixtus Quintus his poisonous sallet, and shall not
this be called forgerie, to cleave to one so abortiue and newfangle, and
forsake the rest? Bishop had quoted Austens Epistle to Pope Coelestinus, about
fustie Antonie, or Antonie of Fussula, his deposing from his Bishopric, which
in none of the old editions is extant, it would have bin counted coggery, or
what worse may be in the language of our F. T. and his fellow-Criticks: yet he
may vouch it, and ask no pardon. Eudaemon-Iohannes that Reverend Father, as
the Adioynder styles him (mulus mulum, cap. 2.) had the Bishop in jealousy,
when time was, for counterfeiting an Epistle of the first Council of
Constantinople to the Emperor Theodosius, which but that he was stark
beetle-blind at broad noone day, he might have found and groped in more then
one edition. And shall these ware go for current now, which never saw the
light till yesterday, to speak of? But as for Eudoemon (howsoever he esteem
of him,) we will say no worse for this once, then with the holy Apostle, (...)
Act. 27. 11.
(...). He should have kept him at Crete, and not imbrued his hands in so
uncivil piece of service. More thanks would have been shared him, with less
loss to his reputation; the (...) and the (...) both avoided. Yet it seems
that the Adioynder, pricked on with his example, makes have to follow him. Of
whom because we are speaking now of his corrupting the Fathers, I see not but
that also may be reckoned among his corruptions, that he defends the Cardinals
adoremus for adornemus, and (...) for (...), and (...) for (...), yea orare for
currere, and invocare Martyrem for festinare ad basilicam; with many such like
errors, not only against the original Greek or Latin, but against any
reason that can be devised in the world. Would it not follow by this means
that angulos for angelos is good reading? As in the Council of Laodicea, Ne
angelos nominemus, Can. 35. in summa Council. per Garanzam Mirand.
which they read angulos for many years together, and thought they had the
perfect meaning of the Canon; so little they feared to be encombred with
idolatry. But to draw to a conclusion.

These things thus considered, may we not say to the Adioynder, rudely replying
upon so reverend a Prelate, as Chrysippus did to one that pestered Cleanthes
(and though unmannerly enough, yet I think not so rustically as our Adiumbler
in many points) (...),. 1. Leave troubling the grave and Apud Diog. La^^^. lib.
7.
ancient Father, and bestow these thy qualicums (thou mouthy Sophister) upon
some younger ears, or greener heads, that neither have weightier studies to
detain them, and are less able to epsy through the shallowness of thy
drifts or the preposterousnesse of thine endeauours.

Though who so blind, but sees that of himself, and sine monitore? The
Jesuits scope being only this in general, to steal away hearts (with
Absalon) from the KING, which is the damnable Plagium inueighed against by the
Apostle, 1. Tim. 1. 9. and justly coupled with (...), of the one side (their
native mark) and (...), of the other (their equiuocating new character) like
the sorcerers of Babylon, (right so they of Rome, the graund mother of
enchantments) of whom we read in Jeremy, 27. 9. that they persuaded the people
with all their Rhetorique, not to adhere to the King, but to relinquish their
fidelity, though Almighty God had expressly charged them to the contrary.
And so here. It is not the double, nor the treble bond, of oft-sworne
ALLEGIANCE, that can bate their fury, or bridle their force. For in all Vows,
the Popes relaxation is excepted, says Iuxta saniorem sententiam, subijcimus
vota nostra summo ecclesi. e pastori, vt soluat votis quae quis vel
absolutissime praestitit, etc. Medina de cont. (...). hom. l. 4. cont. 6. c. 2.
page (Edit. Venet.) 310. B.
Medina, (and he speaks it of Ecclesiastical vows, how much more then of
this, which goes but for Civil?) so as perhaps he will not excuse our very
vow in Baptism. Chap. 14. v. 16.
Thou know Lord that I hate this diadem, and these robes of honor (says
Queen Ester of her own, in humility of spirit.) But they of the Regal,
wheresoever they find them, out of the peevishness of their sect, and the
pride of their heart. Especially in his MAJESTY, since he has entered the
lists, and undertaken in his own person, the defense of his own right (which
these impugn) (...), putting his subjects in mind of their duty by writing,
as Athanasius says every worthy Prince De Incannat. verbi. Idem habet and
Dionys. Epist. ad Demophilum. Sed Athan. incurrit and in Pauli verba (quanquam
de Regibus cum maxim loquens) (...) etc. Tit. 3. Certe, si alij: illis, quidni
ipsi sibi hanc operam locent?
is to do, when he doubts a defection. And he adds most elegantly (as if he
had aimed at the courses lately held by his MAJESTY) (...),. 1. least proiects
without prosecution be despised and derided; suppose the penning of the oath,
without that noble justification of it against the Cardinals countermine,
which soon followed.

As for the Adioynder in particular, (a calo of that camp, but the meanest of
many, -- (...)) it is not to be dissembled neither, what his ends are, or the
ends of them that advance him for their champion. (We hear he is a married man
(though most decently he rail against our Ministers for marrying, and carpe
the Bishop Adioynd. cap. 3. and iteru^ cap. 10.
that defends their doing so.) And they have fitted him to the full; not only
with Haeresis est mala mulier.
heresy the woman (as Epiphanius calls her, and a shrewd one too) but the
Totum hoc ^^^lieris opinio est, etc. De adorantibus Virg.
woman's heresy. For Idolatry and Disloyalty being the woman's heresies (as
Epiphanius also calls the one, and In Epist. ad Ludovicum Comitem Imperij.
Quidam inter MYLIERCVLAS and vulgum suum mussitant, quod non oporteat nos
subijci superioribus potestatibus, etc.
Waltramus of Naumberge the other, in particular) his book is composed of
these two elements only, and out of them amounts his whole sum. Also his
carriage is answerable, (that you may know what he has been used to, and what
school he has passed through) as partly may appear by that which has been
said for the Survay of the whole) partly is to be discerned out of the Title
and Superscription of every page of his book; viz. Conviciare audacter,
aliquid haerebit; Turning the speech, which the noble captain sometime used to
his soldier, into the clean contrary, Non alo te vt pugnes, sed vt latres
modo atque incestes; Only give thy book a broad and a bitter title, Call it,
A Discovery of lies and leasings, of frauds and falsehoods, used by the Bishop;
say somewhat, that so worthy a monument, and prevailing with the world, may
not seem to go clear away without some contradiction; Dart disgraces, vent
thy virulences, fling reproaches boldly, though thou can fasten none.

And the rather, because some Priests are said to stagger here in England,
after their reading the Bishops Answer to the Cardinals Apology, and
considering how he satisfies the very choicest proofs, that the Cardinal
could bring, etiam totis co^tra veritate^ viribus vtens, (besides his Accipiam
intercessione^ sanctorum, etc. c. 1. p. 10. (...). Xen. Cyropaed.
own choosing what points he would speak to) the Adioynd. task must be, vincta
venari, (as Cyrus was wont to say of his huntings in a garden, after the Median
fashion) to hunt bound beasts; namely to keep them Popish that are already
Papists, to divert old soakers from admitting the light shining in through the
loop-holes of their double captivity (more prejudiced consciences, then
imprisoned bodies) for this I say the Adioynder must throw dust, and cast
smoke, and rail with him that bears a head, to confound brains only, to
disioynt judgments, and to disturb proceedings.

And herein I report me to the consciences of those very Priests, that have but
read his book, whether this be meet dealing for one that writes against a
Bishop, or likely to persuade with Christian people.

But neither could Iannes and Iambres resist Moses in his Exodus 7. 11. 11.
miracles, neither may the Truth of God now be outfaced with the calumnies of
lewd and shameless persons, as S. Paul promises us by Moses his example; (for
that which Miracles were then, the Truth is now, by the tenure of S. Paul's
sentence, 2. Tim. 3. 8.) And as for the Bishops reputation, whereof none that I
have observed less sollicitous then himself, it may well be; For his glory
accrewes from hence most of all. Semper adventantis fuit omen dignitatis, bruta
and praeter modum iniuria. As (to persist in the story even now touched upon)
when the people murmured, then Aaron Exodus c. 16. v. 41. etc. 17.
prospered, when the assembly blustered, then his rod flourished, then God
gave testimony of his worthiness from heaven, and not before, as S.
Chrysostom also notes. Allway when a man is most trampled here upon earth,
then God is nearest hand to lift up his scale.

An Abstract of the chiefer points treated in the Defense; either purposely, as
drawn thither by the Adioynders method, or by incidence. And it may serve for
a summarie resutation of the whole.
The Contents of the first Part.
CHAP. 1.
1. IN what sense S. Austen says, that Peter represented the Churches person;
Not as Supreme Magistrate (which savors not of Scripture, neither for words,
nor sense, of Tullies Offices rather;) but as a pattern purposely picked out by
our Savior, to instance unity in, and to speak to one, what he meant of all,
even such as otherwise were clean out of hearing. This is debated by collation
of diverse places out of S. Austen, from page 3. to page 31. [Insomuch as
Sylvester himself, V. Clavis.. 5. Omnes Sacerdotes habent claves. Nec obstat
quod dictum est Petro, Tibi dabo; Nam hoc factum est ad ostendendu^ VNITATEM
ECCLESIAE. Yea Bellarm, acknowledges it to be the exposition of some Divines of
Paris, quod Dominus oravit pro Petro, vt TOTIVS Ecclesiae figuram gerebat.
Meaning thereby, that Christ prayed not for his person; but for the Church,
which he resembled. Or else Bellarm, need not reject this exposition, (as he
does) if they said only, that our Savior Christ prayed for Peter as chief
Magistrate. For then it would descend fitly enough upon the Pope; which is
Bellarmines drift there. But he rejects it as I said; Therefore gerere
personam Ecclesiae, is not to be chief Magistrate, in his or their opinion. De
Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 3. in initio.] 2. How Peter arrived to the glory of
Christ's sufferings, and yet suffered not for us, though fondly he once presumed
to suffer for Christ himself, pro liberatore liberandus, as S. Aust. says.
Against the bartring of Satisfactions between one man and an other, an usual
and againfull trade in Popery. p. 32. 33. 34. 3. Peter the fitter to paragon
the Church, because a great sinner, and so apt to show mercy. The Church
likewise, in the dispensation of the Keys. p. 35. 4. Peter's faults expressed
by S. Austen, but omitted by the Adioynder, where he complains of omissions.
Five in all, to the prejudice of their Primacie, not to the proof of it, as
Bellarmine would. p. 35. 36. etc. 5. The peace of the Church stands in the
gratiousnes of Princes, and their wishing well to Relligion, not in Jesuitical
resistance and arms. p. 38. 39. etc. 6. The Papists pride is the same with the
Luciferians, in that they will not understand Petrum in petra, that is, the
Church in Christ, as S. Austen construes it. p. 40. 7. The Luciferians forbid
marriages, as the Papists do: but not the Fathers, nor the Counsels, though it
be after vow, as is most probable. p. 41. 8. The words of S. Ambrose, which the
Adioynder impudently charges the Bishop to be of his devising, and utterly
beside the truth of all copies, are manifestly showed first to be in eleven
printed copies very ancient, then in four manuscripts beyond exception. One of
the KINGS MAJESTY'S Library, a copy very fair written, and withal so
ancient as before the Conquest, given by a Monk called Os-Ketel, to the
Monastery of Rochester. Another of Merton College in Oxford. Two out of the
University of Cambridge. Lastly, in an other edition of Paris, that retains
those words, after the late Rome Copy had presumed to leave them out, by the
partial direction of Felice Peretto, afterward Sixtus Quintus. page 44. etc.
(Whereunto may be added (because the Adioynder makes this his capital
imputation of untruths to the Bishop) that Johannes Viguerius a Papist of
chief note for learning and judgment, reads them just as the Bishop quoteth
them. Institut, ad Theolog. Christianam, c. 16. 6. v. 5. De Sacramento
Ordinis.) 9. How the Friars use the Fathers, when they are not for their turn,
but especially S. Ambrose above all others, out of Iunius his report of his
own experience of their Presses, when he was at Lions in France. p. 45. and
46. 10. Peter the prime, but more primes then Peter. p. 47. 11. The Vicars of
Christ, are all Ministers in their degree, but specially the Bishops. p. 49.
12. Peter feeds all, and yet others feed him, as Paul and James, so as no
superiority follows from thence. p. 51. 13. The friuelous distinction,
between sheep and lambs, hissed out by Maldonate; prejudicial to the Pope
though it were received, by Tolet and Turrian their expositions. p. 50. 51.
etc. 14. The Levites were subject to the Temporal Prince, and a part of
Israel, even in that sense. The Adioynders proofs to the contrary are
answered. Arguments for the other side, which he has not answered. p. 52. 53.
etc. (Rabanus Maurus in locu^, (praeter alios citatos in corpore Defens.) sic.
Quod recensiti quidem and Leuitae fuerint (inuentusque numerus ad 22000.) sed
seorsim. Non ob exemptionem ab obedientia, sed eximietatem virtutis quam prae
se far debent. Denique. 3. Reg. 11. 38. (secundu^ 70) dantur Salomoni. i.
Regi saeculari. Nihil ergo iuvabit ad exemptione^, quod alias Levitae dati sunt
Aaroni; vt pertendit F. T.) 15. The Adioynders blasphemy confuted, That Christ
by his coming abridged the sovereignty of temporal Princes. That it remains
as ample still, as in the old Law. p. 59. etc. large. 16. Kings are to feed
the Church of God, and Peter himself but to feed it. Cyrus head and pastor of
the Church, with some likelihood that he was saved. p. 63. etc. 17. The Papists
ascribe temporal primacie to the Pope, for all the Adioynders dissembling. The
KINGS MAJESTY is not so forward to challenge spiritual primacie, as the
Papists impute to him; whatsoever he might. p. 67. 18. English Bishops, and
among them the Bishop of Elie, no dealer in Coactions. p. 68. 19. The Swords
are two, and divided in their bearers, though linked in use; according to
Gelasius his judgment of that matter. p. 69. 20. Princeps, and Caput, common
to others with Peter, and therefore enforce not. p. 70. 71. 21. The Papists,
not we, are ready to depose Magistrates, upon conceit of their misbehauiour.
Their slaundering of Wickliff, upon no ground, that they show. (So, in another
matter, Wickliff is censured by Petrus Lutzemburg: to hold that which none else
ever imputed to him, though they had sifted him narrowly. Witness Alphonsus,
lib. 12. contrahaereses. V. Purgatorium, in initio. Lex quaedam accusatoria,
and, Consuetudo maledicendi, pricking them on, without any further evidence, to
carpe at Wickliff.) NONE but CHRIST from heaven may deprive his STEWARD; by
BELLARMINES own confession. p. 74. 75. 22. The Bishop said right, that Peter
was restored to his Apostleship. p. 77. etc. (Add and de Magist. in 4. Sent.
did. 19.) Qualem autem etc. ex August. Saepe lapsis Sacerdotibus reddita est
dignitatis potestas, Et, Petrus post lapsum restitutus fuit, etc.) 23. S.
Cyrill gives the pre-eminence over all, to Kings. p. 81. (To which that might
be added, ex eodem Cyrill. Comment. in locum Micheae citat. (which he speaks
of Kings) (...), Crowned and dignified with the MOST SVPREAME EXCELLENCIES.)
24. S. Chrysostom no favorer of Peter's singular Primacie, but against it
directly. p. 82. 25. Peter the mouth of the Apostles. And what though? p. 83.
26. Peter gains the check, by asking Christ the question, which the Adioynder
would draw to prove his Monarchy by. p. 84. 27. Leoes authorities of Peter's
primacie are discussed. p. 86. 28. The Law Inter claras, not glossed by sundry
Lawyers; and for that, and other reasons, justly to be suspected, if not
rejected. p. 88. etc. 29. The not erring of the Church of Rome for a certain
season, was no security for her perseverance in aftertimes. The titles given
to her by Justinian, are common to other Churches; and some greater then they.
p. 91. 30. Justinians facts of more force to prove, then Patarensis his words.
And the Adioynders instance against this, is answered. p. 93. 31. Unjust
assaults proceeding from authority, are not to be resisted, but from others
they may. Syluerius a traitor to Iustiniau. p. 94 32. Justinian slaundered by
the Adioynder of vnlearnednesse, without ground. His salvation likewise
questioned by him, very uncharitably. p. 95 33. Patarensis his words imply not
Syluerius his right to universal jurisdiction, and much less to the
temporal, which the Pope challenges. p. 96 34. Every Minister is a Minister
over the Church of the whole world: in what sense. p. 97 35. Liberatus his
story which the Adioynder quoteth, has more for the pre-eminence of the
Emperor above the Pope, then the Pope above him. p. 98
CHAP. 2.
36. AThanasius flees to Julius for aid, not for judgment. As any Bishop in
distress might to him that were able to rescue. p. 103 37. It was more then
Pope Leo could do, to quash the Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, concerning
the equalling of Constantinople with Rome. The Adioynders four reasons to the
contrary are answered. p. 105 38. The Popes censures derided by godly Bishops,
and himself censured as fast when there was occasion. p. 107 39. Other
objections dissolved against the Canon of Chalcedon, viz. 1. the Emperor
Justinius, and John Bishop of Constantinople, their seeking for union with the Sea of Rome. 2. Tu es Petrus, and super hanc petram, applied to Pope Symmachus
by the Eastern Bishops. 3. Vigilius his presidentship in the Council of
Constantinople, with Eutychius his good leave. 4. The Popes deposing of
Bishops, etc. p. 108. etc. 40. Pope Leos humble and yet bootelesse intercession
to the Emperor Martian, to disanull the Canon of the Council of Chalcedon. The
Adioynders childish aucupium at the word intercedere. p. 110. etc. 41. Four
reasons brought by the Adioynder, why Pope Leo had good cause to except against
the said Canon, (though it be clean beside the Text of the Bishops book,
which he professes to refute, and a mere itching after occasion to be doing)
are answered in their order. As first, that Anatolius his aspiring humor was
not the cause of enacting this Canon, as the Adioynder staunders him. Secondly,
that the Canon was neither made in the absence of the Popes Legates, nor yet by
constraint or surreption of the Fathers, but with general willingness and
gratulation of all sides, save only the partial Agents of Pope Leo, etc. p.
112. 113. 114. etc. 42. The styles of poor suitors, and the backesides of
letters, not to be drawn into argument, as the Bishop answered. The
Adioynders replies to the contrary confuted. p. 116. 117 43. Titles given to
Leo by the Council, are no more then have been given to other Bishops, and
some of them to Noble Laymen. The Bishops of Alexandria and Constantinople are
called Bishops of the Catholic Church. p. 118 44. Idle distinction of the
Adioynder, between the privileges of Rome, granted in respect of the seat
of the Empire (as the Council specifies) and others issuing from S. Peter,
(which the Fathers take no knowledge of.) p. 121 45. Leoes excommunicating of
Dioscorus; but by the Synod, per praesentem sanctam Synodum, the very words of
his Legates in the Council. Which the Adioynder most wretchedly sticks not to
construe, as if the Synod had been Leoes instrument in the Excommunication.
The Jesuits would make a general Council the Popes instrument. Yet at an
other time, the Pope was as much instrument to the Italian Bishops, and to the
Synod of Rome; for so much as they wrote by Julius Bishop of Rome, says Ath^.
Apol 2. Per Iulium scripsere.
Whereas Peter himself might be his instrument by the same means, it
following immediately, vna cum beato Petro, etc. p. 122 46. Leo the interpreter
of the voice of blessed Peter. A sorry elogium, yet much stood upon by the
Adioynder, to prove the Monarchy. ibid. and 123 47. Leoes presidentship in
the Council of Chalcedon, so much urged by the Adioynder, nothing to the
purpose. No wonder if he were suffered to appoint his own Legates, after they
had made choice of him to be their president. p. 124 48. Priests admitted to
Councels, and sometime they that were no Priests. p. 125.
CHAP. 3.
49. THe Cardinal driven to say Mother Peter, or else to Pamelius his own
Annotation there is, Est insignis hic locut contra cos qui ECCLESIAM contemnunt.
let go S. Cyprians authority; which belongs to the Church, not to Peter, nor
the Pope. p. 126. etc. 50. In the great equality of the Apostles between
themselves, yet one was singled out from the quire in general, to recommend
unity to the followers of Christ (which may serve to stop Mr. Saunders his
foul mouth, that cries De claue David. l. 3. c. 1. Neither had S. Cyprian, and
S. Austen, (that observe this mystery most) any such ONE. And how far are
they from it (for all their crying out upon us) that would turn their one into
twelve? Though S. Austen say, Multi (...), and vn^ dicitur, (wherein he
supposes it belonged to all, or else he says nothing) Pasce o^es (...).
Therefore no Monarchy in those words. But the Jesuits calling for Twelve to
sway the Popedom, do they not proclaim that it was intended to be the
Commission of all Twelve, though for unity sake it was confined to ONE? The
place of S. Austen is, De Pastor. c. 13.
shame upon us for not having such a one at least, though we admit no Pope,
says he. But neither have we such authority to frame mysteries, or mystical
significations to our selves, and unity is most unity, when it is instanced
but once; often, were to break it.) p. 128. 51. Caput in S. Cyprian, is not
the Popes person, nor any man's whatsoever; but Christ's Original Truth which he
brought into the world for our direction. p. 129. 52. The Adioynders gross
corrupting of S. Cyprians text: (though he cry out every where against the
Bishop for corruptions.) p. 130. 53. His ignorance no less gross in his
rudiments of Grammar, and of the Latin tongue, (the usual Cacoethes that
visits him every where.) p. 131. 54. How the Church is built upon Peter. p.
132. 55. The Bishops conjecture remains probable, that the Cardinal left out
those words out of Cyprian deceitfully, wherein he says, That it had been an
arrogant and an insolent part in Peter, to have answered Paul when he rebuked
him, by saying, That the Primacie was his, and therefore he ought not to be
controlled. ibid. 56. The Adioynder nevertheless says, that Peter might have
said so in his full right; giving Cyprian the lie, so. ibid. 57. Peter's
primacie opposed to Paul's nouellitie and iunioritie in the words of S. Cyprian.
Ergo not a primacie of authority. p. 33. 58. The Adioynder is content to
charge S. Peter with error, dummodo imperet. Takes away verity, to give him
primacie, very unadvisedly. ibid. 59. The Bishops denying the sequel, a
fundamento ad caput, is maintained against the trifling sophistries of the
Adioynder. p. 134. 60. The testimonies out of S. Hierome for Peter's primacie,
are answered: for one word of eminency, three of equality are found in the
first of them. p. 135. 61. A head against schism, is a head of order only;
sufficient if it prevent disorder. p. 136. 62. The Apostles though confirmed,
might need such a head; or though not they, yet the multitudes that might have
reference to them. And to the Adioynder, telling us that we need such a head
as much as the Apostles, we grant what he says, and we admit no less, or
rather far more, though we acknowledge no Pope. p. 137. 63. The proudest
Priest of them all, may not force a King: and, That external coaction is
denied to the Minister against whomsoever of the faithful. Late a p. 137. ad
p. 144. 64. The Bishops style not subject to reproof: they that reprehend it,
offend more grossly in the same kind themselves: and namely Cardinal
Bellarmine (...) -- p. 146. 65. Iovinians heresies touch not us, (if they were
herefies) but the Papists rather. And of the honourablenes of holy Matrimony,
which the Adioynder a married man (perhaps repenting) depraues, the Reverend
Bishop in his single life defends. p. 147. 66. A most ridiculous distinction,
between three kinds of Foundations, magnified by the Adioynder, but confuted.
p. 149. 67. Bellarmine and Baronius playing blind-man-buffe, about Peter's
primacie. That which is ordinary to the one, is extraordinary to the other,
and that extraordinary which is ordinary. The same Andabata is between
Bellarmine and himself, as if he loved the sport. Moses the greater Magistrate
(says he) because extraordinary: And yet, Peter because ordinary, therefore
the greater. p. 150 68. S. Hierome rackt to say, Peter's chair is the rock
upon which the Church is built; he says it not. p. 151. 69. Magister orbis, is
not Monarcha orbis, with S. Chrysostom. p. 152. 70. Columna and firmamentum
both veritatis and Ecclesiae, was their title that were no Popes. ibid. 71. S.
James his province as large as Peter's. p. 153. 72. What manner of Princes the
Apostles of Christ were in all Lands. p. 154. 73. The Popes tyranny is not
abated by the multitudes of people that he usurps upon, (as the Adioynder
would) but rather creased, and made more odious. p. 155. 74. Rome no
Sanctuary, Succession no shield, against corruption and error. p. 156.
CHAP. 4.
75. Spiritual Men's Monarchy pleaded for by the Adioynder, in ipsis terminis.
p. 158 76. To be pronounced Blessed, is not to be preferred to the government
of the whole Church. p. 159 77. Basil is not for the Pope to be a Monarch. He
finds footesteps of reverence toward secular Princes, even in reasonlesse
creatures; and interprets the Word of God to be our King. p. 160. 78. Others
as well as Peter, have prelation ((...)) among the Apostles, out of Nazianzene.
And therefore that implies no sovereignty. p. 161. 162. etc. (Vide and Procop.
in Esa. 17. 6. duos tresue (...), and (...), atque (...), elicientem Apostolos;
idque ex verbis Prophetae vt sibi videtur. Nominatque (vt Nazianzenus) Petrum,
Iacobum, Iohannem.) 79. Pastor a word of baseness, with S. Basil. And yet
alleged out of Chrysostom, to prove Peter's supremacy, by the Adioynder.
Item Aristot. pol. 1.
p. 164 80. The Pope alone is not entrusted with the care of converting
infidel countries to the Faith. ibid. 81. Both the Cardinal, and the
Adioynder corrupt S. Chrysostom, foysting the word caput into his Text, where
there is none in the Greek. And then being caught, he carps at our men for
taking upon them (as he calls it) to set out the Greek Fathers. A theife
displeased with Candlelight. p. 165. etc. 82. The comparison that S.
Chrysostom makes, between Peter and Jeremy, in respect of the latitude of
their jurisdictions, it aduantageth not the Pope. p. 168 83. Whether Peter
might create an Apostle of his own head in the place of Judas, without
consulting the community. It seems not, both by S. Chrysostom, and
otherways; though the Adioynder from thence would prove the Popedom. p. 169.
84. More proofs of the Adioynders good skill in Latin. The Bishops book
pushes him away, with the very style and penning of it (tanquam cornibus)
whiles he offers to refute it. Musae surcillis praecipitem cijci(...). Cat.
p. 170. 85. Sermones de Tempore, never so entitled by S. Austen. A doubtful
work, and carrying small validity in it. Full of foul Latin, and fonder
sense, is the Sermon quoted by the Cardinal. p. 172 86. Miserable shifts of
the Adioynder to defend them. ibid. 87. As just as Germans lips, nine miles
asunder. The Eve falls out three days before the holy day; and at another
time, fourteen years before the Feast; the Adioynders rauing computations. p.
173 88. Peter's fall was to assuage his fierceness, being a chollericke man;
And though it were also to incline him to pity, yet without any inference of
the Popedom from thence, pity being a general virtue for all Ministers,
and dealers in Soule-matters, (besides that Paul was touched with as deep a
sense of his infirmities, and remorse for bad courses formerly used, as any of
them all, Tit. 3. 1. Tim. 1. 15. Ephesians. 2. 3. and 4.) And yet both Bellarmine and
the Adioynder are not ashamed to raise such an unlikely consequence, from the
fall of Peter, (for want of better proof) to conclude his Supremacy. p. 174
89. Praeferri cunctae Ecclesiae, is far short of the Primacie, that they
contend for. Common also not to the Apostles only, but to all Bishops in
general, by Origens judgment. p. 174 90. The Reverend Bishop not to be taught
by the Adioynder, how to censure the falls and infirmities of Gods Saints. p.
175 91. Appeals to the Pope out of Africa, for bidden under pain of
Excommunication, in a lawful Synod, whereof S. Austen was one. p. 176. 177 92.
The Fathers words are not supplicatorie but peremptory against Appeals,
though preserving their reverence as to a worthy Sea, and the parties that sat
in it, otherwise godly men, and like enough to be advised by them. p. 178 93.
The Bishop forgeth not, but the Adioynder slauereth and slaundereth as he is
wont. All Appeals out of Africa are interdicted. Not only Priests but Bishops
too, and the Bishops most of all. p. 180 94. The Adioynders slight exceptions
against this are answered. p. 181. and 182 95. His monstrous sliding away from
the state of the question, to fight with an imaginary shadow of his own. And
yet therein also he is not only unsound, but (...), he contradicts himself,
in his second instance, most apparently. p. 182. and 183. 96. Pope Zozimus his
drawing of S. Austen to Caesarea, to dispatch Church-businesses, is no argument
of the ones universal authority, but rather of the others rare sufficiency.
Traxit, compulit, coegit, is for equals, as well as for Superiors. p. 184.
and 185. (Add ex S. Prospero Praef. lib. ad Excerpta Genuens. de Camillo and
Theodoro Presbyteris; quibus obsequium deferens, simplicitatem obedientiae sibi
tribuit, [tantus Episcopus.]) 97. Liberius his letters in behalf of certain
false dissembling Arrians, to the Council of Tyana, for their restitution, to
which also the Council yielded, prove not that the Bishop of Rome is of such
authority as he must needs be obeyed, but that he is not so discerning, but he
may be gulled and cheated, as he was by those hypocrites. Reasons out of S.
Basil, why the Bishops of that Council had respect to Liberius, nothing to the
Supremacy. First, because the abuse springing from those parts (in receiving
Eustathius to grace, undeserving) reason it was that from thence also should
come the reformation. Secondly, to avoid the suspicion of emulation, and
homebred quarrels; which is incidenter between Bishops of the same Country,
then between forreiners. Thirdly, to fortisie the proceedings in the cause by
the concurrence of many Bishops, etc. p. 186. and 187 ((...), Chrysostom, At
Ecclesiast. 12. (...). Quod referunt and huc.) 98. The Bishops that the
Adioynder says Julius restored, Sozomen says plainly, they were restored by
the Emperor. Yet happily Julius was Loco quidem ibi citato, de Constantio
satis clare. Sed long clarius de Constante, circa Athanasium, cum Iulij
literae nibil proficerent^ Verba ciusdem Sozom. Quem vide l. 3. c. 10.
not slack in the cause to do his best endeauours; as becomes every godly
Bishop of Christendom, according to the abilities that his place affoardeth
him. And so may we construe, Omnium curam gerens. Quis scandalizatur and ego
non vror? as it came not from Peter, so it belongs to all that are zealous in
their rank. The Greeks think much that they should come behind the Romans
because of the amplitude of that Church, Their own Genebrard in Psalm. 67. r.
37. expounding that prophecy there of the vocation of the Gentiles, and what
degree of honor they shall hold under Christ, says plainly, that the holy
Ghost Aequat Orientales Occidentalsbus, preferres neither before the other.
Which is a most true word; save only as inward worth shall commend the^ to God.
where as they presume for certain, that they excel them in piety, and
virtuous life. Lastly, they are so hardy, as to threaten Julius for
transgressing of the Canons, p. 188. and 189. 99. Damasus his titles, the
Adioynders tattles, frothie stuff to conclude for Monarchy. p. 189. and 190
100. Damasus his governing the house of God: His letters for Peter of
Alexandria. ibid. 101. Damasus takes in hand, Vitalis an Antiochian heretic,
to examine him; but by the permission of Paulinus his own Bishop. So may any
body. Prescribe, a proud word of the Adioynders weauing in, clean besides the
truth of the text. Damasus confesses that Paulinus could do as much as
himself in the matter, but only to show consent between Bishops, etc. p.
191. 102. The Adioynders buskin terms are opened: Flauianus his pretended
restoring by Damasus, was nothing but their mutual returning to agreement
after a priche; the manner being in those times, for two dissenting Bishops, to
forbear the communion of one another, till reconciliation and clearing of
matters, etc. p. 192 103. Of Pope Siricius; That the Council of Capua
committing to him the small hearing of acause, makes for the Councels
authority, rather then for his; the Council deputing, he being deputed. And
yet not with any power to controwle former judgments, but because (says S.
Ambrose) they presumed that what Theophilus (Bishop of Alexandria) should
define, the same would Siricius (the Pope of Rome) allow. (...) -- p. 193 104.
Siricius rescript to Himerius questions, nothing to our question. ibid. 105.
Anastasius and Innocentius their special aid implored by the Fathers against
the heretics: but no universal jurisdiction of theirs acknowledged. p. 194.
106. Universal jurisdiction goes not with seeds Apostolica. Of which kind
there are more then the Roman Sea. Pastoral diligence to prevent the danger
of Christ's weak members, is made power and authority over ALL the members of
Christ's body, as the Adioynder metamorphoses it, to claw the Pope. p. 195.
107. Innocentius either a badpen-man, or his Epistles counterfeit. Yet
Rescripsit ad omnia prout fas erat etc. is of the matters then in hand, not of
the bye: which notwithstanding are not so prowdas the Adioynder would frame
them, paring away words to pervert the sentence: which he imputes to the
Bishop, while he practices himself. p. 196.
CHAP. 5.
108. Peter's Summitie, or Summa potestas, excludes not the other Apostles from
their fellowship in it, no not in Bellarmines mouth; and much less in Origens.
Therefore it inferres no Monarchy. p. 198. 109. The Papists fleet from sense
to sense, in expounding of Scriptures, and at last they say, that the literal
sense is not so plain as the allegorical. A fine fancy. p. 199. 110. Not we,
but the Papists, confound Clergy and Laity. The Pope gives leave to laymen
to dispense spiritual matters, and some to take the Sacrament out of their own
hands. p. 200. (Women's Baptism usual in Popery: yet S. Chrysostom as
astonished cries out upon it. (...); What say thou? Does a woman baptize?
Tom. 5. Savilian. p. 480. (...)) 111. Origin tastes it not, that the Church
should be built upon Peter alone, and not upon other Apostles as well. p. 201.
112. But upon John rather; whom he preferres wonderfully. p. 203. and 205.
113. As one, so the other, of things spoken to Peter, (in Origens judgment)
are to be construed. Pasce oves, like Ae dificabo super hanc, and e contra.
Therefore the Bishop satisfies all most directly, answering one by the other,
of the places concerning Peter produced out of Origin, notwithstanding the
Adioynders absurd cauillation. p. 202. 114. Paul equal with Peter at least. p.
204. 115. Peter could not merit to be the rock of the Church, as the Adioynder
dreams out of S. Hilarie misunderstood. And much less by only rowing in a
boat at sea, (as out of Maximus) could he atcheiue such preferment, so
incomparably distant. S. Hilarie assigns the prerogative to his faith,
fiue-fold to nothing, above his person. p. 206. 207. 208. 209. 116. Maximus his
Sermons, of what authority. p. 210. 117. The Adioynder as all Papists, would
feign be at his Carters-logicke, and professes cruelties. p. 213 118. The
Papists to blame (as the Bishop most acutely told them, answering Maximus
testimony,) to assign Peter the charge of a particular Church (viz. Rome)
after he was Chief and Governor in their opinion of the Universal. p. 211.
119. This reply of the Bishops, is defended against the Adioynders witty
follies. p. 213. and 214. 120. Continual succssion of Bishops, one after
another, in the same Sea, does not prove that none of them ever erred. p. 212.
121. And much less that Peter was at Rome, because the Succession in the Sea
of Rome never failed. ibid. 122. Maximus his elogia of Paul and Peter so
tempered, as he rather enclines to yield Paul the pre-eminence. p. 214. and 215
123. The old Papists were not so violent in their conclusions against Princes,
as the modern Jesuits. p. 217. (Iesuini in eo sapientes, quod put ant se coelo
ipsi quandoque imperaturos. Pap. Mass. in Paulo 4. [Hem.]) 125. The Adioynder
like a man deadly sick, that does not feel his grief; so refuses to see
wherein the Bishop has hurt them, and says that his arguments trouble the
Bishop out of all measure. p. 217. etc. 126. The temporal and earthly Primacie
disclaimed by the Papists, though they practice the thing it self; which is
utterly forbidden them. p. 220. and 221.
Faults escaped in the Printing, whereof some are already mended in some
Copies.
Page lin. 20 26 cupiditate charitate. 116 vlt. these those 119 23 emprison
surprise 27 surely sure 120 11 humor his humor is 129 17 called culled 131 21
primum primum [and eme^da sic, toties quoties. Viciu^ fuit correctoris
corrige^di] 135 24 What then? [What then?] 138 8 these those 141 8 truly Read
freely 12 speaks upon speaks it upon 152 1 none but none first but 164 24
took Capsur to Capsur 187 33 * Julius Julius 34 Marcellus * Marcellus 218 2
[post] Ambrose has told you, and Origin has told you, 235 11 Number. 49. Number.
20. 242 15 Thessalonians for him Thessalonians to pray for him. 262 20 our your
275 14 Baronius writ it Baron. writing it 275 15 The Apostle S. John Timothy S.
Paul's scholar. [estque locus apud Bar. T. 1. An. 60. number. 41.] 277 23 (...)
(...) 279 4 flumenta fluenta 281 5 opposes apposeth (or paralleleth) 286 21
(...) (...) 307 34 1. Cor. 15. 1. Cor. 11. 315 25 1. Cor. 15. 1. Cor. 13. 321 1
300. years certain 100. year 24 well euict will euict. 354 8 6 7 357 25 dele
also 417 6 [post] (...) and Read that which is not (...), (or, that which is
(...)) may be, etc 426 29 were where 430 8 dele this 9 urging it urging for the
promise 433 2 in Iouinian, in Iouinianum, 462 25 Virgin Nonne 463 6 [post] the
Pope (remaining Pope) cannot 511 27 (...) (...) 516 25 Clergy Church 520 11
Marcion Marcian Marg.
73 5. and 6 and Heracleota Mopsuestenus, Heracleota, and Mopsuestenus, 213 8
Vrbis Orbis 232 5 HE HE 257 16 with them by them 263 1 (...) (...) 278 2 in
Epist. 5. Cant. in cap. 5. Cant. 279 6 cap. 8. Read cap. 9. 307 7 himself said
to S. John? said to S. John himself? 486 dele, Com. in Epist, etc. 489 7 Homo
nihili Testis nihili 506 1 Luc. 2. 2. Luc. 3. 2. 549 lin. 2. unwilling
unwitting. notae quartae

CHAP. I.
Of the Defense of the Bishop of ELIE his Answer to CARD. BELLARMINES Apology,
against the slanderous Adioynder of one F. T.

Wherein besides certain other occurrents of lesser importance, two things
especially are recleered: viz.

The BISHOPS understanding of S. Austens exposition of Pasce oves meas in the
right sense; and his most upright quoting of S. Ambrose his words to the same
purpose.

1. AS Lib. 10. hist. apud Gelasium Cyzicenu^, de a^ Council. Nicaen. l. 2. c. 1.
Eusebius describing the reign of Constantine the Great, after the Nicene
Council, calls it a blessed time, when all things being established both for
Religion and Government, nothing was in mention but the Trinity in heaven, and
the Emperor upon earth, with his Royal issue; that prayed to, these prayed
for, ((...) and (...), as S. Paul couples them, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4) even twice a
day prayed for, in the public service, without any flattery: witness (...).
5.
S. Chrysostom, Com. in 1. Tim. 2. So the Adioynder spends it self in the
defacing of them both, the KINGS Supremacy, and the Invocation of the one and
only true GOD, by his Son Jesus Christ. And first the Supremacy, then the
other; because Kings being as ramparts to fortify Religion, when they go
down, Gods worship consequently goes to wrack. For Kings do not mind
matters of war so much, or of the State (says the same Chrysostom
elsewhere, and Leo Leo epist. 78. ad Le^^. Aug. O^ta^^um ^st vt in ^^nnem
gloria (...) vestru^ c^t^ndatur imp^r^um, qui SVPRA CVRAM RE^^M TEMPORALIVM
Religiolae prouiden^ famulatun divinis and aeternis dispositionibus impe^^itis
Also long after his time, Eulb. Carn. Epist. 13. vt vetus m. s. habet: Henticus
Imper and Rob. Rex Franciae super Cha^um ^luv u^ convenerunt de statu Ecclesiae
amicabiliter tractaturi.
subscribes) by virtue of their calling which they have from God, as of
Religion, and Piety, and of the Church. Georg. Alexandrin. vitae Chrysostom. in
extremo.
(...). Therefore many other particulars occurring in the Bishops Answer to
Card. Bellarmine (as indeed each of his books for their admirable variety,
is rather (...), then (...), rather an artificial embroiderie, then a single
monument) this man singles out only these two in effect, not ignorant of the
relation, or the connection that they have between themselves, That it is
fatal in a manner (as the 2. Philippie.
Orator said of himself) nec vinci sine Republica posse, nec vincere; so, that
Ne veniat anima mea in consilium co^u^ qui dicunt vel imperio pacem and
libertatem ecclesiarum, vel ecclesijs prosperitatem and exaltationem Imperij
nocituram. Non enim vtriusque institutor Deus in destructionem ea connexuit,
sed in aedificationem. Bernard. ad Conradum Regem Romanor. Epist. 24^.
Christ should be dishonored without the King were impeached, nor the King
disparaged, unless Christ were dishonored. And again, Nemo alteri bellum
indicit, qui non eodem etiam tempore and alteri: no man assaults the one, but
he oppugnes the other, for the most part, at the same time.

2. Five Chapters he spends about the first of these two points, five more
about the second, and certain other driblets which he There f^re (though he
fall to other matter) ye he calls his 9. and 10. Chap. the Conclusion of the
Adioynder, as if he had spent his spite with the former. See cap. 9. in Titulo.
interlaces to the end of his book. In the first, is first quarelled S.
Austens exposition of Pasce oves meas, feed my sheep; which the Bishop
alleged out of his book de agone Christiano, c. 30. Cum Petro dicitur, ad
omnes dicitur, Pasce oves. meas: when it is said to Peter, it is said to all,
Feed my sheep. And therefore he is not made, by virtue of those words at least,
Universal Governor of Christ's Church. The strength of F. T. his reply to
this authority (sparing the more ample quotation of the place, which in the
end I shall quote perhaps more amply then he, though he pretend to quote it
somewhat more amply then the Bishop) lies in this; That whereas S. Austen
says, the commission given to Peter, Feed my sheep, was given to all (ad
omnes dicitur,) it was because S. Peter bare the person of the Church, which
with him imports as much, as to be endued with Supreme authority over the
Church. And to this end Tullies Offices are quoted very freshly, Est proprium
munus magistratus, etc. It is the proper office or duty of a Magistrate, to
understand, that he bears the person of the city. And so, says he, Peter
looses no authority by this authority, but gains rather.

3. Where first when S. Austen says, that Peter bare the person of the Church,
and by that expounds his ad omnes dicitur, as this man fancyeth; I should
think under correction, that he means the Church only representative,
consisting of the Apostles and Pastors, and no more; chief Magistrate of: viz.
to bear authority over the whole Church militant, and every member thereof.
Yea, and in some cases of extention, not only over them which are without holy
orders, and so no Feeders, but over them also which are clean fallen away from
the Church: and which is yet more, over them which never set foot within it.
For thither also reaches their ierke, as they call it, of indirect power. S.
Austens sense, that S. Peter bare the person of all the members of the Church,
(as no question but he figured the community in many things, as may be
afterward not only yielded to, but declared at large,) yet who would ever
believe, that when the Feeders of themselves, is put in the evil sense, by S.
Jude v. 12. taking many things from S. Peter himself. 2. Pet. 2.
precept is of Feeding the flock of Christ, this precept is given to the flock
it self? which nevertheless must needs be I say, if it be given to S. Peter,
bearing the person of the flock; as he must needs bear that, if he bear the
person of the whole Church, even in that, that he was bid to feed the flock.
Do you see then what a confusion you have brought us in already? how you have
pulled down the partition wall between the Laity and the Clergy, so as now
Theodor. hist. 5. 1^.
Theodosius may sit him down where he will, though it be at Millan it self,
without any scrupulositie? how you have utterly removed the enclosures about
the mountain, and made way for M. Saunders his Lib. de claue David.
Aclerus, as he calls him, while you would seem to set up a Nauclerus in
Christ's Church, and to be the only true friend to the beauty of Gods house?
Yet you are wont to Adioynd. c. 2. n. 19 and sequen. Item c. 5. n. 6.
say, that this is our fault, to take away distinction between the sheep and
the shepherd, between the people and the Pastors, and to lay all open to the
wild boar out of the wood. Nay, not only you confound the Laity and the
Clergy, but you make as many Popes by this means as there be Christians.
Pasce oves meas, in feeding Christ's sheep, you grant that this commission was
given to Peter representing their persons, etc. Which is as much to say, as,
they are all made Feeders of the whole flock, by virtue of these words, no
less then he.

4. As for that you expound the bearing of the person by Tullies Offices, to be
no other then to be made Supreme Magistrate, though it be first uncouth to
expound Austen by Tullie, whose phrase for the most part is not so suitable; yet
let S. Austen deliver his own mind for this point, lib. de pastor. (for we
speak of pasce, and he handles this argument in the very place that I quote)
cap. 12. Quemadmodum loquantur authors mundi, quid ad nos? As much to say, as,
What care we how Tully speaks? Besides, that if S. Austen had meant to
decipher Peter by those words to be chief magistrate of the Church under
Christ, (for so you conceive) perhaps he would rather have said that he bore
Christi personam, then Ecclesiae; the person of Christ, then of the Church. As
the deputy Regent of a kingdom or territory under an absolute Prince, may
rather be said to bear the Princes person, then the Commonwealths that he
gouernes in his right. So here. And so speaks your Andradius, lib. 1. de
Council. Papa Christi personam gerit, the Pope bears the person of Christ: so
diverse more of the same strain. Neither lastly, does it seem likely in
reason, that a Prince should represent for his Commonwealth, the head for the
body, which are rather distinguished still one against the other, as membra
diuidentia, and two parties; but either certain of the Commons for the whole
multitude; or as in other cases, some one man for the King. But compare we
more narrowly S. Austen with Tully, since you will needs urge us to it.

5. In Tully it is gerere, in S. Austen gestare personam Ecclesiae. Is there no
difference think you between these two? What if one be of things figurative,
another of things essential? will you blame me as too critical for
distinguishing between gerere and gestare? Gerimus magistratum, gestamus
vestem, either scenicam, or some other. Gestamus and personam; I mean not now
personam in S. Austens sense, least S. Peter be farther off from his supremacy
then you are aware. And though Austen in some place may say, gerere personam,
even of Peter in this case, yet neither in that place that you now allege, de
Agone Christiano, cap. 30. and for one gerebat, you shall have 5. gestabats in
S. Austen, I believe. Gestare, portare, sustinere, sigurare, all these I may
remember; gerere, though I deny not, yet it comes so sieldom, as I may truly
say, I scarce remember.

6. Touching what you insert here, That whatsoever is given to the King as
King, the same is given to the Commonwealth, whereof he bears and
represents the person: and so in like manner, what was given to S. Peter as
head of the Church, the same belongs to the Church her self: I will not follow
you too close about your State-positions, so favorable to Kings as we know of
old, so enlarging their sway as you now profess, that what power the one has,
the other has the like, King and people, (though 1. Sam. 8. 11. we read of
iudicium Regis erga populu^, but none populi erga Regem, the King might judge
the people, but not the people the King) and therefore this secret might have
rotted in your breast; to omit this I say, It will follow out of your doctrine,
that what our Savior may do as Head of his Church, the same may his Church
do of her own head. The instances are diverse, in your practice specially, I
need not feign. As to mangle the communion, to dismiss subjects from their
allegiance, to restrain marriages, to dispense with vows, with oaths, etc.
In all which you set your wit against his, your authority against his, and
namely in the question of assoyling from Obedience, how often do we hear from
you in plain Thom. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 12. art. 2. Valentian, in illum locum, and
alij.
terms, that Ecclesia habet authoritatem Dei in terris? No doubt, because
whatsoever is given to the head, the same is given to the body, as here you
tell us. Though again you are as rude with your own Doctors, as before you
were rash with Princes Crowns, when you say in your application, that in like
sort whatsoever is given to Saint Peter as Head of the Church, the same is
given to the Church her self: which you would never have said, I suppose, but
to defend your grammar-paradoxe about gerere personam, with a far more
desperate paradoxe in divinity. Discern you no better between Popes and
Councels, which are the Church in effect? or shall these play quarter masters
with the Pope? Do you so understand the Council of Basile, or the Council of
Constance, which your fellows would help you to construe more mildly; or will
you revive that charm of our King Henry the 4. of famous memory, who writing
to the Pope to persuade Stow annal. Angl. ann. 10. Hen. 4. p. 546.
him to conformity, alleged thus (if Stow say true:) Si non audierit
Ecclesiam, etc. If he hear not the church, that is, obey not, let him be unto
thee as an heathen and a Publican? As for S. Cyprians authority, which you
botch into your text here, impertine^t enough, that Ecclesia est in Episcopo,
the Church is in the Bishop, because the Bishop, as you say, is Head of the
Church; do you not consider why that was spoken by S. Cyprian, even to curb
the insolency of your Romish Hierarche, and to show that Bishops are rather
absolute in themselves, (he of Carthage at least, Romes ancient peu-fellow)
Ecclesia Carthag. (...) anne (...) Ep. 52. alias 55. ad Cor. and ad Steph. l.
2. Ep. 1. In Ecclesiae administratione vnusquisque praepositus liberum habet
voluntatis suae arbitrium. Quae verba repetit and in Ep. ad Magnum. l. 4. Ep.
7. Nemini praescribamus quo minus statuat quod putat vnusquisque Praepositus,
etc. De Pastor, c. 13.
and no way depending on foreign Tribunalls? Rationem actus sui Christo
reddituri, as the same Father says elsewhere, to give account of their doings
to Christ [onely.] But I come to S. Austen. In whose words I affirm, that
gerere personam, is to resemble the Church, or to stand for the Church; not to
be made the chief magistrate of the Church, as you would face us. And that
our Savior directing his charge to them all, instanced the willinger, as I may
say, in one, which was S. Peter, and spoke to him for all, to commend the love
of unity to them. Imo vero and in ipso Petro vnitatem commendauit: yea, and in
Peter himself he commended [this] unity: Multi erant Apostoli, and vni
dicitur, Pasceoues meas: There were many Apostles, and it is said [but] to one,
Feed my sheep: Why that, but only to commend unity to them? In hoc
cognoscent Ioh. 13. 35.
omnes vos esse meos: By this shall all men know you to be my disciples, if you
love one another. And, Look you fall not out by the way: Joseph's precept that
he gave to Genesis 45. 24.
his brethren. This was the care that our Savior had of unity. Again, S.
Austen in the same chapter, cap. 13. de pastorib. (that you may believe that
book the rather in the explication of pasce,) Nam and ipsum Petrum Quasi alter
alteri.
cui commendauit oues suas, quasi alter alteri, vnum secum facere volebat. He
sought not to make him a diverse regent, as you imagine, a deputy in his
absence, but in all his speech, he drove after unity, that intending the
unity of the Church with himself, even as he and his father are all one, (as
he says,) which shall not be perfected Ioh. 17. 22.
till after this life, yet in the mean time one man might stand for his
Church, and represent his Church, the better to knit up this knot between
them. Vt sic ei oues commendaret, says S. Austen, vt esset ille caput, ille
figuram corporis portaret, id est, Ecclesiae, and tanquam sponsus and sponsa
essent duo in carne vna: that is, That so he might commend his sheep unto him,
that himself might be the head, the other might bear the figure of his
body, that is the Church, and as bride and bridegroom they might be twain in
one flesh. Here, I trow, you have Peter, not the head, but the body, plainly
so distinguished by S. Austen, vt esset ille caput, that Christ might be the
head; Peter, shall I say, the body? nay, not so much as the body, but figuram
corporis portaret, says S. Austen, that he might carry the figure or
resemblance of the body. And is gerere personam now, and gestare figuram all
one, think you, because of Tullies Offices? Yet you cry out against the Bishop
for fraudulent dealing, and superscribe your box, A Discovery of his
absurdities, falsities, lies: you blame him for lame quotation of places.
Indeed he is as compendious in quoting the Fathers, as you are ambitious in
citing your own Supplement, and as talkatiue and full of circumstance as any
pies-nest. (...).
(...).


But for quoting of places against the light of conscience, was there ever any
wretch so taken (...), so in the very manner, as you are in the construction of
gerere personam, which S. Austen expounds by gestare figuram, or portare
figuram, you would feign extend to boundless jurisdiction? And if gerere and
gestare were granted you to be all one, is there no difference between figure
and persona, as persona is put for maiestas reip.? will you put figura in that
sense too? You imagine the Church to carry S. Peter; no doubt, as a beast
carries the rider: and some of you have allegorized it so, from Balaam and his
ass, to the Pope and your Church. Here you see the Church does not bear S.
Peter, but S. Peter bears the figure of the body, that is, of the Church. And
where you think the Supremacy that you attribute to your Pope was grounded
upon the infallibility of his judgment in faith, and from thence proceeded
that same Pasce oues meas, S. Austen tells you farther, to correct that opinion,
that the ground of his commission was the strength of his love, in these words,
Proinde vt oues commendaret, quid illi prius dicit, ne illi tanquam alteri
commendaret? Ne illi tanquam alteri.
Petre amas me? Et respondet; Amo, etc. Confirmat trinitatem, vt consolidet
vnitatem: that is, Therefore that he might commend his sheep unto him, what
first does he say unto him, that he might not commend them to him as to
another man? Peter love thou me? And he answers, I love thee, etc. He
confirms trinity, to establish unity. So as every where, unity and love is
aimed at, which is the bond that couples Christ and his Church; which Church as
I tell you, Peter represents here, no otherwise then a proxy does him that
he stands to be admitted for. But you doting upon the privileges of your
earthly God, blot out love to bring in power, and for that which S. Austen said
a little before, vt essent duo in carne vna, your Canonists have not shamed to
turn it thus; vt essent duo in sede vna: as if Christ and the Pope had one
Consistoire. This is the agreement between you and S. Austen here.

7. You again cite S. Austen in his commentary upon the 108. Psalm. Were you
disposed, trow you, to do your self a shrewd turn? For from whence could you
receive a greater blow? Yet here again I must tell you, that your citation is
wrong. Cuius ecclesiae (say you, as quoting S. Austen) ille agnoscitur gessisse
personam, meaning of Peter. But S. Austen says not so. First, not gessisse but
gestasse, is S. Austens. See you now that I distinguished these two, not
without cause before? For neither did you, I am sure, without cause here change
them. You know that gerere is of far more force, then gestare in these
matters: so as gerere remp. is as much as regere remp., gestare not. And if S.
Austen had said gessisse personam; yet see, I pray you, with what
qualification. Not simply gessisse, but in figura gessisse personam ecclesiae:
which you cut out: as if in figura were no words, or words of no sense, or
sense, but not to your tooth. This is your honest dealing, that cry out against
falsehood. Call you this arguing in figura against your betters? And would you
read that to the Corinthians, or suffer to be read, (suppose in your College
hall at Rome, where as we in our Colleges here read the Bible at our ordinary
meals, so Father Parsons made the scholars to read the book of Titles, and
of claims to Kingdoms, if your Seculars have said true, and men say that you
boast of Father Parsons his spirit;) would you suffer I say to be read, Omnia
contingebant illis, and no more, for omnia in figura 1. Cor. 10.
contingebant illis? specially if the controversy were how omnia contingebant
illis, as here the controversy was about gerere personam, and in what sense.
But let us hear S. Austen: Sicut quaedam dicuntur quae ad Apostolum Petrum
proprie pertinere videantur, nec tamen habent illustrem intellectum, nisi cum
referuntur ad ecclesiam, cuius ille agnoscitur in sigura gestasse personam,
propter primatum quem in discipulis habuit, sicut est, Tibi dabo claues regni
coelorum, and siqua huiusmodi: ita Judas personam quodam modo sustinet
inimicorum Christi Iudaeorum; qui and tunc oderant Christum, etc. As some
things are said which may seem properly to belong to the Apostle Peter, and
yet make no clear sense, but when they are referred to the Church, whereof he
is known to have represented the person figuratively, for the cheifedome which
he had among the disciples, as that is for one, To thee I will give the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, and if there be any like: so Judas sustaines after
a manner the person of the Jews Christ's enemies, who both then hated Christ,
etc. Here is somewhat that you catch at, but more that we may retort upon you.
You catch very greedily at propter primatum quem in discipulis habuit, which
we never doubt but S. Peter had, a place of some priority in the quire
Apostolic. And it may be for that, our Savior the rather chose him, to
represent his Church. More zealous then the rest, more ancient then the rest;
whether to figure the faith, or the eternity of the Church, the one in this
world, the other in the next, or for what endowment else of his you can devise.
For some no doubt. And if it be secret, is it therefore none? will you call
Christ to account for every thing? and unless we can answer for him, will
you condemn him? Why not some other as well as Peter, say you, if it were
only a matter of representation? As if I might not say the like, Why not some
other as well as Peter preferred to be the chief magistrate? It was free, you
will say, to our Saviors choice, and but one could be to sway a monarchy: he
chose Peter. And may not I say the same? But one could be to figure unity:
for, for that cause he chose one: and as in diverse other things Peter had the
pre-eminence, but yet with others, as James and John, (...), and Gal. 2.
(...), (more primi then Peter, where more might be used) so here where but one
could be employed in the business, the rest being slipped over, Peter was
thought the meetest to be the model of unity, because in some prerogative he
might pass those primos; or perhaps it was the secret of our Saviors breast.
Are you so little acquainted with the liberty of Gods actions? or reserve you
nothing for our knowledge in the world to come? This to your objection.

8. Now mark what we gather out of S. Austens text. First, Some things there
are seeming to belong to Peter, which can make no clear sense, but when they
are construed of the Church. This is flat against you, that would have Peter
such a figure of the Church forsooth, as yet to occupy a certain place of his
own, and what is given to Peter should be given to the Church, and what to the
Church, the same to Peter. But some things, says S. Austen, are said to Peter
which can have no pregnant construction but of the Church.

Secondly, amidst those some things, is, Tibi dabo claues. S. Austen uses this
very example; which you would fain have to be engrossed by Peter, as if the
keys had personally been delivered to him, and in his own right: which S.
Austen denies.

Thirdly, Si qua alia, if there be any more. There may be more then, as, Pasce
oues. No doubt this must be one; by his own exposition before, de Agone
Christiano, c. 30.

Fourthly, that he bare indeed personam ecclesiae, but in figura, which you had
pared off. Not by power of his place, or authority permanent; but culld out
before the rest by our Lord for that end, to signify unity.

Fifthly, that primatus was not the primacie of magistracy, even that declares;
that he says, the keys were promised to him propter primatum. So that first
the primacie, then the keys. And his primacie among the Apostles was a
motiue-cause to promise him the keys in the name of the Church: whereas else
primatus and the keys had gone together, and as soon as primatus, so soon
the keys. But now they are promised him for some specialty in him. Not for
office then, as you would have it.

Sixthly, as Judas sustained the person of the wicked, (sustinuit, a more
powerful word then gestauit, and much more then significauit, which is said
here of Peter, and yet but quodam modo, so shie is S. Austen, so far from the
jurisdiction that you build upon Tullies Offices) so Peter of the Church. As
Judas of the one, so Peter of the other, says S. Austen: which is no
authoritatiue primacie, you may be sure, unless Judas shall have a generation
of Successors now, as well as Peter, and (which is more damnable) of holy
Scriptures institution. If any such were, who more likely then the Pope, that
holds by the purse which Judas carried, and troubles all the world for
Supremacy in Temporalls? But neither Judas then, nor the Pope now. Else Peter
should have been head, under Judas, his head, (do you like this?) when he went
so far as to scandalize our Savior, and deserved the name of Satan at his
hands. Was Peter then under Judas his jurisdiction? yet, no doubt far gone in
that part, which Judas bare the person of, by S. Austens saying. For so we read
in his Alia expositio of the same Psalm: Cuius populi diximus Iudam in figura
gessisse personam, sicut ecclesiae gessit Apostolus Petrus. Your gravity
perhaps will say, that this is reproach: for so chap. 4. number. 33. But we do
but argue, and I pray who gives the cause? Quacunque scripta sunt, propter nos
scripta sunt. Romans 15.

9. To omit that Prosper upon the same Psalm (Prosper Leo's secretary, and S.
Austens scholar) tunes it yet in a higher key, making Judas not only bear
the person of the wicked, which you construe so imperiously as we have now
heard; but he says in plain terms, Judas primatum gessit inimicorum
Christi, Judas bare the primacie of Christ's enemies: which I trust you will not
expound, how impudent soever, that Judas was made chief magistrate over
Christ's enemies: no more then was Peter over Christ's friends.

10. YOU quote farther S. Austen in his 13. sermon. de verbis Domini secundum
Matthew. out of which you have these words, Petrus a Petra cognominatus, etc.
which moreover you thus english: Peter taking his name from a rock, was happy,
bearing the figure of the Church, having the principality of the Apostleship.
Of which anon as it serves your turn. In the mean time you may see what
variety of words S. Austen has, to set out the meaning of his gerere
personam, both here and elsewhere. Though here he does not use so much as the
word personam, but figuram only, which is a great deal less, or rather makes
all besides to be just nothing. But as I began to say, see a little I pray you,
his store of words, to give you his right sense about gerere personam, that you
dream not always of Magistrates in Tullies Offices. Admonet nos intelligere
mare praesens saeculum esse, Petrum vero Apostolum ecclesiae vnicae typum: He
gives us to understand, that the sea is this present world, and Peter the
Apostle a type or instance of the only Church. The same again, de baptismo
contra Donatist. l. 3. c. 17. In type vnitatis (as before of the Church, so now
of charity, but it is all one in effect) Dominus Petro potestatem dedit, etc.
In the type of unity, our Lord gave Peter power, (says S. Austen.) or in the
type of charity. And will you say that all that were types in the old
Testament, were Cypr^ de bono Patient. Inuenim^^ insto^ omnes qui figuram
Christi imagine prae^unte portabant.
so many magistrates? where some were of Christ, yea very many: were there so
many governors of Christ, I pray you? or the types of the Church that went
before in the old Testament, were they all Church-gouernours? And yet thus, you
see, S. Austen declares his meaning about genere personam, by sigura, by typus,
and such like. But you will say, it follows in S. Austens words, Ipse enim
Petrus in Apostolorum ordine primus. And what then? As if we denied the
primacie in the order of the Apostles, which are ready to grant even more then
so, if need be. The Bishop Or^ (...), loci, (...)* p. 15
yields a triple primacie to Peter, in the book that you confute before you
understand. Out of which you in time may prove the triple crown. And had S.
Auston been so favorable, you had done it ere this. In whom it follows,
Saepe respondet pro omnibus, spoken of Peter. And will you know, quo mysterio?
Let himself show. Vnus pro multis, vnus in multis: once again to endeare this
unity to them. Proceed yet: Simon antea vocabatur: women autem Petrus a Domino
ei impositum est, and hoc, vt ea figura significaret ecclesiam. Do you hear
figura? do you hear significaret? How will this agree with gerere personam in
your maiesticall sense? Yea the name of Peter he says, was given him to that
end, rather to signify for the Church, holding the wholesome confession, Tues
filius Dei viui, then for his own pre-eminence of place over others. And yet
more pregnantly, Quia enim Christus petra^, Petrus populus Christianus. Are you
aware what the people have gotten by this shift, whom you are wont to cut
short? So many people, so many Peter's. Unless you are content that Peter do no
more then represent the Church, that is, the people of God, as S. Austens
meaning is.

11. I might tell you of that between, because I would give you good measure
for complaining of lamo quotations. Petrus a petra, non petra a Petro, and
that, as a Christo Christianus vocatur, non Christus a Christiano. Yet you
would not refuse to be called of Peter: and Bellarmine says, Chrysostom De
notis eccl. lib. 4. c. 4.
prophesied almost as much, Hom. 33. in Act. that you might not be ashamed if
in time to come you were called of the Popes, among whom was Peter. Where you
may do well to think how this agrees with Nazianzen, (...), etc. where he is
so far from being called of Peter, or any other, I love not (says he) to be
called after the name of men, being borne of God) that unless our Savior
Christ were God, he would think it no honor to be called by him, though as a
man never so excellent. But we are now in S. Austen, More plainly then against
them that would be built upon Peter, which (as I said) you blush not, but boast
of at this day as your secondary foundation, See Adioynd. number. 18. c. 3.
Homines volenter adificari super homines, men that have a longing to be built
upon men, (we upon their doctrine, Apoc. 21. 14. and Ephesians. 2. 20. you hardly
upon his person, or as shall seem good) [What say they?] Ego sum Cephae, ipse
est Petrus. Quomodo enim non in Pauli, sic nec in Petri, etc. Vt Petrus super
petram, non petra super Petrum: 1. I am Cephas his, now Cephas and Peter are
all one. For as we are not [baptised in the name of Paul, so are we not of
Peter neither, etc. that Peter may [be known to be built] upon the rock, and
not the rock upon Peter. But close to our purpose. Illum videre Petrum, qui
tunc erat figura nostra: that is, Consider that Peter who was then our figure;
not bare our person, that is, bare rule over us, we never living in Peter's
time, and his regencie being expired before we were born, but (as I have often
said) standing for the Church by way of type or figure, and so he represented
for us, and for the Church to the worlds end, whereas he could govern no
more then lived in his own days. Petrus TVNC erat sigura nostra. Again, to
urge significat against this man's magnificat, which he sings to S. Peter, but
before he know well what it means, In eo quod dixit Petrus, Tues filius Dei
viui, firmos significat, says S. Austen, in eo quod trepidat, etc. infirmos
ecclesiae significat. Is this also to be construed by Tullies Offices, of
government? or does S. Austen not speak yet significantly enough, without we
turn the Jesuits dictionarie? Does a magistrate signify the city that he
gouernes? or was S. Peter at one time the governor of the strong, namely, when
he confessed and believed Christ, an other time of the weak, namely, when he
staggered? How then was he ever an universal governor? For when he doubted,
he confessed not; when he confessed, he doubted not. So never was he governor
of the body altogether, never did he gerere personam in that sense. I think
you see cause to repent your construction, unless you be weary of universal
dominion. And yet once again S. Austen, to give you more light. In illo ergo
vno figurabatur ecclesia, and vtrumque genus significandum fuit, id est, firmi
and infirmi, quia sine vtroque non est ecclesia. In him therefore alone, or in
that one man therefore, the Church was figured, and each kind of men was to be
signified, that is both the strong and the weak, because without both of
these, the Church is not. Do you perceive how this fits with that which went
before? For either S. Peter was a ruler but by halfes, or gerere personam must
be otherwise construed, even as S. Austen does here, by figurare, and
significare, not as you by regere, a word not once used by S. Austen in all
this matter, nor any like it. For, as for primus and praecipuus in ordine
Apostolorum, we have cleared it before, and it is too weak a foundation to
bear such stresse. Save that as Peter of the Church, so these words of Peter,
a semblable supportance and worthy your choosing.

12. We are long upon this place, but the reason is, discover one of our
Discouerers tricks, and discredit all. Ambulauit Petrus super aquas iussu
Domeni. Hi sunt firmi ecclesiae: Peter walked upon the waters at our Lords
commandment. These are the strong in the Church, says S. Austen. It puts me
in mind of your argument for the primacie. Aquae multae, populi multi: Peter's
walking on the sea, was his regiment of the world: yet not all waters, I hope,
were in the sea of Tiberias. Or shall we say, that this prefigured your Tyber?
though so doubtful is as yet Peter's resiance at Rome, that he has not been
seen sitting, and much less walking there, upon your Sea. Onesiphorus with
much seeking found Paul at Rome, 2. Tim. 1. 17. we Peter not yet. Our Lord
indeed entered Peter's ship. But what then? I should think if Peter had entered
his, it had been more pregnant. So might Peter have been thought to have
succeeded in his charge; this allegory makes Christ succeed into Peter's. No
doubt Peter had a boat, as a fisherman should have; our Savior none,
sanctifying another trade, as we are taught by Iustine Martyr, during the time
of his minority, until it pleased him to reveal himself unto the world. But
Bernard says it; will you be judged by Bernard? Do but tell the Pope, as he
did Eugenius, he will say you speak inconsiderately to him. I wisse an easy
matter for S. Bernards wit, with a flourish or so, to establish the Popedom
already established. Besides that, he will tell you, S. James raised seed to
his brother deceased, De consid l. 2
that is, succeeded into our Lords province. Unless our Lord himself had not
the world for his scope. And Eusebius as much, quoting Clemens for his author,
l. 6. Hypotyp. that the chief Apostles themselves, whereof Peter Lib. 2. hist.
cap. 1. (...). (...).
was one, did not once contest with James for that priority. But return we to
S. Austen.

13. There are yet two more places behind in S. Austen. One, Tract. in Iohannem
124. an other de Agone Christiano cap. 30. With that we began, and with the
same we will conclude. But the first we will fetch from his Tractat. in Ioh.
123. somewhat higher. Speaking there of our Saviors repast after his
resurrection with fish and hony-combe, he ponders the very number of the
disciples then present, and thus gathers: Vt omnes qui hanc spem gerimus, per
illum septenarium numerum discipulorum, per quem potest hoc loco nostra
vniuersitas intelligi figurata, tanto sacramento nos communicare nossemus, and
eidem beatitudini sociari. That is, That all we which are endued with this
hope, may know that by that seuenfold number of disciples (by which our whole
company may here seem to be figured) we are both partakers of that mystery,
and fellows in that bliss. Neither doubts he but S. John ending his Gospel
with this narration, having many things else to report of Christ: he ends it,
magna and magnarum rerum contemplatione, as he says: making it as important,
so mystical, you see, by that word of conte^plation. Where first we have
figurari in the sense before confirmed, not theirs, but ours. As erewhile Peter
figured the Church, so now those seven disciples figured the universality of
Gods people, that is, the Church. And yet I hope they are not made thereby
regents of the Church, though the Jesuits have a project, we hear, to bring
in more then one, to manage at one time the Sea Apostolic. I remember Occham
in his Dialogues has a question to that purpose, whether the Popedom may be
swayed by many at once? And inclining to think it lawful, it may be the
Jesuits drew it from him, and would put it in practice. In truth our Savior
choosing 12. Apostles, showed he never meant, that one should govern all after
they were dead, as these now would have the Pope to do in Peter's stead. But as
I was saying, the 7. figurers here are not 7. governors: no more then is Peter
figuring the Church, or bearing the figure of the Church, or whatsoever else
sounds that way, invested in the authority that this man here dreams of, as
if gerere figuram, were gerere personam; and gerere personam, were potiri rerum.

14. HEre also that is answered that F. T. in his wisdom asked a little
before, why only Peter should bear the person of the Church? or, whether none
was meet for that part but he? We have answered it before; and the like might
be asked of Judas, was there none wicked in those days but he? not Herod? not
the Pharisees? not any other? or could none but an Apostle stand for the
pattern of bale and condemnation? But S. Austen here answers it a great deal
more roundly; that seven men at another time, and not only Peter, figurauerunt
vniuersitatem nostram, represented our whole company, the company of the
faithful, that is, the Church of God, whom yet, I suppose, he will not allow
for Popes.

15. Again in the same tractat, that you may see how far Pasce oues meas
surmounts the Pope, or the Popes commission, which they squeeze to the
uttermost to give him advancement, S. Austen insists first upon that
consideration, oues meas, not, oues tuas, which is worth the poizing, not only
in the sense that the Jesuits urge it, as if all Christ's sheep were thereby
recommended to Peter's charge, Apostles, Prophets, Kings and Emperors: whereas
our Savior nevertheless has sheep in heaven, and (...) and (...), both Saints
and Angels, which I trust are not liable to Popish jurisdiction; no, though
pasce were impera, and sarculum sceptrum, contrary to S. Bernard. Not only
thus then I say, but he adds further, and gives other cautions, 1. Feed my
sheep, not, feed thy sheep. Seek my glory in [feeding] them, not thine own
glory; my soueraig^^^e not thine; yea my advantage, not thine own gains.
pasce meas, not pasce tuas, therefore non te pascere cogita, gloriam meam in
ijs quaere, non gloriam tuam, dominium meum (that was not ex hoc mundo) non
tuum, yea lucra mea (let the Venetians hear this) not lucra tua: and to
conclude, 1. Be not of their company that belong to the dangerous times:
Alluding no doubt to that of 2. Tim. 3. where it is said, men shall be covetous,
and proud, and lo^e^^ of pleasures, more the^ ^ers of God.
Ne sis in eorum societate qui pertinent ad tempora periculosa, perilous times:
indeed times the more perilous, because all the strife is de temporalibus.

16. Neither doubts he to extend the force of that pasce which was given to
Peter, to the censure not of Popes only, though of them too, but of all bad
ministers through out the world. Contra hos vigilat toties inculcata ista vox
Christi (Pasce oues meas) quos Apostolus gemit sua quaerere, non quae Jesus
Christi. Against those stands up this saying of Christ, so often repeated,
[Feede my sheep,] whom the Apostle laments for seeking their own, not the
things that are Jesus Christ's: [whosoeuer they are, or of what rank soever.]
And a little before that, Qui hoc animo pascunt oues Christi, vt suas esse
velint non Christi, se convincuntur amare non Christum, vel gloriandi, vel
dominandi, vel acquirendi cupiditate, non obediends, and subueniendi, and deo
placendi cupiditate. Which because our Adioynder understands Latin so well, we
will leave to him for this once to English.

17. Come we now to the 124 Tractat, out of which he urges this: Hoc agit
ecclesia spe beata, in hac vita aerumnosa, cuius Ecclesiae. Petrus, propter
Apostolatus sui primatum, gerebat figurata generalitate personam. Which the
easier to clear, we may sort out by parcels that which makes for them. First
gerebat personam, which this man thinks to be as much as tenebat regimen; but
of that before. To omit how it is qualified with figurata generalitate, his
bearing the person, being but figuring, and signifying, and representing
still, with S. Austen, which is short of Magistracy. Secondly, propter
Apostolatus sui primatum. Which the better to conceive, hear we further S.
Austen, hear you too good Sir, that accuse the Bishop for laming places, as if
no body were such a legal reciter of them as your self. Quod enim adipsum
proprie pertinet, (speaking of Peter) natura onus homo erat, gratia vnus
Christianus, abundantiore gratia vnus idemque primus Apostolus. Sed etc. that
is, For as concerning himself, Peter was by nature [but] one man, by grace one
Christian man, by a greater measure of the same grace, one and a prime Apostle.
But etc. You will say perhaps that this is a third kind of advantage, an
authority more then ever you were aware of, for Peter, vnus idemque primus
Apostolus. But there is more in it then so. S. Austen knows but three steps of
condition here in Peter. A man, which he was by nature, a Christian, which by
grace, but by height of grace, by excess of grace, an Apostle. Yet vnus
Apostolus, but one Apostle, not virtually as you would have it, the whole quire
or College of them. Our Savior was not so poor as to have but one Apostle,
says Irenaeus, l. 3. against them that thought Paul was the only man. So
far off was Peter then, that scarce he was thought to be one of the number.
Indeed twelve, as I showed you before, for great cause. But concerning Peter,
vnus Apostolus, says S. Austen, but one Apostle. As for the prime, we grant
you, as you have been often told, and to content you the more, more then in
one regard of primacie. An excellent flower he was in that garland; what would
you else? But that this primacie was distinct from your supposed magistracy or
majesty Ecclesiastical, as you would infer out of gerere personam, hear
what follows. S. Austen having recounted the three former degrees of Peter's
condition, he proceeds to a fourth, neither coincident with the rest, nor yet
containing any such principality as you talk of, but merely affoarded him of
our Saviors free bounty, in regard to his excellent worth among his fellows.
Sed quando ei dictum est, Tibi dabo claues regni coelorum, and, Quodcunque
ligaueris super 1. But when it was said unto him, To thee will I give the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be
bound also in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose upon earth, shall be
loosed also in heaven, he represented the Universal Church.
terram, erit ligatum and in coelis, and quodcunque solues super terram, erit
solutum and in coelis, vniuersam significabat ecclesiam, says S. Austen: he
stood for the Church, it was said to him in the person of the Church, not as
chief Magistrate, not as primus Apostolus, the first wheel in the clock, but
in a sense distinct from the former three degrees (therefore he says, Sed
quando) yet happily the rather for his aforesaid worthiness, our Savior put
this part upon him, honored him with representation of his Catholic Church,
made him to signify Ecclesiam vniuersam, (S. Austens words) but only to
signify it, and that not as an Apostle, but in a fourth consideration, which
helps you nothing, rather spoils you of all.

18. That which follows is pregnant, but I must be sparing; though you may
think we are afraid to enlarge quotations. Besides, it has been brought
totidem verbis before out of his 13. sermon. de verb. Dom secundum Matthew. the
Father having recorded it in two several places, so far he was from
retracting it; That, Petrus a petra, sicut Christianus a Christo, and not e
contra, that our boast should not be in men, but in the living God. And yet in
truth more plainly in this place, which may serve, if any thing, to open their
eyes, that dare build upon a man as the foundation of their Church, though it
were Peter himself, that I say not how unworthy creatures now in his Room.
Ideo quippe ait Dominus, Super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, quia
dixerat Petrus, Tu es Christus filius dei viui. Super hanc ergo inquit petram
quam confessus es, aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Petra enim erat Christus, super
quod fundamentum ipse etiam aedificatus est Petrus. Fundamentum quippe aliud
nemo potest ponere, praeter id quod positum est, quod est Christus Jesus. That
is: For therefore says our Lord, Upon this rock I will build my Church,
because Peter had said, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. I will
therefore build, says he, my Church upon this rock which thou have confessed.
For the rock was Christ, upon which foundation even Peter himself was feign
to be built. For another foundation can no man lay, besides that which is laid,
which is Jesus Christ. Then, Ecclesia quae fundatur in Christo, claues ab eo
regni coelorum accepit in Petro, id est, potestatem ligandi soluendique
peccata. How so? Quod enim est per proprietatem in Christo ecclesia, hoc est
per significationem Petrus in petra, qua significatione intelligitur Christus
petra, Petrus ecclesia. Haec igitur ecclesia quam significabat Petrus, etc.
that is to say, The Church which is founded in Christ, received of him the
keys of the kingdom of heaven in Peter, that is, the power of binding and
loosing sins. For that which properly the Church is in Christ, the very same
by signification is Peter in the rock. By which signification Christ is
understood to be the rock, Peter to be the Church. This Church therefore which
Peter signified, etc. I say nothing of signification, whereof enough before,
and every line in S. Austen is fraught with it. But is not this strange, that
Peter whom they every where advance for the head, S. Austen should still take
for the body? In the person of the body, of the multitude of the faithful,
did our Savior heap those privileges upon Peter. And whereas some of you are
not ashamed to urge Sequere me, for a document of his primacie, as if it were,
Sequere me in gubernatione ecclesiae (a strange problem of desperate
pleaders,) even there Peter differs not from the community, but still stands
for a figure of the body. Hear S. Austen: Vniuersitati dicitur, Sequere me,
pro qua vniuersitate passus est Christus. It is said to the whole multitude,
Follow me, for which whole multitude Christ suffered. For to construe, Follow
me, in so ambitious a sense, that is, be Lord as I am Lord, be Regent as I am
Regent, Christian people will soon abhor, though meanly instructed, who
know we are to follow our Savior Christ by imitation of his virtues, not by
affectation of his place, and Peter to follow him no otherwise then we Peter:
even as Paul for the agreement of his spirit with them both, is not nice to
call us to the imitation of himself, but yet subordinately to Christ, Be ye
followers of me, even as I am of Christ, 1. Cor. 11. 1. And so absurd is this
argument for Peter's Monarchy from Sequere me, that S. Austen in his commentary
upon the 62. Psalm, construes Sequere me, by vade post me: follow me, by get
thee behind me. His words are, Redi post me Satanas, non enim sapis quae Dei
sunt, sed quae hominum. Then, Quia antecedere me vis, redi post me, vt sequaris
me, vt iam sequens Christum diceret, Agglutinata est anima mea post te: Because
thou will needs go before me, get thee rather behind me, that so thou may
follow me. Though it be true also, that Sequere me, was a common word with our
Savior, and spoken both to S. Matthew, when he called him to the Apostleship
from the receipt of custom, Matthew. 9. and to him that preferred to go and
bury his father, before the following of his Master, Eusebius. Emes. in Hom. de
Johan. Euang. Quod Petro dicitur, omnibus dicitur, Sequere ^nc.
Matthew. 8. And if Peter obeyed the Sequere with the first of these two, in
performing his ministry, his successors with the second, while they leave
Christ to snatch at a mortuarie.

19. I am afraid of giving the Reader a surfeit in a case so evident: but yet I
must not omit this one passage, that follows in the forenamed Tractate of the
Father upon S. John, because our adversary has quoted it.

20. He says then, That as there is a two fold state of the Church, one in
misery and in exile, another in glory, in royalty, and in bliss; so Peter
was made a figure of the former, John of the latter, by our Savior Christ. So
as not only Johannes anteponitur Petro, John in the one of these is preferred
before Peter, (as S. Austens words are) but simply John surpasses Peter, as
much as the life that we shall lead in bliss, excels this miserable that here
we live. For thereafter as the lives are, so are the figures of them both,
which are here said to be these two Apostles, Peter of the militant Church,
John of the triumphaut, as has been showed. But shall we say, trow you, that
John is a monarch in the triumphant, or bears any rule or regiment among the
blessed, where the Son himself resignes his Kingdom, or submits it at least
to God the Father, 1. Cor. 15.? Or if John have no such monarchy by virtue of
his figuring and representing that state, why then should Peter claim any in
earth, because he stands for a figure of the militant? The words are somewhat
long, but I will only set down as many as shall serve to give the Reader
light, the rest may be viewed and dwelt on by leisure. Duas vitas sibi
diuinitus praedicatas and commendat as nouit ecclesia: quarum est vna in fide,
altera in specie: vna in tempore peregrinationis, altera in aeternitate
mansionis: vna in labor, altera in requie vna in via, altera in patria: vna in
opere actionis, altera in mercede contemplationis: vna declinat a malo and
facit bonum, altera nullum habet, a quo declinet, malum, and magnum habet quo
fruatur bonum: vna cum host pugnat, altera sine host regnat: vna fortis est
in aduersis, altera nihil sentit aduersi: vna carnales libidines fraenat,
altera spiritalibus delectationibus vacat: vna est vincendi cura sollicita,
altera victoriae pace secura: vna in tentationibus adiuuatur, altera sine vlla
tentatione in ipso adiutore laetatur: vna subuenit indigenti, altera ibi est
vbi nullum inuenit indigentem: vna aliena peccata vt sua sibi ignoscantur,
ignoscit, altera nec patitur quod ignoscat, nec facit quod sibi poscat ignosci:
vnaflagellatur malis, ne extollatur in bonis, altera tanta plenitudine gratiae
caret omni malo, vt sine vlla tentatione superbiae cohaereat summo bono: vna
bona and mala discernit, altera quae sola bona sunt cernit. Ergo vna bona est,
sed adhuc misera, altera melior and beata. That is, Two sorts of lives does the
Church of Christ know, intimated and recommended to her from God: whereof the
one consists in faith, the other in sight: one in toil and pilgrimage
temporal, the other in rest and ease eternal: one is of the way, the other of
the country: one has the task of tedious action, the other the reward of
blissful contemplation: one flees from evil and does only good, the other
has no evil to shun at all, but enioyes a good past all expressing. One
continually copes with her enemies, the other triumphs without any enemy: one
maintains courage in the midst of tribulation, the other is past sense of any
more trouble: one restraines carnal lusts and pleasures, the other attends
delights spiritual: one is careful out of the desire it has to conquer, the
other is at peace and secure like a conqueresse: one finds help of God in
temptation, the other reioyces in her helper God, scorning the tempter: one
releeues the poor with her charity, the other is there where there is no
poverty: one forgiues other men's sins, that her own may be pardoned, the
other neither commits what she should wish to be forgiven her, nor suffers
ought of that which we pardon in another: one is chastened with ouils, least
she be proud of the good, the other is so freed from all kind of evil by the
fullness of grace, that she adheres to the chief good without any danger of
pride: one discerns the good from the evil, but the other sees nothing but
that which is good. So as the one is good, but as yet in miseries, the other is
better and in most perfect joys. Then follows. Ista significata est per
Apostolum Petrum, illa per Iohannem. Ideo dicitur huic, Sequere me; de illo
autem, si eum volo manore donec veniam, quid ad te? Tu me sequere. Quid enim
est hoc? Quantum sapio, quantum capio, quid est hoc, nisi, Tu me sequere per
imitationem perferendi temporalia mala, ille maneat donec sempiterna venio
redditurus bona? That is, That life was signified by the Apostle Peter, this by
John. Therefore it was said to him, Follow me. But of him thus, If I will have
him rarrie till I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou me. For what means
that? As much as I conceive, as much as I understand, what is it but even this,
Follow thou me by conformity of suffering evils temporatie, and let him
tarry till I come, to repay the everlasting good. Do you see what a Sequere
Peter is called to? Even as much as S. Austen either capit or sapit, only to
the toleration of temporal injuries, out of which you would frame temporal
Monarchies. To which purpose he had also said a little before, setting a mark
upon it, Ecce propter quod ei dictum est, Sequere me. Namely because Christ
having suffered for mankind, left us an example that we might follow his steps,
S. Peter so expounding Sequere me, by, Vt sequamur vestigia eius, 1. Pet. 2.
21. But go we forward as we began, in comparing the co^templatiue life with the
active, John with Peter, this world with the next. Amet ergo cum Petrus, vt ab
ista mortalitate liberemur, and, ametur ab eo Johannes, vt in illa
immortalitate seruemur. That is, Let Peter therefore love him, to the end we
may be delivered from this present mortality, and let John be loved of him,
that we may be saved by him in the immortal glory. Again, Hoc per Petrum
significatum est, plus amantem, sed minus amatum, quia minus nos amat Christus
miseros quam beatos. Veritatis autem contemplationem qualis tunc futura est
minus amamus, quia nondum nouimus, nec habemus. Haec ergo per Iohannem
significata est minus amantem, atque ideo and ad ipsam, and ad eius in nobis
amorem, qualis ei debetur, implendum, donec veniat Dominus, expectantem: sed
plus amatum, quia id quod per illum figuratum est, hoc efficit beatum. That is,
That was signified by Peter who loved Christ more, but was loved of him less:
because Christ loves us less in the state of misery, then he will do us one
day in the kingdom of glory. We also less love the view of truth [and of the
face of God] whiles we are as we are, because we neither have it yet, nor know
it, as we shall do. This life therefore of ours is signified by John, who
loved Christ less, and therefore waits for his coming, til the other life may
be revealed, and the love of it perfited as it should be in us: but the same
John was more loved of Christ, because that [life] makes us blessed, which in
him was instanced; [or, figured.] Then, Nemo tamen istos insignes Apostolos
separet. Yet let no man sever these two excellent Apostles. So then, as one
figures, so the other figures: as the one represents, so the other represents,
and represents only. John was not hereby installed Monarch of heaven, no nor
yet free denison thereof by actual possession. (It was long after that, that
S. John went to heaven.) No more was Peter, then, of earth, or any earthly
prerogative: for they must not be separated, but as one, so the other. Nemo
separet, says S. Austen. Et in eo (says the same Father) quod significabat
Petrus, ambo erant, and in eo quod significabat Johannes, ambo futuri erant:
significando sequebatur iste, manebat ille etc. That is, Both in that [life]
which Peter signified, they were both of them, and in that which John
signified, they were both of them to be. He followed, this stayed, for
signification sake, etc. Do you see that if Peter be a Monarch of the Church,
John must needs be too, which is a thing impossible? For, in eo quod
significabat Petrus, ambo erant, says S. Austen. That is, In that which Peter
signified they were both of them. In whom yet it follows plainer, Nec ipsi
soli, (Peter and John forenamed) sed vniuersa hoc facit sancta Ecclesia sponsa
Christi: ab istis tentationibus eruenda, in illa foelicitate seruanda. Neither
Peter only and John, that is, two of the Apostles, but the whole Church of
God, the spouse of Christ, does the very same: avoiding the tentation, which is
here present, creeping on to the salvation, which is laid up for us in heaven.
Quas duas vitas Petrus and Johannes figurauerunt (as before significabant, so
now figurauerunt) singuli singulas etc. That is, Which two lives Peter and John
figured, the one the one, the other the other, etc. Lastly, Omnibus igitur
sanctis ad Christi corpus inseparabiliter pertinentibus, propter huius vitae
procellosissimae gubernaculum, ad liganda and soluenda peccata, claues regni
coelorum primus Apostolorum Petrus accepit: ijsdemque omnibus sanctis propter
vitae illius secretissimae quietissimum sinum, super pectus Christi Johannes
Euangelista discubuit. Quoniam nec iste solus, sed vniuersa Ecclesia, nec ille
in principio, etc. That is, In lieu therefore of all the Saints of Christ,
which are inseparably grafted into his mystical body, as concerning their
steerage, and the direction of their course, in this most troublesome and
tempestuous world, the prime Apostle Peter received the Keys of the kingdom
of heaven, for the binding and loosing of their offenses. And again in lieu of
all the same Saints, with respect to that most quiet either bosom of secrecy,
or harborough of bliss, the Evangelist John leaned upon the breast of our
blessed Savior. Because neither he alone, but the whole Church, nor the other
in the beginning, etc.

20. Against this I know what Mr. F. T. will say (for Bell, l. 1. de Pontif.
Romans c. 12.
he says no more then out of the mouth of his best masters) As John really, so
Peter really: as the one lay upon our Saviors breast, and it was no fiction,
so the other received the keys of heavens kingdom, and it was more then a
bare representation. Who doubts but S. Peter received the keys, as well as
John leaned on Christ's bosom? But Peter received the keys in the person of
the Church militant, because our Lord would honor unity: and John rested and
repasted himself on his sacred bosom as a figure of the triumphant, to shadow
out unto us the estate of glory and blissful immortality. Each did as we
read they did, but with a drift to intimate some farther thing unto us. Non
tibi sed vnitati, may we say to S. Peter: and, Non tibi sed aeteruitati, may we
say to S. John. Omnibus In liew of all the Saints belonging to the body of
Christ.
Sanctis ad Christi corpus pertinentibus, says S. Austen. And, Neither Peter
alone, nor John alone, but the whole Church.
Quoniam nec iste solus, nec ille solus, sed vniuersa Ecclesia. In this stands
the answer, that both Peter received, and received for himself, (for he had a
part in the keys as well as others, we deny it not) but Beda in Concion,
hyemal. in 16. Matthew. Potestas ligandi and soluendi [per claues] quamvis soli
Petro videatur a Domino data, absque vlla tamen dubietate noscendum est, quia
and caeteris Apostolis datur, ipso test, etc. Et, Nunc etiam in Episcopis and
Presbyteris omni Ecclesie essicium idem committitur. Et, Omni igitur electorum
ecclesie ligandi ac soluendi datur auctoritas, iuxta modum culparum vel
poenitentiae. Et paulo ante, Merito tamen prae caeteris ei qiu maiori deuotione
confessus erat Christum, vt constaret omnibus, quiae absque ea confessione, and
fide, regnum coelorum nullus posset intrare. An other manner of reason why the
keys are given to Peter, then the Jesuits fancy.
(...), not (...), portionally and particularly, not wholly and entirely, save
only as he stood in the Churches room, to grace unity. And this proves no
universal authority. As not John in the triumphant, as not Judas in the
malignant, so neither Peter in the militant. But so much may suffice to have
spoken hereof.

21. THE last place of S. Austen that is cited for this purpose, is that which
I first began with, de Agone Christ. c. 30. which because this hobbyhorse
cries out upon the Bishop so, for alleging fraudulently and lamely, as has
bin said, I will keep my promise to report it even at large. Though in the 20.
chapter of that book, before we come to the place that is now to be scanned,
S. Austen sufficiently shows what he means, by his wonted phrase of gerere
personam. Where he doubts not to say, speaking of the head in a man's body,
wherein all the senses are lodged and recollected, that Caput ipsius animae
quodam modo personam sustinet: not as if the head did rule the soul, which
were very unreasonable (as they would make Peter to be governor of the
Church, they care not how) but happily for Oculos quasi ipsam (...). Et, (...)
sunt (...). Chrvs. in 4. ad Col. Ethico fe^e extremo.
resembling the invisible soul in visible form most lively, and most
apparently, even as Peter did the Church, one for many. And so it follows in
S. Austen, Ibi enim omnes sensus apparent. But speak we to the 30. chapter,
which is the thing in question. Entreating there how the Church ought to show
compassion to her children, converting by repentance, he thus says: Non enim
sine causa inter omnes Apostolos, huius ecclesiae catholicae personam sustinet
Petrus. That is, For not without cause does Peter among all the Apostles
sustain the person of this Catholic Church. Huic enim ecclesiae Claues regni
coelorum datae sunt: For to this Church, the keys of the Kingdom of heaven
were given. Which latter FOR, is not to show that Peter was chosen to bear the
person of the Church, non sine causa, not without cause, as he had said before,
but to prove what he had supposed, that Peter did bear the Churches person;
since the keys are too great a depositum for Peter, to be received in his own
name, but in the Churches. And so much he had delivered before upon the 108.
Psalm. I will not now trouble the Reader to repeat it. Only this may be
remembered, that there he says, Tibi dabo claues, is among those sayings, which
howsoever videntur pertinere ad Petrum, non tamen habent illustrem intellectum,
nisi cum referuntur ad ecclesiam, etc. which howsoever they may seem to belong
to Peter, yet cannot clearly be construed, but when they are referred to the
Church. This there. But now in this place he adds another example, to show
that Peter did bear the Churches person, and not his own: As when, Pasce
oues, is said to him. Et cum ei dicitur, ad omnes dicitur, Amas me? Pasce oues
meas. Where I cannot demand without some passion, what can be said more
pregnantly to the Bishops purpose, that, Pasce oues, was not said to Peter
only, when S. Austen makes it common to all (all of the rank at least) and
vouches it as an instance, that Peter did bear the person of the Church, and
not his own only, in diverse things that passed upon him? Me thinks upon the
alleging but of thus much out of S. Aust. if truly, if in his sense, the
question should be at an end. Yet because this man cries out against maimed
allegations, I will keep promise, as I said, to set down so much of S.
Austens text, as no man coming after shall need more: and that by the way it
may be seen, whether this fellow can clip a text or no, for his advantage, and
leave out that which is too hot for him to meddle with; practicing that
impudently at the very same time, which he traduces the Bishop for most
wrongfully. Thus then S. Austen: Debet ergo Ecclesia Catholica correctis and
pietate firmatis filijs libenter ignoscere, cum ipsi Petro personam eius
gestanti, and cum in mari titubasset, and cum Dominum carnaliter a passione
reuocasset, and cum aurem serui gladio praecidisset, and cum ipsum Dominum ter
negasset, and cum in simulationem postea superstitiosam lapsus esset, videamus
veniam esse concessam, eumque correctum atque firmatum, vsque ad dominicae
passionis gloriam pervenisse. That is to say: The Church Catholic therefore
ought to pardon her children amending their faults, and established in
godliness, since we see pardon affoarded to Peter himself, sustaining the person
of the church, both after that he had wauered in the sea, and carnally dehorted
our Savior from suffering, and with a sword cut off the high Priests servants
ear, and finally fallen into his superstitious hypocrisy; [yet pardon I say
affoarded him, notwithstanding all these faults,] in so much as amended now and
confirmed, he came in the end to partake of the glory of our Saviors
suffering. Here is nothing against us, for ought I can perceive, unless Peter
to have come to the glory of our Lords suffering, may seem to any to make
against us. Which yet I hope they will not construe, as if Peter had died for
the sins of the world, and so equalled our Saviors glory. Wicked though
they are, yet not so wicked, as to divide that praise between Christ and Peter.
Howsoever S. Austen in his tractat upon S. John 123. makes this to be one of S.
Peter's errors, to have offered to die for Christ in all have, pro liberatore
liberandus etc. Wherein he might seem to have aspired to a glory more then
our Saviors, that he dying to save the world, Peter should die for him that
died for the world, which is a point above the other. But howsoever they
magnify Peter's authority, I hope they will attribute to him no such virtue as
this, although he may seem, I say, to have said as much himself when time
was, by S. Austens collection; but rather repent with him repenting, as
afterward we know he changed his mind, and no doubt cried out as Job does,
his eyes being opened, and his weakness discovered, I bewail my Job 42.
self in dust and ashes, I have said once, but I will say it no more. As for
the words of S. Austen, that Peter attained to the honor of our Lords
suffering, it is a story in Eusebius worth the considering, how for the
exceeding honor that hist. 3. 1.
he bare to his Master, (...). Bernard. epist. 25^. Petrus and Paulus, alter
amisso, alter submisso in cruce canite etc.
though he were nailed to a cross of wood like his, yet he refused to dic with
his head upward. Which we may believe the rather, because we read even in
heathen stories of that time, of diverse that were crucified with their heads
downward. And as Peter for humility, (...). Hegesip. etiam lib. 3. c. 2.
Indulgebat persecutor non invitus incrementa poenarum.
begd that boon of the tormentors, so it is like they were not nice to grant
it to him, as the more disgraceful. This was the reverence that our Saviors
conversation begat in his Disciples. In figure where of Job, whom I named even
now, to show the authority that he bare in his house, with semblable love of
all sides, My servants, said he, thought Job 29. 24.
themselves happy in my presence; if I smiled upon them they did not believe
me, yea they cried, Who will give us to Job 31. 31.
eat of his flesh? for the unspeakable sweetness they found by me. See S.
Chrysostom. in his 2. Epist. to Olympias. Who can write of these things without
melting passion? To consider the strange conflict between our Savior and S.
Peter: a conflict of humility, not of pride, of love, not of anger, like that
between our Lord and the Baptist erst, refusing to think himself worthy to
baptize him. Which yet in Peter is more, to think himself not worthy to die
like him. Besides, that John was feign to yield in the end, but herin Peter
had his desire. And which is more singular, not only the kind of strife, to
strive for love, but against the nature of love, which delights in likeness,
that he should choose a contrary positure of body, to testify his love to
his Lord and master. Indeed we have those now a days in the Popedom, that
love to bear themselves (...) Eusebius. vbi su pra.
(...), contrary to Christ, both living and dying, true Torti as the Bishop
has proved them: but S. Peter affected this of mere modesty, which is able
to make impression into a marble heart: These whither not climbing and soaring
in the mean time, with the wings of such ambition, as not I, but F. T. even
now described, (where it is thought T should stand before F, but for crookednes
sake,) not only to control Kings and Countries with their Universal
dominion, but to challenge as much power as Christ himself, the Adioynd. c. 1.
number. 4.
Head of the Church? And yet they make as if it were doubtful, whether
Antichrist be come yea or no, whether he sit in the Church of God, showing
himself for God, or no. But we have strayed out of the way, by occasion of
this mention, that S. Peter was exalted to the likeness or fellowship of our
Saviors martyrdom. Which the Bishop having abated them in his citation of S.
Austen, I confess also they should never have heard from me, but that this man
complained of lame allegations. As for the force it might seem to carry,
against our Saviors single and sovereign sacrifice, I shall need to say no
more then in the Apostles words, If one member suffers, all suffer with it;
even the head and all, but 1. Cor. 12. 26.
then especially I trow, when they suffer for the head, as S. Peter did suffer
for the honor of his Master, in some likeness with his Master, and yet not
daring to die too like his Master. And our Savior though in glory, yet he
cried from heaven, (that you may know he is the true David, whom Saul
annoyeth,) Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? Which words, as if they had
taught S. Paul what to think Act 9. 4.
of the fellowship of sufferings of the body mystical, he is bold to say
afterward in his own case, Adimpleo in corpore meo relliquias. passionum
Christi, pro corpore eius quod est Ecclesia: Coloss. 1.
I fulfill in my body the remainder of Christ's sufferings, for his body which
is the Church. Where pro is exemplarie, not satisfactorie, against the Rhemists
that dream of a mass of passions, upon that place. So does the Mass forsooth
run in their minds. But we speak of his calling them passiones Christi, for
sympathy, and for proportion; of which enough.

22. To return to S. Austen, and to conclude this whole matter with relating
his text as largely as you can desire. The sum is, that the Church must be
gracious toward her children, converting and returning by repentance, as our
Savior was to Peter, the image of the Church, or the proxy of the Church (for
I fear not to vouch that name by him, which has every where so good grounds
in S. Austen, as you have heard) and bearing her person not without cause. For
even Peter (quoth he) found favor after many defaults. Let her show her self
like Peter then, whom Peter figured, and the rather figured, because himself
was a sinner, yea a great sinner, as the Church contains many offenders in
her. That here also you may see another reason, Sir, though you have been
twice answered to this question before, why Peter rather then another figured
the Church, namely, because Peter being a great sinner, and yet after his
sins finding greater grace, was so much the apter to represent her, which in
both these kinds is very notorious, both abundantis peccati, and
super-abundantis gratiae, of surpassing grace after exceeding guiltiness, Romans
5. Our Saviors Parable is not unknown to this purpose, Luke 7. (propounded to
a Simon, though not this Simon) which of the two debtors ought more? The case
was Peter's own, both a great debtor, and released of much, and perhaps our
Savior delivered it as in his hearing, so not without some reference to him
standing by. But at least for this cause he bare the person of the Church. And
so Petri lapsus potius De Pont. Romans l. 1. c. 28. The Adioyndet also cap. (...).
confirmat primatum Pap^, as Bellarmine says; Peter's fall rather confirms the
primacie of the Pope. But you see what primatum, what kind of primacie, not to
be universal Lord or rector, but the Churches type, or the Churches figure, to
teach the Church as you would say, by way of lively instance, to show grace, as
he had found grace, and she both in her own, and his person. This was his
masterie that he had over the Church, to be master of mildness, and we deny
not but above the rest of the Apostles. Do thou love me more then these?
Alas, how could he choose, to whom so much was forgiven? then show compassion.

23. Now the faults of S. Peter, that S. Aust. had set down, but not so F. T.
no more then he durst set down his own name aright, nay which purposely he
leapes over, though they were incident to his allegation, as you may see in his
first chap. number. 3. and yet blames the Bishop for maimed quotations, they are
these ensuing. will say, that was no great matter: of which nevertheless you
may be pleased to remember what our Saviors censure was, heavy no doubt. He
called him Satan. Malchus his care with a sword, wherein his pretended
Successors imitate him but too truly. What though they strike no blow
themselves? Executio (says Bellarmine) ad alios spectat. Let Seneca be heard.
It is thou, Contr. Barcl.
says Seneca, speaking to Alexander, (who transported by anger, commanded
Lysimachus to be cast to a lion, and so De Clem. lib. 1. cap. 25.
torn in pieces, and devoured) it is thou that openest thy jaws upon him, it
is thou that tearest him in pieces with thy teeth: Tuum illud os est, tua illa
feritas. O quam cuperes, etc. The like may be said of Daniel and his enemies.
But this, F. T. durst not so much as once to mention, he knows it makes so
harsh a sound. And therefore he fetches a leap from Peter's doubting, to his
denying, and pares away three of his errors with an and caetera, which S.
Austen had comprehended, and set down in specie. I have heard of some, that
think for Peter to draw his sword at Malchus, because Malchus in Hebrew
signifies a King, as we are taught by S. Jerome, de vita Malchi, was either a
presage, or a justification of the Popes practices at this day. A presage it
might well be. But as for justification, they may call to mind how our Savior
approved it, threatening the sword to them that took the sword, though it were
Peter himself: Matthew. 26. 52.
for even to Peter were those words directed. Not to them that bear the sword,
as committed to them by God, which is the right and the duty of the civil
magistrate, but to them that Romans 13. 2. Accipient iudiciun ((...)) ^cilicet
qu^a accipiunt gladium non sibi commissum.
take it, that is, manage it without commission either by themselves or others,
as the Popes at this day. Therefore lib. de Patient.
Tertull. most wittily, Patientia Domini in Malcho vulnerata est: Our Lords
patience was wounded in Malchus: or, That which Malchus felt in his care, our
Lord felt at his very heart. It displeased him so much, that a Churchman should
strike. Therefore also he healed the wound by miracle, and restored his care
unto him again. Which was not ordinary, to do miracles, for the cure of
unbelievers, specially oppressors and impugners of his person; but that the
importance of the cause so required it, and to show how injurious he accounted
such courtesy, when those which are Churchmen will draw the sword, though it
be in defense of his truth or person.

24. ter negasse Dominu, triple denial of his Lord and Savior. To which
answers, as you have been told, his triple confession, which makes way to the
mandate of Pasce oues meas, exciting care, and study, and diligence, but
importing nothing less then Monarchical jurisdiction. Though S. Austen also
find an other mystery there, namely of Trinity in unity, in the threefold
confession exhibited by one man, in the name of the Church, as we heard before
out of his Tractate upon S. John: Confirmat Trinitatem, vt consolidet vnitatem.

25. Aust. calls it, that at Antioch, no doubt, of which Gal. 2. This also the
Adioyner thought good to leave out, celans peccata sicut Adam, either because
it draws so near an error in faith, or at least for subiecting the Monarch of
the whole world, to the open resistance and reproof of an abortiue; Tom. 5.
(...). In Epist. ad Desyder.
though S. Chrysostom be so far from vnderualuing Paul therefore, that he
doubts not to call him (...), him that of last was made first: (where is primus
Apostolus now?) and Petrus Damiani, that he was antepositus omnibus fratribus,
preferred before all his brethren, like little Benjamin (says he) of whose
tribe he came. And again S. Chrysostom. (...), nay, (...), no body comes near
Paul, no not any thing near. Upon the first to the Coloss. (...). Ethico. And
Aquinas in his commentary on the first to the Galatians, says Paul is wont to
be painted on the right hand, and Peter on the left, (for even your Schoolmen
are miserably troubled with arguments drawn from pictures) because Christ from
heaven called the one to the Apostleship, from earth the other. But so much of
these. I might add more.

26. For so it follows in S. Austen, Pax in Domino reddita Ecclesiae a
Principibus saeculi: peace in the Lord was afforded to the Church by the
secular Princes. Which is as pleasant to a Jesuits ear to hear, as vinegar to
the teeth, or smoke to the eyes, as Solomon says, to think that the outward
welfare of the Church should depend on the Princes gracious aspect, who if they
be auerse, they know a means worth two of S. Paul's, to reduce them to order,
not by prayer or supplication to God for them, 1. Tim. 2. 1. for either they
will enforce them, or make them rue it, either bow or break, as the proverb
is. But S. Austen every where acknowledges Kings to be those kind nursing
fathers, from whose government flows the Churches peace. And it is well known
how he deriues it out of the second Psalm, Et nunc Reges intelligite, ver. 10.
as if the means to order well the Church, and to promote the kingdom, of
which it is said a little before, in the same Psalm, Yet have I set my King
upon my holy hill of Sion, were the right persuasion of Princes concerning the
faith. So as against Faustus the Manichee, lib. 12. cap. 32. he says, the
Emperors raging were the lions devouring, (S. Paul himself calls Nero the
lion, not for nothing, but because king of beasts:) but again when they
converted and embraced the faith, and gave succor and supportance to such as
professed relligion, then was Sampsons riddle verefied, then was honey found in
the lions mouth, then exforti exiuit dulce, and the mouth that before roared
against God, and his truth, (Quare fremuerunt is the lions property in the
Psalm aforesaid) then, munimenta latebrasque dabat dulcedini verbi Euangelici,
became a refuge, or a covering to the honie-combe of the Gospel. And because we
speak of lions, which are sovereign in their kind, kings of beasts, says
Epiphan. haer. 77. it may not be forgotten how the same S. Austen, more then
once or twice, compares the enemies of Christian religion, Kings and Emperors,
to the lions that Daniel was cast unto, amongst whose hands nevertheless God
preserved his Saints, for they that hurt the body could not hurt the soul, by
our Saviors saying; but when once they turned Christians, and enacted Laws,
and decreed punishments, for the suppressing Epist. 50 and lib. 1. contr.
Gaudent. c. 39.
of Atheism, or heresy, or Paganism, or whatsoever is contrary to the
glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, then they were like the lions, which
devoured, not Deniel, but Daniels accusers, and revenged upon them the wrong
that they had done to him before. I see I should be long, if I would bring, not
all, but the least part of the store that is found here of in S. Austens
works. I will point only to that in another place of his of the like
argument, where, as here he ascribes the temporal peace and prosperity of the
Church, to the favorable countenance of Christian Kings; so, there to show
what authority they have in the matters of God, he doubts not to set out their
suppressing of heresies, and Atheism, and schisms, in such a peremptory sort,
as to say Post subuersa idola, post flagellatum diabolum etc. Cuius simile
habes apud S. Cypr. contra Demetrian. Torquentur spiritualibus flagris etc.
Ite^, de Idolot. van. Item, de bono Patient. Zabulus flagellatur cum Angelis
suis.
that they have whipped and scourged the very devils (the authors of the
aforesaid) both by sea and land, both out of town and country. It is well
known, what enemies the Jesuits are to the Kings entermedling with matters of
this nature, to his handling the whip to lash the devil, for his sowing of
cockle amongst good corn; whom they perhaps would exempt, as a spiritual
person, from the Kings jurisdiction, besides that the cause is a cause of
faith. But S. Austen, though he knew well that the devil is not only
spiritual, but even one of the spiritualia nequitiae in coelestibus, as S.
Paul styles him, Ephesians. 6. 12. one of the spiritual wickednesses in heavenly
places, and so in regard even of his place to be privileged, yet doubts not to
put a whip into the Emperors hand, I say, nor cares not though he cry out, or
the Jesuits for him, Who art thou that torments us thus without a calling? But
we stray too far. Howsoever it be, as I promised our gentleman to give him
good measure, so S. Austens ending must by no means be passed over, for the
elegancie of it.

27. Speaking then against the Heretics, descended of one Lucifer, that denied
pardon to the conuerts of the Church, from which occasion sprang all this
treaty about S. Peter, he thus says; Hanc illi matris charitatem superbe
accipientes, and impierepudiantes, quia Petro post galli cantum surgentinon
gratulatisunt, cum Lucifero qui mane oriebatur, cadere meruerunt. That is:
These men, either proudly and scornfully receiving, or wickedly rejecting the
charity of their mother, because they rejoiced not with Peter rising after the
cock-crow, they justly fell with Lucifer that earely-rising star.

28. We have gone thorough the Chapter, which the Adioyner condemns the Bishop
for lamely quoting. Yet I can hardly abstain from yiedling him somewhat, out
of the next Chapter too, to fulfill his measure, to mingle him double in the
cup, whereofhe complains of the scantnes. Itaque miseri (says S. Austen,
speaking still of the Luciferians, but it fits but even too well with out
stout-hearted Jesuits) dum in Petro petram non intelligunt, and nolunt credere
datas ecclesiae claues regni coelorum, ipsi eas de manibus amiserunt. They have
lost the keys whilst they talk so much of them, and all because they
understand not, or will not understand, Petrum in petra, that is, Ecclesiam in
Christo, as S. Austen before expounded it in his 13. Sermon. de verb. Dom.
secundum Matthew. that is, the Church in Christ. So neither Peter the petra, as
they would feign make him, nor Peter at all, but Petrus in petra, that is,
Ecclesia in Christo, or populus Christianus, and fidelis in Christo, the Church
in Christ, or the number Vide Bedam, vt supta.
of the faithful, as they are recollected in Christ, is it to whom the keys
are here gives. But F. T. and his fellows, nolunt credere datas Ecclesiae
claues regni coelorum, will not believe that the keys of the kingdom of
heaven were given to the Church, and why, but quia Petrum in petra non
intelligunt, they will not understand the mystery of Peter, not in himself,
but in the rock, that is, in Christ: S. Austens prophecy, their property at
this day.

29. It follows in him yet, against such as forbid second marriages. Qui S.
Hierome was of another mind, for the purity of Marriage; (though reputed
somewhat partial) then either these heretics, or the Papists. Com. in Tit. 2.
Credant coniugati se opera libirorum perpetrare ante oculos Dei and Angelorum.
Therefore not reprehensible. S. Chrysostom says, that young men go crowned to
their marriage, in the places of Greece, where he lived, to show they have
triumphed over the lusts of youth, and are now past danger of temptation. Com.
in 1. Tim. 3. Sermon. 9. in Ethico. And again, that our Saniour turned water
into wine, at a marriage, to show the power and the effect of marriage, which
is to restrain the frailties of nature, as wine has a binding quality over
water, Ipso fine Com. in Epist. ad Coloss. Origin in 17. Genesis hom. 3 says that
Abraham and his wife deserved to be called Pretbyteri, and were so indeed,
that is to say Priests: for he construes himself to mean, not age, but
ripeness of understanding. See you to what dignity married women may come,
not only men? See lastly S. Ausien cont. Faust. l. 5. c. 9. where he iustifies
holy marriage against Faustus and his inpure litter, by those places of the
Apostle, where in he gives rules to families; as husbands, wives, fathers,
children, masters, servants, as carefully as Ignatius, or Frances, ever did to
their Fraternities. Which is a sign of the reverent estimation that he had of
them. Quid dicemus de illis, quorum domoi tam solerti and diligenti cura
componit Apostolus? etc.
cum super Apostolicam doctrinam se mundiores praedicent, sinomen suum vellent
agnoscere, mundanos se, potius quam mundos, vocare^t. Who pretending themselves
cleaner far then the Apostles doctrine, are found to be clean besides all
praise of cleannes. If you ask, why so? the reason is rendered in the next
words; Cogunt viduas suas vri, quas nubere non premittunt. Non enim
prudentiores habendi sunt quam Apostolus Paulus, qui ait, Malo eas nubere quam
vri. They compel, says he, their widows to burn, whom they forbid to
marry, whereas they should not be counted wiser then the Apostle Paul, who
says, I had rather they should marry then burn. But no doubt while they
affect a purity above the Apostles doctrine, they might give themselves, if so
it pleased them, a name more agreeable to their filthy sect. The world has
not yet forgotten, how roundly Bellarmine replies upon his MAJESTY, moderately
censuring their restraint of marriages, which yet they would have to be so many
Sacraments, that marriages before the vow indeed are Sacraments, but after
that, sacriledges. S. Austen makes it free here for all to marry, that find
themselves to be They compel to burn: who^ they forbid to marry, says S.
Austen, implying, continence is not so cheap or vulgar as the Papists give
out. For then, what compulsion to burn, I pray you, though marriage were
forbidden?
in danger of burning, windows and all, and who knows but vowed and
professed widows? The rule is general, and he applies it generally, without
any limitation, Malo eas nubere quam vri: I had rather they should marry then
burn: from which it is not to be thought he would excuse any. S. Paul
himself, 1. Tim. 5. 12. though he speak of widows, that had given their
first faith, suppose, as you construe it, their faith and vow to remain
widows, yet afterward in the 14, he gives them leave to marry, since they
could keep it no better; I will have younger widows marry. Where it were
hard to construe younger widows twice named, v. 12. and 14. and one time
condemned for their wantonness after vow, desiring to marry, another time
licensed to marry, as for remedy, (They will marry, v. 12. and S. Paul, I
will have (...)* (...). (...). in ad Tim. Volo quia volunt.
them marry, v. 14.) I say it were hard to construe these two, of two sundry
kinds of widows, the one vowed, the other not vowed, whereas then the remedy
were no remedy, if it be not a remedy against such as made default: and if
Paul allowed the vowed widows to marry, though not without check for
breaking their vow, then Bellarmines sacrilege is no sacrilege, but rather
his doctrine sacrilegious. Also Chrysostom. hom. (...). in (...) (not sparing
belike the Vow and all) (...): that is, Run as much as thou please (the way
of continence) but when thou art aweary, and can go no farther, take the
remedy of marriage to thee. Whereto he adds the reason, Because the higher
pitch, the greater fall.
I might show the same out of Lib. 1. Ep. 11. ad Pompon. S. Cyprians words are
these: Si se ex fide Christo dicauerunt, pudire and cast perseverent: si
perseverare nolunt, vel non possunt, melius est vt nubant, etc. And Epiphanius
himself may seem to say as much, where he is thought to say the contrary:
viz haeresi 61. qua Apostolicorum est. Melius est lapsum a cursu, palam sibi
vxorem sumere secundum lege^, etc. It is better for him that is stu^bled in his
course [of intended continence] to marry a wife in the sight of the world
according to law, then etc. As for that, Peccatum est converti ad nuptias post
virginitatem decretam: First, a light name, Peccatum, not Sacrilegium.
Secondly, Peccatum, id est, non sine peccato, by reason of the rash vow. And
Epiphanius allows soon after, that melius est vnum peccatum habere quim
plurae, which concerns this case very nearly. Besides that those Counsels
which condemn this inconstancy, punish it but lightly, and command not the
marriage to be dissolved, as in other cases. See Council. Neocaesar. Can. 2.
Matrimonio soluto admittatur ad p^nitentiam. Not so here.
Cyprian, de S. Virg. cap. 34.
Austen, ad Demetr.
Jerome: I might show it out of some of the auncientest Council. Calched. Can.
16. censures them very gently, though it reprove them. The like does Con.
Aneyr. Can. 19. And E^a^* Sa, verb. Ornatus, makes it venial for a Nun to
deck and beutifie her self, though it be with danger of pleasing a young man's
fancy. Yet inducens in periculum contrahendi mortalis mortale est, says the
same Sa, verb. Curiositas Therefore Nuns marriages are not so damnable. How
much less then are others* since these are counted among the most dangerous.
Councels. I might allege Medina observing as much, though he overthrow it
again, like a cow that has given a good soope of milk, so with the dash of
his heel: In contrarium est D. Thomas. What marvel if Thomas be of such
authority, when Baron. in Martyrolog. Romans Martij 7.
some of you have recorded, that in conclusion of your famous Counsel of
Trent, the Fathers cried out there, as if they had done a great act, upon the
name of S. Thomas, ascribing the winning of the day to him. Just as Plato in
his Timaeus, makes the maker of the world to congratulate his own pains in
the assembly of his pettie-gods, after the creation. And yet some think that
Thomas is not so firm for vows, but when they prove Seconda (...). qu. 88.
art. 10.
inconvenient, he gives leave to break them. But so much of S. Aust. and his
authority, cited out of de Agon. Christ. c. 30. where F. T. complains the
Bishop to have left out so much. Are these, trow you, the things that the
Bishop left out?

30. ANOTHER testimony conform to that of S. Austens, to show either the
force, or the extent of the commission given to Peter in Pasce oues meas, the
Bishop produced out of S. Ambrose, another of the four Doctors of the Church,
of their own registring, that it may satisfy the more. In ore duorum,
praesertim tanti, testium. De sacerdotali dignitate, as now the title runs,
though it has run otherwise in times past, cap. 2. not as F. T. wrongly
cites, the first. Quas oues, and quem gregem, non solum tunc B. suscepit
Petrus, sed and nobiscum eas suscepit, and cum illo eas nos suscepimus omnes.
That is, Which sheep, and which flock, not only Blessed Peter then received,
but both he received them with us, and with him we all have received them. As
for the pregnancy of this testimony, and that it touches to the quick, what
need we say more, when we have our adversary confessing, Cap. 1. number. 7.
Adioynd.
that this manner of speech does indeed enforce a greater equality betwixt S.
Peter and other Pastors, then ever S. Ambrose did imagine, he means then can
subsist with their supposed primacie or Papacy of Peter. But how does he
answer it? Forsooth they are said not to be Ambrose his words, not those at
least, and nobiscum eas suscepit, both he received them with us, etc. And why
so? Because first they are contrary to Ambrose his judgment in other places,
but specially because they are not extant in the printed copies, and in a word
are merely of the Bishops forging. Ambrose which have been set forth, though
we could not come by all to consult them; yet so many are found to have those
words, which he quarrels to be foisted, as may easily show, on which side the
corruption lies, ours for adding, or theirs for defacing and withdrawing.
Five editions at Basile, and all in several years are found to have them:
Ann. 1506. 1516. 1527. the first of Johannes Petri a Langendorfe his setting
forth, the third is Erasmus first edition. Add another at Basile, ann. 1538.
And yet a fifth of Costerius his edition, ann. 1567. all which have them. Of
Paris likewise five: one, ann. 1529. another, 1539. a third, 1549. a fourth,
1569. a fifth, 1586. And so we might go over a great many more, but here is
ten for any one that can be showed yet to have them not. Though as we daily
seek, we find more daily: as a sixth edition at Basile, ann. 1492. ancienter
then any that has been cited yet, and further off from any likelihood to be
corrupted by the Bishop. Add hither four manuscripts, which have them all.
One which is now in his Majesty's library, sometimes belonging to the
Monastery of Rochester, given by OsKetel a monk before the conquest, fair
written, and without all exception. True it is that S. Ambrose his book is
entitled there, Sermo de obseruantia Episcoporum; but it is the same word for
word, with De dignitate sacerdotali, the book which we now treat of. An other
is of Merton college in Oxford, which has also those words; though the title
of the book be changed, as in the former, yet utterly the same it is for
substance. It is there entitled, De obseruantijs Episcoporum, qui inscribitur
Pastorale; but the same, as I said. The third is of Peter-house library in
Cambridge, which they that will consult may find the words in, and see the
slander confuted with their eyes. A fourth in Sidney College library, of the
same University, given by Mr. Mascall, which to this purpose has been
consulted, and is found to have them. We will never deny but Sixtus quintus
his edition, which he set out at Rome, before he was Pope, and so the less
irrefragable forsooth, has them not. And accordingly an other edition of
Paris, ann. 1603. which professes to go step by step with that of Rome,
leaves them out. But what is that to control so many ancient editions? Or
does it not show, that those words are so effectual against your primacie (as
your self at a blush confessed ere-while, saying that S. Ambrose never meant
to be so liberal) that because you could not wrest them with any forged
interpretation, you had rather cut them out then abide the hazard? And yet it
is found, that between the Rome edition, of which I spoke even now, and that of
Paris, ann. 1603. professing to follow it in every point, there is an other of
Paris, ann. 1586. which retains the said words in spite of Rome. Concerning
the Lions, or rather the liars edition of ann. 1559. by Frellonius, you may
please to read what Iunius reports of his own knowledge, in his preface to the
Index expurgatorius; you will not only quit the Bishop from such blame, as now
you cast upon him most unworthily, but acknowledge to your shame, that as you
have used small conscience toward any of the Fathers, so least to Ambrose, of
all other, for abusing him. I will set down a little of the story that he
tells there, and so pass on to your next argument. When I The fellonious
Edition of S. Ambrose at Lions.
was at Lions, says he, in the year 1559. I was acquainted with a certain
corrector of the Press, whose name was Ludouicus Saurius. And coming one day
to visit him, I found him by chance, or rather by the special providence of
God, reuising S. Ambrose's works, which then Frellonius was in printing. And
after much talk on both sides, when I had told him I would not hinder his
work, he reading afresh a page of that work, Do you see (quoth he) the
fashion of this our edition of Ambrose, how neat, how accurate, and if you
regard the sight, to be preferred before all that have been yet printed?
Afterward as I considered and applauded the goodness of it; Well, for all that
(quoth he) if I were to buy me a copy of Ambrose, I would buy any rather then
this that you see. And demanding of him the reason of his so saying, he brought
out certain pages out of the decks under his table, in which pages there were
two rows one against the other, such as they call cancellatioperis, and thus
added: Look you (quoth he) this is the first form of our pages, which within
these few days we printed after a copy of very good credit. But two
Franciscan Friars by their authority dashed all this good work, and in place
of the first sheets, made us print these that you saw even now, clean besides
all the direction of our copies, with no small hinderance and trouble to
Frellonius, etc. This reports Iunius of his own experience, touching your
corrupting of Saint Ambrose; And so much of that point.

31. Primatum non accepit Andreas sed Petrus: Not Andrew, but Peter, received
the primacie. The other, lib. 10. comment, in Luc. cap. 24. Quia solus
profitetur ex omnibus Petrus, ideo omnibus antefertur. Because Peter only
professes among them all, therefore he is honored or preserred before all.
Which the Bishop had assoyled even before they were alleged, acknowledging,
as I have said, two such primacies in Peter, as no way crossing with S.
Ambrose, no way advantage your cause. The first is ordinis, the second
praestantiae. The one of order, the other of eminency. And the one in one, the
other in the other testimony of S. Ambrose may be conceived. Accepit primatum,
you say. A primacie of order being to be given to some, to avoid confusion,
as we shall afterward show, the Lord that divides inter flammas ignium, and
much more between one brother and another, which comes saliens and
transiliens, as it is in the Cant. and of two bedfellowes, of two grinders at
the mill, receives one, refuses the other, preferred Peter before Andrew his
brother. What is this to the Popedom? what to a Monarchy? what, I say not to
their stately, but even statarie and ordinary supremacy in the Church? Was
this to descend from S. Peter to his heirs? which we are told here is so
aliene from carnal prerogative, that therefore it was given to Peter before
Andrew, to show it is merely of divine disposition. Though the more I consider
S. Ambrose his words, the more me thinks they fall upon another answer of the
Bishops, and that proper enough. He speaks in one word of primatus communis,
Hieron. ad Pammach. de obitu Paulin. Primus erat, sed inter primos. So,
Decem-primi apud Ci^er. And, Multiori^^ (in Euang.) multi^ postremi.
not primatus proprius. So Clemens in Eusebius before quoted, (...), so Gal. 2.
(...), and (...): so here in this very place that S. Ambrose comments upon,
(...). Which was a primacie of many, and S. Paul himself had a place in it,
though called after Peter was made a Monarch, if ever he was made, even as
Ambrose here confesses; Hoc erant quod and Apostolus Paulus: They were the same
that Paul, and Paul that they. The wonder then lies here. Andrew that followed
first (that by the way you may see how little senioritie preuailes in Gods
school, which yet you so trust unto) received not the primacie that Peter did,
that is, was none of those three primi whereof Peter was. Neither say ye, that
because Peter only is mentioned here, only opposed to Andrew, therefore only
Peter received the primacie in S. Ambroses meaning. For Peter is opposed to
Andrew, as one brother to another, and the junior to him which is known to
have resorted more carely to Christ, which comparison between him and others
were not so clear. For even Andrew brought Peter to Christ, Ioh. 1. Now the
other primatus, which is primatus praestantiae, as the Bishop had called it,
and so foiled this fellows frivolous objections, even before they were
hatched, belongs to the other place. Quia solus profitetur, solus antefertur.
But anteferri is one thing, praeponi another. The latter may be of authority,
the first of any excellency. Do I seem once again too grammatical to you?
To you perhaps: but how do you gainsay me? Anteferri, I say, is one thing, as
to be esteemed before another, to be graced before another, like anteire,
antecellere, and if you have any more like. For it was not no grace for S.
Peter here, to be bid to feed, as a common man, an universal man, as one in
whose person the others were exhorted, and as S. Austen says, the Church
represented. Thus, quia solus profitetur ex omnibus, omnibus antefertur. And
lastly, martyrij corona decernitur, as S. Ambrose here says, he is promised
martyrdom in those words, Cum senueris etc. which is no small glory. In which
place also by the way, you may see the liberty of Ecclesiastical men, that
you so stand upon. When Peter was young, that is, before he was Apostle, he
might go whither Ioh. 11.
he would. Afterward he was to follow against his will. Is this exemption? But
because you confer place with place, to persuade us that we construe S.
Ambrose amiss, I hope you will give us the like leave hereafter, to confer
diverse places of the Fathers with themselves, before we assent to that which
you produce out of them. And yet it follows in S. Ambrose, after, omnibus
antefertur, as it were by way of reason, Mayor enim omnibus charitas est: for
charity is greater then all. So as Peter's anteferri, is neither grounded upon
his privilege of retaining the faith, as you would make it, of his love
rather, which you confess often to have failed in your Popes, (as if the
after-name Peter had abolished Simon, qui interpretatur obediens, as Beda
notes) and the prioritie, if he had any assigned him over others, Sermon. In
Cath. Petri.
is only like Charities among other virtues, which is to be principal
indeed, but not to rule. The virtues of the prosequutiue part rule not the
intellectual, but are ruled rather. So Faith and Love.

33. As for vicarium amoris, which is another thing that you urge out of his
Comment upon Luke, that Christ left Peter the Vicar of his love, or the deputy
of his love, as if therefore he were that Vicar of his power, or jurisdiction
that you imagine, what so unlikely? Of the Vicar of our Savior you may read in
S. John, cap. 16. Alium paracletum and cap. 14. De praescrip.
dabit vobis: and Tertullian has been told you to give that to the holy Ghost.
He is the Paraclete. Though you have Cletus and Anacletus, yet never a
Paracletus, the Vicar of our Lord, properly so called, in all the rank of your
Popes. For we must desire you now, that we may have no Montanizing. Though, I
suppose, you are not ignorant, what an ornament of yours had like to have been
transported, with the enticing prophecyes and Siren-songs of Mistress
Maximilla, when time was. S. Austen also answerably in his sermon upon the
Epiphanie, 185. Datur vicarius Redemptoris, meaning the holy Ghost: and yet he
adds, Vt quod ille redemit, iste sanctificet, quod ille inchoauit, iste
consummet. Is this Peter? Does he sanctify those whom Christ redeemed? or does
he perfect that which Christ began? But Ambrose calls Peter vicarium amoris,
the deputy of Christ's Heb. 7. 24. (...). Bellarm. calls it blasphemy, to say
the holy Ghost is Christ's vicarius.
love. And who doubts, but as Christ has no proper deputy in the course of
his government, unless you will admit the holy Ghost before named, which
Bellarmine denies to do, so, in a modified sense, the Vicars of his love were
as many as loved her in his absence, whom he loved, and employed all their care
to benefit his Church? which was not one man's charge, but all the Apostles, and
not only the Apostles, but all ministers, to the end of the world. Alij
pastores vicarij sunt illius pastoris, says Lyra upon Ioh. 10. 16. Yea Ambrose
himself; Omnes Episcopi (if not Presbyteri) sunt vicarij Christi, upon 1. Tim.
5. 19. And you may add the two Eusebij, one of Rome in his Epist. ad Episc.
Tusciae and Campaniae, if it be not forged by you, Caput Ecclesiae Christus
est, Christi autem vicarij sacerdotes sunt. The head of the Church is Christ,
and Christ's Vicars art the Priests. The other the Emesene, in his sermon upon
Ioh. 20. Dominica prima post pascha; making it common to the Disciples all to
be Christ's deputies, Meos Vicarios vos constituo, mea vice vos mando, I make
you my Vicars, I appoint you in my stead. In Tractatu de ordin. Epil. and
investituta Laic. Edit. lat. Sirm. Iesuita, p 418. Sed and Aquinas co^^n Heb.
13. Dicit a^te^ Christum Pastorem magnum, quod omnes alq sunt ^arij eius, etc.
Vnde 1. Pet. 5. PRINCIPS PACTORVM vocatur.
Goffridus Vindocinensis thus we read: Episcopus [omnis] Dominus est and
Imperat on Christianorum, qui etiam Christi vices agere creditur. And not only
Bishops, or Ministers; but as Christ loved us, so for us to love one another,
and in that sense to be the deputies of his love (in which only sense S.
Ambrose meant it of S. Peter, saving that he was to do the works of love as
an Apostle) is no more then is enjoined to every Christian. Though S. Ambrose
say only velut vioarium amoris, not daring to say vicarium clean out, as the
nature of his office, as you would make it, but showing that he speaks in a
borrowed phrase, and as it is proper to none, so in that extent perhaps
befitting many. Therefore Bellarmine leaves the velut clean out, citing this
authority, de Pont. Romans l. 1. c. 25.

34. THERE is yet behind another grave observation out of S. Ambrose, that
Peter is not bid now to feed the lambs, or little sheep, but ones ipsas, M^n
Job. 21. Qui disputat cui agnos potius quam ones Christus vocet suos [quasi
distinguens inter haec duo] videat ne doctis hominibus risum praebeat. Nihil
discriminis est in re, sed in voce tantum.
that is, the more perfect. I might send this noddie to M. Casaubones late
monument, or rather mirror of Exercit. 16. c. 133. ad Annal. Baron.
Exercitations to Baronius his Annals, to be informed of S. Ambrose his
reading this text, and the vprightnes of it. Woe is me for that divine man M.
Casaubone, that speaking of his monument, I should speak ambiguously, of his
tomb, or of his writings. But what that has devoured, these shall eternize,
and now is no time to bewail our loss. Because Peter had lambkins, and lambs,
and sheep, committed to his charge, to be fed by him, suppose incipientes,
prosicientes, and perfectos, the leaf, the blossom, and the ripe almond in
Aarons rod, suppose all the steps in Jacobs ladder, at least as it signifies
the Church here militant, suppose Prophets and Apostles, Kings and Emperors,
the boundless latitude of the Church Christian, Ergo quid? who can reply with
patience to such empty stuff? Do we look it should have been said, Feed
all save the Apostles? or, all save Princes? why should Princes and Apostles
not profit by Peter? why should they be denied the benefit of his feeding? why
should not all the Apostles feed all the world? why should not one Apostle
feed another, Peter his fellows, and they Peter? As I think Paul fed him,
and that with his staff too, tipped with iron, (I have heard some construe
virgam ferream so, Apoc. 2. and Psalm. 2. as alluding to the sheepehooke) I
mean with his reproof, and that at Antioch his own seat, not only with
fodder, or with green bows. As again, James fed him with, viri fratres
audite me, Act. 15. 14. you would think this were rather the successor of
Christ, of whom that was said, Hear you him. And again ver. 19. (...). To
say nothing of, Simeon narrauit, in the 14. ver. Not Peter now, but bare
Simeon. Does this prove a Monarchy over the Apostles? Or, if Kings be content
to lend an ear to his pipe, and to graze upon such leaves as he shall cast
before them, the word and the Sacraments, that refection of immortality,
quorum vis August. contr. Faust. l. 19. c. 11.
inenarrabiliter valet plurimum, what is this to your modern frighting
omnipotency? Me thinks I hear Constantine ravished with his note, to yield
thus much, Be you Bishops in the Church, and I without. Me thinks I hear
Valentinian call for such a Prelate, as he may safely lay his head in his
lap, Caesareum caput -- quod caput orbis erat. Ovid. de Trist.
but safely, being the head, which is the head of the world, as even the
heathen Poet could say. But does this prove the terrible power that you strive
for, which is neither of kin to Peter's feeding, and the daungerousest resort
for a Kings head that may be? Nay, how if the Jesuit have so mistaken himself,
in his curious distinction between lambs and sheep, that he has clean
exempted both Apostles and Kings from Peter's jurisdiction, to bring whom in,
and to range them within the compass of that supreme power, the distinction
only was at first devised? For if oves and agni only, be S. Peter's walk, and
he the sheepeheard, where are arietes, where are the rams? The rams being the
Apostles, by Turrian his exposition, or the successors of the Apostles, that is
the Bishops. And again, the rams being meant by Kings, as Tolet will have it,
upon the 15. of S. John, Annot. 3. Two Jesuits you see I bring him, and the one
a Cardinal made for his learning, which I think will never be his lot. But
has not he spun a fair thread I say, shutting them out, both Apostles and
Kings, whom by that very trick he would have shut in?

35. And so much of his answer to the first exception, that the Bishop makes
against their argument drawn from Pasce oues meas, consisting in the
authorities of Austen and Ambrose.

36. IN his second (says he) he seeks to retort the 2 Adioynd. c. 1. number. 12.
etc.
Cardinals argument upon himself, and to prove the Kings supremacy by the
word Pasce, for so much as God said also to David, Tu pasces populum meum
Israel, Thou shall feed my people Israel. In retortio to the Cardinals words,
Vbi nemo negare potest S. Petrum factu^ esse pastorem omnium fi lolium, and
ipsorum etiam. Apostolorum, nisi (...) has vtros^ ^sse (...) Christi. (...)
Where no man can deny (says the Bishop) but that a King was made the Pastor
of all Israel, yea of the Priests themselves, except he will deny them to be
part of Israel. But what faies F. T. think you, to this? Thus argues this
learned and sharp Doctor; overthrowing his own argument sufficiently by his
own conclusion, granting in effect, that if the Priests were not a part of
the people Israel, the King was not their Pastor. These are his prefaces, if
we had time to ponder them. And yet it is almost the modestest clause in the
Book, of them wherein he bespeaks the Bishop, that the Reader may pardon me,
if now and then I be moved, even more then he is aware, or pity me when I am
compelled (as often I am for want of leisure) to swallow such courteous girds in
silence. The sum is, that in answering to the Bishops retortion, he would
have the Priests to be no part of Israel. And once again you shall discern
the spirit of the man, who thus sets forward. To this purpose then it is to be
considered, what I have amply debated in the first Chapter of my Supplement,
concerning the exemption and separation of the Priests and Levites from the
temporal estate, by the express words of Almighty God, Numb. 8. who gave the
Levites to Aaron, and his children, not to the temporal Prince: Tradidi eos
dono Aaron, and filijs eius, de medio populi. And again, Number. 1. The tribe of
Leui shall not be numbered, nor have any part with the rest of Israel, but the
Lord must be their possession, portion, and inheritance. I must be short. And
so shaking off the Supplement, with other idle complements, though he is not
ashamed to set a trumpet to his Pharisaicall cheeks, and every where to
display his own work, as if there were no other storehouse of learning in the
world, no file but this Philistines to whet a wit upon, consider we as well
as we can, what is to be said to this point, of the exemption of Levites from
the state politic, that is, from their subjection to civil Magistrates: for
else he says nothing, since we know the Levites were not laymen, and the
Priests Priests, not populars. Yet he implies such a thing, when having quoted
the text, and not daring to utter that audacious proposition, that Priests were
not subject to the civil Magistrate, he says only this, that God reserved
them for his own service: which no doubt is the true meaning of the place, but
how does this overthrow civil obedience?

37. To speak particularly to the places. As for Number. 1. (to begin with
that) Non numerabitur tribus Leui, I could send him to a place, as he does us,
where he should find his answer, if Datin be no eie-fore to him, already
shaped to a man of his coat; and as it seems very reverently esteemed by
him; I mean John Eudoemon of Crete: but the sum is this. A view of the
people was to be taken there, either as landed men, or sufficient for the wars.
From both which the Levites being exempt by calling, what marvel if with the
rest they are not to be levied? Therefore children are not numbered, nor yet
women, but as it is in the second and third verses, though often repeated
throughout the Chapter, the more to condemn the blindness of this
beetle-head: Quicquid sexus est masculini a vicesimo anno and supra, omnium
virorum fortium ex Israel: Whatsoever is of the male-sexe, from the twentieth
year and upward, of all the valiant men of Israel. Are women and children
therefore, nay all under twenty, exempt from authority? Also Origin hom. 1.
in Number. finds no such mystery, but makes it a token of perfection, to be
numbered cum populo Dei, as the Apostles and Disciples (says he) whose very
hairs of their head were numbered, etc. And so likewise in the resurrection,
Alius (says he) numerabitur in tribu Levi, credo qui been praefuit sacerdotio,
alius in alia tribu. So that he makes Levi to be numbered too. Lastly, Ruport in
his Comment. upon the place, sees no other mystery in these words, save that
Clergy men should by all means withdraw themselves from secular affairs, as
the holy Canons (says he) have decreed.

F. T. here amplifies the separation of the Levites by, though it is not
unknown what cities the Levites enjoyed by assignement afterward, yet what is
that to the purpose? Only I confess they are so much the fitter to be
exempted from subjection, if, their lands being taken from them, they have the
lesser means now to nourish sedition. But what says The Archbishop of Roane
was of another mind for Bishops castles. Chron. Angl nostrae sub Rege Stephano.
Mariana de Institit. Prino. l. 1? Ego volo Episcopis firmissimas arces tradi:
I will have Bishops to be masters of the strongest or stateliest castles.
There Is a Leuite of the Jesuits, or a pretty leuorite rather, to suck a Kings
heart-blood in time. I have given them to Aaron and his sons for a gift, from
the midsts of the people, they are given for service in the holy calling under
Aaron, not for any such dependence and obligation toward him, as if thereby
they were exempt from the authority of the Magistrate. Though the Jesuit cry
out here, as having attained a conquest, Not to the temporal Prince, but to
Aaron. As if the temporal Prince had lost the Leuite, after once God had given
them to Aaron. Where first I might ask him, whether Aaron were exempt himself
or no? If not, why the Levites, and he not? if so, by what gift, by what
donation of God? For giving them to Aaron, he left Aaron as he was, for ought
we read. He will say, Aaron was his before; which I grant, for service, but
where by exemption from the civil Magistrate? What text, what evidence has he
for that? And will he hold that course in making free of apprentises, as to
cancel the indenture, or get the Masters release before he think them free,
and not the same in disanulling subjection to a Prince? Now, we know how Aaron
was taunted by Moses, for making Exodus 32. 21.
the calfe. Which is a sign that this discharge from obedience is a fiction.
Neither challenge we any other supremacy of Princes over the Clergy, save in
the like case to punish the exorbitant. Besides, God here gives the Leuite to
Aaron, as given to him freely by the people. Quos dedistis mihi, dono Aaroni,
v. 16. and 18. See you then what the people may do in the choice of their
Minister? which Bellarmine by no means can be brought to digest at his
MAJESTY'S hands, alleging it out of Cyprian, as anciently practiced: here you
see allowed by God himself in a sort, that the people should offer and set
apart to him their Priests. And if the peoples giving of the Leuite to God, did
not set them free, why should Gods delivering them back to Aaron? Is Aarons
protection more sovereign then Gods, to privilege the Leuite? Yea you
inthrall the Priests to the people unaware, whiles you labor to exempt them
from the Princes authority. For you make the people the first author of their
infranchizoment, as giving them to God, and God to Aaron, by which they hold.
Lastly, the Levites v. 18.
were given to Aaron, as is manifest by this place, only in lieu of the first
borne of the children of Israel, Opinio haec est Rabbi Moysis, and laudatur a
Lyrano in locum.
because they by their default and odious idolatry, had made themselves
unworthy to do God service. I demand then: were the first borne exempted
before, or no? if so, by what charter? for you bring no evidence but this of
the Levites, Number. 8. If not, how could the single putting of others in their
room, to supply for them in divine offices, affoard such privilege to the
deputies, as the original ministers never enjoyed? But to persuade you yet
more fully, that no more is implied in these words, then only to put in one
for the other, the Levites for the first borne, that Aaron and his sons might
not be destitute of some to serve them, in their religious performances,
(besides that the 20. verse specifies so much, where the execution is described
of all that is here commanded, and yet it reaches no further then only to the
application of Aaron and his sons to divine service, together with the Levites,
as Lyra well observes, without any speech of the least exemption from civil
authority) please you to hear your own Doctors speak. First Tostatus as the
more worthy. I have read that this Tostatus emulated Turrecremata, another
prop of your primacie, both contending at one time who should do the Pope most
service. Though he got the Cardinalship, yet you are not wont to despise the
Bishop for his learning. Thus he says. [Tradidi eos dono Aaron and filijs
eius. In 8. Number. quaest. 21.
I have given them for a gift to Aaron and his sons.] Id est, Leuitas
acceptos pro primogenitis Deus tradidit Aaron and filijs suis. That is, God
has delivered to Aaron and his sons, the Levites, whom he took in liewe of
the first borne. And after more plainly: Et dicitur quod tradidit ijs dono, id
est, donando, quia deus imposuerat onus totius ministerij super Aaron and
filios eius. Cum enim dedit ijs Leuitas vt adiuuarent ipsos, dicobatur dono
dare. And it is said that he gave them for a gift, that is, by way of gift,
because God laid the burden of the whole ministry upon Aaron and his sons.
For when he gave them the Levites to help them, he is said to give them for a
gift. So again, [De medio populi, from the midst of the people,] id est, dedit
Leuitas Aaroni, educendo cos de medio populi, quasi dicat; Prius erant Leuitae,
sicut populares, non habentes aliquam specialem dei ministrationem. Postea cum
deus fecit illos esse suos ministros, dicitur separasse illos de medio populi,
id est, ab alijs popularibus distinguendo eos, in diuersitate ministrationis
ijs traditae, quam non habebant alij Israelitae. That is, He gave the Levites
to Aaron, by bringing them forth from the midst of the people. As who would
say: Before the Levites were as the common people, not having any special
service of God [inioyned them.] Afterward when God made them to be his
ministers, he is said to have separated them from the midst of the people,
that is, by distinguishing them from other of the popular sort, in the
diversity of the ministration committed to them, which the other Israelites
had not. Again, [Vt seruiant mihi pro Israel, that they may serve me for
Israel] id est, vt seruiant loco primogenitorum Israel, etc. That is, That they
may serve me in liewe of the first borne of Israel, etc. And indeed these words
show as much as was said before, that, Tradidi dono, was only for service. Now
hear Lyra. [Statues Leuitas in conspectu Aaron, and filiorum eius, and
consecrabis oblatos Domino, ac separabis de medio filiorum Israel, vt sint mei.
Thou shall set the Levites in the sight of Aaron, and of his sons, and shall
consecrate them, having offered them to the Lord, and shall separate them from
the midst of the children of Israel, that they may be mine.] Hic subditur ratio
dicti mandati. Ad hoc enim de mandato Domini ordinabantur, vt seruirent
sacerdotibus in cultu diuino, quia cultus ante legem datam pertinebat ad
primogenitos Israel. Sed quod illi facti sunt inepti ad cultum dei, ideo
Dominus loco illorum, voluit Leuitas ordinari ad cultum suum. Et hoc est quod
dicitur [Et tuli Leuitas] deputando mihi pro cunctis primogenitis filiorum
Israel. That is: Here the reason of the aforesaid commandment is set down.
For to that end were they ordained according to Gods commandment, that they
might serve his Priests in divine worship, which worship before the giving of
the Law belonged to the first borne of the children of Israel. But because they
became unfit for Gods worship, therefore the Lord would have the Levites to be
ordained for his worship in stead of them. And this is that which is said [And
I took the Leuites] deputing them to me for all the first borne of the
children of Israel. To conclude, the Chaldee Paraphrast thus expounds the text,
of gift for service, not, for exemption, which men see none, in these words,
that so bewitch you, except they are Iesuited. Offeret Aaron Leuitas munus in
conspectu Domini a filijs Israel, VT SERVIANT IN MINISTERIO EIVS. That is:
Aaron shall offer the Levites for a gift before the Lord from the children of
Israel, THAT THEY MAY SERVE IN HIS MINISTRY. But so much, and too much,
hereof be said. Saving that not to F. T. this, whose argument deserves it not,
but to others from whom he filcht it, that stand much upon it.

Bishops retortion upon Peter's pasce from David's pasce, Hector Pintus comment.
in cap. 3. Nalium, ad illa verba, Do^^it auerunt pastores tui Rex Assure;
exponit pastores per confiliarios, duces, iudices, and omnes qui temp.
gubernandam sui cipiunt. Citansque aliqunt loca in eam sententiam, vt Esa. 63.
Esa. 44. Ier 10. item Ier. 22. concludit, inquiens, Vides, principes,
gubernatores, and consiliarios appellari PASTORES Videant hi.
which they vouchsafe not to regard; they are so swallowed up of Peter's, is
this; That, suppose David had had supreme government over the Church in the
old Law, yet no Prince temporal may now claim the like, no more then the
ceremonies may be said to stand in force, as the keeping of the Sabbath day, as
polygamie, abstinence from puddings, and the like meats, (says he that is
afraid of loosing his dish belike) and with such good stuff are his pages
fraught. Yea because the Bishop insists more then once upon Moses law, and the
precedents of the old: Testament, to show that primacie belongs to Kings,
therefore he is a Jew rather then a Christian, etc. So that now obedience is
become among the ceremonies, and the honoring of our parents, that is, in
truth of our Princes, Patres patriae by ancient style, (and so Ezechias called
the Priests his children, filij mei, 2. Chron. 29. 11.) is as subject to
alteration as the Sabbath day. (...) (...), may the ceremonies say; insulting
upon the moralls, as the other Kings do upon Lucifer, the king of Tyrus, in
Ezekiel. And because the ceremonies not only may be omitted, but may not be
retained without heinous crime, therefore it shall be conscience to wax wanton
against Princes, to shake off their yoke, yoa merit, virtue, and what not? Let
us believe, that when Christ, witness S. Paul, Coloss. 2. nailed the ordinances
which were against Hegesip. de ex^id. Hieros. l. 2. c. 5. Pilatus Christum
nihil aliud docentem, nisi quo primum deo, deinde Imperatoribus, populos
faceret obedientes, cruci suffixit.
us to his cross, he nailed the law of our subjection to Magistrates, though he
died upon that cross to establish the authority even of Pilate himself, as
both S. Paul elsewhere, and the Gospels witness. Though, when S. Paul says,
such ordinances were nailed to the cross as were against us, he sufficiently
shows that this was none, concerning Magistracy, then which nothing is more
beneficial to mankind, as S. Chrysostom often deduces out of his Epistles,
namely Romans 13. v. 4. and the 1. of Tim. 6. 2. (...) says Chrysostom, and so
likewise Oecumenius, is conditio seruitutis sub Domino, which is more
beneficial to the servant, then the servant possibly can be to his master.
For, (...); he takes care for all. But, if this be good Divinity, that the
sovereignty of Princes is to be reckoned but a ceremony, and to be blown
away among the shadows of the old Law, as if the precept of honoring
Parents, which is primum in promissione, Ephesians. 6. were now secundum in
omissione, after that against images, which is usually cancelled in the Popish
Catechismes, let him tell me what he says to S. Austens sicuts in his Epist.
50.
Epistle ad Bonifacium, where he parallels the Christian Kings with the
Hebrews, thus; Sicut seruiuit Josias, sicut Ezechias etc. How absurd is his
sicut, if their authority were ceremonial, yea or judicial either, and to
expire with the coming in of the new Testament? How does His words are: For
in the book of Kings we read, what pains godly Josias took to bring the
kingdom given him of God, to the true worship of God, etc. Not that we compare
our selves with his holiness, but that WE SHOULD ALVVAIES IMITATE SVCH EXAMPLES
OF THE GODLY. Always, says he, as if the force never expired.
Charles the great assume as much to himself from the example of the said
Kings, praefat, in leges Galliae apud Ansegisum? Neither say as the Adioynder
does here, that David was a Prophet, and so Josias, or Ezechias, and the like.
Vide Acta Concilij.
For the Council of Chalcedon finds as much in Constantine; Constantinus
magnus, vt David, and Rex and Propheta. Which they would not have appropriated
to Constantine neither, but have given, you may be sure, to any other Christian
King, that should have carried himself with the like valiant resolution. And
no marvel, when Solomon makes it common to them all, to have an oracle in
Sozom. l. 7. c. 8. (...): that is, God by aracle instructing the King. Of
Theodosius choosing Nectarius to be Archbishop of Constantinople.
their lips, Prou. 16. and in an other place, their hearts so set in Gods
hands, as extraordinarily subject to his directions. Where because I have named
Solomon, what think you of his Proverbs? are they replenished with
ceremonials, or with iudicialls, or with what? yet he talks of a King, if you
be remembered, one time as chasing away all wickedness with his eye, suppose
heresies and all: another time enacting and decreeing righteousness, sculpens
iustitiam, c. 8. which cannot be without the chief part of it, that is,
relligion: (as we read in Theodoret. l. 4. c. 5. that Valentinian taught all
(...) beginning with (...), all equity, as Solomon here says, beginning with
piety:) another time as one against whom there is no rising up, and with many
such Prove. 30. 31.
like elogiums, he aduances him as supreme in each kind. Neither Solomon
only, but Aristotle himself, as if it were the law of nature, in the third
of his politics. Assuerus, Cyrus S Maximus Hom, in Litanijs, and de Ieiun.
Ninivit. Mira res, dum se Regem hominum non meminit, incipit Rex es(...)
Iusticiae. Et, Sieve ferro, sieve iusticia, pro ciuium salute primus invigilat.
Et, Non perdidit imperium, sed mutauit. Obtinet nunc coelestium disciplinaru^
principatum.
, the King of Nineue, were they not all supreme ordainers in relligion, who
nevertheless were strangers to the law of Moses? This, Parallel. part. 4. de
Paradoxis.
Eudoemon might have told you, who twits the Bishop for ioining those aforesaid
with the kings of Israel. Belike then they are distinct. Therefore not only
Israel, or they that were guided by the law of Moses, but mere Naturalists
have acknowledged thus much, that supremacy is the kings by original right,
and not of ceremony. So, as our Savior said once about circumcision, Non ex
Mose, sed ex Patribus, in like sort here. It is neither ceremony, nor
judicial, neither from (...), nor (...), Romans 9. this authority of Kings in
all causes, and over all persons, which you so carpe. And if it be lawful as
you tell us to argue from the old Testament to the new, by way of sign to the
thing signified, we have enough in that kind to maintain our assertion, though
we had no other argument. For who found a type in Nabuchodonosor even now,
first fierce against Daniel, and Daniels God, afterward making laws as
zealously in his behalf? The oven that was heated to consume the three
children, consumed their adversaries. And so Daniels Lions prepared against
him, devoured his accusers. These are types, if you believe S. Austen, of
heathen Emperors turning Christian, and countenancing religion with all their
might, as before they used the advantage of their place, only to suppress it
and destroy it. I might tell you of other types, that have gone before in the
old testament, touching the supremacy of Kings, appertaining to the new. As
Abraham's harnessing 318. household servants against Kedar-Laomer for the
redeeming of Lot; which is a type of Constantine (say the Fathers of a certain
Chalcedon. in Actis.
Council) managing and mustering just so many Bishops in the Nicene Synod, to
the confusion of Arius. The lion that slew the transgressing Prophet, is a
figure of Leo the Christian Emperor suppressing heresies, etc. as Varadatus,
Ibid. in Actis.
whom they call excellentissimus Monachus, in his Epistle to Leo aforesaid,
construes it. In a word, though you be impudent, and your forehead full of
blasphemies; yet me thinks you should be ashamed to bewray your selves so
much, as to affirm that Kings lost any part of their stroke, by our Saviors
appearing in the new Testament, as needs Herod's panick fear, Non eripit
mortalia, qui regna dat coelestia. Sedul.
they must, if the authority was but ceremonial, or judicial either, which
they exercised before. And therefore I spare from further confutation.

. 39. As for that the Emperors in the new Testament were heathen, and so
neither by Christ, nor his Apostles obeyed, I hope, Sir, it is enough they were
not resisted. And if they made no good laws, yet they might have made them,
and the Church in such case had been bound to obey them. Neither do the
Bishops, I trow, always preach the truth, in which case Lib. de pastor. c. 10.
S. Austen, and Lib. 1. epist. 4. S. Chrysostom. Homil. de Pseudoproph. Ne mirere
etsi Pastores transca^t in lupos. Item Sermon. apud Georg. Alexan. in vita
Chrysostom. Crucifigit Caiphas, and co^fitetur Latro. Denique, Occidere
Sacerdotes, adorauere Magi. See his Epistles, for it was his own case. He
professes that the Bishops were his heauiest enemies in the cause of God and
his truth.
S. Cyprian, give us leave to abandon them. So is it when Kings, transported by
error, forsake their duty, and yet forfeit not their supremacy. Though our
Savior and his Apostles did no more turn away from the edicts of Princes
concerning relligion, then from the Scribe and the Pharisee, and the chair of
Moses it self, which you perhaps would have heard and obeyed in all things.
Will you say therefore that the chair was not supreme in those matters? To
omit, that if Princes had been never so impious for the time present, yet
(...), Gal. 3. the Scripture that foresees might have confirmed the type that
went of their authority in spiritual matters, even in the old Testament,
against such time as God should raise up better in the new. Yet you say that in
the new Testament there is not the least syllable to that purpose. Not Romans 13.
(...), Gods Minister, v. 4. (...), v. 6. which is rather more then the other,
but still Gods, or to God belonging. And not in Gods matters, trow you? In
terrorem malis, that is, to heretics and all. In laudem bonis; yet no
goodness without true relligion, in S. Paul's estimation, who says soon
after, that whatsoever is without faith is sin: the last verse of the next
chapter. So, Coge intrare, Luke 14. to the spiritual banquet, that is, Kings
in special have this compelling power, says S. Austen often. So Gal. 5. where
heresies are reckoned among the works of the flesh, which flesh at least the
kings authority stretches to, according to the similitude that you are wont to
quote out of Gregory Nazianzene, ^ues timore (...).
of the flesh and the spirit, though Athanasius Orat. de incarnat. verbi, makes
the King to be (...) the understanding part, that sets all on work. Lastly, 1.
Tim. 2. 1. where showing that God would have all men saved, the Apostle from
thence argues to prayers for Kings, knowing Kings, if they So Psalm. 2. Dabotibi
gentes hare ditatem tuam, and possessionem tuim terminos terrae, is joined
with, Et nunc reges intelligite etc. as the end with the means.
be Christian, are the notablest instruments to work the worlds salvation. Can
this be, if Kings be not supreme in relligion, and the causes thereof, as well
in the new, as in the old Testament? For least you say, they are to do these
things indeed, but at the Clergies beck, and subordinate to them, they are
called (...), supreme Magistrates, in the places that assign them what to
do: Romans 13. 1. 1. Pet. 2. 13. etc. But now if a man should ask you, where
your Pontifical supremacy is established in the new (besides that you may
fetch it, by authority, from Moses, which Deuteronomy. 17. Iste locus, vel a simili
vel a maiori, debet etiam intelligi de PP. Christianis.
we may not, and so from Aaron and his sons, nay, a maiori says Bell. de
Pontif. Romans l. 4. c. 16. though Moses figured not the Pope, but Christ, Heb.
3. 2. and so likewise Aaron, Heb. 5. 4. yet) perhaps you would quote Luke 22.
Vos autem non sic, for that is more pregnant, then Duo gladij in the same
chapter; or, Qui mayor vestrum est, fiat sicut minimus, or, Regnum meum non est
de hoc mundo, or for love to Peter, Non dominantes Cleris, 1. Pet. 5. 3. Do
not these show the meaning of Pasce oues meas?

40 You say again the Bishop equiuocates in this, that though David and Peter
were both called to feeding, yet Peter to one kind of feeding, David to
another, Peter to spiritual, David to temporal. As if the Bishop could not
discern the difference of their feedings, unless you taught him. But, Sir,
thus it is. For so much as you Jesuits would pick a Vrbanus 7. may seem to
have been of another mind, whose chief care, after he came to be Pope, was to
provide victuals good store: and his ground was, because he was called to
Pas^e o^^s meas, as he said, Cicarella in vita Vib. 7.
feeding of state, that is, of regiment and Monarchy out of Peter's feeding, we
demand whether it be not likely, that, if any government be implied in the word
Pasce, it is rather in David's, whom you confess to have bin a King, then in
Peter's, whom we never acknowledged to be a Monarch? And therefore we say your
argument for the Popes supremacy follows not well from Pasce oues meas.
Rather David's Pasce gives him some interest even in matters of religion, to
which Pasce belongs after a special sort, as it is used in Scriptures, and
Peter is bid to feed, rather then to rule, to show his authority is not
temporal, nor coactiue, but of a milder kind. That you say Cyrus was no head
of Gods Church, though styled Pastor, and Pastor meus, by Gods own mouth, how
do you prove it? No member Head of the Church is said in a threefold respect.
1 2 3
you say, therefore no head. But this Eudoemon will help you to vnriddle.
Though neither he was ingrafted into the body mystical, nor yet linked in
the bond of outward profession, yet a head he might be of Gods people by a
certain deputation or assignement outward, that is, by bearing authority over
the multitude of subjects, committed to his charge, of what relligion soever,
which is the only headshippe that we attribute to Kings. I have read Theodor.
de eurand. Graec. affect. Chemnic. in locis com. part 2. de Paupert. Espenc in
c. 3. Ep. ad Titum opponit eum impio. Quasi reputet pium. Et, Diuinitus
seruatum discimus. Nisi referat hoc ad salutem modo corporis.
some both Fathers and modern writers, that think Cyrus was illuminate, and
faithful, and perhaps saved. Who knows what the reading of that prophecy
might prevail upon him, Esa. 44. (as Josephus witnesses in the 11. of his
Antiq. cap. 1. quoted by S. Hierome upon Esa. 45.) wherein he was called by his
name Multo antequa^ nascereris. Hieron. Annis 210. ante impletam prophetiam.
Espenc.
certain hundred of years before he was borne? If this be so, then he might
be both member and head in your sense, but howsoever, a Pastor by office and
vocation, as God intitles him. Shall we see what follows?

41. Whereas the Bishop in like sort had instanced from Joshua, Numb. 27. whom
God called to feed his people after Moses, one temporal magistrate after
another, least they should be as sheep which have no shepherd, he answers that
Joshua was to be directed by the high Priest, not e contra. As if direction were
not one thing, and commandment another. For the Priest may direct, though the
King command. And we speak of authority now, not of ability to counsel.
Though David is so little affixed to the Priests, that he says, Gods statutes
are the men of his counsel, that is, his privy counselors. The Commonwealth
no doubt is happy, where Heman the Kings Seer is admitted near unto him, vt
exaltet cornu, 1. Chron. 25. or Benaiah placed ad auriculam David, 2. Chron.
11. I mean where Bishops are of the consultation of estate. In multitudine
boum Prove. 14. 4.
implentur praesepia, and where such laborers are, all goes well. But yet
Eleazar shall only run between Joshua and the Lord, while we neither deny
the Lord to be supreme, nor yet suffer the messenger to turn the Kings master.
To the place quoted out of Theodoret. quaest. 48. in lib. Number. that Moses
divided his double glory between Joshua and Eleazar, as giving his supremacy
in spirituals to one, in temporals to another, as the Adioynder would have it:
we find no such thing in the Scripture it self, Number. 27. but only that God
appointed Moses, to give Joshua of his glory, ver. 20. without naming Eleazar.
And Theodoret means no more, but that Moses gave of his Prophecy to Eleazar,
which was aureola gloriae, as your Schoolmen would call it, or an additament
to the maine, not any branch of dignity, or of authority. His words are, Ex
rationali iudicij humeris Eleazari adiacente, discat Joshua quid sit agendum:
Let Joshua learn what to do from the Judgment plate that rests upon Eleazars
shoulders. A great prerogative, believe me, and to top Kings. Is it not rather
to wait upon them, and to serve their uses? Lastly thus, Ex quo discimus
quomodo qui a sacerdotibus ordinantur, gratiam consequuntur spiritualem: that
is, Whereby we learn, how, they that are ordained of Priests, attain
spiritual grace. We call not the Kings primacie spiritual, howsoever it
extends to spiritual matters: though you imputing such a thing unto us, as you
do afterward, you may see what a hint Theodoret gives us here, if we list to
use it. And before, he had told us, that Joshua was consecrated by imposition of
hands. Does not that savor of somewhat spiritual? And how does Moses pray
here, when he prays for a man to be set over the Congregation, namely Joshua?
Lord God of the spirits of all flesh. As if spirit and flesh, temporal and
Ecclesiastical, were the governors charge. And straight after, ver. 18. God
says to Moses, Take Joshua, in whom is the spirit. So Platina in the life of
Clement the seventh, Corona and caeremoniae, per quas inauguratur Imperator,
testimonium sunt diuini spiritus accepti: The crown and the ceremonies, says
he, whereby the Emperor is installed, are a token of the divine spirit
received. And he adds, Qui animum Imperatoris iam augustum, augustiorem
diuinioremque reddat: Which makes the Emperors mind, already royal of it
self, more royal and more divine. Was not Saul changed into another man, upon
his attaining the kingdom? And how, but by, the grace which he received in his
inauguration? Salmeron your fellow-Iesuit, but too learned I fear to be your
fellow throughout, Tom. 12. in Ep. Pauli. p. 251.
says, Kingdoms themselves turn spiritual, in a manner, under Christian
Kings. The same says Rossaeus, with more store of words, Sacrum,
Ecclesiasticum, spirituale, sacerdotale, page De iusta^ Ecclesiae author.
526. I might give you more, but this shall suffice in this place.

42. THE third exception (says he) that the Bishop 3. Number 20. Adioynd.
takes to the argument, drawn from Pasce oues meas, is this: That albeit S.
Austen, and S. Cyrill, have amply commented upon the Gospel of S. John, and
upon those very words of our Savior to S. Peter, Pasce oues meas, yet neither
of them saw, illustrem hunc fidei articulum, de prematu Petri temporali, This
notable (as he construes it) article of faith, concerning the temporal
primacie of Peter, etc. What says Father Thomas to this? For some think F. T.
to have that mystical signification, to note unto us his Fatherhood, which
every hedge-priest and beardlesse boy vsurps now a days among the Jesuits, to
beard Bishops with, and what Bishops? As if the Cardinal (says he) did teach
that S. Peter's primucie is a te^porall primacie, because in some cases it
extends it self to temporal matters. As for the spiritual primacie (says he)
the Bishop himself grants that sometimes, as far forth in effect as we demand.
What the Bishop graunts, we shall see hereafter, when we come to the place,
which is Chap. 3. number. 36. as we are told by you. In the mean time, you reckon
without your host, the Bishop graunts nothing that he will not stand to. Be you
but content with that which he pitches, and the controversy will soon be at
an end. But did you ever hear such an impudent varlet, that plays upon the
word temporal primacie, and denies they give any such to the Pope? What is
their primacie, but a primacie of power? and if the power then be temporal, is
not the primacie so? Now for that, let but Bellarmine declare his opinion, who
intitles his 5. book de Pontif. Romans De potestate Pontificis temporali: Of the
temporal power of the Pope. This is plain, but in the argument of the sixth
chapter of the same book, more plainly, Papam habere temporalem potestatem
indirecte: That the Pope has temporal power, [at least] indirectly. Whereas
we neither ascribe to the King spiritual primacie ouerhastily, nor are wont to
call his power spiritual. If the Bishop have so done, let the place be named,
and the imputation verified, wherewith F. T. charge us, Number. 15. though very
wrongfully, as if we nourished a doctrine of the Kings spiritual primacie. Yet
they say, Sixtus Quintus would have had those works of Bellarmine to be burnt,
perhaps for giving him temporal power only, and not temporal primacy,
totidem verbis. Adioyn. Number. 21. If the Pope's primacie may be called a
temporal primacie for this cause, etc. then may the Bishop or Pastor be justly
called a corporal B shop, and a pecuniarie Pastor, because he does punish men
sometimes in his spiritual court, not only in their bodies, but also in their
purses, etc.
And here our lepus pulpamentum quaerit, a wretch and most obnoxious to all
manner of scorn, flourishes and descants with his leaden wit, upon a corporal
Bishop, as he calls him, Bonner I trow, who excused his corpulencie, wherewith
he was wont to be painted, with saying he had but one doublet too little for
him, and the knave heretics always painted him in that. If you talk of a
punisher of bodies, he was one. We do not know, God be thanked, that our
Bishops have any such power in these days, by the examples we see, but that
you tell us so. And there was a time, when your Popes themselves could inflict
no punishments of this nature, says Papirius Massonius in the life of Leo the
second. Now all their strength stands that way. And so I might say of the
punishing of the purse, and the gains of the Bishops court, which you so
envy, whereas not only he is not forward to deal punishments, and much less
to gain by the parties punished, but I have heard his Chancellor, whom
certainly you meant when you taxed the Courts, utterly disanow, that their
Courts condemn any body in money, howsoever offending. How beit if Kings, to
whom all the power of the sword is committed, that is all kind of coactiue
punishment, should give the Bishops leave to mulct the purse, rather then their
censures should be conte^ned, what is that to the Popes either exercising or
challenging to himself, I know not what temporal power, by virtue of his
Apostleship, and original calling, without donation or delegation from
Princes? Though again if this be granted, which I believe not as yet, because
I have been otherwise informed, as I said, that the Bishops are so licensed by
authority from his MAJESTY here in England, yet the Bishop whom you shoot
at, is so far from delighting in any such markets, that he had rather redeem
offenses with his loss, then raise profit to himself out of punishments.
Imperatorem me peperit matter, said Scipio, non bellatorem, I^l Front. lib. 4.
stratagem. c. 7.
when one chidde him as too remiss and loath to fight. So he. S. Theodoret
says sweetly, that there are no punishments in heaven, in regione hyacinthina,
of which farther you may hear in his due place. And the Bishops calling is a
kind Cap. 3. huius.
of heaven. How much more when it is joined with conscience and clemency?
Which is so proper to the Prelate of whom we speak, as you may wonder: both
his Office and Sea sauouring of (...), of mercy and compassion, rather then of
rigor, but his nature much more. And if S. Chrysostomes Comm. in c 1. ad
Philip. (...). Ethico.
argument for Kings be good, that they are called to (...), because unnointed
(...), that is, called to mercy, because anointed with oil, it may guide you
to conceive aright herein, of the Bishop, whose practice acquites him without
hidden emblemes, or forced hieroglyphics, Unless you think that because he
handled Tortus somewhat roughly, or the Cardinal either, therefore he is more
vindicatiue out of his disposition. But for that you may remember, that he was
the Kings Almoner, and dealt his liberalities as they had been best deserved.

Now leaving the digression that this man's malepertnes has driven us unto,
what says he for substance to the Bishops third exception, as himself
branches it?

43. IT is enough (says he) that Cyrill and Austen deny Number. 21.
not the temporal power of Peter, though they auerre it not, in their
commentaries. Forsooth they expound not Pasce half perfectly, wherein surely
they are to blame, in so large a Commentary, as few have written upon that
Scripture, to say nothing of a thing so material as that, or so principal
rather, and yet so obuious, when the text lies naked before their eyes. For it
is a necessary consequent, the temporal power (says our Jesuit here) of the
spiritual. Which yet Mr. Epist. ad Cardinal. Bellarm.
Blackwell will never believe, nor those Covar. part. 2. p. 504. Navar. and
alibi, and citat. ibid. a Covar. Binsfield. Alan.
authors whom he quotes to the contrary, that make it a point like the
newfound lands, or unfound rather, so wholly undefined and unresolved, whether
the Pope have any such piece of dominion yea or no. Besides, he should have
showed the necessary consequence between the two powers, which because he
does not, I think he either saw it not, or lacked ability to express his
mind. Me thinks nothing easier then to conceive so of them, that though
linked in use, yet divided in nature, and so likewise in subject, as Gelasius
gave caution De vinc. Anathem.
long ago very well, of not confounding them, like the two arms in a man's
body, or the two lights in the firmament, (so far I am content to go with
Bonifacius) yea or the two swords themselves, ecce duo gladij, whereof one
questionless depended not of another, though your exposition be so good, that
Stella is ashamed of it, and diverse Comment. in Luc 22.
more of your own men.

44. That S. Austen acknowledged the Popes temporal primacie, employed in those
words, Pasce oues meas, you bring no other places then we have hitherto
answered, and it might be thought too largely, but that you bring them again,
as primus Apostolorum, and propter primatum Apostolatus, of which no more. Let
them prevail as they can. So likewise I say of representare personam, which
you enforce here again to be supreme governor over the Church. This is your
riches, that run round in a ring, and choke the children of the Prophets
with your crambe, and yet cry out of the Bishop for his nakedness and poverty
in proouing the cause, Numb. 15. As for that you here add, that no other
Apostle is said to represent the Churches person besides Peter, S. Austen has
made you to swallow it before; yet perusing your book, I find it to be no more
then your self attribute to Mr. Thomas Rogers, of whom you say in your ninth
chapter, Number. 78. that he represents the authority of all the Clergy of
England: not only the Clergy, but the authority of them all; and yet I think
you never held him for our supreme governor. To that of S. Cyrill, Vt
Princeps caputque caeterorum primus exclamauit: I wonder first, why you should
construe it exclaimed, unless your argument stand in that, as if Peter should
get the primacie by roaring. So he in Plutarch, when he saw a tall man come in
to try masteries, but otherwise unweildy, This were a likely man, says he, if
the garland hung aloft, and he that could reach it with his hands, were to have
it for his pains. You know that we Englishmen call that exclaiming, when a man
cries out by discontent, or passion. Was Peter offended, when you make him to
exclaim? As for princeps and caput, it is waighed in the balance, and found
too light. S. Jerome, Dial. 1. contra Pelag. Vt Plato princeps Philosophorum,
it a Petrus Apostolorum: as Plato was chief among the Philosophers, so Peter
of the Apostles. Does that please you? For Plato though he lived in Dionysius
his Court, yet he was no Monarch. No more was Peter. And if you would but turn
Tullies Offices again, or almost any other of his works, you should see
Princeps, in quacunque facultate. In medicina, in re bellica, in scena it
self, and where not? Illaerat vita, illa secunda fortuna, (says he) liberate
parem Phil. (...).
esse caeteris, principem dignitate. Therefore princeps is no word of
sovereignty. And was no body ever called caput but Peter? For that is another
thing which you stand upon. I could tell you a distichon out of Baronius, made
neither by Peter, nor by any of his successors, as you interpret his
successors, wherein nevertheless the man is called after other titles, --
Pontificumque caput: Venantius F^natus de Niceta Treuerensi, a pud Baron. tom
7. anno 529 XVII. Col. 181.
which is, the head of Bishops, and Popes, and all. And if a man should call
Eudaemon-Iohannes justly deserving it, as it may be some have called him, caput
furiaru^, would you plead from thence, if need were, that he had any authority
over the devils, or were a young Beelzebub? Further, I believe, when all comes to
all, it is but (...) in the Greek, if we could see it. Of which we shall say
more when we answer to the other Cyrill, namely he of Jerusalem, a little
after. For (...) is (...) Orat. (...), etc.
(...), as we are taught by S. Chrysostom, where yet there is no authority of
one actor over the other. Generally, this arguing from titles of commendation
is very unsound. Who knows not that S. James was called Episcopus Episcoporum,
as Nilus testifies? yet S. Ambrose sermon. 83. gives that to Christ, to be
Episcopus Episcoporu^, as his privilege. Though Sidonius, an author not justly
to be excepted against, affirms Lib 6. Ep. 1.
no less of one Lupus a particular Bishop, that he was Episcopus Episcoporu^,
and Pater Patrum, and alter saeculi sui Iacobus: that is, a Bishop of Bishops,
and a Father of Fathers, and another James [the Apostle] of his age. Which in
the end will prove as much as caput caeterorum, though you bring that to
magnify Peter by. As if caput caeteroru^, might not be one set up by special
prouiso, to keep good order in the College, I mean the College of the
Apostles, though without any commission to derive it to his successors, or
extrauagant power over the rest for the present. Lastly, I might ask you, how
Peter could be caput caeterorum here, that is, Monarch installed in your sense,
when you tell us a little after, Number. 31. out of S. Chrysostom, that Peter
durst not ask our Savior the question, who should betray him, till such time
as he had received the fulness of authority, and after that time he grew
confident. Which time was not till after our Saviors resurrection, and
therefore far from this. So if you trust to Chrysostom, you have lost
Cyrill, if to Cyrill, Chrysostom; you cannot possibly hold them both, if you
urge caput in so rigorous sense. I might add out of S. Cyrill once again, to
stop your mouth, crying out so mainely Hilat. can. 30. in Matthew. Petrus pro
fidei suae calore, -- Quasi Christ's dicta efficienda non essent. So ^^oate that
he thought Christ might be in the wrong, himself in the right.
against lame quotations, that princeps as it may be taken, is expounded there
by ferventissimus Apostolorum, so fervent says S. Cyrill, that he leapt naked
into the sea, out of the ship, for zeal. Where if the ship be the Church, then
we have Peter leaping out of the Church. You will say perhaps, from Antioch to
Rome. Then Antioch is the ship, and Rome the sea. What vantage have you now of
all that is said of Peter's ship to countenance Rome? Do you see how one iumpe
has marred your allegory, and almost your Monarchy? Now S. Cyrill says
farther in the place you quote, lib. 12. cap. 64. in Ioh. Petrus alios
praeveniebat, how? Ardore namque Petrus alios praevenicbat.
Christi praecipuo feruens, and ad faciendum and ad respondendum paratissimus
erat. That is: Peter prevented others. For boiling Petrus feruens ardore.
with an especial zeal to our Savior Christ, he was most ready and forward,
either to do, or say. This was the cause why he exclaimed first. Primus, says
S. Cyrill, but not solus. Hic Malchi etiam aurem amputauit (that you cannot
abide to hear of) putans hoc modo Magistro semper se inhaesurum. So little did
he covet the primacie that you strive for, that he wished never to be absent
from his Master, which if he had not been, he could never have ruled in his
room. Then, in every confession that he made (says S. Cyrill) rationalium
ouium curam sibi habendam esse audiuit. Is cura nothing? which with you
praefectura has clean devoured. And if you but remembered, that they were oues
rationales, you would tyrannize less, and stand less for tyranny. There
There are other things between, which I pass over here, because you shall
hear them anon. Take this for farewell. Doctores hinc Ecclesiae discunt (says
S. Cyrill) non aliter se Christo posse coniungi, nisi omni cura and opera
studeant, vt rationales oues recte pascantur, and recte valiant. Talis erat
Paulus ille, etc. That is: The Doctors of the Church learn from hence, that
they can no otherwise be joined unto Christ, unless they endeavor with all
their pain and diligence, that his reasonable sheep be well fed, and well
liking. Such a one was Paul, etc. By which you see what a sense he gives us of
Pasce, of feeding Christ's sheep, namely with labor and diligence, which the
Pope cannot skill of, and Paul (not only Peter) a prime instance of it.
Neither doubt I, but when Paul says of himself, I have labored more then
they all, S. Cyrill would construe it, according to this rule, I have fed
more then they all.

45. You farther accuse the Bishop, as speaking evidently false, when he says
of the holy Fathers Cyrill and Austen before named, that concerning Peter's
triple acknoweledgement, id tantum vident, nec praeterea quid, they see this
only and nothing else, that he abolished his triple negation by triple
confession, and was restored to the place Isidorus Pelusiota Ep. 103. l. 1.
(...). Idem habent Cirillus, duo Theodori, and Hera^ leota, Mopsuestenus,
Leontius, Theophylactus, Maximus, August. Beda, Nic phoru^ Ambrosius. So as
Maldonat. in Ioh. 21. Vi^ author vllus est qui non dicat, etc.
or degree of Apostleship, from the which he was fallen: for touching the
primacie they are altogether silent. This you say is false in two respects. The
one, for that they saw more then so, namely the primacie of Peter, As I have
showed (say you) out of them both: and, I think, we have answered you, to them
both. The other, because they saw not that, which he affirms in their
behalf: I mean (say you) that S. Peter was, by those words of our Savior,
restored to his place in the Apostleship, which he had lost. For if they should
have said so, they should seem to hold (or favor at least) the pernicious
heresy of Wickliffe, that Magistrates loose their dignity and authority by
mortal sin; which pestiferous opinion, those holy Fathers, no doubt, would
have abhorred, if it had been set abroach, or taught by any in their time:
seeing that it shakes the very foundation of all obedience, either to Civil,
or Ecclesiastical Magistrates, because it does not only make all obedience
uncertain (for no man knows who is in the state of grace) but also gives
occasion to subjects, upon every offense of their Prince, to call his authority
into question. This is the circumstance of this tedious Thom. But that
Wickliffe was in this heresy, you must bring better proofs before we believe
it, it is long since that your words are no slanders. The damnable enormities
used in those times, your very hour and power of darkness, might drive some
to opinion, that the office ceased when the Officer was incorrigible, because
they saw no other remedy. But this, as I believe not to have been Wickliffes
judgment, till you show better evidence, so whose-soeuer it was, you have
rather followed him in your Jesuitical principles, that, the mighty are to be
pulled down from their seats by you, though Marie and Anna make it Gods proper
work, Luke 2. and 1. Sam. 2. one the pearl of the new, the other of the old
Testament, then that we should fear to be enwrapped in his danger. Our
doctrine you know, Reges in saeculum, as Job says, and, Coronamentum in
generationem and Job. 36. 7. Prou. 27. 24.
generationem, with Solomon, though Caietane read it interrogatiuely, Nunquid
coronamentum? Again, Deus perpetua regni sceptra donauit Principibus, says he
in the Council of Chalcedon: and, Aeternum imperium, says another in the
Edit. Council. ^ian p. 251.
same. Whether eternity then, or perpetuity, which Philosophy distinguishes,
you see sound divinity gives them both to the Crown. Neither are we slack to
subscribe to Optatus, lib. 2. cont. Parm. Deus defendit oleum suum, quia si
peccatum est hominis, vnctio tamen est diuinitatis. God protects his oil,
because though the sin be the man's, yet the anointing is his own. And not
only Princes, but by just judgment of God, in lieu of your other error, you
turn out your very Popes for heresy; Canus, and Bellarmine, and some other
hold so, that he is gone ipso facto: we yiedling to no such abdication of our
King, no though his fault were heresy, remembering that Deus defendit oleum
suum, as even now I told you out of Optatus: and, Caesar non desinit esse
Caesar, even in alto gentilismo, as our Savior acknowledged of him, Matthew. 22.
Insomuch as David seems to wonder, 2. Sam. 1. that Saul could die at all,
because he was anointed with oil. He was slain (says he) as if he had not
been anointed. Qui propter ingenium videbatur omnino mori non debuisse, quoth
Tullie of Roscius. Nor he, propter imperij Maiestatem. Therefore the wickedness
lies on your side, whatsoever Wickliffe thought, whom you slander. But so
heinous is the heresy of deposing Magistrates for moral misdemeanors, that
they are justly scourged, even with your own whip. A bad head, I should
think, which the body will be the better for the cutting off. So as De
auctor. Council. l. 2. c. 17 V^des Dominum reseruare oeconomum, suo sol ^dicio:
ex Luc. 12. Idem etiam docet vsu, omnium ^a^rum. Et, Serut hoc nec sol^
possunt, nec congregati. S^il. punire vel expell^re ^conomum. Id enim ad solum
Dominum (...)^tus familiae pertinet.
Bellarmine unawares betraies his cause in my opinion, taking pro concesso,
that the Steward of a house, cannot be deposed from his office, but only by
the grand master of the family, which he construes to be Christ, by analogy,
in the state. What can be said more for his MAJESTY'S security that now is,
(setting aside his princely virtues, which might arm him against all trial)
and that out of the mouth of the very old-one, his adversary? Though the holy
Ghost in Esaias calls all Kings by that name, designing them Stewards, not only
of the state and weal public, but of the Church it self, Erunt Reges
dispensatores tui. As even your own Forerius, Esa 49.
and he a learned Portaguise, expounds it in his commentaries upon that place,
deducing it from the Rabbis. (To say nothing of the claim that Kings might
make to Dispensations henceforth, which now the Pope only in grosseth.) But his
MAJESTY'S cause is yet more pregnant then so, in whose name, not only in his
person, God and nature have engraued this character, not only in femore, but
in vestimento, as it were to mark him out for sacred, against your furious
designs.

46. By the way I might ask you, what you mean by that, that no man knows
who is in the state of grace? Does that confute Wicliffe, or them that hold
Magistrates are no longer Magistrates, after mortal sins? As if a man could
not be out of the state of grace, and yet not all his actions be mortal
sins. Such a babe you are in your own doctrines.

47. And if the Bishop should hold this, which you impute unto him, hot judges
of his holdings, that make him a Polygamist, a Jew, as of late, and now a
broacher forsooth of treasonable positions, yet with what face can you cry out
against him as you do, number. 28. Why should Peter rather then any other loose
his Apostleship? seeing your selves are forwardest to censure your Pope with
deprivation, ipso facto, whereas another Bishop, I suppose, may come to his
trial. Is this that which the Pope gets by, A nemine iudicabitur? Unless the
crime were small to deny Christ, whom he had seen and conuersed with so
familiarly, which Optatus so exaggerates against S. Peter, lib. 7. as if he had
no fellow, Quisquis in persecutione negauit Christum, (imagine Marcellinus, or
the like) leuius Petro deliquisse videtur. The sin of denying Christ in
persecution, seems less then. Peter's: or as if any religion can be maintained
there, where the son of God is abiured and cast off, and therefore once no
heresy more pernicious then this.

48. But now what if the Bishop do not hold that Peter lost his Apostleship?
or, what if he do? Shall it not be lawful for our Savior Christ to put out
his Apostle, (Abi Satan, that is, Get thee gone, says the Arabian translator,
Kirsten. Not. Matthew. 16.
not, Recede, depart, or go aside a while) and yet take him in again, for so
enormious a crime, but every varlet and rascal companion shall presume to do
the same against his Sovereign, and sawcily shake off his Superiors at
pleasure? And yet these are the seeds of that good discipline which here you
sow, and you think S. Peter's case is a^ confirmation of treason, as if he
could not loose his office by censure from our Savior, but subjects may lay
down their fealty to Magistrates, when they fall into offense. Or, do you
think that no Apostle could loose his place? If you do, you may read S.
Hierome ad Rusticum, affirming of Judas, that he fell de fastigio Apostolatus,
etc. to a place unrecoverable. Wherein our Savior dealt more mildly with
Peter, whom he took in again. Curans verbis, quod verbis offensum erat, says
S. Cyrill: healing with words, his fault of words, that is, triple negation by
proportionable confession. And remember you not what the holy Ghost says of
Judas, Episcopatum cius accipiat alter? which was not practiced against S.
Peter, our Lord dealing graciously with him, as I said, as if he had suspended
him, not deprived him. But for my part, I take not upon me to define this
question; and the Bishop, as most able, so I dare say was farther of from
meddling with it. He looks not to by-matters, but when dignus vindice nodus
offers it self, then he lendes a hand; whereas you patch, and pelt, and clowt
every thing into every place that you can, like a beggars coat, or a
Sturbridge-faire booth, or a cypress tree in the midst of the sea. The Bishops
purpose was only to signify in S. Cyrils words, that dignitas Apostolatus
renouata est S. Petro, that the honor of the Apostleship was renewed to S.
Peter. Fatemur (says he) as assenting to S. Cyrill, not iangling nor
determining, as you would have it. And I pray Sir, how does that differ from S.
Cyrils own words, which you traduce in the Bishop, ne propter negationem
labefactata videretur? Concussa therefore it was, shaken and enfeebled, but not
utterly dashed nor vndermin'd. And where you prattle not a little, a little
before, But perhaps some will say, that the Bishop does not plainly affirm
this, but relates the doctrine of S. Austen and S. Cyrill, which you infringe
by those words, that you bring out of the Bishop, restitutus muneri, restored
to his charge, as if therefore he had lost it in the Bishops opinion: what more
is in restitution, then was before in renouation? And if the Apostleship be
renouatus, how is not the Apostle restitutus? If S. Cyrill be right, how is the
Bishop wrong? May I not truly ask, what does this dog lack but a bone? And
yet soon after, he can give the Bishop that term, and another too with
vantage. Verbum in cord stulti, sicut sagitta in femore canis. But the crown
of reverence is thick set with such precious stones. Neither does only Cyrill
say as much, but Euthymius uses the very word restitutus. Conuersus, (says
he) id est, in pristinum locum denuo restitutus. See Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in Psalm.
50. where he says no less: that he lost his Apostleship by denying, and
recovered it by repenting and confessing. Theophyl. in Luc. 22. Cum negaueris,
iterumque receperis, viz. Apostolatum, of which before. He recovered his
Apostleship, ergo he lost it. Arnobius also in Psalm. 138. Mayor gradus redditur
ploranti, quam sublatus est deneganti. A greater degree is restored to him
weeping, then was taken from him denying. Therefore doubtless his denial
deprived him of some degree. Victor Antiochenus, Denuo assumptus, and inter
caeteros Apostolos rursus numeratus, taken home again, and reckoned among the
Apostles. And if S. Austen said by one, not of the best life, Anton. Fussul.
quoted by F. T.
Aut assumat obedientiam, aut deponat praedicationem, you may think what was
fit to be done by Peter here. Quare accipis verba mea in os tuum? said God to
the ungodly. Cum vidisti ancillam, eiurabas me apud eam: for even the falling
of those drops, made a hole into our rock. What marvel if the Fathers put
Peter beside the Apostleship for his greiuous ^p. 1. ad Sympt.
crime, when Pacianus says, such put quite out of the Church? May he be an
Apostle, nay the Prince of the Apostles, in your opinion, that is no member of
the Church? Indeed Bellarmine construes those words of heresy. But first
fondly, and without any ground, then Peter's is no less, if it come to be
weighed, as we have showed out of Optatus.

49. As for the proofs that you bring in defense of Peter, how easily might he
loose his Apostleship for all them, if a man were disposed to enter into
argument? Cyrill of Jerusalem, Catech. Mystag. 2. is brought saying, Petrus
dignitatem Apostolicam retinuit non ablatam: that is, finally, and retinuit ex
intervallo, that is, recuperauit: non ablatam, and yet suspensam. In the Greek
thus, (...), not that he kept it without ever loosing, but rather that the
Apostleship, of it own nature, is such if nothing hinder. But of that I
contend not, neither do you for modesty quote the Greek. The same to Optatus,
lib. 7. He deserved not to be separated from the number of the Apostles. That
is, not finally. Else we know, he went out, and wept bitterly. He went out in a
mystery, and perhaps to show his deserved separation. As when Christ looked
upon him, I grant sensibly, and yet in a mystery, to show the power of his
grace, and irradiation upon his heart. That Optatus says, bono vnitatis
separari non meruit, it is not, least the Disciples should want a head, and yet
there may be a head, only to keep out confusion, as the President of Councels,
and other ordinary assemblies, without any great authority over the
congregation, I wisse; but in regard to his patience, which he Bono vnitatis.
had learnt by his own fall, to show to other offenders. This is bonum
vnitatis, this is pax publica, that keeps all in tune. Ne and tu tenteris,
Gal. 2. how much more, post quam and tentatus, and elisus es? (...), Hebr. 7.
Howbeit besides the Fathers aforementioned, Optatus me thinks is plain enough,
that Peter's Apostleship was not a little endangered. Thus he says, Cui satis
erat, si postquam negauit, solam veniam consequeretur. For whom it had been
enough, if he had obtained pardon only, after his denial. Not the keeping of
his place, but pardon only. Therefore at least he forfeited it. And by the way
you see, what non meruit A foolish trick that the Papists have got, to raise
English merit out of the Latin mereo and mereos, which sounds to a far other
sense with the holy Fathers, God knows.
is, no more then assecutus est, I warrant you.

50. Now whereas you come upon us in your number. 27. and number. 29. with an
ouer-plus of valor, that the Fathers alleged do not only teach in express
words, that S. Peter did not loose his Apostleship by his fall, but do withal
acknowledge a certain increase thereof, and preheminent authority over the
rest of the Apostles, what increase could there be, if he was made their Head
and governor before, and not only theirs, but the whole worlds? Was it so,
that more notice was taken thereof? For I see not what actual exaltation could
accrue. Therefore, you do well to expound your self, by saying that he was
made more eminent, then before. Yet if you will go thus far, Arnobius would
teach you to maintain that which you call increase, in a more literal sense.
For that which before was promised Peter, was now given and exhibited, and so
plus redditum quam sublatum, as Arnobius speaks. Yet no more to Peter, then to
all the rest, as Matthew. 28. 19. and Ioh. 20. 23. To all as much as to Peter was
given. Save only, as the Bishop excellently distinguishes, the res or the
substance to all, the solemnity to Peter, with demand of love, and triple
acknowledgement, Ioh. 21. 15. As for the place out of Matthew, if you compare
the coherence, you shall see if our Savior made any Pope, he made more then
one without all question. For who is the Pope, but he to whom the power of
Christ is communicated? Now he says thus; All power is given me, both in
heaven and in earth. And what then? (...), Go YOU therefore and teach: not,
Go THOU therefore. This power therefore of Christ is communicated to them all,
by virtue of this therefore, as much as he thought good to communicate it at
all. Either many Popes then, that you must give us, or we you none. This by the
way. That Cyrill of Jerusalem calls Peter, princeps Apostolorum
excellontissimus, I have answered you before to the word princeps, in Cyrill of
Alexandria, a man of more authority, then he of Jerusalem, (as one Sea
exceedes the the other) who writ what he writ, when he was young, says S.
Hierome. But the Greek is otherwise, then you quote. First (...), that is, the
most vertical. Therefore many (...), many vertices, that is, either heads, or
crowns of heads, more eminent the^ heads. What if Peter among these excelled?
Even the Sun is sometime more vertical then another, yet he acquires no
authority among the stars, though more opportunity to work upon our
bodies. So Peter to edify with the rest that excelled. But if you stand upon
(...), Basil says of Athanasius, Epist. Basil gr. Froben. p 304. Est alijs cp.
5^.
We run to thee, or to thy persection, (so he styles him) (...), as to the
vertex of the whole world. And Cyrill of Alexandria will tell you, that secular
Princes are the heights of the earth, and so the Scripture Mich. 1. 3. (...),
and (...), whom God treads upon, not your Pope. Again, Amos 4. Calcans
altitudines, God treads upon the altitudes of the earth: that is Kings, by
Cyrills interpretation. What is Peter's altitude to this altitude? (...),
another word that S. Cyrill uses, (whom you allege) is no more then was
given to S. Paul in the Acts, Act. 24 5.
and that by impartial judges of primacie, (I mean such as went by mere
observation) to be (...), as they call him, or the prime man, of the sect of
the Nazarites, that is, of the Christian Church, not only of the twelve. To
the place of Opratus: Solus accepit claues caeteris communicandas: Only Peter
received the Keys to be imparted to others; What more to our purpose, what
less to yours? Does not this confirm all that we have said before, and
overthrow you? Only Peter took them, as an instance of unity, as a pledge of
the body, as you have often heard out of S. Austen before, but neither in his
own name, nor to be kept by him, or swaied by him, but communicandas caeteris,
to be imparted to the rest, and made common to all. Eucherius wittily, Hom. in
Natal. Apost. Petri, and Pauli.
Peter received the keys, but Paul was rapt to the third heaven. How could
that be, if he had not the keys? And Clemens in Eusebius before quoted, lib.
2. cap. 1. says generally of the three, that they communicated it to others,
what they had heard of Christ. These were Peter, James, and John. But that was
doctrine that Clemens spoke of; yet the The Word and Keys, two de* positums of
like nature.
like no doubt holds in the Keys after a sort, at least de possibili, without
any disparagement to the community of the Apostles.

51. Chrysostomes authority mooues less then any other, who in his
Commentaries upon S. John, at that very place where of all the strife is, viz.
Pasce oues meas, says that John as well as Peter, received the (...) And,
(...). And that the reason why Christ so ^bd Peter in his curiosities
concerning John, Hic aute^ quid, was because (...), being ioynt-gouernours of
the world, they were to be dispersed henceforth, and old amities to cease. For
John and Peter had loved together more the^ ordinary. But most pregna^tlv the
same Chry. Hom 2. in c. 1. ad Tit. (...), etc The Apostles dividing the whole
world between themselves, even as if it had been but one house, so discharged
every thing, and took care for every thing, one taking this part, another that
part to look unto. b Tom. 4. edit. D. Sav. p. 501.
government of the whole world from Christ, which is enough to overthrow Peter's
monarchy, even when Chrysoft, shall say, that he was made governor of the
whole world, by pasce oues meas. For how can that now be special to Peter? I
could affoard you better places out of Chrysostom my self, as that Christ
gave power to Peter, (...), to carry all before him, This, no doubt, would serve
the Popes turn right finely, to toss the ball whither he list, to reign and
to ruffle in the Church at his pleasure. But is any so mad, as to think that
Chrysostom meant any such thing? And yet suppose he did, he says the same of
Paul, (...) in Epist. ad Coloss. id est, cap. 4. v. 9. adding (...), even as
Paul thought good. For that you bring out of his 2. book de Sacerdot. you
should have specified the chapter, and we would have closed with you better. In
the Greek I find nothing but (...), of which before out of S. Cyrill, in the
very superlatiue (...). But in the same chap. he says (which is the first of
that book,) that Christ committed his flock by Pasce oues meas, (...), to
Peter, and them after him. And least you think he means only the Popes, he
applies it to Even so is that to be taken which Bellar. notes out of Chrysoft
in Acta (see page 15. (...)) that the Christians are not to be ashamed, if they
be miscalled after the name of some eminent Pastor or Prelate of the Church.
For he means not the Pope there, rather then himself. For first, why should
Constantinople, or Antioch either, gratify Rome so much: considering the
emulations. 2. Though we should grant Chrysoft to speak by prophecy. 3. But
besides it appears, that Chrysostomes followers were called Iohann^, of his
name. Zonar. and alij. 4. And yet we call not the Papists from the name of this
or that Pope among them, as Chrysoft. meaning is, but from a general one to
all that occupy the Sca. 5. Which til the Pope engrossed it, was yet more
general.
himself, not yet so much as Bishop, but only called to single priesthood,
that he should (...), suppose you like a Peter,. i. be set over all the
substance of Gods house. And farther he says he is to do those things, which
Peter if he did, should (...). i. go beyond the rest of the Apostles. Do you
see then how all the prerogative of Peter, is built upon his practice, and good
desert; not absolutely cleaving to him, and his? Nay, no more (says Chrysostom.)
then extends to every good Pastor. I might contemn your Latin now, to which
nothing is answerable in the Greek. Yet suppose it were so, as you avouch.
AVTHORITATE praeditum, ac reliquis item Apostolis long praecellere. Is this
arguing for a Jesuit? Which all put together does not show so much, as that
Peter had any authority over the Apostles. Unless you think because he had
authority, therefore they had none. This were pretty, if you could work it,
but never out of Chrysostom. And yet long praecellere, is worse then so, of
gifts, of qualities, not of jurisdiction. And I believe, if the truth were
known, that same very (...), which I quoted even now, nothing to their
purpose. In sum, if S. Peter had all the authority that Chrysostom. gives the
Priest in his book of priesthood, it would not serve the Pope, who is for
temporal and coactiue, which Chrysostom. denies tooth and nail, cap. 2. 3. etc.
of the aforesaid. Another place you bring out of Chrysostom. cap. vlt. in Euang.
Ioh. that Peter was the mouth of the Apostles. And you might have added that of
David, I will give praise with the best member that I have, meaning the mouth,
or the tongue: for else what gain you by this bargain? And again, Awake my
glory, that is my tongue, say the Interpreters, because the tongue is the
glory of a man, Psalm. 56. Casaubone will show you, and that most excellently,
that the Exercit. ad Baron. page 726.
mouth is put in a diminutiue sense, and notes ministry, not supremacy,
office and pains, not authority. And so we might say of the head; which Peter
was, as the forwardest to resolve; ad respondendum and faciendum paratissimus,
says S. Cyrill, as including both. This was his disposition, not his
commission. Of late the Pope has left both the head, and the mouth, and
betakes him to the hands. S. Bernard had De consid ad Eugen. l 4. c 2. Voss.
edit.
challenged him for it long ago, for living by his hands: not as S. Paul and
the old Monks, which is tedious to you to hear of, but he meant of bribes,
we of forcible and coactiue execution. Brachia mea iudicabunt populos, as if he
took it Esa. 51. 15.
literally, and to himself. And could you not for a need, find in your heart
to construe, caput congregationis, after S. Austens meaning, as a figure of
generality, and representing the whole body? What a scandal will it be for
Jesuits to encounter such a work, and of so reverend a Prelate, with no better
spears, then one might make of fennel stalks, breaking into fitters with the
least crush, and which if a man should answer but as many ways as he might, it
would be intolerable?

52. That which follows is as idle, that Christ did not vpbraid S. Peter for
his sin; as if he does any, Iam. 1. 5. either for grace affoarded, or faults
pardoned. That Peter had the care of his brethren committed to him; as if we
imagined Peter such a Cain, that cried, What have I to look to my brother?
But, he is confident now, that was fearful before, to ask (...). Why not then
rather superior, Chrysostom in Ioh 21. a question. (...): that is, Peter asks
for (...) now, as before John asked at Peter's ^etting on. So it is no great
preroga^i^^, but only one for another.
when he might set John a work to do as he directed? Besides, great charges
make not confident, but careful rather, and solicitous surely, as
extraordinary favors bind to awe, flesh not in pride, unless it be fools.
The approved love of our Savior Christ, in receiving him to grace, and
settling him in his Apostleship, or (if you would suffer me to speak so) in
restoring him, might add spirit to him, which is S. Chrysostomes meaning, not
as you construe him. But, alas, what did Peter get by asking that question?
What, not secret censure, but open check, at our Saviors hands? Quid ad te?
what prejudice to his discretion, let S. Cyrill show you. But two faults only,
Curiosity, and Desire to have other men partakers of his miseries. This is the
inbred corruption of our nature. Communiter insitum hominibus (says S. Cyrill)
vt optent, si quid periculi subituri sint, non se esse solos, sed caeteros
etiam aut videre pati, aut passos audire, aut passuros esse. It is the nature
of men, if they be to slide into any danger, to wish not to be alone, but
either to see others to suffer, or to hear of them that have suffered, or that
they shall, and must, at least, suffer the same. So Peter. Hearing that he must
suffer, he asked whether John should escape; or no. As for, Si me amas; fratrum
curam suscipe, if cura fratrum be the boundless Monarchy, little need he
woo Popes to that place, by so stiff a coniuration, as Si amas me. Ask
Julius the second, who when his friends were offended with him, Papyr. Mass.
for offering too largely for the Popedom, he said, None that knew the worth
of that place, would stick at any gifts, whereby to compass it. Ask
Praetextatus the heathen, Make me Ibid ex Amm. Marcel.
Pope, says he, and I will be a Christian. Yet, this is your, Si amas me,
suscipe curam fratrum. It were infinite to go through all. I will conclude with
Mr. Casaubones most worthy observation, that if Peter were the Head and Rector
intended, as you imagine, what need S. Chrysostom make the question, Quare
Petrum omissis caeteris affatur de his rebus? why does our Savior confer
with Peter about these matters, skipping by the rest? For every man might see
it were the due of his place. And so much of S. Chrysostom.

53. THE last of them whose authority you allege, is S. Leo, your own Pope,
and not a little addicted to the amplyfying of the Phylacteries of his own
sea, as his MAJESTY has told you in his Apology most plentifully; but all, as
it seems, upon the deaf side. For you will not hear, nor be charmed. Yet
what says Leo? The charge of feeding the sheep of Christ, was more specially
commended to Peter, Ep. 89. A most true word. But the Bishop tells you how,
Praeceptum ad omnes, Solennit as ad illum. So Peter more specially received the
keys: for he received them, says S. Austen, as the Churches proxey; but
communicandas cum omnibus, to be imparted to all, as Optatus told you but
very lately. But in an other place, Ser. 3. de Assump. ad Pontif. what brings
he? That Peter was chosen out of the whole world, to have the chief charge of
the vocation of the Gentiles, and of all the Apostles, and of all the Fathers
of the Church. Here is nothing for your turn, save that Peter was chosen to
have the charge of the Apostles. But to the calling of the Gentiles, though all
helped, yet none might compare with S. Paul, for that matter, who therefore
calls himself the Apostle of the Gentiles: and least you think he gloses,
(...), in faith and verity, 1. Tim. 2. 7. Neither do we deny, that Peter
might have the charge of the Apostles, yet no commanding charge; but either as
ferrum acuit ferrum, as Solomon says, one iron whets and sharpens another, so
the Prou. 17. 17.
face of one brother, to quicken another by his encouragements, Confirma
fratres: or, bono vnitatis, preferred for his maturitie, to prevent schism and
disorder, as has been told you. Though the name Apostles is common to some
without the company of the twelve, and the Scripture uses it so, Phil. 2. 25.
whom Peter might be charged with, and with the other Fathers of the Church, as
Leo here calls the Bishops of their making, without derogating from the
College of them, properly so called. Therefore hear how S. Leo qualifies this
saying in the same Sermon, a little after. Transiuit quidem etiam in alios
Apostolos vis potestatis istius, and ad omnes Ecclesiae principes decreti huius
institutio commeauit: sed non frustra vni commendatur, quod omnibus intimatur.
It cannot be denied, but the force of this authority passed also unto the
other Apostles, and the same ordinance comprehends all the peers of the
Church. But not without cause is that delivered to one, which concerns all.
Why so? Petro enim ideo hoc singulariter creditur, quia cunctis Ecclesiae
rectoribus Petri forma proponitur. That is: For therefore is this particularly
recommended to Peter, because Peter is made a pattern of all
Church-gouernours. And S. Austen de verbis Domini secundum Iohannem, Sermon. 49.
Dominus in vno Petro format Ecclesiam: Our Lord still fashions his Church in
Peter. Leo says, the governors; Austen, the whole Church, is exemplified in
Peter. So that Peter, you see, still stood for a general man, and not for a
particular; and as S. Austen said before, to commend unity: so Leo both takes
in that, vni commendatur, and gives the reason withal, because Peter's example
was most worthy the imitating. Cunctis Petri forma proponitur, and, Ecclesiae
rectoribus, to all rulers of the Church, to show that Peter was not ruler
alone. I might oppose you with other sentences in that Sermon, which you could
hardly salve, that wrest all so violently to your turn: as, Vt cum Petrus
multa solus acceperit, nihil in quenquam sine illius participatione transierit:
yet the Scripture never says, that of Peter's fullness we have all received.
And again Leo, Nunquum nisi per ipsum dedit, quicquid alijs non negauit. Yet
S. Austen de verb. Dom. secundum Matthew. Sermon. 13. Quod nemo potest in Petro,
hoc potest in Domino. But his MAJESTY in his Apology, having prevented all
that might be alleged in this kind, your silence shows, you have not what to
answer. Neither will I therefore trouble my self with the rest of your
citations, till you have qualified these. Facile est Athenienses laudare
Athenis: so it was Plato, Menexeno.
easy for Leo, to rhetoricate at Rome, in the praise of Peter. Let us pass,
say you, to some other matter. And let us see, say I, if you bring any better.

54. AS for the law in the Code (the next thing in your book) it is a sign
you lack proofs for Popedom: else you would never bring so cast a law, first
controuert, and then counterfeit, besides importing so little for your side.
Yet you say, this law is brought by you, in your Supplement, to prove the
dutiful respect and obedience of the ancient Emperors to the Roman Sea. The
respect we grant you, as long as it was Catholic. For what good man would
not respect both Church and Bishop Christian? I except not him that wears the
diadem, as S. Chrysostom. speaks in another Hom. 83. in Matthew. iterumque comm.
in Acta.
case: but, as for duty and obedience, certes neither any that we find in this
law greatly, and the clearer monuments, as Gregory, as Agatho, as diverse
others, often brought you, and often told you, will show it rests on the Popes
side. And what if Justinian writing to the Pope, had followed the vein of an
Epistle so far, as to besmeare him with all the kind terms that might be?
All that you bring, is, that the Roman Church is caput Ecelesiarum, which no
way derogates from the Emperors authority, nor inioynes him no such durie or
obedience as now is urged, and when all is done, caput is nothing, but ecclesia
prima in ordine, not, tanquam habens authoritatem in cateras; which is no more
then was determined in the Council of Chalcedon. Can. 28. that the highest
Church in Christendom after Rome, should nevertheless be magnified in
Ecclesiastical menages, no less themshee. And this has been told you, and
rung into you, Cicer. pro Muraena. Neminem vestrum fugit, cu^ multi pares
dignitate fiant, vnus autem primu^ solut possit obtinere, non eundem, and^.
Proptereit quod renunciatio gradus habeat, dignitas autem sit per^^pe ead^
omnium.
of the difference of order, in the equality of power, and yet you stand
urging a stale phrase, out of a law of the Code, no sounder then it should be,
and add no strength to your blunt iron. So, still might the Bishop say,
Poterat abstinere Cardinalis a criando, the Cardinal might have abstained from
quoting this law, and the law inter claras, is scarce a clear law. Yet Baldus
(you say) calls it, Clarissimam legem. And yet he vouchsafes not to gloss it,
scarce in three words, you know. His calling of it Clarissima, with an allusion
to Inter Claras, is nothing, but as every petty Master is wont to praise the
author that he expounds to his scholars, as Persius notes, -- ab insano multum
laudanda magistro. As for Accursius his glossing of it, and some one or two
more, of how much less force is that to prove the soundnes of it, then the
silence of so many, that think it not worthy a gloss, to condemn it? Of whom
you may presently reckon these, more afterward, if they come to your mind:
Bartholomeus de Saliceto, Cynus, Iacobus de Arena, Jason, Antonius also de
Rosellis, if I mistake not, Franciscus Aretinus, Paulus Castrensis,
Butrigarius. And this last says, It is neither ordinarily nor extraordinarily
read, when he wrote, who wrote when the Pope was at the highest. Add to them,
Bartholus, and Angelus Perusinus. By which you see, what is to be attributed to
Alciates conjecture, that, some later heretics, and wishing ill to the Pope,
have rased it out of the books. Is the Pope such a Dionysius, that he dares
not trust the razors? Yet consider how long those Lawyers flourished before
Luthers time, which is the time, no doubt, that Alciat glances at. Iacobus de
Arena, ann. 1300. Butrigarius, who was Bartholus Vid* (...)* Ge^d G^sner. Heg^.
etc.
his Master, ann. 1320. Cynus ann. 1330. Salicet 1390. Aretine 1425. which
being the last of all that I have now named, is just a hundred years before
Luther. Castrensis later, and Jason later then he, yet both short of the 500
year. Sichardus, whom before I named not, ann. 1540. yet he also passes it
over without a Gloss. Since Alciat it has been censured by other Papists in
like sort, whose judgment Alciat could not turn, as Gregory Haloander, and
Antonius Contius, the setter out of the law, in his Praetermissa. I pass by
Hotoman, because he was ours, otherwise no obscure Father of the law, and has
written the largest of all in the cause. Whom he that has undertaken of late
to answer, Andreas Fachineus Count of Lateran, in his eight book of
Controversies, has not satisfied so fully in all points, as is thought.
Neither about the contradiction of the Dates, nor especially to the
contradictions between Justinian and himself, one time not consulting with the
Pope of Rome, about Ecclesiastical matters (as he professes to do here
notwithstanding) namely in his so many Novel Constitutions: another time
making the Church of Constantinople, to be Head of all Churches: (lib. 24. c.
de Sacrosancta Ecclesia, (...): and the same again, L. Decernimus 16. eodem
titulo,) which here you would have him seem to give to Rome. So as still the
law is no law de claris. Your oppositions to the contrary are little worth,
unless because Hypatius and Demetrius were the messengers, no letter could be
cog'd with their names, or that this must needs be the true Epistle, because
Pope Nicholas quotes a shred out of it, or that Justinian confesses he wrote
to Pope John, in a letter to Agapetus, which letter of Justinians, you
referring us only to Binnius for, some would sooner question for Binnius his
sake, then for the credit of it embrace the other. Though for my part, I like
well of what I find there, that Justinian calls it the faith, quam sequendam
DVXIMVS, which shows he depended not upon the Popes approbation, no not for
his faith. And the Pope receiving it with willing gratulation, as he also there
signifies, not his assent only, but the whole Church of Romes was added to it:
which if the Pope were infallible, what needed it? But the truth is, that you
have not yet resolved, whether it be the Pope of Rome, or the Church of Rome,
that cannot err. Enough belike, if either of the^ keep up the ball. Lastly,
to return to the Epistle to Pope John, let me ask you, what you think of the
good Latin in it? (I speak to a Priscian, to a Latin Aristarchus.) Which not
only Justinian, but perhaps Bellisarius himself would not have uttered in
those days. As, Properamus crescere honorem sedis vestrae, for, We make have
to increase the honor of your seat. They did indeed, that meant to do it by
faining. To omit, that if Justinian gave advancement to the seat, it is
beholding to the Empire, not the Empire to it, and so we know from whence the
worship of it flowed. I have heard of some, that this was the cause, why
certain would not gloss it, because it favors the opinion, that the primacie
of Rome is iuris humani, or Imperatorij, not diuini. And yet do you bring this
law against us? As if our selves could more despite the Pope, then by so
saying. But proceed in your eloquence. Alieni Catholicae Dei Ecclesiae; which
sounds well in Greek, not so in Latin: and no better that, Quae ad vos est
vnitas sanctarum ecclesiarum. Lastly, Petimus vos orare pro nobis, and
prouidentiam Dei nobis acquirere. All which, your elegancie would never digest
for good Latin, nor worthy of Justinian, if you are the man that you are taken
for. The testimony that you insist upon, of the perpetual integrity of your
Roman Sea, that as often as any heretics had risen in those parts, they had
still been corrected by the sentence thereof, was no warrant for the times to
come. You did run well, but who has set you back? Thou know not, says
Solomon, what a day brings forth. And if we be forbidden to boast of to morrow,
how much less of the consequence of all times and ages, for the blessing of
God hitherto affoarded? Yet these are your goodly proofs that the Chair of
Rome never tottered In the same book of the Code, Lege Cunctos, Th odosius,
Gratianus, and Valentinian, (Edicto ad Constantinopol. C^) wish all men to
follow the same faith, quam sequi hodie claret Damasum, Pontificem Romanum,
and Petrum Alexandria Episcopum: that is, which Damasus Bishop of Rome, and
Peter of Alexandria embracet, the which Peter he calls more over, Virum
Apostolica sanctitatis, an an of Apostolic holiness: ascribing to Damasus
neither Apostolic, nor any other title. But I note it for this; If the Popes
authority be not sufficient for our direction in matters of faith, except the
Bishop of Alexandria his name be joined with him for illustration sake, what
infallibility has the one above the other?
since, because it corrected heresies in Justinians days. As if more has not
been said of private men, as Carm. de ingratis. Anne alium in finem posset
procedere sanctu^ Concilium, cui dux Aurelius, ingentumque, Augustinus erat,
quem Christi gratia corn^ Vberiore rigans, nostro lumen uedit aeuo Accensum
vero de lumine? S. Austen was light of very light in S. Prospers eye.
Prosper of S. Austen, that where he was present, it was impossible for the
Council to go awry, and yet no man would hold him thereupon excused from
possibility of error, much less perhaps promise for a whole Church. S.
Chrysostom says, that diverse Bishops came to learn of Antioch, and went
away instructed, even of the people there. Neither say, says he, that Rome is
famous for her greatness, but show me a people if you can for your life, as
diligent at hearing Gods word in Rome. Sermon. 4. in Hoseam.
(...). For Sodom had the stately buildings, says he, whiles Abraham remained
in an obscure tent. And he sticks not to call Antioch, (...), in the same
place, the mother city of the whole world. What greater style does Justinian
give to Rome, though there were no question of the sincerity of his style?
Whereas Antioch otherwise was called Euagr. l. 4. c. 38. and alij complures.
Theopolis, Gods own city, which must needs be the largest, I trow, for
regiment. And before, Jerusalem inherited that title, Ciuitas magni Regis, Gods
city, or, the city of the great King, by our Saviors own acknowledgement,
Matthew. 5. 35. Again, Nazianz. Ser. Epitaph. in Caesarium, calls Byzantium that
then was, the now Constantinople, (...), the first city, and (...). Are you
not afraid least that be more then order, even a presidence of authority over
all Europe? Ecclesia praesidens in regione Romanorum. Ignat. Epist. which the
Papists catch at: this per Europa^^.
Whereas Et l. 1. cp. 3. quae est ad (...) sub nomine Paulae and E^, Quanto
Judea caeteris Prouincijs, tanto hae: V^^S cuncta s^bl^or est Judea. Et cum
totius prouinciae gloria metropoli vindi catur, quicq ud in membus ^^udis est,
omne refertur ad caput. Making by that means H^salem the prime seat, and as it
were metropolis of the world.
Hierome speaking of Rome, calls it quondam caput, the sometime head of the
world. No doubt, because it was head in the right of the Empire, and that
changing, the spiritual prehemine^ce of it changed also. So uncertain are
these things, and not built as you would have it, upon divine ordinance, but
either following the favor and good liking of the Emperors, or the other
variable stream of causes. To conclude your Law, about the Universal
authority of the Roman Sea: for so much as you quote Accursius his gloss,
hear what a stout observation he has mode on both sides of that cause.
Justinian calls the Bishop of Constantinople, fratrem vestrum, the Popes
brother. Parificat ergo, therefore he equals them, says Accursius. But
straight again, and with the turning of a hand, because the Emperor says,
sequi festinans sedem vestram, that the Bishop aforesaid labors to follow the
judgment of your seat, Minor est ergo, therefore he is under him. Is not this
well shot now? As if sequi were to come behind in place, not to accord in
opinion. And whereas the Pope, sets the Emperors name before his own, in the
beginning of his Epistle, Iustiniano Johannes, etc. Note, says Accursius, Papa
praemittit Imperatorem, quod hodie non faceret, the Pope sets the Emperors
name before his own, which at this day he would not; belike because prouder.
So much of this Law.

55. THE labell, and the last of your first chapter, is this: The Bishop to the
Cardinal alleging the words of the Pataran Bishop, suing to Justinian to
restore Sylverius, whom he had condemned to banishment, which words seem to
spread the Popes authority very far, answered briefly, and in his wonted
style, the style of wisdom, (...), or as the ancient Divines say of taking
the Sacrament, (...); What should we hear Patarensis his words, as long as we
see Justinians deeds? Justinian banisheth, Sylverius is banished, Patarensis
pleads for him: Who is the Superior? Not because the words, that this pleader
used in Sylverius his behalf, to magnify his reputation, could not otherwise
be answered, as shall appear anon, but being a namelesse person, and no where
else mentioned (which is worthy your marking) the Bishop shook off both him
and the Cardinal, in the aforesaid fashion. So the valiant beast, little
moved with the dog, or the hunters staff, goes on his journey, minding other
matters, as we read in the Poet,

-- Et tergo decutit hastas. By this reason, say you, never any thing in the
world was so wickedly done, but it may be justified. For, howsoever it be
reprehended by holy, grave, or learned men, those that list to justify the
fact, may say, Facta cum videamus, verba quid audiamus? When we see the deed,
what should we hear words, etc. As though it were not one thing to justify a
thing done, by the simple doing of it, against all that might be excepted, or
controlled in it, concerning the wickedness, and another thing to avouch the
power of the doer, or the authority of the doer, who howsoever abusing the
advantage of his place, yet he does no more then in that right he may, and his
deeds pass for uncontrolled. As Nero, as Herod, as Pilate, whom you allege.
Meritum criminis, not always going with ordo potestatis; and ordo potestatis,
often having his course, where there is no meritum criminis. For neither, when
Syluerius was banished by Justinian, do we justify Justinian, as having done
well, though we bid you mark what Justinian did, but rather point at his
authority, euidenced by such actions: nor if we would prove the power of
heathen Caesar over our Savior Christ, condemned by his deputy, and at length
crucified, are we therefore to be thought to approve his deed, or the use of
his jurisdiction. And yet I hope, it shows where the authority rested, and
how true it was that our Savior said, Non haberes potestatem in me, nisi
desuper datam, for so much as our Savior never excepted against Passus est sub
Pontio Pilato. This it a maine cause of Pilates coming into the Creed. And the
Papists doctrine opposing Magistracy, opposes so the Creed, and gathers fast
upon heresy.
him as an incompetent Magistrate, but willingly submitted himself to the very
death. According as S. Andrew, of whom we read in the Decret. part. 2. cause.
23. qu. 1.
Decrees, that being condemned to die by the Lieftenant of Achaia, when some
would have reskued him, he desired them, not; Quaeso, ne impedite martyrium
meum: I pray, good people, disturb not my martyrdom. Who if pirates, or
thieves, had offered him this violence, without any lawful calling of
Magistracy, I suppose he would not have refused to have saved himself by all
honest means. As S. Paul did against whipping, Act. 22. He opposed, says S.
Austen, his civil privilege, to defend him, in the assault of his sacred
faith, as the left hand holds out it self to protect the right. What so
natural? Cum percuteretur dextra, opponeb at sinistram: in Psalm. 120. And most
excellently to our purpose, the same Father again, Epist. 48. to show, that
power howsoever used, is from God. 1. The countermine of Powers temporal op
pugning the truth, is to the godly courageous a glorious trial, to the faint
of courage a dangerous assault. But the same powers, when they stand for the
auouching of truth, to the honest-hearted that are in error, they are
profitable aduertisers: but to the foolish and besotted, bootlesse ^^ourges.
Yet still there is no power but of GOD.
Terror temporalium potestatum, says he, quando veritatem oppugnat, justice
fortibus gloriosa probatio est, infirmis periculosa tentatio. Quando aute^
VERITATEM PRAEDICAT, errantibus cordatis vtilis admonitio est, and insensatis
invtilis afflictio. NON EST TAMEN POTESTAS NISI A DEO, etc. No iniquity can
abolish authority. And yet by your leave, Sir, howsoever you excuse Sylvenius,
in your relation how the matter passed, (as I can not blame you, if you be
loath to have more traitors registered in the beadroll of your Popes, then
needs you must,) both Procopius and Euagrius, lib. 4. cap. 19. show, that he
was held in suspicion of high treason, as drawing the Goths to besiege the
city, and an author of your own, In vit^ Sylver.
Papyr. Masson. can hardly acquit him, as in all likelihood sauouring of old
rellikes, and having a Goth in his belly, since his first education. Forte
enim amantior Gothicarum partium erat Sylverius Frusinone genitus, and, as
Pope, now able to give countenance among the citizens, Such Popes, no marvel
if S. Cyprian say, the Emperor was less offended with a rebels insurrection,
then their creation. Aequior audiebat imperij amulum in se coniurare, quam Dei
fieri Sacerdotem.
to traiterous attempts. Neither was this any cause, that Euagrius mentions, or
in the least sort points at, why Justinian afterward was stricken of God, but
rather his heretical declining from the faith. Now we never denied but
Emperors, if they be men, may fall into heresy, but even in heresy we so
free them from the fear of earthly control, as tremblingly we refer them to
the heavenly censure. Neither yet for lack of learning was Justinian punished,
nor it may be for want of that so much as seduced to heresy (though you would
gladly insinuate so much out of Suidas) since many wanting learning, have both
known the right faith, and kept it to the end. I am sure Pope John, in the
Epistle that begins Inter claras, of which before, calls him edoctum
Ecclesiasticis disciplinis, taught in Church-learning, or Church-disciplines.
Suidas also, at the place that you quote out of him, (...), a most orthodoxe
Emperor. And yet had it bin otherwise, neither you Mr. F. T. nor any of your
side, remembering your Popes; need greatly to object the defects of learning to
a secular Emperor; many of the Popes coming to their preferment, as if it
were by that rule which Aquinas cites out of the 70. Psalm. when he would defend
Geburoth and Sopheroth no friends in Popery. 2. 2. quaest. 188. art. 3.
such proceedings, but not from his heart, Propterea quod non cognovi
literaturam, ideo introibo in potentias Domini. And was it learning, or
charity, that you lacked trow, when you said, that Euagrius places Justinian
in hell, to endure penalties: whereas he only says, he was taken from hence,
(...), to abide the trial of the places beneath. Which not only your own
Popish relligion, holding more underground places then hell, but the right
faith would teach you so to constiue, as should be no prejudice to Justinians
salvation. You cite also Euagrius about the suddenesse of his death, as a
punishment of God, which Euagrius mentions not in the least word, but (...)
(...), invisibly stricken; unless you will say suddenly, because he fore-sawe
not his death coming: which who does? Else he reigned in all about 39. years.
As for the words of Paterensis, whom you call from Patera, as if your mind
were in pateris, or your self dignum patella Ve^^ Athenas neque me quisquam
ibi agnouit. Tusc. Quaest. 5.
operculum, a worthy champion for such a wooden Bishop, whom no body
vouchsafes to know (like another Democritus coming to Athens) save only
Liberatus, and that in the very place, which Surius your own author finds
evident footsteps of egregious forgerie in, ab improbo nebulone quodam conficta
videntur: and, nescio quid monstri parturire: which if any such be, I see not
but it may reach to this story of your man of Patara, being both in the same
page, and within half a score lines one of the other; but howsoever it be, the
authority is not worth a rush. temporal primacie? which we descry here to be
the Emperors, and not the Popes, by Justinians driving him into banishment;
they call it, I know, Bellisarius his act, but in the power of Justinian, no
doubt, and for a secular matter, viz. for treason. So as the Pope is subject to
the Emperors censure for civil faults. order of pre-eminence (not in right of
government, or confirmed jurisdiction) as the chief Patriarch; which is
evident by the comparison, or disparison rather, of earthly Kings there used,
whereof one has no such reference of order to an other, but the Patriarchall
Seas are fixed, says S. Leo, by inviolable Canon, legibus ad finem mundi
mansuris, Epist. 33 ad Anatolium. 3
and admit no confusion. Thirdly, there is this difference between Kings and
Priests, that Kings are confined to their own dominions, and if they be taken
without them, they loose their privilege, and stand but for little better then
subjects in those parts: whereas the Priest may exercise his acts of office, in
every part of the Christian world, as bind, or loose, or preach, or administer,
or ordain also, if he be thereunto called. And if he be restrained from any of
these, it is Ecclesialigante, as your Tapper tells us, and Viguerius, and
diverse more, quae ligat and ligare, which even binds out binding, and for
orders sake confines that but to certain places, which is indifferent to all
by primitive ordination. See your self of this point, cap. 2. numb. 50. and
52. Whosoever is Pastor in any one part of the Church, is capable of Pastoral
jurisdiction in any other, though he be restrained to avoid confusion. And
Basil says of Athanasius, page 304. of the Greek by Frobenius (for the
Epistles are not numbered) That he takes no less care for the whole Church, or
rather all the Churches, then that which was specially committed to him by our
Lord. So Chrysostom says of the Priest, that he is, (...), the father of the
whole In 1 ad Tim. c 1. orat. 6. initio ipso.
world. Where by the way also, you may see the vanity of your reason, which
you magnify so much, when the Council of Chalcedon calls the Pope their
father. Which is no more then Chrysostom gives to every Minister, to be father
of the whole Church, though not in authority, yet in loving care, (...), not
(...), which is all that the Council says there of Leo, and explaines it
self by In this sense Sidonius, l. 6. Fp. 6. ad Eut^^p^ Bonitas conditoris,
habitationem po^ hominum, quam charitatem, finalibus claudit angustij^. And
again, S. Chrysostom. hom. 3. in Acta Apost. Ethico. calls every Bishop in
general (...), the Bishop over all men, and yet in the same place says, That
no Bishop in Bishop over more then one City. Both of which make for us against
you, and seeming contrary include no contradiction. Yea Hom. 8. in Acta, he
says twice together, that his Lay-auditors shall be Occumenicall Masters, if
they do this and this, of his prescribing. Also (...): They shall be to all,
that which he is to them.
beneuolentiam praeferens; of which happily hereafter. The same Chrysostom
again, Epist. 176. ad Paeanium, twice attributes as much to him, to be rector
or rectifyer, as he there speaks, of the whole world. And does not S. Hierome
begin his Epistle ad Salvinianam so, that the care of every Christian belongs
unto him, as he is a minister of Gods Church, pro officio Sacerdotij, and that
their good proceeding is his glory? S. Salvian also ad Salon. l. 1. adv. Avar.
Ad fidei meae cura^. pertinet (as if not his Charities only) nequid
ecclesiastici operis vacillare permitta^. When S. Chrysostom. went into
banishment, Chrysostom. in quadam epist.
you may please to remember how the Monks saluted him, that the sun might
sooner loose his light, the^ his virtue be eclipsed: and yet I hope his
jurisdiction did not stretch, in your opinion, as far as the sun, which if
Patareus Apollo had but said of Sylverius, you would presently have concluded
in favor of him. Justinians Constitutions, about matter of faith, directed to
the Bishops, sometime of Rome, sometime of Constantinople, which you so often
tell us of. Do you see therefore, what power the Emperor had in spiritual
causes, to give forth Constitutions? Agapetus deposed Anthimus, and set up
Menas, but causa perorata apud Iustinianum, Justinian having first the hearing
of the cause, and by his authority, no doubt, though a Bishop was used to
sentence a Bishop, as was Principis fauore Liberat. c. 21.
most meet far form; Menas was preferred to Anthimus his place, but how? as a
special favorite of Justinian, says the story, and so you may be sure by his
direction. Agapetus his judgment of Anthimus was feign to be scanned in a
Council of Constantinople, gathered for that purpose by the Emperor, before
the proceedings of a Pope could give satisfaction to the Church. Patarensis
does not excuse Bishops in general from the Emperors censure, as you would
have it, but only mooues him to show respect to Sylverius, for the amplitude
of his place. Emperor one day, or Imperial man, should make the divorce. On
the other fide, it sets out Justinians praise, that was content to punish
treason so moderately, as not utterly to take his Bishopric from him, but
only to send him packing to Palmaria, or Fonicusa, as now they call it.
Lastly, whereas he reverenced, you say, the Sea Apostolic, let them perish
hardly that reverence not the very place, where the dove has troad, fleeing to
the windows, but with meet proportion, because corrupted since.

To the second Chapter, about sundry passages in the Council of Chalcedon.
IN the Roman discipline when of fendours were many, they used a course called
Decimation, to chastise every tenth person only, for the misdemeanour of a
multitude: So must I herafter, but point as it were at every tenth soloecisme,
which occurres in the perusing of the Adioynder; it being hard I grant, for
any to avoid faults in multiloquio, as the wise man tells us, but specially for
him, as I should think, who so purposely studieth it, as if he meant to
oppress us with a flood of terms, and weary the Reader whom he cannot
persuade. Wherein he could not show himself more adverse to his adversary,
whose praise is compendiousnes, (...), like the gold coins, that include great
worth in small compass, and Timantus pictures, presenting more to the mind
then to the eye.

2. And for so much as I have professed, as the truth is, that my task now was
to justify the allegations only of the Bishops book, against such idle
scruples, as this man casts in every where, having showed, as I may say, by the
blow in the forehead, so by this first encounter, that if need were, I could
take more advantage, and rippe up this Golias, this bulk of paper, as the
other was of flesh, to his greater shame, I will now proceed with all possible
brevity.

3. About the Bishops allegation of the Council of Chalcedon, the 28. Canon,
partly he struggles to shift it off, partly he cauills with him, about the
quoting of it. In which respect, I have thought good, first of all to set it
down, as it lies in our books. In all points following the Decrees of the
holy Fathers, and admitting the Canon lately read, of the 150 most blessed
Bishops, assembled together under the great Emperor Theodosius, of pious
memory, in the Imperial Constantinople, new Rome, we also decree and
determine the same things, concerning the privileges of the most holy Church
of Constantinople aforesaid, the new Rome. For justly did the Fathers give
privileges to the throne of old Rome, because that City was then regent. And
the 150 most blessed Bishops, moved with the same consideration, gave equal
privileges to the most holy throne of new Rome: wisely judging it meet and
reasonable, that the City which enjoyed both Empire and Senate, and was endued
with the like privileges (or equal privileges) that old Rome was, should in
matters Ecclesiastical be advanced and magnified, even as she (or no less
then she) being second after her, (not subject to her, but, second after her:
yet F. T. says the Bishop left out those words of set purpose. Rather indeed
because nothing to the purpose.) And that etc. Even as, if I break off now,
and English not the rest, no wise man nor learned, that has but read the
Canon, will deem I break off fraudulently, or for advantage, but only
because that which follows is not material. Now see what exceptions the
gentleman takes to the Bishops allegation. As first, that he should say, that
the Canon makes the two Seas, the one of Rome, the other of Constantinople,
equal in all things. What is here amiss? Equal, says the text, sicut illam,
even as the other: and (...) equal privileges. But where is that in all
things, says the wrangler? Canon were no Canon, and the rest of the words to
no purpose at all. indefinites are equivalent to vniuersalls, especially where
one exception being made, it is plain that all others are thereby cut off,
according to the rule, Exceptio figit regulam in non exceptis? And therefore
the rank, or the prioritie in order, being only reserved to Rome in that
place, as it follows about Constantinople, that she should secunda post illa^
existere, be second in rue, as the new Rome to the old Rome, the old being
first, and the new second, is it not clear, that there is equality in all
things else granted to Constantinople, and the magnifying or advancing of her
in Ecclesiastical matters, sicut illa, as she, or, no less then she,
generally to be extended as far as Romes? Sozomene says expressly, for
civil matters, (...), she was equalled in all things, Constantinople with
Rome, lib. 7. cap. 9. and the ground of the Canon is, the equality of the two
cities in civil affairs. Therefore, either the Fathers conclude not well, out
of their own premises, or else the equality of the two Seas, even in
Ecclesiastical matters, is to be understood secundum omnia, in every respect.
Error is subject to Inconstancy, you answer this afterward another way your
self, that there might be equality, seruata proportione, and only in
comparison with inferior Seas, where you will not deny, but per omnia, may be
borne in that sense, in the alleging of the Canon, though the text has it
not. The Bishop therefore might add it without injury to the Text, though it
be not in the letter. numb. of this present Chap. you give the Cardinal leave
to add Totius, where there is none in the Text, but vineae only without
totius, saying he does it for explication sake. And may not we then, upon so
good grounds, as you have not for Totius out of all that Epistle, but we have
for per omnia, out of the circumstances of the Canon, as has been showed?
Consulls should strive for pre-eminence, or two States of Venice (to use your
own comparison in another place of this brook,) and the Judge should so order
it, that they should both have equal allowance of honor, the paria priuilegia
that you are so stumbled at, (for so I construe them, and I think the righter)
one to be advanced in matters of government, as well as the other, only that
one should hold the second place, and the other the first, were it not evident
that they were equalled in all points, though the word all were not by him
expressed, save only in paritie of rank and order? So the case was here. The
Bishop of Rome was to sit before the other in assemblies and meetings, to be
mentioned before him in the prayers Barlaam.
of the Church, to deliver his opinion and judgment first, and yet for matter
of authority or jurisdiction, one Sea to be magnified sicut altera, even as
much as the other, and that per omnia, in all respects, whatsoever F. T. grinne
to the contrary.

4. And by this we answer to his other wise objection, that if pre-eminence of
order be reserved to Rome, how then does the Canon make them equal in all
things? In all things else, this only excepted, which the Canon excepts, and
nothing else, to show, that as for other things, they are to be equalled in all.

5. Yet you cavil the Bishop, for leaving out that clause of (...), the second
after the other, namely, Constantinople after Rome, as if the Bishop had left
it out, because making against himself, which was nothing to the purpose to
have inserted, because it concerns not the primacy of authority, but of order
only, about which we strive not.

6. As for the printing of those words, in all things, in a different letter,
which according to the measure of your accustomed franknes, you call corrupt
and fraudulent dealing, how often shall we tell you, that the Bishop followed
the difference of the letter, as diverse others have done, and daily do, to
specify the thing it self intended by the Canon, and to imprint it the deeper
in the Readers mind, not as alleging the letter of it, and so counterfeiting,
as you please to call it. From which in truth he was so far, that you make it
his fault in this very Chapter, number. 3. not to offer to lay it down, or the
words of it, but only to argue, and to draw consequences therefrom, as his
occasion served.

7. Now whereas you would explicate the Canons meaning, by the words following,
about the ordaining of certain Bishops by the Patriarch of Constantinople, as
Pontus, Asia, Thracia, etc. and by exempting that Sea, from standing subject
any longer to the Bishopric of Heraclea, of which it was once but a parcel;
it is true, that from thence, even from so low estate, it was exalted by
consent, to be a patriarchall Sea, and not every such neither, but the second
in order, and setting that aside, equal to Rome in all respects. Else neither
should this Canon have suffered such opposition, you may be sure, at the
Bishop of Romes hands, nor needed the Fathers to name this so distasteful
equality with Rome, in the body of the Canon, if nothing but the ordaining of
Bishops had been assigned him, which other Patriarchs exercise in their
diocese, as well as the Bishop of Rome, without his repining. And yet lastly,
you may remember, that the Canon of Nice, describing the pre-eminence Can. 6.
of the Bishop of Rome, as a pattern of Patriarchship, vtters it in those
words of Ruffinus translation, quod Ecclesiarum suburbicariarum curam habeat,
that he has care of the Churches that are abutting upon the city; to which
Canon of Nice, spreading so the jurisdiction of the Church of Rome, this Canon
of Chalcedon may seem to allude, mentioning so many Churches as you here
recite, and all of them subject to the Sea of Constantinople.

8. As for that you thrust in here, upon very small occasion, of Athanasius of
Alexandria appealing to Julius Bishop of Rome, to show that Alexandria was
subject to Rome, if you mean the subjection of order and rank, it is nothing
to the matter, and yet it follows not, by your leave, out of your example.
The subjection of authority is that which we contend about, and yet that much
less may be gathered from hence. For neither did Athanasius flee to Julius
alone, but with his company of Bishops, as his letters Athanasiapol. conera
Arian.
show, that he brought in his behalf, Omnibus vbique Catholicae Ecclesiae
Episcopis,. i. To all the Bishops of the Catholic Church: and again, Hac
quidem and ad omnes, and ad Iulium scripsere:. i. This they wrote to Julius,
and to all. And the Church that enioies more flourishing fortunes, or whose
arm God has strengthened with temporal prosperity, may be sought unto of
the distressed, though not subject to it, by any duty of obedience, as one
King (says the Orator) easily Pro lege Manil. Regum afflictae opes facise
alliciunt misericordiam.
rescues and succors another, though not referring to him by subjection, no
more then Mithridates did to Tigranes; as also I doubt not, but if Julius had
suffered wrong, and Athanasius could have help him, neither would Julius have
disdained to crave his assistance, nor Athanasius have refused him; no more
then the aforesaid Bishop of Patara did to sue for Syluerius, and to shield him
all he could, against the rage of Justinian, as even now you told us; and yet
he of Patara, much inferior to the other without question.

9. But, to deal more liberally with the Bishop in this point, put case (say
you) that the Council of Chalcedon did mean to give to the Church of
Constantinople that equality with the Sea of Rome, which he affirms; yet he
should nothing gain by it, but rather it confirms the primacie of Pope Leo,
whose only authority was able to quash it. How is that proved? First, because
the Canon took not place presently. Which is no more then happens, for the
most part, to any law, to have slower execution then it has making. But does
it follow from hence, that either the Bishop alleages a counterfeit Canon, (for
by this reason you may cavil any Canon in the book) or that Leo's authority
was of force to disanull it? Let us briefly look into it, as not much to our
purpose. For in truth, what end may we look for of dispute, if so pregnant
allegations be reckoned for counterfeit? By a few heads we may judge of all the
rest. You observe 4. things out of Gelasius his Epistle to the Bishops of
Dardania, to disprooue the Canon.

10. Martian praised Leo for not suffering the old Canons to be violated in
that point, and yet himself zealous for the advancement of Constantinople. The
answer is most easy, He might take Leo's excuse in good part, as grounded upon
pretense of conscience, not to cross the Canons, though it was so far from
being sound, that both Leo might have altered them as your self confess,
(positive Canons) Number 70. huius and number. 28.
and afterward it was altered even by a general Council, (if that of Lateran
at least was general) as you acknowledge. And I hope, Sir, I may praise
Constancy, even in mine adversary, and in a wrong matter, though I could wish
his constancy were better employed. So might Martian with Leo; and somewhat the
rather, to induce him by addoulcings; for direct thwarting alienates rather. Is
this a good reason now, why the Canon should be no Canon, or this also scored
among the Bishops forgeries?

11. that Anatolius, in favor of whom the Canon was made, being rebuked by
Leo for his forwardnes to prefer it, derived the fault upon the Clergy of
Constantinople, and said it was positum in ipsius potestate; Leo might choose
whether he would grant it or no. Answer. That the Clergy of Constantinople
concurred to the making of it, I hope, good Sir, derogates not from the Canon,
but rather fortifies it, as likewise the consent of so many other Bishops; and
if Leo's shake, bestriding his pray (that is, the honor of his seat, the
singularity rather) affrighted Anatolius, and startled lentum illum Heli, as he
calls him, that timorous old man, what is that to the antiquating of the Decree
of a Synod, and so populous a Synod as this was? For I hope the Canon was not
so in favor of Anatolius, (whatsoever you prattle) but that much rather of his
Sea, then of his person, as both the reason shows which the Canon contaynes,
drawn, as you may remember, from the Imperial city, and Martians love was to
the city, not to the man. Yea it rather took place, you say, after his death.
What then do you tell us of Anatolius?

12. that Pope Simplicius was as loath to yield to Leo the Emperor, for the
advancement of Constantinople, as Leo the Pope had been to the Emperor
Martian in the same cause, proves nothing against the Canon, unless it be
granted, that the Pope has a negative voice in the making of them, which is
the thing in question between you and us, and therefore to be proved, not to
be presumed. But if you mean, that it took not place so soon, you have your
answer before, it brake out at last like fire in the bones, and that's enough.

13. Quartum Notabile, that Acacius obtained the censures of Pope Felix, and
executed them upon the Bishops of Alexandria and Antioch. What then? As if one
Bishop may not crave aid of another, to repress abuses, when he cannot do it
himself, even as they in Peter's boat, beckened to the next to come and help
them, (for your primacie is that Moses taken out of the waters by your own
description) so here Acacius becken to Peter, that is, to the Pope himself, as
you dream. Neither think you that Acacius was the Popes man, to execute his
pleasure, but (...), as Homer says. And, congregatis vobiscum vna cum
meospiritu, as in all excommunications, so specially, I suppose, when
Patriarchs are to be censured. Does not Gelasius say so, in the Epistle that
you quote, Ipso quoque Acacio postulante, vel exequente. Where you see what
execution Acacius performed, namely, with which Postulation might well stand,
which is not the ministers, or the under-officers part, to demand censure
against offenders, but only to lay it on as is enjoined. We read in the same
Epistle, that Acacius proceeded against other two Patriarchs of the aforesaid
Seas, whereof one was Calendion, whom Gelasius names, the other unnamed, only
qualiscunque Catholicus, as Gelasius styles him, and that neither with a
Synods, as Gelasius there says, nor by censure obtained from the Sea of Rome,
for ought that he implies, but belike of his own head; yet Acacius had no
authority over the aforesaid Patriarchs. No more then has the Pope ordinary
over them, whom in casu, and quantum fas est, he may offer to excommunicate,
when they are otherwise incorrigible. And therefore this proves no Supremacy
neither, of the Pope above other Patriarchs, that Acacius as you say executed
his censures.

14. What should I say of them that withstood these censures of the Pope, and
despised them? and yet godly men, and allowed by the Church. Which shows, that
they breath from no such power, as you imagine. See Austen contra Donatist. l.
5. c. 25. of Cyprian, not forfeiting his freehold in the Church, though he were
one of them, quos Stephanus Papa abstinendos putauerat, whom Stephen Pope
doomed with excommunication. Irenaeus censured Victors censuring Eusebius. l. 5.
c. 25.
of the Churches of Asia, where Baronius would triumph upon the name of Victor,
as if straightway victory went with Rome, but give me Irenaeus for the (...),
in choro nostro, the supremacy will go rather on his side. Blessed are the
peacemakers. So likewise did Polycrates, if you Ibid. c 26.
regard names so much, a man compounded of multitudes and power, which two
endowments your Church much delights in. Anicetus, a pretty name too, to guggle
Baronius, yet resisted Ibid.
by Polycarpus, not abhorring in his nomenclature from the Churches property,
Esa. 54. Paulinus in his Epistle ad Sulpitium Seuerum, calls the buzze of the
Pope, or the bull, as you term it, vacui murmur culicis, the trumpeting, or
the wheesing of a silly gnat, that was all he set by it. Tertullian has many
flings at him, as Pamelius will tell you, and no marvel De liturgicis
Fragment. Hilarij.
for the rigor he sustained among them. S. Hilarie to Liberius, Quotapars
orbis es tu? as much to say, as, what are you, sir, that you should so take on?
And sometime other Bishops did as much for the Pope, I mean, they
excommunicated him, no body controlling them. For it is ius commeabile, or,
ius reciprocum, passing and walking from the one to the other. In the Council
of Ephesus, the Bishops that held with Apolog. Cyrilli Mandat. Synod. Ephesians.
Cyrill and Memnon, Scire autem volumus vestram sanctitatem, etc. We do you to
wit, (even you the Popes Legates representing his person) that if you despise
ought of these things, you are thereby shut out from our Communion. what was
that in effect but excommunication? Lastly, you tell us, that Acacius obeyed
the Pope for a time, as much to say, as, while he listed himself. And even
Gelasius, when he affirms him to stand excommunicate, by virtue of the
excommunications that he procured against others, he means iure meriti, not,
iure fori, desert being one thing, sentence another. Unless you will say,
that Nathan censured David, in, Tues homo, which was rather David's act against
himself, like that in the Gospel, Ex ore tuo iudico te, which in Conc.
Sinuessano was made you know whose privilege, not the Bishops of
Constantinople, but the Bishop of Romes, (though very ridiculously) that no
body should proceed against him, but only himself. And so much of your four
reasons out of Gelasius his Epistle, why this canon should be insufficient.

15. In the examples that you bring us, of such Bishops of Constantinople, as
sought for union with the sea of Rome, what a childish ignorance is it, not to
be able to discern between the union of consent in matters of faith, and
union of subjection, which implies superiority, that they never acknowledged in
the Popes over them? Was there no union sought for but with Rome? Or, do not
all the members of the great body pant for it, each string of that harp
endeavor after accordance, to make up the perfect harmony of Christianity? No
doubt this is that which the Apostle says, Did the word of God come out from
you alone? or to you alone? (...). Cor. (...). 36.
which was the case of Corinth, not of Rome, in those days. It were long to
trace all your absurdities. The like you bring us out of the Epistle of the
Eastern Bishops to Symmachus, that the soundnes of the true faith was always
preserved in the Roman church, because of Tues Petrus, and super hanc petram.
Lo the primacie of the Sea of Rome, say you, grounded upon our Saviors
express words, with little regard to the equality of privileges in the
Council of Chalcedon, which the Bishop so much stands upon. Thus you will
neither give leave to the learned Fathers, to deflect those words after a witty
manner, to their innocent purpose, as Pighius says of some of them, that
scripturae ijs nascuntur sub manu, for their dexterity that way, and Andradius
dares no otherwise defend your detortion of Ecce duo gladij, to establish the
temporal Defens. Trid. l. 2.
jurisdiction in the spiritual, (one monster in another:) nor again can you
distinguish between primacy of power, and infallibility of judgment, which
though Rome cannot be said to have preserved always, in rigore, as S. Basil
Haere ses propaga^t, Epist. 8. ad Eusebius. Sam.
and diverse others will testify, and somewhat we have spoken thereto before,
yet without doubt this place so glaunces at the one, as it has no word so much
as tending to the other. For if exemption from error entitles to sovereignty,
then how could Peter be the governor of the Apostles, who all of them had this
privilege of not erring? So fowly you fall under your own instance. Lastly,
Chrysostom. Tom. Edit. D. H. Sauil.
4. page 942. in Lat. concion, applies these words, Tues Petrus, etc. to
demonstrate the steadfastnes of the Church of Constantinople, other some to Leo
the lay Emperor, etc. Epist. episcop. secundae Syriae ad Leon. Habetur into
Act? Council. Chalced.


16. The like also I might say of Vigilius his presidentship in the Council of
Constantinople, which what if Eutychius did of courtesy offer him? Praesidente
nobis Beatitudine tua. Who knows not that the Presidents of general Councils,
are not always the chiefest Bishops in Christendom? As Cyrill, as Hosius, as
diverse more. Cui non concilio praefuit Hosius? and yet Hosius a Cordevant, not
a Roman Bishop.

17. The like of the deposition of diverse Bishops of Constantinople, by the
Popes, as you say, and namely that Agapetus deposed Anthimus, with many more.
Shall I tell you what wise men are wont to say in this case? Agapetus did
depose Anthimus; but was Anthimus deposed? as much to say, They did their best,
but de been esse only, and, valeat vt valere potest, for, authority they had
none. And therefore all this while, the Canon is not impeached but remains good.

18. What should I tell you of Euagrius, l. 2. hist. c. 4. that this Canon was
enacted in that Council by the Fathers, not forged by the Bishop? (...), you
may read the rest in the very end of the chapter, that Constantinople had The
prerogatives before other Churches
(...) (...), only short of Rome, and short but in (...), as has been said,
in order, or, in number, as the Logicians are wont to discern things of the
same species. I Nouel. Constit. 131. Com. in Photij Nomocanon. tit. p. c. 5.
Com. in Can.
might add Justinian, Balsamon, Zonaras, the Council quinisextum at
Constantinople in Trullo, c. 36. which both deduces it from the first general
Council in Constantinop. c. 3. which you quarrel, and recites the words that
offend you most in this of Chalcedon, about aequalia priuilegia, and,
Magnificari sicut illam, equal privileges, or equal prerogatives, and to be
advanced like as the other. But I go forward. Indeed nothing is more absurd,
or rather can be, then your descanting upon intercedere, in a double sense,
that you bring, to show you have some smacke of the Latin yet, at least when
your masters and monitors help you. Because the Bishop had said, Leone frustra
intercedente per literas suas apud Augustum, Augustam, and Anatolium; that the
Canon took place for all that Leo could do by his letters to the Emperor, to
the Empress, and to Anatolius: you dream of intercession like that to the
Saints, which you build out of places as well construed as this. And because in
other places, the Bishop happily so uses the word, following your own
terms, for your better capacity, therefore you conclude he uses it so here,
but especially because else, Leo should have been so potent as to resist the
Emperor. As if intercedere per literas, did not a little mollify the matter,
which is to hinder and to dissuade, but by his writing only, and how humble
that? Or to show that Leo did all he could, yet to no purpose; which frustra
gives you to understand, added by the Bishop in the same sentence, non frustra.
But if you will needs make Leo so saucy a Prelate, you may do as you please,
your judgment is free concerning the Popes whom you pretend to honor: we find
his letters to be of another strain, very humble and supplicatorie, toward
the great ones especially, and had rather construe more gently of him. Sciens
gloriosam Clementiam vestram Ecclesiasticae studere concordiae etc. precor and
sedula suggestione vos obsecro. Epist. 54. ad Martianum Augustum. That is:
Knowing your royal grace to be zealous of Church unity, I pray and beseech
you by diligent suggestion, etc. Neither any command shall you find given by
him to the Emperor, nor resistance of authority, though he profess much
zeal to maintain the Canons, thinking he might not break them, as was said
before. Wherein nevertheless, you dissent from him, and say he might. So as,
if you had been his counselor, not only this had bin a Canon, but even a
Canon by Leo's own consent, which you so much oppose, under color of his name
at this day.

19. But are the Jesuits so idle, or so adle rather, as to think that they may
put such tricks, I will not say upon the Bishop, cui nulla ciconia pinsit, but
upon the youngest scholar in our Universities, as because intercedere has a
double sense, either to withstand, or to entreat, they may pin which they list
of the twain upon us? Was not the word rather chose by the Bishop of purpose,
to show what a withstanding Leo used, namely joined with entreatie, as if all
his resistance could not go beyond prayers? which another that had waighed the
double meaning of the word, and with single eye looked into the matter, would
rather have believed to be the Bishops very drift and especial aim. But how
should then the Adioynder have blurred so much paper, to show that Leo did make
no suit? Sure those words before alleged out of his Epistle to Marcian, put
it out of doubt, that he did make suit, whatsoever this iangler mumble to the
contrary. Et precor and sedula suggestione vos obsecro, I both pray and
beseech you, dutifully aduising, or informing. What can be plainer? As for that
he says, non frustra, not in vain, because the Emperor praised Leo for his
constancy, we have refuted it before, and the very event proclaims as much,
that it was frustra, or in vain, the Canon having gotten the credit, which
they in vain malign.

20. Now for that which he cites out of his Epistle to Pulcheria, the 55. in
number, Consensiones Episcoporum repugnantes regulis apud Niceam conditis, in
irritu^ mittimus, if it had been only so, it might have showed Leoes
resolution against the Canon, and his stoutnes to deny it for his part, not but
all this while he was suppliant to the Emperesse. But when he adds moreover,
vnita nobiscum vestrae fidei pietate, and, per authoritatem B. Petri Apostols,
what a vantage does this give, even to Pulcheria her self, to interpose in
determination of Church-businesses, and as it seems, a kind of fellowship in
S. Peter's authority? Yet this is our lay-Iesuites dish above Commons, which
before he called liberal dealing.

21. Concerning Anatolius his receiving to favor, and I know not what
submission, that he would feign bring him to, as it were to ask Leo pardon, I
must tell him as before, that Anatolius his cause, and the Canon are two. If
either weakness, or dissimulation, made him to shrink, yet the Canon prospered
and thriued daily: neither did the Bishop say, frustra, contra ingenium
personae, but contra Canone^ only, in that Leo made head in vain against the
Canon, not against Anatolius his disposition, which is nothing to our matter.

22. Neither are his reasons sound, which he brings, why Leo should be against
the Canon, though as I said, neither this touches at all the Bishop, as being
no refutation of any part of his book, neither is it ought worthy our
consideration, since we hold the Canon might be good without Leo. Indeed they
hold that Leoes consent was requisite to the enacting of it, but that they
prove not. His reasons for Leo are these 4. First because it sprang from
Anatolius proud humor, to advance himself inordinately. But this is a flat
slander of Anatolius, not a justification of Leo: or, though it were true of
Anatolius private part, that he had a touch of the Luciferian spirit, to exalt
his nest, and climb higher, which is not so likely, yet the concurrers with
Anatolius in his desire for Constantinople, were led, as is apparent, with
far diverse respects. In their Epistle to Leo, the Fathers of that Council
mention these: 1. To gratify the Emperors, who rejoiced in it: 2. to show
their zeal to the Senate: 3. their honor to the city of Constantinople it
self: and 4. lastly, not only from the good liking of persons, but a natura
rei, to establish order, and to abandon confusion out of the Church of God. You
see all was not for Anatolius his sake, whom you so much talk of.

23. because it was made you say in the absence of his Legates, and by
surreption. Answer. That it was made in their absence, it was their own
default, who would not stay: but that it was made by surreption, it is your
untruth: for they all gave consent to it again the next day, and protested
strongly against this imputation. You shall hear the Council it self for the
first of these; Act. 16. so we read. Paschasinus and Lucentius vicegerents to
the Sea Apostolic said: If it please your highness we have somewhat to say to
you. The most glorious Judges answered, Say what you will. Paschasinus and
Lucentius said, Yesterday after your Highness were risen, and we followed your
steps, there were certain things decreed as we hear, which we think were
done besides the order and Canons of the Church. We beseech you therefore that
your excellencies would command the same to be read again, that the whole
company may see whether it were rightly or disorderly done. The most glorious
Judge answered, If any thing were decreed after our departures, let it be read
again. And before the reading, Aetius Archdeacon of Constantinople (after a
few other words premised) said thus. We had somewhat to do for the Church of
Constantinople. We prayed the Bishops that came from Rome, that they would
[stay and] communicate with us. They refused, saying, we may not, we are
otherwise charged. We acquainted your Honors with it, and you willed that this
holy Council should consider of it. Your highness then departing, the Bishops
that are here, conferring of a common cause, required this to be done. And here
they are. It was not done in secret, nor by stealth, but orderly and lawfully.
This for the First.

24. Hear also for the second, what we read in the same Action. Lucentius
reverend Bishop, and Vicegerent of the Sea Apostolic, said: First, let your
Highness consider, how guilefully the Bishops were dealt with, and how hastily
the matter was handled, that they should be constrained to subscribe, contrary
to the holy Canons. And Beronicianus, most relligious Secretary of the sacred
Consistory, interpreting the former saying, the Reverend Bishops cried out,
None of us was constrained. And after many things between, again we read: The
most glorious Judges said: These, the most holy Bishops of Asia, and Pontus,
that subscribed to the book, as it was read unto them, let them say whether
they subscribed of their own accord, and with full consent, or compelled by
some necessity laid upon them. And the aforesaid Bishops of Asia, and Pontus,
that had subscribed, coming forth into the midst, Diogenes reverend Bishop
Cyzici, said, Before God I subscribed willingly. Florentius reverend Bishop
Sardeoru^ Lydiae, said, No necessity was laid upon me, but I subscribed of
mine own accord. Romanus reverend Bishop Myrorum, said, I was not constrained:
It seems just to me, and I subscribed willingly. Calogerus reverend Bishop
Claudiopolis Honoriadis, said, I subscribed with my will, not constrained, and
according to the determination of the hundred and fifty holy Fathers [in the
first Council of Constantinople.] Seleucus Bishop of Amasia, said, I did it by
mine own will, desirous to be under this Sea (of Constantinople,) because to
me it seems good wisdom. Eleutherius Bishop of Chalcedon, said, I subscribed
by my will, knowing that both by the Canons, and by custom aforegoing, the Sea
of Constantinople has these privileges. Where, by the way, you may see how
fond the objection is, that Lucentius then made, and some since him, that the
Canon of Constantinople was never put in use, whereas the Bishop of the place
here, where the Council was held, alleadges both Canon and Custom for it.
Nunechius reverend Bishop of Laodicea of Phrygia, I subscribed of mine own
accord. Marinianus, Pergamius, Critonianus, Eusebius, Antiochus, with diverse
more, too long to be reckoned, professed in the same sort, Sponte
subscripsimus, we subscribed willingly, on of our own accord. What can the
Adioyndrer reply to this? And yet afterward more effectually, if it may be,
When the glorious Judges had so pronounced, Oportere sanctissimum
Archiepiscopum regiae Constantinopolis nouae Romae, oisdem primatibus honoris
and ipsum dignum esse, etc. that the most holy Archbishop of the royal city
of Constantinople, which is new Rome, must be allowed the same primacies or
preheminences of honor, that the Archbishop of old Rome is: and when they
desired the holy and universal Council, to declare what they thought, (for so
are their words in the said Action,) Reuerendi Episcopi dixerunt, Haec iusta
sententia, haec omnes dicimus, haec omnibus placent, etc. The Reverend Bishops
said, This is a just sentence, we all say so, these things like us all, we all
say so (once again) the decree is just, -- and much more to that purpose,
which I omit.

25. because the other Canon of Constantinople, upon which this was grounded,
was never put in practice till that time. But how happily have we refuted that
even now, out of the mouth of one of the Bishops that subscribed, Eleutherius
Bishop of Chalcedon? Besides, Baronius confutes him, that acknowledges
Chrysostom (talem patrem, as he says, such a Father,. i. so reverend) to have
practiced this Canon, in deposing no less then 13. Bishops of Asia, as you may
read in Sozom. l. 8. c. 16. Likewise the Clergy of Constantinople, that in
this very Council, Act. 11. relying on this Canon, challenged to themselves
the ordination of the Bishop of Ephesus, metropolitan of Asia minor, and
called it Custom, as well as right. So that belike they had known it
practiced by others. Lastly, why did Anatolius subscribe his name in this
Council, the Council of Chalcedon, before Maximus and Iuuenalis, one Bishop of
Antioch, the other Bishop of Jerusalem, but only because the Canon that was
made at Constantinople, in favor of that Sea, was and might be practiced? And
when you quote Leo, Ep. 53. that the Canon of Constantinople lacked authority,
because it was never sent to the Bishop of Rome, neither does Leo say any such
thing, that I can find in all that Epistle, nor shall you prove that the
Popes consent is necessary to enact Canons, though most childishly you presume
it: and lastly, he rather yields in the said Epistle, as I conceive him,
quandam transmissam huius rei noticiam ad Apostolicam sedem a praedecessoribus
Anatolij, that Anatolius his predecessors sent knowledge hereof to the Roman
Sea, and in the Epist. 55. he graunts that some might have attempted is, (which
without Canon surely they would not in all likelihood) but could not obtain
it, he means perhaps, not so fully as afterward. Else we proved you know
even now, that the Canon was not buried for want of practice, some while
before. Neither can I tell, what those words of Eusebius mean, in the 16. Act
of this Council: And I my self read over this Canon, to the most (...) Pope,
in the City of Rome, in the presence of the Clergy of Constantinople; and he
received it.
Et hanc regula^ Sanctissimo Papae in vrbe Roma ego relegi, praesentibus
Clericis Constantinopolitanis, eamque, suscepit: I say, I know not what they
mean, but that notice hereof was sent to the Pope; which makes Surius in the
margent to note it thus, Either Eusebius (...), or Leo wa^ deceived.
Aut Eusebius mentitur, aut Leonem fefellit: you may do well to help me, if I
be amiss.

26. Leo should disallow this, because it was repugnant to the Canons of Nice,
is a very trifling one, and you answer it your self, in the 28. and 70. Numb.
of this Chapter, granting that he might have ratified it for all that. And I
hope, if the Canons of Nice had been so inviolable, it concerned Maximus, and
Iuuenalis, the two Patriarks, one of Antioch, the other of Jerusalem, to look
to the keeping of them, as well as Leo. Yet they yielded. So much of this.

27. Is there any thing else to be sifted in this chapter? It sticks sore in
his stomach, that the Bishop finds a difference between the back-sides of
letters, and the decrees of general Councels. Because I know not who, some
miserable suitors, had magnified Leo with glorious titles to move compassion.
Mr. F. T. demands, why did not those suitors, that indorsed their supplications
after such a fashion to Leo, rather magnify the Council, and flatter that, if
the Councels authority was greater then Leos? As if he never had heard, how the
man took his ^lspan^. A wood(...) in stead of a dove.
intertainment, when he saw others used as well as himself; greatly scorning
it which before he accepted, and breaking out into these words, (...). And so
Alexander refused to be enrolled free denizon of a certain city that offered
him that honor, till he heard them say they never affoarded it to any but
Hercules. For the respects are Non est admirations vna arbor, cum tota in
eandem altitudinem sylua su^ exit. Seneca.
nothing which are shared among a multitude, to those which are thrown into
the bosom of some one man, and perhaps like Leo here, ambitious enough above
his fellows. Besides that who so honors the President of a Council, in the
place that he holds, his honor redoundeth to the whole assembly, and yet it
delights the ringleader of that dance, after a special manner, being
applied to himself.

28. These titles (says he) were taken by the Notaries, and contradicted by
none. They were taken, as the devotions of poor suitors, who give somewhat to
gain more, and speak fair where they look for relief. -- Liberalis est
pauper (...) (...).
Quoties amico diuiti nihil donat,
could the Poet say, which when it wants in substance, must be supplied with
language. Contradiction needed not, where the style of beggars carried no
validity, and the Council eft-soones controuled those terms, in the Canon
that we speak of, unless well construed and dexterously understood. So the
Patriarko Alexandrine at this day, in his lowest ebbes, writes himself the
Judge of the world, which some say S. Cyrill deserved for himself, and his
successors in that throne, for playing the President so well in the Ephesine
Council: and the rule is not unknown, which teaches us how to interpret such
manner of phrases, Loquendum vt vulgus, sentiendum vt pauci, or, vt sapientes;
the one like Ischyrion, and his distressed mates, the other after the ordinance
of the sacred Council.

29. He thinks the Bishop has not satisfied such places, as were alleged out
of the Epistle of the Synod, wherein Leo's authority is so greatly extolled.
Alas how greatly? Head of the members, that is to say, President of the
Council, and therefore they add, Quibus tu sicut membris caput praeeras, not
praees, which is continual, as by virtue of his (...). finds a Head in every
Congregation; but, Popes are not so frequent.
Popedom, but praeer as for the time only, and as President of the Council.
Again, sicut pater, as a father, for many causes God wot, whereof the Popedom
is none, for his age, for his gravity, for his learning, for his
Praesidentship, for his great eminency in the Church of God, as we our selves
confess, and yet drawing no tail of universal jurisdiction after it. So
Cyrill, so Atticus, call them their sons, whom Epistad Council.
the African Council sent for copies of the Nicene Canons to them; Innocentius
the Priest, and Marcellus the subdeacon, though they were not of their
Diocese, but toto diuisi orb 1. Sam. 25. 8. David eals himself Nabals son,
yet so far from acknowledging any authority that the churl had over him, as
he threatens him the sword soon after, in the same chap.
rather. And, I pray you, does not Marcian call Palladius father, Palladi
Pater? (See Sacra Marciani, post Council. Chalced.) which Palladius was only
Praefectus praetorio, and no way superior to the Emperor Marcian. Not far
off from the same place, the Bishops of Egypt writing to Anatolius, entitle
him thus, Archiepiscopo Constantinopolitanae and Catholicae Ecclesiae Anatolio,
as if besides his Archbishopricke of Constantinople, he had been Bishop of the
Universal Church of Christ, as you wildly feign of the Pope, that he has the
whole Church put into his hands, together with the Bishopric of the city of
Rome; as if the skuller of Rome, forsooth, or the herring-boat rather, cymba
Petri, had the ship of the whole world appendant to it. Proterius in the same
Epistle, Bishop of Alexandria, is thus styled by them: Archiepiscopus, and
Catholicae pastor Ecclesiae, which insinuates as much, too much I know for a
Jesuit to grant, without discreeter interpretation, Gregory Nazianzenes
Epitaph. in Patrem.
father, though a very mean Bishop, and not to be spoke of, but for his son,
was cleped the father of the Popes themselves, (...), father of all the high
Priests of God. Of him in Baronius I told you before, Pontificumque caput, the
head of Bishops, yea of Popes verily. That our Savior committed the charge of
the vineyard to Leo, as is there said, as if therefore his supremacy were de
iure divine, is no more then Palladius, (another Christian Magistrate of that
name) bestows upon Epiphanius in his Epistle to him, before the Anchoratus,
Dignare ad hoc a Saluatore ordinatus, vouchsafe O thou appointed for this end
by our Savior, and what to do, trow you? to prescribe rules of the right
faith in the Trinity, which yet was not Epiphanius his task, de iure diuino,
the Popes rather, as they I am sure would have it, Aquinas by name, in his 2.
2. to give Creedes to the church; And a quaest. 1. art. 10.
little before that, in a stranger tune, as speaking to our blessed Savior,
Praeceptor serua, Master save us. Is not this rather a pylot of the universal
ship?

30. Whereas Dioscorus fault is amplified by the Fathers, to have wronged Leo
after Flauianus and Eusebius, Leo before all, because reckoned after all.
with a post haec omnia, as if therefore Leo were above them all, though we deny
not but in order of place he was above the^, and specially then, when he was
President of the Council, (of which nevertheless we may say with S. Chrysostom
upon the Acts, homil. 3. (...), a matter of presidence rather then of
precedence) yet he might as well argue, that to imprison Peter was a greater
fault in Herod, then to slay James, (and indeed that's the reckening that the
Papists make of these names now a days, I mean Kings and Popes, the one in
James, the other in Peter, yea though they flay the one, and but emprison the
other) because the scripture says (...), he added moreover, or, he proceeded
also, Act. 12. 2. 3.
to attach Peter. Though F. T. perhaps, drunken with Iesuitisme, would argue
from hence for Peter's primacie, as catching at every thing, and surely as
wisely as Turrian his fellow Jesuit, from the 4. quaternions of soldiers that
were set to guard him, in the same Chapter, an universal man no doubt, and
spreading into the four corners of the world. Another time, quia vas pertigit
ad Petrum, the vessel came just as far as Peter, that is, the Church and the
Pope are coextending.

31. But his greatest stick, is at the Bishops answer, about the charge of the
vineyard, committed to Leo, that ad curam omnium ex aquo pertinet, the care of
the vineyard belongs to all alike, not to Leo only. And here he plunges into a
discourse over head and ears, that all are not equally obliged in conscience,
to take care for the Church. As if the Bishop had said, aequaliter pertinet, or
aeque pertinet, that all are bound in like degree, who only says, ad omnes
pertinet ex aequo, that is, that all are bound and none exempt, to take care
for the Church; ex aequo pointing there to the indifferency of the care, the
generality of the parties, not to the degrees of caring.

32. Yet he argues from hence (that you may know the man, and what his humor
his) that if this be true, then cobblers and tinkers shall have as good right of
suffrage in general Councels, as any Bishop of them all. Yea nothing but
confusion and Chaos will ouerflow, the difference of vocations being
extinguished in the Church, etc. As if first the Bishop meant this of the
Laity, such as cobblers and tinkers, and not of Bishops only and other
Clergymen, which afterward himself is feign to acknowledge, number, 86. with
shame enough, having beaten the air so long before to no purpose. Or, if the
Bishop should extend it to the Laity, and all, (for disputation sake, and to
chafe this snarling mastiffe a little,) yet it were not easy to put off all
that he brings, by this distinction, that howsoever the care as exiens in
actum, breaking forth into this or some other duty, is not common to all, as
the nurse only cares so for the child as to suckle it, yet the care in font,
or in radice, the original solicitude and indistinct care, is common to all,
as they say in the Psalms, We have wished you good luck, you that be of the
house of the Lord: even as they may wish well to the child, that are not
particularly put in trust to battle it, and to give it suck, but custod^^o
ordine maternorum membrorum, as S. Austen says in the like ease, or (...),
every man in his own order, 1. Cor. 15.

34. At last, the Bishop is set to school even in plain terms. Whereto I
answer (says he) he must learn to distinguish, etc. Between what think you?
Between the primacy of Peter, and the privileges of the Sea of Rome. So he.
And what of this? Therefore the Fathers might give the privileges indeed, as
the Canon speaks, but still the primacie is of Christ. What primacie, Sir,
what primacie, I pray you, but (...)* to be advanced and magnified in
Church Matters, to be Ladie-regent and gouernresse in that quarter? What
primacie did our Savior else give to your Church, when he gave most, as you
feign in Peter? Unless you speak of the Temporal, which nevertheless you
make a (...) of the other, an undivided consequent, and so both as it were but
one. Nevertheless this (...) is called here privileges, by the Fathers of
this Council, and it is said, the Fathers gave it before to Rome, and now to
Constantinople, by the tenor of (...), unless you will teach the Fathers how
to speak. Which devise of yours, when I think of it, is as good as that
before, numb. 59. that the Fathers gave not all privileges to Rome, but some
only, and therefore the Bishop offended in his si qua, that is, all in
general, or whatsoever. Which you correct thus, The Canon speaks only of
privileges given to the Church of Rome, in respect of the Imperial seat. So
that whereas the Fathers of Calchedon bring this for an argument, why their
fathers and predecessors gave privileges to Rome, namely because Rome was the
Imperial seat, (...), the construction must be thus, by your grand Logic, The
Fathers gave not all privileges to Rome, for the seat Imperial, but the
privileges given thereto, in respect of the Imperial seat, were given thereto
in respect of the Imperial seat, and none others. Is not this sweet art now,
and worthy of a Jesuit?

35. The reasons that you bring, why the Council should not mention the
prerogative of Peter, because it would hinder Anatolius his cause, and the
preferment of Constantinople, which was then intended, do they not show, that
either the Fathers were damnably partial, to obscure the true cause of Romes
advancement, or else that Peter was no cause thereof at all? For say not, it
helped not to the cause in hand. The Fathers were not so blind, as not to see
it; much less so gross, as seeing to smother it, or for desire to win their
cause, to translate it clean another way. And suppose they would have done so,
why did no body contradict them, as you said a little before, about the titles
of Supplications? When there were negatiues in the Council, qui non
subscripserunt, as we read in the 16. Action: why did no body lay forth the
lamenesse of their reason, and draw Peter from under the stuff? Once again,
me thinks, an Angel should have smote him on the side, and bid him stand up
now if ever. For the Fathers had buried his prerogative clean, and entitled
the dignity of Rome to the Empire, as if the Empire authorized the Church, not
the Church the Empire. No reply was made, none found fault with the reason.
Therefore we take you at your word, number. 67. That the mention of Peter's
primacie, does not only not help, but even cross this Canon. If the Canon
then be good, Peter's primacie is none.

36. That Leo excommunicated Dioscorus by the Synod, restraines his power of
excommunicating Patriarchs, rather then establishes it. You know it was a
question, whether the Pope might inflict censures promiscue, without a Synod,
yea or no. Of which more Gelasius in his Epistle before cited, ad Episcopos
Dardaniae. And yet Leo does nothing here, but by the Synod, and re, and stylo,
directly mentioning it, (his Legates I mean for him,) fetching assistance from
it. And Peter is put in the last place, after Leo and the Synod, as Leo (...)
and (...) S. Sy^ cum (...) Apost.
whose authority the Synod as well as he participated. Might not this
therefore have been better left out?

37. You omit not so much, as that Leo is said to be ordained to be the
interpretour of the voice of blessed Peter to all men. I wonder what you would
say, if what Nazianzen ascribes to Athanasius, had been said of your Leo in
that ^anegyr, in Athan.
Council? One time that he was the fan that cleansed the floare, suppose you
the fan in our Lords hand, to separate as it were between the wheat and the
chafe, so between true opinions, or erroneous in the faith, yea you would
say, judging between the nations of the world, and dividing the good from the
bad by sentence. Behold (...) in Alexandria, even before Cyrill. Another time,
that as our Lord rid the ass, so Athanasius managed (...), the people of the
Gentiles, as far spread as they were throughout the world. Another time, that
he was the two tables of Moses, and his verdict (...), the very law of verity:
another time, the tuft of Sampsons head, which, as we know, appropriated the
holy Ghost to him. Yet Leo was the rather praised, because President of the
assembly, and to his face, also enjoying the grace that accompanies Counsels:
Athanasius in his particular, and after death, and not only at one time, but
continuedly. And, I pray you, what says the same Counsel of the Emperors,
Leo by name, but not your Leo? Leo Edit. Venet. p. 389.
Imperator inexpugnabilis palma, and honor fidei, accepit a Deo super omnes
homines sine prohibitione aliqua potestatem. What is this to being the
interpretour of Peter's voice, whereas S. Peter would have every body to be to
God, as they, that you speak of, make Leo to be to Peter, (...), as the oracles
of God, so let-euery man speak, 1. Pet. 4. 11. But there is more in that
authority, for which cause I must english it. Leo our Emperor, the impregnable
garla^d and honor of the faith, has received of him (that is, of God) power
over all men, without any control. We see here for matters of faith, and of
relligion, what the Emperor might challenge, being called the garland of it,
and impregnable, or invincible. 2. He has command over all men, Clerks and
all. 3. from God. 4. without any check or control, which would have made
great titles in the Popes style. Again, Nerui, and arma, and virtus
Ecclesiarum vos est is Ibid. p. 390.
Christianissimi Imperatores, etc. You most Christian Emperors are the
sinews, the weapons, and the puissance of the Churches, etc. This out of the
Council that your self quote. And of the difference of the testimonies, given
to the two Leo's, let the Reader judge.

38. The last thing that I will note in your second chapter, shall be this,
remembering my promise to observe breuity, from which I am but too easily blown
awry, with the storm of your fopperies.

You make it an argument of Leos supremacy, (you call it Monarchy very
roundly a little after, and are not ashamed at it, chap. 4. number. 3.) that,
first Leo was admitted President of the Council held in Greece: then, that Leo
being absent, Anatolius kept not his place, but Legates of his own sending,
whereof one was a Priest. The answer is most easy. Leo being denied one part
of his will, to have the Council in Italy, it was a poor recompense (I mean
for his monarchy, and in regard to that) to be employed to be their President,
as a wise man, a learned man, and a stout man, likewise also in order
surmounting them all, as has been acknowledged, whereas diverse Presidents
had been in Councels, that were inferior to Leo in these points, and
therefore much more removed from the stately Monarchy, that you from hence
gather.

39. But, Why not Anatolius? say you. Was not he fit to be President, whom
the Council thought fit to be so advanced in their Canon, as to have the like
stroke in Ecclesiastical affairs, that the very first of the rank had? Once
again I must tell you belike, that the Canon aduances not Anatolius, but
Constantinople. And it was the parting of stakes between Leo and him, that
though the Council were in Greece, yet Leo should be the President. As for his
Legates, it was no matter, (after once they had concurred upon Leo to be the
man) whom he sent in his place, so long as they were sufficient, since
himself could not be there. And I hope they brought instructions From Leo, as
themselves say often, and might have reference to him, if any doubt should
arise. Also it was the fitter, that Italian Bishops should be Presidents, and
not Grecian, that the Canon might be the authenticaller, which was enacted for
Constantinople, as farther from partiality of the lawmakers. To which purpose
they say, in their Epistle to Leo, (the Fathers of that Council) that the
Emperors affecting the exaltation of Constantinople, Volebant celebrari and ab
universally Concilio, for more authority sake no doubt, and so likewise by
foreign Bishops, as Leo and his Legates. But if you think his Legates had any
such stroke, that Anatolius should envy them for their greatness, you may
remember, how boldly the Council dissented from them, and the Canon was
confirmed, notwithstanding their demurres.

40. Neither despise you Priests, to come into Counsels, Ad number. 78. Specially
one of Leos legates being but a Priest, says the Adioyn.
gentle friend. This shows how vain your discourse was before, number. 52. that
Concilium Episcoporum est, the Council consists of Bishops only. Do you not
know the difference between suffrages, some decisiue, some deliberatiue;
definitine, or consultiue? Has Ego definiens subscripsi, so often repeated in
this Council, no better settled into you? Or will the Jesuits be content, to
refrain from Councels, as many as are not Bishops? Perhaps because they are
loath to be called away from Princes Courts. But that you may know, Priests
have their interest in Councels, at least, Sir, by conniuence of Bishops, (as
Council 1. Nicen. Can. 8. A^^^r. c. 2. itemque Can. 10. (...). Sed praecipue
Can. 13. eiusdem. Sa verbo Praedicare. Nullus Episcopo contradicente praedicare
praesumat. Ex Council. Trid. Et Triumph. Ancon. Licere quidem presbyteris
praedicare; sed de lice^ Episcopi. Quia actus est iurisdictionis. Etsi Pi^s 5.
Mendicantibus liberum voluit, and repugnante Episcopo, nisi praedicare
velletipse. Sa vbi prius.
in diverse other things, as we read in the Canons) Athanasius a Deacon stood
the Sozom. l 1. c. 17.
church in good stead in the Nicen Council: yea an idiot, and a man wholly
illiterate, confuted a Philosopher, one of the Princes of the world, as S. Paul
calls them. In Conc. Ann. 813.
Moguntino, three turmae were set apart, Episcoporum one, Abbatum another; and
the S. Cypr. lib. 4. cp. 2. mentions a kind of Synod, where vna cum Episcopis,
Presbyt. etc. etiam Laici stantes super lapsis tractauere rationem. The
Araus^an Council was subscribed by certain honorable personages of the Laity
Garanza in fine Conc. Araus. And, in Conc. Syrmiensi, Iudices ex palatio,
doctrina praestantes, (learned Courtiers) praesidebant. Soz. l. 4. c. 5.
third of Laymen, that is less then Priests, as you are wont to reckon. I say
nothing of S. Ambrose, made a Bishop before baptized, and Nectarius an
Archbishop, Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 8. So much shall suffice to your second Chapter.

To his third Chapter.
1. Places of the Fathers, S. Cyprian and S. Hierome. 2. The Bishop far from
Ievinianizing. 3. Nothing is deducible out of his doctrine, which favors the
Popedom.

1. THe Fathers follow. First S. Cyprian, de vnitate Ecclesiae. Whereas the
Cardinal had said, that Cyprian makes Peter the head, the root, and the
fountain of the Church, the Bishop most truly and soundly answered, not Peter
of the Church, but the Church her self head of the members belonging to her,
root of the branches shooting out of her, fountain of the waters issuing
forth from her, etc. one in substance, but many in propagation, which is no new
thing in this mystery, or in any such body, as the Philosophers call deiuncta
corpora, rising of many moities into one (...). Plut.
sum. Nay lastly, S. Cyprian, to show whom he speaks of, calls her matrem,
mother, in plain terms, which is not mother Peter, but the Church says the
Bishop. And this so vexes the gall of our Jesuit, as you would not think. For
indeed what more compendious victory could there be, insomuch as F. T. is
feign to say, that Cyprian had no occasion Numb. 7. hulus.
to name Peter there, but the Church only; like the Rhemists annotation upon
16. to the Romans that Peter was out of town, when he should have been saluted
by Paul; so we must believe, just there the occasion failed of naming Peter,
whereas in all the other current he only is meant. (...), as S. Chrysostom
says most excellently, (...), Epist. 190. ad Pentadiam Diaconissam. Such a
thing is truth, in one short word she confutes the cauiller, and stops his
mouth. For the words, lying thus as they do in Cyprian, Vnum tamen caput est,
and origo vna, and vna matter foecunditatis successibus copiosa, yet the head is
but one, the spring but one, the mother but one, plenteous in her blessed and
happy fruitfulness, who can imagine, that Peter is the head here, and the
church the mother, and not rather that the whole sentence belongs but to one,
whether that be Peter, or the Church, or whosoever? For as the sentence runs
on in an even line, so doubtless it comprehends but one and the same subject.
But Peter is not the mother, as F. T. confesses. Therefore neither the head,
nor the spring; nor any thing else. And indeed so it follows in S. Cyprian,
Illius foetu nascimur, illius lacto nutrimur, illius spiritu animamur, she
breeds us, feeds us, and enliues us, which may well be understood of the
Church our mother, but of whom else, whether Peter, or any other, I see not, I
confess, I; S. Austen so, lib. 2. contra Crescon. Grammat. c. 35. and 36. and
again, l. 3. contra eundem, c. 58. and 65. understands these words, quoting S.
Cyprian, not of Peter, but of the Church. And I mean the words de font and
riuo, de sole and radio, that I may fetch it as high as F. T. himself, even
from the place where, if any where, S. Cyprian speaks of Peter, by his own
acknowledgement. And Pamelius, their own author, commenting upon S. Cyprian,
though he greedily draw all advantages that may be, from other places of this
Father, to establish the Popedom, yet passes this over in deep silence, as
nothing favoring their desired Headship, nay crossing it rather. For he had
read immediately before, in the same place, Hoc erant vtique and eaeteri
Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis.
i. The rest of the Apostles were utterly the same that Peter was, endewed with
equal fellowship both of honor and power. Where by the way we may note S.
Ambrose and S. Cyprian their agreement about this point, not only for matter,
but for words. For so Ambrose before quoted, Hoc erant quod Paulus: and here
Cyprian, Hoc erant quod Petrus. As if there were no diffe^ neither between
Peter and Paul, nor between the other Apostles and them both. For quae alicui
tertio vna sunt, inter se quoque vna, or aequalia, says the light of nature.
Will you know then, why he makes mention of Peter in singular? Sed exordium ab
vnitate proficiscitur, vt ecclesia Christi vna monstretur. But the beginning
proceeds from unity, or from one man, to show that the Church of Christ is but
one. How does the beginning proceed from one, but as S. Austen shows in the
place before quoted, Only Peter was spoken De verb. Dom. 13.
to, that others being not excluded, yet this precious unity might be
commended in one? As we read under Solomon, that the people were all like one
man, and Act. 2. in the first times of the new Testament, the people were all
of one heart and one mind. Where by the way you see, how Solomon prefigured
Christ, and those times these latter with strange accordance. And if this
become the people, how much more the pastors, or the master builders, that they
should all set to their work like one man? To which nothing can be more
contrary then the Popish usurpation, ouer-bearing other pastors, which
nevertheless they would ground upon these places for unity. S. Cyprian also
declares his own meaning in the same place, to be as I have said, in these
words. Quamnis omnibus Apostolis parem tribuit potestatem, though our Savior
gave equal power to all his Apostles, tamen vt manifestaret vnitatem,
disposuit originem eius ab vno incipientem, yet to show the unity (so he
construes monstretur, not as if that Church could be pointed to with the
finger; from whence other Churches receive their unity, as F. T. may imagine)
but, vt manifestaret vnitatem, to make known the unity of the Catholic body,
and that the Church is but one congregation of the faithful, though branched
and billetted out into sundry parcells, he took order that her originals
should begin at one, which is short of authority, and much more of
supremacy, but most of all of the monarchy, that the Jesuits would crown
Peter with, by virtue of this place. And when the same Cyprian, a very few
lines before the words last alleged, makes this to be the cause of abuses in
the Church, quod ad veritatis originem non reditur, nec caput quaeritur, nec
magistricoele stis doctrina seruatur, what is plainer, then that by caput
(which they so catch at) he means nothing else but the original verity, which
our Savior Christ first delivered, even that same Sic ab initio, as both origo
veritatis, and doctrina coelestis magistri declares, which encompasse the word
Caput like two torches of both sides of it, to give light unto it, that we
mistake it not. Then follows his commendation of Church-vnity, the only
remedy in Cyprians judgment against the aforesaid maladies, which having
taught to be figured by our Savior in S. Peter, whom in equal privileges of
power with the rest, he called from the rest, to pattern that virtue, he
amplifies from other places the authority of the Church, as vna est columba
mea, Cant. 6. vnum corpus, and vnus spiritus, vna fides, Ephesians. 4. with, Qui
ecclesiae resistit, quomodo se in ecclesia esse confidit? and after a notable
enforcement to the preserving of unity from vnus Episcopatus est, there is but
one Bishopric throughout the whole Church, which every Bishop has his solid
share in, and, Qui in ecclesia praesident, which are chief in the Church,
showing that many Bishops govern the Church, and not one Bishop alone, as the
Papists would have it, he returns to ecclesia, Ecclesia vna est, quae in
multitudine latius incremento faecunditatis extenditur, etc. and yet again
more closely, after certain protases of similitudes, which F. T. says the
Bishop durst not lay down for fraud, but himself laying down gets nothing
but hatred for his abominable tediousness, Ecclesia Domini luce perfusa (says
he) per orbem totum radios suos porrigit, vnum tamen lumen est, ramos suos
extendit, riuos expandit, vnum tamen caput est, and origo vna, and vna matter,
etc. That is: The Church replenished with the light of our Lord, stretches her
beams through all the world, yet the light is but one, (F. T. would have Peter
to be this light, as if the Church were but rays, and he the body of the sun,
which S. Cyprian never meant, but for more perspicuity sake calls it Domini
lucem, our Lords light, unless Peter be that Lord too) reaches out her
branches, spreads her rivers; yet the head is but one, the spring but one, and
the mother (her self) but one, abounding in fruitfulness, etc. So as one may
wonder that F. T. after so manifest conviction, would persist to force this
clause upon Peter, which so properly and so immediately belongs to the Church,
but that it fretted both him and the Cardinal too, not a little, to be taken
tripping so fowly, as to make Peter a mother, or the Pope a woman once again:
and he has no shift but to say, that S. Cyprian in one and the same tenure of
undivided connection, means the first part of Peter, and the latter part of the
Church, like Virgils monster: -- in Pristin' desinit aluus.

2. Here is also to be noted, that F. T. citing that sentence of S. Cyprian,
tamen vt vnitatem manifestaret, etc. foists in those words, which are not to be
found in the printed copies, vt vna cathedra monstretur, at least not in Morel.
edit. of Cyprian praised before all other by Alan. (...). Ad^. ad Lector ante
Dialogos.
Morelius, yet a Popish edition, which I now used, anni 1564 at Paris, not of
Frobenius at Basil, anni 1530. not of Gryphius, not diverse more. And yet this
is the man, that challenges the Bishop for corrupting of Fathers. And farther
he prints those words, one Chair, in an eminent letter, to give credit to his
cosenage, one Church in an ordinary, because though that be Cyprians, yet
nothing to his purpose, number. 5. of this third chap. How beit, if vna cathedra
were read in Cyprian, it is not the Popes chair, but answerable to that of
which he said a little before, Episcopatus vnus est, etc. there is but one
Bishopric in the Church, and yet such a one, as every Bishop has his full
share therein. For as the Bishopric, so the Chair. With like honesty he
peruerts the words of Cyprian, exordium ab vnitate proficiscitur, by either
adding to them, or translating them in this frantic fashion, number. 4. The
primacie is given to Peter, whereof not a word that we find here in Cyprian.
And he tells us, we heard before that Cyprian says our Savior built his
Church upon Peter; which for my part, I neither heard nor read yet in S.
Cyprian de vnitate Ecclesiae, of which work now the question only is. What he
says ad Quintum, comes not to be examined till his 12. numb. But thus he must
patch one thing with another, that cries out against falsehood in all men else,
as the only Dove. And the toil is more to reckon up his lewd corruptions,
then the task to clear the Bishop from those things, which he imputes to him
in that very kind. Lastly, for a taste of his learning, as well as his
sincerity, he construes robur vnum, in S. Cyprians comparison, one strength.
Multi rami, sed robur vnum: Many boughs, but one strength. Neither giving us
the sense of S. Cyprians similitude, but utterly smothering it, like a
faithful alleadger, and forgetting Virgil, Aeneid. 2. -- Roboribus textis --.
yea, his very Accidents, Pectora percussit, pectus quoque robora fiunt.

3. Now in the epistle ad Quintum, what find we? Petrus quem primum Dominus
elegit, and, super quem aedificauit ecclesiam suam. As if one of these did not
expound the other. For our Savior is said to have built his Church upon Peter,
in that he chose him first, not chose him to be first, primum Constar ex Mat.
4. 18. Nec obstat, Johan. 1. 41. vt periti explicant Vide Maldonat.
elegit, not elegit in primatem, as preventing him with the promise, and
honoring him with the exhibition of the keys before the rest. For they were
delivered to him in the general name, as signifying unity, as both S. Austen,
and S. Cyprian have taught before, so as the rest notwithstanding had as full
right in them as ever Peter had; which S. Cyprian declares, when he says,
Pariconsortio praediti potestatis, endued with like fellowship of power; and,
Hoc erant caeteri quod Petrus, the rest were the same that Peter was. S. Austen
also in those words of his cited before, but of necessity to be brought to
your remembrance, I see, ever and anon, There are some things, which though
they were spoken to In Psalm. 108.
Peter, yet can make no good construction, unless they be referred to the
Church in general, and he instances in that, Tibi dabo claues. As for the
building of the Church upon Peter, howsoever some writer may say so in his
sense, yet you need not be ignorant, how the most sort construe it, to be a
building upon his faith, not upon his person: Super petram quam confessus es,.
i. super meipsum. August de verb. Dom. secund. Matthew. sermon. 13. Hilar. de Trin.
l. 2. item l. 6. to the same purpose, (for I couple his faith with the object
for this time, that is to say, Christ,) Chrysostom. hom. 55. in Matthew. Ambrosin
Ephesians. c. 2. and ^t iteru^ Chrysostom. (...) 7 page (...). and iterum Beda ^erm in
Cathed. Petri.
de Sacram. Incarn. Domin. c. 3. Beda in cap. 21. Johan. I sidor. in Exodus c.
42. Dt qua soliditate (fidei) Dominus dicit, Super hanc petram aedificabo
ecclesiam meam:. i. of which soundness (of faith) our Lord says, Upon this
rock I will build my Church. Euagrius may seem to imply as much, lib. 4. c.
40. speaking of Anastasius Bishop of Antioch, where Peter first sat. To which
Bishop the assaults were so fiercely given, as if his overthrow would have been
the Captivity of the right faith (they are the Historians words) and in him
were all. But he manfully withstood, (...). For he remained upon the
impregnable rock of faith, Iuvenalis Bishop of Jerusalem, with five more
Bishops, in Rescripto Synodico, in Council Calched, ad presbyteros and monachos
Palestina Prouincia, having quoted the words of the Gospel aforesaid, inferres
thus,. i. Upon this confession the Church of God is established.
Super hanc confessionem roborata est ecclesia Dei. Where by the way you may
see, what the opinion was of the Fathers of that Council, concerning those
words, Super hanc petram, to settle the cheifedome in Rome, as before you would
bear us down, though they derive the privileges of it merely from the
Empire, and the grant of their ancestors. Also the Bishops surmise remains
good, that the Cardinal left out those other words in Cyprian, as prejudicial
to his cause, that Peter did not challenge to himself any thing insolently or
arrogantly, as to say he had the primacie. You say, he might have said so, in
his full right, but S. Cyprian calls it, an insolent, and an arrogant
challenge, by which you see, that primacie whatsoever it was, was not of
authority, but of mere senioritie, like primum elegit, a little before (even
Andrews first resorting to our Saviors school hinders not this, since there
was duplex vocatio, as Maldonate will show you, before quoted) which the words
following show too, Et obtemperari a nouellis ac posteris sibi potius oportere,
comparing Paul the later called, with Peter aunciently designed to the
Apostleship. In one respect an (...), or an abortiue, as himself confesses,
and yet in other respects nothing short of the chief. S. Austen also, though
he alter S. Cyprians words, lib. 2. de bap. c. 1. as is soon done in
allegations of memory, yet he keeps the sense, and favors you nothing; the
primatus Apostolorum excellenti gratia praeeminens, standing in dignity or
quality, (let the word gratia help to persuade you) not in authority. Yet
we have principes Apostolorum, Paul and Peter, nothing so common in your own
men's mouths: yea Cardinal Pole says, both their Apostleships grew into one:
Amborum Apostolatus in vnum coaluit: lib. 3. ad Henry. 8. etc. So as either no
monarchy now, or of more then one, a thing merely impossible.

4. That you quote out of S. Austen concerning Peter, l. 2. de Bapt. c. 1.
Peter did otherwise then the truth required, yea and in so great a point as
was Circumcision, also afterward more plainly in the same number. 14. that he
erred: would you ever write thus, if you were well in your wits, striving for
Peter's primacie, to impute error to him, and error in faith, which you know
cannot be, without the grand peril of the universal Church? As S. Gregory
says, that all fall, if vnus vniuersalis Lib. 6. cp. 24.
fall, one in whom are all, as you in your Pope, even as the moile stumbling,
all goes to wrack that the beast caries, and the greater the beast, the fouler
the wrack, whether it be gold or silver, or what other freight foeuer. And I
pray you, what does your primacie serve for, unless it be joined with
infallibity? Yet you forfeit the one here, to win the other.

5. I might likewise ask you what manner of primacy you call that, which
excuses not the superior from the just and lawful rebuke of his inferior,
but so as if S. Peter should have refused to follow, and to obey S. Paul, (they
are your own words, number. 16.) he should have done insolently. Call you that a
primacy, specially a Popish one, which must be patient of control, liable to
the obedience, even of his underling, if it will avoid pride?

6. And therefore thought the Bishop in his usual modesty, say, as you note
(numb. 16.) videtur men's Cypriano fuisse, it seems Cyprian was of the mind,
it is not for diffidence Sir, but as I told you. Videtur and est is all one
with the Philosopher, says Zimaras in his Table, quoting the Commentor for it,
And so the Lawyers. If there be fraud in videtur, it is rather in Bellarmines,
De Pontif. Romans l. 1. c. 9. Indicare videtur Apostolus ad Heb. 8. What? that
the Church triumphant is a pattern of the militant; where there may be
videtur, but no est certainly, because there is no such thing in the Apostles
text. You might rather have thought of that, Luke, 22. 24. Quis videretur esse
mayor, where if videretur be not better construed, your primacy is but a (...),
a very fancy.

7. I am ashamed of thus digressing: but your dealing forces me, I cannot
forbear; yet with this I will end concerning Cyprian. To your 17. numb.
whereas the Bishop says, Fundamentum, sed non vnicum, what more confonant to
Scripture? not Apoc. 24. as you quote it, but 21. v. 14. where there are 12.
specified. But again, whereas he says, There is caput vnicum, and therefore
non sequitur a fundamento ad caput; what more agreeable to sense? For, as for
that you add (...), and with a mouth speaking big, which Anna forbids, 1.
Sam. 2. 3. that as the 12. to Christ, so the eleven to Peter, were
enterchangeably subordinate, you should show this written humano stylo, either
in Scripture, or in Father, that we might run and read it. But though you
sweat your heart out, it grows not there. Yet you seem to your self wise,
when you show the Bishop as well many heads upon one body, as many foundations
of one building. Videlicet, say you, the states of Venice, so many states, so
many heads of that commonwealth. Which first is harsh in Aristocraty, to make
every governor a several head (more then the Amphisbaena has) the whole
company rather, and many men if you will, but one head. Yet this fonder, that
the Bishop arguing from a material house, not a metaphorical, and from a
natural body not a proportional, to demonstrate what is meet to be expected
in the mystical, you show him a political, which is nothing to his demand.

8. NExt of S. Hierome. And why might not the Bishop tax the Cardinal, for
suppressing S. Hieromes words, as well as before S. Cyprians? As well (say you)
the one as the other, that is just neither, or neither justly. But of Cyprian
we have seen, see we now of Hierome. Inter duodecim vnus eligitur, vt capite
constituto, schismatis tolleretur occasio. Amongst twelve, one is chosen, that
a Head being appointed, occasion of schism might be taken away. lib. 1. in
Iovin. But in the same book (says the Bishop) Hierome thus, which the
Cardinal would take no notice of. But thou will say, that the Church is built
upon Peter. (What then?) though the same in another place be done upon all,
[that is, the Church is said to be built upon all the Apostles,] and all to
receive the Keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the strength of the Church to
be equally grounded upon them all. Yet indeed one is chosen among the twelve,
that a Head being appointed, occasion of schism might be cut off. Is this no
cooling card to the other authority? For you that tell us of dice, I may do
well to speak to you in a suitable metaphore, and not abhorring from your
trade. As the Philosophers say, the brain in a man's body, tempers the heat of
the heart beneath; so do not the words precedent allay the force of these
latter, which yet the Cardinal only set before us? For the threefold
equality, which S. Hierome before ascribed to all the Apostles, one of their
equal interest in the foundation, another in the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, and the third, which is reiterated for deeper impression, of bearing
the whole strength, or stresse of the Church, leaves only now this sense of
caput, that Peter was chosen to have such a kind of Headship, that is, of
prioritie among the twelve, as should not derogate from paritie, and yet
exclude schism or garboyle, or confusion. Which is the primacie of order that
we have often told you of, and you would feign divert to a primacie of
Majesty. I could not answer your fallacy in a directer fashion, yet I know
you have replies, as that caput in the last place, adds great force, to, super
quem fundata est, in the first. Which we remit to the judgment of the
indifferent Reader, whether so many equalities yielded to the Apostles, in the
words before, do not rather force us, to construe caput as has been said, not
derogating from the equality of their power in the keys, nor from bearing the
groundworke of the Church jointly: that is, as you construe it, from being
governors thereof. Besides that Caput is only a borrowed word, and signifies
primum, or the first in that kind, (which we grant to Peter with all readiness)
and lastly tempered with such a modest clause, to keep out schism or disorder
only.

9. You say, there is more danger of schism now, then among the twelve. For
they were confirmed by special grace, we not so. And therefore they were not
so likely to run into schism, for which they should have a head. As though
Paul and Barnabas were not running into a Act. 15. 39.
schism, a paroxysme at least, that is the first grudging of the other ague;
as though when Peter confirmed his brethren, and tu confirma, Luke 22. 32. they
had the less use of him, as their head, against a schism. And though the will
of God be to confirm some here, yet not without means, neither at first to
rectify them, nor afterward to continue them in their good course, to the
end. Of which means this might be one, of which S. Hierome speaks. Was any
man more confirmed then S. Paul? rapt into the third heaven, etc. yet he
struggles with his nature, least preaching to others, he should be a reprobate
himself. So here. Besides that this schism, which our Savior prevented, by
appointing an Head, as S. Hierome says, might be schisma populorum, not
Apostolorum, and therefore he says, vt occasio schismat is tolleretur; that
the Christian people seeing who was eminent in the College of the Apostles,
might not every one rashly set up their principal, and so fall into schism.

10. But at least we need a Head now a days, as much as they. As if we have
not our Head in our manifold regiments, Dedit quosdam pastores, Ephesians. 4. and,
Obedite praepositis. Hebr. 13. and, Terribilis sicut castrorum acies ordinata,
and so forth. Is there no Head but of an universal Bishop? yea, theirs was of
order only, and to shun confusion, ours of power, and commands subjection.
Besides What a sweet suppressor of schisms the Pope is, may appear by that
of Innocent. 7. who slew eleven persons, endeavoring to succor the state of
their country, running to decay, and cast their bodies out at a window, saying,
That was the way to suppress schisms, and no other. Plat. Innocent 7.
Catilines quenching of fire, non aqua, sed rui^^.
Kings and Princes, which God has given to our times, as to feed his Church,
and to give them milk (which very milk is Discipline,) so to bring home
wanderers from the high ways and the hedges, to the feast of the great King;
that's to suppress schisms, as S. Austen often, but namely contra Gaudent. l.
1. c. 25.

11. For where you tell us that Princes may cause these schisms themselves,
and so contemning spiritual censure and proceedings, must either be hampered
with another coerciue power, extending to bodies, and to estates, or else all
run to nothing, and the Church be clean extinguished, you bewray your spirit
sufficiently, and a man may read your drifts in your forehead, which at another
time you would so feign cover and smooth over; Sermo tuus indicat te, may be
our speech to the Pseudo-Peter, as was once to the true. Do you think then,
that S. Hierome would give this leave to Priests, or the Prince of Priests, as
you would have him, to bind Kings in material chains, and to load their
Senators with such iron fetters, as no metaphore has mollified, and to use
such other violence as commonly goes herewith? Though of you I less wonder, if
you give them iron in their chains, to whom you have given it in their
crowns, as Clement to Charles, if Platina say true, in Clem. 7. But to S.
Hierome. How then does he construe these words of David, Against thee only
have I sinned, to have been spoken Ad Eustochium.
in that sense, because David was a King, and not to be proceeded against by
any temporal punishment, or coactiue hand, of a mortal man? How does he say
in his Epistle to Heliodore, de obitu Nepotiani, that a King rules men against
their wills, a Bishop no farther then they will themselves? They subdue by
fear, these are given us for service; and many the like. How does Basil upon
the 37. Psalm, (...), (and he knew his power as he bore his name,) A King is
subject to no judge? How does Chrysostom profess so often, that he can go no
further then words, (...)? Shepherd though he be, yet he may not fling a stone
at a wolf, but rate him only, (...), etc. Again in his 2. de Sacerd. c. 2.
and 3. at large; again in the Homil. which is not extant in Greek, but in
Latin only, Cum ageretur de expulsione S. Iohannis; Statis omnes non ferro sed
fide deuincti. Tom. 5. And in Act. Apost. hom. 3. in Morali, the people to the
Minister are not (...), but (...), [not subject to him, or in his hands, but
having their obedience free in their own power.] Again in the same place,
within a few lines, (...). [Magistrates rule by fear, so do not these, viz.
the Ministers.] And yet more frankly, (...) Hortantur affectione non potestate.
Cypr. de habitu virgin.
(...). [There things are carried by order, and by appointment: here, no such
thing, neither may we command any thing as by authority.] Again, Comment.
in ad Hebr. (...). The Minister is a teacher (quoth he) (...). And (...), etc.
The same at large, Homil. 11. in 4. ad Ephesians. in Ethico. (...) Idem habet
Comment. in Epist. ad Tit. c. 1. (...). Et, (...). Et, (...), etc. p. 285. and
387. Edit. Eton. per D. H. Savile.
(...). A Minister and a Counselor leave every man to himself, they enforce
nothing. What more can be said for us? See Orat. 5. in Oziam, toward the latter
end. He says the course that God takes with Kings, if they offend, is not to
deliver them over to any man to chastize, but, Adduc ad me, as the father bid
the^ carry the child to his mother, and our Savior the Apostles to bring the
party to him whom they could not cure. Let me alone with him, I shall deal
with him. Orat. 1. in Babylam, he commends him more for moderating his hand,
after he had once put the tyrant back, and that he fell not to flat striking
(which is not lawful for a Priest) then for debarring him entrance into the
Church at first. For, the one, every body would have done, that is, execute
his anger, being enraged, but only Babylas, or one like him, keep a mean in
performing his office after provocation. And because we spoke of chains a
little before, it may be for this cause, Babylas desired to be buried with his
chains, as S. Chrysostom relates, in one of his Orations upon him, and
again, Hom. 9. in 4. ad Ephesians. to show what he endured, not what he
administered; and so likewise of the sword that was buried with him, after it
had struck off his head. S. Hilarie gives the reason, Can. 1. in Matthew.
why Rachel (that is, the Church) would not be comforted for her children,
whom Herod had butchered, (that is, the persecutor martyred) Consolatio enim
rei amissae praestanda est, non auctae: [For we comfort loosers, not gainers.]
Now the Church gains by patience in persecution. Therefore she looses by
resistance, and opposition. Of which thing S. Cyprian also, in application to
the Church, and how she may not resist, nor wreake her wrongs, lib. de bono
patient. at large. Et quoniam plurimos scio, vel pondere iniuriarum, vel
dolor, vindicare velociter cupere etc. nec illud reticondum est quod dicit
Dominus, Soph. 3. Expecta me, quoniam iudicium meum est, vt excipiam Reges;
Only God is to deal with Kings. And soon after, Hunc expectemus iudicem and
vindicem nostrum, omnium iustorum numerum ab initio mundi secum pariter Let all
write for God our judge and our revenger, and not only ours, but all the
Saints (...) the beginning. etc And, The revenger him (e^^e has not yet
revenged himself. (...) (...) (...) (...).
vindicaturum. And lastly, Qui ad vindictam suam nimium festinat, and properat,
consideret, quia needum vindicatus est ipse qui vindicat. And in his book
contra Dometrianum, he alludes to Virgils verse, ^^f^l^^ lolium and steriles
DOMINANTVR ave^^: Implying, that wicked and profane men may obtain domination
over the Church in this world (though the Jesuit cannot abide to hear it,)
and yet still remain but infoelix lolium, in all their iollitie and worldly
ruff. Theodoret. quaest. 6. in Numer. (...). By purple the Kingly office is
declared, and with that goes punishing, or coertion. Of what then is the
Hyacinth a resemblance, which was another covering of the holy vessels? belike
of heaven. (...), says Theodoret. And in heaven there is no punishment. The
Minister, as a heavenly Magistrate, not an earthly Sovereign, he afflicts
none. Gregory Nazianzene in his 2. Steliteut. against Julian, (...). Do you
see what a course he prescribes for reformation? Not by violence, as you
dispute, to repress tyrants; by music, not by blows; by persuasion not
co^pulsion, etc. And a little after, (...); To which he opposes only, (...),
by word and by prayer. You may remember Ambrose, Pugnare non debeo, I may Amb^.
Ep 32. 33. ^o^at contra Au^ent. etc.
not fight: and Arma nostra lachrymae, our weapons are tears; and, Multi Iobi,
many Jobs for one, that is, many patient Christians. And, lib. 3. de officijs
cap. 9. Nulli noceat sacerdos, ne lacessitus quidem, and iniuria offensus: A
Priest must hurt no man, (viz. forcibly and violently) though provoked and
wronged. Whereas you think you may do any thing for bonum spirituale, and in
ordine ad ecclesiam, to preserve that. Primasius in 2. ad Romans Lex Christi iam
non minatur gladium peccantibus, sed promittit praemium libere seruientibus:
that is, The law of Christ now threatens no sword to offenders, but promises
reward to them which truly serve him. Which you must construe in such a sense,
as not to bring in Anabaptisme, nor destroy all Magistracy, but to curb your
Cypr to the very same effect, Epist 11. l 1. ad Pompon. Tune gladio o^e^^^tur,
quando circumcisio carnalis and. nunc quia circumcisio spiritualis, sp^^.
gladio necantur. So as the Adioyner is the Jew, that stands for bloody sorce,
not the Bishop, as he tails and raues.
Priests, in comparison of the Priests of the old law, from attempting
violence, because Primasius speaks upon those words, Litera occidit (that is,
They) but spiritus vinificat, (which you would fain be accounted, calling your
selves to that end the spiritual men.) See the same Primasius again, against
Ministers coactions, in 2. Cor. 1. Non quia ideo credidistis vt vobis
dominemur, sicut in lege sacerdotes, etc. And, Non quod metu cogamini, not that
you are constrained, not so much as with fear, much less by force. Yet with
you it is apparent, that folks believe in Christ, that you may censure the^ the
more freely, even Kings and all, over whom being infidels, you had no such
confessed power. Qui laesi non essent Cic. pro Quint.
nisi CREDIDISSENT, as he says. And therefore see how you will answer
Primasius. Tertullian in Apologet. gives no leave to redress inconveniences
with force, no not with the death of a man, much less with the peril of a
Sovereign Prince or State. Christianus etiam damnatus gratias agit. And,
Christianus nec inimicum suum laedit. And, Paratus est ad omne supplicium ipse
habitus oris Christiani. Hoc agite boni Praesides, extorquete animam Deo
supplicem pro Imperatore. And again in the same book, Hippias, dum ciuitati
insidias disponit, occiditur. Hoc pro suis omni atrocitate dissipatis nemo
vnquam Christianus tentauit. Yet nimius and copiosus noster populus, says S.
Cyprian, speaking to the same purpose; contra And so also Tertul. de multitud.
Christian. satis cre^io.
Demetrianum, whom you may do well to read. And to make short, see Eusebius
Emesenus, sermon. in dominic. 4. Aduentus, upon Ioh. 1. Ego vox clamantis,
(that is a ministers calling) not manus percutientis. If he write upon the wall
a sentence against Baltazar by Gods direction, that is all. Add Council. Tolet.
4. c. 31. where, whom the Minister cannot amend, he delivers over to the King
and his justice, to be accordingly censured, but who shall censure the King
himself? Neither may I omit Origin, both in 13. ad Romans and Tract. 12. in
Euang. Matthew. upon those words of our Savior, Matthew. 20. Reges gentium, etc.
Sicut omnia carnalia in necessitate sunt posita, non in voluntate; spiritualia
autem in voluntate, non in necessitate, sic and Principes spirituales.
Principatus coru^ in dilectione subditorum debet esse positus, non in timore
corporali. Which last authority is cited by Bellarmine, lib. 4. c. 21. de
Pontif. Romans you may wonder how he can digest it. In English thus. [For as all
carnal matters are subject to force, not to free liking, and all spiritual
matters to free liking, not to force; so are also spiritual superiors. Their
cheifdom or princehood ought to stand in the love of such as are under the^,
not in their bodily fear, etc.] Which bodily fear, the Pope is wholly for
driving his subjects into, and without that he is nothing. But thus far the
Fathers, because I spare the rest.

12. The Scriptures also banish us from like forcible dealing, in more the^ one
place, if we had leisure to produce them. The minister must be no striker. The
servant of the Lord must be patient and long suffering, expecting men till God
give the^ a mind to return home. We wrestle not with flesh and blood, that is,
with material enemies. No marvel then if the weapons of our warfare be not
carnal, nor material, but spiritual. Armastulti pastoris sunt gladius and
baculus. Our commission is in our tongue. (...), that is, (...), that I may
explain that by the way. We bear no rule over So, captiua captiuitas, for
captiui. Ephesians. 4. So electio for electi, Romans 11. 7. Vide S. August. de
Praedest. Sanct cap. 6. and (...).
your faith, that is over you the faithful people of God (like vestra
Sanctitas) limiting his power, and preserving his reverence to the Christian
people, both in one. Lastly, we beseech you in Christ's stead, be reconciled
unto God. Yet with you if there be no coaction, all is marred.

13. You say [that Bishops in their Courts mulct the purse, and sometime
imprison the bodies etc.] Though I think you are scarce perfect in this part
of your lesson (for I have heard otherwise of a very sufficient Doctor) yet
suppose it were so; This leave comes of the King, strengthening the arm of
spiritual censure by that means, least the profane and wanton of the world
should contemn Nemo presumitur tulisse contra seipsum: and, Preuilegia non
sunt interpretanda in praeiuduium concedentis.
it. Originally there is no such power in a Bishop. Will you then retort upon
the King with his own license, or unnaturally gall him with his own quils? Is
not this the way rather to spoil all, and to disarme the Church of the royal
protection?

14. You say [that he which has command of the soul, has also of the body.
And therefore the spiritual power which is acknowledged to be in the Minister,
draws the temporal with it as a consequent.] Truly I grant, that he which
can command the soul out of an absolute power, it is likely the body is also
subject to him. But neither the ministers power commands the soul, by any
forcible impression, (for as we cannot make one hair white or black, so no
more can we make one soul merry or sad, further then as God shall cooperate
with our endeauours) and the persuasions that we use, they are directed no
less to the saving of the body, then to the gaining of the soul. Both the
Magistrate and the Minister, deal both with the soul and the body. But the
Magistrate violently applies himself to the body, to reclaim the soul, if
need be; and the Minister perswasiuely carries himself to the soul, to the
end the body may be made pliant to righteousness, Romans 6. The proceeding,
not the subject, then, is that which makes the difference between the two
powers; and howsoever your Casuists say, a lame-handed man cannot Sa. Aphorism.
regularly be made a Minister, yet that is for Pashurs turning Magor-mishabibs,
Ier. 20. the kingdom that we send (...). 2. Cor. 5. 1.
to, as it is not built with hands, so it requires no violence to convey
thither.

15. If in the nonage of the Church, the Apostles were endued with power of
punishing men corporally, to the Orig hom. 14 in Levit. 24. Hur. in 1. Cor. c.
5. Chrysostom in 1. Cor. hum. 15.
end the Gospel should not be trampled underfoot, by unrevenged scorns, yet
now the Magistrate supplies that place, being himself turned Christian, and
suppose that should fail, and all things revolue to barbarous Heathenisme, as
in former time, (which God forbid) yet we are to think, that the like
extraordinary providence would still attend the Church; but howsoever it were,
no private man might be too forward, and much less a Minister, which seemed
then so inconvenient, that the opposers were delivered 1. Corinthians. 5. 5. (...).
1. ^im. 1. 20. (...).
to the devil to be tormented, in defect of Magistrates, rather then the
Jesuitical mutinies, which F. T. here pleads for, should take place.

16. THe substance of your Discourse being thus disprooued, it were no hard
matter to gather up the spoils, and note certain scapes of smaller
importance. In translating the Bishops words, numb. 22. Quod toties iam nobis
serio inculcat Cardinalis, you handle it thus: Which the Cardinal does now so
often and earnestly inculcate unto us. What think you of inculcate first? you
that muster the terms of the Bishop of Lincolnes book (for so hares may
pluck dead lions by the beard) though nothing so uncouth as your Rhemish
Testament has, Praepuce, Sindon, to Euangelize, the orient, etc. But to omit
that, Does the Bishop mean, that Bellarmine pleades earnestly in the case, or
rather marvel, that he is in earnest at all, the argument being trifling,
and not worth the naming? yet thus you say, [so often and earnestly,] as if SO
might augment his earnestnes too. Did you understand the book that you took
in hand to confute? And as this is your eloquence, so view your conscience.
numb. 27. you say, the Bishops have their proper talent of calumniating
Bellarmine. Again calumniate as good a word as inculcate before. And if common
to both, how proper to either? yet you say both have their proper talent. Be
like not quarto modo. But, Sir, who taught you to call vices talents? Is this
your reverence that you bear to Scripture? or do you so confound God with the
devil? What remains but you call grace chafe, and virtue cockle, and the
rest as your ungodly Rhetorique shall inspire you? But well do you fulfill the
measures of your fathers, (...), and the thunder bolts walk not, as Nazianzen
says of them that abused S. Basil. So Campian in the tower ieasting at his
adversaries, for the weakness of their argument, said he could make as good
sport about the Incarnation. Another (I think Rastall) (or but a letters
difference at least) paints his margent thus, Luthers lying with a Nun in the
Lord. What vengeance remains for such graceless companions? And are these
Divines, and handlers of Gods cause, foming out such shame, which were
intolerable in him that followed the plowtaile? Yet you have up with the
Bishop (and Eudaemon before you,) for his pleasant vein forsooth in writing.
You may remember your jolly preface to Parsons Discussion, which I touched He
says there, that the Bishops style becomes him as well, as to dance about a
may pole in his hole and doublet.
at before. If you had your will, you would make us dance about another
maypole without hose or doublet, as you did our forefathers, while your power
lasted. Thanks be unto God, that has shortened those days, abridged your
malice. Yet Elias confounded Baals priests with a jest, and S. Chrysostom
commenting upon the 140. Psalm. bids us Et in epist. ad Philemon (...).
make much of the frumpes of the godly; which is your fault, to have profited
no more by the Bishops kind reproves. Yet in all the passages of that
Reverend man, there is no one word contumelious to piety, or disgraceful to
relligion, or prejudicial to gravity and good manners. Whereas Sir Thomas
More, the champion for your Clergy, (as it were vicarius in spiritualibus, he
was such a buckler to the Bishops, as Stapleton says the common voice was De
tribus Thomis.
in those days;) yet he, I say, undertaking the Churches cause, wrote a book
so gamesome, and so idly idle, that dissembling his own name, he was feign to
father it upon Gulielmus Rossaeus; a title that one of your fellows has taken
upon him of late, to shroud his virulences under, as he did his vanities, and
lastly the great Philosopher kept a fool at home, as the same Stapleton
records, to make him merry no doubt, though his wit was able to provoke
laughter in others, as full often it did. And if More be of no more authority
with you, you may look back to your own Cardinal, that dry Child, that sage
Sobrino: yet he excuses himself in one place of his controversies (a work a
man would think that did not fit so with mirth) Ignoscat lib. 3. de Romans Pont.
c. 22.
Lector quod temridicule Tilemannum exceperim. Let the Reader pardon me for
being so merry, or so pleasant with Tilemanne. This he. Yet because you have
descried such a vein in the Bishop, as you think at least, might you not have
answered your self, touching that which you object to him here about Iouinian,
that it sauoured but of Ironie? For what more fit to be hit in your teeth, who
every where crake to us of Iouinians heresies, then when you bring that in
earnest, to countenance your Popery, which S. Hierome puts upon Iouinian, by
supposall? At dices, tu; Iouiniane scilicet. Though the Bishop does not
challenge him for such an absolute Iouinianist, but only says, Probe in to
secutus Iouinianum, the Cardinal therein following Iouinian very handsomely.
Which words are enough to dissolve your cavil, that the Bishop should lay
absolute Iouinianisme to his charge, which, you say, surpasses all impudency.
Such a rustique you are, an arrant clown, not discerning what is jest, and
what is earnest. Howbeit, it will be hard for you, to prove Iouinian to have
been an heretic, (Epiphanius and Philastrius do not reckon him among the
catalogue). and they that may conclude him to have held a falsehood, will find
some a do to condemn him for an heretics. Neither. is the meaning of that
word by all agreed upon, neither do all take it in every place alike: Yet
because this scandal rests upon Iouinian for the most part, you may be pleased
to remember, Sir, out of S. Austen, what other monsters Iouinian fostered, and
therein, if you think good, compare his doctrine with ours. As, that all
sins are in like degree heinous, which is the Stoicall paradoxe, no way
cleaving to us, though you slander us so unjustly, for not holding venial
sins, which Advers. Luther. And Andradius, Venialia qua dicuntur peccata,
tamen sempiternis poen^ (interdu^) ^untur apud inferes. De pecc. orig. lib. 5.
which utterly overthrows the nature of venial sins, insomuch as Rada (in
Conciliat Thomae and Scot^) says, that God in strict justice, can not punish
such kind of sins in that sort, though all grace of pardon be away.
Roffensis himself held not. That fasting and abstinence profits nothing. Can
you charge us with any such impiety? That the regenerate man cannot sin
after baptism; wherein he comes nearer to you then to us. As for your merits,
you may keep them, the badges of your insolency, and in Tertull. de carne
Christ Quis conspueret Christi faciem nisi merentem: Horribile dictu: Sed vult
dicere, aptam conspui ex vestigijs infirmitatum in suscepta mortalitate, etc.
Sic est illud, (...), Apoc. 3.
you, Sir, of your ignorance, not to know what merit means all this while. Yet
beware how you magnify the Virgin against the married, least the Council of
Gangra condemn you, not for an heretic now, but a cursed heretic, Can. 20.
giving you (...), if you do but (...), though you condemn not marriage; if
you but swell out of the conceit of your single life. And so Minutius Foelix
most divinely, Inuiolati corporis virginitate fruimur potius quam gloriamur:
After that he had said, Vnius matrimonij vinculo libenter inhaeremus. S.
Chrysostom goes further, If the perfection of Monkerie it self may not stand
with marriage, all is spoiled. See Comm. in ad Hebr. (...). in ipso fine. And
why should Virginity then be exalted above marriage, if the perfection of the
strictest Monks themselves be compatible therewith? And he closes his
discourse, with that divine (...), as Pindar says should be taken (...); (a
iunket always in Apud Clem. Alexandr.
the end of a feast) (...) etc. Use marriage moderately, and thou shall be the
very first in the kingdom of heaven. Indeed therefore all the Saints are
lodged in Abraham's bosom, in the married man's bosom, as the same Father
cannot deny, lib. de Virg. in extremo. Once the Trinity in his tent, and now
the Saints in his bosom. Yet still the married man, and not the worse for his
marriage. As for the rewards of the faithful, that they are not equal in the
heaven that we look for, and that the sacred Virgin suffered no decay of her
maidenly honor, by the stainlesse and immaculate birth of our Savior, let
Iouinian think what he will, (though S. Hierome never imputes this latter to
Iouinian, in the 2. books that he wrote against him,) yet, not only you, but
troops in the English Church so teach. And, would the time give leave, is
there not a Montane, and a Tatian, to make you blush, for your abominable
heresies, about meats and marriages, as well as you have a Iouinian to twitt
us withal? But because, I now only assoyle the Bishop from your wicked
slanders, it is well his integrity has so acquitted him without me, that
your self dare not speak of him, but with, It may be, and, Except; such a
hook his fame has put in your nostrills, who only in this may be resembled
to Iouinian (to Paphnutius rather) that in single life, he defends the liberty
of other folks marriages. But have we to an end.

17. To the other places of S. Hierome, as Matthew. 16. which in great good will
you advise the Bishop to read over forsooth, what says S. Hierome there? That
our Saviors dicere is facere, his. saying is doing, therefore calling Peter a
rock, he made him so. But I hope, good Sir, as doing and saying went together
in our Lord, so both of them in his own meaning, not in your mistaking. What
is this then to prove Peter's Monarchy, or smaller regencie either, if such
could content you? And if it could, yet it were hard, I say, to boult it out of
this place of S. Hierome, where (no syllable (...) Apostoli lu^ ex Christo
lumine vocati s^t, and caetera ab code^ sortiti v^bula: s^ Simo^ qui credebat
in petra^ Christum, Petri ^gitus est nome^, Ac secundum metaphoram recte ei
dicitur etc. Hier.
of authority or power once appearing, for explanation sake, as reason was, if
you meant to speed,) he says only, that Peter for believing in the rock,
our Savior bespake him, and yet not properly, but in a metaphore, saying he
would build upon him.

18. The like ad Marcellam, Epist. 54. upon whom our Lord built his Church,
namely Peter. But can we answer S. Hierome better then by S. Hierome? The
fortitude of the Church, or the puissance of the Church, was equally built, or
grounded upon them all. Super omnes ex aequo. You heard it before out of his 1.
lib. against Iouinian. How does this then prove Peter's privilege, in the
matter of authority, though building were granted to found that way, as it
does not? And when S. Paul sundry times, as Coloss. 1. 23. and Ephesians. 2. 20.
speaks of grounding, and building the Church, either upon faith, as in the
first place, or upon the Prophets and Apostles, as in the second, shall we
think he was envious, that said nothing of Peter, and that extraordinary
manner of the Churches building upon him, that you dream of?

19. Here you tell us of three ways, by which the Apostles might be said to
be foundations of the Church, in hope that Peter may be so in singular. And
quoting Bellarmine for it, not your own invention, you counsel the Bishop to
learn it of him. Shall we first see how good it is? Peter alone, but jointly
all of them. In this sense belike they are all foundations. But what is this,
to, being the foundation of the Catholic Church, and to lie like a rock
under that great building, because they were planters of particular Churches?
Also you argue fallaciously, from the diligence of preaching, to the power of
supporting, and that by authority, as now the question is. Besides, a founder
and a foundation, is not all one. And did none plant Churches, good Sir, but
the Apostles? Shall your Jesuits in Iaponia be foundations too? And shall we
say of them, super quos aedificaeta est Ecclesia dei? You see the absurdity.
Yet you quote proofs, Romans 15. I have preached the Gospel where Christ was
not named, least I should build upon another man's foundation. Does this prove
that men are foundations of the Church? or rather, that the man and the
foundation are two? Again, 1. Cor. 3. I have laid the foundation like a wise
architect (so speaks your Vitruvius-ship) but would you call him a wise
Logician, that should argue from hence, that S. Paul meant himself to be the
foundation? Yea, though he said not in the same place, Jesus Christ, and no
other foundation.

20. foundations, because the Christian doctrine was first imparted to them,
and the present faith is grounded upon that, which was delivered at the first.
And new articles of faith (you say) are not always revealed. Is not this
accurate, trow you, as well for order as for substance? For had this been a
reason, ought it not to have been set, in all reason, before the other? Can a
thing be preached, before it be understood? or made known to others, before it
self be known? Your argument therefore from preaching, should by all means,
I say, have followed this from revealing; and this from revealing, have gone
before the other. But pardon your order, look into your substance. Were not
some things revealed to others before the Apostles? Did not our Lord first
manifest his resurrection to women? Did not the Angel say to them, Go and tell
Peter? Will you have women and all to be the foundations of the Church? But we
are much beholden to you, that you coin not new articles of faith every day.
Articles therefore, and new articles you grant, and of frequent revelation,
but not every day. We long for your last kind of foundation, wherein Peter is
so entire.

21. Thirdly then, you say, in respect of government and authority. For
Peter's was ordinary, theirs Legatine; his original, theirs depending from
him. You should show what Father says so, besides your selves, for of
Scripture you despair. And yet you agree so ill among your own selves of this
point, that you iumpe not about the very terms. For See Casaub. (...). 16.
cap. 138. ad Annal. liaron. with the like contradict o^ between Baron. and
Bellarm. as is between Bellar. and himself in this very matter, l. 3. de
Interp. verbi dei, cap. 4. where he makes Moses extraordinary, and so greater
then Aaron, as Peter greater then the rest of the Apostles, because he only
was ordinary, etc. yet he says he mentions Peter, comparationis causa cum
Mose, for comparison sake with Moses. What so unlike? Besides, Aquine will tell
him, that Paul rather answered to Moses, then Peter; each of them being
admitted to the Vision of Gods essence; the one as principal of the Old Test,
the other of the New, (for so he co^pares them) Neque enim probabile est vt
minister veteris Testamenti, etc. Quaest. disp. de Raptu. Art. 1. in Conclus.
As for Peter's being in mentis excessu, Act. 11. he makes nothing of that, to
this of Paul's. Ibid. resp. ad 9.
Baronius calls Peter's power extraordinary, the other Apostles ordinary: you
make his ordinary, and theirs extraordinary. Is it possible that kingdom
should long hold out, which is so at ods? Yet behold another leake in this
observation. For though the Apostles had derived their authority from Peter;
yet they might all have been foundations of the Church, as well as he, even in
regard of government; no less then some receiving the doctrine immediately from
Christ, as Peter, James, and John, (witness Clemens in Eusebius before quoted)
the others from them, yet you make them all, in regard of doctrine, to be
foundations alike, number. 25.

22. Another authority of S. Hieromes is out of his Epist. ad Damas. 57. I
following no first, or chief but Christ, do communicate with thy blessedness,
[or am linked in fellowship with it,] that is to say, with the chair of Peter,
upon that rock I know the Church is built. You see Hierome follows no first
but Christ. Nullum primum. Where is then the primacie that you challenge to
Peter, if none of the Apostles be before another, but Christ? Indeed Bellarmine
says, he means, he preferres none but Christ before Damasus; which is an
utter perverting of S. Hieromes words, who, as he says, he follows no chief
but Christ, or none prime but Christ, so he shows after what sort he is
affected to Damasus, communione not subiectione, by communion, not by
subjection, (communico tibi) as to Theophilus, to Cyrill, to Athanasius, to who
not? the ancient orthodoxe profess of themselves in diverse places. But the
edge of the place, as it serves your turn, lies in those words, I know the
Church is built upon that rock. Which rock is Christ, not so long before
mentioned but this may refer to it; and to build upon a chair, is no such
clean picked metaphore, that we should be forced to take it so, though upon a
rock be. Besides the scio that he gives it, a word of certentie, makes us *
Vide citatos paulo ante auctores in hoc capit. p. 132. Quibus add aliud S.
August. testimonium ex Tract. 10 in 1. Epist. Ioh c. 5. Super hanc petram,
edificabo Ecclesiam meam. Quid est super hanc petram? Super hanc fide^, super
id quod dictum est, Tu es Christus, etc. There is Fides, and obiectum fidei, id
quod dictum est, etc. But by no means does it long to Peter's person.
think he would never be so peremptory for Peter, since diverse have construed
the rock another way, whom S. Hierome would not cross over hastily with his
Solo; and lastly his own modesty declared a little before, professing to
follow none but Christ. Therefore he took Peter for no such foundation.

23. The last, and the least, is out of his first against Iovinian, O vox digna
petra Christi, a speech worthy the rock of Christ! But you may as well build
Christ himself by this devise upon Peter, as the Church of Riuallouus
Archidiac. Redonensis, de Marbodo Episcopo, Hic basis Eccelesia po^du^
portabat, -- apud Jacob. Sirm. in notis ad lib. 3. and epist. 14. Goff. Abb.
Vind.
Christ. For as Saunders writes of the rock of the Church, so Hierome calls
Peter here, the rock of Christ. That is, the fortress, and champion of the
Christian faith, as S. Ambrose was called columna Ecclesiae, S. James (...),
which is the title of the Church of Ephesus, wherein Timothy was to converse,
rather then of Rome, as the Apostle bestows it, and the Petrus Chrysologus.
vide cap. 8. huius, ex Damas^. eadem verba, de Iordane Archimandr^^a Quid quod
idem Damas^. sermon. de Defunctis, vocac Athanasium, (...),. i. the foundation of
the Church of God? Among communities, the University of Oxford was calle^
Ecclesiae fundamentum, in the hearing of the King, and he disliked it not.
Paris Anno 38. Hen. 3. Quidam Magistri Oxoniae, circiter nouem artistae, etc.
Archbishop of Ravenna, in one of the Counsels, was honored by the same
style. So clean is petra Christi beside your purpose, either as too little, or
too much.

24. Of S. Chrysostomes testimony we have said enough before to your first
chapter. Vertex and Princeps is found too light. Magister orbis is not
Monarchae orbis. And for all S. James his, Be not many masters, in this case
many Masters were sent out into the world, whereof James was one. Yea
Chrysostom himself, as Theod. lapsus Rescrip. ad Chrysostom. b Hom. 87. in
Johan.
Theodorus entitles him. Nothing cleerer with Chrysostom in the place you
quote, then that all the Apostles had the charge of the whole world, (...). You
will tell us, I know, of Peter's ordinary power. But in all antiquity we find
no such difference. And yet another testimony of Chrysostom we have cited to
you els-where, out of his Comment. upon the Acts, affirming that Peter did
nothing, by way of authority, in ordering Church-businesse. What can be
plainer?

25. As for James his being only Bishop of Jerusalem, Adioynd. number. 44. Col.
S. Chrysostom (says he) gives us to understand, that whereas S. James was
only Bishop of Jerusalem, and the countries adjoining etc. S. Peter had the
charge of the whole But if we hear Bellarm. de Pontif. Romans l. 1 c. 27.
Caeteri Apostoli missi sunt ad certas prouincias, Paulus ad omnes Gentes, sine
cortae provinciae determinatione. Et ipse de se ait, Plus omnibus laboraui. At
least, as Eutalius Diaconus (for so they write him) praesat. in Epist. Pauli,
Petrus and Paulus inter se partili sunt vniuersum orbem: in which division Paul
had the better every way.
as if that might disparage him in comparison of Peter, it was not because his
power was narrower then Peter's, (for our Savior confined not James to
Jerusalem, but private election) but to show that S. James abode there, as
thinking his pains best employed in that place, Peter in the mean while
traveling farther into the world. In the 3. of ler. 17. v. one would think
Jerusalem the higher seat the^ Rome, besides that it was our Saviors
province, as I told you, and so perhaps to be preferred in that respect. So
far is Peter from any excellence above James.

26. I might pass by your argument out of the 44. Psalm, In stead of fathers
thou shall have children, whom thou may make Princes in all lands. Suppose
first, that this were Monarchical princehood, or a princehood of power, of
majesty, and of authority, which is nothing less: for Ite praedicate carries
no such commission. Yet then they were sent into all the world, then they were
made Princes in all lands. But whatsoever it be, what is this to Peter? Is it
not common to all, does it not extend to all? And not only Peter is not
designed to be he, but no one Prince magnified before another, though we should
grant the singularity to be his, if anies. And shall all the Apostles now
have their successors? shall all their authorities be conveyed to
after-commers? I had thought Peter's only had been permanent. Yet here, of
all, Pro patribus tuis nascentur filij; every Apostle has his son, his
successor, and every ones son is made a Prince throughout all the world. You
will say perhaps it makes for temporal power in the Episcopal calling, though
not for Peter's successors in special. But to omit, that Princehood here is
regnare verbo, and regnare praconio, in which sense Virgil says, a diligent
husbandman -- imperat aruis, as a King at his work, and in his calling, though
homely; You may remember that Chrysostom and Theodoret Conim. in locum.
turn it another way, to the Apostles succeeding the Patriarchs, not to the
Bishops succeeding the Apostles. Though he that considers the tenure of the
place, and how the holy Ghost speaks to the Church there in the person of her
husband the Lord Jesus, will soon resolve it to bear Genebeard construes this
both of all the Apostles, citing Arnobius, Pro 12 Patriarchis (...) 12
Apostoli. and also of all the faithful, who are called sons (says he)
because begotten through the Gospel. And he adds, that they do gerere vices
Christi, (how will the Pope like this?) and that their Sovereignty here
mentioned, stands in the i^^tation of the virtues and worthiness of their
ancestors. And lastly, this he calls the eternal succession. Genebrard. in
Psalm.
this sense (under correction) that as young brides that are loath to leave
their parents, yet for love of their husband, and hope of issue, are content to
abandon their own native home, etc. So should she. Hespere, qui coelo lucet
crudelior ignis,
Qui natam poscas complexu avellere matris!


Yet this for Christ's sake, and for the great reward. Therefore it follows,
Then shall the King have pleasure in thy beauty, and in stead of thy parents
thou shall have children, even royal children, whom thou may make Princes
in all lands. Whom we may construe to be the faithful, and believers in
general, who are Kings and Priests, apoc. 1. a royal priesthood, (S. Peter
himself calling them so) not the Apostles 1. Pet 2. 5.
only, or their proper heirs, the Ministers. And to recall you to a place,
Sir, of your own citing before, Esa. 32. (...) liny^d c. (...). number 56.
Princeps digna Principe eogitabit, a Prince will devise of things worthy of a
Prince. Their princehood then being thus, as I have described, you must look
they should content themselves therewith, not moyle with temporal matters
impertinent. Whereunto even that persuades which you touch upon soon after, in
the same number, viz. 43. that David faies of them in the 19. Psalm, Sonus
eorum, their sound is gone out into all worlds, and their words (as you read
it) into the bounds of the earth. For by them they rule, by words and by
sound, not by forcible engines. Whereas happily if the Pope should domineer no
farther then his voice were heard, or his sound went out, preaching especially,
not only a bulls hide might measure out his territories, as they say of
Carthage, but ere a taper were clean burnt out, we might get forth of his
co^fines, with greater ease, I suppose, then Pius quintus his nephew did, when
his Uncle once discharged Masson in vita P^^ V.
him, in such a sort, upon displeasure.

27. Naught remains that I know of, to be cleared in this Chapter, but your
doubtie collection upon the Bishops words: If the twelve had a head to prevent
schism, as S. Hierome says, or if a head may be appointed over a competent
number, that he can conveniently provide for, and the same endued with a power
proportionable, as the Bishop graunts; much more had we need of one, after the
Church is so multiplied etc. to exclude the disorders which are likelier to
arise between many then few. To which I answer: That we are not so destitute
of a Head, as F. T. imagines, nay of many subordinations of heads and
governors, not without reference to a Principal, though we intertaine no
Pope. The Deacons to the Priests, the Priests to the Bishop, the Bishop must be
subject to Christ, says Ignatius, Epist. 7 quae ad Smymeni^s.
even as he is to his father, and Pope he knows none. Dionysius also will show
you how the Church is raunged, in his Epistle ad Demophilum, where he makes the
scala thus: Apud Gelas. Cyzic. p. 172. ex edit. Morel. per Sal^oreum Iesuitam;
Episcopus habet locum capitis ecclesiae post Christum, preshyter Seraphicum. D
aconus Cherubicum No Pope then but Antichrist.
from (...) to (...), from (...) to (...), and so (...), or (...), and the
(...), as they call it, or the last pitch, is in (...), the coordinate
faithful, not one but many. So the prime in Christendom (for we deny not a
prime) with his Synod of Bishops, as the Counsels both of Basil and Constance
would have it, though the Jesuits repugne, may serve for that use in the
Church of God (not to call for Constantine.) which Peter among the twelve.
Though Peter was the apter to be trusted with that place (principium actionis
only, and the giver of the onset) because a man (...), and so likewise the
whole College which he ouersaw, neither that seditious, nor he tyra^nous. But
the Popes authority being extrauagant in it self, and no way lawful, his
tyranny is not abated by the increase of the Church, or multitude of people,
as the Adioyndrer disputes See him ad longum, number. 40. etc Moses and Salomo,
two famous patterns of government in Scripture, each of them complaining of
the great multitudes of people committed to their charge, (and yet but a
handful to the now Christian) marvel that Peter never did of his, if all was
so entirely recommended to him, as they fable. See 1. King. 3. and Numb 11. 14.
As for Quu ad baec idoneus, that is Paul's, not Peter's.
out of his hidden Politiques, but the more he curbes with it, the more cruelly
he vsurps. And indeed whereas the Bishop made two exceptions against the
argument from Peter, one from the number of the people to be governed, the
other from the nature of the authority to be exercised, he only smothers the
one with the other, (saying, Tyrannies are sooner practiced upon smaller
states,) but answers neither.

28. One thing more, and so an end. Whereas our Adversary would bind the
Adioyn Seeing that Peter was made head of the Apostles, (...). of the Church,
the Bishop cannot deny the same authority to. S. Peter's successors, for the
same reason, especially since the succession of all the Apostles is failed in
other Churches, saving only in the Church of Rome by our Saviors providence,
etc.
first place to Rome, by virtue, as he says, of succeeding Peter, the chief
of the Apostles, number. 38. to omit of Peter's non comparuit at Rome, of which
before, and sure the Scriptures take no knowledge of his arriving there,
whereas S. Paul (says Homil 55. in Act 2.
Chrysostom) entered Rome like a King, or a General after sea fight, quasi Rex
post naualem pugnam at que victoriam, in regalissimam aulam istam ascendit;
nay, as he speaks in another place, the very Praefat. in Epist. Pauli. (...).
Pro Lege Manil.
fame of Paul's coming to Rome, composed matters, and put the city in order.
The like whereof Tullie rhetoricates of Pompey, and Plutarke reports as a truth
of Philopoemen, that the opinion of his drawing near, caused the enemies to
raise their siege: (to omit this,) In Athanas. (...). And Pertinax himself in
Herodian, lib. 2. (...). Much more true in the Episcopal throne, then the
Imperial.
Nazianzo^ will tell him, that no promise of grace goes current with succession
simply considered, and we are so far from acknowledging the Providence, which
he speaks of, in preserving that Sea, that, to say nothing what we have
groped with our own experience, concerning the Apostasy, not only Sedulius
an ancient writer observes upon those words, Romans 1. Obedientia vestra
divulgata est pertotum mundum, that the Romans obedience was divulged Primas.
(...) in Epist. Paul. gives this reason why the Epistle to the Romans is set
first. quiae scripta erat ad inferiores. I suppose it should be infirmiores, by
that which follows. But that helps but little. And comparing all the churches
to which the Apostle wrote, he makes Rome simply the worst And whereas now a
days they conceit it to be such an armorie of faith against all defects, he
makes them so simple, that he says, nihil intelligebant, They understood
nothing at all. As for their moral perfections, see Salvian de gubernat. dei.
l. b. 7. Viciositas and impuritas quasi germanitas quaedam est Romanorum
hominum, and quasi men's atque natura; quia thy praecipue vicia, vbicunque
Romani. Et ibid. Omne impuritatis scelus, omnis impudicitiae tur pitudo, a
Romanu admittitur, a barbaris vindicatur. Et, Auaritiae inhumanitas proprium
est Romanorum pene omnium malum. Et, Indurauerunt facies suas SVPER PETRAM.
This is the super petram that he acknowledges in Rome. And least you think he
excuses them from perverse faith in the midst of so many moral corruptions,
lib. 5. he says, Ipsae haereses barbarorum de ROMANI MAGISTERII prauitate
fluxerunt. See Bernard. de Consyd. ad Eugen. lib. 4 c. 1 and 2. Quid tam notum
seculis quam proteruia and fastus Romanorum etc at large. Yet of late a French
parasite, Flor. Rem. praises that sink, (which is the worse for continuance
without all question) as the Paradise of God, and the dugge of heaven. For he
says it signifies mamilla in the Hebrew, childishly enough. De orig. haer. l.
5. c. 4. number. 5. 6. etc. One thing I allow that he observes, that it was ab
initio obnoxia incendijs, always in danger of fire since first it was a citic:
that we may believe that one day it shall be burnt clean down, as it is in the
Revelation.
throughout the world, divulgata magis quam laudata, rather divulged then
praised, but the Apostle himself is thought to point at as much, both Romans 11.
(...), else thou shall be cut off, even thou for all thy privilege, and Romans
12. (...), that is, to the Bishop and all of that Sea, from time to time, viz.
not to arrogate too much unto himself, not to be wise in his own conceit, as
if he were that infallible one, (...).

To his fourth Chapter.
Basil, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Austen, their authorities; The BISHOPS Answer
stands good against his frivolous exceptions. And of the eight Popes, who
living in S. Austens time, exercised (as the Adioynder dreams) an Universal
and supreme authority.

1. NExt are Basil, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, and Austen. To the place of S.
Basil, De iudicio Dei, Ille beatus qui caeteris praelatus discipulis fuit, cui
claues regni coelestis commissae;. i. that blessed man (Peter) who was
preferred before the rest of the Disciples, to whom the keys of the heavenly
kingdom were committed, etc. he says the Bishop has answered nothing to any
purpose. number. 5. in the end. These are the crakes of this insolent patch; the
very impatience whereof, were able to divert any man from his business. But how
does he take away the Bishops answer, who yields him even more then S. Basil
says in favor of Peter, and yet still numb. 2 ipso fine.
forsooth no Monarch, to return his own words, scoffing though he use them,
not ashamed now in plain terms to plead for the Monarchy of spiritual men.
I know Bishoprics have been called so, as by Hilarie, Pope, in his Epistle ad
Leontium, but never in this sense. And so Paschasinus (among Leo's Epistles it
is) finds a Corona in his great Patron, to wish honor and good success to.
But these are baubles. To the point in hand then. If the argument stand in
BLESSED, that Peter was a Monarch, because called blessed, either by our
Savior, or S. Basil, to omit how many others have been called blessed, both
men and women, in holy Scripture, (they reckon some seven in all, I trow, of
the feminine kind) to whom no Monarchy was decreed; Et nos cum Petro beati,
says Epiphanius, and we are blessed with Praefat. Anchor. Idem Origin. in
Matthew. vide c. 5. huius.
Peter, if we hold fast his confession. Nay, they say when Bellarmines uncle
came to the Popedom, the times were so bad, that it was thought a man could
not be Pope and saved, Masson. in Marcello 2.
that is, Pope and blessed. Therefore what does this argument from beatus on
Gods name? But to omit this I say, the Bishop scanning S. Basils words, finds
Basil the best opener of his own meaning, both concerning the blessedness of
Peter, and his being preferred before the rest, which is the firmer hold of
the two, for you to trust to, if you be wise. For immediately thus it follows
in S. Basil, after (...), preferred before all, (...), that is, who only was
witnessed of more then others, and was pronounced blessed before others. Does
not (...) and (...) now, limit (...), as the Bishop had said? Does not the
honor that he received, to be witnessed of by Christ, as a little before he
had witnessed of Christ, and our Saviors pronouncing him blessed in plain
terms, (which imports no jurisdiction, whatsoever you fancy) limit his
preferment in S. Basils style? And though no such thing were in S. Basil, yet
how many ways are there of preferment, besides making Monarch, or installing
one supreme Prince of the world? Your self, Sir, can tell us soon after very
sawcily, number. 10. of this Chapt. that the King can show favor to some one
subject, and yet not make him Primate of the province. So might Peter be
preferred, and yet not made a Sovereign prince, much more. Though the more I
consider it, (...) is less then our PREFERRED in English. For he means, he
preferred him in voice and verdict, not in real exaltation, as they commonly
take it. And that is it which the Bishop answered out of S. Basils own words:
preferred, but how, quoth he? (...), etc. Let us look into the third title of
Peter's style, as it runs in S. Basil, Cui claues, etc. to whom the keys of
the heavenly Kingdom were committed. But do you see how? Not only the
kingdom is described here, to be heavenly, not earthly, which Peter received
the keys of, (what is this then, I wonder, to temporal Monarchies, which the
very place so counterbuffes, and yet they would feign establish, and establish
from hence?) but how does it make for Peter's sovereignty, since as the Bishop
has most pregnantly answered before, he received the keys indeed as Basil
says, but whether for himself, or for the Church, Basil shows not, Austen
does. You say, you have refuted this, and Cap. 1.
I think we have answered you. Cum caeteris communicandas claues accepit,
says Optatus himself. Will you have so many Monarchs, as received the keys,
that are afraid of two a little after?

2. Your impudent putting of a Monarchy upon the Pope, by your queint
definition, as you think at least, holds no water, and much less fire. A
Monarch is he (say you) that gouernes for the common good, not for his own.
Let us believe the Pope to be that single-hearted Charity, quaerens non quae
sua sunt sed aliorum (aliorum indeed too often, for the devil himself gives
over seeking his own, if S. Bernard say true) is this all that is required to
make a Monarch? Is there no difference between government and government? Let
Gelasius tell you, de vinculo Anathematis, to say nothing of Chrysostom. a little
before quoted, or has not our Savior himself, a Vos autem non sic, to spoil
your definition, and to mar his Monarchy?

3. I might tell you of S. Basil in this very work, what respect God has
planted in us to Kings, by the hand of nature, which respect you would so
wickedly purloyne from them, and carry clean away to the Popes, by perverting
the Fathers words about S. Peter. I have Idem habet S. Cyprian. tract. de
idolorum vanit. Rex vnus est apibus, dux vnus ingregibut. Vide and Hieron. in
epist. ad Rustuum, Grues vnum scquuntur ordine literato. It is a scholler-like
order to be subject to Monarchy in the politic estate. Also Chrysostom. most
excellently, Com in 13. ad Romans (which comment. upon all that discourse of the
Apostle, for obedience to Magistrates, though they be infidels, the Jesuits
are so confronted with, as if it had been purposely written against their
new-fangle devises) finds the like evident prints of sovereignty in Bees, in
Cranes, in flocks of sheep, etc. yea, in the bottom of the sea, among the
fishes, (...). Hence Seneca perhaps, l. 1. de Clemen. c. 19. Natura Regem
commenta est.
scene a swarm of bees, says he, etc. But when he shows what is answerable
in the Church of God, to that which a King is in humane societies, he dreams
not of a Pope to supply the analogy, but of the word of God; that is our King
(says he) and the fall from that makes way to Antichrist: just as S. Paul
says of the dissolution of the Empire, Donec tollatur e medio (...). That you
may see by what means the Popedom thriueth, On the other side, our Savior
Christ came into the world, when intrusion and usurpation of Kingdoms was
^ifest: as if his errand had been among others, to give Monarchies their right,
and to cut short the encroachers, says Haymo. Halberstat. conc. hyem, in
Epiphan. Dom. Quia enim deficienti^ principibus ex Iudi, alienus and extraneus
atque falsus etc.
namely by the fall of Princes, and what thriues with the Popedom, namely
Antichrist, and the extinguishing of Gods word, which is our King, says S.
Basil. But I come to Nazianzene.

4. And though I affect brevity, yet Nazianzenes place I will set down
somewhat more fully, the rather because our man says, the Bishop thought some
words as sore as a bile, and therefore set them down in his margent indeed,
but durst not touch them in his text; those sore words. As if any would do the
one, I mean print them in the margent, that was afraid of the other, that is
to speak to them in the text. For why might he not better have left them
clean out? But hear we Nazianzene, and those words at length. See if any
thing could be brought to check them more. De moderat. in disput. seruanda,
(...), etc. See thou of the Disciples of Christ, all high and worthy to be
chosen, one is called a rock, and has the foundations of the Church entrusted
to him, another is more loved, and leanes upon the breast of Jesus, and the
rest brook this praelation, (...). So that, whereas before he argued out of S.
Basil from praelatus est, we have now prelation first of more then one. But
proceed. When they must go up to the mountain, that he might glister in his
shape, and show his godhead, and discover him that lay hid in the flesh, who go
up with him? For all are not beholders of the miracle. Peter, and James, and
John, (...), which both were, and were reputed to be before the others. Before we
had two (...), preferred; now we have three, (...), that were, and were
reckoned to be before the rest. But who were with him in his agony, and a
little before his death, when he went aside and prayed? the same again. (...).
This is the order that our Savior took in preferring. It follows. The rest
of their comeliness, and orderlinesse, how great? Peter asks this question,
Philip that, Judas that, Thomas that, another that, and neither all the same,
nor one man all, but every man particularly, and one by one; and as you would
say, every one thereafter as he needed. But of that what think you? Philip
would say a thing, and dares not alone, but takes Andrew to him. Peter has a
question to ask, and sets on John by a nodde. Where is surlinesse here? where
is ambition? How could they more show themselves the disciples of Christ, that
meek and humble hearted one for us, a servant for us his servants, and who in
all things returned all the glory to his Father, that he might show us an
example of orderlinesse and modesty, which we are so far from observing,
that I would think it were well with us, if we were not bold-hardier then all
besides, etc. Now let F. T. plead for primacie from hence, and the pride that
our Savior suppressed in his disciples so long ago. You see, that if our
Savior preferred one, he preferred more, and the name of preferment, serves
them all alike, no better of Peter, no worse of James, of John, etc. So true it
is, that the Bishop answered, of many monarchs, to be picked from hence, if any
at all. But what say we to the words, as sore as a bile, That Peter had sibi
credita Ecclesiae fundamenta, the foundations of the Church entrusted to him?
Neither does this prove monarchy, nor supreme magistracy. It is nothing but
an exegesis of what went before, that Peter was a rock and not a rock for
nothing, but to build upon, and to carry (as the rest doc, Apoc. 21. for I must
not leave urging him with the Bishops answer, though I see it anger him) the
foundations of the Church, though to him, more particularly confessing Christ,
it was said also more particularly. But if this was the reward of his constant
profession, as no man doubts, and the text most clearly shows, to be termed
rock, and withal he confessed in the name of the rest, as Bellarmine De Romans
Pontif. l^b 1 c 12. ex Chrysostom. Hieron. and Aug. Petrus pro omnibus locutus
est. Add Cyprian. l. 1. ep. 3. ad Co^. Petrus vnus pro omnibus loquent, and
ecclesie v^^ respondent.
graunts, and the Fathers affirm, who sees not that this title must belong to
the rest, to be rocks all, as well as he? and therefore the Bishops answer
remains most sound, that he is a rock indeed, and bears the foundations,
but with others. And so his instance vanishes, that a King may bear one more
favor then another, though he make him not so great an officer or prelate.
For, as we grant, the pre-eminence that Nazian. speaks, to have been yielded
S. John, to lean upon Christ's breast, did come from greater love then to Peter;
so we deny, that Peter's was a prerogative of jurisdiction, though it was the
honoring of him in an other meet kind, answerable to the confession, wherein
he out-stript his fellows. For as he spoke first, so the terms of honor
first lighted upon him, no authority, Sir. And to be graced with those
terms directed to him, was the particular pre-eminence that Nazianzene
speaks of, answerable to S. John's leaning upon Christ's bosom in particular.
Though it is true, that John also signified for others, as we showed Cap^ag.
25. 26. etc.
before out of S. Austen, as well as in Peter the others were included, that
allowed his confession. And truly if it be good arguing from the prerogatives
of Peter and John in Nazianzene, the one to be called a rock, another to lean
upon our Saviors bosom, I see not but John excelled Peter herein. For his
honor was real, Peter's verbal (hitherto) though I know that Christ makes
all good in the end which he promises. Peter's doubtful, and subject to
expositions; John's clear, evident, and ocular. Peter, you say, was the first
stone in the foundation after Christ, but John we see, immediately leaned upon
his breast; which breast, if it be, (as certainly it is) the foundation of the
Church, is not this a type, who has the greater interest therein of the
twain? But your way should have been, if you had not been that fumbler, to
have argued thus out of our graunts; That all the Apostles were the foundations
of the Church, and Peter had the foundations committed to his charge, as
Nazianzene says, therefore Peter was made governor of the Apostles. As if
(...), were any thing but the exegesis of a rock, as I said, ordained for
building, it self the foundation, and carrying the foundations as you would
say; (...), an usual scheme. Which was the cause that the Bishop meddled not
with that bile, having said enough to it in the word Rock before. But suppose
(...) made a distinct sense, will you say they were committed to him to be
governed? Does the earth govern the heavens and all, because they are in a
manner founded upon it? What preposterousnesse is this? or what faith is there
in him, that would so falsify the very word of faithfulness it self, (...) I
mean, in his 8. numb. where he deflects it to government, all too
unseasonably?

5. As for Chrysostom, which is the next, never any thing so ridiculous, as he
shows himself there, in defending the Cardinal. Only the Cardinal owes him
so much the more, for doing him service, in so desperate a cause. Tanto plus
debes, Sexte, quod erubui. Mart.
Homil. in Matthew. 55. Cuius pastor and caput homo piscator, speaking belike of
Peter and the Church; that is to say, whose Pastor and Head a fisherman is.
Though to be a Pastor of the Church, is a small title in S. Peter's style. For
first, a pastor is (...), captivut pastor: non Rec pastor: as the Papists
would. Vide Joseph. l. 1. contra (...).
a word of reproach, and baseness, if we believe S. Basil. Orat. (...), and yet
transferred to Church-vses, it is nothing singular, but comprehends, whom not?
both Apostles, and others. Dedit quosdam pastores, Ephesians. 4. He gave some to be
Pastors, and to what end? Not only (...), to keep them right that are once
converted to the faith, but also (...), to gain them that are without,
(Aquinas so distinguishes them upon the place) which the Papists would make to
be the Popes proper care, to set men on work to convert the infidels and
unbelievers. But here we see it is common to collegium pastorum, to the many
pastors, not to vnus pastor only, Eccl. 13. or to the master of the
assemblies. Even as Demetrianus of Alex. sent Pantaenus into Hierom. epist. ad
Magnum.
India, to convert the Brachmanes, into India Athanasius sent Frumentius,
Sozom. l. 2. c. 23. A pud Theod in Eccl. lust. l. 5. c. 4.
Meletius sent Stephanus into Germanicia: S. Austen of his own head writes to
the Madaurenses, to convert them from Paganism, Epist. 42. Victor Vticensis
yields us another example hereof, lib. 1. de persecut. Vandal. which I will set
down somewhat at large, because I am fallen into this argument. Martinianus
(says he) Saturianus, and two more brothers of them, being sold by Gensericus
that cruel tyrant, took Capsur King of Mauritania, keeping his Court in that
place of the wilderness, which is called Caprapicti, what by their preaching,
what by their living, (and yet but At least Martinianus consented to marry a
maid called Maxima, which you may do well to see Mr F. T. whether you will
allow to Churchmen, or no^ though we hear you have taken this liberty to
your self, whatsoever you are.
lay-folke, for so much as appears by the story, and moreover sold for
bondslaues, whereas the Jesuits think that piety can find no work to do
in captivity, but has her arms and her legs chopped off, as Solomon says in
another matter, only exercising her self in a pleasurable estate) tali modo
ingentem multitudinem gentilium barbarorum Christo Domino lucrauerunt (so
speaks Victor) vbi antea nulla fama Christiani nominis erat divulgata: i.
gained a great multitude of Gentiles and Barbarians to the Lord Christ, where
before the Christian name was not heard by fame. And all this they effected,
before they had help from Rome; afterward they sought, and found there, as
reason was. TVNC DEINDE COGITATVR quid fieret etc. So as Rome it self did not
presently come into their minds for this matter, but that other places might
have affoarded the same aid at need, and like enough usually so they did.
This Victor. But now, as I was saying, and to return to the authority quoted
out of S. Chrysostom: Whatsoever become of pastor, which though we find not
where he quotes it in S. Chrysostom. yet with all our hearts we ascribe to Peter, (I
would he could keep there; God appeared to Moses, (...), not contending, but
keeping sheep, says S. Basil where before, but the Pope he has left the one
for the other) yea and ecclesiae pastor, pastor of the Church, of the
Catholic Church. (So Clemens makes all Bishops, Constitut. lib. 6. cap. 14.
much more then, an Apostle.) What says he to caput, that Peter is head of the
Church, which we find not in the Greek? You shall hear his answer, and cum
riseritis ineptias hominis, then think as you list, for my discourse will
soon be at an end. I answer (says he) that though they number. 12.
be not now in the Greek copies, which the Bishop has seen, yet it little
imports, seeing that the Latin translatour found them, as it is most probable
in the Greek copy, which he followed, and S. Chrysostom. says as much in
effect, both there, and in other places. Number the absurdities. First, not
now. Belike then heretofore they were in. Who took them out? you shall hear
his own guess, number. 18. Either the Grecians themselves in the time of their
schism from the Roman Church, or perhaps some of our late heretics, who have
taken upon them (TAKEN So cap. 1. hu^us, Al^^ate not finding the uncertain
Epistle of Pope John in some ancient copyes, suspects the heretics (as he
calls the^) to have raced* it out.
UPON THEM) to print the Greek in these days. Perhaps, says he, so
doubtfully he speaks, and perhaps neither. But if the Printers of these days
have picked them out, why show ye not some ancienter copies at least; that have
them? Not any (say you) which the Bishop has seen. Has any then, trow, that
your self has seen? or that the Cardinal has seen, or any other? If they
have, why do they not name them, why not produce them? Not only none has
them, that the Bishop has seen, but show you which of all has not been
seen by the Bishop, that we may believe they are yet extant in some other
copies. The rather, because the Cardinal alleging the same place in his
controversies, de Romans Pontif. lib. 1. c. 25. cries out by parenthesis, as if
he had cause to triumph, Ecce nomen capitis Calvino inauditum, behold the name
of Head which Calvin never heard of. And the Gentleman by the way, as offended
with our men's ambitious In like sort Florimund. Remund. (...) orig haeres.
part. 1. shows himself very much offended with those of our Divines, that
translated Greek authors, either historians, or dogmatists, etc.
forwardness forsooth, calls it taking upon them, to print the Greek Fathers.
Numb. 16. 3.
You take too much upon you, Moses and Aaron, said they of old, or as David's
brethren, 1. Sam. 17. 28.
We know thy pride. For our defense would not be taken, although we should say
with David, Was there not a cause? Belike they should have tarried till F. T.
would have given the onset, the signal to the battle: as no man among the
Brisson. in Persicis.
Persians might shoot the dear, till the King had begun. But how if the man
be so modest, that we should have stayed, God knows how long, to our no small
disadvantage, ere he had presumed to venture upon the work? Shall it
notwithstanding be called arrogance, or precipitation, in our men, or taking
upon them? Crasse pudet me tui, o stultos Cottas etc. I Cic. in Pis.
am sorry for Eton College, and my honorable and worthy friend Sr Henry
Savile, that he used no more advise before his setting forth of Chrysostom, but
rashly so precipitated into a work, not for his mowing, without the Popes
leave. But this complaint comes all too late now. And no force. Yet the Latin
translatour found them there, as it is most probable (you say) in the ancient
Greek copies. Why not you rather foisted them into his translation? or, what
if he were false and partial to your side, as you said even now, the Grecians
were to theirs, and so put them in where he found them not? Shall we not
therefore be judged by the authentical Greek copies? And yet, alas, poor
Grecians, Plut.
well may I pity them; upon whom (as gardeners set rue by roses, for these to
purge all their venomous qualities upon the other, to whom such noysomnes is
but natural; so now) as if they served for nothing else, other men's faults and
scapes must be derived. And shall that be called Chrysostom, in the trying of
the question between the King and the Cardinal, which is no where to be seen
now but in the Translatour of Chrysostom? But the last excells. Though it be
not extant totidem verbis, in the place quoted by the Cardinal, yet in effect
and substance it is to be found, you say, both in that Homily and elsewhere.
Who ever heard such paltring as this? The words must be brought, and when they
are not to be found, the sense must serve. So a man may say, that the
deposition of Kings, and worse too, is authorized by the Apostle, Hebr. 7. 7.
not that he speaks a word to that And indeed Pope Nicholas argues so in gond
earnest, out of that place, from Benedicitur to M^* l^d^^ur. Epist. ad Michael
Impor. Tom. 3. Com. Sur.
purpose, but, minor a maiori benedicitur, this proves the superiority of
Priests to Kings, in a Jesuits construction, and therefore interficitur, or
deturbatur, and what not? Is this to give us the sense for the words? the
spirit for the letter, quoth you? or do you so maintain godliness in the power
of it, Tit. 1? And yet supoose this were right, where is the sense, or the
substance that you talk of? If in other places of Chrysostom, why are not
those places quoted at the first? why do you choose to dwell upon a
counterfeit one? Are you not ashamed to run gadding thus up and down, first
from words to sense, then from one place to another, to make your lamps to
shine with borrowed oil, begged rather, nay stolen apparently, after the
thrones are set, and the Judge is come? On the other side, how direct is the
Bishop in his proceedings? how square, as I may say, and exact every way? Has
he not satisfied the Cardinal to the very last farthing, and paid the score
which he brought to convince the King withal? His MAJESTY calls for the
Fathers of such a compass, to disprooue him. And you see how they are
brought, not only speaking by an interpretor, and not the faithfullest
neither, whereas there should be no compromitting at all in so serious a
canvase: but no tinker in his kettleworke was ever more fowly foiled, then he
in avouching the Cardinals quotations. Lysanders two skins to patch the one the
other, so he his words with senses, nay one text with another, is the most
natural representation of his dodging here. In so much, as if I should not
answer a word more in the behalf of the Bishop, yet you see how he has
performed as much as he undertook, namely, to maintain the kings challe^ge
against the Cardinal, about the judgment of the Fathers within such a space,
and this fellow cannot refute him without such shameful shifts, as lay him
open to more disgrace. Yet to two places I will say somewhat, for the other are
not worth the while.

6. Homily aforesaid, Peter was a diamond, Jeremy a brazen pillar, or an iron
wall. And which meant Chrysostom. for the stronger of the two? or did he mean to
magnify one above the other at all? yet you should speak to their authority,
and let their constancy alone. Their virtue is one thing, their place another,
howsoever how confound them. Unless you think, that because with you place
goes for virtue, (witness Hildebrande in Dictatis) therefore with them virtue
may infer place too, which is nothing so. But let us hear the rest. Jeremy
was set over one nation, Peter over the whole world. And what is this, but the
difference of the old testament and the new? the field and the garden? fons
signatus Cant. 4. and fons patens or reclusus Zach. 13. the breaking down of
the partition wall, Ephesians. 2. the rending of the veil, etc. I hope every
minister in the new testament, not Peter only, has not the land of
Palaestine, which might be Ieremies limitation, but the latitude of the whole
world, to deal with. Yea it is your own doctrine, c. 2. numb. 50. and 52.
that as far as the Church reaches, (which at this day reaches through out the
whole world,) the office and function of every minister may extend. But the
Apostles specially, between whom and Peter, herein, there was no ods,
whatsoever difference there might be in their provinces, as they parted them
among themselves. but Peter might have chosen Matthias Apostle without
communicating with the rest, for which you quote Chrysostom hom. 3. in Acta.
Quid? annon licebat ipsi eligere? Licebat, and quidem maxim, etc. And again
in the same place, Quam est feruidus? quam agnoscit creditum a Christo gregem?
Might not he choose? yea verily he might. Then: How fervent is he? how does he
acknowledge the slocke of Christ committed to his charge? No doubt he regards
the flock of Christ, in speaking first in the congregation, about the choice
of an Apostle, which much concerned the Church at that time, not to be
destitute of a pastor, in the defect of Judas. And this was grex creditus,
which S. Peter so regarded, not the Apostles his flock, as you would feign
have it: as if he were their Tutor, and they his pupills, (as you were wont to
appoint Polydor. Virgil. Anglic. hist. l. 21. in Hen 7. Cic. de si^^b. 5.
our King his Tutor, Nos tutores Regibus misimus, right Romans:) but the
flock which he regarded jointly with the Apostles, was the Church in general,
whose benefit he provided for, in calling the company together, for the choice
of an Apostle, Judas being removed. And S. Chrysostom. says but so, as your
self English him. How does he every where speak first? (...), Eusebius. l. 2. c.
13. Not for any authority then, but (...) for his virtues sake. And what order
can you imagine, where many meet, unless one speak first? then, why not
Peter he, and yet not superior to the rest? As for Peter's power to choose an
Apostle of his own head, it is marvel it should so be, since Bellarmine
gives him not power to choose the Deacons, (much less then the Apostles)
without consent of the multitude, holding it to be enough that they were not
chosen against his will, nor without his assent. de Pontif. Romans l. 1. c. 16.
In the choosing of Matthias, we find no less then an hundred and twenty to
have come together. Act. 1. 15. whereof some were women, v. 14. of the same:
and not Peter, but the lot settled it upon Matthias, v. 26. What then says
Chrysostom, whom you quote, that Peter might have done this alone, and of his
own authority? You quote him lamely, which you object to the Bishop about
Cyrill and Austen, but how falsely, we have showed. The next words in Chrysostom.
confute you plainly, if you had durst to allege them. (...). And besides
(says he) he had not yet received the holy Ghost. Do you think then, that
Peter might have chose the Apostle by authority given him from our Savior
Christ, to whom Christ had not yet given the gift of discerning, or the holy
Ghost to direct him? where is your axiom, that you can brave us with
elsewhere, Qui dat formam, dat omnia Cap. 3. number. 40. Qui dat esse. etc.
consequentia formam? or where do you find God to allow the end, without
means sufficient to atchieue that end? We are therefore to understand, that
if Chrysostom. say (as he says but at uncertain) that Peter might have made the
Apostle himself, he might upon presumption of the multitudes good will, who
would not have contested with him in such a case likely, as honoring him for
his virtue, etc. In which regard he commends to us the meeknes of those times,
for our imitation, and as he says, that Peter did nothing (...) nor (...), so
he maruels that S. James would not interpose a word, being at home as we would
say, and Bishop of Jerusalem, where this assembly was held. Neither lastly
do I see, how, ius constituendi par omnibus habebat, can so handsomely be
drawn out of Chrysostomes text, (...), which is the commoner reading in the
greek copies, and denies it rather. Thus much of Chrysostom.

. 7. About the place of S. Austen, sermon. 1. 24. de Temp. I have touched before
in a word or two, your notable ignorances, with no less malice, which you
bewray in the misconstruing of the Bishops words. Componit salutem, and,
medicorum filij, and, Etsi omnes, non ego. You complain in your 10. Chap. of
the obscurenesse of the Bishops style, and he seems to you (...) at noone day.
I believe it verily, your apprehension is so good. Senecaes fool said, the
house was dark (...).
after her self was fallen blind: And S. Paul before his conversion, was
dazeled with the exceeding lightsomnesse, as S. Chrysostom notes most
excellently: but soon after he Ser 4. in Apost Paul. tom. 8. Nemo been v^d^^,
nisi qui prius (...), exeundo Pauli. Chrysostom.
saw cleerest upon his eye-sights taking from him. An image of the Papists
(specially our English) that are offended with nothing more then the abundance
of that light, that shines in their country at this day, whom a little of the
old darkness perhaps would reduce to their right minds; as mad folks are tamed
(they say) with withdrawing of the light from them. But omitting complaints,
quae ne tum quidem gratae, tum necessariae, what say you to the answers to S.
Austens place? Three exceptions did the Bishop take unto it. First, 1 2
that it was cited out of a doubtful work. Secondly, that it mentioned but a
crazed head, and therefore not to be brought for honesty sake, to prove Peter's
primacie, which another would disprooue it by rather. that S. Austen, not in
asermon de Tempore, but in a lawful Synod, cures this head, by confining him
to his bounds, and restraining appeals from beyond the sea, which you brook
not. The first of these is confirmed diverse ways. I 1
One, that the title of those Sermons is not sincere, neither given by S.
Austen at the first, nor yet known by that name diverse hundreds of years,
after his death. And if S. Austen wrote no Sermones de tempore, why should we
yield, as to S. Austens authority, to that which is quoted by the name of de
Tempore? Yet you say, they are taken out of other his works. Let those works
then be quoted by their own names: let every witness appear in his own
likeness. The Emperor would not trust the man that had dyed his Quia barbam
caputque tinxerat, iccirco rem^ eum de coll egio ^udicum P^ut. in apotheg^. at
Philip.
own beard, he suspected salshood by such small tokens. And where the name is
counterfeit, what credit can there be either in the man, or in his verdict?
Does not such an one rather profess that he means craft? Innominatus habetur
pro nullo, is the axiom of the law. And why not then perverse nominatus, much
more? number of these Sermons, yea the substance too, now adding, then
diminishing, sometime amplifying, and then again withdrawing, in your diverse
editions, that no Euripus more uncertain to build faith upon. And yet these
you bring forsooth to confute his MAJESTY, and to disprooue his challenge. For
where you say, they were so called and culled out from the rest, for the ease
and commodity of the Readers: I see not what more ease can be in giving them a
false name then a true, or what commodity can arise from hence to the Reader,
unless to be abused and deceived, be a commodity. Yet such are the
commodities, Egraunt, that you Jesuits deal in, when you set forth Authors.
Austens. As what think you of that clause in the latter end of it? Agnouit
enim sibi vt homini peccati irrepsisse perniciem, quod totum hactenus vt memini
diuinitus procuratum est. Have you so lost your smell, as not to difcerne
between this, and the true S. Austen? I say nothing of that which follows,
which no wise man but would abjure for S. Austens, Videte quemadmodum exiguae
culpae permittitur subiacere tantus Apostolus: (first, who ever called this
exigua cupla, to deny our Savior? which Bellarmine himself, when he excuses
De Romans Pont. (...). (...). c, 28.
all that may be, cannot deny to have been a most horrible trespass.) And
again, vt emendatus elationis vicio atque correctus. Did S. Austen ever say,
emendatus vicio? The rest is as good, but I spare. Yet, Quemadmodum eum dominus
tui causa patitur circumscribi delicto, would not be passed over. I leave it
to your thinking. In the same sermon, he makes Peter to have been a stark
Pelagian; Per solum liberum arbitrium, non addito dei adiutorio, promiserat se
pro. Domino moriturum. The Pope an (...). 4
And yet you bring this to prove Peter's primacie, and Lordship paramount, over
the whole Church, for direction sake. As for your sleeuelesse shift, that S.
Austen wrote Sermons of the solemn tunes of the year, of Saints days also,
etc. so has the Bishop preached as much as any, of the yearly festiualls,
(and long may he I pray God) yet he never thought he had made sermons de
Tempore, till you told him so. The thing no doubt is ancient, for the
substantial object, to solemnize the appointed times of the year, as the
Quadragesima, or the Ascension, or the Natalitia, and the like, which you
instance in, with suitable sermons: but Sermones de Tempore, is too short a
name, though we take in de Sanctis too, to comprehe^d all, since there were many
more Sermons made, both by Austen, and others, upon ordinary Sundays, which
are reducible to neither part of the aforesaid division. Possidius, that S.
Austen made sermons in vigilijs paschae, upon Easter eve, whereof this, you
say, was one in all likelihood, being made on the Wednesday before Easter, is
it not as mad as all the rest, or shall we think it likely, that Easter eve
fell upon the wednesday before Easter? What confidence has the Jesuit, that
would bore such holes in his Readers nose, and paint his face, while he lies
broad awake? Yet numb. 56. of this Chapter, you find that which was 14. year
after the time, as fit as the Eve, you say, to the holy day, belike that we may
believe you the rather here, of three days distance between the Eve and the
Feast, when at another time the Eve sell out just 14. year, you say, before
the holy day. And so much to instifie the Bishops first exception.

. 8. To the second you answer, that Bellarmine had no II
reason to be greatly ashamed of the place that mentions Peter's frailty, for
even that confirms his primacy most wonderfully. How so? For having had trial
of infirmities, he was so much the apter to succor others, or to show
compassion to others. Truly I doubt not, but Peter's fall made him the
tendererhearted to repenting sinners, yet not so much in his particular, or for
any primacie, as representing the Church, and the whole body of the ministry,
as you were told out of S. Austen, de Agone Christiano. c. 30. Else only Popes
should be tender hearted. Though S. Austen also in the place, that you newly
quoted, Sermon. de Temp. 124. says it fell the rather upon Peter, because he was
a fierce and a choleric man, (not only fervent as others call him) as his
practice showed upon poor Malchus, and therefore it was meet he should be
abated so. Howsoever it be, the Bishops exception to the Cardinal is very good,
that a better place would have been brought in all reason out of S. Austen, so
copious an author, to prove Peter's headship by, then that which implies the
crazines of it, even before we are showed to what use the soundnes of it
serves. Neither does the Bishop argue, as you wickedly slander him, that Peter
by frailty denied our Savior, ergo he is not head of the Church. And yet it
were as good as Bellarmines argument, and better too, which you use in this
place, that his headship is confirmed, or established by his fall. As if none
could fall any whit fowly, but from the height of supremacy over the Church.
Was it nothing to fall after his exaltation to the Apostleship, after other
graces which he enjoyed not a few? Did not this make our Eutychus his fall the
more dangerous, that he tumbled down even from such a window? That you may see
how many primacies were in Peter, as it were stories in a building, though no
such monarchical pre-eminence ensue: which primacies the Bishop never denied.
And if Peter's gentleness, which he learned by his fall, reach no further, then
to assoile offenders upon their repentance, as I see not what other you here
aim at, you know that office belongs to all Priests in general, as well as to
the head of Priests, and therefore no Popedom follows fromhence any way at
all.

9. To your place of S. Gregory, hom. 22. in Euang. that our Lord intended
Petrum praeferre cunctae Ecclesiae, we return S. Greg. l. 4. in 1. Reg. cap.
vltimum, that Paul was made caput nationum, where caput is more then praeferri
ecclesiae, since every minister is set over the Church, as we have often told
you, Qui vocatur ad Episcopatum, vocatur ad seruitutem As the service of God is
the truest liberty, so the ministers regiment is but service.
^^tius ecclesiae, says Origin. hom. 6. in Esaeiam, each Bishop is servant to
the whole Church: as otherwhere, Ad imperium vocantur totius ecclesiae, qui
Episcopi creantur. Goffrid. Tract. de Ordin. etc. for the sense is all one, and
every where you see the latitude of their bounds; and in a word, they are
nothing but circu^locutions of their Apostleships both Paul's and Peter's.
Lastly, you abuse the Bishop intolerably, in saying he taunts at Peter's fall,
who is of another spirit, and knows that Saints can, pugnare de genu, or as S.
Chrysostom Seneca.
says, (...), The Saints are gloririous even in their falls: but he refutes
Peter's proud vaunt, Etsi omnes non tamen ego, by his own experience, which is
lawful to do, I mean to take down the confident and the ouerweener with a
sober gleeke, as even Aristotle can Arist. Rhetor. Cic. de orat. 2.
teach you, Eth. 4. and elsewhere. So much also of his second exception.

10. Austen, not a counterfeit Sermon of Austens, but himself in person, and
sitting in Council, neither flourishing before the people in a bastard homily,
about Peter's prerogatives (which we must tell you again and again, are not
straight the Popes, though you presume so,) but consulting most advisedly in an
assembly of Fathers about the Bishop of Rome, (which is the man in
controversy, and against whom our plea lies, not against Peter,) I say, that
S. Austen consulting about the Pope, and his authority to hear appeals, in a
council of Africa, is not fearful to censure them with excommunication, as
many as shall appeal beyond the sea, that is to Rome, says Balsamon, that is
to the Pope say we, and you will not deny. Which how could S. Austen and
others have done, I would feign know of you, if they had been persuaded of his
universal power over the Christian world!

11. Here you cast mysts, and fogs, and raylings. But passing by them, as the
Moon does by the barking of a curre-dogge, let us take you as you lie. You
deduct three points from the Bishops words, as you say, and you call them three
lies of his, in little more then three lines. Usual modesty, but let us view
your parts. The first, That the Pope had no further authority, but over the
Church of Rome in S. Austens time. The second, That no man might appeal to
Rome, out of Africa, in those days. The third, That S. Austen never
acknowledged those three Popes, Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus, to be
heads of the Church, and yet cured S. Peter's disease in them. The first, say
you, will be clear by the discussing of the second and the third. But how if
the Bishop never affirmed the first? neither is any such thing to be gathered
out of his words? What needs your second and third to refute this? Why rather
do you not bend against the second, and third, for their own sakes, to show
that all Appeals were not cut off, by the Fathers, out of Africa to Rome, or
that S. Austen cured the swelling disease in the Popes aforesaid? Does not this
show, that you neither want impudence, and yet want matter? since the Bishops
words, that may sound that way to your first proposition, are only these, If
ever he be healed (viz. the Pope) let him be head of the Church of Rome, as he
was in S. Austens time, but let no man appeal, etc. And is this as much as
that the Pope had no authority over more then Rome? whereas the Bishop neither
denies his Western Patriarkship, Ci^ says of one, Quod nondu^ potestate
poterat, ob^i^u^t authoritate. So as power and authority go not always together,
though the Jesuit confound them.
nor otherwise the great sway that he might justly carry throughout the rest
of Christendom, out of the eminency of his place, especially if joined with
virtues answerable, though still his Diocese were but particular. But as for
Appeals, what more plain, for the proouing that S. Austen censured all such
Appellants out of Africa to the sea of Rome, with excommunication, then that
which we read in the Council of Milevitum, Can. 22. enacted both by him, and
diverse other Bishops there? Whosoever shall think fit to appeal beyond the
Sea, let no person within Africa receive him to fellowship, or to communion.
First therefore you turn away, and will not understand, till diverse sections
after, any such Canon or Council, but tell us of a letter written to Pope
Celestine by the African Bishops, which, you say, was petitorie, but containing
no Decree nor demand, as altogether resting in Celestines pleasure, whether he
would grant it, or no. I will set down the words, that the truth may be
seen. Though this I must premise, that it was nothing unbeseeming the holy
Fathers, to use reverent terms, even of petition and request to Pope
Celestine, when they sued for no more then their own right, as the Apostle S.
Peter, and diverse others in the like cases, I beseech you brethren, abstain
etc. Sapientem omnia prius quam armis experiri decet; it is the old saying:
and, Responsio mollis frang it iram. So here. Stricte exigo, and stricte
praecipio, is for the Pope to his Catholics, whom he makes conies. But the
words are these: Our due salutations remembered, and done: We entreat, and
earnestly pray you, that hereafter you will not lightly give audience to those
that come from hence to you, neither any more receive such to the communion, as
we excommunicate: because your Reverence shall easily perceive that order taken
by the Nicene Council. For if there appear a prouiso for inferior Clerks
and laymen, how much more would the Synod have the same observed in Bishops,
that being excommunicated in their own Province, they should not be suddenly,
hastily, or unduly restored to the communion by your holiness? And likewise
your holiness must repel these wicked refuges of Priests, and other Clergy men
[to Rome,] as becomes you: for that by no determination of the Fathers, this
is derogated from the Church of Africa: and the Nicene Canons do most
evidently commit both inferior Clergymen, and the Bishops themselves, to
their own Metropolitans. No doubt they most wisely and rightly provide, that
all matters should be ended in the places where they first arose: neither shall
the grace of the holy Ghost be wanting to any Province, by the which equity
may be gravely weighed, and stoutly followed, by the Priests of Christ,
especially whereas every man has liberty, if he mislike the judgment of
those that hear his cause, to appeal to the Counsels of his own Province,
or to a general Council. Or how shall the judgment over the Seas [at Rome]
be good, whereto the necessary persons of the witnesses, either for sex, or
for age, or sundry other impediments, cannot be brought? FOR THAT ANY SHOULD
BE SENT [as Legates] FROM YOUR HOLINESS SIDE, WE FIND DECREED BY NO SYNOD OF
THE FATHERS.

12. And be here no words, but supplicatorie, will you say? When they urge so
vehemently, that the Nicene Council took order to the same purpose, that
causes should not be removed from place to place, alluding to the 5. Canon of
that Council, and to the latter end of the fourth, do these men think it is
a matter of mere grant, or wholly depending of the Popes pleasure? when they
call such a refuge, a wicked refuge, of them that run to Rome, do they not
show what opinion they conceive of it? Is it in the Popes power to license
wickedness, or if it be now, was it so then? Nay, when they say he must
repulse such straggling clients, is must a word for suitors and suppliants? when
they tell him in the same passage, that it becomes him to stop such holes, that
wretched men would creep out at, do they not plainly declare, that they have
more confidence in it, then in a mere suit or petition only? yea, when they
urge again, that the Nicene Council so ordered, and no derogation was ever
made to that Canon, by any contrary constitution, do they leave it free to the
Pope to yield to, yea or no? No doubt, say they, they most wisely and rightly
provided, that all matters should be ended in the places where they first
arose. And would these men have confessed, that the Pope might with justice do
to the contrary? When they tell him, That the grace of the holy Ghost is not
so fastened to The holy Ghost (...) other provinces as well as in Rome.
Rome, but that it is to be found in other Provinces too, by the which equity
may be gravely waighed, and stoutly followed by the Priests of Christ; do they
not privily tax him for fondly ouerweening his own sea, if he think matters
cannot be ended at home, without his interposing? When they allege, that
witnesses cannot be present at Rome, whom either age, or sex, or diverse
other infirmities and casualties hinder, and yet so necessary many times, as
that the causes cannot be tried without them, do they not rather show, what
is meet in reason, and just in conscience, then leave it wholly in the Popes
hands, to grant or no? Lastly, what opinion had they of the Popes agents in
foreign countries, that stick not to avouch this to his head, That any from
his Holiness should be sent as Legates, we find decreed by no Synod of the
Fathers? Where, because you dare talk of the Nicene copies, as allowing
appeals, which were pretended then Numb. 36.
with shame enough, but none such found upon most dilligent enquiry, take you in
that also which follows, in Gods name. That which you sent us hither by
Faustinus, as a part of the Nicene Council, in the truer copies which we have
received from holy Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, and reverend Atticus Bishop of
Constantinople, taken out of the originals themselves (which also we sent to
Bonifacius your predecessor) in them, we say, we could find no such thing.
Let Baronius, or Bellarmine, salve this now, as well as they can. Finally thus.
And as for your agents or messengers, send them not, grant them not at, every
man's request (do you see how faintly these men speak, as remembering they sued
only to the Pope for that which was in his power to grant or no; and which if
he did grant, he did but depart with his own right?) To which, this that
follows, may be a notable confirmation? Least we seem to bring the smokie
pride of the world, into the Church of Christ, which proposes the light of
simplicity and humility to those that desire to see God, etc. This of the
Epistle of the African Fathers to Pope Caelestine.

13. But now what says he to the Mileuitan Canon? Since that was it, which the
Bishop aimed at; as at last he awakes, and acknowledges himself. It excludes
not all from appealing (quoth he) but Priests and Deacons only, and such
inferior Clergy men. So as still the Bishops might appeal to Rome. And,
transmarinus nemo, is of the Bishops forging, too too general. Is it even so?
Whose forging then is that, Ad transmarina autem qui putauer it appellandum,
whosoever shall think good to appeal beyond the sea, let him be renounced
from the communion of all in Africa, the very words of the Canon? Is not, nemo
transmarinus appellet, all one with quicunque transmarinus appellandum
putauerit, or, quicunque appellauerit ad transmarina, puniatur, etc? What
difference is here, but that the one is comminatory, the other prohibitiue,
both universal and peremptory? Yea, but Bishops are excepted, because not
named. How if Bishops most of all included? As not only reason leads us to
think, because Bishops might not so well be spared out of the province, as
Priests might, they few to these many, (see Eusebius. l. 6. hist.) and therefore
no such Carnel. apud Eusebius lib 6. histor. c. 33. d^^^t Rome vnum (...)
Episcopum, presby: erot autem ^6. Vide B^ll^r. de Rom Po^t^f. lib. 2. c. 7.
detriment in the Priests absence, as in the Bishops: but the Fathers of the
aforesaid African council, in their epistle to Coelestine, intimate as much,
not only that Bishops are comprehended as well as Priests, but even much more.
For if (say they) there appear a prouiso for inferior Clerks and laymen, how
much more would the Synod have the same to be observed in Bishops, that being
excommunicated in their own province, they should not be suddenly, hastily, or
unduly, restored to the Communion, no not by your holiness? And as the Council
of Nice, meaning to forbid both Clerks and Lay, to forsake the judgment of
their own province, and betake themselves to another, named not the Bishops,
and yet in the general comprehended them too, quoting an auncienter Canon for
their purpose, (...) Can. 5. (...).
(...), that whom one casts out (whosoever he be) another should not receive:
so here the Fathers: for whom it was enough to instance in certain inferior
degrees of Clergy, though their intent was doubtless to comprehend all:
either as aiming at the Nicene Canon it self, and so laboring to come as
near it as possibly they could, or because Canons are applied to the present
use, (as ^.
the saying is) and the rashness of a Priest, one Apiarius by name, gave
occasion to Africa thus to decree. I might further ask, whether laymen might
appeal, notwithstanding this Canon, yea or no? Since only Clerks are mentioned
in it, and F. T. will have none but those to be prohibited, who are directly
named. If he say they might, what a wide gate is left open to tumult and
disorder, notwithstanding the Canon, for laymen to do that which Clerks might
not? Nay how does the Clerk avoid committing himself to foreign tribunals,
since a layman, in case of controversy with a Clerk, complaining to a
forreiner, draws the Clerk happily after him, to his no small molestation? If
he say, he might not; but that he is forbidden, though he be not specified, so
might the Bishops likewise, which is our question. Lastly, if those Fathers
might forbid Clergi-men to appeal to Rome, though Clergi-men only of the
inferior sort, it shows that the Popes jurisdiction is not universal, and in
the end Bishops might be forbid and all.

14. As for your fustie Epistle to Antonie of Fussula, it is out of the number
of S. Austens Epistles, which Possidius recounts, a faithful witness of S.
Austens desks and papers. One Grauius, a Dutchman, brought it first from Rome,
and set it out as a neweltie, which your selves durst not auow, from whom it
sprang. And though nothing is in the Epistle prejudicial to our cause, which
may not easily be answered, yet this shall suffice in this place.

15. Innocentius, you say, allowed the Canon of the Milevitan Council.
Therefore it makes not against the Pope. Nay, therefore Innocentius was content
with that proportion, which the later Popes are not satisfied with. As Boniface
himself in his Epistle to Eulalius Bishop of Carthage, is so impatient of this
restraint, that he makes the devil to be the author of that, which S. Austen
and the rest devised, for the barring of Appeals to Rome. Behold, what kin the
devil is to S. Austen, as Boniface would persuade. And yet others succeeding,
less moderate then he. You tell us that the Sardican Council allowed these
appeals. What then? Therefore this in all likelihoode contradicts them not. As
if that which was lawfully ordained at first, might not afterward be changed
upon apparent inconvenience, as your self here insinuate of the Popes Legates,
and their outrages: of whom you know what Salisb. Polycrat. Vide and Bernard.
de consid. ad Eugen. l. 4. The words of Charles Brandon Earl of Suffolk, that
England never received any good by the Popes Legates. Vide and Sadolet. Epist.
one said, that they were as Satanas emissus a facie Domini ad vexandum orbem
terrarum, like the devil let loose to scourge the world. Yet, you like a good
fellow, would prove the lawfulness of appeals, by their pranks and
practices, though never so irregular, as he that would justify false titles by
possession. Albeit neither was the Sardican Council general, and so of no
force to bind all in all places: and if it had so been, yet you may remember,
how many Sanctions even of the Nicene Council, are out of use with you,
canceled, abrogate, as the Bishop shows in one part of that book of his, Cap.
7. p. 168.
which you now fumble about the refuting of. To omit that the constitution
runs but thus, though it were never so authentical, even by Placet vobis?
May you please Can. 3. Sard. Council.
to allow; and rather for Julius his virtue, then the seats privilege, and so
to last no longer then men endued with the like integrity that Julius was,
should occupy the room, but no way descending of such original right, as you
pretend. Else what need the Canon either the Fathers consent, or the scrutiner
to begin with placet vobis? As for Petri memoriam, that they would vouchsafe to
honor Peter's, memory, (...), non res (...) ergo.
even that shows it was arbitrarie, and rather not to be denied to his blessed
memory, then due to his successor by right of inheritance. Though Optatus
leads us to more memories then one, as there were more Apostles and Saints then
one: of whom he construes that, even in the Sardican sense, memorijs Sanctoru^
co^municantes ((...) for (...)) Romans 12. 13.
lib. 2. contra Parmenianum, and again, memorijs Apostolorum, lib. 4.

16. Now to back your fancy, that appeals were not forbid by the Mileuitan
Canon, in S. Austens time, you descend to Leos time, short of S. Austens, so as
you refute not the Bishop, nor say nothing to the purpose, but that you long to
be vntrussing your pedlerly fardles. As if Leo were not like enough to encroach
upon the Canon, to gain advantage to his Sea; a sea indeed, which ears out
the earth Leo Epist. 87. ad Episcop. Maucitaniae.
though never so well fenced: and the distressed estate of the Churches of
Africa, increasing with the times, might drive them to admit of more then was
reason, but that they were glad to make their peace, at any hand, though with
hard conditions. Concerning Gregory's times, you fall a Greg. Regist. l. 1.
epist. 82.
great deal lower, though you are clean besides the cushion there too. For
whereas you granted before, that the Canon forbad the appeals of Deacons,
though not of Bishops; now you bring us an instance of two Deacons appealing,
Felicissimus and Vincentius.
so as the Canon is trampled down by your own confession, and yet the Bishops
allegation was of the Canon only. Shall law, or practice be our Judge? And yet
when Gregory, refers the plaintiue Deacons over to a Synod, he does but as
the Canons had enacted before in that behalf, namely, Nicen. can. 3. Antioch.
can. 9. Constantinop. can. 2. What proof then is this of Gregory's authority
to hear appeals, which rather he commits to the trial of Synods, as equity
would?

17. And the same fault is in your next example. Certain Priests of Africa
complained against Paulinus, Donadeus a Deacon against Victor his Bishop. Yet
you granted even now, that Priests and Deacons were barred Appeals, by the
Canon, most evidently. What is this then to the matter, but that you want
work, and are feign to suck occasion out of your fingers ends, that you may
be doing? And in one word, when Gregory so orders the matter upon these
fellows complaints, that he refers the hearing to an assembly of Bishops, with
the primate of the Province, as you allege, either Victor, or Columbus, or
whom you will, he shows no authority, but only does as the Canons had
appointed to be done, whether he would or no. Indeed Gregory professes his
respect to the Canons in diverse places, and herein he keeps it.

. 18. It follows, of certain Popes, who exercised (he says) universal
authority in S. Austens days. Though I showed that this need not, because no
way thwarting the Bishops words, yet briefly to his objections, that he seem
not over wise in his own conceit. S. Austen says of Zozim. Ep. 157. ad Opt.
Iniuncta nobis a venerabili Papa Zozimo Apostolicae sedis Episcopo
Ecclesiastica necessitas nos Caesaream traxerat. The necessary occasions of
the Church imposed upon me by Pope Zozimus drew me to Caesarea. And out of
Possidius, Literae sedis Apostolicae compulerunt. This may prove violence, as
well as authority, because of trahere and compellere: Which surely Zozimus used
not to S. Austen. He lackt a learned man, and called for S. Austen, using his
best interest to persuade him. What is this to the Popedom? How many such
compellers could I show you out of S. Austen? Marcellinus for one, a temporal
Earl, but an exceeding good man, and afterward Martyr, as we are told by S.
Hierome. Sic Contra Pelag. lib. vlt.
me compulit vel ipsa charitas tui Marcelline Comes, sic inquam me compulit,
sic duxit, and traxit, etc. De peccat. meritis and remiss. l. 1. c. 1. Just as
the Apostle acknowledges of himself, and all Christians, Charitas Christi
cogit nos, the love of Christ constraines us. So here the necessities of the
Church did S. Austen, reco^mended to him by Pope Zozimus; yet with no more
jurisdiction perhaps, then Marcellinus had over him, which I think was but
small. The examples of this kind of phrase, are rife every where. We read in
the book of Samuel, that the witch constrained king Saul to eat meat. 1.
Sam. 28. And Luke 24. coegerunt eum, the two Disciples that went into Emaus,
constrained our Savior to tarry with them. Howbeit doubtless not superior to
him, specially after his resurrection. Abraham and Lot constrained their
guests, as we may read in Genesis, yet not giving laws I suppose to strangers,
which is condemned in another place of that book, Peregrinus est, and vult
dare leges, but to teach us to enforce our liberalities and our courtesies,
where modesty Chrysostom. in locum.
reiects them, though need crave them. And these guests were Angels. Which it
were fine if you could bring under the Popes compulsion, as some of your men
have seriously labored, to make the Pope paramount to the Angels themselves;
once, Abraham and Lot though no spiritual men, here constrained them for
certain. What speak I of Scriptures? Even Tully de Amicitia, Cogitis certe,
quid enim refert qua ratione cogatis? You constrain me (quoth Lelius) no
matter how. And again S. Austen, Praef. librorum ad Simplicianum,
Quaestiunculas quas mihi enodandas iubere dignatus es. He says, Simplician
commanded him to dissolve questions. And yet, I take it, Simplician had no
such regular power over S. Austen, as to command him. This iubere would have
troubled Pope Nicholas wonderfully. I never read his Epistle ad Michaelem
Imperatorem, but I pity his passions, to see him so stormed with a poor
iubere of the Emperor. Whereas the Emperor writing in all likelihood in
Greek, (...) might be construed, wishing or exhorting, if either he or his
interpretour had not been afraid of a blew spider, a dread where none was. But
again S. Austen in the forenamed place, Cum tibi placet quod scribo, noui cui
placeat, quoniam qui te inhabitet noui. He means, that the holy Ghost dwells
in Simplicianus, which would have made a fair show in a Popes style. Largitor
enim omnium munerum per tuam sententiam confirmauit obedientiam meam, etc. He
speaks of obedience yielded to Simplician, who yet was not his superior.
Again, In meo ministerio, dixit Deus fiat and factum est. (He calls it his
ministry, or his service, and sets him almost in the place of God.) In tua
vero approbatione, vidit deus quia bonum est. At least, there he makes him his
God, or his superior directly. Generally of all Bishops, thus we read in S.
Austen, Epist. 168. In alijs ciuitatibus tantum agimus, quod ad ecclesiam dei
pertinet, quaentum vel nos permittunt, vel NOBIS IMPONVNT earundem ciuitatum
Episcopi, See the same phrase, Cura scripturarum in^posita, Epist 110. of the
Bishops of Carth. and Numidia: that enjoined him to write a book. Which he did.
fratres and consacerdotes nostri. What is less in imponunt, then in the
iniungunt that you urge? Iniuncta nobis a Zozimo necessitas. Yet here you see,
imponunt is an act that any Bishop might exercise toward S. Austen, even his
brothers and fellow-priests, [fratres and consacerdotes,) not only Zozimus. So
Ruffinus in exposit. symbol. ad Laurent. which Laurence was no Pope, though he
be called Papa there,. i. a reverent personage. One Laurentius stood with
Symmachus for the Popedom, I grant, but he lost it, as you know. Well, what
says Ruffinus? He calls it, pondus praecepti, because Laurentius desired him
to put his exposition which he had preached upon the Creed, in writing; the
weight of his charge, or the charge of his commandment. Again, Astringis me
vt aliquid tibi de side, etc. Yet Laurence had no power, that I know, of
binding Ruffinus. Lastly, expositionis a te impositae necessitatem, says he,
which answers word for word almost to that which you bring out of S. Austen,
Iniuncta nobis a Zozimo necessitas. But of Zozimus (says he) hereafter,
wherein we will attend him.

19. First therefore of Liberius, a most wretched proof. Certain Arian
heretics obtained his letters for their restitution, Basil. epist. 74. and 32.
to the assembly of Tyana, and by virtue of them they were restored, though
they did but dissemble, in that they feigned their conformity with the Church
of God, inwardly remaining deep Arians. Is not this fit to be brought in
behalf of the Pope, to show how well he stands upon his watch, how meet a man
he is to inherit the trust of all Christian souls, that suffers such knaves to
beguile him in this sort? As for that, that Liberius letters were of force; so
should any other grave and worthy Prelates have been, upon whose testimony
the Synod might rely; especially when, if there had been no doubt of their
repentance, they should have needed no other mediator happily then themselves.
But because he has quoted S. Basil in the margent, let us hear his words, and
see what confidence he puts in Rome, or in the Bishop thereof. Epist. 74. thus
he says of Liberius, and his restoring of Eustathius that Arian heretic,
which suspicion, to say truth, Liberius was not free from, enclining thither
himself when time was. The rather might he write in the behalf of an Arian.
(...), etc. Since therefore from thence (he means from Rome, and from the
Western Churches, this Epistle bearing inscription to the (...), the Bishops
of the West) since from thence he has received power to hurt the Churches, and
the liberty that you gave him (Liberius with the rest) he to the subversion of
many has abused, it is necessary that reformation should spring from the same
place, and that you should send word to the Churches, for what cause he was
received, and how being changed since in his opinion, he makes void the grace
that was then given him (not by Liberius so much as by the Fathers, that is,
they of the Council of Tyana) of which before. And in the same Epistle, a
little before this place, S. Basil gives two reasons, why he implores the aid
of the Italian Bishops, in these words, (...), etc. The first is, because if
only the Eastern Bishops appear against Eustathius, it may be thought to
come of emulation and partiality, one Bishop of the same country opposing
another. (...). But you the farther of, the better believed. Which, to say
truth, has always bin the Popes felicity. But you see he flies not to them
for any universal authority or prerogative (as they imagine) from Peter
derived, but for the distance of the place, which makes them seem to be more
incorrupt. The second reason is, from the consenting of many Bishops together,
and the power of that to prevail with peoples minds, when there shall be a
concurrence, (...). That is; But of with joint consent many shall auerre the
same thing, the very multitude of them that are of one mind, will make it to
be entertained without contradiction. By which, you see, the Pope can do
little alone. And so speaks Basil in his greatest extremity, even when he
needs the Pope most. Else we know, how sharply he can tax Rome, and give the
Popes their own, when occasion serves. (...), the Western pride, says he,
and, haereses propagant, they spread heresies, or, multiply heresies. Epist.
8. ad Eusebius. Samosat.

20. Of Yet Sozomene l. 3. hist. c. 23. Pa^lus, Marcellus, Asclepas, and
Lu^ius, suas seeds recuperarunt, quandoquide^ ex literis Imperatoris facta est
his potestas ad sua redeundi. The Emperor (^ot Julius, says he) restored them.
Julius and Athanasius I spoke before. The same was the cause of Marcellus, and
Asclepas, Paulus, and Lucian and the rest, restored, as you say, by Julius
Pope, tanquam omnium curam gerentem, as bearing care of all. Tripart. l. 4. c.
15. As if every Bishop were not obliged to do his service to the whole Church,
as far as he can, which were easy to demonstrate, but that I have done it
before, and quoted Origin very lately for the same; yet Julius the rather,
because the prime Bishop, but prime in order only, and in a certain
excellency, propter sedis dignitatem, as the Tripartite here speaks, in the
very words that this man quotes, not propter auctoritatem. S. Austen calls it
Speculam, his watchtower. Besides that this same Julius is many years before
S. Austen, and yet he professes to reckon up only such as lived in S. Austens
time. Do you not see how he labors to utter his provision? Finally in
Sozomene, who reports the same matter, and is quoted by this man, to that very
purpose, cap. 2. number. 8. In Sozomene I say, lib. 3. c. 7. thus we read. That
the persons, to whom Julius wrote, in behalf of the aforesaid catholic
Bishops, though they acknowledged the Church of Rome, primas far apud omnes,
to be the chief Church in every bodies estimation, as (...), and (...), the
school of the Apostles, and the mother city of piety, (not for any succession
into the authority of S. Peter in particular) and yet deny (they say) they
cannot, but the first authors of Christian relligion sprang from the East (not
from Rome) nevertheless indignati sunt se posteriores ide^ferre, quod
magnitudine ecclesiae superarentur, idque cu^ virtute, and pio viuendi
instituto, long superiores essent: they thought much that they should be set
any whit behind the others, because their Church was not so great or so ample
as theirs, specially when in virtue, and godly life, they far excelled them.
Thus they. I compare not now the opinions of Arians with Catholics, in that
point of their dissension, which the Scripture has determined, and right faith
compounded, but as for East and West, you see what estimation one had of the
other, and how little our Grecians thought themselves short of Rome. Therefore
they are so confident a little after, as to challenge Julius for doing against
the Council, and their own definition; Insimularunt Iulium ceu
transgredientem ecclesiae leges. And whereas Julius a little before had
threatened them, they threaten him again: and Sozomene calls the letter that
they sent to Julius, plenam minarum atque ironiae, full not only of threats,
but mocks and taunts, unless you will otherwise construe it; So miserably were
they afraid of the Popes authority in those days, divided from equity.
Pollicentur pace^ and communionem Iulio, si approbaret abdicationem factam, sin
resisteret decretis eorum, etc. They promise Julius to be of his communion, if
he will do as they would have him, if not, to leave [that is, to disclaime]
him, you would say to excommunicate him, if it made for you. And indeed in the
10. Chap. of Sozomene, soon after, they do so in good earnest.

21. The next is Damasus. In whom I must be short. What tell you us of titles,
and terms, and styles? what though they called him most blessed Lord, raised
to the height of Apostolic dignity, holy father of fathers, Damasus Pope,
etc. Think you, that the boys would forbear laughter, hearing this argument?
That the Bishops of Africa call him Damasum Papam, Pope Damasus, etc. therefore
Damasus Pope might receive appeals out of Africa. If that be not in their
style, the rest is vulgar, and nothing to the matter. Who was not Papa in those
days? which you engrossing, bewray your selves. Yea, but nothing might go for
current concerning important affairs, as deposition of Bishops, say you, nisi
ad noticiam vestrae sedis delatum fuerit, unless your Sea knew of it. To
which, I answer, noticia is one Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 6. Assuerus Rex
non erat subiectus sapientibus illis vi^^^, quorum faciebat cuncta consilio:
Hest. 1. And yet that was consilium statum, or permanentiae; this less then
so. Nay there was to be consensut (cuncta faciebat de illorum consilio) here
relatio at the most, or noticiae, but intimation.
thing, consensus another. Men may seek for resolution, and yet not be subject
to authority, unless themselves please. (...), that the sovereign stroke in
every business should be the Metropolitanes of the Province, the Council of
Nice determined very clearly, Can. 4. of more authority then your Damasus
his epistles, or to Damasus.

22. But is not that a brave confuting of the Mileuitan Canon, alleged by the
Bishop against appeals beyond the sea, that S. Hierome sought to Damasus for
his judgment about Hypostasis? This also may prove an appeal in time, when
appeals grow scant. It has been answered by our Divines, over and over: it is
nothing to our question, therefore I insist not upon it. Neither yet that of
Ambrose (if it be Ambrose) who living within Italy, that is Damasus his
province, says, Damasus governed the house of God, the house no doubt, wherein
he lived, and wrote at that day. But how if he had called it, as it follows
in S. Paul, columnam 1. Tim. 3.
and firmamentum veritatis, which S. Paul does Ephesus, wherein Timothy lived?
yet neither Ephesus that infallible one, that you imagine Rome to be, for truth
of doctrine, nor Timothy a monarch or universal Bishop.

23. That Peter of Alexandria was restored to his Bishopric upon Damasus his
letters: you show not they were mandatorie, we think rather commendatorie.
Damasus certified good things of Peter, and the people received him, illis
confisus, trusting they might be true; or, they did what they desired and
longed to do, upon so good a hint. The Pope gave not Patriarkships in And long
after that time, Fulbert. Carnoten. (I thought good to note it) calls himself,
Dei gratia Episcop^^, and Regis sui Rob^, i. Bishop by the grace of God and the
King. Epist 4. quae ad ipsum.
those days: yea had any so challenged, the Alexandrines would have torn him
in pieces, they were so violent.

24. Vitalis an heretic, and an Antiochian, was examined, and censured by
Pope Damasus. But you dissemble not that Paulinus their Bishop permitted it.
The wonder had been, if Damasus had intermedied against his consent. One
Bishop may refer his Priest, to be examined by another whom he will. Things
were not so well settled with Paulinus at this time in Antioch, as it should
seem, through intestine discords, which long continued. So Damasus might
prescribe a form of abiuration to Vitalis the heretic, though otherwise
prescribe is but an imperious word of your own devising, and to draw him a
form, which he meant should be used by him upon his return to Antioch, had
been enough. Your author whom you quote, in Ep. Elias Cretens.
2. ad Cledon. says only thus; Damaso postulante edidit, or, literis
consignauit fidem: at Damasus his insta^ce he penned a form of his belief: not
Damasus for him, but he to Damasus. Which Athanasius also did at the Emp.
Iouians request, not to purge Theod. histor. lib. 4. cap. 2.
suspicion, but to instruct him in the truth. Of prescribing to Paulinus, I
read nothing in that place. In Damasus his Epistle Tom. 1. Council. Ep. 1. Damas.
I find this qualification, both that tuae voluntati and tuo iudicto omnia
derelinquimus, we leave all to your will, and your judgment: and in the end
this, Non quod haec ipsa quae scribimus, non potueris conuertentium susceptioni
proponere, sed quo noster consensus liberum in suscipiendo tibi tribuat
exemplu^: Not that you could not of your own self have propounded these
things to conuerts, ere they were received, but that our concurrence might
yield you freedom of example to receive them. And if freedom, how
prescription?

25. It is a wonder, how you dare mention the name of Flauianus, who by the
Emperors favor kept his seat against Theod. l. 5. c. 23.
so many Popes one after another, striving to unhorse him, and all in vain.
The pains that Chrysostom and Theophilus took, to make a peace between him
and Damasus, showed their good care of the Churches unity, and worthily
entitles them to the blessing of peacemakers. But that which you call pardoning
Flauianus offense, and restoring him to the communion of the Church again, was
no more then was usual in those days, between Bishop and Bishop, if they
misliked one another, to forbear communicating mutually; if satisfaction were
given, to return to fellowship and communion again, which you perhaps, to
amplify the Popes power, would have us think to be excommunication and
absolution. Where you say, that the people of Antioch, were IN TIME REDVCED to
concord and unity, with Flavianus their Bishop, through this act of Damasus,
it shows it was rather the relenting of their minds, and appeasing their
stomachs, out of Flavianus good demeanure, and other such considerations, then
the Popes sentence, or bare definition. For then what need long time to work
it? Neither was that a sign of Damasus his supremacy, that Flavianus sent his
embassage to Rome. For when two are to meet, why should not the inferior come
to the superior, rather then otherwise? I mean inferior in order, as
Flavianus here to Damasus, Antioch to Rome, but not in authority. Though the
embassage was not intended so much to Damasus, as to clear the scandal that
went of Flavian, and to satisfy the whole Church of God in those parts, that
East and West might no longer continue in jealousy and alienation.

26. And now to come to his successor Syricius, as your own words are, how do
you prove his universal jurisdiction? I know it wrings you to be held to this
point, but there is no remedy, to that you must speak. Forsooth the Council
of Capua, committed the hearing of Flauianus his cause to the Bishop of
Alexandria and the Bishop of Egypt, with this limitation, as S. Ambrose
witnesses (I report your own words) that the approbation and confirmation of
their sentence should be reserved to the Roman sea, and the Bishop thereof, who
was then Syricius. Suppose this were so, how far is it from arguing
universal jurisdiction? For as the Council might make choice of the Bishop of
Alexandria, and the Bishops of Egypt, to take the first knowledge of Flavianus
his cause into their hands, so, out of the same authority, might it reserve
the after judgment, and the up shot of all, to the Bishop of Rome: it might
do this, I say, out of it own liberty, and for the personal worth of
Syricius Pope, not for any prerogative of his Sea. And rather it shows the
pre-eminence of the Council, that might depute the Pope to such a business, as
likewise the Bishop of Alexandria and Egypt. The Eusebians made an offer
(witness Athanasius in his Apology) to Julius Pope of Rome, to be their judge,
if he thought good; Iulio si vellet arbitrium causae detulerunt. But if Julius
had no other hold, it was a poor supremacy that might content him. Yet
Ambrose, in the Epistle 78. which you quote, says not so much. Rather of
Theophilus somewhat magnificently, Vt duobus istis tuae sanctitatis examen
impartiretur, confidentibus Aegyptijs, that your Holiness might have the
scanning of these men's cause, while the Bishops of Egypt were your assessors.
And again, Sancta Synodus, cognitionis ius unanimitati tuae, caeterisque ex
Aegypto consacerdotibus nostris commisit. The holy Synod (of Capua) committed
the power of judging this matter to your agreement, and the Egyptian Bishops.
What then of the Pope? Sane referendum arbitramur ad sanctum fratrem nostrum
Romanae sacerdotem Ecclesiae. Sure, we are of the mind, that it were good it
were referred to our holy brother the Priest of Rome. First brother, then
Priest of Rome, lastly arbitramur. The Synod belike not ordering so, but
Ambrose giving his opinion thus. And, Quoniam praesumimus te ea iudicaturum
quae etiam illi displicere nequeant, because we presume you will resolve in
such manner, as shall not be displeasing to him. See you, how one of them is as
free from error, as the other, in S. Ambrose mind? And he is content, that
Syricius should have the cognusance of the cause after Theophilus, not that
Theophilus error might be corrected by Syricius, but that ones concurrence
might strengthen the other.

27. Do you look I should answer to Syricius Decretall sent to Himerius? or
does the conueying of it, to France and Portugal, prove universal
jurisdiction, exercised by the Popes in S. Austens time? But with such baggage
you make up your measure. Himerius asked, and Syricius answers. What then? And
Himerius was within the Roman Patriarchship, caput corporis tai, not caput
corporis vniuersalis, says Syricius himself, in the end of his Rescript. But
proceed. Optatus (say you) calls Peter principem nostrum, our Prince. Now he
could not mean Peter to be that Prince, for he was dead and gone, and so
nothing worth. Therefore Siricius who then lived, and was his successor in the
Popedom. Bravely shot, and like a Sadducee. Yet in the same book, Optatus
calls Siricius in plain terms, not princeps noster, but socius noster, our
friend and fellow, as S. Ambrose a little before, his brother and priest.

28. That, in the African Council, Can. 35. the Fathers decreed, that letters
should be sent to their brethren and fellow-Bishops abroad, but especially to
Anastasius, to inform them, how necessary their latter decree was, in favor
of the Donatists, contradicting a former Canon made against them, what is that
to Anastasius his universal jurisdiction? Do you see how you are choked, if
you be but held to the point? yet they sent to others, no less then to
Anastasius. But to him especially, you say. It might be so; for the eminency
of his Sea, as we have often told you. And the Donatists being too strong for
them, as appears by that decree, which controules the former, they were glad
to take any advantage, I warrant you, to countenance their proceedings. Durum
telum necessitas est.

29. That, the Bishops of Africa requested Innocentius to use his authority,
to the confirmation of their statutes against the Pelagian heretics; it was
not because the ordinances of provincial Synods, are not good in their
precincts, without the Pope, as I think your selves will not deny, but that
the Pelagian heresy being far spread throughout the world, might be curbed
within the places that Innocentius had to do in, as well as in Africa, where
the Council was held. Which taking so good effect, as it seems it did, S.
Austen cries out that they were So likewise. Alexander Bishop of Alexand^,
wrote to all Bishops wheresoever d^, warning them to r^s^aine from the
communion of (...). Sozom lib. 1 c. 14. which i^ more then to define
dogmatically. Yet they will not allow him universal (...).
toto Christiano orb damnati, condemned over all the Christian world: not that
Innocentius authority was irrefragable, but the concurrence of so many Pastors
in the cause of Gods truth, was of force at that time to rectify the
consciences of such as wauered before. In this sense Possidius might well call
it, iudicium catholicae dei Ecclesie, the judgment of the Catholic Church of
God, when Innocentius and Zo^^mus accursed the Pelagians, because it sprang
from the consent of so many godly Fathers, as incited those Popes to that act
of justice, and lead them the way in this dance of zeal, as I may so call it.
Not that the Church stood in them two, or as if they had the universal
jurisdiction that he talks of, or rather dares not talk of, but captiously
and crookedly inuolues only in impertinent allegations.

30. I might spend time, about S. Austens authority, Epist. 92. writing thus
to Innocentius; That the Lord has placed thee Sozom. l. 1. c. 1. Episiopt
Nicaeni dignum (...) dicauere Eustath^m, qui capesseret sedem, Apostolicam. Est
vule dicere, (...) ex Be^ensi. Idem Sozom l. end. e. 10 Alexand^m quoque and
(...) Ecclesiam. Apostol^ accipit, sub Man and Alexandro. Iterum apud eundem
Sozom. lib. 4. c. ^4. Cy^llu^ Aposto^ sedis antistes, quia ^cil. Episcopus
Hi^rosolym^ Sido^. Epist. 1. l. 6 de Lupo, Post nouem dec^^ sa quinque^ (...)
Sede. Apostol^^. Et paulo ante de codem, To^a Ecclesiae dei membra super (...).
Et, Dig^^ q^^ ab omnibus consula^. Howbeit Bishop only of (...) in France Yet
Bellar. most impudently l. 4. c. 8. de Not. Eccl. will have the whole Church of
God to be called Apostolic, only because the succession from the Apostles
never failed in the Church of Rome, as he idly doates, whereas in other (he
think) it has, and so only that Apostolic for ^ooth. But besides that
already brought out of Sozomene and other^, Baronius checks him, acknowledging
more Churches then the Roman to be Apostolic. See Tertull. de Praescript. c.
36. Per^ Ecclesias. Apostolicas, apud qu^ adhuc Cathe dr^^ Apostolorum, etc.
Lastly, Eusebius l. t. hist. c. 1.
in sede Apostolica. And does this prove universal jurisdiction? or is there
no Apostolic sea but the Roman? By which reason we shall have many
universal jurisdictions. Or, that it were negligence to co^ceale ought from
his Reverence, which concerned the Church? But if it were, as they pretend, it
were more then negligence, even flat rebellion, not to communicate with him
about all such affairs. But making it but negligence, he shows they sought
for advice only, or countenance, not for leave and grace, when they referred
to him. Whereas S. Austen had spoke, of the Popes applying his pastoral
diligence, to prevent the dangers of Christ's weak members, F. T. interprets
it, his power and authority, over all the members of Christ; which if the
Bishop had so done, to put in ALL, where it was not in S. Austen, to enforce an
argument, had been cheating, and coosenage, and to be proclaimed in markets.
See chap. 2.

31. Innocentius his testimony of his own precedencie, carries small force
with it, and I confess I was once of A^ his mind; but since I (...) by perusal
of more, that this Epistle, bad though it be, yet i^ like all the rest of
Innocenti^sse^, as to (...) (...), to Aureliu^, to Johannes Hierosolym. etc.
Never worse Secretary, I think, or that kept (...).
Erasmus has found some cause to suspect this Epistle for counterfeit, or at
least censured it for one not worthy of Innocentius. Whereas the Apostle Paul
had said of himself, Praeter ea quae extrinsecus sunt, cura omnium
Ecclesiarum, this man imitating him ( Bellar. de Pont Romans lib. 1. c. 17. (...)
Quod autem.
for you hold of Paul too as well as Peter) reads it clean contrary, Praeter
ea quae intrinsecus sunt, etc. that you may see his Clerkship. And yet you make
him worse, then in truth he is. For whereas he more modestly, Arbitramur
referri debere etc. you leaving out arbitramur, avouch it peremptorily, that
about matters of faith, all Bishops ought tareferre, etc. Is this good dealing?
Lastly, if S. Austen and Alipius say of him, concerning his rescript,
Rescripsit ad omnia eo modo quo Adomnia, and per omnia, differ.
fas erat, etc. he has written back to all, as meet was; they mean for
matter, and for the points in controversy, between Pelagius and the Church,
not for ought that he enterlaces of the ambition of his own Sea. And of these
things hitherto.

To his fifth Chapter:
Of Origin, Hilarie, and Maximus, their authorities.

. 1. AS I have often complained of the tediousnes of this mate, the only:
invincible armor that he fights with, as certain beasts make their parts good
Cic 2. de (...). Deorum.
against the hunter, by the evil savor and sent they cast forth to annoy him,
being otherwise unable to resist him in the encounter: So he shows it in this
chapter more then any where else, referring us (besides his prattle) to former
places of his book, for confutation of such points, as he mislikes in the
Bishops Answer. As if no body had confuted his confutation of those Answers,
which the Reader of himself is able to do, I dare say, if he have perused but
the former part of this book, without any further pains to be taken in that
behalf. And yet every where he remits us to what he has done, and said, as
altogether unconquerable. Now for that which is so firm in the Bishops Answer,
as not to be removed by any means, that he railes at and calls stale: else S.
Hilarie professes of himself to do so, vt recens lectio and collata responsis
invitis etiam and co^tradicentibus sensum veritatis eliciat. De Trin. lib 6.
why cannot he iterate his refutation again, as well as the Bishop repeat his
Answer? but it shames him, that so many Arguments should stumble at one stone,
Judge. 9.
like the sons of Gedeon, beheaded by Abimelech all at one block: and
therefore he falls to carping and deprauing. Etiamne antidotum contra Caesarem?
said he. So here, the Bishops fault is to have showed the error, and not let
the Cardinals fallacies to pass for current.

2. That Origin and S. Hilarie, in allowing the Church to be built upon Peter,
with certain other preheminences which they affoard him, deny not but the
rest had their fellowshippe in the same, this is Adioynd. number. 3 He flies to
his common and s^e shift. All which I have fully confuted to his she in the 1.
Chap. where I have de^lared how he abuses SS. August. Ambrose, Cyrill, etc.
stale to F. T. and for that only reason deserves to be misprized. As if the
fault were, not so much in the weakness of the answer, as in the frequencie of
repeating it, to which his Battismes nevertheless, and his abominable
Crambes, give the only occasion. Whereas, I think, a bad answer is to be
accounted bad, though but As Menanders saying is, That Hunter is short to him,
though his tale be never so long, because he tells it well; Chaerilus tedious
in three words speaking.
once given; and a good, the oftener it serves the purpose, the more it bewrayes
its own strength, and the adversaries exigent, that has but one kind of way
to assault the truth, and therefore is still beat back at the same door.
Where, what marvel if the Bishop rest not satisfied with this inference, that
those Fathers Number. (...). [Card.] Origin. in 6 ad Romans Petro cum summa rerum de
pascendus ^bus traderetur. and^.] To which the ^ish answer, Summa rerum, The
chief pastoral charge was giu^ to Peter, but it was given others also. Ex
Origene ipso in Matthew. 16. Tract 1.
when they ascribe certain excellencies to S. Peter, and yet perhaps, short of
the supposed Monarchy, by that means, debar the rest of the Apostles from
their part therein, whereas the Cardinal himself says as much of S. Peter,
as you would think a man could possibly say, to advance his dignity, and yet
means not but the Twelve were equal with him, in the same? Which were hard to
allege now, for the proouing of Peter's excellency above the other Apostles,
though we would argue for the Cardinal out of the Cardinals own works. For
example, what can be more for Peter's Monarchy over the Church, then to say,
that he only was made chief Regent thereof? And yet summa potestas, is by the
Cardinal made common to all the Apostles, not once, but twice, within few
lines, cap. 9. l. 1. de Romans Pont. and again in the same chapter, Vnusquisque
Apostolorum it a cur am gerebat totius Ecclesiae, ac si ad SE SOLVM ea cura
pertineret. Every one of the Apostles so managed the Church, as if that care
had only belonged to him. And, cap. 11. Summa atque amplissima potestas, is
given to them all. Shall we not ponder these words then, henceforth in Authors,
if at any time they give as much as this to Peter, and be ready to acknowledge
by the Cardinal his own confession, that Peter had no more then the rest of
the Apostles in all this prerogative, and therefore no Monarch?

3. Now that Origin follows an Allegorical sense like to a Preacher, as you
say, (whereas the Preacher, Adiovnd. It is to be observed, that Origin in that
Homily follows altogether an Allegorical sense, and seeking to draw from
thence some moral doctrine, (as Preachers use to do) applies the same, not
only to all the Apostles, as well as to Peter, but also to all perfect
Christians, teaching, that whosoever does confess Christ as Peter did, he
shall have the same beatitude that Peter had, and be a Ra^ke as he was, etc. So
also (N^m. (...)) he applies the giving of the Keys as well to every ^a^ ^ll
Christian as Peter, or the rest of the Apostles. But then (Number. 5.) every just
man and wom^n, should have as much Eccles^^sticall power and Jurisdiction as
Peter, to bind, loose, ex ^ommunicate, and^. Then (Number (...).) every Priest as
much as his Bishop, Bishop as Metropolitan, etc. overthrowing thereby all
subordination in the Church, and confounding the Eccles^^sti all with the
Se^ular, the La^^^e with the Clergy, head with members, shepherd with sheep,
etc.
if any body should tell the plain truth) leaving the literal altogether, it
may show his modesty; and check your rashness, that build so boldly upon the
literal sense, if it be true which the Cardinal in another place observes,
that the literal sense of things spoken to Peter, is obscurer then the
allegorical, though that be hard to be believed too, and is commonly found
contrary, by his leave. Yet thus he writes, lib. 1. de Pont. Romans cap. 12. Non
negat Augustinus ad literam posse and debere intelligi quae dicuntur de Judah,
Petro, and Iohanne: Sed tantum dicit literalem sensum saepe esse obscurum, and
non facile inueniri, sensum autem mysticum esse multo illustriorem and
clariorem, and propterea se omisso literali figurate ea exponere loca voluisse.
That is, S. Augustine denies not, (so as he would bring S. August. too within
the compass of this dotage) that things said of Peter, Judas, and John, both
may and ought to be literally understood, but only he says, that the literal
sense is ofttimes obscure, and hard to sinde out (where I wonder says S.
August. so?) but that the mystical sense is He quotes Trac. vl^ in Johan. but
all too wide.
far more clear and evident, and therefore that he omitting the literal
exposition, would expound those places figuratively, forsooth. This is the
constancy of these men, that as Benhadad for fear and guilty conscience, ran
from chamber to chamber, so they to avoid what makes against them, change
sense for sense, sometime literal for allegorical, then allegorical for the
literal, about the words spoken to Peter by our Savior. The former they
think they may do with S. August. and avouch him for it; there the allegory
is the cleerer; As for the latter, they will not endure that Origin should do
so, by any means. Here all is spoild, unless you stick to the Letter: And a
Chaos, a confusion is brought in by us, Lay folk and Clerks, Men and Women,
promiscuously inuading both the keys and the office, no difference left, nor
sign of difference, if we allow of this. Thus he. But howsoever you roll and
ruffle in your Rhetorique, declaiming against the supposed Anarchy of our
Church, and not discerning (which even Balaam did) the beauty of those tents,
to which you are a professed enemy, (so thick is the fogge of your malicious
ignorance, that stuffes up your senses;) I believe Sir, the keys are
conueighed to the commonalty rather by you then us, and to the worser sex too
(not so to be honored) as in your Abbesses to be governors, in your gossips
to be dippers and baptisers, and I know not what. And doubtless you would have
admitted them to be Preachers Catholic Divine in Answer to the Reports, etc c
8 sect. 16. quotes out of Baldus, that the Pope in some case may commit
spiritual things to a mere layman And that de facto he gave a noble Lady
leave to take the communion out of her own hands, Vide Florim. Rae^ de ortu
haeres huius saeculi. lib. 6. c. 19. sect. 4.
too by this time, if you had not thought it fitter to discharge your men, then
to license your Women. Neither if Origin extend this to more then Peter, must
it therefore presently be communicated to all; There are Apostles besides
Peter, there are Pastors besides the Apostles, there are the just and faithful
of all sorts, besides diverse that belong to the body of the Church in show. It
is not necessary we should open so great a gappe as you think, though we take
Origin literally. Though this I must tell you, that Origin in all likelihood
would not have applied it so by allegory, unless he had stretched it beyond
Peter, in the very property. For assurance whereof consider his words. Si super
vnum illum Petrum existimas aedificari totam in Matthew. 16. Tract. 1.
ecclesiam, quid dicturus es de Iohanne filio tonitrui, and Apostolorum
vnoquoque? If thou think the whole Church is built only upon Peter, what
will thou say of John the son of thunder, what of every one of the Apostles
besides? It seems incredible first to Origin, that the whole Church should be
built upon one man only, though it were Peter himself. Therefore he insists
upon totam Ecclesiam, and considerately opposes vnum illum. And makes the one
but existimas, or si existimas, If thou think so (says he) by Peter, but
the other is, quid dicturus es, how will thou answer it, how will thou defend
it, against John, and against the rest? And sure as Origin was of the mind,
that no Apostle of the Twelve, sat out from being a foundation of the Church,
in the sense that Peter was, so he names John you see in particular, of whom
afterward you shall see how great opinion he conceived, and how full of
reverence, not inferior to Peter. In the mean while it is evident how he
pleades for the Apostles all in general, whom he cannot digest to be denied
this privilege, of supporting the frame equally with Peter. For which cause he
deals so peremptorily, and takes up his adversary, as we noted before, Si
existimas Petrum, quid dicturus es de caeteris, etc. Which differs from his
moral collection, as you call it, which is a great deal more mawdlen, where he
affirms by fortasse, Fortasse autem quod Petrus respondens dixit, etc. Perhaps
if we say the same that Peter said, we shall be privileged like him: this is
but perhaps. Yea, the practice of the Church implies no less, then we now
stand for, which Origin there declares toward the end of his discourse.
Quoniam ij qui Episcoporum locum sibi vindicant, vtuntur eo dicto sicut Petrus,
and claues regni coelorum acceperunt, etc. Because they that are Bishops, take
this to themselves, even as Peter, and have received the keys of the kingdom
of heaven. Hear you? not every Christian now, nor predestinate man, which is
his moral doctrine, and offends you so mainly, but the Bishops, good Sir, the
Bishops in special take this to belong to them, and claim the keys. Is not
this a sign the keys were committed to all the Apostles? For the community
of Bishops descendes from all the Apostles; If the Keys had been Peter's only,
only the Pope should claim them, pretending Hierm. ad Euag. Omnes Ep^s^opi
Apostolo^um successores sunt.
to come of him, as now he does. But Origin says, the Bishops do this in
plural, Episcopi vtuntur eo dicto sicut Petrus. The Bishops make use of this
saying, even as Peter did. And they have received the Keys, etc.

4. Now when you tell us, that Origin never mentions in this place the
commission of feeding, pasce oues meas, (though the Bishop brings this place to
answer the other by, about Summa rerum de ouibus pascendis, out of his
Commentary upon Romans 6.) and so the Bishops answer fits not with the objection:
You are to know, that S. Cyprian puts the^ both in one, speaking thus, De
habitu V^rg. Petrus etiam cui oues suas dominus p^scendas (...) commendat,
super quem posuit and fund^uit ecclesiam.
as the one, so the other is to be construed, either of Peter or of all. If,
Tibi dabo claues, belong to them all, and specially, if, Super te aedificabo
ecclesiam meam, so does Pasce oues too, by proportion, either equal, or
maioris virtutis, as they call it. For what so singular and so individuate, as
Super te aedificabo? Sure, pasce oues, is not so much. The one a promise, the
other a precept, and precept is not broken, if it extend to many, promise
either is, or is the weaker for it, without all doubt. And yet Origin himself
teaches you as much in this tractate, as it were preventing your objection,
when thus he says toward the middle of it: Si dictum hoc commune est
caeteris, cur non simul omnia velut dicta ad Petrum tame^sunt omnium communia?
That is, If this belong to all, though spoken to Peter, (as he doubts not but
it does) why not all the rest then, though directed to him, yet are to be meant
of all?

5. Another place you quote out of the same Origin, vnquoted by the Cardinal,
but belike to help him, post aciem inclinatam, out of Hom. 2. in diuersa Euang.
namely that Peter was Vertex, which is no more then (...), of which before,
given by S. Baesil to the great Athanasius. Yea, (...), no bare top, nor no
bald vertex, as your Popes is, at this day. Martial has an Epigram, against
one that had three sculls, and when alms were distributed came for three men's
parts. Si te viderit Hercules, peristi. We are not they that make more (...),
or more Coryphaeos, then needs we must in the senate Apostolic. The number of
such worthies, whereof every one was so sufficient as to be a (...) (as they
say of the Argosey, that every mariner in it might have been a pilot) commends
the wisdom of Christ the chooser, and makes much for the Churches safety and
prosperity, to whom they were appointed guardians. But as for the man of three
sculis, or the (...), in Martial, let your Pope in good earnest take heed of
Hercules, wearing three Crowns, and not content with more then three men's
parts. Of vertex too much, whether in jest or earnest, unless the argument
were better. We are speaking of Origin, and his second Hom. in diuersa. Are ye
advised therefore what privileges he heaps upon S. John there, not inferior
to Peter, not to any? for it is not for nothing, that John still crosses Peter,
though the one set out former, yet the other arriving first at his iournies
end, Ioh. 20. Cui donatum est (says Origin) quod tibi donatum est, o beat? To
whom was it ever given, that which to thee has been given, O thou blessed
creature? Dic quaeso, cui talis ac tanta donata est gratia? I pray thee tell
me; To whom ever was such and so great grace conferred? Fear you not least he
deface the Virgins garland, not only Peter's? And as Peter is a rock, by
interpretation, as you tell us, so John (if we believe Origin) Latin, quod
donatum est, as if a pack of gifts were couched in him, and the speciallest
gift, that ever befell a man, (either the Monarchy then belike, or above the
Monarchy,) another one in degree, to whom that may befit, (...), you know the
place. And indeed no writer speaks of Peter, as if he had all gifts in him. S.
Ambrose diuides them between Peter and Paul, sermon. 66. One had one key, another
another. Ille scientiae, iste potentiae. And iste erudit ad salutem, ille
suscipit ad quietem. Paul in this life, Peter in the next. Neither does this
much make for the Popes preheminencies, who is not so simple, as to reserve
himself for Paradise, rather all for the world present, which was made (they
say) for the presumptuous. Yea, most plainly in the same Sermon, Quis cui
praeponatur incertum est. S. Ambrose knows not which to prefer. Wherein
Bellarmine is more happy; for he says, Paulus plus profuit De Romans Pont. l.
1. c. 27. versus finem.
Ecclesiae, Paul did the Church more good then Peter. And he would have him
more honored of us at this day, then Peter. As Stephen a Deacon is more
honored in his memory, The Pope a Poly-Stephen for his triple crown sake.
(says he) then S. James an Apostle (why should he strike at James above all
the rest?) Laurence then Sixtus, etc. Neither is this peculiar to Bellarmine,
but all the Jesuits ought to be of this mind. For they propounded S. Paul of
all other the Apostles, whom they would most willingly imitate, witness
Maffaeus, de vita Ignatij, l. 2. c. 13. And yet Cuiut maxim ve^ sequerentur.
Therefore they went to his Church potissi (...), and there s^s^ere votum
relligionis suae, profession^ solenn^: says Massaeus ibid.
the Jesuits, men archicall enough, or given to sway. Which is an argument,
that may make for Paul's supremacy in time, above Peter; not only for
preaching, but for government too, unless they abate. And the other Fathers
are of the same judgment. S. Leo sermon. 1. de Natali Apostolorum. In the body
of the Church, whose Head is Christ (not Peter nor the Pope) the two Apostles
Peter and Paul are set like geminum lumen oculorum, like the two eyes in a man's
head. Therefore no such difference. S. Gregory, l. 1. dial. c. vlt. Add
E^tius com in Ep a l Rom c. 1. Ne vel ipso Coryphaeo Petro inferior videretur
Paulus, aut (...) aliquid ha^re. Not minus (...) in grace and in gifts; not
^ior in government, and such like pr^heminence. By which we see what a
Coryphaeos Peter.
Paulus Apostolus Petro [etsi] Apostolorum primo, in principatu Apostolico
frater est. What is this but equality, in principatu, in the cheifedom it
self? Eucher. in Natal. Apost. Petri and Pauli, calls them aequali per terram
luce fulgentes, shining all over the world with equal brightness. Lastly, all
the solution that S. Ambr. can find of his doubt, is this, by reducing it to
their titles; that one is Petra, the other Vasculum, both of them necessaria
domni saluatoris, each necessary to our Lords house. Paul feeds and releeues
the household, whiles Peter's virtue is buried under ground, like the foundation
of an house, and as it were least in sight. Though for my part, I confess, I
can hardly conceive how this holds, or how Peter stands the Church in such
stead, to lie under it, as you would say, to this very time. In a house, I
grant, S. Gregor. says, l. 28. in Job c. 6. that, In sacriloquio, etc. he
never finds the word foundation put in the singular, throughout al Scripture,
but only for Christ. Yet the Papists make Peter a singular foundation, and by
himself. See Haymo com. in Ephesians. 2. where he will not so much as construe that,
Fundati super fund. Proph. and Apost. otherwise the^ thus, That Christ alone is
the foundation of Praphets, of Apostles, and all: and he adds out of Matthew.
16. Super hanc petram, i. super me aedificabo Ecclesiam.
the foundation is of most use. But such a Foundation, who can lay but Christ?
1. Cor. 3. 11. S. Paul's benefit of feeding us, that is of instructing us, is
daily, and obuious, and intelligible. Therefore by my consent, the prerogative
shall rest with him still. But leaving Ambrose, to whom we have digressed,
return we to Origin, and conclude of him in a word. Concerning John he adds;
Fortasse quis dicet, tantundem Petro collatum. Happily a man may say, S. Peter
had as much bestowed on him; but he denies it in the next words, and more
plainly soon after; Sed non temere quis dixerit, etc. yea, how high he rises?
Non ergo Johannes erat homo, sed plusquam homo. Therefore John was no man, but
more then a man. How would this serve the Popes turn, had it been said of
Peter, and if the Canonists had the handling of it? Who not only salute him
with Dominus Deus Papa, even in their late editions of such slattering Glosses,
as they have decked their Law with, which perhaps might be excused, either by
Dij sunt multi, Dominique multi, 1. Cor. 8. 5. or the style of Rome under
Domitian, full Though Augustus himself refused the title Dominus; which
Orosius construes to have been done in honor of Christ then borne. l. 6. c 22.
of baseness; but even in their studies, and closets, and most retired
contemplations, define him to be, Ioh. Capistranus.
Ens conflatum ex Deo and homine, a certain medley of God and man. But being
affirmed of John, as it is by Origin, I hope here Mr. F. T. will give way to
allegories, to quench the fire, which else these words might kindle very
dangerous, and not urge him to maintain the letter too precisely. Lastly,
thus: Whiles John was leaning upon our Saviors breast, and so safe, and well
appaid, Peter often tripped, saepe titubabat, quasi trepidae actionis symbolum,
says Origin; not the rock of faith now, immooueable, impregnable, but the
picture of the active part of our life, weak, and frail, and faint, and
tottering. This of Origin.

6. In S. Hilaries words, and your exception to the Of S. Hilar. testimony.
Bishops answer to them, there remains only these two points to be cleared.
One, that you say S. Hilary so ascribes it to the faith of Peter, to be petra
digna aedificatione Christi, a rock worthy of Christ's building upon, as yet
withal he denies it not to his very person. Another, that you affirm in
plain terms, it was the merit of his faith which purchased him this. Charity
not faith is the fons meriti, the actual deseruer, by condignity at least, as
your selves hold; for ex longinquo is another thing, and expraeuia
dispositione, etc. Where in truth you are so dazeled about this merit of
Peter's, that you say you know not what, ascribing that to his charity which is
more proper to his faith, and again that to his faith which belongs to his
charity. To be chief in feeding you ascribe to his Love, to Amas me plus his?
Which is true in our Saviors Ioh. 21.
sense, for exciting his care, not in yours to inuest him in the supreme
jurisdiction, which rather requires the privilege of freedom from error. And
here, his deserving to be the rock, or the principal, for bearing sway, you
impute it to his faith, which is too young to be a deseruer, if it be Absolute
Pelagianisme. See S. Austen, etc.
not otherwise accommodated, even by your own doctrine. This is one absurdity
therefore. Secondly, that he should merit to be the rock of the Church,
whereas a man cannot merit, that is not first in the Church, (as yourselues will
not deny) and so presupposes the foundation is laid. But in no sort, can one
merit to be the foundation thereof himself. As De praedestin. Sanct. ad
Prosper. and Hilar. lib. 1. Cap. 15. Est etiam praeclarissimum lumen
praedestinationis and gratiae, ipse saluitor, ipse mediator. Respendeatur
quaeso, vnde haee merunt? Quod etus bonum qualecunque pracessit, etc.
S. August. often shows, that the Redeemer of the world, did not merit the
conjunction of his flesh with the deity, but being invested once therewith,
then merited for us, and wrought salvation. Whom, although we should grant, to
have merited to be the foundation of the Church, the Judge of the world, etc.
yet you are not ignorant, how it is held by your own divines, namely per
titulum secundarium, having right to it before, out of the worth of his
hypostasis, which in S. Peter is nothing so. But especially, if you will take
to that of Maximus, whom you quote a little after, that S. Peter for rowing in
a frigot or small boat, was made Master and governor of the Universal
Church. for what merit could there be, of that in this? And suppose that there
is an orderly promotion among Vide Epist. Anaclet. 1. and. 2 ite^ Clement ad
Jacob. fratrem domini, (...). 1. Tim. 3. 13.
shipmen, from the Lower rooms to the higher, till they be Pilots, and
Admiralls, etc. or in like sort, that the good Deacon gets himself a fair
degree, (as S. Paul speaks,) to be made Priest, Priest a Bishop, Bishop a
metropolitan, etc. yet you speak of a promotion in diuersissimo genere; which
is too too uncouth, that S. Peter for steering his material vessel at the
sea, should be preferred to sit in the highest place of the Church, and
congregation of God. Thirdly, if this were true that you avouch of his merits,
S. Peter should not only have merited for himself, but for as many monsters
and miscreants, as ever sat after him in that sea; Which you do well to
shroud under the merits of S. Peter, least they appear too too ugly naked in
themselves; saving that pallium breue as the Prophet Esaias speaks, their
covering is too short, and non est satis nobis and vobis: Matthew. 25. What? For
them that believe not, for them that apprehend not, that concur not in the
least sort, yea for them that were not borne when S. Peter lived, could S.
Peter merit? As for Hild. Dict. Sent. 2^. Pontifex Romanus, sicanoni^^ mod^
ordinatus suerit, meritis B. Petri indubitanter efficitur sanctus.
Hildebrands dictates, they are no gospel. His words are neither slanders, when
they are directed against us, nor testimonies of any force, when they are
produced for you. And will you allow no qualification of S. Hilaries word?
Whereas they that have but tasted the ancient writers, know that to merit, is
to obtain and procure, though by grace and favor, and no further to be urged.
He attained then (says S. Hilary) a supereminent glory. Which glory may be in
many Lib. 6. de trin.
things, beside his primacie, as the Bishop answered you of (...) and (...), in
S. Basils authority; and calling it gloriam, it seems he rather points to our
Saviors approbation, then to any real preferment collated upon Peter. Gloria
is in fame, in predication, and report, as even Tully will teach you, Orat. pro
Marcello, which is nothing to office, and to installment. Si quidem gloria est
peruagata, etc.


7. As for the coupling of S. Peter's person with his Adioynd. number. 9. Thus
says the Bishop seeking by a lying gloss of his own to make his Reader
believe, that S. Hilarie does so admit S. Peter's faith to he the foundation of
the Church that he excludes his person, etc. Nevertheless I would not have
him to think, that in affirming with S. Hilarie, that Peter was the foundation
of the Church, I do exclude his faith from his person, as though S. Hilar.
should say, or any Catholic man mean, that the Church was built upon Peter's
person, and not upon his faith, etc. Fearing least another should deprave him
as he has done the Bishop.
faith, and his faith with his person, which is the second point of the twain,
about which you sweat, and travel sore, casting up mole-hils, and mustering
your Metaphysics long vnskoured, the Bishop never dreamt, as you fantastically
imagine, that S. Hilary should give this to a fleeting shadow, or to faith
without a subject, like your Accidents in the Eucharist, which you welcome as
well, as S. James his host does his guests, that biddes them warm themselves
without a fire, feed without victuals, and so you them to sit down without a
chair, or a stool: Not so: But if faith be the proper foundation of the
Church, as S. Hilary implies by his fiue-fold repetition, Haec fides, haec
fides, etc. Haec fides Ecclesiae fundamentum est, per han^ fide^ infirma sunt
aduersus eam po^^ inferorum. Haec fides Regni coelestis, etc Hilar. vbi prius.
then was Peter, in behalf of his faith only, pronounced by our Savior the
foundation of the Church. Which is another thing then to be preferred, for the
merit of his faith, to be the Churches foundation, as you fondly dream. For so
it might fall out, that he should still remain the foundation of the Church,
though he had cast of his faith, wherewith he began, which will not stand
with S. Hylaries conceit of it, and accordingly, none other are at any time to
be reckoned the foundations of the Church, but they that shall tread in the
steps of faithful Peter, howsoever otherwise they may come near him in
calling. For where is more promised to Peter's successors, by virtue of mere
succession, then to Abraham's children? Romans 4. Nay, the adoptiue branch may not
challenge so much to it self, as the natural, Romans 11. Succession (says
Greg. Nazianzen) is oft-times Paneg. in Athanas.
between contraries. Sickness succeeds health, night succeeds day, so an
unworthy Bishop succeeds a worthy, as Nazianzen instanceth. So your Popes may
Peter. Irenaeus says warily, that we must obey those Priests in the Church of
God, which deriuing their succession from the Apostles, together with their
succession in Office, have received the certain gift of truth, lib. 4. cap. 43.

8. By this also the other places of S. Hilary are declared, Beatus Simon
subiacens aedificationi ecclesiae: (scil) post sacramenti confessionens.
where he proceeds to call Peter the foundation of the Church, as you expound
them; his person, I grant, if ought at all, as the Bishop also meant, (not a
quality without a subject, which is your chimaera) but in respect of his
virtue, not of his authority singular. And as all the faithful may Idem
Hilar. eodem libro, tres columnas ecclesiarum facit, Petrum, Iohannem, and
Iacobum. In the same place S. Hilary thus bespeaks the Apostles (not Peter
alone) Vos O sancti and beat viri, ob FIDEI VESTRAE MERIT^^, claues regni
coelorum sortiti, and ligandi atque soluendi in caelo and in terra^ i^^, etc.
come more or less, near to Peter's faith, so they have all more or less a
part in this prerogative, as you heard lately out of Origin, yet still without
disturbing the Churches array. Neither perhaps should Peter have been the rock,
(...), if so precise regard had been had to his faith, as to value it with his
primacie, so much for so much, by way of meed and merit, as you pretend (and
yet no Simonists) but either all the Christians, (...), 1. Pet. 2. 1. which are
dignifyed with a faith nothing inferior to ours, even to Peter's self, or the
poor woman in the Gospel, of whom our Savior affirmed, O woman, great is thy
faith: or lastly the Centurion, Verily, I have not found so great faith in
Israel.

9. But in silentio reliquorum, while others held their Hilar. vbi. priu^.
peace, and primum cognoscere, and eloqui illud quod nondum vox humana
protulerat, that was it that made S. Peter's confession Vide Bellar. de Romans
Pont. lib. 1. cap. 12. ^^antem globum testiu^ in hanc sentent. Leo ^^rm. 11. de
past. D^ Omnium (...) ^ra pr^m. Chrysostom (...). 55. in M^t. Confe^ pr^t, ac
praeue^ ait. Of (...) Ma^m. testimony.
so glorious, and so remarkable, witness Hilary, witness diverse more, whom I
forbear to name. And in that sense, he might instly be termed a foundation,
or a prime workman; not but that others followed or consented with him, and so
foundations too, Apocal. 21. but his zeal was such, he spoke first, for which
have it is not like he was made chief governor.

10. There remains S. Maximus, and first, whether he were that same Bishop of
Turin, or no. Which the Bishop denied not, as not hasty that way (although the
case were plainer) to be so peremptory, (it is enough for you to determine
magistraliter) but left under doubt, the rather because the Sermons that are
attributed to Maximus, have been printed with S. Ambroses in times past, and
so uncertain to whom to be adjudged, as in many other fathers it fares at
this day. And if your observation be good, which The Adioynd. p^fes, that S.
Maximu^ made certain ^ermons of this kind.
you bring out of Gennadius, you see what profit the Bishops doubting has
brought with it, I would say praise and commendation to you, if it were thought
to be your own, which you will hardly persuade them that know you here, not to
have dropped out of the Note-booke of some of your good Masters. As for the
Sermons de tempore, not made as the Bishop said in S. August. time, which you
call a scaepe or a not able oversight of his, and you think you might call it
a flat lie, according to the rest of your maydenly modesty; you are answered
before; yea your self have answered See before cap. (...).
your self in that point, as Siseraes mother did, that at least S. August.
gave no such titles to his sermons, whatsoever they did that came after. Yet in
producing Witnesses, is it not reason that you should call them by their proper
and right names, or else they loose the force of their credit for deposition?
And this was all, that the Bishop made stick at, concerning that point.

11. Now to the authority it self, and the Bishops answer thereto; Quanti
igitur merits apud Deum suum Petrus, which you persist to construe, Of how
great merit was Peter with his God, (so hardly are you driven with the dog
from his licourment) as if Peter's merit had been to row the boat, and his
reward to be made the governor of the world, whereas the indifferent
translator would rather have construed it thus, Of how great interest, or how
great account, therefore, was Peter with his God, (antecedens pro consequente,
which your Rhetorique cannot be ignorant of, that quote Quintilian Adioynd.
cap. 9.
afterward, about the trope Catachresis) who after the rowing of a little
boat, had the government of the whole Church committed to him? Thus Maximus.
And the more to blame you then, as the Bishop well answers you, to assign him
the government of a particular Church (Peter I mean) and so in effect to rob
him of the Universal. For we deny not, but that both he, and his fellow
Apostles, had the whole Church committed to their care, jointly and severally,
without any limitation. And surely Maximus his words import no more. As for
that the Bishop says, that Y O V have given him the government of a particular
Church, after the government of the whole, have not You, I Numb. 14. He
supposes h^re that not Christ but (...) have give it him, and that S. Peter ^s
not Bishop of Rome, otherwise the^ in our concert, and by our gift.
pray, given it him, in that You allow it him, and that You stand for it to be
his, against them that make question of it? Will you never leave this
dissembling of your skill, to take all things in so wrong a sense, and by the
left handle, as Epictetus calls it? Isay, You have given it him. Not we but
Christ, you will say. You mean perhaps of his Universal government of the
whole Church, which in a sense we grant you, as common to the rest, and not to
be transmitted to posterity. In your sense you are as far from euicting any
such thing, for ought I see, as if you had never gone about it, that he should
be the ordinary pastor only, and the rest the extraordinaries. But to the
particular Church of Rome, Eud^. Patal. p. 137 Non du^ qu^ tot^ (...) sa^lo
ho^m ^deat, ^m P^ (...), (...) (...) ^re.
you will not say your selves that Christ designed him, no more then to Antioch
which he abandoned after possession, but rather his own choice, if not your
fiction. For you have given him leave to sleet, and to chop, and to fix his
seat else where then at Rome, when so seems good. Only, pie we must believe,
that he will not do so in have. Howbeit Bellar. de Pont. Romans lib. 4. c. 4.
if we should deny that he was ever at Rome, as some have bin moved by no
weak grounds to do, as both collections out of Scripture, and supputations of
the time when he should arrive there, yet your argument is strange whereby you
would approve it here, in your number. 15. where you say, it is demonstrated, and
as it were proclaimed, by the continual successions of Bishops in that Sea, to
this very day. Call you this a demonstration of Peter's being at Rome, that
Bishops never failed in that Sea, to this day, ergo S. Peter was the first that
sat there? Though again it were no hard matter, to disprooue the continuance
of your Bishops in that Sea, even at sundry seasons, By schisms, by simonies,
by transmigrations, sometime also by plurality of incu^bents. As Felix and
Liberius, Sozom. l. 4. c. 14. But chiefly whereas the Papists challenge other
Seas to have failed in their succession of Bishops, we may truly answer them,
that it had been more for their credit to have had none at all, then diverse
such as they are feign to show to uphold theirs, of late times.
if it were pertinent to this place. But howsoever that be, you ought to bring
a more colorable argument of Peter's sitting there as I take it. For of many
that I have heard, this is simply the simplest. Neither is that much better,
which you vaunt far more in, if it be possible, writing thus in the same
numb. And withal he adds a strange Parenthesis [quasi ea totius pars non
esset] as though the same particular Church of Rome were not a part of the
whole. As who would say, that S. Peter could not be governor, both of the
whole Church, and of a particular Church. Wherein, he argues as wisely, as if
he should say, that a Bishop of Ely could not be governor of the particular
Church of Ely, and of the whole Diocese; or that a Bishop of Canterbury could
not be governor of that Bishopric, and primate of England; or that a
general of an army could not govern a particular company, and yet be general
of the whole army. And here, though you would seem to have triumphed over the
Bishop, in your impregnable instances, yet you show, it wrings you at the very
heart, to be so met with about Maximus his authority, when in your numb.
following you set him down both in Text, and Margent, for a man whose head
should be confounded with blows, rather then confuted with arguments. So
notable a champion you are at your Ismaels Logic, whose fist was against
every body, and every bodies against his, which Philo interprets to be the
image of a disputer, but like none so much as the Popish disputants (you may
say they dispute in Schola Tyranni, Act. 19.) from whose butcherly hands, I
pray God deliver us, that even thus declare their fingers to be itching, till
they may deal with us.

12. As for the Bishopric of Rome, joined or adjoined to the Bishopric of
the whole Church, which you would pattern with the Diocese and Church of Ely,
recommended to the government of one man, or the government of a whole army,
and one company in that army, entrusted to the care of the same general, and
such like; how unlike are these comparisons, I report me to your conscience!
Ely Church from Ely Diocese is not so easily separated, in ordine currente, as
now things go; but he that has the one must needs have the other. But your
selves hold, that the Bishopric of the whole world, has been actually
divided from the Bishopric of Rome, as namely while Peter sat at Antioch,
before he came to Rome, to say nothing of your later Popes, that lay soaking at
Auenion seventy years together: whereupon Bellarmine graunts, as you heard even
now, that they may be divided again, if occasion so require, Idem Bellarm.
alibi, nimirum de Roman. Pont. l. 2. c. 12. Si transferatur etiamnum sede^,
Romani Episcopi non erunt (...) totius ecclesiae Episcopi. And, Francisc
Vellosillus, Bishop of Luca, in Aduertentijs. in 4. tomum B. Chrysostom. Quaesit.
17. proves this conclusion of his, by diverse reasons, Quid constitutione
ecclesiae sieri posset, vt Episcopus vrbis non modo sedem suam ab vrbe
demutaret (as he speaks) sed vt nullam omnino particularem ecclesiam sibi
applicaret, etc.
and yet hopes that God will not easily permit it; by which you see, your
comparison halts of one foot. But the maine point lies in this: Bishop of Ely,
has no new induction to his Church of Ely, more then was given him at first
entrance upon the entire Bishopric, and so the general of an army, has no
new constitution over a part of his army, after he is admitted General over
the whole. Whereas you giving to S. Peter the whole Church for his Bishopric,
if afterward he take up his seat in Rome, by a more peculiar title, what does
he but extinguish his former clean? which, I think, will hold even in
Fitzherberts Law.

13. Neither say that S. James was Bishop of Jerusalem, and yet governor of
the whole Church, with the rest of his colleagues: for James was extraordinary
as you also confess: but show that one man may be ordinary Pastor of the
whole Church, and yet ordinary Pastor of a part too, by a second title
distinct from the former; or else you say nothing, but palter about the Bishops
answer to Maximus, and bewray a manifest contradiction in your doctrine.

14. I labor to be brief, and I need not to add any thing to the Bishops
answers, which you see how pregnant they are against all reproof. Only,
because the Bishop is so exceedingly compendious, in his Answer to the
Apology, and occasion has been given me to peruse the Sermons newly quoted
of S. Maximus, I will set down, in a word or two, mine own observations, out
of the said Sermons lately set forth, for F. T. to consider, if they make not
Ann. 1614. Pa^is.
more for S. Paul, then that does for Peter, which the Cardinal alleged. In
his second Sermon therefore, de eodem festo, viz. Natali B B. Petri and Pauli,
speaking of Paul, after he had commended Peter for his great faith, Cuius tanta
est nihilominus plenitudo sidei: Whose fullness of faith is so great
notwithstanding. First, fullness of faith, like plenitudo spiritus, which they
attribute to the Pope. And, notwithstanding Peter's, as deserving a reward no
less the^ his, if there were place for deserts, unless you will say, that
Peter had engrossed all Nothing left for. ^^sopt. because his fellows
professed to know all things first. (...).
before, and nothing was left for Paul though deserving. Yea he adds, that our
Savior in his providence chose him, peculiarem quodam modo ducem, a captain
(of his Church) in a manner singular, and without fellow. Erat enim tam
praecipuus, etc. vt ad ecclesiae solatium, and ad firmamentum omnium
credentium, Christus eum vocaret e caelo. He was so singular (in his gift)
that to the comfort of his Church, and the support of all the faithful,
(firmamentum credentium not inferior to petra) our Lord directly called him
from heaven. Lastly, Vt aduerteret princeps futurus nominis Christiani, that he
which was to be the prince of the name Christian, that is, the most eminent in
all the Christian congregation, might mark, etc. As for the third Sermon of
that argument, which is that from whence the words, Quanti meriti, are quoted,
whereunto the Bishop answers: it follows immediately after them in the praise
of Peter, thus of Paul: That Paul in his Apostleship, how highly did he please
Christ? (where you see meritum is counterpoized by placere, indeed all one) who
is his own witness, sidelissimus sibi testis: who shunning to reveal his
own praise, and yet seeking to make known the power of his Christ, wraps up
in modesty, etc. Alluding, no doubt, to those places of his Epistles, wherein
he evidently challenges equality with the best, and reports viz. 2. Cor.
11. 23. etc.
such things as is wonderful by himself, though not tickled thereto by any
private vain-glorie, but merely enforced by his adversaries importunity. In
the first Sermon of that argument, they are jointly called, both Paul and
Peter, Ecclesiarum omnium principes, Princes of all the S. Hieron Praef. comm.
in epist. ad Gal. calls them twice, principes, within a few lines, once
Apostolor^^, again Ecclesia^.
Churches: and again, reuerendissimi Principes omnium Ecclesiarum, the most
reverend Princes of all the Churches.

15. I omit your railing in your number. 18. where you say the Bishop has been
puzzled with places, and feign to trisle, wrangle, cogge, and lie, etc. I
account it my ill hap, to be matched with such a rakeshame, that observes no
reverence, and is only good at proouing our patience. Only my comfort is, as
Demosthenes is said, to have said in the like, that I shall overcome in being
put down, and you loose in conquering, in so damned an encounter. The Bishop
had said of the Cardinals testimonies, cited out of the fathers, vnum hoc
peccant omnia. All the places brought for Peter's primacie, trip in this, that
they have nothing, in truth, which may not straight be granted, except some
petty word, about which I mean not to iangle. And what more excellent (...)
could there be then this? a premunition, or an amulet, against the errors, that
might arise in unstable minds, by mistaking the fathers, while they use such
speeches. For as Epiphanius says, that such cautions must be used sometimes,
even toward the writings of holy Scripture, least the Reader be perverted,
rather then edified; so, in the fathers much more, who neither write so plain
for understanding as the Scriptures, nor yet so current for belief. It
follows in the Bishop; Nam nec primatum negamus Petri etc. for we deny not
the primacy of Peter, nor the names which do signify it, but we demand the
thing, or the matter it self now in question, to wit, his earthly Monarchy.
Thus he. And to this what say you? You say, he grants the primacy of Peter, and
yet labors to overthrow it, when it is proved out of the fathers. As how,
trow you? When they teach that Peter had the primacie, because he was the
foundation of the Church, and that he had a special commission given him to
feed Christ's sheep, he goes about to prove that Peter was no more the
foundation of the Church, then the rest of the Apostles were, nor otherwise
Pastor thereof, then they. And what of that? Wherein then consisted this
primacy, which the fathers teach, and deduce, from the power given him by the
keys, and by his pastoral commission, which do import authority, power,
jurisdiction, and government? This you. It has bin told you, Sir,
sufficiently, over and over, wherein the primacy of Peter consisted, though it
draw no sovereignty or Jurisdiction with it, and much less so great, as you
are in love with, I mean the temporal and the terrible; quae and spiritum
concutit saecularis rei gratia, as Tertullian says, or saeculum concutit
praetextu De patientia.
Spiritus, as yours apparently does. It is The ancienter Papists were not so
immoderate. Ioh. Slotanus contr. V^^sium, etc. after he had allowed the Pope
^aculum, as well as ^eram, one for doctrine, the other for discipline, expounds
himself in this manner. Habet summus ecclesiae Antistes super omnes
potentiorem potestatem coactiuam; qua^ etiam Principes sil^ subi^^ere potest.
SEEN CAEDE TAMEN. Hic est autem spiritualis gladius ^lle, per quem interdicere
potest ingressu ecclesiae, and coelum claudere, etc. Thus he limits the Popes
coactiue power. And Espencaeus Digress^n Epist. ad Titum, c. 1. p 172. En
Episcopalem duritiem, in VFRRIS tamen, non in VERBERIBVS sitam. Nam carceres,
and huiusmodi corporum coerctiones, cum dominij^ temporalibus, BENEFICIO ET
DEVOTIONE PRINCIPVM accessisse puto. Grauissima TVM poena erat excommunicatio,
non MORTALIS ^a^, sed medicinalis. Also, Card. Pole, lib. de sum. Pont. c. 49.
praising the Popes form of government, None to that (says he) quae --
volentes Per populordat iura. And, c. 44. The Pope, if he will be good, must
never descendere de Cruce, i. interpose in worldly affairs.
neither keys not crook, that will content you, but only a glaiue, and a
staff, the armor of the foolish shepherd, whereof Zachary speaks,
describing your Pope, that idol in sede mea, as Christ from heaven bespake him
long ago, if the stories say true. And yet why should we tell you, wherein
this primacie consists, that the Fathers deduce out of the words of Scripture,
rather then you conclude it out of the words themselves, or the Fathers words
upon those words, and so force it upon our consciences, that we may have
nothing to answer, but by yielding to your desire? Now you are feign to rave,
and chase, and cry, after all is done, what is it, if it be not this? What is
pasce oues, and super hanc petram, but only the making Peter chief Magistrate
of the Church, so as all Jurisdiction may flow from him? Whereas we may say
more truly, and ask of you, what so unlikely foundation has this exorbitant
power, as either the keys of the Church, or the feeding of Christ's sheep? And
does the Bishop, good Sir, only go about to prove that other Apostles are
joined with Peter, either in the feeding of Christ's flock, or in the receiving
of the keys? Which he has evidently convinced, and demonstrated to your eye,
both by the sequel of the text, and the authorities of the Fathers. The
Fathers argument then, (say you) is nothing worth, whereby they would establish
the primacie of Peter, from such places. As though Peter's primacy might not be
proved from The Papists device is overthrown by themselves; so far are the
Fathers from abetting it. For Maldonate upon Ioh. 21. notes it for a principal
circumstance, that Pasce oues meas was said to Peter, post prandium, after
dinner: and yet the rule of their law is, that Ordines non dantur post
prandium, Sa. ex Syluest. v. Ordines. 14 How much less the Pop^dome, which so
infinitely surmounteth all order* Though Mald. most absurdly note in the
afor^said place, that our Savior Christ did almost all his extraordinary
works, either after dinner, or after supper. These are the grauities and
godliness of our Jesuits. To our Savior, no doubt, all times were one.
the places, and yet that primacie be no such primacie as you conceit. For the
very promising of the keys, though with intention to them all, yet to him
only formally, and the feeding of Christ's lambs, which was the charge of them
all, yet three several times enjoined to him, because of his threefold denial
of his Lord, gives him a kind of prerogative or primacie, if you call it so,
which we envy him not, and yet still falls short of your Monstrous Monarchy.
S. August. has told you, and S. Ambrose Bellarmine himself confesses, that
Pasce oues meas, feed my sheep, is said omnibus pastoribus, to all ministers
and past^^. De Romans Pont. l. 1. e. 12. resp. ad 5. and moreover, whatsoever is
said to him, ratione off^ pastoralis, in regard of his ministry, is common to
all.
has told you, the first two that Pasce oues, belongs to all, yea to all us,
not only to all them; but the last, that not those words only, but whatsoever
else was said to Peter, (by way of such honor no doubt) is commune omnium,
common Vid^ supra in hoe cap.
to all, at least common to all the Apostles. Neither pity the fathers, as
most idly you would seem to do, in your 19. numb. for inferring the
primacie from such places as those; but rather condemn your own foolish
fancy, for misinterpreting so grossly, both the Fathers and the places. When
you say, The Bishop is miserably troubled with certain petty words, with
voculae quaedam, as Caput, and Primatus, and sometimes he graunts them,
sometimes denies them: What more just, or more reasonable course can be held,
then both to grant them, and deny them, the one in the Fathers sense, that
they allege them in; the other in yours, as you pervert them? As for troubling
the Bishop, they are so far from that, those small words, and as you say,
petty voculae; that by his accurate explaining them, I verily believe, he has
provided so well, as they shall never trouble any man more hereafter.

16. In fine you carp him, for calling the Popes supremacy, an earthly
Monarchy, or temporal primacy; of which before. Yet you repeat it again. And
wherefore then did you, in reporting Origens words, number. 2. of this Chap.
concerning the founding of the Church upon Peter, veluti super terram, as upon
the earth, break off the English, to print those words as well in Latin as in
English, veluti super terram, which is more then you affoarded to certain
other of Super terram.
the same sentence, to express them twice? Was it not to persuade us, that his
primacie was earthly, or his Monarchy temporal, which here you abhor? But
let us hear Mo^^^chia terrestris.
you in good earnest. The place, say you, is temporal, or earthly, where it is
exercised, that is this present world, the power Adi^yn. Number. 22. cap. 5.
heavenly, both by institution from above, and because he is guided, by Gods
spirit, in the use of it. Which, I pray you, may we not say, of the power of
Kings, as well? Unless either you have forgotten Romans 13. That, there is no
power but of God, Theodor. de Constantin. Magno, in principio historiae: and,
Concal. Triburiens. de Arnulpho, anno Dom. ^95. vide edit. Venet. tom. 4. p.
27. A^apet. Epist.
or the Emperors style, which the Fathers give them, Non ex hominibus neque
per homines, or in the Council of Calchedon, Desuper regni sceptra suscipiens
Imperator, etc. Or, Per me reges regnant, Pro. 8. 15. Or, Inde potestas, vnde
spiritus, Tertullian in Apologet. Or Gregory Nazianzene in orat. ad Praesidem
irascentem, (...), ab illo sceptrum habes, etc. Thou raignest with Christ, thou
have thy scepter from him. Or that happily ye are persuaded, that the Pope is
better assisted, then the King, by God, in his Consultations. What means that
then, Prove. 16. 10? Oraculum in labijs: and, In iudicio non errabit os eius.
What that, Prou. 21. 1? The heart of the King is in the hand of God, and
quocunque volet flectet illud. Which S. August. so stands upon, that he doubts
not to say, per cor Regis ipsa veritas iussit, Truth it self commands by the
heart of the King; and again, Emperors command the self same that Christ,
for when they command what good is, no man commands by them, but Christ.
Epist. 166. To make short, what think you of that, Romans 13. Rulers are no
terror to good works, but to the evil. No nor to Praise comprehends all the
means that Kings have to reward, though they are mary. Because it is s^^um
humano^, as Aristot ^aves. (...).
workers neither. Do what is good, and he will praise thee not punish thee.
The ruler is the Minister of God, for thy good, but if thou do that which is
evil, be afraid, for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath
upon all them, that do evil. Yea, they are all Gods Ministers, attending upon
this very thing continually. Does not this rather show, that the King is
assisted by God, then the Pope, to preserve him as well from scandal of
action, as from error in judgment? Though for the Pope, you are not wont to
deny your selves, that he may err in action, and that very fowly: all your
care is to uphold the credit of his Judgment, wherein you see the King
enioyes Gods directions, no less then he. But why should you be so loath, to
admit of the term of temporal Monarchy, or earthly primacy? May we not say
with the Poet, as he does of Dido? -- hoc praetexit nomine culpa^, cladem
rather: or with the same author elsewhere, -- Quid si quod voce negatis, Mente
datis, or vendicatis? What is this, but to cut the throat with a woode^ knife,
pretending gentleness to the acts of fiercenes, Jacobs voice, and Esaus hands?
Or like the Axe, in Aesops fables, which Bishop Fisher told of, that came a
begging upon a time to a certain goodly wood, or tuft of trees, for a helue or
a handle, promising to trim it, and prune it, and keep it neat, but ended in
felling, quelling, and destroying. So the Pope challenges nothing, but a
spiritual primacie, to keep Kings in order and in awe, who else would be
extrauagant, he says; which if once you grant him, you shall see what feats
of mischeife he will work you, as Balaam said, I would kill the outright, if I
had but a sword, or as Numb 22. ^9. 1. Sam 21. 9.
David of Golias his, so he of the spiritual, Give me but that, there is none
to that. Let him alone, if once he can get but to graspe the sword, be it what
it will be, sword, or swithe; Monarchy, or Primacie, and of what kind soever.

17. Why, but S. Peter exercised a corporal power, and S. Paul likewise, for
so much as they both ended in corporal effects, as Adioyn Number. 22
in striking Elymas the sorcerer blind, as in punishing Ananias, and Sapphira,
with bodily death. As if this were the power, either of Peter or Paul, being
miraculous in them both; whereas Miracles come from no inhaerent power, as your
Schoolmen teach, from a circumstant rather, or an attendant; almighty God, by
means unknown, being ready to execute the determinations of his servants. But
we speak of a power inherent in the magistrate, which is denominated by the
effects, as the effects are sorted and qualified by their objects, goods,
bodies, limbs, and liberty. For about them are conversant the acts of
magistracy, deprivations, imprisonments, maymes, or deaths. Which the doer of
miracles has no hand in the inflicting of, but at his request Omnipotency
effects. Even as you read of Joshua commanding the sun, Obediuit Deus voci
hominis, but voci only, etc. S. Ambr. confutes this argument of yours, lib. 3.
Offic. cap. 14. speaking of Elizeus and the Syrians whom he took prisoners,
that, Non erant manu percutiendi, quos supernaturali virtute subiugasset. They
might not be stricken with hand, whom God had extraordinarily put into his
hands. So as S. Peter himself Expellit dictis, non armis, says Lucret. lib. 5.
might not exercise any bodily force upon those, whom the holy Ghost by miracle
had subjected to him. Much less then may we, by his example.

18. Neither is it to be wondered, that the primitive Church might have
temporal power, or corporal power in defect of Christian Magistrates, to
punish offenders, which since has ceased in the ordinary government, the
Church having returned to her Channells, as I may say, and the Magistrate being
at hand to take her part. To omit Cap. 3. huiu^.
that as I noted to you before, the devil was appointed to be the executioner,
rather then once the Apostles should defile themselves, with that work, or
handle the sword; to which now the Popes hand even cleaues for eagerness, as
did that Captains, 2. Sam. 23. 10.

THE DEFENSE OF the Bishop of ELIE his Answer to Card. BELLARMINES Apology,
against the slanderous Adioynder of F. T. The second Part.

EPHREM.

To thee, and but to thee to none, I make my prayer.

PRINTED BY CANTRELL LEG, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1617.

To the sixth Chapter of the Adioynder, about Invocation of Saints.
The auctorities of the Fathers, of the first and second rank (according to
the BISHOPS most accurate division of the confused huddle brought by the
Cardinal) are re-examined in this Chapter;

AND HIS ANSWERS TO THEM found to be such, as maintain themselves against all
exception.

. 1. TVllie would not vouchsafe to accuse Vatinius, but only presses him with
certain questions, to disgrace him the more. I have hitherto done nothing,
unbeseeming the reputation of a far greater adversary, and indeed affoarded
him somewhat too large answers, making bold with the Reader, and his gentle
patience, rather then I would come behind in any sort of satisfaction.
Henceforth I I must crave leave to be a great deal rounder and stricter with
him, as drawing toward the Center. It a feriendus est homo, vt ne sentiat
quidem perirese: for his comfort.

2. Number. 3. then. He acknowledges invocation of Saints (though not of God) to
be possible without faith in them. This is first against the generality of the
Apostles text, Quomodo inuocabunt in quem, that is, in que^cunque non
credideru^t? Romans 10, How shall they call upon him, in who^[soeuer] they have
not believed? And at least a man might invoke God, though not as the Aqui^
part. (...). summae, quest. 25. Artic. 3. in resp. citans glossam. Deus per
creationem, cui debetur Latria. Dominus per po^am, cui Dulia. Such are their
fooleriet, that in one respect now, God and the Saint shall be worshipped
alike, yea with equal worship, with Dulia both. Whereas, (...) Deo nihil mi
(...) est, or else, Non esset omne Deu^ quod in Deo est, contrary to the
Axiom. See S. Leo sweetly pronouncing of this point, sermon. 8. in Not. Domini.
creator of heaven and earth, yet (...), as some Saint, or demy-god, by this
distinction; not ex ass but ex semuncia, (as Contra Iul. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Julian the Pelagian cauilled with S. Austen de senis vncijs) albeit we did
not put affiance in him. Which were against the Apostles, Quomodo inuocabunt?
How shall they call? As who would say, Nullo pacto, not at all. Therefore, number.
9. he eats his word, and allows faith in Saints themselves, as necessary for
the invocation of them too. In some sort, says he. An egregious blasphemy,
and by which one Chosroes only, a Persian, is known, none else that ever I
read of, (...) Call^st. lib. 18. cap. 22. Hist Ecclesiast.
(Nicephorus reporting it,) to allow faith in Saints, or in creatures, to be
lawful. Ioh 24.
You believe in God, believe also in me. Who might say this, but he that was
more then a bare creature? Quis dicat Sanctorum, Creed in me, nisi Sanctus
Sanctorum, says S. Austen, de peccatorum meritis and remiss. lib. 1. cap. 14.
And Origin to the same purpose, In Euang. Iohann. Tom. 32.
Non est dictum, Qui credit in vos, credit in me; etsi dictum est, Qui recipit
vos, recipit me. It is not said, He that believes in you, believes in me,
though it be said, He that receives you receives me. And the one of these,
is for the Sermo, in Origens declaration of it, the other for them qui a
sermon, that is for the Apostles. The very same has S. Austen, almost totidem
verbis, upon the same place of S. John, Tract. 44. that you may know one Father
borrowed of another, specially the Latin of the Greek. Each of them showing
this, that the Saints though they are to be received by us, yet not received by
faith, but Christ only, who is the word of his father. And again Origin more
pithily, Hom. 4. in Ezech. Ad eos qui in Sanctis fiduciam habent, non incongrue
proferimus exemplum, Maledictus homo qui spem habet in homine. Against them
that put their trust in Saints, we allege that Scripture not without good
cause, Cursed is the man that makes man his trust. And a little after, Si
necesse est in aliquo sperare, omnibus derelictis speremus in Domino. If we
must needs hope in some body, leaving all let us hope in the Lord. Like those
godly Burgundions, whom Socrates reports of, lib. 7. hist. cap. 30. that weary
of seeking aid any more of man, they determined to commit themselves
henceforth wholly to God, and guided by the providence that never forsakes,
chose the Christians God, who was then worshipped throughout the Roman Empire;
And their reason was, because he was never known to fail any such as trusted
in him. A most true Elogium, and a worthy ground of coming to God, accedendi
ad Deum, that I may speak with the Apostle, Heb. 11. Which soon after was
verefyed upon them, by a most joyful experience; and a Bishop of France (no
need of the Pope to such work, I wisse, whatsoever you dream) baptized them,
and incorporated them, after he had humbled them with fasting (a most worthy
practice) seven days together, and instructed them in the faith. But this by
the way. Return we to putting confidence in God only. How often does the
Scripture particularly so appropriate it? Faith in God, Act. 20. Hebr. 6.
Ierem. 17. Psalm. 117. Psalm. 146. etc. As who would say, It is the privilege
wherein God and the creature communicate not, (like gloria mea not to be given
to another, like Achilles (...).
his spear, which only himself could brandish) no more then Joseph and
Putiphar, or Joseph and Pharaoh, the one in the government of his private
house, the other of his Kingdom, might be consorted. Yet nothing reserved
from Joseph by either of them, but only the one his wife, and the other his
crown. So is faith in God, one of Gods peculiars. Yea S. Chrysostom observes,
Hom. 3. in Act. that the Apostles durst not say when time was, Fides in eum,
that is, in Christum, but only, fides per nomen eius, faith by his name. So
tender a point this is. Which he repeates elsewhere. S. Cyrill also; of whom In
fine huius.
anon. In the mean while proceed.

3. Numb. 4. He belyes S. Hieromes Commentary Among S. Hieromes works, the
Com. upon this Epistle is twofold. In one, he extends charitatem to the
Sanct^, but not fidem, ^ing, Qu^ enim diligit caput, diligat oportet and
membra, not so, Qui credit; In the other, thus he explaines himself. Quod
autem dico^ale est. Cre^ quispiam in con^ Deum: Non potest credere ^si prius
crediderit de Sanctis (...) vera esse que scripta sunt: Adam a D^e plasm^m,
Eu^m, etc. Where is conscience now, Mr. F. T?
upon the Epistle to Philemon, who speaks of no faith to be reposed in Saints,
but credence given to their doctrine only. S. Paul's text then must thus be
understood, fidem in Deum, and charitatem in Sanctos, faith in God, and love to
the Saints, specially such Saints as there he speaks of, whose bowels must be
refreshed, which are neither fit to be prayed to, because they stand in want;
how much less to be the objects of our Christian faith, if it be but because
they are the subjects of our sight? According as to the Coloss. 1. 4. he vtters
the same more distinctly, thus; faith in Christ; and love to the Saints, though
here he deliver it (...), or upon a heap. So likewise again 2. Thessal. 1. 3.
albeit when he says, (...), of every one of you toward another, he shows
plainly enough, that love goes further then faith may, unless every Christian
may believe in every one, and then where shall we stay? Gregory Nazianzen:
orat. (...) in Ep. ad (...) (...) habutt Phil. (...), (...) (...) ^lloru^
ex^tendo. Or, (...), pro communone (...), as the (...) words are, explaining
these, that is, d^^ds of mercy, to which he was (...) to ^ort him; not to
believe in Saints.
5. de Theolog: says well, (...), It is one thing to believe in a thing,
another to believe what is reported of it. Which S. Hierome only meant of the
Saints in that place, that the histories that went of them in Scripture, were
to be believed, and credited. Nazianzene adds, (...), for this belongs to
God[onely,] namely to be believed in. And again, (...) The Co^ of Cal^ in Al^
ad (...). page 21^. Sur. call^ this, a man ^^ference.
(...); If he be a creature, how do we believe in him? making it an evident
argument of the divinity of the holy Ghost, that we believe in him. Also the
Creed knows no faith in Saints, yet a complete form of our believing no
doubt. As for Credo in ecclesiam, if some (...). Symb. Nicen. Quanquam idem
symbolum, vt exprimit^ a Basi^o, in Epist. ad Antiochen, page 308. edit. Graec.
Froben. Omnem fidem perspicue reuocat ad tres personas Trinitatis, ne nomin^
quidem Ecclesia^, nisi in diuersissimum sensum, sati^ di^^ post.
have read it so, though there are other answers, yet it is enough that the
Church consists of far more then they will allow us to put our trust in. And
indeed it is a strange huddle and confusion of things, when the Church which
was wont to conteyne the faithful, shall have them in it now, upon whom we
must rely by faith.

4. Numb. 5. Almost senceles shift. As there is, Soli Deo gloria, says he, and
yet, honor and gloria omni operanti bonum. Romans 2. so there is a double
invocation, one of Saints, another of God. As if glory in the first place, be
not glory which we ascribe to God, in the second that which God vouchsafes to
us. Is invocation so? Does God invoke? And why does our Savior conclude his
prayer, the exemplary platform of all praying, with Quia tua est gloria, etc.
but that Saints have no such glory; and yet pray we must not, but only to
them, to whom we may ascribe the like glory. As the causall particle in that
prayer implies, QVIA tuum est regnum, and potentia, and gloria, etc. FOR thine
is the kingdom, the power, and the glory. Here they are gone in the Pater
noster, as before they were confuted by page 94 (...).
the Creed, for Primacy. Passus est sub Pontio Pilato, etc.

5. Out of Genesis 48. Inuocetur nomen meum super pueros, he is not ashamed to
renew such motheaten stalenesses. For what does that mean? Let them be called
by my name, or let it be their title and style to have Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, to their Fathers. For it is no small prerogative, Quorum sunt patres,
Romans 9. Did they give commandment to be inuocated as Gods, when they lay a
dying (as he belike Jacob is made to Canonize himself, yet alive.
would have it) like Cyrus in Xenophon, Sic me colitote vt Deum? And in Limbo
this? See Psalm, 48. as the seventy read it. (...). That is, upon their houses
and lands. Which we in English read thus, They call their lands after their
own names, an usual phrase throughout the scripture. So Iam. 2. 7. They
slander the worthy name which is called upon you, (...), that is, as our late
English excellently well has it, by which you are called. And Esaias. 4. Seven
women shall say to one man, let thy name be called upon us; in the very same
sense: that is, let us be reckoned and accounted thine. Solomon a little
otherwise, in the dedication of his temple, desires that Gods name may be
called upon it, yet not as if the temple should pray to God, etc. But the
rather did the Patriarch here desire this, concerning Ephraim and Manasseh,
least the disparity of their birth having an Egyptian to their mother, might
quail their confidence in Gods promises to their Fathers, and that they might
know they had as good interest in them, as the rest of their kindred.

6. As for S. Austens place, Locutinoum de Genesi, number. 200. He determines not
whether the Patriarks were inuocated by their children, as F. T. would bear us
in hand, or upon them rather as we say, but only biddes us note, that the word
invocation is sometime veryfied upon men, as well as upon God, and so exaudition
likewise. What of that?

7. Numb. 7. Let him prove and not say, or not say till he prove, that
intercession to Saints by our seeking to them, and intercession of Saints to
God for us, is all one. Negamus and pernegamus. In all Chrysostomes Liturgy, (
Our Church seems to reckon it for Chrysostomes, calling one of the prayers in
it Chrysostomes prayer.
I mean that which bears his name) where there is mention of the intercession
of Saints for us so many and so Nothing but (...). And as for Marie, (...). Not
to her, not to them, but to Christ only.
sundry times, there is not the least praying on the Understand this of the
original Greek, not of Leo Tuscus his translation.
faithfulls part, so much as once, to the greatest Saint.

8. To the. 9. Numb. It will never be disprooued what the Bishop answers to S.
Basils authority, that aliud est facere, aliud statuere; and Legibus non
exemplis viuen dum est. Gregory Nazianz. saying is, as I remember, Priuilegia
paucorum non faciunt legem Ecclesiae. Seneca himself, Permittit sibi Consol.
ad Marcian.
quaedam, and contra bonum morem, magna pietas. And what though S. Basil should
draw an argument from thence, which he does not? Does not S. Paul so from a
corrupt fashion of baptising over the dead, in some Writers opinions? 1. Cor.
15. See Bellar. de Purgat. lib. 1. cap. 6. confessing as much. Likewise
Chrysostom gives folk Hom. 10. in Acta Apost. Non tamen (inquit) (...).
leave to swear by themselves, that the name of God might be less dishonored
by them in their daily mention. Is it lawful therefore to swear by ones self?
Himself denies it in the same place.

9. Numb. 25. He says there is no ordinance, or no decree, but in Counsels.
Let him bring them hardly then, let Our demand of a decree for prayer to
Saints.
him cite the Counsels. Are not they Fathers, and multiplied Fathers? Will his
MAJESTY refuse the Counsels, wherein so many speak as one man, that is
content to be ordered by the Fathers in singular, if the authority be pregnant,
and the antiquity sufficient? But how shamefully does he belie the Council of
Gangra? Neither is any such thing in the Proeme there, nor yet in the Canons.
Only a corruption is crept into the Proeme, which is nothing material
neither, though it were granted. See the Greek at Paris, of Tilius his
edition, see other Greek copies. And, is to meet at Churches, or not to shun
assemblyes in Basilicis martyrum, all one with the invocation of Saints now
become? Why rather should we not think their private mass condemned under a
Priest and his boy, in the 6. Canon of that Council, contra (...), against
them that assemble without a lawful assembly? as likewise their
Gossip-baptizers taxed in that which follows, (...), that is, against the
performers of Churchbusinesses, without Priestly assistance, etc. On the other
side, how mainely are the Popish practices in that Preface confuted? About Can.
1.
the honor of the married life, the Can. 4.
indifferency of celebrating with Priests married or unmarried, Can. 14.
against women leaving their proper husbands, to observe the profession of I
know not what continency, but like theirs certainly. Against Can. 12. and 13.
affectation of apparel, as in the Nuns and Friars now of all colors. Yea,
Can. 3.
for the authority of Masters over their servants (the very case of Supremacy
this day in question) though the one be Christian, the other an infidel: of
which point Epiphanius most sweetly in a certain place, Nauis ecclesiae non
recipit fugitivum, neque qui a proprijs Dominis discedit. The ship of God, lib.
2. Tom. 1. haer. 61. quae. Apostolicorum est.
or of his Church, admits no runaway, nor for saker of his own masters.
Against departing with riches under hope of more holiness, which is their vow of
poverty, so magnifyed at Vide Praefat. Council.
this day. I might add, out of comparison of the 19. Canon with the second in
that Council, that although fastings, such as the Church appoints, are to be
kept, which we deny not, yet without preferring of fish before flesh, as the
more holy, which is their error. And do they tell us of the Council of
Gangra? In which there is not one syllable, neither in preface nor bulk, of
praying to Saints. Yea, in the 20. Canon, (...), and (...), being distinctly
so mentioned, and attributed to the Martyrs, (...) Martres memories, but Gods
service.
are put absolutely as only (...), as Gods only. Yet we have Counsels
against them, even ancient Counsels, prayer to Angels being condemned in
the Laodicean Council, and called a close Idolatry, of which hereafter. Now if
to Angels, how much more to Saints, as Epiphanius his argument is, Ne Angeli
quidem, nedum silia Annae; No not the Angels, much less the daughter of Anna,
which is their Hzres. Collyrid.
highest Saint. See the Council of Nice, Can. 20. (...), prayers to God, and
to God only: as S. Paul in the Acts. 26. 29. (...), and, 2. Cor. 13. 7. (...),
which is not Paul's speech more then vox ipsius naturae, the voice of Nature;
Men praying still to God, and to God only, by the instinct of nature. As
Tertullian observes somewhat not unlike in his Apologet. Idem fere Cyprian l.
de vanitat. idol Nam and vulgus in multis Deum natural ter consitetur. Item,
Quae haec summa'delicts est, nolle agnoscere que^ ignorare non poss^ Yet the
Papists so.
O testimonium animae naturaliter Christianae. Nature her self teaches men
this point of relligion. But pass we to more.

10. S. Hierome against Vigilantius, never patronizes in one word praying to
Saints. Yet F. T. is not ashamed to confound the questions still, of their
praying for us, with ours to them. Whereas if they pray for us, they pray to
God, and all our question tends only to the end, that God be not intermedled
with, in his right to hear prayers. For so in the Psalm. 64. I ween, Thou that
hear the prayer; and, To thee shall all flesh come. Well may they go
together; The hearer of the prayer is the receiver of all, to him. But no
particular Saint receives all flesh to him, Ergo. Again, Psalm. 5. v. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5. many reasons are given of his praying to God (unto thee do I pray, says
he) which utterly abolish all praying to Saints. As namely, the absolute
purity of the divine essence: For thou art a God with whom dwells no
wickedness: whereas, in his Angels themselves he has found folly, as Job says,
And many the like. But returning to our Adioynder, how gross is his ignorance
numb. 19. that Adioynd. Numb. 19. The Latin Translator doubted not to
translate, (...), hos oret, (the more wretch he) expresting also the Indicative
mood in the Greek by an Imparatiue in the Latin: (so prates the parret, and
so he writes it) how boldly both?
(...), is to pray, or to run to pray, as if there were no other running?
Does not S. Austen speak of the fashions of his time, curritur cum infantulis,
for baptism, no doubt, to be had of the Priest, not for prayers to the Priest;
and so for many other causes, besides intercession? Likewise Denis of
Mars-street, in his Epistle ad Demophilum, not unfit to be tung into a Jesuits
ear, to expel the devil of rebellion that is in them (as they hold opinion
of bells, that they are Doctrine of peace and good order out of Mars-street.
to be dis-enchaunted:) Si famulum in Dominum, si adolescentem in Seniorem, si
filium in Patrem dicere videremus, etc. flagitiose facere videremur, nisi
CVRRENTES superioribus Would this stand with Card. Allens project against Q
Eliz^
epem ferremus, etiamsi for sitan illi priores iniuriam acceperint. Here is
CVRRENTES, and yet in no such sense. But I will English the whole, for the good
that may come of it. If we should see ones servant give his Master Superiors
must be helped against their subject, with all speed, even RVNNING, though
abused but in tongue only, yea though themselves have done the wrong.
bad words, the younger to his elder, the son to the father, we might seem to
be guilty of no less then villainy, if we did not R V N and succor them,
yea and that though the injury sprang first from them (viz.) the superiors. R
V N says Denis, and succor the Magistrate. Yet with this man, currere is
nothing but inuocare; to run is to pray unto. I might ask him here, whom he
went to invoke, which of all the Saints, that same aliquem Sanctorum, as most
fondly they construe, Job. 5. that he could not come to in England, when he
ran beyond Sea. Besides that, (...), is, to the monuments of the Martyrs, not
to the Martyrs themselves, whom we need not to run unto, if it be as they
say, that they hear our prayers, but may speak unto them in every place, and
from every place, as shut up no where. Let them remember their own
principles, Non inijcimus Christo compedes: We do not fetter Christ. (...) de
Eucha^
And surely, where the Lamb is, there are they. Apoc. 14. 4. and Euang. Ioh.
17. 24.

11. In his 16. numb. (for I go over them thus cursorily, not curious of a
method) when he thinks he has greatest advantage against the Bishop, and
talks so like a noddie, of a new Grammar; what says Truly he must either
make a new Grammar to (...) his construction, or else retract his exposition,
and and, Number. 15. But will you further yet bear him confute his own gloss,
and see him tript, as I may say, in his (...) play? The word HE (says the
Bishop) cannot be referred to relliques. For the gender does not suffer it. Why
does he then in the former place, make hos to signify memorias martyrum? Does
the gender trow you suffer it, either in the Latin or the Greek? Can he make
hi or ho, to agree wish memorias (...) monumenta, etc. Ad^ynd.
he? (...) (says he) cannot signify memorias martyrum, or (...), or (...),
because that is masculine, and these are feminine, or neuter. I might tell him
of (...), or the like; which in effect are all one with (...) or memoriae. But
let them stand aside. Euripides in Medea, speaking of the children newly
returned from play, (...), that is, ex gymnasio ad eum vsum: not from the (...)
themselves, though the one be masculine and the other neuter. So here. (...),
per metonymiam, is put for the place to which they belong, of what gender
soever they are, that resort to the place. See Casaubone of this in Theophrasti
characteres. And withal hear, what the oracle of our parts, for Greek and
all good learning, Mr. Andrewe Downs, (whom I name by way of reverence, and
singular honor) has taught us of this matter, even ludibundus, sometimes. In
orat. Demosthen. contr. Androtionem. (...), pro, in comitio, vbi congregatur
(...), in the same oration, pro (...). Theophrast. in Charact. (...) Apud
Lucian. (...), pro loco habendi symposy.
(...).. i. in loco vbi praestigiae spectantur. I suppose, this is the place
that gives occasion to Mr. Casaubone, whom I lately named, to make the like
observation; but remembering the general, I had forgotten the particular, I
confess. At Athens in the Piraeum, not far from the haven, there was a place
called the (...), viz. where proof was made of wares and merchandise. Homer.
Odyss. (...). (in answer to your quotations out of Homer about Thetis and the
rest) (...): there is (...), for locus saltandi, and (...) for locus certandi.
Plautus himself, if his mention offend you not, (though why should it, when
you can front us with your Ovid?) In iure, pro eo quod est, (...), vbi ius
dicitur. So, in ius vocare, in ius ambulare, pergere, etc. that is, (...). In
one of the Apocryphaes, (...), pro, in loco vbi discuntur and docentur
parabolae. (...), apud Aristoph. pro, (...). Sexcenta sunt eiusmodi. I must
bring you home. How often in S. Leo, or S. Gregory, crastino apud sanctum
Petrum, for, in Basilica S. Petri, or the like? Your own Maldonate in 4.
Matthew. v. 23. has the like observation, of the word ecclesiae, both from the
Hebrews and the Greeks, as he says. The persons give name to the place that
they use. Chrysostom. orat. 1. (...), to the same purpose. (...). It is the
Scriptures fashion, when a thing is done at such a place, or at such a time, to
call both time and place by the name of the thing. So also of the persons. Why
not? And yet (...), shall not be cum memorijs, but cum Sanctis ipsis. For (...)
is the place, I say, when words of moving to it, or remoouing from it, are
used, as (...) before. But (...), implies no such thing, and may therefore be
understood of the Martyrs themselves. Do you now see the reason, good Sir, to
vary the construction, without any inconstancy in the Bishop as you imagine?

12. Likewise once again, I must tell you, to your number. 17. the Cardinals
argument is most ridiculously miserable, from veneration of relliques, to
intercession of Saints. Quo ferrumine tandem ista? What sother has he to make
these hold? Though we deny relliques to have been ever venerated in the
primitive Church with your manner of venerations. S. Austen indeed says,
veneramur baptismum Epist. 145. and, Hortatio haec quae vbique iam praedicatur,
quae vbique veneratur, de Agon: Christ. cap. 11. Baptism, and the word
preached, are venerable to S. Austen would have Baptism and the word preached
to be had in worship of us. Which the Papists making slight of, divert their
veneration now to the Sacrament of the Altar, as if none but that. S.
Chrysostom hom. 8. in epist. ad Ephesians. Angeli venerantur (...) Pauli, which
were too much for an Angel, to worship Paul himself, much more his chains.
But, Estimation with (...), is called worship, if F. T. would understand this.
S. Austen. So happily relliques. They were venerabiliter habitae, respectfully
kept, or regardfully preserved, not worshipped, nor adored. You may read S.
Gregory about this point, Epist. ad Constant. August. where he mislikes the
taking up of dead bodies, to make relliques of them; the worshipping much more.
They neither sought the living among the dead, which the Angel condemns, nor
a viuentibus ad mortuos, which Esaias forbids, and he purged as you know by an
Angel, and a coal. But what need we more words, when your self say, that
Cap. 10. Numb. 19. of the Adioynd.
the Bishop graunts as much as you desire in this point? Do then as he.

13. Now to your numb. 17. and 18. Not hae, but hi, protect Countries without
all doubt. Adloynd. Although the Cardinal cites those words of S. Bisil, for
the veneration of rellique^, [Hi martvres, etc.] yet the intercession of Saint,
is also CLEERFLY proved thereby, and again the use and veneration of holy
relliques, by the help and protection (...) we receive from (...) and Marty^.
Not the relliques of Martyrs, but the Martyrs themselves (if ought at all)
under God. S. Basil meant no otherwise. Therefore Bellarmine is most idle, when
he draws such consequences, from the virtue of Martyrs, to the veneration of
their relliques. Are not relliques subject to diverse casualties? to wars, to
fires, to consumption, etc. And shall they keep Countries, that not
themselves? S. Chrysostom. in Lazarum, says, that the very houses wherein Bibles
are, are the more defenced against Devils and sundry calamities. Yet the Bible
is not worshipped, by you especially. But for their love to the Bibles, God
does this. So for them that honor his Saints without idolatry.

14. To Numb. 29. Mamas was but vocatus, not inuocatus, nor aduocatus neither,
as you translate it. (...), Vocatus is not straight ^catus, or aduocatus.
says S. Basil. And that might be by Apostrophe. Or, as if we should say,
Daniels God, not inuoking Daniel; so Mamas his god; we name his name, but we
do not invoke him as our patron. Only we show we consent in religion with
him, and in our joint service to the common Lord. As he that commanded all men
to worship Daniels God. Dan. 6. 26. Does S. Basil say that Mamas ever helped
him? I warrant you not. What then does he else, but even take advantage of the
honest peoples affection, toward the deceased champion, to establish them in
the zeal of the true God, whom he served and suffered for? In this sense it
may be true, what you say out of Theodoret, cap. 8. number. 45. That, prayer to
Saints (such prayer as I have Deus Christianorum, often in the Church.
historians. Does that infer praying to Christians (...) or not rather to the
God of Christians only?
now described) confirms Christ's Divinity. Which else it disables rather, but
surely dishonours. And so I answer to your 22. and 23. numb. of this Chap. that
by this means they might know the same God to have helped them, whose Martyr
Mamas was, though they made no petitions to the Martyr himself.

15. The defense of your translation of S. Basils text, against so clear a
light as is the original greek, is more then impudent. Therefore I pass by
that, and come to Eusebius, the Cardinals next author, in your Numb. 29. De
praep. Euan. l. 13. cap. 7.


16. Though that also about Eusebius, is of the same strain, for matter of
translation. Quid The Bishop charge the Cardinal with fraud in p^ting the
Greek text, because the words in the Greek are somewhat otherwise, making no
express mention of praying to Martyrs, but only at their tombs. Whereto I
answer, that the Latin translator followed the sense of Eusebius, gathering
the same out of the circumstance of the place. For Eusebius showing the
conformity of Platoes doctrine to our Christian relligion, etc: Numb. 29. A
dioynd.
tandem? You defend Christophorsons false gloss against Eusebius his original
greek text. Whom shall we believe in this case? Neither say, it is gathered out
of the circumstances of the text. His MAJESTY looks for Fathers, in suo puro
and natiuo, without your dashings, or interlacings. Nay verily it is an
argument, that no such service of Saints was ever used in the primitive Church,
because Eusebius here has no such words. Who else would have been forward, you
may be, sure to have paralleled herein the Christian fashion with Platoes
devices. But he mentions not praying to them in the least word; the Translator
only. Therefore as I said.

17. You plead, that the Cardinal is guiltles of this fraud, and deals
uprightly, though the Translator lead him aside into error. It is hard to
believe you, when the Greek was at his hand. But in the mean time, you see his
proofs are answered, which is all we stand upon.

18. Numb. 31. Out of Chrysostomes Orat. in Iuventinum and Maximinum. I would I
had the leisure to compare your relligion, with the relligion of those two.
They complained of smoke, of sacrifice, etc. while Julian domineered. Apud
That.
Under you the sun is darkened with such vapors, with your censing,
perfuming, and the like. They offered to die in obedience to the Emperor, and
so they did, though martial men and well able to resist. With you, against the
King, if the Pope proscribe him, Omnis homo miles est, as Tertullian speaks,
even Churchmen and all. Apologet.
But to the purpose. Adoremus for adornemus. How can you defend this? Are you
not ashamed to reiterate it? What though your Venetian Editions have it? the
Iuntae, and the Sessae, and such like? Is that enough to make it authentical,
because it came from Venice? So you read angulos for angelos, Can. 35. apud
Garanzam in ^ma. Cone.
in the Laodicean Council, as if that were the way to decline it. But it is
well, that the Council is so forcible against you, that it drives you into
corners. As for (...), which is to touch, that it should signify to worship,
as you bear us in hand, who believes it? Yet it is marvel you infer not
faith in relliques, because S. Chrysostom says, Let us embrace them, (...),
with faith. Which rather, I should think, checks your use of relliques, as now
adays they are used, and lifts up the mind a mortuis ad viuentem, or a spolijs
mortuorum, from shirts and hand-kercheffs, to the living God.

19. You quote Plutarch, Othone, (...). Some think it should be (...), (...).
per modum supplicationis tetigere manus. But in Plut. Otho I find neither, and
both come to one end.
If your quotation be right (for I promise you I cannot find it) it proves
not, that touching is worshipping, with Plutarch, but that hands supplicate, or
make request, which they performed then, of whom Plutarch speaks, (...), viz.
(...), aggressi sunt, they set forward to supplicate and make prayer by hands,
as I construe it. Else I know not what the meaning of your quotation is, and
whence you had it, see you. You quote Crispinus his Dictionary, co^piled out of
another of Budaeus his, as you imply. But in Crispins Dictionary of 1595. which
is said to be recens restitutum and auctum, I find not one word sounding that
way. Therefore I think it is not in Budaeus neither, yet he reckons up many
significations (I mean Crispine does) as capessere Rempublicam, laedere',
haerere and conglutinari, gustare, comedere, perstringere etiam and taxare.
Marvel, how he should leave out only this, if any such were. Sure you never
turned the book, but either believed your Monitors, or thought it was so,
because you wished and strongly imagined it to be so indeed. Hesychius, and
Suidas, are as dumb the same way about the sense of the word (...). Stephen and
Scapula, who both quote Budaeus for the senses of (...), yet have none such
neither. In the end of Plutarchs Otho, I find only this, speaking of the love
which the soldiers bare to Otho even dead, (...), that is, some touched his
hands, Which, I pray you, may not a man do toward a dead body, for the love
he bore to the person in his life time, unless he worship it? Remember the
story of Artemisia and Mausolus. That was more then touching, when she eat
and drank the ashes of her dead husband, for very love. Some kissed (says
Plutarch) the wound of the dead body, some touched his hands, some made
obeisance a far off. What is this to the matter? And one of the Dictionarists
aforenamed, quotes the place of the Gospel, of many that touched the hemme of
our Saviors garment. Yet of worshipping it, not a word. I should think that
were a fine place to ground worshipping of relliques upon, (if touching be
worshipping) our Savior being as sacred and sovereign in his life time, as
any Saint is after his death. But the story of his interring by Joseph and
Nicodemus, (where there is no mention to Mark. 15. 46.
this purpose) consutes relliques more then this can possibly help them. And
yet least you think it holds only in Christ, who was to rise again the third
day; hear how your Maldonate construes that of S. John, Volo eum manner Com.
in 21. Ioh.
donec veniam. This may be (says he) though S. John dyed, well enough. For
manner is to tarry, non concisum neque dilaceratum, sed sanum atque integrum,
quamvis mortuum. Which could not be if he were to be cut out into mammocks,
such Nemo distrahat Martyrs, etiam (...) sensu. Vide August. de oper. Monach.
c. 28. Alij membra Martyrum (si tamen Martyrum) venditant, etc. In Greg. Turon.
lib. 9. c. 6. A sachel of mice-bones, moales-teeth, beares-clawes, etc. were
found with a Mountibanke, in stead of true Relliques.
as your Relliques are. Not Christ therefore, nor John, were to be carved into
Relliques. And were any worthier to be preserved, trow you, then they?

20. As for tangere genua, a circumstance which they were wont to use that
prayed, it shows not that tangere signifies to pray, nor yet to worship, unless
genua be put to it, or some such rite expressed, which in Relliques holds not.
S. Chrysostom does not say, Let us touch their knees, but them howsoever.
Which some body perhaps would construe without any great anagogy, of not
abhorring either the death of Gods Saints, which is precious in his eyes, as
David witnesses (in his, whatsoever Sure in S. Gregory's time it was impious
and sacrilegious but even to touch the bodies of Saints dead in the Western
parts; with whom we have now to deal. Intolerabile est atque sacrilegum. Vide
Epist. 30. lib. 3. Regist. indict. 12.
it be in the worlds) or the memorialls of the deceased, lately temples of the
holy Ghost. But upon that I stand not. So (...), in Homer; so Thet is
elsewhere; so Hecuba in Euripides. What is this to touching in an absolute
sense, to signify worshipping? Is it not one thing what touching simply
signifies, another what touching with such particular circumstance, as the
beard, the knee, the hand? etc. Our Savior himself touched the leper, and
cured him, Mat. 8. 3. And, Mar. 10. 13. for the like cause they brought young
children to him, (...), that he should touch them,. i. bless them, not worship
them. You say, Job professes that he kissed not his hand at the Sun rising,
which with you imports, that he worshipped not the Sun. If you would persist
in your first principle, that touching is worshipping, Job should rather have
S. Chrysostom. construes those words of Job, Job 31. (the Adioynd. notes no
place) of the frailty of all things, which appears even in the sun and
moons decays; nothing to Adoration. Orat de Auarit. l. a^. Tom. 7. Edit. Eton.
said, that he touched not the Sun with his hand, when it rises, which who
does? And S. Chrysostom does not bid us touch our hands, or kiss our hands, at
the sight of the Relliques, but touch them. Let Chrysostom expound himself in
another place. In his Comment. upon 2. Cor. the last chapter, Hom. 30. he
mentions not only touching, but kissing one another (and that expressly in
osculo sancto, with the holy kiss, or the relligious kiss;) yea he says,
they kissed the Church so, and the Church Porch so. Which, I suppose, your
selves would not admit, that we should worship one another, or worship the
Church, and much less the Church Porch, with relligious adoration. Therefore
touching is no adoring; no nor Touching and kissing of holy things, is from a
reverent assection, not a relligious adoration.
kissing neither, which is a touching in specie, as your Martial, no doubt,
has told you long ere this time. And now to Mr. Marshall therefore.

21. Roma salutauit voce manuque Ducem. Matt. lib. 8.
What is this to worshipping, and not rather to saluting, but that with you, to
salute the Virgin, is to pray to her? We worship the God, whom we confess we
cannot touch. But, Otho protendens manum, adorauit vulgum, in Tacitus. By that
reason, S. Paul adored the assembly when he stretched out his hand, speaking to
them, Act. 26. 2. Which Athanasius says of himself, that he does too, as much
as he may in absence, to the Emperor Constantius. See Apolog. ad Constant. in
the beginning. Did he worship him in so doing, trow you? or rather make
audience? Neither did Otho touch the people whom he worshipped, and yet you
bring this, to prove, that touching is worshipping. Venerantes Deum tangimus
frontem, says Seruius; but nostram, not deorum. What is this to tangamus
relliquias, for adoremus? So the rest that you produce out of Paynim-idolatry,
as your self confess to your great glory. And lastly, out of Ovid his good
stuff, Tange manu mensam, as we do the book when we take an oath. What of
that? Or would you ever reason so, if you had either conscience, or reason in
you? We touch the book when we swear upon it: Ergo, the touching of relliques
is the worshipping of them. Well, Basil says, that relliques Com. in Ps. 115.
Orat. 1. in ^ulia^. The bodies of Saints departed profit (...) less (...)
the^^ s^ules.
help by contact, and so Nazianzen. And, 4. Reg. 13. the touch of Elizeus
bones, revived the dead. Belike, the dead body worshipped Elizeus, whom it
touched; for that you must say, or else you say nothing. We will soon grant,
that God may dispense blessings by dead bones, but not to the worshippers, no
not of the living Prophets, but of God only. Him worship, Apoc. 19. and 22.
Yea, S. Ambrose would not say, Tactu ipso medicabiles esse relliquias, if
Tactus ipse were adoration. For why should he extenuate adoration so? I touch a
wholesome herb, and it abates anguish; I worship it not. Nay, the woman
that found health by touching our Saviors hemme of his garment, though he was
the proper object of worship, which Saints are not, yet her touching was no
symbolum of her adoration of him, albeit by Gods blessing a means of health to
her. Therefore we deny your conclusion, numb. 42. that touching includes
veneration of the thing touched. Yea, sometime the healer touched the party
grieved, (whom he worshipped not you may be sure) as 2. Kin. 5. 11. Naaman
looked for it. But in the 4. of the same book, v. 34. Elizeus practices it
far more strangely, upon the Sunamites dead child, who^ he raises to life.
Of our Savior before, who touched the leper, another time the beer that
carried the dead, Luke 7. (...).
14. but worshipped neither.

22. Numb. 46. you say, a few sermons of Ephrem cannot deserve the name of a
Tome. Yet (...), and resoluit Conc. Constantinop. Can 5. and Calched. Conc. in
Act.
tomum, or scidit tomum, often in the Councels, not for a huge volume, but what
scrowle soever. Why may not the Bishop speak after that manner? Though you
cannot deny, that Ephrems edition is distinguished by Tomes, as they are
properly so called, unless you be very stranger to the matter. And give us
leave to suspect your Crypticke authors of your own editions, and but late
editions, when we call for Fathers, that is no bastard Fathers, to determine
controversies. The Bishop was not only true in quoting Ephrem, but quoted
him out of the original Arabique, that he wrote in. Not in coggerie therefore,
as you call it, but so much the more to be respected and credited, before your
grottae, or your Cryptae. As for Vossius the Translator and Prefacer, and
setter forth, with whose authority, poor man, you are so much delighted, as
his name in Dutch, which was his natural language, signifies a Fox, so you
are but the Goose for your labor, if you credit him too far. And this as I was
wished from him that understands these things best, so I tell it you.

23. Now Numb. 46. We may pray to God alone, you say, and yet to Saints too.
Fine phoolosophyes. Tibi soli Ambr. in Psalm. Hieron. ad Eusto^h.
peccaui, and yet he sinned against men. Let S. Ambrose teach you, or S.
Hierome either, the meaning of those words, to establish in you at once, as
well loyalty to Princes, as piety to God: that he sinned against God only,
as his competent Judge, being utterly exempt from flagella hominum, from
humane punishments. And in that sense he sinned not against any man.

24. Numb. 47. S. Paul's stirring up the Thessalonians to pray for him, is
compared with prayers made to Saints deceased. Quam nihil simile? Did S. Paul
desire them to pray to Saints for him, or to Angels? etc. That were somewhat.
In the mean while, our requesting of good men to pray for us, that yet live,
is no cultus, no Church-seruice, or else we might have a lyturgie in the Church
to living Saints, to mediate for us to God. And not only to the now living,
but to the veroe Saints in glory. Witness their owme Cardinal Tolet in Su^ma
C^^uum l. 1. c. 1. Qui prec^s pe^^^ a sa^^^do^e, De^ se ^^cere prae^s^mit. viz.
Sae^e^dotaliter, and (...) a part of Church-seruice. Now, if we may offer them
to the Saints, the Saints may peter^, ask the n. Why not* So as Tullie Philip.
2. (guided by the light of nature) ^rves out against. (...). O h^inem dete^lem,
for being Cae^sar. Priest, after his death; that is, honoring him in public
and Preistly ^^shion.
But that were very absurd. Therefore your comparison is not fit, and your
consequence does not hold. Fraternall and lyturgicall, or brotherly and
Churchly, officious and relligious mediations, I say, are diverse. To the Saint
it is worship, to one another of us it is not. As appears by the example which
your self bring, of S. Paul's requesting the Thessalonians for him, who^
doubtless he worshipped not, being so much his inferiors, though the
Thessalonians like the Lystrians might seem to do so to him, (in your mad
fancy at least) if they had requested the like charity of him.

25. You ask the Bishop, who published Ephrem, how many Tomes of him, etc. In
which matter we are not scrupulous to shape you answer to the full, though it
were more that you asked. Of Tomes before. The words are these, which willingly
I would set down, both in the Arabique and the Hebrew, as I have received them
of the Bishop, if we had such characters at hand. But in the Latin thus, both
for form and meaning. Illaica we shaueca lam atlabu.. i. Ad te and praeterquam
ad te, non facio orationem. In English thus, for the satisfaction of every
Reader, your self and all, good Mr. F. T. To thee, and but to thee to none, I
make my prayer. The Bishop cited them out of a manuscript which he keeps yet
to be seen, upon any occasion, called the Diuruall of the Maronites, a
certain kind of Monks, in a Monastery on Mount Sinah. Which book was printed
at Rome, anno 1584. at the commandment of Gregory 13. by Dominicus Basa in
Syriaque characters, though it be the Arabique tongue, under the name of the
prayer of S. Ephrem. The words also before and after, are these; Accipe
deprecationem meam o Domine, non propter iustitiam meam, sed propter
misericordiam tuam, and in multitudine benignitatum tuarum, and miserationum
tuarum, salua animam meam, quae captiuata est a morte. Memor esto mei o Domine,
and etiamsi peccaui and vulneratus sim vulneribus laethalibus, tamen NON PRECOR
QVENQVAM PRAETERTE. Sed ad misericordiam tuam and bonitatem me recipio, quoniam
tu es ille Dominus Deus omnia co^prehendens, and potestas tua super omne vitam
trahens, etc. That is; Receive my prayer O Lord, not for my righteousness, but
for thy mercyes sake, and in the multitude of thy bountyes and of thy
compassions, save my soul which is taken prisoner of death. Remember me O
Lord, and although I have sinned, and am wounded with deadly wounds, YET DO I
NOT PRAY TO ANY BESIDES THY SELF. Look you; The Papists would have them that
are oppressed with the conscience of grievous sins, fly to the Saints as
fittest to deal with, or to deal by, for desperate offenders; they being too
unworthy to appear immediately before God. Yet S. Ephrem says, that although
he have sinned, and be deadly wounded, yet to God, and to God only, does he
commend himself by prayer. It follows. But to thy mercy and bounty do I
betake my self, because thou art that Lord God, which comprisest all things,
(or embracest all things) no doubt the most recreant sinners of all) and thy
power is over all that lives and breaths, etc. Besides this, which yet is
pregnant enough to justify the Bishop from being such a falsary, as this man
would make him, (who may rather fear the imputation of it himself, as if his
two letters were as many marks in his forehead to know a False Thief by)
besides this I say, though S. Ephrem (as he is now printed) have not these
words verbatim, yet in all the procationes and orationes of his (which of
purpose have been perused and read over for this end) in the first Tome (for
if any of it be Ephrems, that is; as for the rest, the Bishop will avouch it,
that they are no more Ephrems works, then his own) there is never any the
least mention of praying to any Saint. And so much also of Ephrem and his
authority be spoken.

26. Numb. 47. Ambiguously, if not fraudulently, or fraudulently if not falsely,
you translate, (...), prays unto them, for stands in need of them. Who
ever denied but we need the Angels, and the heavenly messengers, as (...)
Hebr. 1. yea the Sun, and the Moon too, (...), made and appointed for the
common good by God? Yet I pray you, let us have no praying to them. And is this
the place that you would needs help the Cardinal with, out of S.
Chrysostom, after the Bishops answer so pregnant to those authorities which
he brought before? For let me tell you in a word, you dash against that rock,
all your foming waves (...), the rock I say of the Bishops double caveat. de
rebus necessarijs ad salutem, which Chrysostom never held prayer to Saints to
be. Nay he says that our Savior yielded to the poor woman Matthew. 12. suing
for herself, and Hom. in ea verb.
denied her when she used the Apostles for her mediators, and generally, that
he respects our prayers for our selves, more then others for us. Yea Tom. 1. in
Genesin. page 345. Edit. D. Hen. Sauile.
he says God never hears the prayers of the dead for us, but only when there
are none left alive to make intercession in our behalf. And he whets it with
that place (...), Esa. 48. 11.
not only (...) says he, but if there were none else, (...), God will do it
for his own sake. See ibid. page 49. of Job, Daniel, and Noe, who he says
benefitted others in their life time by Idest in Genesis c. 19. sermon. 43. Item in
Acta Apost. c. 16. Hom. 36. in Ethic. (...): God takes it unkindly at our
hands, when we dare not trust him so far, as to speak for our selves, but
set up other mediators to him in our room.
praying for them. But even they being dead shall not be heard, says God: To
show, that the most potent for mediation in their life time, are not to be
sought unto after death. See page 360. and 361. to the same purpose. Yet most
absurdly you prate numb. 55. that prayer to Saints is a necessary duty, and may
not be spared, nor bated us at any hand, because the Catholic Church has
practiced it. Does not this bewray your beggarly proofs for prayer to Saints,
together with your base conceit of the articles of faith, and things necessary
to salvation? I remember Bonauenture (and he not the worst of your
schoolmen) In 4. senten. Did. 45. art. 3. quaest. 3.
having alleged many reasons against prayer to Saints, and surely not to be
despised, howsoever he thought of them, determines thus in the end, as in
very good earnest, that those reasons are no reasons, because facit hoc
communiter ecclesia, and constat quod non errat, etc. that is his last
resolution. The Church does otherwise, and she for certain cannot err. So
you. But what says the spirit, Psalm. 93. v. 6. Eleuauerunt flumina vocem suam,
the floods O God have lift up their voice. That is the noise and the dinne
which your Church makes. But. v. 8. testimonia tua credibilia nimis, etc. This
drownes the other, not the other this, as Bonauenture fancyeth. The Son of
Sirach says right well, cap. 16. v. 3. Better is one that does the will of
God, then a thousand transgressors. The like sentence ^is cited out of your
own Panormitane. See Chrysostom at large following the same point, and
quoting that very place of the Son of Sirach, Hom. 8. in Acta Apostolor. where
among other things he thus says; That a multitude not agreeing in the will of
God, (...), is as good as no body, etc. And yet when did you bring us the
consent of the Church, (unless it be your own late faction, (...), but not
(...), as S. Chrysostom there distinguishes) that allege no Council, no
Canon, Chrysoft. adds there, Multi in gehe^na, pauci in regno. And, (...). As
he of children, so we of Fathers and authors themselves, unless they be very
approved. 2
nor no ordinance, within the compass assigned for sound antiquity, but
private men only, voluntary devotions, popular multitudes, which is the other
head, or the other horn, as I may so call it of the Bishops answer, and that
impregnable?

27. So Numb. 51. You add to the authority that the Cardinal cited out of S.
Chrysostom, certain words next following, wherein there is not one dram of
matter to your purpose, though they were squeezed to the proof. Howbeit I make
have, yet I will set them down. Thus he says. Therefore dare thou be so
bold to say, that their Lord or Master is dead, whose servants even when they
are dead, are Ex Hom. 66. 2d Pop Antioch. vel 26. Hom. in 2. Cor.
the protectors of the world? (This may prove perhaps their intercession for
us, though in strict Logic it proves not that neither, but ours to them no
way, no color.) Then he goes forward. And this is not only seen at Rome, but
also at Constantinople. For even here the son of Constantine the great,
thought his Father to be much honored, if his body were laid before the gates
of the Fisherman. Thus Chrysostom. And what is this to the matter? Though I
remember the same Father speaking of Constantinople in another place, says,
How. 11. in 4. ad Ephesians. If a man (...) lost (...) relligion, he might find et
at Co^^tant^nople.
the common voice was, that they were a people that would entertayne any
relligion, even the Christians among them, and professed. The rather this
perhaps under a semblant of devotion, but the place shows not so much as that.
Unless you please your self therein, that S. Peter is called the fisherman.
Of whom I remember what Arator, lib. 1.

-- Petrus omnia prendens (the Pope just,)
Bethsaida satus vrbe fuit. Then,
-- Quo nomine Hebraeo
Venatorum est dicta domus, quia verus ab illa
Ecclesiae venator adest, etc.
You have succeeded the hunter, and Abac. 1. 15. the fisher too. Specially in
troubled waters.

28. In the 53. Numb. You say somewhat, if you could prove it, that they that
oppugn prayer to Saints, oppugn a notable argument of Christ's divinity. Which
is so contrary to all truth, that Athanasius, and Cyrill, and as many as prove
the divinity of our Savior, against the Arrian heresy, prove it by this
argument among the first, sometime that he is prayed to, sometime believed in,
sometime worshipped. So Domine Iosu suscipe spiritum meum; Stephen Act. 7. 5 p.
at his death. And it is Bellarmines own argument against the Transyluanian
Arrians, to maintain the divinity of our Savior Christ by. So Psalm. 72.
Prayer shall be made ever unto him. -- vocabitur hic quoque votis. Aeneid. 1.
And because you quoted Martial even now, take Martial; Qui fingit sacros
auro vel marmore vultus,
Non facit ille deos, qui ROGAT ille facit.
Do you see how gods are made, not as Michael Angelus, D^^ina (...) M^ h^ and
Ti^ani. Flor. Rem. l. 8. de orig^r^s. (...). 3.
or other Statuaries in your Church are wont, whose divine hand most
ridiculously you magnify? Of our Saviors quia, I spoke before, quia tuum est
regnum potentia and gloria. As who would say, therefore we pray to him, and but
to him that stands invested with these prerogatives, we pray to none, as
Ephrem said even now. Yet you will cavil perhaps, as you insinuated before, or
rather more then insinuated, in the beginning of this Chapter, that honor and
glory is to every well doer, Romans 2. Therefore to the Saints. But it follows
in the Lords prayer, in saeculum saeculi, for ever and ever. Gods eternity
confutes you, which the Saints do not communicate in, neither ab ante at all,
nor a retro in the sense that the Lords prayer has it. For the Saints
continuance has flux and succession, so has not Gods, but is tota simul, as
Bo^thius has explained, and diverse others. Who only has immortalitit. (...).
Tim. 6.
Of Athanasius see answer to your 8. Chapter. Of Cyrill thus briefly, out of
one only book of his, De recta Fide ad Theodosium. The Angels (says he) were
bidden to worship Adorate e^m o^nes Ang^l^ Dei. Heb. 1.
the Son; poterant enim; and valde merito, humanitatis videntes paruitatem,
tardiores ad colendum and adorandum esse, and ad glorisicandum eum quem nobis
similem cognoscebant; vt quam longissime discedere viderentur ab errore. That
is: For they might, and that very justly, considering the stendernes of his
humane-nature, be the lo^ther to worship and to adore him, and to glorify one
whom they knew to be like unto our selves, avoiding so, the very show of
committing the error (of idolatry) as carefully Abstinete ab omnis spe^ie ^^^li.
as was possible. Do you see how dangerous it is to worship a man? and how
carefully the Angels fled of from that error? Themselves forbid themselves to
be worshipped, Revel. 18. and here they are feign to be commanded to it, before
they can be brought to worship a Man. Yet what man? Adoratur, quidem vt
vnigenitus, et si vocetur primogenitus, id quod manifestissimae humanitatis
mensuras maxim decet. As the first begotten he worships, as the only begotten
he is worshipped. For he consists, ex nature a adorabili, and adorante, says
the same Cyrill there. According as his own words are, Ioh. 4. Nos adoramus
quod scimus. Yet playner. Number igitur tanquam hominem adoramus Immanuelem?
Absit. Deliramentum enim hoc esset, and deceptio, ac error. That is. Do we
therefore worship the Immanuel as a man? God forbid. For that were to doat, to
err, and to be deceived. And, In hoc enim nihil differremus ab his qui
creaturam colunt vltra conditorem. That is, For in so doing we should, differ
nothing from them that worship the creature above the Creator. Not that any
worshipped the creature more then the creator, (who so mad?) but every iuxta is
vltra with S. Paul, when any thing comes to be worshipped besides God, Romans 1.
Many the like clauses are in that book, but with this I will end, to show
Cyrills judgment of faith in Saints, which was the thing that we began
with. Alioqui quemode in illum credamus? Else how should we believe in him?
namely if Christ be not God. Again, Non enim tanquam in vnum nobis similem
(yet the Saints are like us, I am. 5. 17.) neque etiam in hominem fides, sed in
Deum tendit naturalem and verum (for we are (...) too, but not (...), Gal. 4.
8. whom we (...).
must not so much as (...), not give dulia to, unless it be naturalis deus) in
persona Christi. That is. For our faith is grounded, not upon one like us, (as
the Saints for certain are; no) nor upon any MAN; but upon the natural and
true God in the Person of Christ. And wot you what he adds yet, for assurance
sake? Hinc quidam curabant, ne fides in Christum reciperetur, namely, quia eum
simplicem hominem minimeque deum esse putabant. That is. For this cause some
endeavored to hinder the enterteyning of faith in Christ, because they were
persuaded he was a mere man, and not God. Would the Church at that time allow
faith in Saints think you? Ergo necessario ad periculum and metum illum
tollendum, sidem referebat in Deitatis naturam (Christus viz,) and quidem in
persona patris, and non nostra humilitate, dicebat, Qui credit in me, non
credit in me, sed in eum qui misit me. That is. Therefore of necessity to
prevent that fear, and that danger, (Christ) reduced our faith in him unto
the nature of his Godhead, and said in the person of his father, and not in our
[natures] meannesse, He that believes in me, believes not in me, but in him
that sent me. This agrees with S. Chrysostom, who, as I told you before,
observes that the Apostle durst not so much as name sidem in Christum, faith in
Christ, a good while after his resurrection, till the world was better seasoned
with the belief of his Godhead. But hereof so much.

29. Numb. 58. Certain books of Scripture, you say, are not known by what
authors they were penned, and yet they carry the force of authority
notwithstanding. Therefore Homilyes falsely or uncertainly attributed to these
and these Fathers, are available against the King, in the trying of this
controversy.] Negatur consequentia. There we know the inditer, though we doubt
of the penman. Here all rests upon the credit of the writer. See S. Austen of
thi^, lib. 3. de Trinit. in prooem. Item lib. 2. ad Vincent. Vict. Epist. 1^ ad
Hieron. Epist. 7. ad Marcel. Epist. 48. ad Vinc. Ep. ad Fort. 111. Item lib. 2.
de Baptis. contra Donat. cap. 3. S. Hieron. in Ep ad Theoph. aduers. Ioh
Hierosolym. Quae omnia apud Great. 9. Did. Decret.
Divine authority goes not with true Fathers, says Gelasius, S. Austen, and
your own Who also distinguishes between Canonita veritas, and Ca^ca authoritas.
Driedo, with many more, much less with the suspected or questioned. Though
suppose it were otherwise, what says Maximus, or Ambrose, or whosoever he is,
when you have done all you In natoli D Agnetis.
can? For I spare to tell you that this Oration is not in Ambrose, where diverse
others are of them which are found of late to be Maximus his brood. So as this
also may seem to smell of a grotte. I will take the words, as they lie in your
book, and of your own translating: We beseech thee, O Virgin, with as
fervent prayers as we may. The very Latin words are these. Quibus (...)
precibus exo^amus. Not as he falsely translates them, as seruently as we may,
(there is no word of feruencie there, or any such thing:) but doubting belike
that she was clean out of the hearing of prayers; which we also think.
Which we our selves are ready to do, I mean to pray to any that we may.
But he that says so, doubts of the lawfulnes of his own act. How think you?
or if this like you not, you may do well next time to set down Maximus his
own words in Latin, and sparing yours, to leave the Reader to his own
interpretation of them, unless you could better. And why I pray you does
Maximus pray only to Agnes among so many Saints, as he Panegyrizeth in those
Orations, both men and women? Or how did he say a little before, Veni iam Virgo
ad Thalamum, etc. Is not your own note, in the Margent there, this, IMITATIO?
to show that it is not real but figurative. And yet you are he, that will
allow no tropes forsooth, in the fathers compellation of Saints deceased.

30. Numb. 63. You say, Nazianzene exhorted others, to imitate the example of
her, that prayed to the blessed Virgin. Yet in Nazianzenes words, even as you
cite them your self, there is no such thing but only that they should rejoice,
and give ear, both sorts of them, both married and unmarried: for to both (he
says) his narration may serve for an ornament. This is all. What shall we say
to him, that so shamefully belyes his own tale, and corrupts Nazianzene?
Neither do you wipe away the stain of inconsequence and contradiction about a
double Cyprian in that Oration of Nazianzene, which the Bishop had charged
you with. In so much as Billius your own man, confesses, that Nazianzenus hic
caecutijt, Nazianzene was dazzled here. Lastly, suppose the damsel made such
prayer, as you speak of, it will always be true, what I told you out of Seneca,
Permittit sibi quaedam and contra bonum morem magna pietas. Devotion
transports, if it be fervent, commonly. Gorgonia, Nazianzenes sister,
abandoned her chamber, in Apud Nazianz. Epitaph. Gorg.
her fit of sickness, but a little slaking, and went to the Altar to pray to
God, threatening not to depart ((...) says Nazianzene) till she had her desire.
Was that well done? And yet her fit. clean left her, and she came home well.
For she prayed to God, not to the Saints. But I speak of the aberrations of
minds, that are otherwise godly, even in prayer. Therefore when Abraham was to
do that great work Orat. in eam rem.
(says S. Chrysostom) of sacrificing his son, God called him by his name,
Abraham, Abraham, and he answered, Here I am. Not to show in what place he was,
which God doubted not, but that he knew what he did, and was not transported
with any violent pang of passion. (...), says the famous Apostle, 2. Cor. 5.
13. We are mad to God. Else Ignatius gives to maidens this precept in
special: That, when they pray, at any time, they should (...) Epist 6. quae ad
Philadelph.
(...);. i. have only Christ and his father before their eyes, being
illuminated by the holy Ghost. How sweetly has he comprehended the blessed
Trinity alone, and shut out al others, from communicating with them in prayer?
Now briefly to your seventh Chapter: Of your sixth thus much.

To the seventh Chapter of the Adioynder: Chap. 7. of the Defense, etc.
Wherein (answerably to the Title that he gives to his) the Fathers of the
third rank, their testimonies brought for Invocation of Saints, are showed to
be most plentifully assoyled by the Bishop, and S. Ambrose by name to have
received no injury, nor disgust from him, no not the least: (could they as well
justify their false printing of him, a most inexpiable abuse:)

As also, That what he talks of a general practice of Invocation of Saints in
the Primitive Church, both by the Fathers and the Faithful, is a mere jest,
and a Jesuitical crake: Epiphanius besides others prophesying even then, (and
in this very matter) that Haeresis est sicut mala mulier, Heresy is like a
shrew, getting ground vnsensibly by the conniuence of people, unless snebd at
first, (which our age has found true) as also (which F. T. here brings to our
minds, in not resting satisfied with the Bishops answers, though never so
absolute) that she will be sure to have the last word.

1. NOthing is more accurate then that division of the Bishops, of the confused
rout of the Cardinals witnesses into three classes. Some true Fathers, but not
truly alleged: Some truly alleged, but not true Fathers: Some true and
truly alleged, but nothing to the purpose. Yet this man derides it, counts
it not worth three chips. What should one stand tugging with such a sowterly
fellow, qui neque literas neque nare, that knows not art, when it is brought
before him, and laid on his trencher? To the third of these ranks, belong those
Fathers, says he, whom we must now entreat of, Nyssen, Nazianzen, Hierome,
Maximus, etc. We must see whether Apostrophes, or Rhetorical compellations may
be discovered in these men's prayers to Saints. Which the Bishop had both
answered, and backed with sundry reasons: as that they speak to other things
in like phrase of speech, whom nevertheless they would never speak to, but
in a figure of Rhetorique: So Luke 1. 76. Et tu puer. Yet the child understood
not Zachary prophesying. Unless we will continue the miracle, as I grant some
of the Fathers do, Origin, Theophylact, etc. but sure it needs not. And again,
1. Cor. 15. O death, O hell, where is thy sting, or thy victory?
Eusebius to Piety, de vita Constant. lib. 5. Ambrose to the water of
Baptism, lib. 10. in Luc. cap. 22. Nazianzene to the feast of Easter, Orat. 2.
in Pasch. Of which sort we have many in Scripture too, and namely that, Numb.
21. 17. Rise up well. Cantic. 4. 16. Arise O North, and come O South, and
blow, etc. Besides that they profess, they are uncertain whether they are
heard by the parties they speak to, yea or no. Nazianzen of Constantius, or
rather of Constantine, (...), if thou discernest any thing that is here done.
So of his sister Gorgonia. So Nyssen of Theodorus, Hierome of Nepotian, etc.

2. We are admonished of 4. things by this man in his third numb, to disprooue
the Bishops answer in this behalf.

that the doubt of some men's estates, as not delivered from Purgatory, nor
having paid their last farthing (though Tertullian call inferos nouissimi
quadrantis exactores, hell (not Purgatory) De resurrect, carnis.
the exactor of the last farthing) might make them to be uncertain whether
they were heard or no, by such as they spoke unto. Wherefore is this? That one
error may support another, whereas rather each destroys the other, as Cadmus
children, or as they their brethren, whom Moses set on work to mutual
slaughter, Exodus 32. For if they held them to be in pains, and not in glory,
how would S. Cyprian, Orat. de lapsis. will not allow Martyrs to help us
before the day of judgment: much less I should think those, whose state is
either miserable, or at the best but uncertain. Credimus quidem posse apud
indicem plurimum (...) martyrum, etc. sed cum iudicij dies venerit, post
occasuns saeculi, etc. And soon after, Putemusne quenquam prius quam
vindicetur ipse, alios posse desendere? Shall any help another, that is yet
unrevenged himself? Yet so are all the Saints and Martyrs, Apoc (...). 10.
Howbeit Emanuel Sain Aphor. (...). O^atio, is for souls in purgatory to be
praved to and all. Possu^^ (...) and an^ quae sunt in Purgatorio, says he. So
cross he is to Cyprian, and in the other extremity clean. But to which side
soever of the two you incline, they both consute the Adioynders fiction here,
that the Fathers would pray more confidently to Saints departed, but for fear
of purgatory.
they pray to them? were they not afraid of that, Thou which hear others,
help thy self? Or if they pray unto them, before they are certified of their
estate, either they are rash in praying (for there must be no wavering James 1.
6.) or else it appears they dreamt not of Purgatory. Would you have them to
mammer, as Elias said merrily once of Baal, Perhaps he is gone to war, or
perhaps in his journey, so perhaps he is gone to Purgatory? You say, they made
no question of their hearing, that were Saints declared and acknowledged, and
you name Theodorus in Nyssen for one. Yet of him, Nyssenus in the Orat. you
quote, Vbicunque tandem fueris, wheresoever thou art. He doubted therefore.
Certainly Abraham has not known us, nor Israel acknowledged us, Nune cognoui,.
i. s^re and ipsum, and a^ fect de Abrahem. Genesis 22. 12. Therefore Abraham a
Saint declared. 2
meum say you, though erroneously, and Deus Abraham, Deus Isaac, confirms no
less by our Saviors exposition. This was your first exception.

3. Another, that when Nazianzen says to Constantius, and so others to others,
If thou hear, or if thou discernest, it is not of doubting, but of
adiuration, as when a friend to a friend, If you love me: and S. Paul to
Philemon, If thou account me as thy partner: that is, because I know thou
accountest me. That Nazianzenes meaning may be this, Because o Constantius I
know thou discernest, etc. Which I list not to refute, but refer to the
Readers indifferent judgment, whether Nazianzen in bespeaking Constantius so,
should mean to adjure him, and all other souls of Christian Kings, whom there
he calls unto, no less then his. The Greek Scholiast says plainly, upon that
place, (...), this is taken from Isocrates, who perhaps held not that the
Saints see all clearly before the day of judgment. And he construes it in other
words (...) (for he was absent) If thou have any (...) to discern and hear
things here done.
(...). Now, (...), is no form of adiuration, but of doubting still. Else it
should be (...), like S. Paul's (...). And by the way, you may see how true it
is, that the Bishop observes, of the Fathers falling into Rhetorical
acclamations, whereof this was one, taken from Isocrates, a Mr. in that
faculty. But more clearly of Gorgonia, Si Sancta animae haec talia
persentiscant. If the holy souls understand such things as these. This is no
adiuring of Gorgonia, I trow, but his doubt in general, even of them he spoke
not to, but only of.

4. That it is dangerous to say the Fathers carried themselves like Orators.
Not a whit I warrant you, though it be your shame to mistake them so grossly,
as from thence to patch up your damnable idolatryes. So wings, and arms, and
eyes, and other members are attributed to God in holy Scripture. A stumbling
block to the Anthropomorphites, or such shallow wits, but no fault of the holy
Ghostes, qui scribit vigilantibus, as laws are made. We imagine not, says S.
Austen, our God to be a Cupid, because he is described to have wings and
arrows, lib. 3. contra Crescon. c. 78. You heard before, what Nazianzenes
commentor says, of his borrowing from Isocrates. Though the Bishop says no
where in plain terms, that the Fathers did as Orators, not as Christians.
But, Theologiamne docore, an rhetoricari putes? Would you think these men
meant to read a lecture of Divinity, or to practice their Rhetorique? And,
Oratorum encomia, quae nihil habent enucleatae Theologiae: Orators praises,
which contain no perfect substance of Divinity: suppose you, like that which
your Schoolmen deliver. So Hierome (says the Bishop) speaks with Paula and
Nepotian: how? With both as an Orator, with neither as a Christian, that is,
according to the rules of strict catechism. What of this?

5. numb. is petitio principij, and the turning of the wheel. Therefore I will
not meddle with it. Let the Bishops answer be but applied to your objection,
and it will salve it as before.

6. You praise pictures by the way, and say that they greatly edify the
people. Which shows to what kind of creatures your book is dedicated, namely
those, whom an Idol may hold in awe for their simplicity, and though it be
Ne^ cognoscit Deum ex simulachro. A^tisthenes apud Theodor. contr. Graec. 1.
not good at teaching any thing, save only lies, as the holy Ghost says, in
Abac. 1. 18. yet it may serve well enough to be their Master. You do but
utter your ware, when you enterlace here about pictures: for else you know it
is nothing to that place in the Bishops book, which you pretend to confute.
And I might seem to do the like, if I should be so mad as to follow you.
Only thus in brief. S. Chrysostom of them that would have pictures of the
Seraphim, Tom. 7. (...).
because they appeared in such and such form, Esa. 6. which is your very
pretense at this day, why God should be painted, (not the Seraphim only, but
God; a monstrous shame.) Non te defodis? Art thou not ashamed, O thou wretch,
(says he) of such a gross collection? Why do thou not rather run under
ground, bury thy self alive? And he adds in the same place, that the
Seraphim are said to cover their faces with wings at the appearance of God,
only to show that God is incomprehensible. Yet you paint them for their
wings, whereas their wings are given them by the holy Ghost, says Chrysostom,
to show the secrecy, and that it must not be painted, which cannot so much as
be comprehended. I say nothing of the forbidding of the Lamb to be painted, in
the Council of Constantinople, which Mald. your fellow Jesuit in his Comment
upon Daniel answers thus. That the Fathers in that Council were not rightly
instructed, and the Church saw more upon better consideration in after times.
Yet you make us believe that you reverence the Fathers, and we censure them. As
for the fruit you talk of to come by pictures, it is one thing, I should
think, what constant and stayed minds may gather therefrom; another whether A^
speaks to his waxen image of Cupid, saying he will fire it, unless it en^e
him. A just reason to burn Popish idols (even out of the mouth of an idolater)
because they kindle to no good.
they are fit to be set up in Churches, to nourish the devotion of simple
people by. Least they plant error while they would induce to piety, seduce I
should say, as they that pulling up the weeds, in the parable, pluck up the
wheat with all, peruersa diligentia. You may remember what S. Austen says de
consensu Euangel. l. 1. c. 10. The same S. Austen lib. 5. contra Julian. c. 2.
when Julian had said, that he borrowed his arguments from the pictures of Adam
and Eve, repels that slander with this peremptory denial, that, Non a
pictore inanium sigurarum, sed a doctore diuinarum literarum; showing us what
we should trust to. And yet both Aquine and Bellarm argue from pictures in the
question of Peter's primacie, and again sarre worse about the dolours of
Christ's soul. If it were so (says Bellar.) we should have seen him painted in
Churches tormented by the Devils, etc. De anima Christi. l. 4. c. 8. Is not
this a grave handling of controversies, trow you, especially with them that
find fault with our lightness?
Sic errare meruerunt qui Christum non in codicibus, sed in pictis parietibus
quaesiuerunt. So they deserved to be mocked that sought for Christ not in
written books, but in painted walls. Neither are muri depicti, your images, or
your pictures, though such are promised unto the Church, Esa. 49. 16. nor
portae sculptae, 54. 12. of the same book. Of the Council Eliberitan. Can.
20. of Epiphanius, and his rending the veil of Anablath, of S. Chrysostomes
exiling painters clean out of the city, and out of the world too, as men of
no use, no service in life, much more out of the Church, I might spend much
paper. See his hom. 50. in Matthew. Yet with you it is one of the three gainefull
trades now at Rome, as we are informed, even as the making of shrines was to
Demetrius, or (...), Act. Apost.
in the same book. Nyssen speaks of pictures for ornament chiefly, for
instruction either very faintly, or not at all. And yet that also for grounded
Christians, rather then for nouices, (for S. Austen is jealous what may betide
to such) but Ad curua^dam infoelicem animam. In Psalm. 113.
of worshipping them not a word. Lastly, as the Martyr, so also the persecutor
was painted in the work that Nyssen speaks of, and upon the pauement to be
trod on, as well as upon the walls to be gazd on. Par opus historiae in
pauimento quod pedibus calcatur effecit pictor. What does this help you?

7. You mislike the Bishops answer, of Vbicunque fueris, to show the
uncertainty of their persuasion. He might be high (say you) in Gods favor,
wheresoever he was. What? if in the punishments of his own sins? (for such a
place you have for the Elect after this life.) Might he be so high in favor
for all that, as to succor others, and be prayed unto? Therefore this is not
Nyssens belying the people to their faces, as you fondly fancy, but your own
want of understanding Nyssens meaning, and the peoples practice. Which though
unwarranted by Scripture, or Church-law, as we have often told you, yet was not
so bad as you would make it. In such case we may be bold to say with Tertudian,
Meminero cor De resurrect. carn. c. 3. The peoples heart is but ashes.
populi cinerem dictum, and with Chrysostom, Hom. 4. in Epist. ad Romans (...):
Not every bodies voice, but wise men's, must be attended, to decide
controversies. Ne me curavt bubulcum, said he. Now when they pray to him in
Nyssen, as entire and present, (...), who was mangled and disparent, is there
no Rhetorique in this neither? or should that be a good ground to build faith
upon? Yet this is that gemme, for which you have searched the Vatican, as you
tell us. As for degrees of glory, though we doubt not but there be such, for
stella a stella, etc. and he that sowes sparingly shall reap sparingly, and
many Vide supr. c. 3.
the like, yet I hope one heaven contains them all. Would you say of Paul,
vbicunque fueris, or of the blessed Virgin, etc? yet you know not their
punctual degrees of glory. Yea, and of Christ himself? yet we know not the
particulars of his advancement; ouely nomen dedit supra omne nomen. Philip. 2.
and 1. Pet. 3. 22.

8. To color your imposture, you construe Greg. Nyssens, wheresoever thou art,
by, howsoever thou art employed in Gods service. Which is not Nyssens meaning,
but your own vision. For the Saints have served their age, seruierunt saculo
suo, Act. 13. 36. and henceforth they are occupied about us no more. Mortui non
miscentur actibus viuorum, neque adiuvandis, neque cognoscendis, says S.
Austen, de Cura pro mortuis, c. 13. Do they not rest from their labors, Apoc.
14. 13? And active at least, if not passive, to preserve your purgatory, as
Denis answers it. Neither say it seems not labor to Resolut. Theolog. Item
Francis. Mayron.
them, though it be laborious, for no more it here seems to godly men. Lastly,
it is wonder you should stand so stiffely upon that point, that the godly
Fathers, and by name S. Hierome, (for you name him among the rest) should not
sometime flourish with a figure of Rhetorique, since not only diverse of them
haunted that school, as Austen, as Basil, as Nazianzen, and the like,
Chrysostom especially (who would not ride to school, being a rich man's child
borne, Vita Chrysostom. per Anonymum.
but preferred to go on foot, for his love to learning,) but S. Hierome
professes of himself so much in plain terms, where speaking of his Epist.
ad Heliodorum, de laud vitae solitariae, he calls it Iusus, his play. Epist.
proxime sequent. quae est ad Nepotianum, de vita Ctericorum.

9. To your 16. 17. etc. Numb. The Bishop said not, that Ambrose was
blasphemous, as you blaspheme him, but that the Cardinal citing that place of
Ambrose, which you might better have abstained from, shows he had rather bring
Christ's blood into contempt, then let go his Dalila. Is this against S.
Ambrose? or the Cardinal rather? Whom Ambrose his speech, not so wary as to
be wished perhaps, yet excusable by his being a nouice, as then for certain he
was, might trip as it does, and has done but even too often. What virulencie,
good Sir, is this against S. Ambrose? Though if need were, as there is none,
and yet if there were, I were not worthy, being more nouice to the most
worthy Bishop, then ever S. Ambrose was to himself, yet I say, if occasion so
required, to show what my conceit was once hereof at a blush, and a little to
choke you the more about the place that you so ruffle in, how if granting it
in rigore, that To seek to Angels, may be construed, to resort to the
Ministers for help, who are our Angels.
obsecrandi sunt Angeli, etc. yet we should deny that Ambrose allows prayers
to Saints, or to Angels either? Are not Ministers called Angels? Apoc. 1. Even
as Angels are called Ministers, Heb. 1. Who if ever they be to be sought unto
by supplication, I suppose in such case as Ambrose there speaks of, that is,
in the hour of temptation, and amidst the violent assaults of youthful lusts,
and fancies. To say nothing of repayring to them in distress of conscience, in
which sense S. Chrysostom says, he will rise at midnight for Simile apud
Dionys. ^^copin epist. ad Demophilum.
the relief of any poor soul, and Minutius Foelix in Octauio, reports the
ieere of wicked Pagans, in those terms, Adorata sacerdotum virilia, etc. Not
that it was so, but for seeking to them for aid, in the aforesaid fitts and
pangs of mind, most submissely. But what then shall we say of Martyrs, which is
another thing in S. Ambrose? As if the ancient Christians were not wont to
crave pacem a Martyribus designatis, before they went to execution. See
Tertullian in Exhort. ad Martyrs.
his book of that argument, see others. I do but oppose you, I leave it so.
Cyrill upon the 1. of Michea, (...). The Angels leave us, they play the
fugitives. And the same he gathers out of Esa. 1. 8. that the daughter of Sion
shall Di^^ys. in epist. praecita^ ad D^: Deuteronomy haeret ^ter and cum (...) qui cum
deserunt. God sticks l^gly even to them that forsake him.
be like a cottage in a vineyard, like a lodge in a garden of cucumbers,
namely, because waited upon no longer by the Angels. And how are they fit to
be prayed unto that leave us? Neither say that after sin, for after sin we
have most need to pray of all. The Apostle is confident, that Angels It is
enough that Angels cannot divide us ^to Christ, but they mediate not for us,
Romans 8. where ver 26. and v. 34. we have two persons in the very Trinity, one
(...), another (...) for us. As many as the mystery of their relations would
permit. And need we more?
shall not separate us, Romans 8. 38. but no talk of uniting us, or approaching
us to Christ. Sure S. Ambrose his ground was from intercessio viuorum, namely
Andrews and Peter's, for Peter's mother in law, Luke 4. which we allow. And
Ministers are praesidia nobis, (as S. Ambrose speaks) not only Angels; while
that which is said of martyrs may be understood per Proterosin, of them that
are not yet martyred, but only appointed to the block: whom we have more
then pignore corporis with us, and yet that too. True praesules, true
speculatores, as S. Ambrose calls them.

10. Yet lo you will prove, though clean besides our scope, besides your
own, (but that, as they say, a beggar is never out of his way) that we may
satisfy for our sins. And you lay your ground, numb. 18. that Christ's
passion gives life to all. That Is the blindation. But as well wood and clay, or
other base ingredients in Nabuchodonosors image, with sounder metals, eagles
feathers, and other birds, may be mixed and compounded, yea the iarring ashes
of the two Thebane brethren reconciled, as our wretched works and sorry
sufferings with our Saviors righteousness, which is Ibi habitat iustitia,. i.
Christus. Pet (...).
righteousness it self. Do you not conceive how one is incompatible with the
other, almost crying out with S. Peter, Depart Lord, for I am a sinful man,
so, depart Lord, for I am a sinful work; while you boldly blend, and play
the Vinteners, mingling guilty blood, with the blood of his sacrifice, innocent
and immaculate, most preposterous Pilates?

11. Nazianzen is quoted Orat. 1. in Julian. vt satisfacerent Christo sanguine
suo. In Nazianz. it is (...), which may as well be the justifying of Christ's
cause by the effusion of their blood, having newly dishonored it by stooping
to the Emperors poisonous baits, as to satisfy for their fault to the judge
of the world; which no man can do, though in shadow and proportion one may
come nearer perhaps then another: As he that spares not his life in his Lords
cause, after he has offended him, before him that languishes still, and plays
the lazy Christian. So Nazianzen might mean, I see no cause to the contrary.
Does not S. Peter take the word so? (...), 1. Pet 3. 15.
etc. The same is to be said to your other authorities, if time would serve,
which you fondly here multiply, clean besides the mark, but that you longed I
dare say to vent your commodities, and were glad no doubt of this occasion. In
so much as you have not spared Dan. 4. Peccatum tuum eleemosynis redime. Which
in Hebrew is abrumpe, as has been often answered you, and so in other places.
Yea, we are saved by hope, and he has saved us, by the lauer of regeneration,
comes in to show, that a man may wash away his own sins, either with tears,
or with blood. Is this good handling of Scriptures, trow you? If we are saved
by hope, is it by hope in our selves, or our own arm? If baptism purges us,
and the Sacrament of our Lord, shall there be the same virtue in our corrupt
selves, who but for grace should rather stain the font, stain our baptism,
true Coprony^?

12. To S. Ambroses place in 1. ad Romans Ad deum non est opus suffragatore, that
is, To god we need no spokes-man: He says, S. Ambrose speaks against them
only, that were devoted to the Sun, and Moon, and the Planets. But did ever
any man make them his suffragators or spokes-men to god? And if as numb. 18.
you suggest to us, it was the Paynims fault to hold that God governed the world
by under officers, what is yours less, that apply that so, indeauouring to
make way to invocation of Saints, Take thou power over five cities, thou over
ten, etc? Shall Paynims faults be only taxed in Coster. Enchirid.
Paynims, and not in them that revive the errors of Paynims, which they call
Catholic? You wish the Bishop to mark those words, Ad deum promerendum in S.
Ambroses mouth, and so in other Fathers, nothing to your merit god wot.
Multanos a deo bona meruisse cognouimus quibus nequaquam digni fuimus, says
Theodosius the Emperor (among Felix culps quae talem MERVIT redemptorem.
the laws I trow it is) and many the like. Ad promerendum deum, that is, ad
conciliandum. (...) is so translated by our old interpreter, Heb. 13. By which
you may see that to promerite is nothing, but to gratify, or to please. But of
merit heretofore, and more hereafter.

13. You say, no sacrifice might be offered but to God. And is not prayer a
sacrifice? Indeed what The Papists make the Jews to have had a worship of God
inco^municable to creatures, namely sacrifice, us none, since now sacrifices
are ceased. So much are the Jews perfecter the^ the Christians by their
reckoning.
richer? Is not all almost turned thereinto? Into puram precem, as Apologet.
Tertullian says. And what salt is in sacrifice, without prayer? Yet sale
salietur, you know the place. Every sacrifice shall be salted with salt; which
you apply to purgatory, wisely no doubt. You say, that to God all hearts are
manifest, and he needs no relator. Indeed because he only is (...), Thou
that hear the prayer, (viz and beside whom none else; i^ is made Gods
property) to thee shall all flesh ^ome. Psalm. 64 ^^cumdum vulga^.
therefore only he is fit to be prayed unto, since prayer is of the heart, not
a calfe of the lips, though of them too, when occasion serves, but the life
thereof is from the heart, as Solomon says truly, that from the heart proceed
the issues of life. And I see not but it may be verified, even in this sense
too. To whom of the Saints then dare you pray thus, either as they in the
Acts, (...), 1. 24. or as the Church in her service, O God to whom all hearts
are open, all desires known, etc. But that passes, that by this reason S.
Ambrose may seem to take away our Savior Christ's mediation and all, if he be
not limited by your interpretation. Read but the Fathers, Primasius,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, and Theophylact, upon Romans 8. 34. Interpellat pro
nobis. You shall find, his intercession stands, in offering up the memory of
his death and passion to his father, for us. As a soldier which shows his
skars to his Prince, though he say nothing, yet he begs favor. Which makes our
prayers at the Eucharist, so much the more effectual, because therein we renew
the memory of his death and bloodshed so lively. According as himself said
at the institution, who best knew the virtue of his own Sacrament, Do this as
often as you shall do it, in remembrance of me. Our (...), i (say some which are
no raw Grecians) ad refricandam apud patrem memoriam mei, to bring the father
in ren e^brance of me, and my precious and powerful sacrifice. S. Chrysostom
also saying to this purpose, that the time of praying is while the King is
set,. i. during the communion, and so long he graunts any thing.
minds therefore being possessed with the remembrance of that his death,
wholly taken up with that recogitation, our prayers have so much the more easy
speeding toward the throne of grace, to whom that gives force. And can the
Saints do so of theirs? Which of them all was crucified for you? 1. Cor. 1.
13. yet you compare their intercession, with Christ's for us. Of whom some died
not at all, most of them not violently, but none at all to make atonement to
God, for us. And because I have vouched the Fathers exposition upon Romans 8. to
be as I said, I will set down their authorities in no other words then their
own. Theophylact says, Intuens namque Christi corpus pater, recordatur
dilectionis suae erga genus humanum, qua de causa scilicet filius olim corpus
gessit, at que inde ad misericordiam and miserationem inflectitur. This sense
renders Theophylact of interpellat pro nobis. The like has S. Hierome, Comm.
huius loci. Interpellare pro nobis dicitur [Christus] dum hominem quem
suscepit, patri pro nobis pignus ostendit and offert. The very words of S.
Hierome, has Primasius in his commentary, and Sedulius in his. Remigius has
the sense in somewhat otherwords. Interpellat pro nobis patrem, says he, non
voce sedmiseratione; dum quotidie hominem quem assumpsit, and grauissimum genus
mortis quod pro nobis sustinuit, vultui paterno offert, vt nostri misereatur.
Haymoes words, in his commentary, are the very same with Remigius his, now set
down. Saving that Remigius ends in this most sweet close; Qui qualemc unque
habet tribulationem, hanc audiat Pauliexhortationem. Into whatsoever
tribulation any man is sunk, let him give ear to this exhortation of S. Paul.
Whereas the Papists think, that some may be buried under so deep oppressions
for the conscience of their sins, as they may not presume to come immediately
to Christ, [whose intercession, says Euthymius, is semper essicax, always
effectual for us: in comm. huius loci] but they must run circuiting and
fetching a compass about by the Saints. Of what judgment Chrysostom and
Theodoret are, may be seen by Theophylact before alleged, who sieldome
dissent either for opinion or words. Of Lyra, and of Aquine, the like might be
promised. But Sylvester in Summa shall determine all, though he expressly
quote Aquine, Part. 2. V. Oration, secundo: Filius orat patrem (says he)
ostendendo patri humanitatem cum mysterijs eius, vt dicit S. Tho. Romans 8. Let
this susfice for this matter.

14. Neither does S. Ambrose say, Declaratore non opus est; but, suffragatore
non opus est. You pervert him therefore when you say, he meant no more then so,
that the Angels and Saints need not inform God.

15. I will conclude with that, that S. Ambrose forbidding to adore our
fellow-seruants (for prayer and adoration go together with him, as I told you
of S. Cyrill even now the saine) says, we can reserve nothing more to God. But
you have found out certain distinctions and kinds of it, which the Saints may
partake, without Gods iniutie. Adoro te, but thus far, intra Canonem, intra
mensuram, 1. Cor. 10. 13. Huc vsque venies, and franges furentes fluctus tuos.
Dulice, not latrice. Gloriam meam dabo, but not totam dabo. The strumpets
diuidatur.

16. Numb. 32. and 33. Tu solus innocandus, is rather strengthened and
fortified, by, Tu I think the Bishop will not diuie, her that (...). Ambrose
might very lawfully have d^sired the people to pray to God to represent
Theodosius in his children, though S. Ambrose say, Tu solu^ (...) gandu^,
(...), etc Therefore, Tu solu^ (...) du^, may stand with prayer to Saints.
Adjoined.
solus rogandus, but surely not enseebled. Though you cast this, as cold water,
in the face of the other. For S. Ambr. (say you) might rogare the people to
pray for another Theodosius. Is this comparable with our rogare Deu^, with our
making requests to God? Is God and the people sued unto alike? Why then do you
join such unsuitable matches, when you pretend earnest? But hircum qui mulgent,
and vulpes iungant. As for your sweet distinction, and subtle one no doubt,
that only Another shift of the Adioynd.
God is to be sued unto for grace, but Saints for other things, and that this
is the reason, why S. Ambrose said, that God indeed only was to be requested,
to give a supply of more Theodosij, which without his grace could not be
Consuted three ways. 1
done, I might ask you, first, what one thing we have by virtue of prayer,
which may not be termed grace? I mean as descending of free gift, and bounty.
In which sense, perhaps, the fathers of that Council defined so long ago,
that if any body, bearing the mind to commit lewdness, (...). Con^.
Neocaesar. Can. 4.
should be hindered of his purpose [howsoeuer,] we were to know that such a one
was delivered by grace. Therefore if grace come from God, not from the Saint,
from God not from the Saint must come all that we stand in need of. And so
prayer be made, not to the Saint, but to God only. representare Theodosios,
supply good men as fast as they decay, if not by their own strength and
inherent virtue, which reaches neither to grace I confess, nor to one crum of
bread, yet by their potency with God, and by procuring his aid through their
mediation, if at least your doctrine be true on this part. And therefore the
qualification that you use toward S. Ambrose, about Tu solus inriocandus, or
rogandus either, is most ridiculous and childish. For even the Saints power,
may stretch to Grace at second hand, as you imagine. tu solus rogandus es vt
Theodosios repraesentes, is particularly determined, and if you will to grace,
because without that a Theodosius could not be: but, Tu solus inuocandus es,
is as general as any thing, even as the objects of prayer themselves in their
largest extention; and therefore this last must not be limited by the former,
howsoever construed, but all invocation is to be confined to God by the
judgment of S. Ambrose, saying, Tu solus inuocandus es; scilicet ad omnia, or,
in quacunque causa.

17. The most Reverend Bishop never said of himself, Adioynd. number. 34.
that he could not slip in matter of memory. Si sciens fallo, is his
imprecation. So Jeremy for Zachary, Matthew. 27. 9. so diverse like. For what
should I say of the Fathers quoting Scripture, as they do often, rather as it
was in their memories, then as we read it in the text? And yet no honest
learned man, but would hold such scapes for very venial I imagine. S. Austen a
little before was found to have reported S. Cyprian somewhat wrongly, citing
words out of his Cap. 3. hulus.
book de vnitate Ecclesiae. Sunt quidam eruditi errores and obliuiones, says
Rodolphus Agricola, Certain learned errors or obliuious confusions even in the
best authors. And Turrian says of Cicero, Praefat. in Constitut. Clementis,
that he was mine immemoris ingenij: very forgetful touching quotations. Though
there are more in this kind to be observed in Tully, then ever Turrian took
note of I believe, as hypercriticall as he was. And think you not that we may
with better reason avow, if we had not rather be ingenuous, then obstinately
contentious, as you are in defending your gross errors when they are espied,
that S. Ambrose wrote not only one book, but even many de Oratione, then you
can avow the Cardinals allegations, either by the circumstance of the text
when the letter fayles you, or by the Italian presses of the Iuntae or the
Sessae? Call to mind a little, if you think good, De interpellatione three
books, De interpellatione David one book, that is, all of them in effect de
Oratione. Again in his books de Sacramentis, also upon the Lords prayer etc.
All these wrote S. Ambrose in effect of prayer, I Basil. Orat. in Iulittam.
Nyssen Orat. 1. itemque 2. de Orat. dom. Chrysostom hom. 3. in Genesis Damase. l. 3.
de side Orthod. c. 24. And Clichtoueus in his Comment. upon Damas. calls it
completam definitionem orationis, a perfect de sinition of prayer. Sylvester,
Nauarrus, diverse other Papists retain the same.
say, or de Oratione, as the Bishop called it, and mentions not any where
praying to Saints. Is this now of no force with you? And finally, so many
Fathers have defined prayer by our reference to God only, (as indeed the
Pater noster does, which I must always tell you of) that neither shall you be
ever able to claw of that argument, neither if we now and then name one of them
for another, ought you so much to blame us for defect of memory, as forcibly
subscribe to so great variety of consent, as is able to confound the best
memory.

18. But what if S. Ambrose mention not praying to Saints? No more he does (say
you) of our mutual praying for our enemies and the like. As if these were not
the objects and materials of our prayers, which are infinite in number, as
Aristotle Indiuidua sunt insimta.
tells us, that all particulars are, and therefore not to be comprehended. We
speak of him to whom we are to direct them, which is soon learned, and most
meet to be told, as Pater noster, and nomen TVVM, and regnum TVVM, and the
conclusion of all, quia TVVM, thrice repeated, of which I told you before.
Every clause, every syllable in the pater noster, shows to whom we must pray.
So no doubt would Ambrose, commenting of prayer, have directed us to the
Saints, if God had not sufficed. But he is Shaddai so too.

19. Yea but Numb. 36. you tell us, that S. Ambrose makes no mention of the
Saints interceding for us, which the Bishop never thelesse graunts. Is it
therefore none? (...), and an ox with an ass. Good Lord how unlike? For the
one of these is free to think or not, the other of faith, that God must be
prayed to. If he be on our side, Romans 8. you know what follows, all other may
be spared. Even the Angels themselves, even then when they come ad denarium
numenum, Christ is better then ten Angels, that is, then all, says Albinus
Alcuin.
to the number of perfection, (december principes eiuitatis, Eccles. 7. 20.) yet
wisdom is better then they, that is Christ, says Albinus, upon the place
before named. No doubt our Lord is all sufficient to relieve us. And, not
praying to God, we can receive no benefit from him; the Saints intercession
which they make for us, whether we sleep or wake, whether we know of it or
not, is alike beneficial to all. No such reason therefore to determine this.

20. S. Ambrose himself, of whom we speak, upon the words now quoted, Romans
8. Semper causas nostras agit apud patrem [Christus.] Our Savior always
pleads our causes before his Father. And shall the Saints put in, where he is
always agent? This is worse then spectante Roscio gestum agere, to interpose our
Savior at pleading for us, as if he were not either cunning or graceful
enough at it. Again, Cuius postulatio contemni non potest (nor therefore,
adiavari opus habet aduentitia aliqua aduocatione) quia in dextra Dei est.
Whose request cannot be despised, because he sits at the right hand of God.
Like unto which Tertullian, Facile impetratur semper quod filius De peenitent.
postulat. That suite has evermore easy speeding which the son makes,
(Christ, to wit.) Neither does S. Ambrose mention without cause, the sitting of
Christ at the right hand of Christ fits at the right hand of God to make
request for us.
his Father, to whet his mediation. Which S. Paul had mentioned, for the very
same cause, in the place that he comments upon, Romans 8. 34. And indeed but to
Christ, it was never said to any, Sede a dexteris meis, sit on my right hand,
Hebr. 1. 13. Which by collation of places, shows, that there is none other
intercessor for us, but he. Lastly, thus S. Ambrose, Vt de Deo patre securi,
and Christo filio eius, in eorum fide laetemur. That being confident of God
the Father, and Christ his Son, we may rejoice in the faith that we have in
them. So as you see, faith and aduocation goes only still with Christ, not
with the Saints.

21. NExt is Ruffinus lib. 2. historiae c. 33. who says not, that Theodosius
did inuoke the Saints, but as the Bishop answered you, and you cannot take
away, that at the tombs of Martyrs he craved help of God, by the Saints
intercossion. Which although it suppose their suing for us, yet it is not
coupled with our praying to them. What you bring out of Chrysostom, who names
not Theodosius, much less points at this fact of his, as you dream both here,
and numb. 50. but only speaks universally of the Emperors, has been replied
to before. We dress no Crambe. He names Constantine. And if he meant
Theodosius, why does he not name him? But whomsoever he means, they may be
(...), need the holy ones (suppose the Angels) and yet not pray to them, nor to
Saints neither; and yet whether they do or no, it makes no law. Hear S.
Cyprian orat. de lapsis. Mandant aliquid Martyrs fieri? Sed si scripta non
sunt in Domini lege quae mandant, ante est vt sciamus illos de Deo impetrasse
quod postulant, tunc facere quod mandant. That is, Do the Martyrs command a
thing to be done? But if that which they command be not written in Gods law,
it is reason we should first know, that God allows what they ask, before we
do what they command. So as not only the actions of mortal men, though never
so godly, but the commands of Martyrs, appearing from heaven, must be examined
by the law of God, ere they may be accomplished by S. Cypr. judgment. Ante est
vt sciamus, etc. Yet you back it by Sozomen. lib. 7. histor. cap. 24. out of
whom that which you bring is but (...), in Sozomene, it is said, or reported,
though you amplify it, by, commonly reported. Well what is it? First you leave
out Theodosius his going into the Church to pray to God, and to none else, that
he names in that part of the sentence. This you dissemble, and leave out, as
not concerning the matter, though nothing more, who charge the Bishop so
causlesly and sencelesly else where for the same fault; yea, when it is no
fault. Secondly, as for the Temple which Theodosius built in the honor of S. I.
Baptist, we might ask you, how that agrees with S. Austens, Templum Martyribus
De ciuit. dei. lib. 8. c. 27. Sic Greg. de Val. T. 3. Comm. Disp. 6. q 11.
puncto 5. de Idololatria.
non ponimus? You will say, it was called by the Baptists name only, and in
memory of him. So, it may be, he but named or remembered the Baptist in his
prayer, as he had good occasion, conuersing in the Church that might put him in
mind of him. You have both built Churches, and offered sacrifice (though you
cloak it never so much) to him and to Martyrs, contrary to S. Austen. For do
you not offer sacrifice in the honor of the Virgin? You will not deny it. How
then does this differ from the Collyridian heresy? To omit how Vide eundem
Greg. vbi supra, frigidissime and hoc and alia defendentem. Atque iterum in
libris de rebus fidei controuerfis, lib. singulari de Idolol. eadem ad verbum
repetentem.
much more heinous a matter it is to offer Christ our Lord, in honor of his
Mother, then a cake as they. The like I might say of vows which you make to
Saints by way of special honor, which the aforesaid Valentia, seeking four
ways to justify, is most foul in all. One time he says, that the Saints are
called for witnesses of what we vow to God. A small prerogative, and yet more
then need too, even this. Another time, that we vow to God indeed, but for
love to the Saints. As if God were not lovely enough, or had not right enough
to our vows, but for the Saints sake. A third time, that we do this, because
we think the Saints are well pleased with such service, when it is performed
to God. But by this reason we may as well vow to Saints in earth, and in
mortality. Lastly', he denies it to be an act of relligion, if it be done to
the Saints; of which hereafter. As for Theodosius, his calling S. John Baptist
to be his (...), it might be materialiter, that the piety which he had showed
in decking the Temple, with the name of the Baptist, for distinction sake,
might be mentioned by him to God, to move him to favor, as Ezechias and
Nehem. 15. 14. Remember me, O my God, con^^r^g what I have done for the house
of God, etc. and in fine. Remember me, O my God, for good.
Nehemias and diverse more have done the like. And yet not trusting in their
own righteousness neither, but by some proportion of their endeavor, and his
good acceptance. In this sense, S. John Baptist might be called (...), and as
our works are said to pray for us, (vitalis oration, Bellarmine acknowledges;
another, that eleemosyna orabit pro te) so this an imploration of S. John
Baptist, renewing the memory of the Temple that bore his name, before God in
his prayer. The stars, are said, to fight against Sisera. Heaven is called to
rejoice over Babylon. So all the Saints out of their brotherly sympathy, are
our (...) at all times; vocati nec vocati; and yet when we call for them, we
may call for them of God, without praying to them. Ille educit thesauros ex
abyssis. This therefore, though there were no (...), proves no praying to
Saints. Whereas you say, that if we pray to S. John Baptist, why not to others?
We make no question, but the reason is alike; but you have heard our answer to
Sozomens story, which at another time no man disclaimes more then your selves,
(Sozomenus multa mentitur in historia, Greg. de Val. Tom. 4. Comm. Theol. p.
1952. The like judgment gives Bellarmine both of him and Socrates, T. 2. edit.
Ingolstad. anni 1605. p. 487.) and remember, I pray you, that he says,
Theodosius went in to pray to God, so as if he prayed to the Baptist, it was
besides his purpose.

22. The Bishops reasons against prayer to Saints, because we have no such
warrant in the holy Scripture, and we know not if they hear us or no, etc. how
do you refute? The Church of God, say you, the spouse of Christ, the pillar of
truth, has done it before us, with whom our Savior has promised to be
continually assistant. What then? And this is in stead of Scripture. To you it
may be. But first you have brought us no such testimony of the Church, unless
you think, that all that meet in a Church to hear a Sermon, or a Homily, as
they did Nyssens, of whom we spoke a little before, are a sufficient assembly
to counteruaile a Synod, which is the Church, without question, from whom we
should look for determination in such causes, even by your own confession.
Yet now you are offended with us, when we call for Synods. As for, our Saviors
assistance with us, to the end of the world, I see not how that proves praying
to Saints, but rather sends us from them to him, as to whom we have not only
easy access, but himself continually watching about us. Do you not read in
the Cantic. how dangerous it is for the spouse of Cant. 1. 7.
Christ, to run a gadding after the flocks of the shepherds, though they be
called his fellows, or companions, but not fellows in this. And again in the
same book, Paululum cum pertransissem, Cant. 3. 5.
when I had past a little farther; that is, as both S. Bernard and Guarricus
expound it, when I had passed the Angels, and soared above the creatures, then
I found where to rest, upon God and Christ, no doubt, and not before. And it
proves not, first, that the Church cannot err, If the Church be of such
authority for being the p^ll^r of truth, what shall we say of him that bears
the Church it self, not the Pope, but Chrysostome^ (...). In concione apud
Georg. Alex. in vita cius.
though she were the pillar of truth, that you speak of, 1. Tim. 3. 15.
Where, if it were lawful to add any thing to that which has been answered
to that place of the Apostle, over and over by our writers, I would say that he
alluded to the two pillars, which the posterity of Seth are said to Joseph.
Antiq. l. c. 3.
have erected after the flood, containing diverse verities both physical and
Theological, most memorable in them, but not authorizing them at all. So
happily the Church. For to her the depositum was committed coram testibus, as
the Apostle says in the next Epistle, 2. Tim. 2. 2. the truth, as I may say,
engraven in her, as it were in a marble pillar. But secondly, though the Church
were never so infallible for her doctrines, yet she might err in her
practice, as you confess of the Pope. For even the Church her self, is not
more privileged with you, then the Pope, from error. Though we never read him
called the pillar of truth, as we do of others, (...),. i. O most divine
father, the pillar and ground of truth; says Damascen to Iordanes the
Archimandrite in his Epistle de Trisagio ad eundem. And yet he not infallible
neither, because no Pope. Thirdly, your examples, put them altogether, make no
Church. Which hole shall we stop first in your sieue, in your argument?

23. Theodorets beginning is very laudable, that they often Ex 8. lib. de
Graec. morbis curandis.
meet to sing hymns and praise to the Lord of Martyrs. If they went any
further, I can but say with Epiphanius, Haeresis est tanquam mala mulier,
heresy is like a shrewd woman, give Contr. Collyrid.
her no advantage, no more then to the water, no not a little, let her not have
her will. If she had been curbed at the first, it had not come to those
riots, and extremities, that since we labor of. Though when I cast mine eye
upon Theodorets own text, not as you trenlace and translate it at pleasure, I
see very little to make for you, if ought at all. First, he reports only
fashion or use, and that not general, which you promise in your title of this
seventh Chapter. Do you see then how quickly you are fallen away from your
terms, which very terms were not answerable to the primitive challenge,
although you had kept them; which called for sanction not for practice, for
rules of Fathers, not routs of people, etc. Neither does Theodoret say that the
people made their prayers to Martyrs, but having spoken in the last words of
the God of Martyrs, he adds immediately of their praying, for all such things
as they stand in need of, but specifies not to whom they prayed for them,
whether to God, or to the Martyrs. To whom then rather, then to the God of
Martyrs? His words are, (...), etc. Thirdly, if there prayers were made at
first to the Martyrs, to them also should their thanks for speeding be
returned. Of which thanks he speaks in these words, (...). But your selves in
your Liturgyes, sieldome return thanks to the Saints or Martyrs, of which I
am to speak in another place. And indeed, if thanks are to be returned to
the Saints, can it be but that God is in exceeding great danger of loosing his
honor, with whom such partners shall communicate? And as for (...), it does
not force that they prayed to the Martyrs to accompany them, whose company
they might beg as well of God, and he license them. Which nevertheless would
be thought of, how possibly it can stand with another clause of Theodorets in
that very chapter, viz. the souls of Saints, (...), raunge about heaven, and
their bodies are dispersed into diverse towns and countries. How then could
they accompany the poor wayfaring man, but that Theodoret turns
rhetorical, and meant no other, then only to oppose to the Gentile gods
lately by him named, or such as intruded upon the honor of God, Antiochus,
Hadrian, Vespasian, etc. the exaltation of Christian Saints, so far as was
compatible with Christ's true Relligion? And therefore correcting himself, he
is feign to say, (...); not absurdly distinguishing between dulia and latria,
as your brains crow, but deprecating the scandal which his former words
might seem to imply. Where we have also the gifts and donaries before spoken
of, offered to God in plain and direct terms, not to the Martyrs. (...): For
their Master accepts them, says he, [not they,] As for (...), let the Saints
pray for us as much as you will, that is nothing to our question of praying to
them. And yet Theodoret adds, (...). This shewet, that their God is the true
God. Which confirms what I said, in the former Chapter, of Mamas spoken of in
S. Basil, that Deus Mamantis, Mamas his God, and so here, the Martyrs God, they
are mentioned to this end, to show that the peoples recourse unto them, was not
as to certain favorites, and under-officers of the great King, to dispense
largesses, but as worshippers of the same God, (even with loss of their
dearest blood lately in their life time,) in whose honorable service
themselves rejoiced, and the rather because dignified by such noble partners,
and fellow-seruants. Lastly, showing of what trades and occupations of life,
diverse of those Martyrs were while they lived, he reckons up very mean ones,
not to call them base, and concludes thus; (...): That is, Of such men and
women consists the Quire of Martyrs. Yet Parsons that hell-hound (your worthy
In his Three Conversions of England, but namely part. 3. in the month of
March. Chap. 7.
predecessor, or if you will, progenitor, into your world of Anticks) scoffs at
shoomakers, and beere-brewers, and such kind of people, that they should be
thought Martyrs fit for a Calender, or able to discern what faith they died
for. You hear what Theodoret here not only confesses, but vaunts of. Of such
men and women consists the Quire of Martyrs. And what says the Apostle? Non
multi nobiles, etc. Or what kind of trade is contemned in Scripture, toward
the advancing of Christ's Gospel, fishing, tanning, weauing, tent-making, and
such like? Ecclesia Christi de vili plebecula congregata est, says S. Hierome
lib. 3. Comm. in Epist. ad Gal. And Onesimus the fugitive (Baronius writ it, if
I remember) succeeded the Apostle S. John in his Bishopric of Ephesus. But
Parsons has answered this by this time, and many other matters; I urge him no
farther.

24. Only take you heed, how you believe the Saints (as here you seem to
do) to It follows, not-onely that, etc. but that Saintsheare the prayers that
are made unto them, seeing that they obtain the grant thereof, and give
succor to their suppliants. Adioynd. numb. 45.
understand the prayers that are made unto them, because now and then the
desire is granted. Consider ye not what collusions may be among devils? And,
Audit ad voluntatem, cum non ad salutem, even God himself as S. Austen
teaches, which your Syluester with others observe out of him, v. Oration. He
hears us to our will, when not to our weal. Conceditque iratus quae negaret
propitius, says the same father. And grants in anger what he would deny in
love. Neither is the devil the better loved for speeding in his suite, to go
into the swine, you may be sure. Yet the devil begd rightly, you worse then
he, at a wrong door. Neither is the Bishop to be blamed for searching this
question of Invocation by reasons (as S. Hierome says of Quadratus that he
wrote a book in defense De scriptor. Ecclesias^.
of our relligio^, Full of faith and reason.
plenum fidei and rationis) since you confess your self that it is
persuadeable, but by inducements, namely what others have observed, found, and
experienced, and is not necessary to salvation, A fitof contradiction between
the Adioynd. and himself, in number 29. and number. 55. where he calls it a
necessary duty, unless he mean necessary, but not to salvation, to
destruction rather.
numb. 29. Why then should you shun the trial of reason? To omit that as S.
De ciuit. dei.
Austen, and your School has it, In faith are many things above reason, but
none against it.

25. The revelation of vicissitude or per interualla that Saints may have, as
Elizeus of Naaman and Gehezi, and the like, is not enough to avouch praying to
them. It must be permanentiae, it must be spiritus manens and non transiens.
Else we may pray to them, when they hear us not, and when nothing is revealed.
This man has prayed to me, and I was not aware, or Dominus abscondidit a me,
as the Prophet said. So shall we be sure that they do not ever hear us, but
whether they do ever hear us or no, we shall not be sure. Can there be any
thing more disparageable to a poor suitor then this? This to your numb. 46.

26. Whereas you say in the 47. that they know our prayers, by the relation of
Angels. First, how shall the Angels know them to relate? By revelation from
God, you will say. But he that reueales to the Angels, might reveal to the
Saints eadem opera. What needs this revelation then? Sic fieri per plura, quod
potuit per pauciora? Secondly, who makes that the Angels work, to be offerers
of our prayers to the Saints in heaven? Is this worthy of them? Is this a fit
work to employ Angels about? Why not rather to my self, says the Angel? And
surely if this be once entertained, that the Angels acquaint the Saints with
our prayers, which else they should not know but for them, will not the Pagan
opinion which S. Ambrose hissed out, and you with him, even now, return, that
God also should be ignorant of our affairs, unless the Angels revealed them?
For you make the Angels, to offer our prayers to God too. A just reward of your
perverting so the Apocalypse, c. 5. v. 8.

27. To your 48. 49. etc. Numbers. Council. Tolet. 3. can. 11. Irreligi^sa
Consuetudo est, quam vulgut agere consu^t in se^^i^^tatibus Sanctorum: Both
Custom and Multitude are to be condemned, if they be wrong.
That Churchcustome determines diverse things without Scripture: I answer
briefly, they must be things of a lighter nature, then the substantialls of
Gods service, as is our prayer to him, or whomsoever you will thrust into his
room. No praescription can rob him of his honor. Homines nihil vsu capere
possunt Cic. de leg. ex. 12. tab.
a dijs immortalibus. And again, among the same Laws, as I rememember,
Aduersus hostem aeternae authoritas, but maxim Dei, and Diuina sibi
vendicantem. Your own Genebrard upon that verse of the 119. Psalm. LEGEM tuam
dilexi, To balke the Law of God, is to decline to heresy.
INIQVOS odio habui, that is, haereticos says he, or such as departing from
the law of God, either fall into heresy, or are not far from it. So much it
concerns us to stick close to the Law; (...), as S. Basil wills: and in
another place he makes a Law to himself, to endure all (...), all forms of
death, rather then to forfeit one syllable of divine Apud Theodoret. hist. l.
4. c. 1^.
writ, being tempted to dispense at the small things of Gods Law, (as was
pretended at least by the wily Courtier) with no small offers. The very place
of Esaias, that sends us ad legem and ad testimonium, bars us from looking
toward the departed, though they be Saints. It were endless to reckon up all
the fathers authorities, in detestation of such traditions, as accrue besides
the word of God, and how they reduce all controversies of this nature, to no
other touchstone, then the holy Scriptures decision. Out of THESE BOOKS,
says Constantine, let us try the Question, meaning Apud Gelas. Cyzic
the Bibles. (...), let the Scripture be Vmpire, says Basil ad Eustathium. S.
Chrysostom, Tom. 4. edit. Eton. per D. H. Savile, (...). The doctrine of holy
Scriptures is the inheritance of our Fathers. Even as we say, that the Common
Law is every man's inheritance, because it tries titles, and by that we hold.
Dionysius therefore most properly calls it substantiam fidei, the substance or
liuelihood of our faith, suppose that by which it is fed, as you would say,
and nourished, and maintained. Likewise, Thy testimonies have I claimed as mine
HERITAGE for ever, says the Prophet David, in the Psalm before named. So as
the King you see, consists by the tillage of this field, and they are his for
ever, even as in the nature of an inheritance, as was before said. Apollinaris
(in Eusebius. l. 5. c. 1.) Bishop of Hierapolis, writing to a friend of his,
Avircius Marcellus, about the heresy of the Cataphrygians, alleadges this as a
cause of his slow setting forward to write (even against those heretics,) ne
quicquam apponere viderer Euangelico verbo noui testamenti: least writing so
much as one line after the Canon of holy Scripture, he might seem to have a
mind to add to her most complete sufficiency. S. Gregory also the great,
lib. 1. Epist. 24. ad quatuer Patriarchas, says, that as the Priest in old
times was wont to consult God in doubtful cases, apud arcam testamenti, at the
Arc of the Covenant, or of the testimony, so Ecclesiastical rulers are to
perform the same now, [apud arcam testamenti Dominum consulunt] si de his in
quibus dubitant intus apud semetipsos sacri Eloquij paginas requirant. The
Pastors then consult the Arc of the Testament, when concerning those things
that they make doubt of in their minds, they have recourse to the pages of the
word of God in their breasts. For which cause you shall find, that a Divine of
yours, Antonius de Pad^a, was called Arca testamenti, Apud Lip^.
the Arc of the Testament, by them that admired his cunning in the Scriptures.
Which study is not so honorable, if we read them but to read them, or to wax
cunning in them only, unless we resort unto them as to the law of our life,
and countenance of our whole proceedings. Wherefore again the same Gregory,
whereas the Church in the Canticles is called a Dove, he gives this reason of
it, because the Doves property is to gaze upon the rivers, and so In Epist. 5.
Cant
the Churches study is wholly in the Scriptures. His words are, Doves also for
this cause are wont to sit by the full rivers of waters, that they may discern
the shadows of birds flying over them, and casting themselves upon the waters,
eschew the claws of such foul as are too feirce for them. Even so godly men
discern by holy Scriptures the deceits of the devil, (suppose such as F. T.
would feign put upon us here under the color of the Church) and by the
platform therein contained they discry the fiend, as the birds do the hawke by
her shadow in the water. Then follows, Du^que se consilijs Scripturae addicunt,
vt videlicet NIHIL AGANT nisi quod ex RESPONSO SCRIPTVRARVM audiunt, quasi in
aquam se proijcientes, hosti illudunt. Quae flumenta PLENISSIMA dicuntur, quod
de QVIBVSCVNQVE SCRVPVLIS, in Scripturis consilium quaeritur, sine minoratione
de OMNIBVS ad plenu^ inuenitur. What can be said more for the perfection of
Scriptures? It is well that Canus says a Pope may err if he write a book, as
here Gregory does; not if he determine Can. loc. com. de Pont. Romans autho rit.
in the chair. Yea and Anselme, your own Doctor, no less then Greg. upon
Col. 3. Habitet in vobis verbum Christi copiose in omni sapientia, etc. is not
nice to affirm, that omnis sapientia is where Christi verbum is, all wisdom
is there where Christ's word and warrant is. And reckoning but those four
branches of wisdom, first, to know the holy Trinity, then the manner of
worship belonging unto it, thirdly, godly coveting after the Kingdom of
heaven, fourthly, good works and honest life in this world, he concludes thus,
In huiusmodi rebus est omnis sapientia quam Christianus habere debet in hac
vita, that is, In such things as these, stands all the wisdom, that a
Christian man needs to have in this life. What then should we do with Saints
and Angels, and the worshipping of them, after the holy Trinity religiously
served by us, unto which S. De Orat. dominic. Observe that word Observance, For
by that, Greg. de Val. his distinction is taken away, that denies the worship
of relligion to Saints, but graunts the worship of Observance. See hereafter,
Cap. 8.
Cyprian says, that all our devotion and observance ought to be confined? Yea
and Aquine further quotes Deuteronomy. 4. Haec est sapientia vestra, etc. and Act. 20.
Non sub erfugi annunciare vobis OMNE consilium Dei. Even as we do against the
Papists, denying the Scriptures sufficiency.
Aquine himself, more yours perhaps then Anselme (as was Anselme then
Gregory) yet co^menting upon the same words, acknowledges such perfection in
the holy Scripture, that saying the Apostle exhorts, us there to wisdom, he
adds more over, that he begins that exhortation, with showing them where
wisdom is, and calls the word of God, (to the study whereof the Apostle there
incites) fontem sapientiae, the FOVNTAINE of wisdom. Unless your thirst be so
preposterous, as the very fountain cannot quench it. And indeed in old times,
the Bible was laid forth in the midst of Synods, as Constantines words
insinuated even now, quoted out of Gelasius, to show, that their
determinations of matters of importance, should come only from thence. Sexta
Synod. Constant. sub Agath. Propositis in medio sacrosanctis Euangelijs Christi
Dei nostri: The holy Gospells of our Lord Jesus Christ, being laid forth in
the midst. And S. Cyprian. l. 4. Ep. 2. Copiosus numerus Episcoporum in vnum
convenimus, and Scripturis diu ex vtraque part prolatis, etc.

28. To the 51. numb. What marvel if Paulinus be poetical in verse, when the
Fathers, as has been showed, have their flourishes in prose? And yet not to
the derogation of Christian relligion, save only as you flies, or beetles
rather, corrupt good ointment with your abusiue breath. The custom and
practice of the whole. Adiovnd. ex Hi^. contia Lucifer. cap. 4. and alijs.
To^ius orbis in hanc partem consens^^ insta^ praecepti obtin^ret. But every
body may see that he speaks not this dogmatically, but insultingly over his
adversaries, after he had foiled them otherwise sufficiently, by Scripture.
Church, is a bauble which the fool has gotten by the end, and brandisheth
it as gloriously as if it were Hercules his clubbe. We have seen no such, I
tell you. Ecclesia Dei non habet talem consuetudinem, vix vel simplicem praxin.
And yet if you think to facere populum, and carry the cause by many voices, I
must tell you with the same S. Hierome, whom you quote so rise, lib. 3. contra
Pelag. prope finem, that, Multitudo sociorum nequaquam te Catholicum sed
haereticum demonstrabit. To allege multitudes on your side, will make you
thought to be an heretic, not a Catholic. The like I have quoted to you out
of S. Chrysostom before, Hom. 8. in Act. Apost. And in brief, what custom
can do, you may learn of your fellow Sa, in Apharismis, v. festum. namely,
that faires may be kept, and the mill driven upon the holy day, with some other
things, which certain of you will scarce excuse from mortal sins, (as he
says;) but the salve of all is, Licet, concedente id consuetudine: It is
lawful, because custom permits it. Is it not reason that we should be guided
by such a wandering star?

29. What can be more absolute, or more powdered with that salt, which our
Savior co^mends, then the Bishops answer to S. Austens authority, out of
Sermon. 17. de verb. Apostoli? that, for a man to be recommended to the prayers
of the Martyrs, is to be interessed in the intercession of the mystical body,
etc. Christ only being prayed to, and yet God hearing both him and us, while
each is sollicitous for the need of others, no less then of himself. Neither
does the comparison, wherein the gentleman so pleases himself, Adioynd. Numb.
60. As if a man should say that for a man to be recommended to the prayers of
the Bishop of Ely, is not to ^raue the help of his prayers in particular, but
to wish that the Kings MAIESTIN, and all English Protestants, may pray for
(...).
numb. 60. to disprooue this, any whit prejudice the Bishops interpretation.
Nay, if a subjects wishes were so favored by a King, as whatsoever he wished,
the King would accomplish, might I not sue even to the King to have my part
among them that the favorite should recommend, without making particular
means to himself? So Christ and the Martyrs. What they wish we have, what he
inspires they wish; and yet we seek not to the Martyrs, but to God only.

30. His unsavory scorn of his MOST SACRED MAJESTY, to be Head of the
Church of England, I might well reckon with him for, but I pass by. God be
thanked at what time I was writing these things, the news was (and true he
grant, as we doubt not but he will of his grace, in the end) that the King
of France had acknowledged this title by proclamation in his Dominions, and
severely threatened the contradictors. There is hope that this leaven which his
MAJESTY has prepared, like the good house-wife in the Gospel, by his most
skillful hand, will leaven more then one pecke in time, even the other parts of
the Christian world.

31. Espencaeus (and he a French Papist) says, that Reges are prima and maxima
capita populorum (even Christianorum, and therefore Ecclesiae. For what is the
Church but Christian people?) How then does this differ from our KINGS style in
English? Espenc. in Ep. ad Tit. cap. 3. initio ipso. And soon after, he
construes columbam Domini, spoken of by Jeremy 25. 27. 46. 50. to be
Nabuchodonosor, though a profane King; whom the Jesuitical spirit would have
termed corvum diaboli, the devils crow, rather then Gods dove. The like he
has often in his foresaid Digressions.

32. Numb. 56. you say, S. Austen denies no invocation to the Martyrs, but
sacrificall and Priestly only. For he adds, you say, whose Priest he is,
namely Gods: and you construe it thus, that because the Priest is Gods Priest,
and ought to sacrifice to God alone, therefore he does not invoke the Martyrs
in his sacrifice. But the Bishops questions will never be answered, If at
Mattens, why not at mass? If not the Priest, why others? Might a layman, at
the time when he communicates in the mass, privately inuoke a Martyr, or no?
If he may, what a foil is this, to S. Austens, Non inuocantur apud
sacrificium? If not, what difference is there, between Priest and laymen
then, in this point? For I hope it is lawful, even for a private man, not to
participate your mass, without a private invocation, even in the act of that
service. And are Priests set only to offer sacrifice? Is not blessing and
praying a Priestly function, as it is exercised in the Church? or does not the
force of the sacrifice stand in invocation? The Saints therefore, and the
Martyrs, being removed from the one, they are removed from the other, by S.
Austen. But if you admit them to the one, as you do to Invocation, you cannot
repel them from Sacrifice neither. It comes here to my mind, that as S.
Chrysostom notes lib. 1. contra Indaees, that God gave the Jews leave to
sacrifice to himself (though he delight not in sacrifice) rather then to
devils: so, if the fathers could be convinced to have winked at this error,
not weighing the consequence of it, yet it was rather to alienate the peoples
minds from Idols, then that they thought it good relligion to pray to Saints.
Sure I am, that in the third council of Carthage (which is both ancient in it
self, and confirmed by the sixth general Council in Trullo) there was prouiso
made, that no man should presume to use a form of prayer, dissident from the
common, till he had consulted with certain brethren of the better instructed
sort (so speaks the Council) and that always at the Altar, the prayer should
be directed ad patrem, to the Father, not excluding thereby the other two
persons of the Trinity ( S. Hieron. in Ep. Pauli. item Chrysostom. and Aug. in
varijs locis. and S. Athan. in Epist, ad Serapion.
as all divines agree) but yet Saints, and creatures, whatsoever.

33. You refer us to S. Austen de cura pro mortuis, c. 4. which the Cardinal
brought not: but still you may help him, suc Mineruam. What says S. Austen
there? I see not what help the dead may receive (belike Baronius Annal. Tom.
2. Anno 226. sect. 12. brings another reason out of Maximus, as if the very
neighborhood of the Saints bodies auailed the souls of them that lie buried
by them, against damnation: so does superstition increase in despite of S.
Austen here, after once it has broken loose: yet Maximus having ascribed
somewhat to the Saints, dares not rest there, but brings us home to our selves
again, as time was, saying, Attamen consocij sanctitate.
by being buried in Churches) but only that whiles the living remember where
their bodies lie, they may by prayer recommend them to the same Saints, as to
their patrons, who have received them into their protection. Where, a man might
ask you, if already they are received into the Saints protection, what
further need of recommendation? But the burying in Churches, is but a cold
recommending to the mercies of Saints, howsoever you magnify it. By the way
you construe, apud dominum adiuvandos commendent, they may commend them to be
helped with Almighty God, as if apud dominum depended of adiuvandos, and not
of commendent. With such pretty bosses of exquisite learning, is your work
embellished, that write against Bishops. And may we not stomach with Synesius,
in such a case?

(...)
(...) Hymn.

(...).
But in a word to S. Austen. Do you see how little this makes for praying to
Saints? I see no other cause (says he) but this. He affirms not this cause
then, but seeking the cause of a causeless zeal that men have one way, he
lights upon this, which eftsoons he refutes. But they might do that (says he)
as well, though they were not buried there, etc. And yet shall this be brought
for S. Austens judgment about prayer to Saints? which perhaps the very
multitudes would not bring for themselves. Of affectus recordantis, and
precantis, I there read: but affection is no good rule to rectify the
conscience by, specially popular, and of them that we know not what they were.
And, issdem Adioynd. Numb. 62. The prayer whereof S. Austen speaks here,
cannot be said to be made generally to Christ, and to all his mystical body,
according to the Bishops gloss, but particularly (...) Sanctis tanquam (...),
to the s^ Saints as to their patrones, and eidens Maytyri, to the same Martyr,
by whose tomb the b^dies of the dead are buried.
sanctis, or eidem Martyri, excludes not the general, howsoever you press it,
though it endeares perhaps to him the party buried, to whose protection, you
say, he was recommended.

34. By the way, you wish us, to mark the fashion of praying for the dead.
Which although it be nothing to our question, yet it neither follows half
currantly out of the words that you here quote, nor aduantageth you one whit,
albeit it were granted. For all your striving about prayer for the dead, is
for Purgatory, as we know, whose walls rise not at the others rising. Neither
is every Purgatory, that has been fancied, alike. S. Hierome reports upon
Ephesians. 6. the opinion of some that should think, that no man's conflicts end
with death, and that there are tentations expecting us after our deliverance
from the body. Which they would also ground upon the Apostles words in that
place. Non omne aduersus diabolum praelium morte finitur. Sed cum de isto
saculo exierimus, tunc nobis fortius and apertius praesentibus contra
praesentes est futurum certamen. And, Non potest aliquis omnia in praesenti
vita operari. Sed 2. Cor. 5. sieve in praesenti, sieve in futuro, studendum est
placere Domino. For thither also they would draw those words of the Apostle,
in his Epistle to the Corinthians. S. Hierome delivers not his judgment
hereof, one way nor another, much less shall I needmine. Only we may well
lament our case, me thinks, if there be new temptations accosting us after this
life, and that it is not enough to have been faithful unto the death. For my
part, I hope for a far better condition, when we have quitted this. Or else,
what get we by the exchange so much desired? Yet your Purgatory gets as little
by this new purgation. For first, this is general, and encloseth all, Non
potest aliquis omnia in praesenti vita operari. Then necessary, not subject to
be diminished or released by the prayers of the living. Upon which foundation
nevertheless, your market-house is erected. And lastly, not torments, but
tentations remain for us, and fresh combats, if these say true. Your pots may
freeze then for all this Purgatory. But at least it follows from prayers for
the dead; which you bid us mark here. As if in the ancient Liturgies, S.
Cyprian lib. 3. Epist. 6. and lib. 4. Ep. 5. Meminit oblationum pro marlyribus.
Sacrificia proijs (inquit) somper offerimu^. Whereas one cannot offer prayers
for a Martyr, without doing him in^ie, faith S. Austen. Those oblations
therefore neither were prayers, nor went with prayers. S. Epiphan, also ^resi
A^, thus has, reciting whom they pray for. Proi^stis, and Patribus, and
Patriarchis, and Prophetis, Apostolit, Euangelstis, Martyribus, Confessoribus,
Episcop^, Ana. horet^, ac* pro ^iuer so ord^.
the Virgin Mary were not prayed for, whom you so quit from Purgatory, that
you excuse from death: in other some the Martyrs, who go not thither by your
doctrine, but are glorified immediately: yea, all souls, and all departed, are
prayed for by others. Yet not only S. Bernards soul flow immediately to
heaven, as your Authors inform us., but even Father Hozius the Jesuit,
Massaeus in de vita Ignat. l. 2. c. 6.
and I know not who of that crew, their souls were seen fleeting thither as
fast, by some of their own consederacy forsooth, that we may believe it the
rather. S. Cyrill in his Catechis. quotes the words of the Greek service thus;
Offerimus and pro omnibus qui^ saculo tibi placuerunt Sanctis: We offer for all
Saints and righteous persons, that have been pleasing to thee, O Lord, from
the beginning of the world. And more peremptorily afterward, to show that even
profit accrueth here of the souls departed; but what profit you may think,
since he makes it common to the souls of the most righteous and just
themselves, even all of the^. Magnam vtilitatem credentes accessuram eorum
animabus pro quibus offertur, which puzles your Pamelius, who quotes that, to
prove the clean contrary of it, which it imports. Gregory Nazianz, Orat.
in Caesarium sratrem, though he had laid down his ground, that Caesari^ was
saved, and his soul enriched with competent honors, (dignum fructificaret
honorem) yet he prays thus to God in the sequel for him, Nunc, O Domine,
Caesarium suscipe. Tuis eum (...). That is, Receive him, Lord, we give thee him
whom thou have already taken. Of which manner of prayer I shall speak a
little after. S. Ambrose is not S. Ambrose says of Valentinian, that he is in
luce perpetua, in tranquillitate diuturna, in detectatione florenti^ in light
never sailing, in rest a^xaies lasting, and in flourishing delectation. How
much short of heaven then, I would feign knows
slack to pray for Valentinian: Confess. l 9. c. 13.
S. Austen for his mother Monica, though they assure themselves of their
exemption from all manner of pain: Et credo iamfeceris quod te rogo, says S.
Austen, sed tamen voluntaria or is mei approba Domine: And I believe Lord, thou
have already done this; but yet Lord, accept the free will offerings of my
mouth. But let Gregory de Valentia cast it hardly. Tom. 4. Com. Theolog.
Disput. 6. Quaest. 6. Punct. 1. De forma Eucharistiae, thus he says; Facit
saepe magnitudo affectus in Sanctis, vt illud tanquam in excasi quadam petant a
Deo, quodtamen iam factum est. [The Saints in transportation, many times pray
for things already granted.] The same says S. Chrysostom of S. Paul, Hom.
10. in 4. ad Coloss. (...): He begs for what he has already. Holy Job also
concurring, cap. 9. Cum vocantem me exaudierit, non tamen credo quod audier it
vocem meam: [When he hears me calling upon him, yet I scarce believe that he
has heard my voice; and therefore importune him with fresh suite for the same
thing.] Yea, Maldonate the Jesuit gives as much (out of the Author Imperfecti)
commenting upon Matt. 6. 11. Vocari volunt panem nostrum illum etiam ipsum quem
iam habemus, quem nihilominus a Deo petere iubemur. Quod verum quidem and pium
est, etc. So as not only in ecstasy and transportation, as Valentia would, but
in the daily form of prayer, prescribed by our Savior to the whole Church,
the Saints are to pray for things already had. But return we where we left.

35. The last is of Florentius, apoore old man of Hippo, who Aug. de cluit.
dei, l. 22. c. 8.
having lost his cloak, S. Austen says, he prayed at the monuments of
certain Martyrs; but not to them. The young men scoft him, say you, for
praying to the Martyrs. It seems then, it was no such use to do so. For they
were not Pagan young men, but more likely Christian. And though they mocked him
eo ipso nomine, for praying to the Martyrs, yet it follows not that he did so:
for even our Savior was mocked as praying to Elias, when he prayed to his
Father only. So it might be that neither Florentius prayed to any but to God,
and the young men mocking him as praying to the Martyrs, declared the judgment
of those times and those parts, which was, that Martyrs were not to be prayed
to. You say, they mocked him not for praying to the Martyrs, but for requesting
of them, quinquagenos folles (so many pieces of money) toward his cloak.
Which is not likely, he would capitulate so precisely with Saints, for the
buying of a new cloak: but if he did, you may weigh his wisdom, and think how
fit a man to square the faith of Gods Church by his actions. Cartosus the cook
might say, Ecce quomodo Martyrs te vestierunt; behold how the Martyrs have
clothed thee, though neither Florentius prayed to them, nor Cartosus allowed
such prayer to be lawful, but only comforting him against the taunts of the
young men, who had impured that to him, to pray to Martyrs. S. Austens
epiphonema, Cui nisi huic fidei attestantur ista miracula, to what faith do
these miracles bear witness, etc. hurts not us, who deny not miracles, (though
they that call for them untimely, drive our Savior to groans again, Mark. 8.
12.) nor wish ill to Martyrs, and least of all to Faith, but say, that faith in
Saints, and prayer to the dead, are both of them repugnant to the right faith
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

To the eight Chapter,
The Bishops arguments against Praying to Saints are maintained (which the
Adioynder says, may be expected in all likelihood, that he should satisfy,
and therefore addresseth himself thereunto in this chapter.) The Canon of the
Church of England about the Cross in Baptism, neither guilty of imposture,
nor any otherways to blame. Wrangling, iuggling, trifling, and the rest of his
brave Rhetorique wherewith he fronts the Bishop, returned upon himself rather
in proof then words.

1. YOU call it the Bishops abusing of Theoderet, to quote as much of the text
only, as was most pregnant to the matter in hand, besides that you know his
accustomed breuity: And yet professing to lay down Theodonets place, you dare
not your self lay it down at large. I will add what you left out. The
question between us arises of the 35. Canon of the Council of Laodicea. Of
that Theodoret in his Comment, upon the 2. to the Coloss. thus. They which
defended the law, did provoke them also to the worship of Angels, saying that
the law was given by them. Now this fault remained in Phrygia and Pisidia a
long time. Wherefore the Council which met at Laodicea, which is the
Metropolis The Council forbids praying to Angels.
of Phrygia, by decree forbad praying to Angels. And to this day we may see,
among them, and their neighbors, Churches, or Oratories, to S. Michael. Most
of this, good Sir, you left out, you I say, that blame the Bishop for not
putting in all. I imagine you were ashamed of S. Michaels Oratories, which you
have multiplied, in ipsa forma, or that the idolatry to Angels, which the
Council forbids, is construed by Theodoret The Papists maintain cultu^
Angelorum, Angels worship, which is idolatry, by Theodorets exposition of the
Council of Laodicek.
cultus Angelorum, the worship of Angels, which worship of them at least your
selves defend. He goes forward, They therefore gave this counsel in humblenes
of mind, saying, the God of all things could not be seen nor comprehended, nor
that we could come to him, and that we must procure Gods good will by Angels.
This S. Theodoret calls baseness of mind, and the worshipping of Angels. He
calls it worshipping of Angels I say, our seeking to procure Gods favor to us,
by their mediation. Yet you do so. And further, the Council calls it
Idolatry. You are idolaters therefore in so doing. Lastly, it reformes that
whole fault by forbidding prayer to Angels. Now think you therefore, whether
Theodoret be against you, and the Council of Laodicea, and whether you be
idolaters, yea or no, for your resorting to Angels, praying to them, single
worshipping of them, though you went no further. And least you think Theodoret
construes the Council amiss, by saying it forbids prayer to Angels, when it
forbids idolatry, (though the Council be plain, Ne nominemus Angelos, which
is the Invocation of them, or calling upon their names, and it were hard to
entertain such a thought of Theodoret, yet) hear Theodoret repeating the same
again, upon the third Chap. to the Coloss. The Synod of Laodicea also
following this rule, and desirous to remedy that old disease, by statute
decreed, that none should pray to Angels, nor forsake our Lord Jesus Christ.
What more evident, then that prayer to Angels was forbid by the Laodicean
Council, in Theodorets judgment? No, say you, but the forsaking of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Pray to him, pray to Angels, pray to both. Which the Council
says not, as distinguishing between them that prayed to Angels alone, and
them that pray to Not unlike to Qu^ Mambre in Sozom. lib. 1. c. 3. at which
Pars pieces deo omnium mederatori fundunt, pars ^bi Angel^s invo^ant. Quisque
prout singulorum poscit relligio, etc. So that one and the same relligion calls
not upon God and Angels; yet F. T. would have it so; which is the worse.
our Lord Jesus Christ too, but they as I shall set down in their own words;
That Christians must not forsake the Church of God (by this you see that prayer
to Angels was not then received publicly in the Church,) and depart aside,
(either as into corners, or from the tracke of the Church-fashion and
observation) and name the Angels, (or call upon them by way of prayer, as
Theodoret construed it) and make meetings, which is a thing forbidden, (viz.
all the forenamed.) If any man therefore be found to use such privy idolatry
(they call it idolatry, praying to Angels) let him be accursed. Because he
has forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, and betaken himself to
idolatry. Now, say there are two kinds of worshipping of Angels, one with
Christ, another without, as your Valentia distinguishes of two kind of
idolatries, one lawful, the other unlawful; Vbi supra. (...). 1. Pet. 4. 3.
Ierem. 2. 13.
out of S. Peter. The Council yields it as a perpetual reason, why we should
not pray to Angels, because that is to forsake our Lord Jesus Christ the Son
of God. Two evils (says the Prophet) has my people committed, digging false
pitts that hold no water, and leaving me the fountain of life. So here.

2. You say, Theodoret alleadges not any one word of the Canon, numb. 3. It is
enough that Theodoret understood the Canon, and construes that which they there
forbid, to be praying to Angels. Either say that Theodoret mistakes the sense
of the Canon, if you dare for your ears, or confess you are concluded under
the Councels curse, for praying to Angels. And yet Angels, I hope, is one word
of the Canon, which Theodoret uses. And is not relinquere dominum nostrum Iesum
Christum, another clause of the same? which Theodoret has in his Comment. upon
the 3. to the Coloss. But what talk you of words, when he gives you the sense?

3. You say, the heresy which the Council forbid, was of such, as thought we
could not come to God, otherwise then by Angels, which you do not. But the
Council first has no such words, but forbids the inuocating of Angels barely,
without showing their reason that were wont to use it, and Theodoret himself
does not say otherwise, but only non posse perueniri, that is, that God was
hid, and retired, and incomprehensible, not to be come at, (viz. of himself)
and therefore that we must use the mediation of Angels; Which your selves would
not stick to allege, to him that you would persuade to worship Angels, and
draw an argument from the remoteness of Almighty God, to crave help of such
proctors, though you dare not deny the mediation of Christ. Mean while, herein
you are worse then they, for they say, God cannot be approached to without
Angels, you say, Christ himself must be approached to by the Angels, as if he
did not offer himself unto us, and so lead us to God; for by him we have
entrance, etc. Ipse via, ipse Romans 5. 2.
vita. Leo de passione Domini, Sermon. 16. Merito Dominus ipse nobis factus est
via, quia nisi per Christum non itur ad Christum. Well is our Lord made our
way, because by Christ only we come to Christ. S. Austen also in Psalm. 123.
Praefat. Ipse Rex patriae factus est via. Quo imus? ad Christum: qua imus? per
Christum, etc. The king of the Country is made our way to the Country.
Whether go we? to Christ: which way go we? by Christ, etc. To whom add that
of Theophylact, in his Comment upon the 3. to the Coloss. at those words, verse
17. Whatsoever you do in word or in deed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God, and the Father, by him. By him (says
Theophylact) we must thank the Father, by him pray to the Father, in his name
do all things. For as he is our mediator, to bring our persons to his
Father, at the first; so also to convey our prayers to him for ever after.
Where is your distinction become, between mediator of redemption, and
mediator of intercession, if this may take place? He that brings our persons,
brings our prayers to the Father. And that you may know, that not only Christ
is to be embraced, and laid hold of, but the Angels to be quite casheered in
this work of recommendation to almighty God, S. Chrysostom and S. Theodoret,
both, thus proceed. If by Christ, then not by Angels. Theodoret as you quote
him, upon the 3. to the Col. in your 4. Numb. Utter your thanks to God by
Christ, and not by Angels. And as thanks, so prayers questionless, 1. Tim. 2.
1. for thanks are a kind of prayers. Chrysostom so likewise, hom. 6. in 2. ad
Coloss. Walk in him (says he) (for he is the way (...). v. 6.
that leads to the Father) not in the Angels. That way (viz. the Angels) leads
us not thither: that is, the Angels have no part at all in mediation to God for
us. And yet more pregnantly, if more may be, Hom. 9. in 3. ad Coloss. ver. 16.
etc. Whether thou eat, or drink, or marry, or travel, do all in the name
of God; that is, calling him for thine assistant, praying to him before all,
and so set upon thy business. Will thou say any thing? set him first. For this
cause we (or as others read Paul) set the name of the Lord foremost in our (or
as other his) Epistles. Where the name of the Lord is, there all things are
prosperous. For if the names of the Consuls make their writings to be of
force, much more shall the name of Christ do the same. This also may be the
Apostles meaning here, that we should say and do all in the name of God, as
has been showed, or in affiance toward God, not bringing the Angels. Do
thou eat? thank God both before thou eat, and afterward. Do thou sleep?
Thank God both before thou sleep, and afterward. Do thou go to the market
place? Do the same. Do all in the name of the Lord, and all things shall go
well with thee. Wheresoever the name of God is set, there all things are
prosperous. If it expel devils, if it drive away diseases, much more will it
give easy riddance to thy business. And what is that that the Apostle says,
Whether in word or deed? That is, either praying, or doing any thing else.
Hearken how Abraham dismissed his servant, in the name of God; how in the name
God David overcame Goliath. Marvelous is his name, and very great. Again,
Jacob sending away his sons, says, My God give you grace in that man's sight.
For he that does so, has God for his aid, without whom he durst do
nothing. God therefore in recompense of the honor, wherewith a man honors
him, by calling upon him, will honor him again, by giving good success unto
his business. Call upon the Christian invocation has this property' that one
person being prayed to, all are prayed to. Which is not so in prater to
Saints. For neither, if one Saint be called upon, another is, nor if the Saint
be prayed to, therefore is God called on. And this latter much less. Because
God and the Saints are farther off in nature, then the Saints between
themselves. Which shows how repugnant prayer to Saints is to the Christian
invocation.
Son, give thanks to the Father. For when the Son is called upon, the
Father is called upon: and when we give thanks to the Son, we thank also the
Father. Let us learn to perform these things (let the Jesuits learn, if
they love their salvation) not only in words but in deeds. Nothing is of like
force to this name, (the name of God) this name is wonderful in all places.
For thy name (says he) is like unto ointment powered out. Whosoever names this
name, he is straight-waies filled with most sweet savor. No man can call Jesus
the Lord, but in the holy Ghost. This name works so great things. If thou
say by faith, IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, Ephesians. 2. 18 We have access to the
father, through Christ, in one Spirit. The whole Trinity is named; but no
Saint needful to the procuring of our access.
AND OF THE SON, AND OF THE HOLY GHOST, thou have effected all. See how great
things thou have done. Thou have created a man, and done all else that is wont
to be done by baptism. This is that fearful name, that commands
sickenesses. For this cause THE DEVIL BROVGHT IN ANGELS, (their service or
worship) envying us the honor (of having to do with God only.) These are the
enchantments of the devils. Though he be Angel, though Archangel, though a
Cherubim, endure it not. For indeed the very (heavenly) powers themselves,
will not endure it, nor admit it, but will repulse and reject it, when they see
their Master dishonored. I have honored thee, says he, and I have said,
Call upon me. And do thou dishonor him? If thou but faithfully apply Note
this consequence of S. Chrysostom. which the Jesuits deride. Call upon me, says
God: Ergo not upon creatures, though they be Saints or Angels.
this charm, thou shall drive away both devils and diseases (and all.) And if
happily thou shall not be able to conquer the disease, yet know that it is for
the good of the party, not for the weakness of thy charm. According to thy
greatness, says he, so is thy praise. By the virtue of this name, the world
was converted, the tyranny dissolved, the devil trampled, the heavens opened.
And what say I the heavens? We our selves by this means are begotten a new.
If we have this name, then we flourish and shine. This name makes Martyrs,
this name Add hereunto another excellent declaration of S. Chrisost. judgment
touching prayer to S^ C^. in 1. Cor. (...). at those words, With all that call
upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ; (...) (says he) (...). Not this (...)
and that man^ name, but only Christ^.
makes Confessors. Let us hold fast this name for a great gift, etc. Or if you
will, let us change this name for a new, the Name of God, and of Christ, and
of the Holy Trinity, by Paul, and by Chrysostom so highly commended to us,
for new names of I wot not whom, foysted in by the Jesuits. I speak to our
Countrymen, weary of their welfare, and itching after novelties, hasting out
of Gods blessing into the Saints warm sun, as they suppose at least. To
whom I add, but this one thing, by way of remembrance, because they would
seem zealous of their Country, and the ancient Card. Al^^s Answer to the
Apolog. of Engl. Just. See Speed in He^. (...).
honors thereof. The famous victory, that our nation atcheiued, against the
French, at Agen-Court, so few against so many, was consecrated by the prayers
of King Henry the fifth, of worthy memory, exhorting thus his soldiers, partly
sanctifying their mouths with the participation of Christ's sacrament, partly
kissing a mould of earth in rememembrance of their mortality, IN THE NAME OF
THE HOLY TRINIIE, AND IN THE BEST HOVRE OF THE YEAR. But go we onward as I
said.

4. Numb. 5. You quote the Council false, accessit ad idola, for, ad
idololatriam. Be like you think the Angels are no way idola, though we pray
unto them, and therefore the Council cannot be meant of that. But besides that
it is (...), in the greek, perverse worship and rash prayer turns an Angel
into an idol. And here your idols are (...), things essential, or
subsistent, not Chimeraes only, as you pervert S. Paul, 1. Cor. 8.

5. But, O noble argument, Numb. 6. That this cannot be the abominable
idolatry, which the Council forbids, (the Council calls it privy idolatry,
as taxing the fair gloses, wherewith you guild over your idolatry, abominable
though it be, yet perhaps not outwardly, and therefore not so called by the
Council) but it cannot be the same you say, because then S. Paul should be an
idolater, exciting the Corinthians, the Romans, and Thessalonians, to pray for
him, etc. For he has for saken the Church of God, (mutual prayers agree not
with Church Discipline) and renounced Christ, etc. Will this balductum never be
left? Also Jacob should be an idolater, because of, Angelus qui eruit me, the
Angel that delivered me, bless these children. Did you never hear of Angelus
magniconsilij, Esa. 9? or Angelus foederis, Malach. 3? The Angel of his
Counsel, and the Angel of the Covenant, that is Christ, and none other Angel?
a word of office, not of nature. Or, that the Mediator preluded to his future
incarnation, by appearing familiarly many times to men, and exercising the part
of a gracious Angel? Idem habet Greg hom. 6. in Evang. and hom. ^5. Quid est
quod duo Angeli videntur in loco dominici corporis, nisi quia Latina lingua
Angelus nuncius dicitur, and ille ex passione sua nunciandus erat qui est Deus,
etc.
S. Austen cont. Faust. lib. 16. c. 20. Quis, nisi nec tenuiter Graecis
tinctus, ignorant, Angelum nuncium dioi? To be sent about a message therefore,
is enough to make one be called an Angel.

6. Iosue fell down before an Angel, you say, and called him Lord. Why not as
before? Yet some say representing the person of God, like honos Regis legato
delatus, the honor of the King given to his Ambassador. Hom. 8. in Euang. Non
habere dedignantur hominem socium, qui super se adorant hominem deum. Of the
same mind are Beda, Ruportu^, Anselm^^, Richardus, etc. all quoted by the
Adioynder himself, cap. 9. to this very purpose.
Gregory observes, that in the old Testament this was sometimes in use, before
our nature was exalted by our Lords taking part of it, but not in the New.
Neither did the Virgin worship Gabriel, Luke 1. (rather Gabriel may seem to
pray to the Virgin, in his Ave Maria, if that be a prayer, as with you it is)
nor the Disciples those Angels that appeared at the sepulcher, Ioh. 20. and you
know in the Revelation it is absolutely forbidden. Vide ne. Yea the Fathers
say, Leo sermon. 12. de Passione Dom.
Christ should not have been adored by the Mage, by the Centurion, and others,
but that he was acknowledged to be the Word, and the second person in Trinity.

7. Assistance of Angels proves not prayer unto them; Adioynd. vbi supra.
not presence, not help, nor benefits through them. Such Divinity is for
parasites, or them that labor in the kitchen, like Ignatius and Borgias, the
two first stones in your foundation, Rib^ra de vita ^gnat. l. 3. c. 2. Scho.
Ios. de vita B^rg. l. 2. c. 12.
that are enrolled Jesuits: (...). My oil and my wine, says she in the
Prophet, nay, my flesh pots and my garlic, more shamefully, if it may be. If
we should construe S. Paul so (as some do) Ephesians. 3. 10. that the Angels receive
benefit and increase of knowledge by our preaching (which is another-gates
advantage, then your temporal reuersions that you are so madded with) would it
infer any duty from them to us? I think not. No nor yet, that we have all,
our particular Angel; which is another thing that you stand upon. By this
reason, we should pray but to one among them all; and how shall we know him, or
how distinguish him from the rest of the company, that we be not unthankful
to him, that we may speak properly, when we pray unto him? Though from thence
it is come to that pass now (the mala mulier is) that every particular
Monastery and congregation of Friars, has his particular Angel, or Angels,
over it. So says Molina in 1. part. Thom. Quaest. 113. Disp. vnic. And, they
move, singulos communitatis, to such or such enterprises, as are for the good
of the whole fraternity. To the murdering of Kings, to the embroyling of
States, etc. that that may be called an Angelical work now, as Guadalupa upon
Hoseah says, the Inquisition is rather an Angelical institution then humane.
So has Satan forgot his qualities and old cunning, of transforming himself
into an Angel of light. And dare you talk of imperium Angelorum over men,
Angels government or command, which though it were current once, yet is not
now? as Hebr. 2. Non subiecit Angelis orbem de quo loquimur: The world that we
now speak of, is not governed by the Angels, that is, the world of the new
Testament. And again in the Revel. conservus tuus sum; I am thy fellow
servant, Not, -- dominum cognoscite vestrum: but one of the many that depend of
the maine, (...), Coloss. 2. 19. holding by the head, no less then thou, which
is our best security. Yet you quote also Theodorets Questions upon Genesis,
nothing to this time. Besides, imperium Quaest. 30.
might be the government, that any principal in his faculty has over the
nouice, without such authority, or superiority, as you fondly amplify in
ministering spirits, Heb. 1. (how then commanding?) specially so great, as to
make va ask them blessing.

8. But how he sweates in the 9. Number. to show what this idolatry was, which
the Council Photius in Comm. hulus loci. makes the error to have been this.
Quod obsecrandi essent Angeli, (that by this we may know how to weigh S.
Ambroses, Obsecrandi sunt Angeli, totidem verbi^) and all because we are not
worthy to come to God of our selves, not yet to be brought on by Christ: The
very Popery that we protest against at this day.
forbids, that it be not prayer to Angels, as Theodoret has defined twice
over? Some Magical worship, says he, of Simon Magus. But is sorcerie, and
idolatry all one? Why no word of magique then, in all the Canon? in
Chrysostomes Comment? in Theodorets? in the rest? Oratoria Michaelis were the
sorcerie, or the magique that Theodoret described, none other. And the
idolatry is forbid to Angels by name, magique neither to Angels nor without
Angels is allowed. S. Paul distinguishes (...) from (...), Gal. 5. 20. you
confound Item Johan. A. poc. 22. 15.
them. It might be Cerinthus heresy, say you, (but him John confutes,) Or
certain Phrygians. Well may it be called (...), which seeing you will not see,
In Popery it is now turned, (...), Lawful Idolatry, according to Valent. his
distinct.
but hood-winke your self wilfully, as if partnership in offenses might quit
the guilty. Whosoever build Oratories, or places of prayers to Angels, whether
they be Michael, or Gabriel, or whomso you list, if to created Angels, they
have abandoned Christ, as the Council tells you ((...), at least privily,
though not so openly as Cerinthus) and are become anathema. And to conclude
this matter; I must tell you to your 11. numb. that the prayer to Angels was
sooner banished, then to Saints. For that was stale idolatry, vetus morbus,
says Theodoret, and so the easier discerned: this In Coloss^. (...).
came up secretly, closely, imperceiueably, while men were both zealous to
honor the Martyrs, that had been so vallant as to die for relligion, and yet
suspected no intrusion into Gods privileges, because their mortality had
declared them to be but men. Neither of which was incident to the Angels. As
withal also to confirm the Christians belief, touching the immortality of
the soul, even in them that had lately died before their eyes, which in the
Angels needed not. And yet Theodorets (...), or taking his leave of them, whose
lives he had wrote, with a prayer at the end; some would think to be no
prayer, howsoever you account of it, but a flourish of his pen, by way of an
Apostrophe, in the conclusion of his work; or to make the most of it, like the
subscription of the Nicene Canons in the Arabique copy, which your Turrian
tells us of, in his translation of them. Orationes sanctorum patrum Nicaenorum,
sint cum eo qui descripsit hos canones; which is not to pray to them, but to
be prayed for by them, to be comprehended in their good wishes. Which is the
grace that Theodoret may here seem to long for, notwithstanding his (...). And
so much to these Numbers.

9. As for Numb. 12. the next in your bill; Whereas, the Bishop (you say)
argues against praying to Saints, out of Reason and Discourse; why not rather
then you, (for as well is too little, considering the cause in hand) that bring
your inducements of praying to them, from the like heads many times? As twice
in this chapter, from the practice of people, from the sense of their benefits,
from conformities and congruities with other Scriptures, though testimonies of
Scripture you are able to show none direct, neither indeed endeavor you.
Above all, that if charity remain in them, they will help us, and being
potent they can; and, that they know our case, and behold our estate, or else
they were not completely blessed, if they should wish us well, and yet not know
how we did. With a great deal more of such fiddle-faddle-stuffe which S. Paul
condemns in one word, in the place before named, Coloss. 2. Instatus sensu
carnis sua, puffed up with his own carnal reason, or carnal sense; and,
(...), strutting and pacing in things that he has not seen. Not seen indeed,
but yet picked out, by F. T. his occulta philosophia^.

10. You know not (says he) how the sea ^^s and flows, Adioynd. number. 13.
how the lodestone draws iron, how the eye sees, whether extramittendo, or
intromittendo, etc. And surely though we doubt of them, we are in no great
danger. Simple may we be, but not sacrilegious. Quae sine periculo ignorantur,
oppugnantur etiam quandoque cum laud. Faith has her assurance, and sense
hers. That Saints should be prayed to, is accompanied with neither. Were it as
evident as the former, though we might sift it happily, with an argument or
two, for discourse sake, yet we would not persist in the denial of it, as now,
when neither Scripture abets it, and sounder antiquity makes against it. He
says, We know not how the Saints, pray for us: Suppose we do not, the matter
is not great. Yet we must be sure they hear us, and perhaps know how, before
we pray to them. For they may do us good, though we be not aware of it; have
reference to them we may not, unless we have good ground for it. Howbeit,
whereas he says, we cannot conceive how the Saints pray for us, if the Saints
have reason and affection remaining with them, as doubtless they have, what
difficulty is it to conceive how they should pray for us?

11. And dare you question of our Savior, how he sees our prayers? Do you
not rather Adioynd. Number. 14 Let him tell me how the Angels and Saints in heaven
pray for us, or how the humanity of Christ hears our prayers, and knows
our actions, etc.
wonder how he should be ignorant of any thing? have you forgot what flows
from the hypostaticall union? Which Saints have not, Angels have not. You are
wont to tax us with the Agnoites heresy: who is the Agnoite now, but he that
doubts how Christ should know all things, and that not in pilgramage, but in
bliss?

12. To your 15. and 16. numb. out of S. Austens lib. 22. de Ciuit. Dei. That
God works wonders at the Tombs of Saints, and yet we know not how: Therefore
we may pray to Saints, though we discern not how they hear us. Resp. Nothing
like: For neither does the Scripture ever say, that God shows no miracles at
the tombs of Martyrs, that we should question this so nicely before we
believe it, by the Virgins Quomodo, Luc. 1. Rather it most often witnesses of
Almighty God, qui facit mirabilia magna solus, indeed solus, so as no body
cooperating with him, none suffered to see and to inquire how he does them.
Quis consiliarius fuit ei? Romans 11. 34. But for so much as it denies that the
dead know any thing of our condition here, and such a gulf (as I may so say)
is pight between us and them, as all Psalm. 6. Esa. 65. upon which words S.
Austen, de cura pro mort. cap. 13. St tanti Patriarcha nescisbant populum ex se
procreatum, and di^tus promissum, etc. Psalm. 27. 12. Ecclesiast. 9. 5. Josias
subtractus ne videret malumiquod and Aug. adducit vbi prius.
intercourse and commerce is debarred, (the places are too common to be here
recited) therefore first show us how, or worthily we believe you not.

13. The Angels may rejoice, upon the rising of a sinner, Adioynd. number. 17.
when they conduct him into heaven, as they did Lazarus his soul, though they
be not privy to his passages here in earth. And yet in earth, they may see, by
outward demonstrations, such signs of repentance, as they cannot always trace
our supplications by: which for the most part are cordial, and within the
veil. The heart is deceitful, and who shall search it, who gage it? says
Jeremy. For which cause, S. John says, God is greater then our heart: only
God. We are strangers to it our selves, and shall they be no strangers, which
are so much estranged from us, both in place and quality? In Cassians
Collations, a godly Abbot, Abbas Serenus. apud Cass. Coll. lib. 7. c. 16. Velut
quodam de intimis concl^b us prode^ tinnit^s, quid sit reconditum in abdi^is
interioris hominis recognoscunt. And, vt the saurum corporis nostri explorent,
noxias suggestiones quasi arenas inspergunt.
uses this similitude. As certain the eues when they would know what store of
gold is hidden in a house, that they beset, they fling in some handfulls of
smaller sands, at the windows, that by the sound of that in the fall, they may
judge whether any treasure be within or no, and not loose their labor; so the
thoughts of the heart are subject to knowledge, by such or such signs, upon
provocation. Which may hold well enough in matter of repentance, to see whether
the sinner will return to his old courses or no, but is no way to know what he
begs in prayer. To omit, that our Saviors words might be construed by
supposition, that so great is the joy for repenting sinners, as Angels would
have their part in it, if they knew it, and when they know it, then they have
de facto. Heaven and earth in Apocal.
another place are invited to rejoice over Babylon, your Babylon, by a figure
of hyperbole, for the wrongs that you have done them. Lastly, Revelatio
vicissitudinis, or intervalli, is one thing, as I told you before, statae
permanentiae another. The first may suffice to verify the saying, Luke 15. of
the joy of Angels over repenting sinners, but that they should know our prayers
whenever we make them, more is required.

14. The like I might say to your instance of Samuel, who told Saul all that
was in his heart, namely concerning the matter then in hand. Of Elizeus, that
saw Gehezi by transitory revelation, and discovered what the king of Syria did
in his privy chamber. The presenting of our Saviors glorious body to S.
Steuens eyes, is not comparable with an intuitiue speculation of the thoughts,
though this also was at a glimpse, and not ordinary, whereas the Saints must
have ordinary to hear us at all times, if they will be called upon.

15. Athanasius is counterfeit; yet he means but of Quaest. 11. ad Antiochum.
things belonging to their beatitude. Sine his autem satis beati esse possumus.
Both we and they too may be happy enough without this. Then, post mortem and in
die Iudicij. After death and in the day of judgment. Time enough therefore if
they know all things in the last judgment. What is that to prayer to them,
which must be in the mean while, if it be at all?

16. As for S. Basil, he means intra sphaeram only, Lib. de vera virginit.
Nullus est ex his qui non singula vbique consideret.
within their quarter. For though they are quicker sighted then we, yet they
have a limitation both of act and virtue. The Custodia hominum, which S. Basil
ascribes to them, may be with knowledge of our outward ways, without knowledge
of the inward, to which our prayers belong. And yet again he may be custos or
protector of us, that watches over our safety with prayers, and with good
wishes, though he know not so much as our outward estate. As Job, when he
prayed for his children, unknowing to them; as S. Paul when he said, absens
corpore, prasens spiritu, and yet knew not what they did, but love linked him;
nor might they petition to him in such absence. Spectator actuum an Angel may
be, as you quote out of S. Ambrose, and yet not cogitatuum, De viduit.
which is prayers chief seat, as has been often told you.

17. We say not, that Saints are shut up in a coffer, as you maliciously
slander us, with Vigilantius. We grant they follow the Lamb whethersoeuer
he goes, but signanter dictum, sequuntur non praeeunt, they follow him, not
go before him, that is, they applaude his resolutions of showing mercy to his
Church, not importune him always with fresh demands, only sighing for our
salvation in general. The blessed Martyr Fructuosus, as you may read in
Baronius, Tom. 2. Anno. 262. when he was hasting to his martyrdom, and now
come to the stage of his execution, one Felix requested him to have him in
mind, [belike after death] To whom the holy Martyr and Bishop answered, clara
voce and audientibus cunctis; In mente me habere necesse est ecclesiam
Catholicam ab orient vsque in Occidentem. That is, I must needs have in mind
the Universal Church of Christ, even from the East to West. Limiting thereby
his prayers, to the Universal estate of Christ's Church here upon earth, and no
longer owning particular suits, after his departure out of the body. As he that
gives us the Contents of the second Tome of Baronius, in the end of the book,
understands those words more peremptorily yet then so. Non esse orandum sibi
nisi pro Ecclesia Catholica, that he may not pray for any but only for the
Church. Whereas what if they should pray for the general of mankind? But I
must further follow you.

18. S. Gregory's speculum, is rejected by your selves. Adioynd. Number. 21.
Is it like the Saints see as much as God? Do they see him as much as he is to
be seen? Do they comprehend him, in quantum comprehensitilis est? Yet
himself does so; And if by seeing him, they see as far into him, as the
nature of things is resplendent in him, they should do this, and all. He
means, the presence and contemplation of God excludes all wretched and woeful
ignorance from them, and fills them full of happiness, but after the measure of
their capacity. And though they could discern all that is in God, yet it is a
question whether he would not restrain them from some things purposely,
speculum voluntarium, not natural. Though they affect us well, as we
confess, yet their felicity stands not in the knowledge of our welfare, but in
submitting themselves and all their desires to the pleasure of God, of whom
we read, that he shall be all in all in them, but not that they shall be all
in all in him. I mean, to see all that is to be seen by him.

19. I have omitted one thing in the 17. Numb. that the Saints offer up our
prayers unto God, Apoc. 5. for so you quote. In all which chapter
nevertheless, there is no mention of offering at all. The 24 Elders are said
to have harpes, that is, the instruments of praise, and vialls full of sweet
odors, which the holy Ghost expounds, to be the prayers of the Saints. But
their own as well as others, for ought I know. Either their thanksgiving to
God, for their wonderful redemption, as v. 12. (for thanksgiving is reckoned a
kind of prayer:) or, because you are so delighted with the Bishops grant, the
intercessions which they continually make for us. As for the 8. chapter of the
same book, where you read thus, Another Angel came, and much incense was given
him, to the end that he might, dare de orationibus Sanctorum, offer, as you
conceive it, of the prayers of the Saints, the original Greek reads, dare
orationibus, that he might give of that In eadem opinione est Viega in hunc
locu^n, nec Ribera negat multos sentire.
incense to the prayers of the Saints, not offer them himself. Which Angel, S.
Primasius expounds to be Christ, so Beda, so Ausbertus, (our Rhemists
insinuating though not expressing so much) S. Austen before them all, Hom. 6.
in Apocal. and therefore he is called another Angel, as eminent above the
former; and he indeed graces our prayers with his merits, as it were with
sweet odours, to make them acceptable to God; Or if you will needs take it of
the created Angels, you see they add no merits of their own to countenance
our prayers with, but borrow incense from the Altar, that is, Christ's merits
from him, for he is our Altar, Hebr. 13. Data sunt ei thymiamata multa, as
having none of his own. Which is enough to overthrow the mediation of Angels,
though there were no more. For by a scheme of speech, they are made to be
casters on of the perfume, though it be Christ alone that can dispense his own
merits, and the Angels are strangers to them. As when it is said in Mulachie,
that a book of remembrance was written before the Lord, another is made to
supply his memory, as it were, though his singular sufficiency need no such
help. Lastly, if we should read, as we no where read, that the Angels offered
up our prayers to God, or carried them to God, I would say that their carrying
or offering them to God, were naught else but their understanding his gracious
will and pleasure, for the granting of our prayers comme^ced in Christ's name,
beautified with those incense, whereof the text speaks; and their return to
us, the execution or performance of them on their parts, wherein we needed
their succor; as Tob. 12. Act. 10. and sundry places in the Psalms, as,
Mandabit angelis suis de te: again, Mittet de coelis and cruet me: He shall
command his Angels, he shall send from on high and save me. etc.

20. It is not worth the ripping up now, how the Rhemists have expressed their
dotage upon this place, Apoc. 8. that because it is said, verse. 3. the prayers
of all Saints, etc. or because the title of Saints they are but slowely belike
(...) worse then that in Te^ Per^ (...) ipsi (...) est ^tro^^ quem d^f^^so^
(...).
brought to extend to holy persons living upon the earth, therefore they have
devised mediations of mediators between themselves, Saints for Saints, and
Angels for Angels, making intercession in heaven, the superior for the
inferior as they term it. What greater victory could we wish to the Truth, or
where shall we stay if this be once admitted?

21. NVm. 24. He comes to another head of the Bishops plea, why we should not
pray to Saints, because there is no precept for it, and all addition to the
Law, in matter of Gods service, is Leuiathan, a bugge. But he insists upon the
place, Deuter. 12. alleged by the Bishop. Quod ^^bi praecepero hoc tantum
facies. Thou shall only do that which I command thee. It extends no further,
(says F. T.) then to the things in that Chapter, namely to the not offering of
such sacrifices as the heathen. As if God could be offended only one manner of
way, viz. by sacrifice, or, as if in sacrifices themselves, some rites were not
arbitrary, as he instances himself, about feasts, and holy days, in his numb.
26.) so the substance be uncorrupted; or, as if other things being precisely
ordered by Gods mouth, this were not a general recapitulation of all the rest,
as too long to be repeated in particular, that nothing in Gods worship must be
done besides his word, I mean for the substantialls. And, Quod de vno dico, de
omnibus intelligite, as our Savior to his Disciples, what I say to you, I say
to all. So what of one, that of all. The Scripture is full of the like caueats
every where, against Deuteronomy. 5. 3. and 17. 20. etc.
your patchings to the word. Turn neither to the right hand, nor to the left
hand. Which Bellarmine says, is all D^verbo Dei, vb (...). D^uter. ^2. (...).
(...) 2^. (...). Prou 30. 6. Deuter. 4^ and D^ut^^* (...). (...)
one with the former. To the Law and the Testimony, Esaias. 8. 20. Gods works
are perfect: add not to them, nor detract not from them, no more then from
Lysias his Orations, (nay much less) where one syllable being perverted, all
the whole frame falls to ground. His law is the truth, yea and the whole truth.
Whatsoever is without that, is but mere fables. Iniqui narrauerunt mihi
fabulas, The ungodly told me Psalm. 119.
fables, but not according to thy Law. Therefore fables, because not according
to thy Law. And a hundredth such like, which no doubt bind us, to a precise
adherence to Gods will and sure, revealed in his word, even us I say of the new
Testament, Numb. 26. c. 8. Adioyr. Put case that this commandment was general
in the o^dlaw, will the Bishop infer that it is to be extended to the new
Law? etc.
not only them of the old (see Apocal. 22. 18.) yet, for this the Bishop is a
Jew with this gentleman, a reuiuer of Moses ordinances, and I know not what.

22. Though more particularly I might reply to his fond exception, unto the
place aforenamed out of Deuter. 12. (which he says was only a rule for
sacrifice) that the same precept was given before, even Deuteronomy. 4. and without any
mention of sacrifices, sometimes applied to all the commandments ver. 2.
again, ver. 5. again, ver. 8. particularly against idolatry ver. 15. to which
this, of praying to Saints, is thought to be reducible. Therefore Bellarmine
answers that place another way, lib. 4. De verbo. Dei cap. 10. Not that we must
do no more then is commanded us, but in a thing commanded, no more for
substance, then the commandment imports. Which is enough for us, as I have
often said, that God therefore is not to be prayed unto, by the mediation of
Saints, unless he had commanded it; because that is not so much an
appertinence, or a bare form, as a wrong service, a substance by it self.

23. Absurdly in his 26. number, is the multiplication of certain festiualls,
in which no new If these wor^ shall be understood as the Bishop takes them,
then the solemn feasts ordained by Mard^che^s, I^h, and the Macchabees, to
wit, that of the Dedication which our Savior honored with his presence, Ioh.
10. had been unlawful, etc. Adioynd. Ier. 2. 28. and 11. ^3.
worship of God was erected, compared with the setting up of tutelary Saints
now a days, and praying to them, that of Jeremy being verified of the Popish
Church, Numerus divorum secundum numerum civitatum, yea capitum. The number of
their Saints is after the number of their cities, yea verily their persons.

24. A new device in the 28. number; that though it were true as the Bishop
affirms, that we may not depart one inch, from Gods prescript and will, yet
the will of God reaches further then his written word. Let him show, that this
holds concerning the substance of Gods service, we contend not with him for
minutiae, for such accidents as may adesse and abesse (says Porphyrie) without
corruption of the maine. To place a Saint in Gods throne, to S. John thought
this a sufficient restraint of superfluous prayer, 1. Ioh. 5. 16. Non dico, I
do not say, insinuating, that in prayer we must hold no other course, then
Scripture leads to, (...); how much more then, when the Scripture shall say,
No, or Vide ne, as the Angel himself said to S. John? Apoc. 22.
address our worship to him, to pour out our heart and conscience into his
lap, to submit unto him by prayer and devotion, is no such petty thing,
whatsoever he imagines, but touches the foundations. Where this is offered,
strange fire is offered, unless God authorize it.

25. To the place of Chrysostom, upon that text of the Apostle, Tenete
traditiones, 2 Thessalonians. 2. eadem fide digna sunt, tam illa quam ista. No doubt
whatsoever the Apostles delivered, either by word, or writing (and they might
deliver by word, what they did not by writing, as long as they were points of
meaner nature, especially some of them, that wrote nothing at all) I say,
whatsoever the Apostles delivered, no doubt but all deserved credit, and credit
alike, ratione annuntiantium, in regard of their persons, which were far from
lying, but not as to force us to the like obligation of believing and crediting
them, in the way of salvation, or to eternal life. And do ye think, we could
muster no authorities of Fathers, if the time would permit, or we were so
disposed, to show that all is contained in Scripture, which we are either to
practice, or believe, as by necessity of commandment, and how that entering
into that Sanctuary (the Sanctuary of Scripture, and revelation from above)
Simulac introiut in Sanctuarium, tunc cognoui Psa.
we may be instructed and certified about any points sufficiently? As Rebecca
to the Oracle, when there was strife in her womb; so we in controversies. The
Scriptures are called Oracles, Romans 3. I am wiser then my teachers (says he,)
but how? by studying thy Law. (...), which are able to make thee wise, and wise
to salvation, spoken of Timothy taught in the Scriptures from a child, which
were able to consummate him a MAN a man of God, 2. Tim. 3. 15, 16, 17.
Scripture: again, (...), that the man of God may be perfect in all things.
Perfect, without traditions. (...), I delivered what I received. S. Paul goes
no farther, 1. Cor. 15. And there, a point recorded and written in Scripture,
as the doctrine of the Lords Supper, is comprehended under (...), and made a
Tradition. All Traditions therefore, you see, are not unwritten: but the
tradition is to be spurned at, that descends not from Christ; (...).
Athanasius, one for many, Oratione contra Gentes, about the very beginning,
(...). To the declaration of truth (unless your Traditions be not of truth,
the guise of some is to delight in lies, a just reward for abhorring Scripture
the rule of truth. 2 Thessalonians. 2.) to the declaration of truth (says
Athanasius,) the holy Scriptures are sufficient and complete. And are the
Scriptures so sufficient to beat down Ethniques, whom Athanasius there writes
against, and who care not for Scripture, as is commonly seen, and yet shall
they not be sufficient to compound controversies arising in the Church,
between Christian and Christian?

26. Theophylact makes them to be (...), in 10. Johan. The Scriptures (says
he) give resolution of all points. Tertullian most excellently, Apologetice
contra Gentes: Quo before and impressius dispositiones eius and voluntates
adiremus, instrumentum adiecit literaturae, si quid velit de Deo inquirere, and
inquisitum inuenire, and inuentum credere, and credito deseruire. Search,
truth, faith, service, all comes of Scripture. And to the end we might
confer with God more fully, and more effectually, or piercingly, know his
courses, know his will, instrumentum adiecit literaturae, he has given it us
in writing, in black and in white, as you would say, he has recommended to us
the Scriptures. Add Hilarie in Psalm. 118. Octon. Nun. Vt qui nocte egressus
lucernam antefert, and quo pedem inferat contuetur, atque ad singulos gressus
lumine praeeunte sollicitus; ita vnusquisque nostrum manens in se, verbum dei
in omnes operum processus tanquam lucernam praetendit. And again, Vt ea in
omnem progressum cuiuscunque operationis vtamur. Yea not only operationis, but
cum aut agimus, aut cogitamus, aut loquimur. And lastly, Ad omnem animae
nostrae pedem. The sum is. As a man will not set foot to ground in a dark
night, but he will have a candle borne before him, so Gods word must be the
direction to all our deeds; yea deeds, words, and thoughts. S. Chrysostom, I
grant, observes in a certain place, that it is a sign that God is not so
well pleased with us, as of old, because now he writes to us, rather then
speaks and confers as he was wont. Mittit (...), tanquam alienioribus, (...),
etc. Tom. 5. And yet Orlandine the Jesuit in his Historia societatis Jesus,
lib. 1. number. 27. says of Ignatius their founder, that he, quamvis nulla
extarent sacrarum monumenta ac testimonia literarum, tamen fidei dogmata, and
tenere recte posset, and tradere, etc. He could deliver points of faith,
though there were no Scripture, well enough. Do you see the Jesuits drift, to
ease us of Scripture by all means they can, and they care not how? either by
dreaming of such a perfection, and entirenes with God, as needs no Scripture
(as he said of Ignatius) which is their pride; or taking away that very
remaining token of Gods love, and manner of communicating himself unto us,
which is by writing (as S. Chrysostom had said) and argues nothing but their
detestable cruelty, and regardlesse behavior toward the souls of Christian
people. But let us hear you farther.

27. You say, That Christ gave no commandment of Adioynd. numb. 28. It is
evident that our Savior did not command any thing at all to be written, etc.
writing. No more he does of fasting perhaps, of feeding our parents, of
waging war for our country, not literally, not expressly, but yet
insinuatiuely and intentionally, even of lifting up our enemies beast out of
the ditch. Whereof none is prescribed totidem verbis, in our Saviors doctrine,
yet all of force issuing and flowing from the same. The word Honor in the 5.
Commandment, how much does it comprehend, sustenance, services, reverence?
etc. So, Preach the Gospel: Predicate every way, vijs and modis, by writing
too; by printing and publishing, though long since devised. S. Gregory says
upon the 9. of Ezech. as I take it, that our Savior appeared with a writers
Inke-horne at his back, cum atramentario adrenes, because though he writ
nothing himself, whilst he lived, yet when his back was turned, and after
his ascension into heaven, the Apostles did for him; by his appointment no
doubt. Yet to S. John in the Reu. the spirit says directly, Scribe, write. He
is bidden to write. And if no prophecy (S. Peter telling us. 2. Pet. 1. 21.)
came at any time by the will of man, but the men of God spoke as they were lead
by the Holy Ghost, then were not written prophecies neither merely depending
of the will of men, and of the election of the writers, but they did as men of
God, that is servants of God, homines (...).
Dei, even herein also obeying his will, and as the spirit carried them, that
is, enjoined them. Whosoever therefore wrote the Scriptures, had a commandment
for writing them. (...), I was necessitated to write, Jude the 3. ver. In the
4. to the Ephesians. Dedit quosdam Euangelistas, quosdam pastores, etc. Some think
Euangelistae are scriptores sacri codicis; that the Evangelists there, are the
penmen of holy writ, and by that differ from others there mentioned. It is
said, dedit, Christ gave them to the Church, therefore he set them on work.
For no man would take this honor to himself, Heb. 5. No wise man at least:
not a lesser then this, and therefore this much less, to indite Scriptures,
which is one of the greatest of all. The place to the Ephesians, Aquine, and
certain others, so interpret, as I have said, viz. Anselme, Lyra, yea and
Canus himself, l. 7. Locorum: which is de Sanctorum authoritate. c. 3.

28. Now to Numb. 32. Of the Baptism of infants. Have we no Scripture for
that? Origin (you say) calls it an Apostolic tradition, Yea, he means, that
at least, though it be of Scripture too. And there are scriptae traditiones,
as your own place teaches you, 2. Thessal. 2. Retinete traditiones, hold fast
the traditions, sieve per sermonem, sieve per epistolam, whether by word, or by
writing, commended to you. Therefore traditions might be both. S. Austen you
allege, de Genesi ad literam. lib. 10. c. 23. that the baptism of infants
were not to be believed unless it were an Apostolic tradition. That is, I
suppose, incident to one of the two kinds aforenamed, and in a word if it
disagreed from the Doctrine of the Apostles. The Adioynders absurd slander of
the Bishop throughout both questions, both of Princely supremacy, and
Scriptures sufficiency, concerning Gods worship, that he is Jewish. But only
in not casting such a hog as he.
space only. And yet they are no Jews that observe this analogy. We read of
whole houses baptized by the Apostles, Lydiaes, Stephanaes, the Tailors, etc.
Marvel but some infants. Sinite parvulos venire ad me, a model, and an idea
of baptism, at the least. For what does Christ in baptism, but bless them,
and release them from their sins? For, hic est qui baptizat, it is Christ
still that baptizeth: and, Ephesians. 5. he cleanses the Church. If regnum coelorum
belong to such, why not baptism, which is the door of the kingdom of heaven?
If they be in foedere, why 4 1. Cor. 7. 14.
not in tessera? If they be borne holy, no doubt in the right that they have to
baptism. For else holiness proceeds not from the womb, corruption rather.
Psalm. 51. Ephesians. 2. 3. Romans 5. In The worm our sister, and corruption our mother.
Job. and ex eo Greg hoc sensu.
quo omnes peccauerunt, etc. What should I say of that, Baptizantes omnes
nationes, Matthew. 28? among whom were infants. We have diverse other grounds, if
this were a time to open them. But these are enough, to show that we have more
then bare president, and practice, for our warrant, in affoarding baptism to
Infants. And if S. Austen against Lib. 1 cap ^3. Places alleged by the
Adioy^d Number. (...). etc.
Cresconius says, that the determination of the Church is enough to stop the
mouths of such clamorous heretics, as the Donatists were, about their
rebaptization, though Scripture were silent, because the Church abhors it,
yet prayer to Saints is of another nature, neither are you the Church, and much
less the Church, sine vlla ambiguitate, as he there speaks, nor can you show
this descending of the practice of the church, from the first times, fili
ductu, which was Austens triumph, to confound them with the Church, after he
had conquered them with the Scriptures. Nay, in his second book against
Cresconius, c. 31. he allows such a supremacy to holy Scriptures, that by
direction of them, do caeteris literis fidelium (not only infidelium) libere
iudicemus. We may freely judge of ought other writings, of faithful men
(therefore of Fathers themselves) by collation of Scriptures. And, de unit.
Eccl. c. 16. Non dicimus nos nobis ideo credi oportere, quod in Ecclesia
Christi sumus. [We say not, we must be credited, because we are in the Church.]

29. As for that other place of his, out of the 4. de baptism. cont. Denatist.
cap. 24. What neither Counsels have determined, nor Scripture defined, etc.
one part is for you, that no Counsels have decreed your prayers to Saints, no
Scriptures ordained them, but in the other ye are far short, Quod vniuersa
tenet Ecclesia, whereas you show nothing before the fourth age. And God wot how
weak, Martyr pro nobis oret, Let the Martyr pray for us?

30. Numb. 33. Are Godfathers and Godmothers of the substance of baptism? And
yet suppose they were, I hope there is a print of this very thing in Scripture.
See Esa. 8. v. 2. I took unto me faithful witnesses, Vriah the Priest, and
Zachariah the son of Ieberechiah. This was at the naming of the son of the
Prophetess, Maher-shalal-hash-baz. But you answer your self by the words of
the Canon, in the same number, that these rules are rules of doctrine,
concerning Can Ecclesiast. 30 in the Synod at London Anno. 1603.
indifferent things. And is our strife with you about such?

31. Mr. Rogers might well say, that we are not commanded by express terms
to baptize infants. Yet warranted, as I have showed you, yea commanded, but not
in express terms, which you would smother. Your fopperies are neither
expressly, nor implicitly, Scripturall.

32. To your 34. Numb. where you profess to lay open a notable piece of
trumpery, of the Bishops of England, (for with such reverence you speak, when
you speak of them all) I pray you see how notable. First, the Canon never Can.
qui ptius.
says expressly, nor by consequence, that the Papists hold that the sign of
the Cross is of the substance of the Sacrament. And yet herein you would feign
observe a contradiction between his ROYAL MATESTIES gracious censure of you,
acquiting you from that error, and the Conference at (...).
words of the Canon, as they may seem to glaunce at you for so holding. Such
encouragement you give his MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, to make the best of your
errors, to which his princely nature easily enclineth him, and more easily
might, for the great benefit of Gods Church, and the compounding of discords,
if you had the grace not to deprane him. But as I was saying; The Canon only
affirms, that the sign of the Cross has ever been accompanied, of late
times, in the Church of England, with sufficient cautions, and exceptions,
against all popish superstition and error, and again, That since the
abolishing of Popery, the Church of England has ever held and taught, that the
sign of the Cross is no part of the substance of that Sacrament; and that the
infant baptized, is, by virtue of baptism, received into the Congregation of
Christ's flock, as a perfect member thereof, even before it be signed with the
sign of the Cross. Whereas all this while there may be other errors about the
sign of the Cross, then holding it to be a part of the substance of Baptism.
And from them we have purged it. Bellarmine, I am sure, de effectu sacram: lib.
2. cap. 31. ascribes spiritual virtue to this ceremony, and quotes to that
end, a number of authors, but wrested, as his manner is. Yea he would have it
to work wholesome effects ex opere operato. What think you of that? And how
if Bellarmine either straggle and wander, now, from your Church herein, or,
convince you to be unworthy of his MAJESTY'S mild censure, in attributing
grace and power to this sign? Lastly, though your Church never held any such
thing, that is, your congregatio An Owl at C^^stance in the Council.
Aquilarum, as Pighius calls it, your quickesighted clerks, and in that
respect the Prelates might truly inform his MAJESTY, that you your selves
were never so gross, as to impute virtue, or efficacy thereunto, yet diverse
simple souls, lurking in the promiscuous body of popery, might be tainted with
this infection, and in that respect it might be called a popish error, though
still I must tell you, that the Canon does not call it so, there are errors
enough besides that which the Canon might refer unto. Yea the fond persuasion
of lay-Papists, calling for it as violently, and as importunely, as for the
water in baptism, which has been known in this land, (I will not say where,
nor how lately) because it is an error springing from Popery, and fostered in
your bosoms, though not proclaimed by your Church, might well be accounted
among the Popish errors, from which we have refined the sign of the Cross, by
neither ascribing virtue to it, holiness, grace, nor yet necessary observation,
but only by way of obedience where the Canon appoints, and conueniencie
withstandeth not, for some aduertisements sake. Can you doubt that there are
errors, and errors in Popery, about the sign of the Cross, besides making it
to be a part of the Sacrament of baptism, that allege Nauarrus here, your
grand Casuist, affirming Manual. c. 22. number. 6.
that if baptism be administered without the Cross, we ought to supply it
afterward? whereas either baptism must then be renewed and readministred to
the party, which cannot be without horrible sacrilege, Heb. 6. and Ephesians. 4.
or the signing with the Cross there, is not the Cross in baptism, if it come
so long after. But we treat of the Cross in Baptism, and that is it which
has ministered all the offense. Finally, you say, if the midwife baptize, then
the child must be crossed afterward. So that the midwife may baptize belike,
not cross. A high point in your low Divinity, unless you will have the midwife
to baptize the unborn, another worthy practice no doubt, and yet then they
might cross too, one as well as the other, in aerem both, as the Apostle
speaks. 1. Cor. 14. But we go forward.

33. Numb. 41. The Bishop cannot answer, you say, in defense of himself, that
in things indifferent it is lawful to add besides the written word; though
not otherwise: for his saying is, id tantum audemus facere: We dare only do
that; etc. But be you answered, That facere with the Bishop, as with Moses
before, concerns the maine action; not the ceremony appertaining, and
vesting, such as prayer to Saints cannot be reputed, but is a service of it
self, and of a proper erection. Though if it were a ceremony, ceremonies are
like your glosses, which if they deface the text, they are accursed, Male^^cta
glossae, quae corrumpat textum.
so these when they destroy the substance.

34. Number. 43. Beyond the degree of ridiculous. The Bishop seems to grant,
that to pray unto Saints, is either good of it self, or at least indifferent.
Why so? For if it were absolutely bad, says he, it were in vain to demand a
precept of it, which notwithstanding he does. What? and if he demand of them,
that think they do well in so doing? Yet the Bedlam adds, So as either this
his demand is very idle and absurd, or else he must acknowledge it at least
to be indifferent, and consequently no less lawful, then the Cross in
Baptism. Time and paper, how are you cast away?

35. Number. 45. If we cannot pray to Saints without injury to Christ, how do we
crave one another prayers here in earth? If of sinners, why not of Saints? If
of men, why not of Angels? Thus he. And why might Adoniah marry lower, and yet
not match with Abishac his fathers concubine, without high treason? Of deep
providence has almighty God enlarged charity amongst Saints on S. Greg lib.
1. Regist. Ep. 24. shows this sweetly, by a comparison of two men, that walk
together in a slippery place, and each holds up the other from falling. Impendo
quod peto, sed recipiam quod impendo. No such exchange between Saints in heaven
and us.
earth, and ratified the exhibitions thereof by law. But where there is no fear
of decaying it any more, as in the heavenly Kingdom, where (...), 1. Cor. 15.
the offices are superfluous that tend thereunto, and all reference to the
glorified spirits, so complete of themselves, that we cannot requite their
favors with the like, is construed to be prejudicial to our common King. By
which we answer also to your retortion of the Bishops text, in your numb. 47.
Is the desiring the prayers of living Saints, as much as Venite ad me? Do not
they come to us, as well as we to them in this sort? Venite ad me therefore, is
a far other matter, and to be shunned toward Angels, toward heavenly
Saints; not so the borrowing of aid, the imploring of help of men, and
pilgrims, such as our selves are.

36. Numb. 49. You acknowledge like a man, that Christ is our only Mediator
by way of prayer, as well as of redemption. Accedens per semetipsum, Heb. 7.
and many such like. Hold you to that then. Your foot stands right if you can
keep it so. And when S. John says, whom you also quote, 1. Ioh. 2. We have
an advocate, and he is the propitiation: does he not show that propitiation
goes to make an advocate? So, Vnus est Mediator, but, qui dedit se pro omnibus,
that is, by redemption, 1. Tim. 2. they go still together. Now the Angels are
not for the one: therefore, not for the other.

37 You answer us, as you think, Number. 52. That the Angels are not excluded as
Mediators to God for us, but that by way of Christ's merits they may mediate
well enough: and so you construe that of Austen, contra Epist. Parmen. cap. 8.
lib. 2. that only Christ prays for all, he whets the prayers that others
offer for us. But what are Christ's merits to the Angels, good Sir? what
interest have they in them? Do you think they were directed to the use of
Angels, that they should lay hold on them? And if not so, with what confidence
shall they pray to God through them? how shall they desire to be heard of God,
whether they pray for us or for themselves, (for that skils not) by the merits
of Christ, as you fancy? We have heard that prayer presupposes faith. Shall
the Angels repose trust in the merits of Christ, which belong not to them? So
are you tossed in your vanity, like a boat in a storm, that you forget the
very principles of Christian relligion, namely, that Christ never took the
Angels upon him, but the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. and for us he suffered, not
for them; and by him, not by them, are we to be brought to God, as Theodoret,
as Chrysostom. as Theophylact, See cap. 8. huius.
as Photius told you before, as the Scripture every where, per quem habemus
accessum, Ephesians. 2. 18.

38. Yet, you say, the Church concludes her prayers to Saints and Angels, per
Christum Dominum It is to be noted, that notwithstanding this clause, per
Christum Dominum nostrum, the Papists have other prayers to Saints in which
there is no such. Which Greg. de Val. being to answer to, has no refuge but
this; Quaererem ab ijs qui tanta diligentia^ eiusmodi praecandi formulas in
obsoletis and corrosis voluminibus venantur, our illis magis qu^n alijs
mouentur, etc. A pitiful defense. Tom. 3. Comment. Theol. Disp. 6. Qu. 11.
punct. 5. At interdum.
nostrum, adiuring belike the Saint, to be gracious unto us for Christ's sake,
(for what else is the meaning of that clause?) As if Christ were now our
Mediator to the Saint, not the Saint to Christ. So are you gyddied and hurled
up and down, with every blast of vain doctrine, every puff of temeritie.
The like I read in Maffaeus his life of Ignatius the Iesuite-maker, lib. 2. c.
5. that God the Father commended the Jesuits to his Son, whom the Scripture
speaks of as our commender to the Father, and no otherwise. A voice was heard
from heaven, saying to Salmeron, and Laynez, and those good fellows, Ego vos
commendaui, or conciliaui, filio meo. These were the trances, and the windlaces
of the first Jesuits.

39. But least you think, you can wrest that club of S. Austen, contra Epist.
Parmen. before quoted, out of the Bishops hands, viz. that Christ is he alone,
pro quo nemo interpellat, sed ipse pro omnibus, for whom no body makes
request, but he for all; you may please to consider, that if this be so, then
must the Angels of force give over being Mediators. For if they mediate at
all, they must mediate for all, and none for them, which, S. Austen says, is
proper to Christ. None for them, because they are in no want, as other folks
are, all tears being wiped from their eyes, or rather never any tear having
bedewed their cheeks. Again, they for all; because burning with charity,
they neglect none, but compassionate the cause of all them that are in
distress. And from hence it will follow, that either Christ must needs give
over this specialtie, which S. Austen inuests him with, or the Angels their
mediation. Do you see now, how fitly the Bishop urges this place against you,
and how you have inuerted that of Daniel, in stead of millia millium
ministrabant ei, setting up so many Angels, qui depraedentur eum, to supplant
God, and rob him of his honor?

40. But let us hear you out of Daniel, what you allege for your self. Number.
57. out of Dan. 3. that militant Christians fare the better, for the prayers of
the Saints in glory, because Daniel belike urges God, with his promise, to
Abraham, and Isaac, etc. This I find not in the 3. of Dan. and the question is
not, whether Saints benefit us, or no, but whether we may pray to them. In this
place Daniel only mentions them to God, but makes no petition to them
himself. Yet because it is a phrase that occurres in Scripture, and may
stumble the heedelesse, I answer briefly. For Abraham, and Isaac, and Isreal's
sake, that is, not for the merits of the men, as you construe it, whereas they
never entreated by their own merits, much less others by theirs: (see Dan. 9.
8.) but for the tenure of Gods promise, running upon Abraham, upon Isaac, and
their seed. So our Savior in S. John, Adhuc nihil rogastis in nomine meo; As
yet you have asked nothing in my name. In my name, that is, in express
knowledge of me, since I was revealed to the world. For, Deus Abraham, and
Isaac, was then all in all. Henceforth we pray, per Christum Dominum, or per
Christum filium, and obtain our suit in that form of style. As was prophesied
long before, Psalm. 60. 16. Adorabunt per eum, they shall worship by him, or
pray by him, which then was not performed, now is. Howbeit Origin not amiss,
puts them both together, hom. 7. in Ezech. upon those words, Incensum meum
posuistis ante faciem eorum, that is, idolorum; and, incensum, says he, is
Orationes sanctorum, out of the Apocal. Incense is prayer. Si ergo instituti ad
Orationem, cum illam Deo debeamus offerre, Deo Abraham, Deo Isaac, Deo Jacob,
and Patri Jesus Christi, ijs offerimus quae ipsi confinximus, in tantum vt
idolis incensum Dei proponamus, etc. that is, [If therefore whereas we are
taught and trained how to pray, we when as we should offer our prayers to God,
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob, and the Father of Jesus
Christ, shall offer them to such things as our selves have devised, insomuch as
we set the incense of God before idols, etc.] Note here three things. as
belonging to God only. Incensum Dei est oration. And to that we are trained,
nurtured, and taught. Instituti ad hoc. And what else says Origin? Quod
debeamus orationem Deo offerre: that we must offer our prayers to God; not ante
faciem eorum, not to others. idols: quae confinximus ipsi, which our selves
have devised. Unless we have warrant for so doing; but warrant we have none,
God neither giving us, nor meaning to give us any. As Tiberius forbad the
Romans, Dio in Tiberio.
to erect any Temple or image to him, Nisi ego permittam: adding immediately,
Atqui ego non permittam: [that is, unless I license you: now I never mean to
license you.] You are Idolaters therefore, you cannot avoid it, though they
be Saints that you pray to, unless you can show a reuocation of Gods mind
in this behalf under his own hand. Deus Abraham, with Pater Christi, the new
Testament with the old. Though now the former of these two, resolves into the
latter; the God of Abraham into the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom
alone we must put our trust, concerning the granting of our prayers. Your
selves do not much mention Abraham amongst the Saints, nor Isaac, nor Jacob,
which shows their names were not put for meritorious, but only formal, or
legal, as upon whom went the promise, which now in Christ alone is yea and
amen, that is, perfectly perfect.

41. To return to your method. So for David's sake, 1. King. 11. God abated his
wrath toward Solomon, you say. But Solomon never prayed to his Father David,
in such a manner, after he was dead. How then? God having promised in David's
life time, that he would So 2. King. 13. 23. thus we read (which cleeres this
point) And the Lord was grations unto them, and had compassion on them, and had
respect unto them, because of HIS COVENANT with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc.
not destroy his children, though they transgressed his Laws, but only
chastise them with the scourge of men, verifies this upon Solomon now, by force
of his promise so made to David. What gather ye from hence? Is it not lawful
to urge God with his promise, unless we pray to the Saints? As for David's
divinity, it was clean otherwise. No man may deliver his brothers soul,
Psalm. 49. and Psalm. 6. In inferno quis confitebitur tibi? Besides that, Christ
is often called David, in the old Testament: as, Suscitabo eis David Regem
ipsorum, Ierem. 30. id est, Christum, says Theodoret upon that place; and, the
holy things of David, Act. 13. And the Keys of David, Apocal. 3. 7. who is
that but Christ?

42. Moses, and Paul, their saving diverse hundreths, or one of them hundred
thousands, by their intercessions, in their life time; neither argues their
particular intercession for us, now they are dead, (servierunt enim saeculo suo
to speak with S. Peter) and much less the lawfulnes of our recourse to them.
The like of Job, of others that you bring, may be said. Baruch, me thinks,
properly, Bar. 4. 21. Clamabo ad altissimum in diebus meis, I will cry to the
most high, in my days, that is, whiles I live. Meaning, he should have no
place of doing so after death. As S. Peter says of preaching, 2. Pet. 1. 13.
and S. Paul also, Phil. 1. 23. who else needed not to have been in a strayte,
if after death he might have succored his people.

43. In your 59. Number. you bewray your self. The ability of Saints to help men
(say you) is to be ascribed not only to the effect of their prayers, but also
to their power, authority, and dignity. You fly then to the Saints, as to the
giuers of those things (out of their power and authority) which you ask in
prayer, not only as suitors to God for them in your behalf. What more gross
idolatry can there be then this? Is not this that, that you were wont to
disclaim? Where is now per Christum Dominum nostrum?

44. Well; Number. 61. having talked your pleasure of the practice of Christ's
Church, of the consent of antiquity, of the custom of all ages, etc. at last
you bethink your self, how all this will go for current, when you shall come
to a reckoning. The Bishop say you, will oppose to this effect, that the
authorities brought, fail both in time, as being later by 300 years, then the
challenge was, and in uniform consent, for others also must be heard to speak
as well as they, if any thing will be done. Yet you comfort your self thus,
that his MAJESTY professes to reverence the Fathers, more then ever the
Jesuits did, and yet they reverence them all, after the three first, to many
ages downward. Who doubts but his MAJESTY reuerences the Fathers, both for
infinite good that may be gotten by the reading of them, and namely toward the
discerning of the truth of points, even now controuerted in relligion, though
still with submission of his judgment to holy Scripture, and also reuerenceth
them more by much then the Jesuits do, though the Jesuits happily reverence
more fathers then he? For what pedaneous author have not they made a father of?
Ye may say with him, considering their falsifications in this kind, Mutauit
calceos, pater conscriptus repent factus est. Cic. Philipp.
Nay, now every Jesuit is a Father at first dash, whether R. P. the Jesuits
style.
he write or no. And though his MAJESTY has dispensed so much with his
height, as by writing his Apology to encounter with them that are no Kings, yet
he will never be tried by them that are no Fathers. And therefore you guess
well, when you think you shall be forced to look farther backward, then you
have done yet, if you well euict any thing. It is true also, that the Bishop
says, (although it anger you) of the Cardinal, that he has done nothing in
his Apology, in doing no more then so. (...), he had as good made no Apology
at all. By the way it is pretty, and worth the noting, how you report the
Bishops words, Rex expectat in quadringentis annis, etc. though de
quadringentis would have fitted you better; which you quote in the margent, as
the Bishops own words, and like enough to be so; not, in quadringentis. But
this is your Latin, when you list to speak like your self, and reform
Bishops for theirs. If it be true, as you say, that the Fathers of the three
first hundred years after Christ, are so few and so scantie remaining to our
days, (you reckon but 7. or 8. though, I suppose, there are diverse more) yet
what ill luck have you with them, that can find no footing of all your
newfangled superstition, in any of their works? Not in Tertullian, not in
Origin, not in Irena, Ignace, Lactance, Melito, Cyprian, Iustine, Clemens,
Arnobius, Methodius, Minutius, the Cyrills, Dionysius, Athenagoras, Theophilus,
etc. not in Eusebius himself, who lived there anewst, and inclined to the
Platonicks, as did some others of the forenamed rank. Which Platonicks are
thought to be somewhat favorable to your fancy of worshipping Saints, above
the rest of the Philosophers. And if the Fathers, as you say, write so few in
an age, does not this show that the square of our faith is the Scripture, not
the Fathers? for how if the Fathers had wrote nothing at all? As, of diverse
points, you confess your self, they did not, Number. 63. and, Number. 66. And in
the beginning of this Chapter, you would make us believe, that the Apostles
themselves had no commandment for writing. Might not the Fathers pens much
more have stood still? Yet you add that the after-ages abounded with writers,
when persecution ceased, and many worthy Volumes were spread abroad into the
world. It may well be; but as heresy is confounded many times by writing, so
some errors will creep in withal, and hardly can it be eschewed. Abundabit
scientia, but abundabit iniquitas too. Daniel the one, our Savior Christ the
other, each of the same times of the world, and of the Church. The Elephant
oppresses Eleazar in the fall. So falsehood gets some ground of truth, even in
seeming to be foiled. (...), was our Saviors depositum, which he left to the
Church; witness he in the Nicene Council, Apud Socr. lib. 1. cap. 8. not
ventilation, not disputation. Wherein, I may boldly say, that truth of
relligion comes in as much hazard to be lost, as our Savior was in the
crowde, and concourse at Jerusalem. As in the ouerflowes of Nilus, the corn
feilds are the better, and the fatter for it, but serpents and Crocodyles come
in amain; so whiles many pens walk, the original purity is less
preserved. It will be always true which Tully says, Quo propius aberant a
diuina progeny, etc. (so from the Primitive times) eo acutius, cautiusque and
vena videbant, and recta tenebant, which posterity failed in.

45. When you ask, if we would not receive the sign of the Cross, as
proceeding from antiquity, unless all the Fathers had stood for it, why should
we hold you long in suspense? It is the uniform consent of the godly Fathers,
that endeares the use of that memorial to us, and had only certain singulars,
like stars in a dark night, delivered their opinion of it, it should never
have found such entertainment at our hands, for the antiquities sake. And
therefore you must muster a squadron of Fathers (though I see it be troublesome
unto you) for prayer to Saints: not come in with your snatches, and your (...),
here and there, if you will carry it by the Fathers. Where it may please you,
to remember, that in the Conference at Hampton Court, which you quoted so
lately, the Bishop that you now write against, brought Tertullian for the
Cross, and the use thereof in baptism, in immortali lauacro; you have neither
author, for Invocation of Saints so ancient, nor piece of an author. Yet you
compare this with the sign of the cross. How unfitly?

46. The Bishops, (you say) are given to teach the Church; if they may err
therein, the Church may be deceived, and so all is marred. The Adioynder
charge us wi^h Vigilantius his heresy. And yet he would have the question
det^rmined by verdict of Bishops. Whereas Hierome reports ^ripto prime cont.
Vigilant. that the Bishop of the place, and he a holy man, winkt at
Vigilantius. Miror sanctum Episcopum, in cuin^ parochia esse Presbyter dicitur,
acquiesiere (...) eius. Yea, he speaks of him, as if he had run the same
course with him; Videbat furem, and curreba^ cum eo, etc. How then shall the
Bishops direct, our judgment? Also Julian (apud August in lib. 1. e posterior.
(...).) acknowledges, that there were 650. Bishops, who took part with Arius;
scarce 7. remaining Catholic, in the whole world.
As if (...). Austen does not tell you of erring Bishops, of deceiving Bishops,
which the people fondly relied upon, he in vain recalling them, and denouncing
that the Bishops authority is no sanctuary to the erroneous. See lib. de
pastor. cap. 10. Saepe hoc dicunt heretici, securi sequimur Episcopos. The
heretics have this often in their mouths, (...) are safe so long as we follow
our Bishops. It is a sign of heresy, with S. Austen, to follow the Bishops,
and their judgment, securely, viz. without looking any further. And in the 7.
Chapter of the said book, he applies that to the Bishops of his time out of
Ezekiel. 34. Quod errabat non reuocastis, the wandering sheep ye have not called
back. What remedy are the Bishops now against error? And, Si Episcopus
constitutus in ecclesia catholica non bonam rationem reddit de oue, quam non
quaesierit errantem de grege Dei, qualem rationem redditurus est haereticus
(viz. Episcopus) qui non solum non reuocauit ab errore, sed etiam impulit in
errorem? Do you see, that Bishops do not only not bring from error, but
lead into error, yea thrust, impell? cap. 10. of the aforesaid. And yet you
think, the only antidote of Church errors, lies in the Bishops. How much
better, S. Peter, Habemus firmiorem sermonem propheticum? We have a surer
testimony, namely the holy Scripture, not only then the authority of any
Bishops can be to preserve from error, but then a voice from heaven, (for of
that speaks S. Peter) which Satan may counterfeit, and so likewise feign
himself a Bishop, as well as change himself into an Angel of light. Therefore
S. Hilary says, that Christ would not Hilar. in Matthew. can. 16.
let his Disciples bear witness of him, (and yet no mean persons) because he
was to be approved by other manner of witnesses, namely the Law and the
Prophets, that is, the Scriptures. And S. Chrysostom, Hom. 9. in cap. 3. ad
Coloss. Exhorting the laymen to provide them books, the medicines (...). Aug.
de Unit. eccl. c. 10. says Christ proved his bodies resurrection, not by his
body, though he had it to show, but by Scrip. And S. Chrysostom. says, that
of their souls, as he calls them, bids them (...) not to tarry for another
Master (not the Prelate himself) (...), for he hides many things, many times,
from them, for envy, or for vainglory. Whereas the Scripture lays all open
sincerely. Is this a small prerogative of Scriptures above the Doctors? S.
Austen also cap. 11. of the book aforequoted, after he had lodged his sheep,
like a good pastor, in the mountains of Israel, that is, as he interprets it,
in the authority of the divine Scriptures, he thus bespeaks them. Ibi pascite,
vt secure pascatis. Quicquid inde Christ lost his head (or his life) only to
fulfill the Scrip. [So as Script. is preferred by Christ himself, both before
his head and his body.] Heman Matthew. 84.
audieritis, hoc vobis been sapiat, quicquid extra est, respuite. And again,
Audite vocem pastoris, colligite vos ad montes Scripturae sanctae. No doubt,
these are the mountains that our Savior bids us fly unto, under Antichrists
persecution, that is, yours. Ibi sunt deliciae cordis vestri, (adds S. Austen)
ibi nihil venenosum, nihil alienum. And lastly, when he has shut them into
that sheepcoat, and pend them up in that fold, for he urges the word, [Erunt
stabula earum illic,] he gives them Stabula earum illic. Ezech. 34.
leave to triumph, and say in this wise: Been est, verum est, manifestum est,
non fallimur. This he calls, requiescere in stabulis illic, to rely upon
Scripture, not upon the Bishops authority. Now it is well with us, now we are
right, now the case is plain, now we are not deceived, when the Scripture
first says it. What should I tell you here either of Cyprians licensing the
people of God, Ne sibi plebi blandiatur, quasi immunis a contagione delicto
esse possit, cum sacerdote peccatore communicans, and ad iniustum atque
illicitum praepositi sui Episcopatum, consensum suum accommodans, cum per Oseam
deus doceat omnes omnino ad peccatum constringi, qui fuerint profuni and
iniusti sacerdotis sacrificio cotaminati.
the flock of Christ, to renounce their wicked Bishop, not partake with his
services, lib. 1. Ep. 4. or of the third Canon of that famous Council of
Ephesus, which enioynes thus, (...). The Council gives charge, Not to submit
to the authority of any backe-slided Bishops, or Bishops departed, that is
departed from the truth. There may be Apostaticall Bishops then, departers
from the truth, (had you no such Popes? ask Lyra, ask Genebrard) and
Apostatare a side, Lyr. in Matt. Apostatici, saltem apotastici, PP. Geneb.
they are not to be regarded. And even in those which deserve not to be called
Apostatae, by so heavy name, because they fell not so fowly, simpliciter
errantes, as S. Austen calls them, de Bap. l. 4. c. 5. yet their lighter
errors, their moales, as I may term them, like that in Cyprians own breast,
which S. Austen says, was covered with the dugges of his charity, August. cp.
48.
they make no authority for others to follow them, least Vincentius Lerinensis
pronounce his doom upon them thus, though wondering at it himself, O mira
conuersio: absoluuntur Commonitorio.
Magistri, condemnantur discipuli: O strange pass: The thief scapes, and the
receiver is hanged, the inuentor goes away scotfree, and the scholar perishes
in his prone credulity. Which you may do well to take heed of, in the present
question, of praying to Saints, if any passion from a multitude, or a single
Christian, has drawn forth a vow, a prayer, or such like, if any sudden
motion has transported further then should, yet to beware how you make an
article of it.

47. As for that you say, the Fathers whom you quote about this point, were
agents in the Counsels, which the King and the Bishop profess to reuerenee;
it is one thing what the Fathers say in several, as it were solitarij in
tecto, another when they meet Synodically in a Council. Is there no grace
belonging to Counsels? Why is it not said then, vbi vnus, but, vbi duo aut
tres in nomine meo, naming the first multitudes, to show the virtue of an
assembly, where far more meet then two or three? You have first no Counsels,
for your supplication to Saints; for miserable are your proofs of Flauianus
and Proterius: they have touched the Diamond, but they cannot draw like the
Diamond, they are (...) Actis.
of kin to the Council, but they are not brought within the Canon. Neither
again have you all the Fathers, no not of one whole age among the five, no not
of the later and weaker in authority, nearer the bottom, and those that you
have they write dispersedly, never so much as joined in domestical conference,
which is a great derogation in regard of the credit that goes with lawful
Synods, although less general. And lastly though you never lyn vaunting, and
prating, what you have produced out of the Fathers, as if it were so
peremptory, yet we having examined and perused them before, find not one of
them to depose so pregnantly on your side, but that he may be avoided. If the
stream of the Fathers, not only of one age, as you idly crake, but sundry
ages together could prevail any thing with you, you would never have defined
so proudly and Lib 7. loc. c. 1. Omnes Sancti vno ore, asseverarunt B. Vrginem
in peccata concepta^.
so irreligiously of the conception of the Blessed Virgin, without sin: (of
which see Canus your own author, with his legion of Fathers) nor given
sentence against the Dominican for the Franciscan. As for the place to the
Ephesians. which you quote, to show that God has placed Pastors in the Church, to
defend it from error, Dedit quosdam pastores, etc. Ephesians. 4. It is by way of
industry, in dispensing Gods word, not of infallibility, that they cannot
possibly err. Where vision ceases, though the Pastors be never so many, yet
the people perish; yea, many Pastors are the cause, says God, why my vine is
destroyed. I made indeed my Covenant with Levi, and, the Priests lips should
preserve knowledge, Mal. 2. but the Priests often times depart out of the way,
and they cause many to stu^ble in the Law; IN THE LAW, says God, by
misinterpreting it, no doubt; they have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, says
the Lord of hoasts. This in the old Testament. In the new, what? If the salt be
unsavory, to the dunghill with it, says Unless you will admit of the rotten
gloss of Pa^ de Palacio, in his Comm. upon S. Matthew. cap. 5. that the Si
indeed is put upon the salt degenerating, because Salt stands for life and
good manners, and Popes and Prelates may fail in them, but not upon the Light.
It is not said, if the light be darkened, to show that Prelates cannot fail in
truth of Doctrine. This he. Why then does he call the Pope, Sal salium, in the
same place? Is it because his manners cannot be tainted neither? Or, why does
he say, that Praelatus satuus mittendus est for as? Shall the Pope be deposed
for evil life? It is not the fashion. Or lastly, why does he argue from, In
quo salietur? co prove that the Pope has no superior to salt him, and
therefore concludes, that he cannot turn foolish, because Christ (says he)
left nothing without remedy. Is not the dunghill his remedy? And yet in
another place, he allows the Pope to be Pope, though his light turn darkness,
as well as his salt folly. Papa tenet cathedram etsi ignirantissimus: in 16.
Matthew. How do these things hang together?
our blessed Savior, of his times. Out of you shall come fierce wolves, says
S. Paul, Act. 20. speaking of the^ soon after, that is, (...), Bishops and
Priests, as S. Chrysostom. construes it, Tom. 7. D. H. Savile. p. 219. There
shall be false teachers among you, as well as in that people, says Peter,
whom you build upon, 1. Pet. 2. 1. And he adds moreover, bringing in privily
damnable heresies. This of yours is privy ((...)) take heed it be not
damnable. I have acquitted the Fathers in my former speech; I apply this to
you.

48 But S. Austen, you say, thought the testimony of six Bishops, sufficient
to convince Julian the Pelagian about original sin, and the baptism of
young infants. He means sufficient to tame Iulians pride, and haughty humor,
after he had laid him on his back, with Scripture-arguments, which is not all
one with deciding the question by the Fathers authority. Julian had called
Original sin, Manichaismum. S. Austen alleadges those Fathers for it, that
were known to be no Manichees. It^^e tibi, fili Iuliane, nos omnes Manichai
The same he has often, in libr^ posterioribus contra Julian. hac anno primum
ed^. per Claud. Menardum. p. 170. 172. and 194.
esse videmur? l. 1. c. 4. not 2. as you quote it. So is it one thing ad
hominem, and another adrem, disputare. As likewise it is one thing vincere, and
another thing triumphare, as that memorable Dr. Whitakers, was wont to say in
this case. The Fathers and all come in at the triumph, like those that waited
on our Savior into Jerusalem, but it is the Scripture that strikes the
stroke. Neither does S. Austen mislike that saying of Julian, l. 1. c. 7. that
Scripturarum authoritas, goes before eruditio Sanctorum. In the establishing of
a truth, the authority of Scripture, goes before the learning of holy men. Qui
tamen sancti non authoritatem veritati suo tribuere consensu, sed testimonium
and gloriam de ei^ suscepere consortio, [Which Saints nevertheless, or godly
men, authorize not the truth by their concurring in one, but win praise and
estimation by their general submitting of their judgments thereunto.] Or, is
not original sin to be proved by Scripture, without a Jury of Fathers,
think you? As for the baptism of infants, I have spoken before. And Julian
himself was baptized in his infancy, as S. Austen tells him, l. 1. c. 4. What
compass will hold the authorities of Scripture, that proclaim our infection
from the very womb? Job says, the infant of one night is not clean, etc.
Nay, he would never have cursed the day of his birth, c. 3. but that he was
borne in sin. For nothing can subject a man to the curse, but sin. The
Psalm says, Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and made warm in my mothers
sins. Again, The ungodly are froward from the womb. And, The iniquity of
my heels, (that's the original (...). ^r. 12.
sin, which sticks so fast,) encounters him still, euen-after regeneration.
For the serpene wounds us in the heel, the woman's seed him in the head.
Illusiones lumborum, and, Ab occultis meis munda me, is thought to be the same.
Moses says, every figmentum of the heart of man, is only evil continually.
What was Esaies uncleanness of his lips, Esa. 6. but this Os and labia ponuntur
pro toto homine. Espencaei obseruatio in ad Tit and est ve^issima.
Original pollution, that he had not discarded from him? For we must not
think that the Prophet was ribauld in his talk, or that-waies obnoxious, as a
filthy speaker. God forbid. And infinite the like, throughout all the old
Testament. Besides diverse other proofs out of Salomons Proverbs, he would
never have said, that the day of death is better then the day of birth, but
that we are borne in sin, and never set free from this grave iugum, of the
sons of Adam, as another calls it, till our very death. It is primum vivens,
Ecclesiast.
and vltimum moriens. But my purpose was not to reckon up places of Scripture,
for confirmation of Original sin, though you see how far your provocation
carries me, that say, that this could not be proved against young Julian, but
by the Fathers. If I should speak of the new Testament, what end would there
be? I will name but one place (omitting (...), Ephesians. 4. and, Eramus quondam,
Tit. 3. and many the like) namely, that which S. Aust. choaks the gallant with,
after he had ruffled in his rhetorike, and so sprusely urged him to show but a
crannie, or a little hole, by which this original sin has crept into the
world. Ostendo tibi, says S. Austen, non angustam rimam, sed latissimam
ianuam, IN QVO OMNES PECCAVERVNT. Romans 5. Look you, Sir, (says S. Aust.) not
a little hole; but a broad gate that I show you, or rather the Apostle shows
you, by which sin entered into the world; viz. the first man, in whose fall we
were bruised, as the Platonikes are wont to say of the wing of the soul, and
they alluding perhaps hither. So notorious is the original corruption of
mankind, that sense gropes it, and nature feels it, and the world complains
of it, that though the Scriptures did not testify it, the Fathers need not be
cited, where the Platoniks proclaim it. As for S. Austens judgment of
Counsels, where the lis is dependens, and Scripture has been produced as yet
on neither side, that one saying of his is sufficient, to show the
insufficiency of them, which is extant in his book against Maximinus the
Arrian, l. 3. c. 14. Nec ego tibi Nicenum, nec tu mihi Ariminense debes
concilium obijcere. He remits his adversary the Nicene Council, rather then he
will stand to any trial but Scriptures, about a point of faith. In which
Nicene there were more then six Fathers, which you talk of here; no less
then 318. if you remember.

49. And is not that goodly proof now, for invocation of Saints, that it has
been beneficial to the world, and graced with miracles, etc? As if it were for
nothing, that the spirit says, Si surrexerit in medio tui propheta, yea and
etiamsi Deuteronomy. 13. 1. etc.
euenerit secundum verbum eius, although it come to pass according to his
word. For God does all this to try us. A shipman is seen says Pliny, in a
tempest, when the cables are stretched, when the winds beat, the waters swell,
cum gemit arbor, when the shipboard groans, yea when the blood comes out at
the marryners fingers ends. So faith is no faith till it be soundly tried. Now
let me see says Hercules to his son, (in Sophocles his Trachiniae) Mean an
illam potiorem putes, whether thou love thy mother (the Papists are (...)) or
me better. So God of us.

50. As for Deuteronomy. 17. that two witnesses are to be heard, I answer in matter of
fact, not of faith: where Angels are not Gal 1. 8.
to be heard, if they cross the Gospel, though coming from heaven, nay
Anathema must be said to them; which the Council of Laodicea precisely
observes, in this very cause of adoring Angels, Can. 35. to give Anathema to
all such (belike Angels and all) of which before. Yea, not only Angels, but
Christ himself, if he be counterfeited, is to be rejected, Ecce hic, and ecce
illic, as in the Cook Cartosus, in the zeal of the multitudes mad upon
Mamas, and the like. For to speak of Peter now, were superfluous after these,
though he be your Pope, whom you prefer before all, in your partial fancy;
of whom Remigius construes Com. in locum.
those words of the Apostle, Gal. 2. (...), though any other, though the Pope
himself; yea, if himself corrupt the Gospel, let him be accursed.

51. But that surpasses, in your 70. Number. that because the Bishop shows by his
quotation of Bellarmine, that he had read his book, de Beatitud. Sanct. lib.
1. cap. 20. and refutes not the answer that he there makes to our men's
objections, about praying to Saints, therefore he is guilty of wilful malice,
and goes against his conscience, in not taking away the solutions, as there
they stand. As if the Bishop lackt work for sooth, or his task had been to
refute the Cardinals Controversies, and not the Apology only. With such
crimes you patch up, when you lack matter.

52. You think much, that the Bishop calls you to such authors, as Origin
against Celsus, as Athanasius, and Cyrill, and the like Fathers, auncienter
then those that you delight in, by which time a leake was made in relligion;
and corruption, (which can hardly be kept out for a hundred years, as Luther
was wont to say) in process of time had gotten no small advantage. (...)
(idolatry at lest) (...) apud Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 32. Vide and Eusebius. lib. 4. c.
7. and c. 21. Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 7. Tertul. de Praescrip. Ammian.
Marcellin. l. 21. Christiana^ relligionem absolutam and simplicem anili
superstitione confundens. De Constan. Hegesippus, Tum quidem ecclesiam virginem
fuisse, idque antonomastice, vt declarat Baro. tom. 2. Ann. 120. At deinde
faciem eius nec decoram, nec specta^tibus dignoscibilem, sed instar solis
densis obtecti nubibus; atque errores aperto capite in eam irruisse.
Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, his speech is very obseruable, concerning the
Church, that being left as a chaste virgin, and spouse of Christ, to the
Apostles tuition, they indeed kept her so, but so did not they that came after,
but stained that praise of hers by sundry devises of their own bringing in,
which was a thing that S. Paul feared in his own life time, about the Church
of Corinth, 2. Cor. 11. 2. 3. least Satan had played the wily serpent with
them, and seduced them from the original simplicity of Christ, which they once
enjoyed. In Origin and the aforenamed Authors, we find no such Divinity, as
praying to Saints, though much occasion was given them not to have dissembled
it, if any such had been. As when with their conformity, they might have
gained the heathen, by enclining to them, which is a thing that Eusebius
hunteth De praep. Euan. lib. 12. and 13.
after not a little, to parallel us together. Origin refuteth the argument
drawn from Courtly mediations, as Ambrose after him; and though he whisper as
if the Saints spoke certain good words for us after they are in heaven, yet he
makes it no consequent that we should pray to them, nay he says, as jealous of
his own judgment, in Epist. ad Romans lib. 2. Maneatinter occulta, Item in
Cant. hom. 3. Non erit inconueniens sic putare. In Ios. c. 3. Ego sic arbitror.
And, Audiui quendam ita dicentem. This is great certainty, no doubt. So Eusebius.
of Potamiaena, lib. 6. c. 5. that undertook to intercede for Basilides after
her death: (...). Be it as it may be, as not greatly believing it. Valeat vt
valere potest.
nec chartis committatur, [Let it remain as secret, and not be delivered in
writing,] acknowledging it Apocryphal, and not Canonical doctrine, by the
very tenure of his words. And this he speaks of their praying for us: not
acknowledging so much as the Bishop graunts, (as you often tell us) though when
that is granted, that they pray for us, it follows not that we must pray to
them. See Origin contr. Celsum lib. 8. at large. One time he reiects Celsus his
Popish inference, that God is not displeased with such inferior patrones, as
the Angels, and spirits, to mediate for us. He graunts that the Angels are Gods
Ministers indeed, and his honorable friends, but he says, that when God is
made our friend, all his friends are straight at friendship with us. And
because the places are many, I will relate them in order, beginning with the
first, though alleging many, I may seem to leave out more. He begins his
aforesaid book then, viz. the eight against Celsus, with praying to Christ,
and to Christ only, to be his good speed. Octavum aggressurus volumen, precor
Deum and verbum eius vnigenitum: the rather to confute Celsus his praying to
sundry demy-gods, which in the process he challenges him for more openly.
Iamque ad sequentem Celsi contextum pergendum est, vbi scitatur, qua de causa
grauemur daemonas colere. That is, [And now we must proceed to Celsus his next
words, wherein he asks, why we should beloath to worship Angels.] And when we
say, Impossible est pluribus Dominis simul seruire, [It is impossible to serve
more then one Master:] Celsus reiects this, which nevertheless was our
Saviors rule at first, and agrees very well with our worshipping the holy
Trinity, wherein there is but one Dominus, but one Lord or Master, though
distinguished into many persons; and excludes all dependence upon Saints and
Angels, for so much as they are not interessed in the mystery of the Trinity,
how glorious otherwise soever. Celsus proceeds. Qui enim plures deos
venerantur, hoc ipso re^ gratam faciunt summo Deo, quod nemini honor contingat
nisi quem ille honorari vult. Quapropter qui veneratur eius subditos, non
offendit illum, cuius omnes sunt: that is, [For he that worships many gods,
does good service therein to the supreme God, because he honors none but whom
he would have to be honored. And therefore he that honors his subjects, does
in no wise offend him whose subjects we are all.] But by this reason, we were
to honor all men in the world, because they are all Gods subjects. In the
mean time, this defense of Celsus. his idolatry, is the very same with the
Papists, who are not ashamed Coster. Enchir. de venerat. Sanct.
to say, that we must honor God for his own sake, and the Saints for Gods
sake. It follows in Origin. Nobis autem vnus Deus Pater, ex quo omnia. That
is, But we have one God the Father, to our Father, of whom are all things. This
NOBIS, says he, he speaks of himself, and all that have ascended to the God
of Gods, as I told you before out of the book of the Canticles, according to
S. Bernards exposition, Paululum cum pertransissem^, etc. Ascendit autem in
summum Deum is, qui eum inseparabiliter and indiuisibiliter colit per Iesum Dei
filium, cuius solius ductu pervenitur ad patrem, per cuius verbi ac sapientiae
contemplationem, modis omnibus conciliamur Deo conditori omnium. That is, [Nowe
he ascends to the God of We approach by Christ to worship the Father, because
by him we are reconciled to the Father.
Gods (fleeing over other petty gods) who inseparably and vndiuidedly worships
him, through Jesus the Son of God, by whose conduct alone we approach to the
Father; by the consideration of whose word and wisdom, we are every way
reconciled to God the maker of al things.] And a little after, Laudat creaturam
beneque ei precatur: He praises the creature (but that is all) and wishes well
to it, (not precatur sibi ab ea, not prays unto it,) nec distrahitur ipse a
Deo, vt liud colat simul cum eo, nec sustinet seruire duobus Dominis. That is,
[Neither is he rent a pieces from God, to worship some other thing with him,
neither does he endure to serve many Lords or Masters.] Then, Non est igitur
seditiosa vox sic sentientium, and nolentium seruire dominis pluribus,
contentorum vno Domino Jesus Christo. Celsus had called this a seditious speech,
to worship none but God, neither Saints, nor Angels, etc. Therefore Origin
answers him; [And this is no seditious speech of them that are thus minded, and
that refuse to serve many Masters, being content with the Lord Jesus Christ
alone.] Cui seruientes erudiuntur ab eo, vt eruditi reddantur digni regno Dei
and patris, etc. Whom they which serve, are instructed of him, that being
sufficiently learned, Christ a sufficient bringer to the Father, because a
sufficient teacher of him.
they may become fit or worthy of the Kingdom of God, and the Father, etc.
Christ, you see, is able to bring to heaven the worshippers of him, though they
worship none besides him. Nec ideo cauemus ne cui praeter Deum seruiamus, ne
laedatur Deus, sicut home laeditur, si seruus eius seruiat alteri: sed ideo
illi seruimus ne nos ipsi laedamur, separantes nos a portione Dei, etc. Celsus
belike had said, that God was not hurt, though more were served besides him, as
men think themselves hurt, when their servants serve any other besides
themselves. But we are loath, says Origin, to hurt our selves, rending and
separating us from the inheritance of God, if we look to any other then God
alone, to worship them. Olim Lacedaemoniorum legati Persarum regem adorare
noluerunt timentes vnicum suum Dominum. The Lacedemonian Ambassadors in old
time, would not worship the King of Persia, though greatly pricked on thereunto
by his Courtiers, because they feared their only Lord. So should we (thinks
Origin) and with far greater reason, refuse to give worship to any other then
our Lord God only, etiamsi satellites horum principum daemones atque Angeli,
etc. though Angels or devils (indeed the devils angels) draw us never so
much aside into error. I pass by many things, because I have many to go
thorough. Whereas Celsus had said, that if they will needs worship but one
God, by that reason they must not adore Christ neither, etc. Origin thus
answers: Si Celsus intellexisset illud, Ego and Pater vnum sumus, and iterum,
Sicut Ego and Tu vnum sumus, non putasset nos alium colere Deum. That is: If
Celsus had known the force of those words, I and my Father are one, or, As
thou, O Father, and I are all one, he would never have thought us to have
worshipped another God, though we worship Christ together with the Father. By
which we see, that worship belongs only to God, and to Christ, no otherwise
then as he is God, even one God with the Father, and that they only are to be
worshipped, who are so subsisting in that unity of Godhead, and trinity of
Persons, as the honor done to one, necessarily reflects upon them all. Which,
as I have often said, is not the Saints lot, because they are infinitely short
of that divine prerogative, though never so eminent in the rank of creatures.
Where, I cannot but insert, as it were into Origens ring, this gemme of
Athanasius, it is so suitable, though I shall have occasion to speak of him
more particularly anon. In his book de Incarnat. verbi, thus he says; Si
adoras hominem Christum, eo quod inhabitet in eo dei verbum, eadem opera adora
Sanctos quoque, ob Deum, qui domicilium in ijs habet. That is: If thou worship
Christ, because the word dwells in him, (to wit, dwells in him by grace, and not
by personal union) worship the Saints too, in whom God also dwells. As who
would say, that neither the Saints are to be worshipped, though God dwell in
them, nor any thing which is less then the Deity it self. Whereas,
doubtless, if there had been a worship proper to Saints, neither Origin, nor
Athanasius might have done them this wrong, to deprive them of all worship,
under color of the Divine; but here, if ever, the distinction should have
showed it self, either of latria and dulia, or cultus mayor and minor, as
Bellarmine neatly calls it, or minimus and maximus, or minor minimo, De Satr.
Euchar. lib. 4. cap. (...)
or mayor maximo, or what you please.

53. I see I should be long, if I would lay forth all the treasure, which the
aforesaid book of Origens against Celsus contains, condemning the idolatry
that reigns now in Popery. That which has hitherto been alleged, may
seem to make against the worship of Angels, somewhat generally. Hear we now
a word or two of prayer and Invocation of them in particular, how that is
rellished by Origin, and so conclude. Page 406. of the Greek by Haeschelius,
1605 at Augusta. (...). That is: Away with Celsus his counsel, saying, that we
must pray to Angels: let us not so much as once hear of it. FOR WE MVST PRAY
ONLY TO GOD, which is above all, and we must pray to the word of God his only
begotten Son, the first borne of all creatures, and we must beseech him, that
he as high Priest would offer As OUR RIGH PRIEST. But the Saints are not so.
Yet this is Origens appropriating reason here. And if the Schoolmen deny that
an Angel may minister the communion, what more right have they to of^ our
prayers? Is it not a priestly action?
up our prayers to his God and our God, after himself has received them. And
though nothing can be either more pregnant or more perspicuous the^ this, which
Origin has both delivered, and by reason confirmed, yet add we, as it
follows, in the very same place. Only thus premising. It seems Celsus,
besides all other honors and prerogatives, which willingly he garnished his
Angels with, (whose favor and good affection he magnified no less mightily,
then the Adioynder does the Saints, when he dilates their happiness who have
them for their patrons,) yet farther allowed them says, and prayer, in
particular; the two things now in question, between the Bishop and the
Adioynder. Celsus words were, (...): and, (...). That is: That we must both
pray to them, and put our trust in them, that they may be gracious unto us. And
because, though they are no Gods, yet they belong to God, (as chief Ministers
no doubt, etc.) What says Origin of this? How does he value the Angels favor?
(...), etc. That is: What talk ye of the favor, or patronage of Angels?) He
that has the God which is above all things, gracious unto him, for his piety
toward him, and because he has entertained [in his heart by faith] that same
Angel of the Great Counsel of God, the Lord Jesus, if he [can] content
himself with the favor of God, through Jesus Christ, he may boldly say, as
one whom all the whole army of the devils cannot hurt, The Lord is my light,
and my salvation, whom then shall I fear? The Lord is the defendour and
protector of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid? Yea, and he shall say,
Though a legion of men were set in battle array against me, yet shall not my
heart be troubled nor dismayed. Again, in the same book; (...), etc. That is:
But we to whom we give our first fruits, to him [and to him onely] we send up
our prayers: (now first fruits are Gods, in signum, and in recognitionem,
vniuersalis dominij, as your Schoolmen teach us, which the Saints, I hope,
have no right in, unless you will make many Gods) having A GREAT HIGH PRIEST
that has entered the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God. And we hold fast this
confession whiles we live, having God favorable to us, and his only begotten
Son Jesus Christ, being revealed amongst us. But if we be in love with any
multitude, whose favor we would gladly purchase, [suppose Angels and Spirits]
we learn [out of Dan. 7. and 10.] that thousand thousands stand by him, and
millions of millions minister unto him. Who beholding them that imitate their
piety toward God (with the very same countenance, that one would look upon
his friends and his kinsfolks,) help toward their salvation, for so much as
they call upon God, and sincerely call upon him: appearing [also] Angels
obedient to godly men.
unto them, and thinking that they are bound to yield obedience, and as it were
at the hearing of the watchword, or signal, march forth for the benefit and
salvation of [all] such as PRAY TO GOD; to whom themselves also pray. See ye
now that the Angels their praying to God, does not enforce our praying to them?
Nay, because they pray to the same God with us, therefore we are taught by
that, not to pray to them, but to God with them, as Origin tells you. In whom
it follows. For they are all [but] ministering spirits, [and] sent forth to
minister for them that shall receive the inheritance of salvation. And yet it
follows again, a little after, to refute Celsus his fond distinction, of
satrapae aulici, and satrapae coelestes, or elementares, which is the Papists
distinction at this day, and likewise their comparison of earthly favorites in
Princes Courts, with celestial spokesmen, and mediators for us, in the
kingdom of heaven: (...), etc. Look you (says he) how Celsus has devised
his Satrapae, and Consuls, and Praefecti, under-officers of the great God,
after the fashion of silly mortallmen, etc. But this being formerly refuted by
Ambrose, we shall need no longer to insist upon it here. Page 430. thus we
read, (...), etc. that is, How much better is it, to entrust our selves with
the God which is above all things, [hee would have trust to be put in none but
in God,] through Jesus Christ which has taught us this lesson, and to crave of
him all aid, and preservation, even that which the holy Angels and righteous
spirits may afford us: that they may rescue us from the naughty devils which
hover about the earth, and are plunged in sensuality, etc. [The preservation
through Angels, is to be sought for from God, not from Angels themselves.]
What then shall we pray to them for, if we may not pray to them for that,
which themselves immediately and of themselves may afford? But I will conclude
for Origin, and his opinion of this matter, with that one famous sentence of
his, and reiection of Celsus, which is extent in the foresaid book, page 432.
of the Greek. Celsus therefore having endeavored diverse manner of ways, (as
is the fashion of all such) to divert the mind from her dependence upon God
alone, insomuch as after he had sought to enfeoffe them to Angels, at last he
was not ashamed to enthrall them to mighty Princes and Potentates here in
earth, not caring which way, so he discouraged piety, and decayed relligion,
(like that ungodly Lawgiver, which forbad Daniel, and all his subjects to ask
any thing of God, for the space of certain days, but only of himself.) To
this subtle device of Celsus, I say, thus Origin replies; (...), etc. that is,
We must endeavor to please only God alone, who is above all things: AND WE
MVST PRAY TO HIM ALONE, THAT HE VVOVLD BE MERCIFVLL TO US, procuring his favor
with godly piety, and all manner virtue. And yet if Celsus would needs have
us, to insinuate into the favor of any more besides the most high and supreme
God, let him consider, that as when the body is moved, the motion of the
shadow does infallibly accompany it: In like sort if Almighty God be but
propitious unto us, it follows that all his friends, both Angels, and spirits,
and souls of the righteous, will be freindly to us, and take our parts. For
they are privy unto such, as are thought worthy to find favor in the eyes of
Almighty God. And not only they mean well to such as are found worthy, but
they assist all such as are forward at the worshipping of God Almighty, and
they pray together with them, and they entreat together with them, and together
with them they incline him to favor. Insomuch as we may boldly say, that with
godly virtuous men praying to God, an innumerable company of heavenly powers
pray together with them VNPRAYED UNTO, or unspoken to, (...). If (...), be M^
prayed unto, (see cap. (...). h^) the^ here Angels help us, though they be not
prayed unto. But whether it be so, or not, Origin is direct against praying to
them. For if we may not vocare, how much less invocare?
succouring with joint consent our mortal and frail nature, whom they see so
many devils to make head against, and to seek by all means to subvert their
salvation, specially such as have committed themselves to God, [forsaking and
abandoning all other created patronages.] Of Origin thus much. Is there yet any
more?

54. You say, the Saints were never honored in like manner, as the heroes of
the heathen. Yet you may remember what Mantuan says, Vt Latij Martem, sic nos
te sancte Georgi. And many such like testimonies out of your own mouths might
be alleged to convince your idolatries, if we list to observe them. Or, if
the Saints are not honored like the heroes of the heathen, when as
questionless they stand in like proportion to God, in your opinion, it must
needs be, because you are borne down with that truth, that none are to be
honored with relligious worship, but only GOD, in what proportion or distance
soever they stand unto him. Culius relligionis, or the relligious worship, is
not to be given to any creature, but to God only, says S. Austen, no mean
Father, and in no mean work of his, but another palmare, if I may say it
without offending you, which the Bishop cannot do of his de ciuit. Dei, but
you will be ever touching upon that string. And I mean, contr. Faustum, lib.
14. c. 11. Apostolus vetat culium relligionis exhiberi creaturae: The Apostle
forbids relligious worship to be given to the creature. If the Apostles
authority may move with you, forbidding it; let S. Austen be believed
delivering the message, and telling you that he forbids it. S. Chrysostom had
said upon Matthew. 26. in the homily quoted not long before to the like purpose,
that when the Apostles dissuaded our Savior from suffering, he referred them
to the Scriptures: Else, says he, how shall Matthew. 25. 54. Luke 24. 26. item
ibid. 44.
the Scriptures be fulfilled? And so, repugnantibus quamvis Apostolis, vicit
sententia Scripturarum. But this is two in one, that we bring you now, not an
Apostle without Scripture, but an Apostle in his writing, or the Apostolic
Scripture. And for interpretation of it, you have the judgment of S. Austen.
The Apostle (quoth he) forbids relligious worship to be given to the creature.
And there the Scripture prevailed against the Apostles, to the destroying of
our Savior. How much more shall Scripture, and Apostolic Scripture, prevail
against all such pitiful deponents as you rely upon, to the maintenance of
Christ's honor, which is dearer to him then his life? So as these things are
more, if they be laid together, then arguments ab authoritate mere negatiua,
which you so scoff at, numb. 73. as if that were the only argument that the
Bishop brought, or not sufficient to beat you down, as he vrges it. And now to
show what a Clerk you are, you charge the Bishop in the last place, with false
quoting of Athanasius. You grant, that in his third oration, contra Arianos,
he proves the divinity of our Savior Christ, from our adoration of him. Of
which it is consequent, that no mere creatures are at all to be adored,
neither Saints nor Angels. We take this grant of yours, concerning Athanasius
his authority. As for your trifling distinctions wherewith you would elude it,
they have been huffed out before. And yet more may be said in the next
chapter, where you shall hear your own Doctor, Dr. Gregor. de Valent. to
renounce this distinction, and clean wash his hands of it. Mean while, S.
Austens testimony so lately quoted, is a choake-peare that you cannot swallow,
that relligious worship is not to be given to any creature: Therefore to God
only. Though Athanasius has the same again, in another book of his, viz. De
incarnatione verbi, that you may know how familiar this kind of arguing was
with Athanasius. And S. Ambrose the same in 8. ad Romans Nec Dominus vbique, se
adorari pateretur, nisi quia Deus: Our Lord would not suffer himself to be so
commonly worshipped, but that he was God. S. Leo likewise if you have not heard
of it before, de passione Domini. sermon. 12. Sine Idem habet Chrysostom. hom. 8. in
Matthew.
verbi potentia, magi puerum non adorarent: that is, But for the power of the
word, the wisemen would never have worshipped the child. As much to say, Unless
the Child had been the word, that is very God with us, and the second person
in Trinity. Answerable to that in the parable, Matthew. 18. of the two debtors,
whereof one owed his Master, the other his fellow-seruant, (...), v. 6. (...),
v. 29. The former worshipped, as a servant should his Master, the latter
entreated only, as a servant to his fellow-seruant, to forgive the offense, as
it was committed against him. Neither yet are there wanting other places of
Athanasius, to the same effect. In Epist. ad Adelph. contra Arianos, one time
thus. (...). That is, We worship not any creature, God forbid we should. (No
not so much as the humanity of our Savior Christ, if it were divided from the
Godhead: for of that he speaks there: how much less the Saints?) Another
time thus, (...) Let them know.
(...), etc. Let them know at last, that when we worship our Lord in the flesh,
we worship no creature. Another time thus most divinely, (...): that Creatures
worship not creatures.
is, The creature did not worship the creature, when the Sea, and other
elements adored our Savior, etc. And truly, if worship were due from
creatures to creatures, there should be a Dulia of the Sea, and of the winds,
etc. to the Saints belonging, as well as Latria to God, and to Christ. But you
deny that in the second Oration of Athanasius, contr. Arian. any such thing is
to be found, as the Bishop quotes, namely, that he concludes Christ to be God
because he is inuocated or prayed unto. Now truly I might have believed the
Bishops quotation, without farther searching, because it was his; yet I conne
you thanks for giving me the occasion, to read over that long, but most
excellent, Oration. In the end thereof (you were weary belike ere you could
turn so far) we thus find. (...). Let them know, says he, that the Saints
do not Let them know.
request him to be their helper, that is a mere creature. And not only there
so, but he has the like again, Oratione contra Gentes; (...). He speaks of
images, which the heathen worship as Gods, and thus he says: They pray unto
them as Gods (belike Athanasius would have none prayed unto but God) and they
inuest them with this honor of the true God. So as praying to, is for God, and
the true God, only. Again in the same book, he coupleth prayer and the
Godhead, thus: (...); That is, How then should these be Gods, or how may it
beseem us to request any thing of them? The grand master of Requests is God
only, with Athanasius. And yet if you lack a mediator, hear him once again
in his book De Incarnat. verbi: (...). That is: The word of God alone (to wit,
Christ, his Son) is sufficient to mediate, or to be our ambassador to the
Father, in what cause so ever. The reason whereof he gives in his Epistle ad
Adelph. (...). That is: For one creature can never be of force to save another.
And therefore not to mediate between God and it self. Yea, if this had been
possible, I mean for one creature to undertake for another, in any sort or
fashion, the Redeemer of the world might have been some mere man of Gods
making, and yet divided from the Godhead, though a principal Man. Shall I
speak yet plainer to you, or do you understand me sufficiently? As you make
the Saint to intercede but for show, and pretend that all the Per Christum Dom.
nostrum, used to the Saints.
virtue comes from Christ: so God of his free mercy might have A new way of
redemption out of the Papists new-fangle intercessions; and like that of the
Persians, beating the robe, for the noble man's offense.
pardoned us the fault, and yet chastised it for certain exemplarie
satisfaction sake, in the person of that elect creature, man or woman. But this
conceit is abominable, and the work too weighty for any but the Immanuell,
the Son of God, to travail in, as Athanasius implies throughout his whole
work, or works rather, quelling you. And so much of Athanasius, and this eight
Chapter of yours. For when you tell us in the end, Number. 76. that the Devil
enuies the honor of Saints and Angels, and uses S. Chrysostom. contrariwise,
(before quoted in 3. ad Coloss.) says, the honoring of Angels canie from the
Devils envying of us and our honuor: which in all likelihood he more malignes.
See also Epiphan. quoted in the 9. cap. and how often he puts all this
idolatry to Saints and Images, upon the Devil.
the Bishop as an instrument to deface them, it may please you to remember,
that the Devils malice is auncienter to God, then to his Saints; and his
intrusion into the titles of the one, much more usual then of the other. Ero
similis ALTISSIMO, not subordinatis. And when he cannot aspire thither
himself, he ingests in other partners and compossessioners, he cares not
whom. By which your wisdom may weigh, who is more like to be the Devils
proctor, that you talk of so queintly, and take heed it be not your self,
even while you plead for Saints.

To his 9. Chapter.
The Adioynders small drops in this and the next Chapter, after his greater
storm. Earthly Monarchy, Supererogation, Relliques, Merits, Hierome of
Adoration, Gregory of Counsels, Supremacy, English Puritans, Mr. Thomas
Rogers, etc. In all which, the Reverend Bishop, out of the warines of his own
writing, (which is the Adioynders stumbling-blocke) acquites himself from the
others most unjust slanders, and uncivil reproaches.

1. THE Bishops faults, and herein his changing the state of the question, are
the subject of his ninth Chapter. And how first does he change the state of the
question? In confounding Peter's primacie, with his earthly Monarchy. And of
this (says he) before. 1. Earthly Monarchy.
And, I think, you are answered to it before. The sum is, that not only
Primacie and Monarchy, but even spiritual and temporal, as you have tied
them together, like Sampsons foxes, are in effect all one. Change of words is
no change of the state of the question, but an opening rather, which is
necessary many times, if but for this one cause, that men would smooth over
their dangerous and desperate assertions, with plausible and colorable
terms, and when those terms are once removed, themselves grow ashamed of
what they thought to persuade others before. Like as when some old witch is
turned out of her dress, wherewith she besotted as many as saw her, and
afterward is confounded at the sight of her own vglines. In this sense, say
you hardly, that the Bishop has changed the state of the question, for other
aim or sinister drift in varying the words he had none. And yet, do not you,
good Sir, grant at another time, that it is a plain Monarchy, viz. chap. 5.
number. 21. of your Adioynder? Or why does Sanders entitle his book, de Monarchia
Ecclesiae, but to addoube the Pope a Monarch at least? Or what are the effects
of it, but to dispose Monarchies? Is not that it we contend about? Lastly, how
many clauses are there, in your Cardinals books de Pontif. Romans that sound
this way, and that not hoarsly, but very shrilly? even besides that in his
first book, cap. 9. whose plain title is, Quod Regimen Ecclesiasticum
praecipue Monarchicum esse debeat: That the government of the Church, ought
especially to be Monarchical. Wherein his mind does not so wholly run upon
Christ, to be the chief Monarch, but just in the next Chapter, cap. 10. the
title is, Probatur PETRI Monarchia, etc. The Monarchy of Peter is here
proved. And that after he had pleased himself in his former pains so well,
about the Church-Monarchie in general, that he says, Explicatum est, and,
nisi fallor, satis diligenter: We have showed it, and I believe diligently
enough. But the word earthly, that offends you. It is no earthly Monarchy. As
if the objects of this power, and the origin from whence it flows, coming
into comparison, (which are the two ways to judge of the temporaltie or
secularitie thereof) it be not plainer which we allege, that the objects
thereof are earthly to make it earthly, then that which you pretend, that the
institution is from heaven, to call it he auenly. As for temporal power, we
have before showed you, where Bellarmine calls it so, and writes a whole book
of it under Lib. 5. de Pont. Romans See c. 1. h^s. 42.
that name. How much does that differ from earthly then?

2. A second is about Supererogation. I will neither hold 2 Supererogation.
you, nor the Reader long. The defense of the Bishop is compendious, and stands
in this, that either you must mend your meaning, or change your word. For
Supererogation there is none, where first all is not done that ought to be
done, and then a vantage too, or surplus over. Now, for so much as there is no
man but labors of his defects, and all We cannot answer him one of a thousands
Job. And S. Chrysostom. The most righteous of all need mercy in Ep. ad Philip. c.
1. Sermon. 4. at large. Idem habet D^s. Ep ad Demoph. Idem Epiph haeresi A^
discrimen hoc assignans, inter Christum, and alius Sanctos: quod and apparere
vult in funcribus mortuorum. Aug. lib. 9. confess. c. 13. Neque enim responde
bit illa nihil se debere, ne convincatur etc. praeclare.
come short of the glory of God, and all have need to cry, Dimitte nobis
debita nostra, forgive us our trespasses, which is the Bishops own allegation,
and yet by you called an impertinent arguing: I say, for so much as there is no
man living, but stands charged in the former of these two kinds, to be somewhat
short with God in his reckonings about obedience, therefore it is certain that
Supererogation there can be none, though praetererogation we should grant you,
howbeit subtererogation were the fitter word, as the Bishop has most godlily
and acutely told you, wishing you to mend the other by this. What you tattle of
S. Austen, is nothing to the purpose. As if we could not tell you the like of
S. Hilarie, in Psalm. 118. as also of Greg. Nazianz. in his first Steliteutike
against Julian: S. Hierome in many places, and namely ad Pammachium de obitu
Paulinae, etc. Whereas, if you look to the scope of that Parable, Luke 10. no
question but that drives clean another way, namely, that the Lord Jesus left
no part of our score unsatisfied to the Father, not to show what we do in
recompense to him; who for certain are the traveler wounded, and half dead
in the way, not the host of the house, as we are there figured. Nay, the host
being S. Paul, as both S. Austen, and S. Hilarie, and the In the places quoted
by the Adioynder.
author of the Hypognostique, l. 3. c. 9. do consent, how does not that shake
S. Peter's primacy, that the chief of the house whither the wounded man was
carried, should be Paul, not Peter? (for the Church is the Inn, and therefore
the host of the Inn, must be the chief in the Church.) Or if you say, (...),
a fit resembla^ce for an oecumenicall Pastor.
that he is the stabularius, because of his Doctrine, why should S. Paul give
higher rules of perfection, then are to be found either in S. Peter, or any
other Apostles writing, but for some S. Aug. ad Bonifac. l. 3. c. 3. If you say
the Apostle, and name not which Apostle, we understand Paul.
cause of eminency of degree, above the rest? Yet they all make him only to
be the stabularius, and the Scriptures, to say truth, show no less. As for the
word supererogate, which makes all the stir (yet no such dangerous word in
the good Samaritans meaning) S. Austen he took it as it lay in the Text of the
old translation, and applying it to us, though not without a wrest, as even now
I said, yet gave the most consonant sense to the faith, that he could then find
of it, without building an article, a dogma upon it, as you fondly do:
whereas, if a man should have told him, that erogare with super, to pay over
and above, presupposes the payment of the principal debt, he would neither
have denied the truth of that suggestion, nor blushed at the humility of our
confession, crying all with one consent, Dimitte nobis debita nostra, and that
the whole world is obnoxious to God, and that, if he should enter into
judgment with his servants, or mark what is done amiss, no man would be able
to abide it, etc. Neither tell you me, that you also are of this opinion, and
confess with the forwardest, your many scapes, and halting obedience. For why
then do you not reform so monstrous a term, especially since you pervert it
to a more uncouth sense, then ever came in S. Austens head, from whom never
thelesse you would seem to borrow it? Is it not pity, that you should talk
prowder then you think, and speak loftier then you are affected? For if you
mean no more then so, that a man may do somewhat, which may be pleasing to
God, and yet not descending of his rigorous iniunction or taxation, as
Tertullian says wittily (though considering contra Psych.
the cause he then maintained, scarce Catholikely, as your selves will not
deny,) Non tantum obedire debeo Deo, sed adulari, We must not only obey God,
but addoulce him and flatter him; I say, if this be all, we differ not much
from you, neither about refraining marriage, nor refusing hyre for preaching
the The Adioynders examples.
Gospel, (as for an Apostles laboring with his own hands, look you to that,
how you will censure it.) Though you shall do well to consider, what S.
Chrysostom writes, Hom. 5. in 1. Romans alluding to that of our Savior no
doubt, When ye have done all that ye should, say ye are unprofitable servants,
and therefore be far from craking of supererogations. His words are, (...).
That is, It was a debt that which the servant did, if he did ought at all. For
whatsoever things we do, we do but fulfill a duty in so doing. Wherefore
Christ himself said, When you have done all things, etc. say, We are but
unprofitable servants, for what we should do, that we have done, [and no
more.) You will say, that at another time, S. Chrysostom says, S. Paul flew
over the line of the Law, and did more T. 8. D. Savile. Ser (...). 1. in S.
Apost Paulum, and saepicule alias.
then was commanded him. Therefore you must construe that place by this; and
above all things mollify the hard word Supererogate, learning rather of the
Bishop how to change your rough and ill chosen terms, then carping him for
changing the question, which he changes not.

3. The third is ridiculous. Call you that also changing the state of the
question, that when the Cardinal says, Christ 3 Adoration of Christ.
is to be adored in the Sacrament, the Bishop takes exception to his
limitation, and says, Apage vero, Away for shame, and why not out of the
Sacrament too? Rather the Cardinal changes Christ, a thing of greater
importance then the state of the question, expounding himself thus, The
Sacrament, that is, Christ in the Sacrament. Is Christ the Sacrament? Is the
author and the institution all one? does the substance and the symbolum differ
nothing? Does not Bellarmine say, that the De Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 16.
Sacraments of both Laws, viz. Baptism and Circumcision, are neither good nor
bad of themselves, but indifferent? And is Christ so? Are you so indifferent
what you think or say of Christ? What a change then make you here, that cry
out upon changing? We deny not that the flesh of Christ is to be adored,
whether we eat, or eat not. Yea, with Austen and Ambrose, we adore it the
rather, when we partake the Ambros. lib. 3. de Sp. Sanct. c. 12. Aug. in Psalm.
98.
Sacrament. For when have we greater cause of so doing, I mean of adoring, and
falling down, and thanking God, then when that business awakes our
consideration? Then, I think, is the time exultandi spiritu, and yet
procidendi corpore. Adorauerunt, and manducauerunt, says the Psalm. Which S.
Austen turns hither, I say not how rightly. But, Nemo manducat panem illum,
nisi prius adorauerit. No man eats of that bread, unless he first worship.
Let-it be granted. He does not say, unless he worship the bread first, for
which you strive. Solum contemptum non vult cibus ille, says he elsewhere, In
Psalm. 118.
That food asks no more of us, but that we contemn it not: that we honor it
as a Sacrament, not as the Lord of the Sacrament; as Panis Domini, not as Panis
Dominus, to speak with the same Austen, Tract. 59. in Johan. whom we more then
honor, we adore and worship at that time, at other times, in the Sacrament,
without the Sacrament, when, where not? Why should this dislike you? And yet,
this is the effect, of all that which you cavil at, in the Bishops doctrine,
in this place. Where you might do better to correct your own manner of
speaking, then traduce his. For in your 8. Number. here, speaking of the Elements
going with Christ, which is the substance of the Sacrament, or as you call it
the thing, and how we ought not to make divorce between them two, you bring
for example, the humanity of our Savior Christ accompanying his divinity, so
as worshipping the one, we worship the other, in the unity of his person, etc.
And to enforce this comparison, you begin your sentence with, As well might he
say, which is very inconsiderate, that I censure it no harder, to think that
the Elements or forms of the Sacrament, are linked to Christ in as straight a
band, as his divinity and humanity are between themselves; or that the one
of these couples, may be divorced with equal facility, as the other. The
forms without Christ, is no impossible matter, Christ without the forms, how
usual, how necessary? and yet you would have these, to go as well together,
as Nature with Nature does in his sacred person. Who though they should not be
divided in ordinary event, Nunquam deposuit quod semel assumpsit Axiom. Theol.
I mean the species from Christ, no more then his Natures may be parted
asunder, yet still the union is very different of the two couples, this
hypostaticall, that but institutionall, and arbitrarie, and Sacramental, and
therefore you were more hot then judicious in your As well, which is full ill
rather, and nothing at all to the purpose. And albeit the Bishop did not mean,
to put that blame upon you, which you are suspicious guilty of (as it seems)
in this place, that the bare Sacrament, or forms of bread and wine, are to be
adored: yet you may remember, what a certain writer of your own, and he not
of the worst note for such argument, as he has handled, one Didacus Yanguas a
Spaniard, writes of this matter, in his 2. book of Sermons, Sermon. 1. de
Sacram. Eucharist. to this purpose; Neque solum terra carnis eius, sed and
species ipsae Sacramentales, ex union a^ carnem Christi, ita elevantur, Also
Cornel. Mus. com. in Romans 8. Sacramentum Eucharistiae est Ipsa Gratia: which is
Christ's title, (...). Tit. 2. 11.
and excelsa terra fiunt, vt etiam virtutem effectivam habeant conferendi
hominibus gratiam, and alios spirituales effectus, sicut non paucis Theologis
visum est. That is: And not only the earth of his flesh, (viz. Christ's) but
the species also, or the forms, of the Sacrament, themselves, are by their
union to the flesh of Christ, so elevated, and exalted, that they have power
effectual, to confer grace, and other spiritual effects, upon men, as no
few Divines have thought. Can ye be long from adoring them, if ye attribute
this to them?

4. Number. 10. You would charge the Bishop with changing the state of the
question, about the adoring of Relliques, and 4 Adoration of Relliques.
yet you confess, that for his refuge, he took hold of the word Adoration,
used by the Apology, and exacteth of the Cardinal some proof of adoration
due to relliques, taking adoration in the stricter sense, as due to God. Where
you see, you cannot charge the Bishop with this fault, unless you lay it upon
the Apology first, or rather because the Bishop was to follow the Apology
(...), he is so far from changing the substance of any question between you
and us, that he sticks close to the very words which the Apology uses, whose
defense he undertook, and for that full wisely here you peach him. But neither
does the Apology mistake the question, and when the Bishop calls for the word
adorare, it was partly because the Cardinal had fronted him with one such
false place out of Chrysostom [adoremus for adornemus] partly because venerari
implies no worship at all, in the Fathers sense, neither As S. Chrysostom. in
vlt. ad Coloss. at those words, Salutatio mea Pauli, manu mea. (...), etc. It
was like they would find themselves somewhat affected, at the sight of Paul's
hand. Yet not to worship the paper. So we at relliques. Yet S. Paul's
handwriting not inferior perhaps to relliques.
divine nor humane, but only reverent esteeming, or preserving; (as to omit
other places, S. Austen twice together says it of the Bible, The same says
Constantius apud Athan. Graecol. p. 716. in epist. ad Episc. Arimini
congregatos, de doctrina and verbo, which S. Austen says de codice. (...).
Behold the book and doctrine venerable, or worthy to be worshipped. What more
of the Sacrament, or where the like of the species?
veneramur codicem, we worship the book, de unit. Eccles. c. 12. and yet
neither by dulia nor latria;) partly because whatsoever be the doctrine of your
Schools in this point, which is commonly subject to great inconstancy, the
practice of your idiots must so be defended, or else left for desperate.

5. In the mean time it is worth the noting, in your 12. Numb. how you confute
the Bishop, about the Angel forbidding S. John to adore him (which the Bishop
had alleged) to prove, that other strange peruersitie of his, or change of
the question, as no less textually, then marginally, both ways, you blaze it,
that no adoration of creatures is lawful. First, say you, he makes S. John
ignorant, until the Angel instructed him. Novum crimen, etc. No S. Austen is
of another mind, quaest. in Genesis 23. Corrigendus fuerat adorator Angeli. The
worshipper of the Angel, (viz. S. John) was to be reformed. Therefore he might
err. Yea therefore he did err.
doubt a great scandal, and unworthy of S. John, either to offer for his
ignorances, with the high Priest in the old law, Heb. 9. 7. (and yet S. John no
high Priest, nor proportional to him, but only Peter to be so paragoned)
especially when the ignorance was not iuris, but facti, or to have an Angel to
be his schoolmaster. We may call for the ox and the ass to be yours, Esaias 1.
which forget neither their Master, nor their masters cribbe, whiles you run a
gaddng post greges sodalium, not content with one or two, unless you heap up
deities to your selves, as they do doctors, 1. Tim. 4. 3. But this is one
exception which you take to the Bishop. that he reasons (you say) as
substantially, as if some holy man of modesty and humility, refusing some
extraordinary honor done unto him, saying it were to be done, not to him, but
to God, one should infer, that no such reverence should be done to men. For
such no doubt was the case betwixt S. John and the Angel, either of them
showing their humility, and their respect they bare the one to the other, etc.
Thus you: changing very handsomely the law of relligion, and those absolute and
peremptory words of the Angel, vide ne, into mere complements, and courtings,
between S. John and the Angel: as who would say, Remember your self, Be not
so courteous, a shadow whereof there was between our Savior Christ and S.
John Baptist, I grant, Matthew. 3. but between the Angel, and the Evangelist
here, for certain, none at all. Is adora Deum, and vide ne feceris, of no more
force with you, the^ so? And to your noble insta^ce, of a godly man, putting
off a great honor done unto him, etc. If that godly man were well learned
withal, and seen in points of faith, above the other, whom he should charge
to keep such honor for God, and not to cast away upon him, would you doubt
but he were to be listened to, and obeyed in his good counsel, not idle
complement, as you madly decipher it? So did they in the Acts, I mean Paul and
Barnabas, refusing Act. 14.
the Lycaonians, and their wild honors; so Peter to the Centurion, so
Gregory, so your Vincentius, so many more, not by complement or courtship, but
by horror of the fact, and straight commandment to desist. You quote in the
same Numb. S. Greg. ide^ repetit, in Com. Cant. 8. praeter locos alibi citatos.
S. Gregory, S. Bid, Anselme, Rupert, Richardus de Victore, to this effect,
that the Angel refused S. John's adoration, in regard of the incarnation of our
Savior Christ, since which our nature is reverenced and respected by the
Angels, and they presume not to take such obeisance Now Reader judge, who
comes nearer to Iudaesme, the Bishop, and the Church of England, as F. T.
objects in diverse places, or they that revive the worshipping of Angels under
the new, which these Authors confiue to the old Testament.
at our hands. Does not this confute you then, for worshipping them still, and
ascribing sovereignty to them (as your relligious submissions to them can
import no less) who not only are our conservi, by right of creation, but
inferior to us, in so much as our nature is united unto the godhead, which
theirs is not?

6. You tell us in your 13. Numb. of three kinds of adoration, and say, it is
instruction for ignorant readers. We know but two, Sacred, and Civil. You
would feign cogge a third, as it were semi-sacred. Whereas, secunda relligio,
or relligio secundae maiestatis, as Tertullian calls it, is for earthly Apolog
contra Gentes.
Kings, not for heavenly Saints, who by your distinction should inherit it
before the other, if it were properly so called. But God having the first
relligion, the Emperor the second (as we speak at least) the Saints is none
now, because it must not be the third. Therefore they are banished from
relligious adoration. To your authorities that you bring out of Genesis 8. Genesis
19. etc. where Angels appeared in visible forms, and corporal shape (for
(...), Hebr. 13. 2. they that entertained them, knew not whom they
entertained) what marvel if they received civil adoration, going for men,
and not known to be other? Or why should we think that that was relligious?
The same I might say of Abraham's, the same of Lots respect, which they showed
to Angels. And so likewise of Iosuahs, Ios. 5. Though, as I signified before,
sometimes Christ is called the Angel, when he makes apparition, (Athanas. cont.
Gent. (...), The Word, that is Christ, is justly termed his Fathers Angel, or
Messenger) and sometimes also God is honored in his ambassador. Which
aduantageth you nothing, that vendicate a proper and a standing worship to the
Angels, due by kind, or by excellency of their order, not only to the person
which they casually sustain. You say, Saul adored Samuels soul. Though I
believe it not of Saul, and there is no reason to load him with more
infirmities then his own, yet if you will needs have it so, let him be your
example hardly, as also of going to a witch, and consulting with the devil.
How well did you transform idolatry into sorcerie, in your 6. Chapt. where
you labored to put off the Laodicean Council, who now so confound sorcerie
with idolatry, that by the example you bring of Saul, you may defend the one
as well as the other, if at least any such ever were? Abdias, you say, was a
man in temporal dignity far greater then Elias, yet Abdias fell on his face
before him, and therein did an act of relligion to Elias. Believe it who list.
And did the Emperors perform When the late king of France Henry 4. did M.
Beza such like honor, dismounting from his horse, and running to embrace him,
marvel but this was relligious adoration, in our Adioynders fancy.
acts of relligion to the Pope, when they used the like reverent demeanor
toward him? or perhaps the Popes were not so relligious of late days, that
the honor done to them should be an honor of relligion. For you would have it
to be relligious, when it is done to relligious men, and for relligions sake,
and so to differ from the Civil forsooth. Likewise, the children of the
Adioynd. cap 9. Numb. 14.
Prophets, worshipped Elizeus, with relligious adoration, because they saw him
pass the river by miracle: a thing which every damned Greg. Hom. 29. in Huang
Corporali^ miracula, ost^^dunt aliqu^^de sanctitatem, no^ (...).
wretch might have done, to have wrought a miracle, and yet this must challenge
relligious adoration. But, if S. Austens notation of the word relligion be
true, de vera rell. c. 54. quod vni deo religet animas nostras, because it
binds our souls to God only, then sure though S. Austen had not put in vni
Deo, but only told us of religation, or of binding, it had been enough to show
that S. Austens meaning was, that relligious worship belonged only to God, as
to whom only we are bound in knots of soules-seruice, otherwise free, being
fellow-seruants between our selves, as you heard the Angel say but lately to
S. John. What else is there? The children of the Prophets, adorauerunt Eliam
proni in terram, worshipped Elias falling flat upon the ground, which you persist
to construe of relligious adoration, we see no cause why it should be so, no
more then Ruthes to Booz, or Mephibosheths to David, or the rest, whom you
sequester from this kind your self, though the Scripture speak of them in the
same phrase, as your self also acknowledge, numb. 15. But what marvel if ye
hale in these into your muster, when as Nabuchodonosor adored Daniel, you say,
with a relligious adoration, and Jacob worshipped the top of Joseph's rod, which
you would make a rood of, a puppet, or what you please, like the worshipping of
the footestoole, of which anon? For as they that run a whoring once after the
creature, forsaking the one and only true God, Romans 1. change him into the
vilest and lewdest shapes that may be, of calves, of creeping things, etc. so
it was meet that when you would bring down once your relligious adorations,
from that divine sublimitie, to such pelting trash, as in respect of God is
whatsoever the world contains, you should stay no where, but even bequeath it
to rods, to foot-stooles, and to what not? Was it all one for Jacob in his
feeble and accrazed state, to worship God upon the top of his staff, being
unable without that to sit up in his bed, (an act, without all doubt, of most
absolute devotion; for where would not he worship God, that worshipped him so?)
is it all one, I say, for an old man to worship God, raising himself upon his
staff in his bed; and to worship the staff it self with relligious worship?
Are you not afraid least this staff prove a scorpion to chastize you, while
you argue so wantonly, so wickedly, and yet so weakly: or that your hearers
hardly hold their hands from you, to be mocked so grossly? Or if Joseph be this
rod, as other some construe it, like that phrase in Esaias, Egredietur virga de
radice Iesse, will you persuade us that Jacob worshipped his staff, because he
worshipped God in the hopes of his son Joseph, shooting up like a plant out of
a pleasant ground, as they that came of the stock of Iesse before named? But
let us hear the Fathers, and how they interpret it. S. Primasius two ways
upon this place, but in neither of them dancing after your pipe. One while he
says, that Jacob worshipped his son Joseph as a temporal Prince over all the
land of Egypt. But if you take it of a spiritual and relligious worship, then
worshipped he Christ (says he) and his mystical Kingdom, over all creatures,
both in heaven and earth, not any material rod, which is heathenish to
Primasius. His words are. Jacob cognouit per illam virgam Joseph, designari
regnum Christi. Non ergo virga^ adorauit pro Deo, secundum ritum gentilium,
etc. The same words has Remigius, as it were borrowed of Primasius. But he
proceeds; Vel quantum ad literam, fortassis secundum consuetudinem illius
temporis adorauit virgam Joseph, quem videbat Dominum esse totius regni terrae
Aegypti; qua scilicet ratione, Hester legitur adorasse virgam Assueri. That is,
Jacob understood that the Kingdom of Christ was resembled and figured by that
rod of Joseph. He did not therefore worship the rod for God [or, with divine
worship] which is the manner of heathens and gentiles, etc. Or happily to
understand this text literally, it may be that according to the custom of
those times, he proceeded to worship Joseph's rod or scepter, whom he saw to
be Lord over all the land of the Kingdom of Egypt. In like sort as Ester is
recorded to have worshipped Assuerus his scepter. This is Primasius his
judgment. Haymo has the same word^s with Primasius.
Anselme upon the place says, Nos in noua translatione legimus, Adorauit
Israel Deum. Jacob worshipped God, (not the rod but God.) Which in our English
translation, the Rhemists so mislike, that they call it an intolerable
corruption. And again: Si adorasset fastigium virgae illius, non esset dicenda
sides. To worship the top of a staff, had been no faith (Infidelity rather,
and Idolatry, I suppose) whereas the Apostle brings in this for an example of
his faith. But he adored (says Anselme) sublime imperium Christi, the lofty
kingdom and government of Christ, to which he submitted himself with all his
heart. And whereas some read, Adorauit ad caput lectuli (which the Hebrew is
not against) he says, the holy man had his bed stand so, that he might
compose himself to prayer in it, upon any occasion, (but to prayer to God
only) and that was his worship here spoken of by the Apostle. As for Austen,
our Rhemists confess no less of him, and in one word they are so bare upon
this place, as they have not one Father so much as to pretend for them, by way
of color. And this may suffice about the worshipping of the staff, which
Erasmus makes so light of, that he thinks, to deride it, is to refute it. They
have found out (says he) a new fangle worship, the worship of the staff, by
their quaint Metaphysics, and their rare devises. Thus he.

7. As for the worshipping of the footstool, adorate scabellum, for adorate ad
scabellum, per ellipsin praepositionis alioqui bis inculcandae, and somewhat
like also in the Hebrew, though not altogether the same, the Bishop has so
plentifully Respons. ad Apolog. page 201.
cleared it in his answer, that it is more then wondrous how you dare meddle
with it, but that you are more then impudent in outfacing us with any thing.
And by this also may be seen, to what simple animals your work is dedicated,
that dare offer to feed them with such dirt for dietbread.

8. Nabuchodonosors also adoring of Daniel, is as frivolous, which you will
needs have to be with a relligious adoration. Dan. 2.
But you may remember, that incense also and sacrifice was offered to Daniel by
Nabuchodonosor, and to be short, he worshipped him in all points as a God. Will
you by this then prove your worshipping of Saints? Joseph. l. 10. e. 11.
Antiq. Iud. Nabuchodonosor non aliter Danielem quam Deum adoravit, divinis
iuvenem dignatus honoribus: that is, Nabuchodonosor worshipped Daniel no
otherwise then God himself, yielding divine honor to the young man. S.
Hierome resolves it, at last, thus. Regem stupore confusum ignorasse quid
faceret. That the King amazed at the wonderful effects of Daniel, knew not
what he did, and so discerned not inter servum and Dominum, between the
servant and the master, in giving honor. Hieron. Com. in 2. Dan. And Theod.
Com. in eundem loc. says, he gives the Priests charge to offer incense to
Daniel, not presuming himself upon that service, as too sacred for him.
Whereas the honor due to Saints, is such, as any body, not only the Priests,
may perform unto them, in the Papists opinion. Yea, I believe, they had rather
trust the poor ignorant people with this kind of duties, then their more
intelligent Clergymen. And Bellarmine does as good as confess this one
where, telling us how dangerous it is, to unfold their mysteries, of Saints,
and Images, in a popular assembly. But Theodoret brings yet another thing to
our mind. Co^sydera quanti sit, illu^ arrogantem and insaniae morbo correptum,
adorare captivum Iudaeorum, in ordine^ mancipiorum redactum, etc. That is;
[Consider what a thing it was for that proud and haughty Tyrant, almost mad
with pride, to adore a Jewish prisoner, one no better then a slave, etc.] Which
may teach the Jesuits, those stormers against the authority of heathen
Magistrates over believers, that servitude under Infidels, is no disparagement
to true virtue, wheresoever to be found. S. Chrysostom also, though he may
seem to waver through Com. in 11. ad Hebr. Homil. 26. in Ethico.
vncertenties, as one that does not greatly care to assoyle the question,
(professing that he had rather give his auditors occasion to search it by
themselves) yet once or twice he enclines this way; and with more reason.
(...). That is, He whom all the earth honored as God, reckoned of Daniel
even as of a God. And afterward comparing him with Herod, or rather more,
(...). That is, But Daniel accepted of divine honor, not of words only
tending that way (as Herod did.) Which how it may stand with Daniels piety, it
were good that you would consider a while. For Chrysostom meant not to leave
him with that aspersion, and yet thus you see he declares the nature of that
honor, which the Tyrant affoarded him. Lastly, his reason is, that the King
called him Beltazzar, which was the name of his God. Therefore it is likely he
honored him as God. Neither does Chrysostom neglect the note, formerly made
by Theodoret upon this place, that captivity under infidels, is no abatement
to true virtue. For here the conqueror adores the prisoner, etc.

9. As for the signification of the word adoro, if to that end only you
allege the place, to show what the word may sometimes signify concerning the
adoring of one man by another, and that not ciuilly only, but relligiously, it
follows not that it is every where to be so taken and construed of a
relligious worship, if in this monstrous and exoticall one act of
Nabuchodonosor toward the Prophet Daniel, it imports so. Your self bring many
places, and many examples, of Scripture, and holy men there recorded, by whom
you confess it is to be taken only of eiuill adoration, number. 15. of this
Chapter. As of Judith to Holophernes, of Abigail to David, etc. And Gregory de
Valentia, your champion for Idolatries, yet in the place that I shall quote by
and by out of him, is not afraid to grant as much, even in this very cause,
that Vno eodemque communi vocabulo res etiam diuersissimae significantur; that
is, that Unity of terms makes no identitie of things: or, diverse things are
sometimes signified by the same words. Lastly also, to your other quidditie,
that The worship of Saints is relligious worship, because yielded to Saints for
their relligion sake: I deny your reason. As well might you say, that the
worshipping of a wooden image is blockish worship, because done to a block;
or to relieve a soldier in case of necessity, is an act of souldierie, because
done for consideration of his souldierlike exploits in former times. Rather
say, because it springs from the virtue of relligion in the mind of him that
yields it, as the original of his act, and yet impera^t only, not elicient,
dirigent, not exequent, as your Schoolmen love to speak. But so are many acts
besides, neither done to relligious persons, or done to them, and yet not for
the relligions sake, which nevertheless are accounted relligious actions,
because they proceed from the virtue of relligion in the doers. As even your
own man acknowledges, Greg. de Val. Tom. 3. Disput. 6. Quaest. 11. etc.
denying flatly that the worship of Saints is properly or immediately relligious
worship, yet he adds in this wise: Quanquam non est negandum, quin ipsd
virtute relligionis erga Deum, vt ad VIRTVTVM ALIARVM officia, sic etiam ad
exhibendum sanctis honorem OBSERVANTIAE, (not relligionis) induci possimus.
That is, [Though it is not to be denied, that we may be moved, as to other
offices of sundry virtues, so to yield the Saints the honor of obseruancie,
out of the virtue of relligion toward God in our hearts.] So as both he would
have relligion to be only toward God, and yet an exciter or setter on of our
reverence to Saints, per modum imperantis, as I said before. And should we rest
in your devise of relligious worship, because given to certain men for their
relligions sake, weigh the consequence, and tell me how you like it. For by
this means it might come to pass, that two men at one time should both give
and take relligious worship of one another, and that equal in measure, if they
equal in merits, which were very uncouth (to say no more) that you should
worship him that worshipped you, and that just so much, and at the very same
time. Finally, whereas the Bishop denies, that creatures may be adored, and yet
both you and we grant, that there may be The Adioynder sinds a knot in a
bulrush, a contradiction in the Bishop where none is.
a civil adoration, you must understand the Bishop to speak of the sacred or
relligious adoration, in which fense S. Chrysostom in Epist ad Coloss. p 114. lin
20. edit. D. H. Sauile.
Chrysostom goes further the^ so, to deny even (...) (which is less the^
adoration, and but Valentiaes obseruancy) to Angels, to Archangels, or to any
creature whatsoever; but he means the sacred, or the relligious (...), even as
the Bishop does.

10. You brook not that S. Hieromes adorare ciueres Abdiae, in his Epistle ad
Marcella^i, should be expounded by the same S. Hierome, writing to Vigilantius,
and that not pauso vigilantius perhaps, by non ador^; we worship not only not
relliques, but neither Cherubim, nor Seraphim, nor any such like. Yet if it be
true which we are often taught by S. Austen, that Ecclesiastical writers are
not so absolute in their Vide page 249. h^ius c. 6. and add eundem August. de
vnitat. Eccl. pluribu^ locis.
writings, but that they may fall into error now and then, and be reformed by
the judgment of aftercomers, much more may they be corrected by their own
selves in other places, and their suddenner or less advised phrase of speech
one while, be qualified and tempered by their more deliberate resolutions, at
another. As here S. Hierome. In the full source of his Rhetorique, and where he
spoke without an adversary, or to one that could understand him inoffensiuely,
and with discretion sufficient, he speaks for adoring of Abdias his ashes,
that is zealous resorting to the place of his burial (for that is all:) but
where he spoke before his adversary, before Vigilantius, like the bird that
sleeps with the thorn at her breast, then more vigilantly, more accurately,
and more circumspectly, he denies it utterly, that they adore either relliques,
or things better then relliques, even those for whose sakes the relliques are
made much of. There, error Hieron. aduersus Vigilant.
iuuenum, and culpa muliercularum, non est imputanda relligiosis hominibus; the
error of young men, and the default of light giddie women is not to be imputed
to Relligious persons. There, paucorum culpa non praeiudicat relligioni, the
aberration of some few is no prejudice to relligion. Lastly, there, Non
adoramus, etc. we worship neither relliques, nor Martyrs, nor Angels, nor any
name that is named either in this world, or in the world to come, but God only.

11. Here also we have another cast of your sweet Latinity, numb. 22. Ais
Vigilantius, etc. Which, breaking of, you construe thus, you say that
Vigilantius, how fitly for Grammar, let the Grammarians judge. It pleases you
not, that the Bishop in the conclusion of his answers, inclines to that, that
S. Hieromes adoration is adoratio per (...), and not properly so called. For
(...), you say, is never used, but when there wants a proper word, witness
Quintilian, etc. You mean, never el^, but when the speaker wants a proper word
to express his mind by, as namely when he would either fall so low, or soar
so high, as no ordinary word occurreth to him to equal his conceits, though
the language has store enough besides. So here S. Hierome. Therefore he
expounds his adorare in one place, by non adorare, sed honorare, in another;
when the passion was cooled, and the judgment awaked. Non colimus and
adoramus, sed honoramus, etc. lib. 1. contra Vigil. The Grammarians will tell
you, because you send us to the Grammarians, that there is a (...) in this
verse of Vergil, and least happily you find it not, in the word sperare. Hunc
ego si potui tantum sperare dolorem; Aeneid. 4.
though the language have diverse more to supply the sense of it, as timere,
prouidere, metuere, etc. S. Austen also aduertising us contra Faustum, lib. 22.
c. 18. that Abusio verborum in omnibus linguis late patet, which is in effect,
that Catachresis spreads further then want of words by much, in any language.

12. But I may not omit numb. 18. where you think you have spoiled a jest of
the Bishops. But one could you? Though you shall find earnest where you look
for jest, at those hands; woollen pace and iron vengeance; severity loves to
mask in smiles. I quoted S. Chrysostom to you before, that the Saints
merriments are holy earnest, and S. Austen contra Faustum lib. 15. c. 9.
speaking to the Church, bids her misericorditer irridere, deride and pity, or,
compassionately deride, the madness of the Manichees, her transported
adversaries. At other times you are wont to charge the Bishope Chap. 10.
Adioynd, sub fine.
with the clean contrary, as harsh and crabbed in the Genius of his style, not
propense to jesting, (...) -- (...).

(...) --
as Homer says of the champions in their deathfull combat; so hard a thing it
is to give you content. But what is it you bring? That, puluerem lingere, is
not in all that Epistle of S. Hierome ad Marcellam, but only lambere lignum
crucis, not to lick the dust, but to lick the wood of the cross. A great
mistake surely, to put the one for the other. And yet puluerem lingere, to
lick the dust, is the honester of the twain, as S. Austen describing the
idolatry of the Gentiles, whom our Savior calls dogs, in his speech with
the poor caytiffe, Matthew. 15. (the image of us all) It is true (says S.
Austen) the Gentiles are dogs, for canum est lingere saxa, Sermon. de Temp.
it is a dogs property to lick stones, and so ligna too, so statuas, and the
rest; whereas the other the Psalm directly leads us to, speaking of the
conversion of the Gentiles to God, that they shall lick the dust of his feet,
or footstool. Psalm.
If you are not ashamed of the first, why should you be of the second, which is
so much more countenanced, as you see, then the other? Or, to speak in your
own words which you delight in, as it were your darling, if ye be
cruci-ligni-lambi, why should you be afraid to be pulueri-lingi? But if not
this, how the other? So that you see in effect it comes all to one. But for so
much as the Bishops drift was, only to show that S. Hierome speaks
figuratively in that discourse, and you have no way to resist him, but only by
saying, that all the Epistle is not figurative, as if some might not be, though
all were not, let us see if you think good, not how many elegant metaphores
and allegories, as you confess, are scattered throughout the context of that
Epistle, but whole periods of speech, tending to the same purpose of devotion,
can be construed no otherwise then only figuratively. First, Sepulchrum Domini
quotiescunque ingredimur, toties iacere in syndone cernimus saluatorem. That
is, As often as we go into the sepulcher of our Lord, so often we see our
Savior wrapped in a linen cloth to lie before us. Is this true properly? Is it
true without a figure? Yet add again, Et paululum ibidem commorantes, rursum
videmus Angelum sedere ad pedes eius, and ad caput sudarium conuolutum. That
is, And staying there but a while, again we see thee Angel to sit at his
feet, and his clothes wrapped or folded toward his head. Can ye understand this
to be true without a figure? But come to the end, and to the place that you
now touch upon, see whether there be any scanty of figures. In Oliueti montem,
cum ascendente Domino, voto and animo subleuemur. Let us be lifted up in heart
and wishes into the mount of Oliuet, together with our Lord asce^ding. Yet our
Lords ascent is long since past, and we come too late to ascend with him now.
Again, Videre exire Lazarum fascijs colligatum, and fluenta Iordanis ad
lauacrum Domini puriora, etc. To see Lazarus come forth bound about with his
partlets, and the river of Jordan waxing the purer for our Saviors bathing in
it. Inde ad mare veniemus Genezareth, and de quinque and septem panibus
videbimus in deserto quinque and quatuor hominum miillia saturata; That is,
From thence we will come to the sea of Genezareth, and of five loaves and
seven, we will see five and four thousand men satisfied in the wilderness. Is
this also true properly? or could Marcella, and her inuitresses, see these
things without a figure? But what a shake does he give to your superstition of
Saints, when he concludes thus? Pergemus ad Itabyrium, and tabernacula
salnatoris, non vt Petrus voluit cum Mose aut cum Elia, sed cum patre cernemus
and spiritu sancto. We will go to the mount Taber, and we will there behold
the tabernacle of our Savior, not as Peter would with Moses and Elias, but
with the Father and the holy Ghost. Do you see whom he leads us to, and from
whom he weanes us? From Moses, and Elias, that is, the Saints, to our Savior
and his company, to wit, the Father and the holy Ghost. Unless happily it
delight you to err with Peter, because Petrus aliter voluit, Peter seemed to
be of another mind. I believe your selves will be glad here to acknowledge a
figure.

13. To conclude about relliques, and their adoration, how may they be believed
to have adored relliques, that were no friends to the keeping of them, as we
may gather diverse ways? For though relliques may be kept, and not adored; yet
no adoration, if no keeping. S. Ambrose lib. 1. de Abraham. cap. 9. bids us,
non diutius inhaetere ^^rtuis, but only officij quantum satis est defer.
That is in effect, to bury the departed, but not to dwell long upon dead
coarses; which how it can stand with the preserving of relliques, I say not
honoring, observing, worshipping them? And again the same Father, l. 2. de
officijs, c. 28. In sepulturis Christianorum requies defunctorum est: In the
burial of Christians, is the repose of the dead: which stands not with
relliques, either to be preserved, or dug up. And in the same place again,
Nemo potest indignari humandis fideliu^ relliquijs spacia esse laxata: that is,
It is no fault, nor thing to be grudged at (unless then by the Arians, who
carpt S. Ambrose without cause, and so now by the Jesuits) that the ground is
enlarged to bury the remnants of faithful bodies massacred.) Is this man
likely to countenance relliques, or the worshipping thereof? Sozomen, lib. 4.
c. 20. says, that when there was consultation about remoouing the body of
Constantine the great, out of the Church of Constantinople, (where it was first
interred,) because they feared the fall of that Church, this purpose was
resisted by such as took part with the Nicene Council, that is, the godly and
the Orthodoxe, who held it, says Sozomen, for no less a sacrilege, to
translate dead bodies, then to break open tombs violently and felloniously.
And do not these condemn the use of relliques, which in you is accompanied
with translation, with circumgestation, and such like pompes? Yet behold, when
the Church was like to fall, they refused to be of party with the preseruers
of the bones of that divine Emperor, by translating them, not but that they
were worthy the preserving with the best. When Chrysostom. etc. (...), etc.
Theod. lib. 3. histor. cap. 10.
Babylas his body was translated from Daphne to Antioch, by Iulians
appointment, and the devils instigation (not by any seeking of the Christian
people) they cried that accompanied it, all the way as they went, Confunda^tur
omnes qui adorant sculptilia, Confounded be al they that worship carved images.
Does this please you? Optatus will tell you his opinion of Lucilla, that
factious dame, and employer of her wealth to support mutinies against the
Church of God, as S. Austen reports of her in more then one place: I say,
Contr. Petili. (...). etc. Contr. Parmen. lib. (...).
Optatus will tell you how wicked she was, in not receiving the Sacrament of
the Lords body and blood, unless she had kissed the relliques of a certain
Martyr that morning, if at least a Martyr, says Optatus. Yet you are for
kissing them, in your numb. 24. very definitiuely. And if it be godly to kiss
them, why not also to begin the communion with such a service? And may not we
say of your Martyrs, as Optatus does of hers, of Lucillaes I mean, si tamen
Martyris, if at least they be Martyrs, either your ancient, or your modern?
But Optatus mislikes this doting upon Martyrs relliques, though true Martyrs,
as the place shows. Of Joseph and Nicodemus, no snatchers after relliques,
not so much as clothes, though they had as fair opportunity as ever any, I
told you before. Yet doubtless their behavior was a lesson to posterity, how
to be affected toward the dead bodies of Saints. They committed it to the
ground, and that was all, though the rather to a garden, in the hope of
reviving and reflourishing the third day, as from a fertile soil, as S.
Ambrose sweetly gathers, alluding to our Saviors speedy resurrection. So
likewise of S. Gregory In Lucam.
l. 3. Registri, Epist. 30. ad Constant. August. It amazed him to hear the
dead bodies should be dug up again, or as the fashion before had been, (S.
August. so witnessing, S. Noui multos sepulchrorum adoratores, etc. Et in
Epist. Hieron. quoque. Vid. Epist. eius.
Hierome, and diverse more) that the fragments of Martyrs should be carried up
and down, under pretense of devotion, but indeed for sale, or for gaze of
idle people. It being one thing not to neglect either the body of a Martyr,
after he had given up his soul in the Imper^tores Honori^s and Theodosi^^
Augg. lege^ tulerunt, Nemo martyrs distrahat, (this was to put the Martyrs to
a second death, I am ^os secunda (...) ma^et, to speak with Bo^thi^^) nemo
mercetur. By the way, note the power of Kings commanding about matters of
relligion. But more fully, read Gregor. T^^. l. 9. c. 6. and that hideous
history of a Rellique-monging impostor, with his sachel full of rats-bones,
and roots, and the teeth of moales, and the fat of bears, etc. Yet he
concludes, Multi sunt qui (...) s^ctiones exercent, and populum rusticum in
errorem mittere non desinunt. De quibus opinor Dominus in Euangelio,
Surrecturos in novissimis qui etiam electos in errorem inducant, etc. Is it not
pity that we Englishmen, will not traffike with the Jesuits, for such ghostly
commodities?
defense of the Christian faith, or some limb of his body casually brought to
hand, to preserve it from unseemly and unmanly disparagements, who but for his
constancy in Christ's cause, might happily have been buried in his ancestors
tombs; another thing to convert it to profane idolatry. I have omitted
Origin, lib. 8. contra Celsum, who thus professes of his time, and of the
doctrine they had learnt. Organa rationalis animae sepulchro honorifice demand
are didicimus: We have learned to recommend honorably to the grave, the
instruments of the soul reasonable, that is, the bodies of men, and the
members thereof. Therefore not to make relliques of them. In Victor Vticensis,
lib. 1. de Persecut. Vandal. we have two examples hereof. One of Armogastes, a
godly Christian, who desired Felix (another of the profession) sepeliri sub
arbore siliquae,. i. that being dead he might be buried under a homely tree (if
a tree,) non cum triumpho and gratia, not with triumph, and favor, or
solemnity. As for the Sarcophagus, which appeared, as it were by miracle, in
the place by him allotted for his burial, I impute that to the satisfaction of
his godly desire, about a quick consumption, or turning into nothing, then
which nothing can be more repugnant to your ceremony of Relliques. Another in
the same book a little before, of Deogratias, Bishop of Carthage, whose worthy
members (so speaks the Historian) the people out of their zeal might have
violently snatched away, or pulled a sunder, nisi CONSILIO PRVDENTVM nesciente
multitudine sepeliretur:. 1. unless he had been buried whiles the people did
not know of it, at the suggestion or direction of wise men. So as to resist
your Relliquations (the true bankruptures of relligion) is wisdom to Victor,
and to the ancient Christians that lived before him. But let S. Hierome end
this matter, in De vita Hilarionis, where he will tell you, that S. Hilarion
gave order before his death, to be buried in his clothes, in tunica cilicina,
in his coat of sackecloath, and sago rustico, and his homely cloak, or of the
country fashion, cum cuculla, with his hood, and ne puncto quidem horae post
mortem reseruari, and not to be kept above ground, no not an instant of an
hour, after his departure. Would he have been content to have been pickled up
in Relliques? And in the same book, Anthony charged them that were about him,
to bury him privily, where no man might know of it, least one Pergamius, as he
said, a very rich man of that country, and belike devout in his kind, should
steal away his body, and enclose it in a shrine. The like was done to Moses
body for the same cause, God every where forbidding to seek the living among
the dead, as you do plainly in your relliques, worshipping not them, but
Christ in them, as you stick not to triumph, numb. 25. of this chapter. But so
much shall suffice to have spoken hereof.

14. Yet you think to mend the matter, with your De Civit. Dei. l. 10, c. 1.
and quaest. in Genes.
moath-eaten distinction of adoratio latriae, quoting S. Austen for it, number.
28. But S. Austen never said, that we may adore a creature, whether Saint or
Saints rellique, with a relligious adoration, no not under latria, or never so
dulically. He says, the word adoration is equivocal, which is very true, I
grant, and transferred to men, whom we adore ciuilly: for he speaks of
Abraham adoring the Gentiles, that is, the children of Heth, which for certain
was but civil. Quaest, in Genesis 23.
But taking it in the sense of relligious adoration, as we now do in our
question with you, he never denies but that it is proper to God. I will observe
a few clauses, out of his de Ciuit. Dei, which you quote, lib. 10. c. 1. He
expounds relligionem seruare erga Angelos, by sacrificare, and sacra facere.
But you will have no sacrificing to them, nor S. Austen neither. Therefore no
relligion is due to them. His words are; Nunc videndum ac disserendum est,
quomodo credendi sint Angeli velle a nobis pietatem relligionemque seruari, hoc
est vt apertius dicam, vtrum etiam sibi, an tantum Deo suo, qui and noster est,
placeat eis vt sacra faciamus, and sacrificemus, vel aliqua nostra, seu
nosipsos, RELLIGIONIS ritibus consecremus. Again, Seruitus duliae quae debetur
hominibus, is such a servitude, according to which the Apostle commands
servants to be subject to their masters. Only this, is due hominibus, to men,
says S. Austen, or of this kind only. And will this kind of service content
your Saints? It will not certainly. Therefore S. Austen patronizeth not your
dulia to Saints. Mean while, you may well blush reading this place of S.
Austen, or of the Apostle either, concerning the dulia due to masters from
their servants, that have extinguished all allegiance and subjection upon
earth, what The two questions still cross, or rather kiss one another, of our
subjection to Princes, and devotion to God.
by your treasons, and what by your releases, to erect an I mean odious even
to the Saints themselves. Witness Chrysostom. Homil. 9. in 3. ad Coloss. See
page 293 huius.
odious service to Saints in heaven. S. Austen goes forward, to show, that not
only these things, quibus nos relligiosa humilitate submittimus, to which we
submit our selves by a conscionable humility, or a relligious humility, are
said coli; but etiam subiecta nobis, diverse things under us: so that the
cultus of creatures, is of that kind, by which, things that are inferior to
us, may be honored, and therefore surely not relligious. Yea, but S. Austen
says, that we submit our selves to the creature, relligiosa humilitate, by
relligious humility. What marvel, when he acknowledges in the same place,
that not only adoratio, but relligio, and pietas, are words aequiuocall, or of
diverse significations? For we are pij in parents, (which even S. Paul shows
to Timothy) and (...). 1. Tim. 5. (...).
exhibemus relligionem, says he, quibuscunque necessitudinibus, to
affinities, and kinreds, not only doctissimorum, but also imperitorum. To all
these, we perform a reverence of relligion. But relligion, as it stands for
holy, for sacred, and spiritual, you are not able to show, where S. Austen
ever allows to the creatures. Therefore your distinction of dulia is
impertinent, and never owned by S. Austen in this sense. Yea Gregory himself
de Valentia, Tom. 3. Disp. 6. Quaest. 11. de Idol. puncto 5. at last awakes,
and recants the old error of his consorts, about relligious worship, to be
given to any but God. Sequitur ex dictis actionem illam, qua Sanctis honorem
damus, proxime non pertinere ad virtutem relligionis, sed ad aliam long
diuersam, quae species quaedam obseruantiae erga rationales (no talk of
SANCTAS) creaturas sit. And he adds, Quae doctrina est Divi Augustini, quoting
lib. 10. de Ciuit. dei, c. 1. (the very place that we ground upon) and
explicatur (says he) a D. Thoma 2. 2. q. Falsely printed in Valentia, 10. 3.
103. art. 3. and 4. Again, (that you may know it slipped not from him unawares)
Actus proprius virtutis relligionis diuinam gloriam spectat proxime, and
indirco ad deum tantummodo proxime pertinet: Actio vero qua veneramur Sanctos,
non nisi etc. And, Hoc discrimen inter vtrumque cultum, dei scilicet and
Sanctorum, quod profecto LONG MAXIMVM EST and ADMODVM REALE, indicare volunt
Orthodoxi Doctores, cum etc. Then, Qua sane ratione illi non differentiam
verbalem tantum assignant, sed eo diuerso loquendi modo differentiam illam
realem inter vtramque colendirationem significant, quam exposuimus iam esse
MAXIMAM, inter duas illas virtutes dictas, relligionem nempe erga deum, and
peculiarem erga creaturas praestantes (not yet SANCTAS) obseruantia^. And
repeating the same again, Exposuimus quemadmodum honor Sanctis, non per
virtutem relligionis proxime, sed per aliam LONG DIVERSAM exhibeatur. So
ashamed is the late Jesuit, and ponderer of all the circumstances of this
cause, to stand to relligious worshipping of creatures, in any sense, though
never so diminutiue. Yet he proceeds in his rage against Calvin, to contradict
himself after so many declarations of his mind. Quanquam si maxim vna
eademque relligionis virtute alium deo, alium Sanctis honorem tribueremus, non
equidem satis intelligo quidnam iccirco de diuino honor detraheretur, vti
fingit Calvinus. Vt enim eadem virtute charitatis etc. An evident contradiction
out of mere malice to Calvine, not that he repents of his former doctrine. For
if there is to be maximum and reale discrimen, between our worship of God, and
of the creatures, and, LONG DIVERSA VIRTUES, which applies us to them both,
etc. how can it be without Gods great dishonor, to give the creature his
worship, or the creatures to him? But what marvel, when he will have us love
God and our neighbor with the like, yea the SAME charity? Which is not to be
granted, save so far forth as the name is the same, but the thing most
diverse. Yet this is his doubtie instance of this matter. Will you hear what S.
Austen says in other places hereof? Lib. 20. contra Faustum, c. 5. Solus ille
colendus, quo solo fruens beatus fit cultor eius, and quo solo non fruens omnis
men's misera est, etsi qualibet re alia perfruatur. That is, He only is to be
worshipped, (namely relligiously,) in the fruition of whom stands the
blessedness of the worshipper, and by want of whom alone, each soul turns
miserable, though it plentifully enjoy all things besides. Are Saints such? Are
Angels such? or is any creature in the world such? Yet you tell us most
absurdly of a divine cult, Numb. 26. (for so cult you are, or so quilted in
your terms) as if there were an inferior and humane answering to it. S.
Austen knows no colere here, and therefore no adorare, of ought else save God
only, in whose fruition alone consists our blessedness, and not in the fruition
of one another. And of Martyrs more plainly in the same book, cap. 21. (for
Faustus it seems urged him with the Christian practice, which might be
straggling in some few, but surely Catholic in the maine, as he complains in
the same place, that the godly of his age are compeld to bear with many
things, which they liked not, and yet could not redress, Aliud est quod
docemus, aliud quod sustinemus) Sic de moritus Eccl. c. 34. etc.
I say, of Martyrs, he thus professes: Colimus Martyrs, sed eo cultu quo in
hac vita coluntur Sancti homines. That is, We worship Martyrs, but with such a
kind of worship, as holy men are worshipped with, during this life, that is,
during their mortality, during their corruption, and that Heb. 12. 1.
same fast-cleauing sinnefulnes; which is wonder if it should stretch so far,
as to relligious adoration of men, not only frail, but also faulty, and
obnoxious. Finally, to omit how (...) is more the^ (...), if at least Aug. de
Morib. Eccl. Cath. c. 30. Merito ecclesia Catholiea nullam nobis creaturam
adorandam inducit, cui servire iubeamur. Remouet a creatura adorationem etiam
eam quae cum simplici seruitute coniunctaest. Quorsum ergo de Dulia?
there be any difference, whereas you would have us serve the creature more
submissiuely, and more basely, namely per (...), God more remissely, by your
latria, as you call it, (which is exceeding preposterous, that we should submit
to men lower then to God.) as also that the 70. put the one for the other, opus
(...), not for a work of relligion, but of ordinary household service: Yea the
new Testament does the fame, sometime confounding them, as Apoc. 22. 13. (...),
sometimes complaining of the (...) of the creatures (which you are not offended
at) (...), Gal. 4. 8. sometime extending even latria to the creature, or
seeming to extend it, as (...), Heb. 13. 10. To omit these, I say, S. Austen
cuts the throat of this bastardly distinction, whom you S. Austen would have
both duliae and latria given to God, not to Saints. 1 (...) Lao Sermon 8. de Not.
Dom. Ne^ sunt gradus (...) (...), ^c. 2
very friuolously entitle the father to it. Quaest. in Exodus 94. he
appropriates latria to God as God, dulia to him as Lord. So as, first,
worshipping God, we shall worship him in disparitie, and in inequality, as if
there were any thing in God to be worshipped less then another, and not all to
be worshipped after the most excellent fashion that we can. Yea by this means,
we shall worship God with the worship of the creature, namely by dulia, if your
distinction say true, which how can you think convenient, I pray you? For if
God, as the creature, then the creature as God. Why not? Though it is worse to
abase God, then to exalt the creature, and yet both most dangerous. Lords into
the world, contrary to that, Ephesians. 4. 5. vnus Dominus, likewise Isa. 42. 8. 1.
Cor. 8. 6. or else your dulia must come to nothing. I have to an end.

15. You rest not satisfied with the Bishops answer, to those words of S.
Ambrose, Crux Christi in regibus adoratur, De obit. Theodos.
the cross of Christ is adored in Kings: that, if the cross of Christ be
adored in Kings, then with the same adoration that Kings are, which is not
spiritual, nor relligious. What can you find fault with in this answer? For if
the cross with one adoration, and the King with another, be to be adored, it
had been more for the commendation of the cross, to have said, we worship it
wheresoever, even in the beggarliest creatures, where no cause else appears of
worshipping. But because it is true, that when we give honor to the King, we
honor per accidens all that he is adorned with, for so much as the Emperors
abhorred not the monument of the cross in their attires, S. Ambrose shows how
much it has gained by their conversion, namely to be honored alike with the^,
yet ciuilly still, and not relligiously. So S. Austen, as I remember, Contra
Faust. Manich. Sed and contra Crese. Grammat. Grammat. 2. c. 15. Honoramus
Sacramenta in gestante.
says, the Sacrament either of Baptism, or Circumcision, is worshipped in the
partaker, adoratur in gestante; there the man for the sacrament, here the thing
for the man's sake that carried it about him, winnes honor and respect: but
how? Sicut ipsa incircumcisio in allophylo spernebatur, as the want of the
sacrament was despised in a forrreyner. Yet none ever worshipped the sacrament of
Baptism relligiously (and much less circumcision) as you would have us to do
your cross, or your wooden images, though we acknowledge the worth of Gods
institution, wheresoever we find it. So as neither civil is relligious first,
nor all adoration the adoration that you strive for, but an honorable esteem,
nor the cross the cross, by S. Hieroms exposition, as you shall hear anon.
As for defer redemptioni, which you say follows immediately in S. Ambrose,
to honor our redemption, that is it that we plead for, and we do that
without adoring either wood or picture, yet excited happily by occurring
memorialls and aduertisements whatsoever. As S. Austen acknowledges, that ab
admonitu locorum we think of the Saints, and endeavor the imitation of them
so much the more zealously, when we but come into their Churches (I mean
Churches called by their names, not otherwise) lib. 20. contra Faust. c. 21.
How much more then, are we ravished with the admiration of our Savior,
considering the very instrument upon which he dyed for us? So Helen, when she
had found, not the sign of The Adioynd. of Helen, numb. 29.
the cross, but the very cross it self, or the remainders thereof, S.
Ambrose carefully prouides his spell, as I may say, to exempt her from blame,
that, non vtique lignum, she Vbi prius.
adored not the wood, which is a heathenish passion, and the vanity of the
wicked, says he. And if she worshipped not the wood, she worshipped nothing of the
cross that she found in Palestine, which was all of wood, but her Savior, and
her redeemer, by that occasion lively brought to her remembrance, him she
worshipped. Even so they that approached the Emperor in his Court, with the
cross in his garments, from thence they rose to think of their redemption. In
other cases you may distinguish between lignum (as you are wont) and forma
Sancti, or Sanctae, in ligno, but here if not lignum, nothing but redemptorem,
and seruatorem, without question. But not lignum, says S. Ambrose, that is the
Pagans error, therefore not ferrum they, nor any such material, whether in
bosse, or bridle, or in the kings crown. Ego crucem dico, non lignum, sed
passionem, says S. Hierome, in Psalm. 46. I by the cross understand Christ's
suffering. And when I profess to worship the one, I mean my affection and
devotion to the other. And yet you quote a fresh testimony of S. Hierome,
vncited by the Cardinal, saying that Apolog 2. advers. Ruff.
he adored the cradle and the cratch, coming to Bethleem. No doubt as he did
the ashes of Abdias before, in his visitation of the holy places, or as they
did in whose person he there speaks. Was our Saviors cratch (for cradle he
had none) or Abdias ashes, remaining, think you, till then? As for admonitus
locorum, as S. Austen speaks, the place was not so ruinous, but it might put
him in mind of who had been there sometime. Yet you never so much as mention
this explanation of S. Hieroms, concerning the cross, to understand the
passion by it, which the Bishop alleges, whom nevertheless you may accuse for
leaving out whole periods, and taking no notice of principal arguments, of
which we are now to consider in the second place.

16. Bishop, for not printing all his adversaries words, but suppressing
somewhat of that which was forcible. And you descant merrily, that happily it
might be for lack of room in the margent, or some such cause. But what would
you say, if he printed none at all, as few do, and as the fashion is, or but
very sieldome, now adays? though I have scarcely seen a book that has so
much printed of his adversaries text, especially in the margent, unless it
contained all, without any contractions. Is there no refutation unless all be
spoken to? what end may we then look for? But at least you should have
performed this your self, before you taxed others, who of all writers are
simply the farthest off from it, not excepting your colleague that lately raged
against the Bishop in like sort, as you do now. And if no body had flewen upon
the Bishops book, but he which had perused and confuted it, by peecemeale,
omitting nothing, the first stone had not yet been cast at it, nor I think
ever would be cast, the most of it being such stone-worke, as no less
impregnable to your confutation, then rock and flint to your digestion. But I
pray let us hear this same notable argument, which dropped thorough the sieue,
when his fellows stayed behind. You say the Bishops argument, about the
covering of sins, has been an hundred times answered, (in your Numb. 25.) I
believe, this no less then a thousand. And indeed how little pertinent was it
to the grand question, viz. his Majesty's challenge of five hundred years? and
then how loosely, how wretchedly does it hang together? As thus, That because
Adam fills us full of sins, as soon The Card, infers with the blessed
Apostle, that seeing the sin of Adam was of force to make us truly sinners,
the merits and grace of Christ are of far greater force, to purge and cleanse
us from our sins, and to make us truly just: otherwise our help is not
equivalent to our harm, our remedy to our disease, our rising to our fall, nor
our gain to our loss, nor consequently Christ to Adam, etc. The Adioynders
clo quence, numb. 40.
as we are borne, therefore the gift of regeneration, which we have by Christ,
replenishes us as suddenly with all manner of righteousness, and euacuates in
us the body of sin. Is it not pity this Achilles should have been past
over in silence? Which the ears of our Sophisters every day ring with, and the
schools, Churches, streets, with the answer of it. Again, that Adam conveyed
inherent corruption to us, therefore the righteousness that we have by Christ
is more then imputative. As if first we denied the riches of Christ's grace, to
be plentifully To the 2.
inherent in the souls of his Saints, as faith, as temperance, as patience, as
charitablenes, etc. Ibunt de virtute in virtutem: though the maine by which we
hold, and by which we are saved, is not our own strength, or our own virtue,
but the sufficiency only inherent Pronihilo salvos facies eos; which
construction of the Fathers in this sense, (though deflected) Andradius
himself mislikes not, but erounds a rule upon it for the like expositions.
Defens. Council. Trid. calling it, expositio per accommodationem: (belike,
though praeter scopum.)
in the person of our Redeemer, which questionless is made ours, because
interpreted to be ours, by the fathers gracious acceptance, as if our selves
were possessed of it, which is that terrible imputation, that you are so
startled with. As if our Lord had not plainly said in S. John's Gospel, drawing
toward his death, Ego pro ijs Sanctifico me; I sanctify my self for them,
showing that both in life and death he wrought for us, he served our turn, and
not his own. For even in this sense also, he came to serve and not to be
served. But if this be your skill in the principles of Divinity, as not to
understand how Christ both saues us by S Hierom Co^. in Epist. ad Philem, at
those words, Mihi imputa, acknowledges the like between Christ and us (for
matter of Imputation) is was between Paul and Philemon: saying immediately,
Imitator domini sui, and Christu^ in se loquentem habens, ea debet sacere quae
Christus, etc.
imputation, and yet powers upon us the gifts of his holy spirit really,
howsoever abated by our in-dwelling corruption, and therefore not of ability to
protect us in the day of judgment, I may doubt also whether you be perfect in
Adams case, upon which you ground your argument, whose very act of eating the
forbidden fruit, is so ours, (says S. Gregory Nazianzen) ((...),) that it were
enough to condemn us, though no other imperfection had ^rat in S. Baptis^.
been conveyed from him unto us. And so the merits of our Lord, which are
without us, save us, his fasting, his praying, his weeping, his bleeding (like
Adams reaching, eating, and presuming) though each of them convey a certain
positive store unto us, the second Adam of holiness, as the first does of
viciousnes. But I have stood too long upon so trifling an objection, specially
since the Apostle never compares them in this point, in his 5. to the Romans
which you here quote, I mean the one in ministering righteousness, as much as
the other does sin, and that presently, but either grace answerable to former
trespasses, which grace is in remitting, not only in replenishing; in
forgiving, not only in infusing; or the number of the one people, with the
number of the other, that belong to each root, viz. Adam and Christ, (where by
the way you tell us, numb. 39. your Latin translation says, Plures per
Christum quam per Adamum, more are restored by Christ, then are perished in
Adam, which were worth the knowing how:) or lastly, that in the substance of
their gift they may be equalled, though the remedy come halting after the
offense in time, like Lite after Ate. Regnabunt iusti, v. 17. and,
constituentur, v. 19. (both future.) And so to the Cor. Primo quod animale, 1.
15.
deinde quod spirituale, and as the Psalm says, Which day by day were
fashioned, when as yet there was none of them, but in thy book they were all
written, viz. the members of the inward man and all. And, vt sit sine macula
and ruga, that she Aug. l. 2. Re^r. and, lib. de perfect. iusticiae. Hieron.
etiam in Hier. 31. Bernard. in fest. omn. Sanct. homil. 3. Thom. part. 3. q. 8.
art. 3. ad 1. To the I.
may be without spot and wrinckle, not that now she is so, (S. Austen so
construing it) Ephesians. 5. And, Iustorum lux sicut aurora, crescens paulatim vsque
ad perfectum diem: The light of the righteous is like the morning (says
Solomon) which flasheth not forth all at once, but by little and little
creeps on to perfect day. By which also you are answered, to your first
cavil of the two above propounded, concerning our first birth from Adam, and
our second regeneration by Christ. Whereas we are regenerating here all the
time of our life, (you happily think it is done in a moment) for which cause
Ista dece^ menses non peperere bona. Prop.
it is called, the Regeneration by our Savior, even the resurrection of the
dead is, Matthew. 19. 28. A most true saying, Non moritur hostis, nisi in
resurrectione mortuorum. August, in Psalm. and, Moriendo nascimur, it must cost
us our life, in this sense most of all. Hence it is, that S. Paul, Phil. 4. Non
quod peruenerim ad resurrectionem mortuorum, not that as yet I have attained
(says he) to the resurrection of the dead. Alas, who had? But he means of
his slow creeping to perfection daily, I suppose like that of Ionathans
armor-bearer, toward the top of an high mountain, upon his hands and his
knees, so between humble prayer and fervent endeavor. Contrary to which
opinion of S. Paul, touching himself, Hymenaeus and Philetus proudly gave out
that the resurrection was already past, viz. on their sides, as if they had
been at the top of the ladder of perfection, much like to that which the
Jesuits dream of now a days among themselves. See, 2. Tim. 2. 17. And Canus
expounding it in the aforesaid sense, (which I report for his commendation)
lib. 4. locorum, cap. 6.

17. To Numb. 35. That, Justin Martyr, Origin, Hierome, Austen, Gregory the
great, and collation (as you say) of the Scriptures themselves teach, that
covering of sins is a full remission of them, may well make against you, that
hold punishments of sins to remain to be abidden after remission, as if God
would punish what he had once pardoned, yea truly and fully pardoned, as says
the Cardinal: against us nothing Card. in Apol. c. 7. p. 84. l. 19. as the
Adioynder quoteth him in this 9 cap. numb. 33. page 387.
at all, who teach, that our sins are so pardoned, when they are pardoned, as
we shall never come into condemnation for them, Romans 8. though the spring of
old corruption be not clean dried up in us. The Apostle saying there, not that
there is no crime in us, but no (...), after we are engraffed into Christ, and,
non ne insit, sed ne obsit, as S. Austen speaks, peccatum regnans being one
thing, and peccatum inhabitans another, and the Iebusite not so easily turned
out of doors, to use S. Bernards allegory. Yet most Vbi prius.
pitifully you quote the Cardinal, saying, that it is Christ's disgrace, if he
could not truly and properly purge, or make clean those, that are borne again
in him. As if it were for want of power in Christ, that we are not suddenly
perfited, that the Iebusite is not cast out upon the sudden. Whereas rather
his power is perfected in weakness, and, his Grace is sufficient for us: and as
God would not suddenly cast out all the inhabitants of the land of Canaan
before the children of Israel, Josh. 17.
because they were not enough to empeople the Country, thinking it the more
easy affliction of the two, that they should be encombred with enemies, then
ouer-run with wild beasts; so here to keep out pride, like a wild beast, and
to exercise us with daily struggling against concupiscence our enemy, (our foe,
the fomes) Almighty God has deferred to work a perfect regeneration of us,
though he has granted from the beginning a perfect remission, which is your
monstrous error, not to distinguish between remitting and remoouing faults,
between releasing them and rooting them clean out.

18. The like I say to your quotations out of Esaias, and diverse other Prophets,
Numb. 36. namely, that the iniquity of Gods people shall be taken away, wiped,
or blotted out, abolished like a cloud, like a dew, like a mist, that our
sins shall be buried in the bottom of the sea, that he has removed them as
far from us as the East is from the West, that our sin shall be sought and
not be found, with many the like: Quoad reatum nimirum, not quoad vitium, in
regard of the guilt, not in regard of the fault, of the stain, of the
corruption, which has taken deep rooting in mortality, and is not pulled
out, but with Cor ipsum eum cupiditatibus evellendum. Sen.
our very heart. We reuolue all these sentences, with unspeakable comfort, for
securing of our conscience against the hour of tentation, though we dare not
wax insolent, because of the sense of our infirmity, continuing in us, that
we can not do as we would, Gal. 5. 17. and for that no good thing dwells in
our flesh, and, we see a law of sin in our members, rebelling against the law
of our mind, yea and leading us captive to the law of sin, Romans 7. But, cum
venerit quod perfectum est, abolebitur quod imperfectum, and when this
mortality shall put on immortality, and our corruptible be clothed with
incorruption, when we shall see him as he is, and be satisfied with his
likeness, then it will be otherwise with us. You in the mean time are all for
the present, as if the Jerusalem were on earth which comes down from heaven,
and is not ready for her husband yet, but yet is making ready daily. For when
you bring in that among the rest, that sins like skarlet shall be made as
white as snow, you must beware how you stretch it too far, beyond the sense,
though you are a partial friend to the Cardinals skarlet, whose cause you
plead, and which perhaps you look to inherit one day: neither think that
sins shall ever turn so white, as to become virtues, but the indulgence of a
father, forgiving all that is amiss, turns skarlet to snow, into innocence
guiltines. And that is by not imputing, not by clean abolishing. So David's,
Wash, yea wash me more and more, makes more and more against your self, when
you quote it most: for this shows, that we are never washed clean enough
whiles we live here, but though God has begun to make a renouation in us, yet
still we cry, and have cause to cry with David, O Lord wash me yet more and
more. Whereunto if one should object, as you are not very forward, that, Qui
Iotus est, non habet opus nisi vt pedes lauet, etc. although that may seem to
set out the singlenes of the Sacrament of Baptism, which without horrible
sacrilege cannot be reiterated, yet applying it to the daily defunctions of
our penitence, we may answer briefly, that we are totipedes, more feet and more
soil then a man would think. As for your numb. 37. where you heap as many
places out of the new Testament (as before out of the old,) testifying that
Christ has purged our sins, purified our hearts, cancelled our debts, killed
enmities, exhausted corruptions, that we might be holy, immaculate, and
irreprehensible before him, etc. This is first true in the Saints that are in
heaven, who have shaken of this yoke of woeful bondage, and in regard of our
Savior it is true de merito, concerning us too, their unhappy suruiuers,
though our indisposition delay the complementum of it, for which we sigh, and
groan, and wait, and attend, though our eyes wast with looking for his
salvation. O Lord I have looked for thy salvation, says the Patriarch, even
when he was ready to dye. So happy are they, to whom, I say not in senectute,
but in morte contigerit huc aspirare, as he says; Cui suspiramus semper. Where
you say that no guile must be in the spirit, Psalm. 32. 2. and therefore sin
is clean purged in the just, you are to know that all sin is not guile, but
the sin of hypocrisy, dissembling our sinnefulnesse, and rejoicing
sinisterly in our supposed perfection, of which let them take heed that dance
to your pipe, and delight in your doctrine. The Psalm opposes it there to dum
tacui in the next verse, v. 3. for where there is tacui, there is guile, where
no guile no tacui. And the Saints in the Revelation had no guile found in their
mouths, because they confessed they were sinners, sath S. Austen.

19. Bishops, is here complained of, that he has not laid down at full the
Cardinals argument, out of the Epistle of Theodosius to the Council of
Ephesus, by which is showed who should be present at general Counsels. And I
hope it is no matter, whether he lay it down at length or no, so he answer it.
But you that undertake the refutation of the Bishops answer to the Cardinals
Apology, why do you mention but one part of his answer to this very argument?
Is not this a worse fault, and yet in the same kind? As for example, one part
of the Bishops answer was this, that a Count and a King be not all one, and
when Theodosius forbad the Count to meddle, he precluded not himself. This you
mention, but the rest you leave out. First, that it appears Theodosius did not
set this law to himself, to be no medler in Councels, because he assembled it,
yea confirmed it, and ratified the Acts of it, which Count Candidian might not
do. Secondly, that the Emperor exhorted this noble Courtier and Count
Candidian, to suppress them that were at odds, and to curb the humor of
such as loved iangling. Could this be without his interposing in their
tractate, which are the words that you stand upon? Can 69. of approaching the
Altar.
And you shall find in the Trullan Council, that other laymen are forbidden
that thing, the liberty whereof is reserved to the Emperor notwithstanding.
So might it be here. And indeed who would ever retort upon a King out of his
own words, or bind Theodosius as it were with his own girdle, so with his
own Epistle, This is like the woman-philosophers elench, apud Laert. l. 8. in
Hipparch. (...). Non sequitur (...).
which he never meant should yoke himself? To omit, that Constantine carried
himself like a Bishop, witness De vit. Constant. l. 1. c. 37. see ibid. l. 3.
c. 13. item c. 22. 23. etc.
Eusebius, nay Bishop over Bishops, that is the oecumenicall Bishop, which you
would be glad if your Pope had the like plea for himself, to intermeddle with
the matters of Constantine, and of the Empire. Why then might not Theodosius?
Or though only Bishops, as you would feign force, may have to do in Councels,
yet why should Theodosius or Constantine sit out, that are Bishops without the
Church, as others are within, and during divine service? See Sozom. l. 4. c.
21. of Leonas and Laritius, two lay-Courtiers, one satelles aulae, another
praefectus militum, as the author styles them, sent to the Council of Seleucia
in Isauria, de mandato Constantij, by Constantius his commandment, that in
their presence de fide accurate inquireretur, strict enquiry might be made of
Faith. And when some Bishops would not enter into disputation about things
controuerted, because of the absence of other, Leonas tamen iussit de fide
disceptari, Leonas nevertheless commanded them to confer about relligion. In
the Council of Syrmium, the Emperor likewise appointed Judges president of
his own palace, doctrina and auctoritate caeteris praestantes, in all
likelihood but laymen. Idem Sozom. lib. 4. c. 5. And cap. 13. of the same
book, Constantius letter to the Church of Antioch, and the Bishops there
assembled, conteines thus; Placet prohibere a conventibus Ecclesiasticis, It is
our pleasure to forbid certain from Ecclesiastical assemblies. You may say
now, if you will after all this, that Emperors have nothing to do in
Councels, and that Theodosius meant to bar himself by his own letter, or
else that he knew not the right which Constantius exercised, and was descended
to him by succession even from Constantine. But there is a letter of Theodos.
and Valentinian, jointly extant in the Acts of the Ephesine Council, the 3. in
number, in Surius his edition, beginning thus, Praeclarissimo Comiti, etc.
Which you may do well to read, to see what lay Emperors may do in Counsels.
You shall see how he checks the whole Council there, for there partiality and
part-taking, for their tumults and sicut non conueniebat, and how he concludes
the matter, Quapropter Maiestati nostrae visum est, vt huiusmodi authoritas
nullo pacto locum habeat, and quae inordinate sunt gesta cassentur. Wherefore
it seemed good to our Majesty, that such authority should by no means take
place, and that those things be abrogated or disanulled, which were disorderly
done. Yea how he ties the Bishops to their residence at the Council,
forbidding any to depart, and how he sets an Oportet upon omnia corroboranda
sunt a nostra pietate, and lastly how he ends most imperially and worthily,
Maiestas nostra no^ hominum aliquorum, sed ipsius doctrinae ac veritatis curam
gerit! Our Majesty takes not care of men's persons, but of (Gods) truth, and
the [heauenly] doctrine. The like he does in the Epistle that you quote, and
namely charge them to hear no accusations, but proceed to discussion of
faith only.

20. TO your numb. 42. and 43. what we hear from witnesses, though sure and
certain witnesses, yet we do but hear, when you have made the most of it. So
as the Bishop might well say, Augustinus nihil praeter auditum habet, Austen
has nothing more then hearsay, Of Felix his apparition after death, ex Aug.
de cuta pro mortu^. c. 1^.
meaning he reports not this of his own knowledge, though he would not seem to
deny credit to those witnesses. Which many a man (to say truth) is loath to
do, I mean to detract any thing from the credit of the reporter, even then
when he scarce believes that which is told. As for the assistance of Angels, or
apparition of Saints, it proves not that it is lawful for us to pray to them
(as has been showed before) and therefore it matters not greatly whether that
of Felix be true or no. Sure it is, that S. Austen in the same book where he
tells this, de cura promortuis, argues from the saying of holy Scripture,
Abraham has not known us, nor Israel, etc. that Saints departed are ignorant,
if not careless, or forgetful, of our state here. A figure whereof there may
seem to be in the story of Joseph, whom the (...), and, (...) (...) sunt
Apostolo, Heb. 13.
butler forgot as soon as himself was escaped out of prison, (as it were the
Saint newly departed out of the body, and I mean not a culpable oblivion in
the Saints, as was in the Butler, but as they complain in Esaias, Israel
nesciuit nos, or, Terra obliuionis, in Job; and, All his thoughts perish. In
sepulcher quis meminit tu^ Pl. 6. a Joseph's.
forgetting his late fellows in pilgrimage) the rather, because both a Philo
and the Rabbines say, that God ordained this of special purpose, that only
himself might be seen in Joseph's exaltation, without the cooperation of any
man: even as now he would have us to beg of him, not of Saint or Angel. But
is not that pretty, numb. 44. that though the Saints appear not in their own
persons, yet the apparition may well be called theirs, viz. because Angels
appear for them, in their name and likeness? as if the Devil did not
counterfeit their name and likeness too, and therefore he appearing, they may be
said to appear, as well as when the Angels, by this reason. Yet most
ridiculously you add, that Angels appear for the Saints merits, and so the
Angels apparition is the Saints apparition. But first, we have told you our
mind about merits, in the former part of this book, which if any were in this
life, yet none in the other, none in patria, where the Saints are. They have
done meriting, and yet to merit for others, is more abominable then for ones
self; but for men to merit, that Angels should come, and do offices in their
name, is most absurd of all, and therefore worthy of F. T. whatsoever he is.
At last, you grant in the same Numb. that not only Saints may appear in the
shape of Angels, but God himself has done so de facto, as Genesis 18. Exodus 3.
to Abraham, and to Moses. Yet, before you said, that the Angel whom Abraham
worshipped, was a created Angel, numb. 14. How does this hang together? As for
that you enterlace, that no shape can represent God, it is so true, that S.
Isidore, upon Exodus 3. says, God appeared to Moses, in rubo, in a bush,
because the bush is unfittest of all shrubs to be graven or made an image 2.
Cor. 4. 4. Christ is the image of the invisible God. As who would say, No image
of God (because invisible) but only Christ. In him we see God.
of. But then, how do you not tremble, to have images in your Churches, and
images of God? Whereas the Council in Trullo, Canone 83. forbids Christ to be
painted in the form of a lamb, which is far more tolerable then the holy
Ghost like a dove.

21. Bishop. But there you commit that very fault, which was the last This
fault is called by the Adioynder, The Bishops abuse of Authors, partly in
wresting their sense, partly in fraudulent citation of them. And I will
begin, says he, with his abuse of the Cardinal.
that you blamed him for, though without cause, as I have showed. Quoting
Calvin's words, lib. 3. Institut. c. 14. as they lie in Bellarmine, your other
self (I and the Cardinal, or else it is no bargain) where you leave out the
Paragraph, or the section of the chapter, to hide your craft the more, you
clippe off those words also (words of moment) si in se censeantur: and only
say, that, no work can pass from holy men, by Calvin's verdict, which does not
deserve the just reward of shame. True, Sir, if you take in all that Calvine
says, namely, if it be weighed strictly, rigorously, and in it self, without
any ouershadowing of the divine pity. Si in se censeantur. Refute this, if
you can. In the mean time you allege the author corruptly, which is the
thing that you declaime against; stealing, and crying out against theft both at
one time.

22. What mislikes you in the Bishops antithesis, that he makes to the
Cardinals disputation about the justice of works? I believe nothing more then
that you cannot brook it, and yet know not how to put it off. Opponi potuisse,
ast non potuisse refelli. I have heard some praise this one passage, as the
flower of the Bishops book, although they thought honorably of all.
Vulnerasti me vno crine tuo, or, vno oculo tuo, may we say with the Spouse,
though Tota pulchra, by his confession elsewhere. But you must be allowed so
much the rather to carpe at it. Fortuna attonat summa (as Mecaenas was wont to
say,) and no less, Procacitas rodit. For the Cardinals modesty, Adioynd. Number.
54. Ostentation of merits so far from the Cardinals humility and (...),
(...).
as he is a private man, it is nothing to the purpose, whatsoever you prate,
unless you will weigh by that the dangerousnes of your doctrine, fraught with
such insolences, that it may make even a modest man to turn proud. And if
that be true, which here you pretend, that when we teach that the form of our
justification before God, stands in his free mercy, not imputing our sins to
us, we take away all use of a future judgment, by consequence of that
doctrine, does not the Bishop as truly, and most pithily, retort, that if you
can be justified by your works here, you may as well also forbear any other
judgment? How does the first of these, euacuate the judgment, which we
believe in the Creed, more then the second? Or why should not a judgment be
held for this cause, as well that it may be seen and made known to the whole
world, whom God has acquitted and whom not, to whom he imputes their sins,
and to whom not, who have laid hold upon him by faith and who not, as who have
kept the law, wrought righteousness, fulfilled the commandments, and who not?
Besides, that if our actions be partly pure, and partly impure, as both Bernard
and Gregory acknowledge, in those sentences which the Bishop quoted, and you
suppress, the judgment may be for the notifying of them both, the one to
acceptance, the other to remission and pardon, why not? And the good that is
in them, the cleaner part as I may so call it, though not published nor
accepted ad meritum salutis, to the merit of salvation, which is your
blasphemy, as if we might be saved by our well doings, yet ad cumulum gloriae,
to the improouement of our reward, and to acquire a degree of pre-eminence in
And this not secundum exigentiam operis, but either proportionem studierum, or
condecentiam b^ d^. They are the words of your own shop.
the kingdom, which both you acknowledge, and our selves deny not, as has
been told you heretofore. And yet again, for so Cap. 3. ^s.
much as faith is that by which we attain salvation, not only the cumulum, or
degree of glory, but the very first interest in our salvation, Faith in
essentiali, and as it is habitus. For augmentum and intensio, belong ad grad^
gloriae, or ad cumulum praem^, as other v^tues do in their total.
I say, which faith is cou^terfeited by diverse hypocrites that have it not,
why should not works come to be examined in the judgment, as the cognizances of
our faith, the obrussa, or the touchstone, according to the saying, Ex
fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos, and Gal. 5. Faith profits indeed, but, if
it work by love? Agreeable whereunto our Savior Matthew. 25. though he
pronounce the blessing upon such only as have fed himself, clothed him,
and visited him, which is faiths proper object, to be conversant about Maria
autem assidebat Christo, while Martha attends other necessary provisions, A
semblant perhaps of Faith and her sister Charity.
CHRIST, and to make all toward him, yet he descryes it by our works done to
our neighbors, In quantu^ minimis hisce fecistis, mihi. Insomuch as you have
done it to one of these little ones, you have done it to me: that is to say,
your works have approved your faith, and your respect to mine, shows your
trust in me. Lastly, the last judgment may by no means be spared, though
only faith, and not imputation of sins, be there predominant (as not only
S. Basile, of whom you have often heard, but S. Chrysostom De Humilitate.
Com. in Epi^ ad Colos p. 114. Edit. Etonensis, Nobilissi^ D. Sauilij.
also could say, long before Luther was borne, (...), that is, by faith only
without any of these workings) I say, the last judgment may by no means be
spared, though faith only should there reign, if it be but to make manifest
to the mundus circumfusus, to the nations round about us, what the riches of
Gods grace is in pardoning our offenses, in receiving to favor such recreant
sinners, without any deserts of ours either before or after, how his mercy
waighes down all his works. Is this a small cause of erecting the throne, or
exercising the judgment, the manifestation of Gods glory? But Stella, Suarez,
with Bellarm, and diverse others, plead for an honorable salvation, which they
think is by our works. As if we were to God, as Tully to Caesar, Minus me
debere tibi putarem, si vt sceleratum me a te conseruatum existimarem. Pro
Marcell. Which is nothing so. But, cum adhuc inim^ci essemus. Rom 5.
because you aim only at your own glory, therefore that being taken away, you
would take away the judgment too, and the thrones and all. And lo, you are
not ashamed to urge that place of the Apostle, 2. Tim. 4. 8. Quam reddet mihi
iustus iudex, as if iustus were not as much as clemens and misericors, in the
scripture phrase, as Matthew. 1. 19. Joseph being a just man, would not shame
his wife, nor expose her to censure, no more will God us for his iustice-sake,
that he will exercise in that day, that is, his clemency and his pity. Even as
it follows in the Apostle, omnibus diligentibus aduentum eius: yet, to all
that love and desire his coming; which we should dread and fear, and Mercy
rejoices against judgment. Iac. 2. 13. specially in that day, and in altero
saeculo says S. Austen For he had said a little before, as of the time to come
(...)
not love nor long after, if justice were so rife, or so bestird herself, as
you would make, and the account that we were to render, of our life, and
actions, to be none other then so, that we must answer Almighty God for our
carriage to a hair, or else clean perish, as the Cardinal fancieth. Born. in
Cant. sermon. 71. Ego fidenter mihi vsurpo ex visceribus domini mei, etc. Anselme
exhort. al fratrem moriturum: Obijcio mortent filij tui inter te and me, aliter
tecum non contendo. Idem in meditat. Conscientia mea meruit damnationeni,
poenitentia mea non sufficit ad satisfactionem, sed misericordia tua super omne
opus meum. What marvel, cum super omne opus suum?
Can any better account be made to God, of our actions, then by opposing the
death and passion of his son, to the rigor of his justice, for whatsoever we
have done amiss, and been faulty in? But so much may suffice to have spoken
hereof.

23. Numb. 55. and so 56. and 57. you do nothing but sing your Cuckowes song,
what corruptions of the Bishop you have formerly discovered, about S. Ambrose,
S. Austen, and S. Cyrill, as also the Council of Calchedon, and the African
Synod, with Theodorets commentary. All which have been cleared by me before.
And though you have this trick by your self, clean differing from the fashion
of all other writers, that ever I read, to repeat, and reiterate, and resing
your own glories; yet we, non habentes talem consuetudinem, thus pass on.

24. Epiphanius, you say, never reprehended praying to the Haeres 77. apud
Epiph. quae Collyridian.
Virgin Marie, but sacrifice only in the Collyridian gossips. And was their
sacrifice without prayer? or could it well be? Remember I pray, your own
principles: then show where Epiphanius, reproouing the sacrifice, excepts
praying, and condemns not all their fopperie in gross. Yet he scannes the
point nicely, and shows what we may give to the Virgin without offense, what
we may not, in all which, of prayer not a word that he vouchsafes her. What
marvel, when he acknowledges such virtue in prayer, in comparison of
sacrifice, that he says elsewhere, the sacrifice of prayer, turned Anchorato.
the old Testament into the new, even before the Gospel. At least therefore
now, prayer and praise, is our best sacrifice, under the new Testament, and not
to be affoarded to any but God. But because when you stand for the invocation
of Saints, you deny not but it is an act of the adoration belonging to them,
and refer it to the cult that you so foolishly talked of not long before, you
shall hear how often Epiphanius debarreth all adoration from the Virgin, in
the treatise aforementioned, against the woman's heresy (for so also he Totum hoc
mulieris opinio est. And Hi enim qui hoc docent, quinam sunt praeterquam
multeres?
terms it) never adiudging any adoration to her, of what kind soever, never
prayers, and much less praying to her there himself, though he shut up that
discourse Pergamus deum inuocantes vt opituletur, quo veritatis parts
investigemus, etc. And in like sort he had begun, Pro viribus deum inuocantes
contra hanc haeresim dicemus. And, Vt quorundam rabiem in Deo exoluere
possimus, etc.
with a prayer to God, not so much as mentioning her. First, condemning the
worshipping of Saints, and the use of images, both in one, and making the devil
to be the author of both. Vnde non est simulachrificu^ hoc studium, and
diabolicus conatus? [How can this be but an idolous piece of work, or a
deuillish attempt?] Praetextu enim iustitiae semper subiens hominum mentem
diabolus, mortalem naturam in hominum oculis deificans, statuas humanas
imagines prae se ferentes per artium varietatem expressit: [For the devil
always creeping into men's minds, under the color of righteousness, deifying the
frail nature in the eyes of men, has framed images resembling men's
countenances, by diversity of skill, etc.] Et mortui quidem sunt qui
adorantur, ipsorum vero imagines quae The dead not to be worshipped.
nunquam vixerunt adorandas introducunt, adulterante mente ab vno and solo deo,
velut commune scortum, etc. [And (first) they are dead men whom they worship
(which should not be:) Much less images either of dead or living.
(secondly) they bring in their images (inferior to the dead parties
themselves) which are not dead indeed, and good cause why, because they never
were alive, and nothing can die, but that which once lived.] By which we see,
that Epiphanius would have that only to be adored, which (first) lives, and
(secondly) dies not, or cannot die again. Such as only God is, as the
Apostle speaks, who only has immortality; neither Saint, nor Angel, in that
sort. Then follow his terms of detestation of this practice, that the mind by
so doing, runs a whoring from the one and only God (only God therefore is
the object of chaste worshippers) like a common harlot, that has out-liued all
honesty, and keeping of trust in wedlock, itching and tickling after
innumerable enormities of diverse lustfulnes, etc. (which is notably to be seen
in the Romish Church this day, who leaving God, and declining to creatures,
could keep no hoe, no measure, in their misdemeanors.) But (as if one had
objected, what is this to the Virgin Marie, and the worshipping of her? for she
is not every body; Is adoration Whereas Epiphan. in all this tract, dwells
so much upon those words, speaking of B. Marie, Non est Deus, she is no God, it
is a greater abatement of her honor, then perhaps the Pap. will grant, who
will easily say, that they hold her not for God, (thongh some of them have
called her so, even lately) and it may be expounded by that of Dionys. in
Epist. 4. ad Caium Monachum, Jesus ne homo quidem erat, non quod non esset
homo, sed quod homines long superaret. The Virgin is denied to be God
therefore, as not so highly Superior, no not to men.
proper to none but God?) Epiphanius therefore adds, confirming our assertion;
Revera, Sanctum erat corpus Mariae, non tamen deus, Revera virgo erat ipsa
virgo, and honorata, sed non ad adorationem nobis data, sed ipsa adorans, etc.
That is, No doubt the body of Marie was holy (he calls her Marie still, as
Hieron. ad Theodoram v. duam de morte Lucini Betici mariti sui: and addit,
Confundatur haresti quae ideo incerta and magna promittit (to the Saints no
doubt) vt quae certa and moderata sunt auferat.
S. Hierome in the like case, Let them know, says he, Mariam Mariam, that
Marie is but Marie) her body was holy, but [shee was] no god: no doubt the
Virgo, virgo, like S. Hieromes Maria, Maria.
Virgin was a virgin, and [also] Not so much as magis eximia, But with the
Papists no superlatiues are enough in their Hyperduliae^ Epiphan. remooues from
her the comparatiue degree here.
honorable, but she was not given us to worship, but her self worshipped him,
who sprang of her according to the flesh (Christ) etc. Et propterea, Euangelium
munit nos dicens, quod ipse Dominus dixerit, Quid mihi and tibi est mulier?
nondum venit hora mea. Quo non putarent aliqui magis eximiam esse sanctam
Virginem, mulierem eam appellauit, velut prophetans quae futura esset in terra,
sectarum ac haerese^n gratia, vt ne aliqui NIMIVM ADMIRATI SANCTAM, in hanc
haeresim eiusque deliramenta dilabantur. Est enim ludibrium tota res, and
anicularum fabula, vt ita dicam, tota haeresis tractatio. That is, [And
therefore the Gospel armeth us, saying, (...). ad Timoth. This day rife in
Popery, and specially about the Virgin. See Done. Eliens. Resp ad Apol. p. 175.
that our Lord himself said, What have I to do with thee woman? mine hour is
not yet come. To the end that some might not think that the holy Virgin was
more excellent, he called her [barely] woman, as it were foreshewing what
should happen in the world by way of sects and heresies [concerning her] that
some through too great admiration of that holy [woman] might not slide into
this heresy, and the dotage thereof. For in very truth, all this whole
passage, is nothing but a mere mockery, and a toy, and an old wives tale,
etc.] Then, Quae vero scriptura de hoc narravit? Quis Prophetarum praecepit
hominem adorari, nedum mulierem? That is, [And I pray what Scripture informs
us hereof? Which of the Prophets commanded any man to be worshipped, and if not
a man, much less a woman?] See you how he reduces this controversy to
Scripture? yet the Adioynd. makes no reckning of scripture So Council. Eliber.
(a very ancient Council of Spain) can. 60. condemns a practice (seeming
most relligious) Quia in Euangelio non est scriptum, neque inuenitur ab
Apostolis vnquam factitatum: Because the Apostles did it not, and the Gospels
have it not.
in this question, so we have miracles and traditions, and other observations.
Well; it was lawful for Epiphanius to fly to that, Quae vero Scriptura? And,
Quis Prophetarum praecepit, etc? See you also how he preferres not a few before
the Virgin? For, we must not worship man, says he, and much less a woman,
belike though it be the Virgin her self. Eximium quidem est vas, sed mulier,
and nihil a natura immutata. That is; [An excellent vessel she is no doubt,
but yet a woman, and not a whit changed in regard of her nature.] Further,
Honored she is, but as the bodies are of the Saints, and if I may say any more
toward the magnifying of her, sicut Elias, sicut Johannes, sicut Thecla, Like
Elias, like John, like Thecla. Only herein (says Epiphan.) more honorable
then Thecla, that she was employed to be the instrument of the mysterious birth
of our Lord. But suppose she be like only to other Saints, may not they be
worshipped? Epiphanius proceeds. Sed neque Elias adorandus est, etiamsi in
vivis sit, neque Johannes adorandus, neque Thecla, neque quisquam Sanctus
adoratur. Not only no dead Saint, but not so much as they that never died, may
be adored. (This, though we should The Virgin not assumed in Epiphan. opinion.
Where I cannot but exemplifit the ^regious fondness of him that compiled the
Index to Epipha^. latin, of the Paris edition, 1564. that scores the page 107.
l. t. to n. 3. to prove that Epiphan held the virgins body to be assumed. For
what words think you? By which only he would show that the flesh is not
simply evil, because the Virgin cum sua (...) p^ssideb^t regn^m c^, etc. The
assumption of the Virgin, is left in dulio, by Charles. Legum F^. l. 1. c. 158.
grant that the Virgin was assumed; though Epiph. seem rather to argue a
maiori, and to count her among the dead.) Neither Elias is to be adored, nor
John to be adored, nor Thecla, nor any Saint is to be adored. Was it not
possible, that Epiph. should light upon your distinction of diminutiue
adoration, that so often, so peremptory, denies it to the Saints, that it is
lawful to adore them, and never comes in and expounds himself? Non enim
dominabitur nobis antiquus error, vt relinquamus viuente^, and adoremus ea quae
ab ipso facto sunt. [For we will not be ouerruled with the ancient error, that
we should leave the living [God,] and worship the things which he has made.]
First, errors though ancient, shall not ouerrule Epiphanius; nor antiquity
therefore if it be erroneous. Secondly, old errors are old errors still, with
Epiphanius, though new scoured, and new whetted, as this by the Jesuits.
Lastly, he will not adore any thing that is factum, that is, any creature, and
if he should do so, he thinks he should relinquere viventem, leave the living
God: which consequence the Jesuits will not yield to at this day, nor no doubt
would the Gossips then in their mad service, but say that they stuck
constant to the living God, and yet worshipped the Virgin, as his notable
instrument, by a subordinate kind of devotion. And though the margent of the
book, translated by a Papist, by a Papist corrected, and printed by Papists,
with an epistle before it, thus superscribed, Omnibus Ecclesiae Catholicae
Romanae filijs, etc. To all the sons of Epi^h. interpret Iano Cornario, cum
repurgatione ind^^^s, and praefatione totius libri per Iacobum Fabrum, Doctorem
Sorbonicum, i^pressus Par. sijs. 1564. The Papists notes upon Epiphanius
concerning Popery.
the Roman Catholic Church: I say though the margent of the book, thus by
many interests Popish, in the edition, may seem to have acknowledged no less,
then we plead for, by noting as it does in the side of it, Imagines damnatae,
that is, Images are here condemned; and again, Sancti non adorandi, Saints are
not to be adored, or worshipped, etc; Yet let us go on with Epiphanius a
step further. Coluerunt enim and adorarunt creaturam praeter creatorem, etc.
It is a trespass with Epiphanius to worship the creature, or to adore the
creature, (for he puts both) praeter creatorem, beside the creator; that is,
though you exclude not the worship of the Creator, but only take in the
worship of the creature. Si enim Angelos adorari non vult, quanto magis eam
quae genita est ab Anna, etc. non tamen aliter genita est praeter hominum
naturam, sed sicut omnes, ex semine viri, and vtero mulieris. Here, here,
arrige aures Pamphile. Here you should do well to list a while, you
Polyphilus, or rather Pamphilus, of all bastard Deities. For if (says he) God
will not have the Angels to be worshipped, how much more will he not have her
which was borne of Anna, and yet not borne otherwise, then the fashion is, and
nature of all mankind, but etc. Two great points assoyled by Epiph. in these
few words. One, that the Virgin Marie was not conceived, nor borne, after
extraordinary manner, as the Jesuits affirm, but even as others are, which
must needs be in sin, and in corruption. Another, that she is not so
exalted in heaven, but inferior to the Angels, or else the consequence were
not good, If not the Angels, much less Mary, or the daughter of Anna. There
are yet more clauses against the adoration of the Virgin, in this tract of
Epiph. Non tamen vt adoretur virgo. And, Sit in honor Maria, but Pater, and
filius, and spiritus Sanctus adorentur. Again, Mariam nemo adoret, non dico
mulierem, immo neque virum. And, Deo debetur hoc mysterium. Deleantur quae male
scripta sunt in cord deceptorum. Tollatur ex oculis cupiditas ligni.
Conuertatur rursus figmentum ad Dominum. Ne quis comedat de errore qui est
propter Mariam: nam and lignum non erat error, sed per lignum, etc. So by abuse
of the blessed Virgin, creepes in error into the Church. And, Etsi pulchrum est
lignum, sed tamen non ad cibum. So, Etsi pulcherrima est Maria, and Sancta, and
honorata, at non ad adorationem. There are these, I say, and more sentences
yet, tending that way, but aut hoc satis est testimoniorum (as he was wont to
say testium,) aut ego nescio quid sit satis. Epiphanius himself seems to be
weary of his own prolixities. Therefore I will conclude with him. Quo vero
non longius extendam sermonem, sufficiant nobis relata. Maria in honor sit,
Dominus adoretur. Iusti enim nemini exhibent errorem. Neque tentat Deus
aliquem, neque serui ipsius ad deceptionem. That is, [And that I may prolong my
discourse no farther, it shall suffice to have said thus much. Let Mary be
honored, but let God be worshipped or adored. The Saints lead none into
error. God tempts none, nor his servants tempt none to deceive them.] Meaning,
that if visions or apparitions of Saints, be brought to prove the lawful
worshipping of them, we should not believe them. What bring you next?

26. Number. 58. You challenge the Bishop, for saying that Gregory siluit de
quinto generali Concilio, said nothing of the fifth general Council, viz. when
he professed his devotion to the other four. And though you might answer your
self by his words in the same place, Quatuor prima tantum honor HOC dignatus
est, he honored only the four first, with THIS honor, or with so much
honor, so as his meaner commendations of the fifth general Council, may seem
to The Bish. words are in the same place, Magnifice de quatuor pri^, etc.
be a certain comparatiue silence thereof; I say, though you might answer your
self thus, out of the place which you quote, page 160. Respons. ad Apolog. yet
suppose that all this did but go to the objection, as I see you take it in to
no other purpose, nevertheless you might have found the plain solution
thereof, if you had turned but a little further, viz. page 182. in summo
paginae, where the Bishop both acknowledges that which you here oppose him
with, out of S. Gregory's words, Quintum quoque Pariter is not aequaliter with
S. Gregory, but as the Adioynder truly Englishes it (for lack of too much
Latin perhaps) together with. And it is to be noted, that S. Greg. lib. 3. cp.
37. is easily persuaded by Constantius Bishop of Millan, to pass over the fifth
Council, and quatuor solummodo synodos laudare. Whereas it had been hard to
leave out one of the 4. Gospels, for scandals sake. Ergo he held it not in the
account, which he does the other. The Bishop alleges not only Gregory, but
Isidore, who names quatuor Synodos principales, and no more. But of him not a
word from F. T. because he was not for his carping.
pariter veneror, etc. and gives you answer, even before your objection was
hatched, by explaining his meaning, to this effect; Gregorius quatuor prima
Concilia sicut quatuor Euangelia, veneratur and suscipit. Quatuor prima
Concilia quadratus lapis ei sunt, in quo fidei vitaeque structura consurgit.
Qui etsi veneratur, and quintum, non de eo tamen tam sensit honorifice. That
is, Gregory reuerenceth and receives the 4. first Counsels, like the four
Gospels. The four first Counsels are to him, that fouresquare stone, upon
which the building of faith and manners arises. Who although he reuerenceth
the fifth Council too [in proportion] yet holds it not in so great estimation
as the others. These are the Bishops words, are they not? What then have you
brought to confute him by, more then is answered in his own writings? Let me
speak unto you in your own words here, Number. 63. What more palpable fraud or
foolerie can there be, the^ to take the objection out of ones adversaries
books, and to dissemble the solution, though it be to be found there? And if S.
Gregory's meaning had Adioynd. numb. 60. And does he not (Greg) acknowledge
the infallible verity of the 5. Council, as well as of the other, holding him
for accursed, who does reject any thing determined by any of the 5. etc? And
what other reason does he allege, but because they were all 5. held by
general consent, giving evidently to understand, that a general Council
lawfully assembled, represents the whole Church of God, and is infallibly
guided by the holy Ghost. Yet B^llarm. being to avouch the iner^ablenes of
Councels, quotes for proof thereof, S. Gregory's judgment only of the four
first, and not a word of the fifth. De Council. author. l. 2. c. 3. quoting Greg.
l. 1. cp. 24.
been to avouch that infallibility of general Counsels, which you dream
of, as if all that were ordained by an universal consent, did for certain
descend of the Holy Ghost, he would not have professed this reverence only to
those Councels, which himself had seen and known, but to all those which
should be held with like order and solemnity in after times, even to the
worlds end. But now if you mark him, he speaks only de praeterito, nothing
of the time to come, which he knew he might well doubt.

26. The Kings Supremacy, is not well proved (you think) out of Deuteronomy. 17. nor
his authority to interpose in matters of relligion. I knew you could not be so
swallowed up of your zeal to the Saints, but that you would now and then, have
a rush at the Supremacy, though it lay not in your way. But wherein fails the
proof out of Deuteronomie? First Moses gave no copy of the law to any King in
The 1. Exception of the Adioynder.
his time, for there were no Kings diverse years after. Resp. Though summus
Magistratus be equivalent to a King, in the Polity that he gouernes whatsoever
it be, and of Moses it be said, Erat Rex in iustitia, and not only Iustine the
Historian, Deuteronomy. 33. ver. 5.
and a heathen man, reckons Moses among the Kings of the people of Israel, lib.
36. Hist. but the Cardinal himself, de Pontif. Romans lib. 1. cap. 2. says the
same, quoting Exodus 32. that, as verus and summus princept populi Iudaici, as a
true and sovereign prince of the people of the Jews, he commanded many
thousands to be put to death in one day, for the golden calfe, etc. yet what
then? Does it not show what right belongs to Kings, when Kings at least should
be established in time to come? Will you allow nothing to Scriptures
providence, or to Gods foresight? Does not this show rather, that the precept
which was given for to be observed by the Israelites diverse years after came
of God, and not of man? And do not your selves argue, out of the same books
of Moses, that a king is not to be chosen but only exfratribus, which you are
careful to have Deuteronomy. 17. 15.
observed, as you would seem at least, even till this day, though Kings (as
you say) there were none in Moses time? What then do you tell us, that there
were then no Kings? Yea, but this is no more then every private man and woman
might be allowed, to have the copy of the Law at home with them. a slavery upon
Christians, more then ever they were put to that lived under the letter, to
take both letter and spirit from us, which will least of all befit you in your
encounter with the Bishop, that charge him with no fault more, nor more often,
then that he enclines to Iudaisme, and holds Jewish conclusions about
ceremonies, and Circumcision, and a great deal more of such idle stuff that
you travail with. I am sure S. Chrysostom upon the 3. to the Coloss. exhorts
his people, those of the lay-fort, thus: For I speak (says he) to you of the
lay: (...), that is, buie you books [particularly the Bibles] which are the
medicines of your souls: (...): No master like them. And Thomas Aquinas your
jolly Schoole-man, handling the same words, by occasion whereof S. Chrysostom
was lead to say this, namely, That the word of Christ should dwell richly,
Coloss. 3. 16.
or plentifully in us, resolves thus. Aliquibus sufficit modicum quid de verbo
Christi, sed Apostolus vult quod habeamus multum. Ideo dicit, Abundanter. That
is, Some men are content with a small portion or pittance, God wot, of the word
of Christ, (this is not you, nor your church at this day, and that is pity)
but the Apostle will have us to have much of it, or a great deal of it.
Therefore he says, PLENTIFVLLY. S. Hierom and S. Primasius, infer out of the
same words, that lay-folkes ought to have the word of God among them, and that
non solum sufficienter, sed etiam abundanter, not only sufficiently, but also
abundantly, or as the Rhemists translate it, as if zealous of good measure, to
be dealt to these poor folks, (though they mean nothing less) even
abundantly. So Anselme upon certain other words of the same Apostle, Ephesians. 2.
19. You are no more strangers or pilgrims, but of the household of God, etc.
gathers both wittily and godlily, that ideo non erant hospites testamentorum,
(as some others had been, of whom he spoke before) quia non in transitu and
recessu videbant ipsa testamenta, sed assidue morabantur and exercebantur in
ijs; that is, that therefore they were no strangers (to God, and his
Testaments) because they saw not his testaments only at a blush, or passing
by, as you would say, but daily they staid upon them, and were exercised in
them, etc. This is with Anselme to be no stranger to God, but one of his
household, etc. Whereas that unconscionable Cardinal of yours, in his
Controversy about this matter, whether lay-folke should read Scripture, or no,
quotes Ioh. 6. to prove that laymen have no right to Scriptures, because the
wicked Priests said, Populus qui extra est, The people which is without, knows
not the law, as if still without, and not yet taken into house. (...). But this
by the way only, because you say it is no more then every private man was
allowed among the Jews, to have the Bible in his house. This at least is more
on the Kings side, then on the private man's, that the King in particular is
appointed to have it, by order from Gods own mouth, and the Priest to yield it
him, yea the King himself to write it out for his own use. It shall be (says
the text) when he sits upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write
him a copy of this Law in a book, out of that which is before the Priests,
the Levites. WHEN HE SITS UPON HIS THRONE. Does not this make a distinction
between the Kings, and the lay-mans having of the book, though neither be
forbidden it? Or does it not show, that the King is entrusted with the book, in
reference to his government over the whole kingdom? For the book must be
offered him, when he sits upon the throne of his kingdom (says the text,)
no doubt to distinguish between the end, for which he, and for which
ordinary men, must read the book, if they read it at all. And what think you
of that, that the King must write himself a copy? Is not this too great
pains for a King? Which though I doubt not but we may construe, that the King
must procure one to write it out for him, as Solomon is said to sacrifice when
the Priests sacrificed by his appointment, and our Savior Christ to baptize,
though he baptized none himself, but only through his Disciples, yet first it
argues a great entrusting of the King with divine matters, to let him have the
Bible so much at his disposing, as to copy it out by such as he shall set a
work. Secondly, it gives him a secret item to diligence, and to studying of
this book, with more then ordinary carefulnes. And lastly, as often as the King
changes, so often (as it may seem) should the Bible be transcribed, for the use
of the Crown, while the Priests and the Levites are enjoined no such task,
for the making of them perfect. Oleaster complains upon this place, that it is
a wonder to see how dissolute Kings are, touching the study of laws, not
only Gods laws, but their own; whereas your doctrine, if they are prone of
themselves, as we are all by nature to such recklesnesse, drives them
headlong, and sets them going by authority. Yea, you threaten them with great
penalties, if at any time they do but presume the contrary, as if they passed
the bounds of their commission, in so doing. But I suppose Oleaster, when he
took up that complaint, was not much acquainted with foreign Kings and
Queens, such as God has blessed our land with since, of whom I will say
nothing in this place, least I should seem to affect flattery, though it be
hard to pass over in silence such an incomparable mirror as we enjoy in this
kind at this day, God be thanked, and long, most long, may we enjoy I pray God.
Yet I marvel that being a Portaguise, Vide Lipsium in Quaest. Epistolic. l.
2. cp. 23. ad Turconium and Maldechemium, Vix est v^ ^sum teneam, etc. Sed
melius magnus ille Rex, (Alphons. scil.) etc.

Apud Anton. Panormit. in vita. Alphons. S. Hierom. reports a fair less
matter of Hilarion, vet not unworthy to be taken notice of, that in ^u su^
descripsit adolescens Euangeliorum cod ce^, which afterward he sold to pay the
boa^man for his fare in necessity. Yet Hilarion no Clearke. In vita Hilar.


if not originally Spanish, Alphonsus King of Arragon, one of his contrymen,
should not come into his mind, who is said to have writ out the Bible once
with his own hand, in Hebrew (as I take it,) and to have read it, as I
remember, no less then sixteen times over. I think few Kings have come nearer
to this precept of copying the Law, for the literal sense of it, then
Alphonsus did, though certainly we are to presume he was no babe in the
understanding of it neither. But Oleaster notes further, that from hence in all
likelihood that custom took his beginning, that the Kings of Israel should be
crowned with the book of the Law in their hand, 1. Chr. 24. which is very
remarkable; and no less then for the King of France to be invested in a
Deacons habit at his De just. etc. p. 433. 3.
coronation, as we are told by Rossaeus. A third exception. Vt discat (say you)
Deum timere, that he may learn only to fear God, and for his private
instruction. As if first any thing might well be called private in so great a
Majesty, or as if the King learning his duty from the book of the law, could
learn it for himself only, and not for others, his duty being to see that
others do their duties, as every magistrates is, and his fearing of God being
to fear him not only in the course of his own life, but of his whole
government. Yet you please your self in your queint language, that the priest
was to be possessed of a copy of the law, that he might observe it punctually
for his own self. Not only so, Sir, but pungitiuely for others; he was to
make others, even Priests and all, to keep the law, to enforce them, and to
constrain them, to prick them and to drive them onward by the edge of his
sword, which he carried neither edgeles, nor in vain, Romans 13. no not then; as
Ezechias did the Leuits, til he made them offer. Obtulerunt tandem, as it is in
the Chronicles, by the Kings instigation. S. Austen warranteth this in diverse
places, as has been told you, but I will allege S. Gregory to you now, l.
9. Registri. Epist. 60. ad Aldiberium, one of the kings of our Country. Regni
sui vos ipse faciat esse participes, cuius vos fidem in regno recipitis and
facitis custodiri: that is, Even he make you partakers of his kingdom, whose
faith in yours you both entertain, and MAKE to be observed. The Kings office
is not only custodire, but facere custodiri, as the Bishop told you, if you
had the grace to hear him. The Kings keeping is keeping in Hiphil, like
spiritus interpellat, for facit interpellare, Romans 8. Even as God says in
Ezechiel, Faciam vt faciatis; but God by aid, and by divine inspiration, the
King by terror, by censure, and by fear; yet thus also is that fulfilled, Dij
estis, whereas our part is Obsecramus vos loco Christi, etc. 2. Cor. 5. See
Romans 13. where all the good that is done in a common wealth, is attributed to
the King, all the evil is avenged by him. And 1. Tim. 2. 2. exhorting that
prayers and supplications be made for all men, he instanceth only in Kings,
because the Kings courses have an universal influence, and not only for a
quiet and peaceable estate, but for a godly and an honest, which refutes the
Jesuits, that think a Kings care is to extend no farther then bonum
politicum, or bonum reip. to preserve the commonwealth from running to
confusion, from want, from plague, from hostility, or seditions, not regarding
piety. But most notably of all, Psalm. 2. not only the relligion of a private
commonwealth, but the conversion of the whole body of the Gentiles, is linked
inseparably with the relligiousnesse of Kings. For having said in the 8. verse,
I will give thee the Gentiles, for thine inheritance, he points to the means
in the 10. and 11. Be wise now therefore o ye Kings, and nunc Reges
intelligite. Where and nunc is pregnant F. T. is full of this divinity in his
first chapter of the Adioynd.
to confute the Jesuits, that think the care of Relligion, as it should be in
Kings, is expired with the Kings of the old Testament. But the Psalm. says, and
nunc, prophesying of the conversion of the Gentiles under the new. And further
he bids them serve the Lord, whereas Kings (says S. August.) then serve the
Lord, when they do that for Epist. 50.
the Lord, which none can do but they that are Kings. But private honesty, or
private integrity, is that which every body may look to and perform for
themselves. Therefore the Kings Office, which Deuteronomy calls him to, is an
universal inspection. And as the piety of kingdoms dependes of their Kings,
as the latter end of the Psalm. shows, that I now quoted, so the impiety, and
the irreligion of them, is to be referred to none other, as appears by the
beginning The people rage, because the Princes stand up, and take part against
Christ.
of it. For whereas he had asked the question, why do the heathen and the
people rage, presently he adds, or rather answers, and gives the cause
himself, The Kings of the earth have conspired together, and the Rulers taken
counsel, etc.

27. What now though the Original copy of the Bible 4. Exception of the
Adioynder to the place in Deuteronomy.
was to remain with the Priest? is it not enough that the King was to have a
true copy, and answerable to the Original in all points? For therefore he was
bid to provide him a copy, to be written out of the Levites Original. But
let it be that this makes the Priest to be Superior, since you will needs
have it so, yet Superior as Expositor, or as Interpreter, if you please, not
as guardian, not as custos.

28. Lastly, the King is bid to be obedient unto the Priest, 5. Exception of
the Adioynd.
even by the law it self, which he was to copy out, as appears in the same
chap. v. 10.] I might say that the King is not named among those that are
enjoined this obedience, and therefore not comprehended. For it must be
liquidum ius that shall bind princes. The Sovereign is wont to be exempted in
such cases. Let one be free that all the rest may be the better ordered. As
iura Maiestatis non sunt communicanda cum ciuibus, both by Bodines rule and
other Politicians, so necessitates subditoru^, the taxations of subjects must
not be enforced upon Princes, Unless the King were named therefore, no reason
to bring him in within the compass of this statute. And yet secondly, there is
an obedience to counsel, and to advice, to resolution, and instruction, --
(...), not only to authority. Hesiod.
The first way the King may be subject to his subjects, and obedient to the
Priests, if you will needs have it so, but the second way the Priest is
subject to the King, without all question, and that is it with which Supremacy
goes. The Cardinal himself can tell us so, when his fit is over, when it is
his good day, lib. 1. de Pontif. cap. 6. Ne Assuerus quidem The Adioynder finds
in the Bishop, ^ucul^ interualla.
Rex sapientibus illis viris subiectus erat, quorum tamen faciebat cuncta
consilio. Ester. 1. that is, King Assuerus was not subject to those wise men,
by whose advice notwithstanding he managed all affairs. As for matter of
execution, or coactiue justice, the Judge is joined in commission with the
Priest here, v. 12. And is it possible that the King should be an underling to
the Judge?

29. That the Bishop should call Bellarmine dotard, for mistaking our English
affairs so much, seems a matter to you very abusiue, and intolerable. So as
curiosity is but a light fault with you, though in strange Commonwealths, nor
does it yrke you any thing to hear your nation accused, which neither has
deserved ill at your hands, nor is culpable of that which the erring Cardinal
lays to her charge. Though S. Paul would not accuse his own nation, albeit
deserving, Act. 28. 19. (...): Not as if I had any thing (says he) Comman vlt.
Actor. The same Chrysostom. notes the like of Joseph, that being cast into
prison, etc. he never told the Butler, and such others as he found there, of
his brethrens malice and cruelty toward him, but concealed domestical
scandals.
to accuse my nation of. Where S. Chrysostom notes most excellently, that not
only he accused them not, though no doubt he had great cause, having conspired
to kill him before they either ate or drank; but insinuated to the company,
and yet without a lie, that he had nothing at all to accuse them of. For so are
his words, Not as if I had any thing to accuse mine own nation of. But you
renegates, and runnagates, forsakers of the Land, make a trade of slaundering
your own native country, and patronizing the slaunderours, as here the
Cardinal, and whereas S. Paul with great dexterity shunned the lie, to save
his countrymens reputation, you make no conscience of lying and slaundering, to
defame yours. And why may not the Cardinal be said to doat? Does not the Poet
say, dulce est desipere in loco? Which he did, I trow, when he accepted at last
the Cardinal-ship against his will, and after much refusal, as Eudaemon tells
us.

-- Cunctantem and multa parantem
Dicere.
To whom we may say in the same Poets words,

-- Quid si quod voce grauaris
Mente dares?
And at last you see he yielded indeed. But to the point. Do not the English
Puritanes pray daily for his Majesty by the title of supreme head and
governor? Do they not set their hand to it, and subscribe their name? Et voce
and mann attesting to it, least happily you should say, vox quidem Jacob, manus
autem Esau. And who are you then to gage hearts, which Hieremy says are
vnfaddomable, or to search after secrets, which the Deuteronomy bids us to
reserve to God, and leaves to man only such things as are manifest. Whence is
it that you can reckon but of one example among us all of the English Clergy,
that was censured for omitting the aforesaid title in his prayer, as you
inform? Does it not show that others are of another mind, though this were
granted you to be so? And yet there may be cause not to mention it in prayer,
besides the want of persuasion of the truth of it at the heart. Though for my
part I will not believe you in this report, which otherwise perhaps I should
not greatly stick at, yet if it be but because it is of your suggesting. That
of ^^pr. l. 4 epist. 2. ad Antonianum. Neque enim possunt laudare no^ qui
recedunt a nobis, ^ut expectare deber^ vt placeamu^ illis qui nobis displi^,
etc.
the Philosopher being verified upon such Tribades mendaciorum, such
hackney-lyars as you are, that with telling so many untruths, you have lost
your credit for ever, even then when you shall perchance speak the truth. And
as Lucian says in his Phalaris, of such a kind of people as E^on-Iohan.
confesses as much, that the English Traitors, Sermonibus su^^ ^ora (...) ^ala
(...), i. aggrauated ^ir evils with talking. Apolog. Pro. ^e^. Gar^. cap. 9.
page ^38.
our English run-awayes and malcontents are, that exaggerate the severity of
our laws with their lies, Believe them not, though they say they saw it,
believe them not though they say they felt it, meaning the torments which they
most falsely amplified, as these also have done, and set out in print,
V^^^^^gan. Thea^crudel. haeret. nostri temporis.
of whom I speak. But behold another argument to convince the Puritanes, and
that we are cumbred with such cattle yet, as deny the Supremacy, whatsoever
the Bishop Adioynd. numb. 76. 76. etc.
says to the contrary. There were such spirits certain years ago. Are they
therefore now? Or, All have not disclaymed the former error. Therefore none? or
a few only? or not the most? nay, why not all? For my part, if no other
Puritanes were to be found, then such as acknowledge not the kings supremacy,
even in terminis, I think they would be a very geason people to meet with,
like pretiosa visio. 1. Sam. 3. Yet you say, they choke conscience to swallow
benefices, etc. Mala men's, malus animus. And, vt quisque animo optime affectus
est, it a difficillime alios esse improbos suspicatur. Open suspecting of
others, comes of secret conde^ning your self. But Bishop Barlow, and Mr.
Rogers, lay this to the Puritanes that they digest not the supremacy. The word
is one, the kind is diverse: as all Papists are not powder-Papists: vsus
flectit, dies lenit, tempus It seems strange to the Adioynd^r, that the
Puritanes sect should vanish in England, whereas not only the wiseman says,
Spuria vitulamina non agunt altas radices, etc. but S Cyprian of schism in
particular, S^hismatici semper inter initia seruent, increment^ vero habere non
possunt, lib. 4. cp. 2. and Epiphan. more particularly yet, of certain
heretics, called the Ange^ (for their Purities like enough) that there was
little to be found of their Tenets in his days, quiae ad tempus modo durarunt,
and illi^o d^sicrunt ac deleti sunt. Haer. 60.
mitigat: Some are boisterous in their beginnings, like Ruben the first borne,
(whom Jacob calls his strength) that in process of time are not so violent.
Mr. Rogers exemplifies it by foreign Puritanes, not by domestical, or by the
old, not by the modern, if you allege him right. And Bishop Barlow speaks of
the Puritanes, as they were in the Auge, or in the Zenith, in their first love,
when their appetites were sharpest, their proceedings hottest, not as it has
pleased God to qualify them since, and to temper them, qui reuelat etiam si
quis aliter sapit, as the Apostle says. You say, * The Cardinal does not
Adioynd. numb. 8^.
know this, though they have altered their iugdement, and therefore he must
have leave, forsooth, to slander our Nation, or to say he doates is hard
language. Yet why might he not have heard of it, if he had been so disposed?
Shall we say, that ill news flies apace, the Ate still out-running the Latae,
and his cares are open to no other talk, as the fly that hasts to sore places
in the body, taking no delight in the sound? Or as Theodorus the stage-plaier
in Aristot. Politickes, would never be brought to play any part upon a stage,
unless he might enter first, because the first things are most noted (he said)
and make the deepest impression, (the man belike having a good conceit of
himself) so the Cardinal keeps that fast which he has heard first, either
for fame, or for faith, and it is true as the Kings MAJESTY says in his book
of him, that the English fugitives (your self for one M. F. T.) have so ramd
in certain forms and apprehensions into his head, that they will not out again
with any force. But though he be only for the first, let us have to your last.

30. The last are these. One about the Jesuits, that Adi^ynd. numb. 82. 83. 84.
should say they had committed no sin in diverse years. Another about three
Bulls of Excommunication from the Pope, ready to be published in three
especial parts of the Kingdom, if the powder plot had taken effect. A third,
about F. Garnet, and his being privy to the said treason, as by his often
confessions both before and at his death may appear yet, whereof some are
under his hand. As for the first of these, the Adioynder may do well to have
recourse to Father Cotton, and to know of him what he thinks, whether it be
possible or no to attain to such a perfection, of not sinning, in this life.
Not only as to avoid singula peccata, each sin in the particular, but even
omnia peccata, all altogether. The first of which Friar Soto says is possible
to all men (not only to Jesuits, or such sublimated creatures) and pro toto
vitae cursu, as long as we here live, not only for certain years, which is
the case in the objection. Neither is Soto only of that opinion, among the
Papists. Though the Bishop does not say, that any Jesuit De Naturi and Great.
l. 1. Also Bellarm l. 2. de Great. and lib. a^b. cap. 7.
has written so of himself, as the Adioynder either rashly or maliciously
implies, to augment the slander. It is enough that they affirm it, though
they put it not in print, as Orlandinus does of Ignatius, the Protoplast
Jesuit, that he Hist. Societ. Ies. lib. (...). page 10. Notab. 30.
should say he had no vainglory to accuse himself of, in confession, full
twenty years before he died. Whereas vain-glorie notwithstanding, is one of
the last sins that we shake off, (as appears by S. Paul, who was feign to be
buffetted by an angel of Satan for the repressing of that vice in him)
especially in such a life as Ignatius his was, daily meriting, and rising up in
merits. And yet as he, that being reviled, and for a great while together said
nothing again, at last when he cried out, See how patient I am, he lost the
praise which else he might have won, if he had continued silent: So I would
feign know, either of Ignatius, or his followers, how he that professes his
freedom from the ticklings of vainglory, does not thereby bewray, that he
has yet some spice of the old corruption in him, whereof he will not be
aknowne.

31. Concerning his second Quaere: Strange, if Father Baldwine cannot resolve
him of that point, with all the circumstances thereto belonging, insomuch as
one of them saw, or said he saw, the very boxes or caskets, which contained
those Bulls, ready for the baiting. Neither is this so unusual a practice in
Popery, that he should believe it so slowly; either to mind ill to a whole
State, especially our English, which Eudaemon would have us think, that there
is Apolog. pro Henr. Garnetto. cap. 4. ipso fine. id est, page 112.
no good man, but would spoil it if he could, and set fire to it, or again to
awaite a time, of easing their malice, and pouring forth of mischief at the
best occasion. Howbeit herein he mistakes, whether wilfully, or no, let the
reader judge. For the Bishop did not say, that the Jesuit being in prison,
revealed this concerning the Bulls, moved merely thereunto by remorse of
conscience, though well he See the place in the Bishops Answer to the Apology,
cap. 5. in initio. Id est, page 113. Which the Adioynder quoteth not (as his
fashion is in all other places) least his wilful forgerie and deprauation
might be espied, making that to come of conscience, Numb. 84. in two several
periods, which the Bishop never so much as in the least word insinuates, to
have proceeded thereof. And yet it might be a truth, though revealed in passion.
might say, that he confessed it of his own accord, without fear, or
compulsion, or examination any at all. Quid si in iurgio? what if in a pet? As
the French proverb is, that the boiling pot discouers the little pea that is in
the very bottom of it. So enraged minds disclose all. But Mr. Adioynder
thinks all is so holy among the Jesuits, that if our compulsions and
examinations be away, nothing is done by them forsooth, but of mere conscience.

32. The third and last, about Father Garnet, is otherwise sufficiently
testified to the world, though I say nothing: both by the most reverend Bishop
in sundry places of each his books, out of the authentical Records of this
Kingdom, and Father Garnets handwriting yet to be seen. Against all which
Father Thomas opposes the credit of a certain namelesse Gentleman, that stood
by Garnet (as himself says) whiles he was executed, and told him clean
otherwise, viz. that he never confessed any such thing. Is it not reason that
he should be believed, though he brought no more then even so to refell the
Bishop? And indeed no more he brings to convince our Acts by, yea our ears
and our eyes, our knowledge and our senses that here live, and were present at
the whole passage. Yet he adds, that false bruits were spread against Garnet
over all Christendom. As much to say belike, as the whole Church was in an
error for censuring the Traitor. But to his notable impudence, brauing thus
the Bishop, that mirror of gravity, of conscience, and sincerity, himself a
shadow, and one of Homers sneakes, -- (...), as to vpbraid him with the lie,
and the impudent lie, as the margent has it, Numb. 82. or as the text rises
afterward, Numb. 83. an egregious lie, I will say no more, but even gently
leading him by the hand, and bringing him home to his own door, remember him
what liberty they in all likelihood take to themselves of lying far beyond
us, who thus dogmatize, That a lie in a Sermon is no mortal sin, I Sa
Iesuita in Aphorism. v. Men^.
suppose if it be to a good end. And from hence it is that we have so many
lies in Popery, prophesied of by S. Paul, 2. Tim. 4. 5. vt si vult decipi
populus, decipiatur, that if the people will be deceived, they may be deceived,
their own common saying. Perhaps not thinking of that which they fit to their
peoples backs, but even too handsomely, by this means, Qui non susceperunt
amorem veritatis, sed complacuerunt sibi in iniquitate, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. 12.
who refused to entertain the love of truth, and delighted in falsehood and in
injustice, (voluerunt decipi, they would needs be deceived;) the very mark of
the beast, and the character of them that are to live under Antichrist. But my
wonder is not, that Papists lie, but that they lie in Sermons, and then excuse
it from crime, or from mortal blame: First lying in their very doctrines, and
in the course of their preaching, then raising a doctrine of the lawfulnes of
lies.

To the 10. Chapter.
The Reverend Bishop, most upright and uniform in his proceedings, throughout
the whole cause. Concerning the Sacrament, the Reward of good works, the name
Catholic, Monkerie, Succession of Bishops, Kingly Supremacy, and the rest.
The Adioynder laying preuarication to his charge, is found to fulfill the
slander himself.

1. Being to speak to your tenth and last Chapter, I think good to begin with
setting down the Title of it, as it lies in your book, which is this: That
the Bishop overthrows his own cause, and fortifieth the Popish, granting
many important points of Catholic relligion. That he is turned Puritan in the
Kings Ecclesiastical Supremacy, and betrayeth his Majesty's cause under hand,
pretending to defend it: and therefore is neither good English Protestant, nor
yet good subject. Lastly, what is the opinion of learned strangers, concerning
him, and his book; with a good advise for a friendly farewell.

. 2. Do you expect what I reply to this frantike inscription? Spectatum
admissi? Or rather, we will wish you some warm brothes to comfort your brain,
then either confound it with blows, as you even now sentenced (you may
remember whom) pro ingenita modestia tua, or distress Cap. 6. of the Adioynder.
it with gibings (though never so just) already troubled. And yet before you
come to execute your late glorious title and denunciation of this your tenth
Chapter, you must do as the Comoedians do, that in their last act, bring in
all the Actors upon the stage afresh, for pomp sake: So you tell us here, what
feats you have wrought, in the precedent part of your book, as if they had
never been dashed by any confutation, nor your interlude disturbed in the
least sort. In the first Chapter I have done this, (say you;) and in the second
Chapter this, in the third Chapter the like: and so you go on, blazing your
trophies, both in Text and Margent, as if no body could reply to you, none
stand in your hands, but you had carried all before you, wheresoever you came,
like a young Alexander. And yet more definitiuely, as it were from your
iudgement-seat, thus you pronounce, an other Herod, that the world may take
notice of your great equity and vnpartialitie, joined with like gift of
discerning spirits: Thou may remember (good Reader) that among many things,
which I censured and reproved in Ms. Barlow, I greatly allowed and approved
one, etc. No doubt, terrible is your censure, your reproves dangerous, and woe
be to them upon whom they light. Yet the Prelate that you speak of, were he
alive again, he would rest so little satisfied with your approbation of him,
in that one point, whatsoever it is, among the many that you disallowe in him,
that he would conjure you into a boot, or into a bench-hole for your labor,
like a saucy Sinckanter, and make you an example for ever censuring him again,
or any of his rank. But his untimely death preventing his pains, the want of
the like spirits nourishes insolency, and fleshes importunity, in such bold
companions as you and yours. As for that you tell the Reader, he may remember,
etc. I assure you, it is more then I can do, to remember that which I never
read, never heard of. I guess by the Margent you should mean your Supplement,
from which God excuse me, for I would not read it if it were brought to me, or
I hired to peruse it, specially if it be like this that here you offer us, the
most wooden com-patchment, in such tediousness of repetitions, that ever I
hit on.

3. Now there rests only one point to be handled (say you) which is of far
different quality from the former. And that is, as you explane your self
shortly after, of such places in the Bishops book, as he overthrows his
own cause by, and fortifieth yours, even more then ever Mr. Barlowe did. A
pretty imagination: shall we see how trow? First, because he acknowledges,
that Christ is to be adored, in and cum Sacramento, About the adoration of
Christ in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. Adioynd. cap. 10. number. 4.
in and with the Sacrament. Why not? since wheresoever he is, he is to be
adored, and we deny him not to be in the Sacrament, (howsoever you slander
us) though we define not the manner, but leave that to him, who both can and
will verify his promise, though we be neither conscious nor concurrent. I may
say unto you here, as Dionysius to Sopater, Epist. 6. Non si quid non rubrum
est, propterea candidum; nec si quis non est equus, is homo sit necesse est:
Every thing is not white that is not read, neither if we deny a thing to be
a horse, do we therefore straight conclude that it is a man. The Bishop grants
that Christ is to be worshipped, and that he is to be worshipped in the
Sacrament, which he infallibly accompanies, and effectually assisteth: Ergo,
with you he is a Pontifician, and maintains your cause, and betrayeth his
own. No such thing, gentle Sir. To make him yours, more goes to it then so.
Especially these two, Corporal presence, and Transubstantiation or conversion.
These are the two maine badges, or rather buttresses, of your Cyclops, neither
of which is be found in the Bishops writing, and God knows is far off from
his belief. Howbeit, think you not that Christ is so to be worshipped in the
Sacrament, or with the Sacrament, by our doctrine, as the Father with the
Son, Athanas. ad Serap. Quod Spiritus S. non sit creatura.
and the Son with the Father, or each of them in the other, where each
partakes alike worship with the other: but as if I should say, that the King is
to be worshipped, whether naked or in his clothes; whether bare-headed, or
with his crown and diadem on; so Christ is to be worshipped in the Sacrament,
and with the Sacrament, every where no doubt, but more specially there, where
so incomparable a benefit exhibited to our eyes, and presented to our hands,
justly challenges Cyrill. Cateches. 5. (...).
the greatest zeal that may be.

4. Though again, when we say that Christ is in the Sacrament (because we
would not be mistaken) we say not that he is there after a corporal manner:
nay, that your own Captain and Cardinal disclaimeth, Corporaliter Bellarm. de
Sacr. Eucharist. l. 1. c. 2. where he adds out of S. Bernard, Sermon de S.
Martino; that, In Sacramento exhibetur nobis vera carnis (Christi) substantia,
sed spiritualiter non carnaliter: that is, that the true flesh of Christ is
communicated to us in the Sacrament, yet not carnally, but spiritually. What
other do we teach at this day? Therefore Bellarm, in the words following,
puts his finger to his mouth, and gives us an item, not to talk too much of
this point. Non videtur haec vex multum frequentanda. And, Periculum est ne
trahatur ab aduersarijs, etc.
esse Christum in Sacramento: but we say not so much as that his flesh is
there, or his The Rhemists are so confounded in their bodily presen^e, that
they make Christ's body to be a figure of it self, in the Sacrament. Rhem.
upon Luke 12. adding, that Christ is the image of his father, and yet of the
same substance with him. But who knows not, that the Father and the Son are
two distinct persons, or supposita, so as well may one be image of the other?
But Christ's body is only one, and the same. I would they had brought no other
images into the church, but such as are the same with the primitive or
prototypon.
body there at all, not only after a bodily or fleshly manner. Christus
(says S. Leo) quadragesimo post resurrectionem die, coram discipulis eleuatus
in coelum, corporalis praesentiae modum fecit, etc. Christ made a period of his
bodily presence, being lifted up into heaven, before the face of his Disciples
the fortieth day after his resurrection. And S. Austen out of those words,
Matthew. 26. Non semper habebitis me vobiscum, with other like in S. John, chap.
12. resolves it plainly, that secundum carnem non semper, according to the
flesh, he is not always with us. Tract. 109. in Ioh. It were not hard to
produce diverse more to the same purpose. Yea, Si esset in terra, non esset
sacerdos, Heb. 8. If Christ were on the earth, he could be no Priest. So as you
destroy his Priesthood, while you stand for such presence, to commend your
Sacrifice. I say therefore neither bodily, nor in body at all. For though the
flesh and the deity of our Savior Christ never were separated, nor never may
be, since the first instant of his sacred conception, if you attend the knot of
personal union, yet the Godhead is spread through diverse places and spaces,
S. Hierome in Mark. c. 12. says of Christ, Coniungens in coena^ pura agnum cum
pane: finiens vetus, novum inch^ans testamentum. So as the bread remains. For
as the passover in the lamb, so the Eucharist in bread: or else the new
Testament is not yet begun. And the same Hierome soon after in Mark. 14.
Transfigurans corpus suum in panem, forma^s sanguinem suum in calicem: that
Christ be transubstantiated into the elements, not the elements into Christ, by
S. Hieromes manner of speaking. But by this, we see, the Fathers were far
from being so strict for Tra^substantiation of the bread (as the Papists are
now adays) only laboring to fulfill the verity of the Sacrament, and to
bring Christ, and his ordinance, together.
which the body and flesh approaches not in any distance. Unless you will be so
wood now, as to add brutish Vbiquitisme, to your barbarous Cyclopisme. So as
Christ may be in the Sacrament, and there adored, yet his body be neither
there, or not after bodily manner at least; but howsoever it be there, not
transformed, nor transubstantiated out of the bread, as your conceit is. And
thus therefore there is not paries, or maceries only, but murus still, or
valtum, between yours and the reverend Bishops assertion. The profoundnesse of
this mystery, leads us to wade thus softly and suspensiuely, knowing that Gods
ways are in many waters, and his footsteps unknown, his paths unsearchable.
We can scarce discern the print of his chariot-wheeles, as he rides along
before our eyes, only we hear a noise in the tops of the mulberrie trees, as
David did sometime, 2. Sam. 5. 24. The bones of the Passover must be burnt
with fire, says S. Chrysostom, and S. Theophylact, that is, Divine mysteries
Comm. in Johan 19.
not ripped up, nor ransacked, but adored and covered by devout respect. And
with good Mr. Hooker, we conclude our enquiries Church Polity; vbi de Euchar.
about the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, with this modest Epiphonema, O my
God, thou art true, O my soul thou art happy, sollicitous for no more.

5. I had thought I had been at an end of this intricate question, or near
an end, when I was crossed in my conceits by the author of the Manna. Whose
intents as I cannot but praise for auouching the honor, and expressing the
fruit of this divine mystery, so, what weight there is in his remonstrances
for their Transubstantiation, that one sentence of his may show, which he
quotes out of S. Cyrill of Jerusalem, Catechesi 4. Mystagogica, and he is
content to seem to put such affiance in, as in that ship to venture all his
ware, which the wise forbid. For which cause also, he has not only singled it
out from the rest, but set it in the front of his following Discourse, while he
inserts it into his Epistle to his most Excellent MAJESTY, as the motive most
of might, in all his Mount of Testimonies (so he calls them;) belike mons
caseatus according well with coelum mellifluum, or nubes escatilis, as
Tertullian describes it. Well, what says S. Cyrill? I will translate it out of
the Latin, as the Author renders it, though the Latin be not so exact with
the Greek in all points. Knowing this, and believing it for certain, that
this bread which we see is not bread, although the taste discernes it to be
bread, but that it is the body of Christ. And the wine which we see, although
it seem to be wine to our sense of taste, yet is not wine, but the blood of
Christ. This S. Cyrill. In all which words, of Transubstantiation not a word;
or conversion any. And yet this sentence must carry the world, by the
judgment of our Author, speaking from the clouds, and distilling influences.
But he that does not acknowledge the phrase of the holy Fathers, speaking of
Christ's Sacraments, to magnify the virtue of the hidden grace, with a certain
contempt of the external sign, or abolishment rather, that the other may be
most eminent, he may sooner bewray his rawnes in Divinity, then hurt the cause
by his profound arguing. Zelus domus tuae comedit me, says the Prophet David:
And, Zelus mensae tuae nos, may they say. I mean the supernall and mystical
table, (which themselves often speak of, as prepared in heaven, (...). The
rather perhaps, (...). Cyrill ipse, Catech. 4. quae est illa quam citat Author.
whereas if the Christ were on earth, on earth should be our table too, as well
as our dish) but, the zeal, I say, which they carried to that intelligible
table, and the grace that the great feast-maker distributes therefrom, makes
them to make no reckoning of the visible elements, as they are hammered in
natures forge. For what profane eye cannot discern of them so? Who so ill
nurtured, or so new-illuminate, such as those were to whom S. Cyrill speaks
here? But to lift up the mind higher, to bring the spouse into the
wine-cellar, (as the holy Ghost speaks in the Canticles) and to acquaint them
with the treasure which those homely vessels contain, that was here S.
Cyrills study, and about that the holy Fathers spend their strengths most
willingly, when they treat of this argument. The Cardinal says, (I grant)
that in a Catechism, all things should be laid out most literally, and most
plainly. And therefore S. Cyrill calling his works here Catechizings, we
should For whereas he adds farther in the same place, that Cyrill was never
suspected of error about the Sacrament, though he speak so; it is a mere
bauble. As if we dissented from Cyrill, and not from them about the meaning of
his words.
look for no figures, but all direct. In Catechesi omnia proprie and
simpliciter explic antur, says he. Lib. 2. de Eucharist. cap. 13. Forgetting
that these, though they are called Catechizings, yet not so much of
instruction, as ours are wont to be, when we teach in Churches, as of spur
and exhortation to the new-illuminate, (they are called (...) here by S.
Cyrill,) to inflame their minds, to kindle their affections, rather then to
inlighten their judgments, (Seraph-like, not Cherub-like, if I may be suffered
so to speak,) that they would consider of their profession, and adorn their
calling, keep pure their garments, and henceforth construe of occurrents in
relligion, rather Christianly then popularly, which is the cause that S. Cyrill
lifts up his voice, and bespeaks them in the language of vehemence new laid
down. Not only to preserve the primitive phrase of the institution, though
that prevail we see so far with the Apostle Paul, as to call it the body,
when he calls it the bread (even with one 1. Cor. 10. cap. itemque ^1. varijs
locis and versibu^.
breath both,) but to eleuate folks minds also to the consideration of the
right worth and value of it. As another of them, being to express the benefit
of Baptism (a Sacrament less admired, though of most principal operation) is
not afraid to say as much for our transubstantiation into Christ, as they can
allege for the breads, out of any writer. And yet I hope they will not say,
that we are really metamorphosed, or substantially transformed, into Christ's
body, by Baptism. Leo Ser. 14. de Pass. Dom. In Baptism (says he) while we
lay down the old man, and take up the new, there is a semblant of our dying,
as well as of our rising again; both in one. Vt susceptus a Christo
Christu^que suscipiens, non ide^ sit post lavacru^ qui fuit ante Baptismum, sed
corpus regeniti sit caro crucifixi. That is, [The body of the party
Christened, is the flesh of our Lord, crucified.] This S. Leo. And to help you
to Transubstantiation, he enclines almost to utter abolition, or annihilation,
if that may gratify you. For he says, Non idem post qui ante lavacrum. That
is, [The baptized party is not the same after, that he was before his
baptism.] What more dangerous word could S. Cyrill let fall, or any Father of
them all, to sound for your supposalls about Transubstantiation, while they
meant no such thing (your selves will confess that they never meant it in
baptism) but only sought to endeare the Sacrament to us, and to auerre the
sovereign virtue of it? But let S. Cyrill be judge, as we read him in the same
place, which our Cateches. 4. generali, quae prima in Graeca editione Morel.
Anni 1564. (...). And, (...), etc.
Druggist quotes: specially because we find him so well minded in relligion,
(Cyrill I mean) as to make the Scripture judge of all that he shall say,
commanding his scholars to believe him no otherwise, then as he shall be able
to justify, all that he brings, by Scripture.

6. First, in his first Catechese, (...), out of which the aforesaid authority
is quoted. He makes (...), and (...), not simply (...), nor simply (...), to be
opposed to the body and blood of Christ. Which shows, that he enclines not to
Transubstantiation, but a change of the use, and an increase of the grace, or
benediction, that goes with them. For (...) is not repugnant to (...), but to
(...), or (...), and may be wine still. Again, he imputes this to the (...)
over them, the invocation of Gods grace, and holy Spirits assistance, (which
likewise he repeats in his sift Cateches: soon after) not to demurmuratorie
words, which they use in Popery, and call Consecration. Yea doubtless,
comparing this our Christian service, with the service of devils, (to give a
little light by way of contrariety) wherein things offered to devils, are
made profane by such offering, ((...)) though before they were sacred, or
indifferent, he gives us to understand, that he means no more, but that the
elements by prayer acquire a degree of sanctification (not of nature,) (I mean
relative and collatiue, not essential sanctification) Creatura sanctificatur
per orationem and verbum dei. 1. Tim. 4. 5.
though they are called by him the body and blood of Christ, in the same
place, as they are also by S. Paul in the chapters before noted, either to
keep the phrase of Christ's primitive institution (as I said) or to augment
their reverence, and to proclaim their worth, for effectual operation.

7. Another place is in the Catechese which the objection is taken out of,
(...). You shall hear what words lie round about it, to direct us in the
understanding. First, he says we have the body of Christ reached to us,
(...), in the type of bread, and (...), his blood in the type of wine, not in
the Accidents of either. (...) being put so constantly for a substantial
simile, as I think they will not easily show example to the contrary. And
therefore no Transubstantiation with S. Cyrill. But he promises us to be
concorporate, and of one blood with Christ, adding that we shall be made
partakers of the divine nature by the same means, as S. Peter had said.] Which
sure is not their lot that receive at all-aduentures, as it should be, if
Christ's flesh were really in the Sacrament, but according to the faith of each
godly receiver, so it happens unto him to be united to Christ, and that is the
transformation which S. Cyrill here drives at. In so much as he condemns
Sarcophagie in plain terms, which is the opinion that some have, as if they
should eat Christ's natural flesh in the Sacrament, (the very Popish Canniball
at this day.) And he counts them Capernaites, for their gross conceit of that
Divine mystery, saying that no marvel if they went back from Christ, Ioh. 6.
v. 66. (even as this drives many back now, in Popery) only for want of
spiritual understanding. Yet what spiritual understanding I pray, if Christ's
flesh be eaten properly, properly between our teeth, digested properly into
the members of our body, as he had said before, (...), except only that he
says not properly, because he means mystically, and no otherwise.

8. Then comes in the distinction, between (...), or (...), and themselves as
they are sanctified. (...). Consider not the bread and wine, as single bread
and wine. For why? they are sanctified. And in our Saviors phrase they are his
body and his blood, but in our Saviors phrase only, (...), says S. Cyrill.
What more true? And now we are not to think, that no more virtue goes with
them, then the eye can perceive, or the taste discern, but we must rest our
selves upon our Saviors words, upon faith, not upon sense. This is all the
appeal from sense to faith, that S. Cyrill allows, not for quelling the
natures, but extolling the powers, of the consecrated elements. As he says in
the conclusion of his fourth Catechese, as it were taunting at the senses, if
they contest with faith, or intrude themselves unmannerly into Gods mysteries,
(...), though sense be frampoll, though sense will needs have it so, (Hagar
against Sarah) that is raw sense, and uncontrolled by the Spirit, which else is
so governed and trained from above, as (not renouncing the taste, or digging out
the eyes, with the heathenish Democritus, but only washing and cleansing them
in the poole Siloam,) in a rugged shell it sees a pearl most precious.

9. The like in his fifth Catechese, and upon the like grounds. (...), etc. That
is, Commit not the judgment of this matter to your throat (your bodily
throat) but to steadfast faith, etc. And good reason. For which he adds,
(...). That is, For no body is willed to eat bread, or to taste wine, (when
the Sacrament is to be received:) But as the semblants or memorialls of Christ's
body and blood, so are they reached to us, and so received of us. Most truly,
and most divinely. Which hinders not their persisting in the same nature that
they were, though they are delivered to us, as instruments now of another
work, or as monuments, or pledges, of a greater grace. Nay, because he makes
them (...), and (...), figures only of his blood, and figures of his body, he
denies the essential in the Papists raw sense at least, to all that are not
preiudicate.

10. But because I am stepped into his fifth Catechese ere I was aware, I will
conclude with that. One time we read thus there. (...). He had said that we
inuoke or call for the holy Ghost, to be sent down upon the elements as they
lie before us: (...). Then he adds, as the Greek imports, newly set down; For
wheresoever the holy Spirit of God does but touch, immediately the thing is
sanctified, and also changed. Lo what transmutation S. Cyrill means, namely,
Yet the Author of the Manna, quotes Mr. Casaubone, as if he were astounded with
the word. Transmutation, so often occurring in the Greek Fathers. No cause why.
that which stands only in sanctification. And he says, whersoeuer the holy
Ghost but touches, the like transmutation is instantly wrought. Yet how often
do we change by the operation of the holy Ghost, and not in substance? As, a
gloria in gloriam, tanquam a Domini spiritu: which words were the conclusion of
his last Catechese before this; and many the like changes that might be brought
for instance. Finally, thus: (...). And again bringing them together, (...).
That is, Holy is that before us, Holy you whom the holy Ghost has inspired.
Holy things with holy things bear good proportion. Yet what (...) between
Christ and us, in the matter of holiness? what proportion or correspondence
between our holiness and his? As S. Chrysostom sweetly says upon Matthew. 5.
p. 96. edit. Etonen. Between Gods mercy, and humane pity, there is as much
difference, as between the very goodness and naughtiness that is incident to
men. And so also between our holiness and Christ's holiness. Therefore S.
Cyrill concludes, looking up to Christ; (...). There is but one holy, there is
but one Lord, which is Jesus Christ. Rising from the elements, passing by
themselves which were of the audience, pitching in Christ. Whom he knew to be
far above, and in an other region, not in altars made with hands, but in the
Kingdom everlasting, where righteousness dwells, that is, where himself. So
as we have the Pharisee as well as the Capernaite, Popish Justification
together with Transubstantiation, here confuted. But this purposely, that by
the way.

11. As for Bellarmines addition to the other testimonies of S. Cyrill (which
the Manna pretermits, or at least makes no vaunt of it in his Dedicatorie) that
S. Cyrill should forbid us in his fifth Catechese, to spill the crummes of the
holy Eucharist, Ergo, he presupposes bodily presence; I answer in one word: we
do the like with them, (I mean with the crummes, which our Lord forbad to be
spilt, when they ministered no grace, but only manifested his power, Ioh. 6.
12.) And not only with them, but with things much less holy. We bear a meet
respect toward them, Propter connexionem cum Sancto; as the nature of mankind
is, (even without a Schoolmasters) to be moved with the bye, and where we
honor the principal, not to contemn the appertinances. Yet no
Transformators, no such savage Sarcophagi, as S. Cyrill bends his pen
against, in the place before showed. And thus much of S. Cyrill. I return into
my way, and from Manna to Marah, to the Adioynders cauills.

12. Two more he uses yet about this matter of the Sacrament, which I will end
with them, them with it. One, that Calvin and diverse other Protestant
Divines, deny that Christ is to be worshipped in the Sacrament, or with the
Sacrament, that so he may make the Bishop to be irregular and paradoxicall,
(...). Though it be allowed to Eagles to fly alone, and they are said to be
but sheep that always heard together, yet he shall never put this scandal
upon the Reverend Bishop, nor divide in him the eminence of a Pastor most
conspicuous, from the meekness and the conformablenesse of the quietest lamb
in the flock. Therefore shore up your eyes, good Mr Adioynder, and look once
again upon your Bellarmine, from whom you stole these quotations, wherewith
your Margent is be-painted, in this place, of Calvine, and Melancthon, denying,
as you pretend, the worship of the Sacrament, in the sense aforesaid: though
still I must tell you, that the Bishop never avouched the worship of the
Sacrament, (which some of your own Divines deny, if Lib. 4. de Sacram.
Eucharist. c. 29. De modo autem, etc. Nempe [ipsi Catho^ici] qui docent
Sacramentum Eucharistiae formaliter esse species panis and vini, illi negant
Sacramentum hoc, [nisi materialiter] esse adorandum. That is to say, that
Christ only is to be worshipped, and not the Sacrament, unless we will
confound them.
Bellarmine say true) but only of the Lord, either acco^panying his Sacrament,
or wheresoever else present. You shall find in Bellarmine, that all the
question between our Divines about the worshipping of the Sacrament, is
twofold: The one during the use and the act of the Lords Supper, the other for
the time following, and upon the reservation of the elements. And though this
may find but small friendship among our writers, which, if your opinion be not
disclaimed, exposes Christ to the most abominable injuries that may be, (as
namely, to be worried or wasted of beasts, while you pretend to keep him to be
worshipped of men,) yet in the act of participation, Contendunt Christi corpus
esse adorandum, (says he) they are earnest to avouch the worshipping of
Christ's body, namely, Luther. in formula Missae. and in lib. de verb. s, Hoc
est corpus meum, and alihi.
Luther, Bucer. in actis colloq. Ratisbon.
Bucer, Ioh. Brentius in Apolog. pro confess. Wittemberg. Pericop 2.
Brentius, and Chemnit. in 2. part. exam. Trid. Council. sessione 13. cap 5.
Chemnitius. But it may be you will say, that these are such as hold the
corporal presence and coexistence. You shall hear Calvine therefore, whom
your self quote, as a condemner of this worship, how modestly and how mildly
he discusses the whole question hereabout. Institut. l. 4. c. 17. Parag. 35.
Quomodo ex re ambigua cerio conficient quod volunt? Nempe vbi certo Dei verbo
desicise videbunt, quo vno consistunt animae nostrae, vbi Apostolorum doctrinam
and exempla sibi aduersari, se vero solos sibi authors esse cogitabunt, etc.
Accedent etiam alia. Quid? an res erat nullius momenti Deum hac forma adorare,
vt nihil nobis praescriberetur? An cum de vero Dei cultu ageretur, tanta
leuitate fuerat tentandum, de quo nullum vsquam verbum legebatur? That is; How
will they conclude certainly, out of a thing uncertain? For when they shall see
they are destitute of Gods most pregnant word, upon which alone our souls
rely, when they shall see that both the doctrine, and examples of the Apostles
are wanting to them, and that themselves are the only authors of this devise,
namely then they will be to seek for their adoration. So that Calvine, you
see, argues from the want of ground in Scriptures for this controuerted
worship, rather then oppugnes it in any odious or offensive fashion. As also
that shows which follows in him. [Is it a small matter, says he, to adore
God in such a manner as he never prescribed, or should that be so lightly or
rashly attempted in the matter of Gods worship, of which we never read any word
any where extant?] At si qua decet humilitate, etc. auscultassent certe quod
ipse dixit, Accipite, manducate, bibite, huicque mandato paruissent, quo accipi
Sacramentum, non adorari iubet. That is, But if they had submitted themselves
to Gods word, as they ought, they would have hearkened to that which himself
said, Take, eat, drink, and they would have obeyed that Commandment, whereby
he bad them receive, not adore, the Sacrament. Bell. vbi prius, itemque Valent.
ijsdem prope verbis, sed ista friuola sunt: Nam Christus non quondam in
praesepi vt adoraretur, sed vt ibi requiesceret, and tamen illu^ Magi in
praesepi adorarunt: and cum ambularet in terris, non ambulabat vt adoraretur,
and tamen passim adorabatur. Et quando hic in terris Principes aliquo
proficiscuntur, non eunt ad eum finem, vt ab occurrentibus salutentur, and
tamen, etc. Quare aduersarij pluris faciunt printipem terrenum, quam Christum.
Vide Greg. de Valent. Tom. 3. Comm. Theol. Disput. 6. quaest. 11. de
Idololatria. punct. 4.
I know, that both Bellarm. and Valentia, and the rest of you, are wont to
scoff at this argument. [He bids us receive it, but not adore it.] This (say
you) follows not. But you shall see that Epiphanius argues so altogether in his
Tractate against the Collyridian heretics, of which before. Marie was holy,
says he, Marie was created for good use, and for the benefit of mankind, but
not to be worshipped. This is his manner of arguing. If you deride us, deride
him too, for our method is the same. I return to Calvine. Habemus Apostolorum
exemplum, quos non legimus prostratos adorasse, sed vt erant discumbentes
accepisse and manducasse. Habemus Apostolicae Ecclesiae vsum, vbi fideles non
in adoratione, etc. That is; We have the practice of the Apostles for us, of
whom we do not read, that they fell prostrate and adored, but as they sat at
table they took and eat. We have the observation of the Church, in the
Apostles time, of whom S. Luke reports, that the faithful communicated, not
in worshipping, but breaking of the bread. We have lastly the doctrine of the
Apostles on our side, namely that in which Paul instructed the Corinthians [not
mentioning the adoration of the Sacrament in least wise, and yet] professing
that what he delivered to them he received of the Lord. In fine he concludes:
Atque haec quidem eo tendunt, Expendant Loctores.
vt expendant pij lectores, quam non tutum sit in rebus tam arduis, etc.
Calvine would have us to refrain from worshipping the Sacrament of the
Eucharist for safety sake. Quia non tutum. Nam vt Christum illic rite
apprehendant piae animae, in coelum erigantur necesse est. For the soul that
will apprehend Christ rightly in the Sacrament, must be lifted up into heaven,
there is no remedy. Can you deny this to be most true? He adds yet. Quid
ergo? superstitiosum esse cultum negabimus, cum sese homines coram pane
prosternunt, vt Christum illic adorent? Huic malo proculdubio obuiare voluit
Nicaena Synodus etc. That is; What then? shall we deny that to be a
superstitious kind of worship, when men cast down themselves before a piece of
bread, to the end they may worship Christ there? No doubt the Nicene Council
intended to prevent this mischief, when it forbad us to be too basely or
sollicitously attentive about the elements set before us. And for this cause
the people were wont to be advertised by some one speaking in a loud voice,
sursum corda, that they should lift up their hearts. The Scripture also showing
us where to seek Christ, bids us seek him in heaven, at the right hand of his
Father, Col. 3. 1. Secundum hanc regulam erat potius spiritualiter in coelesti
gloria adorandus Christus, quam excogitandum istud tam periculosum adorationis
genus, etc. According to this rule we ought rather to worship Christ
spiritually, and as he is placed in the heavenly glory, then devise this so
dangerous kind of adoration. Dangerous he calls it, because it may have evil
consequence, and be of kindred to gross and carnal opinions, concerning God,
as are his words following in the same place; also he preferres the other
before it by a potius, or by a rather only, as sparing the rest. Lastly, he
thus disputes, or concludes shall I say, in his 37. Parag. not far from the
former place. Christo inquiunt hanc venerationem deferimus. Primum si in caena
hoc fieret, dicerem adorationem eam demum esse legitimam, qua non in signo
residet, sed ad Christum in coelo sedentem dirigitur. The question is there
about the carrying of the host up and down in pomp. And they allege for
themselves, says he, that they give this worship to Christ. But how does
Calvine answer them? I am first to say, quoth he, that if this were done of
them, at the time of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, nevertheless that
worship only were to be counted lawful, which did not rest in the element,
but rose up higher, and were directed to Christ sitting in heaven. Where you
see he resists the circumgestation of the host, rather then the reverence that
belongs to the Lords Supper, and graunts directly, that in cana si hoc fieret,
in the Lords Supper if this were done (namely that Christ were adored there) he
would not greatly mislike it, so we soared above the sign, and confined him
not to the element, but rose up in our cogitations to him, as he is sitting in
heaven. The Bishop therefore reuolts not from the current of our Divines, about
the worshipping of the Sacrament, but worshipping Christ wheresoever he finds
him (for even Bellarmine can tell us here, that we are not tied to any Bell.
vbi prius, ex Ioh. 4. Non in hoc monte, etc.
place, Ioh. 4. since the times of the new Testament, but that they admit of
all alike,) yet willingliest rises above the sphere of the Creation, and
considers him as apparelled with celestial glory. This was one.

13. Another thing that I am to note, of kin to the former, and entangled with
the argument of the adoration of the Sacrament, is this. In sum, a gross
untruth of the Adioynders, Numb. 4. In that quoting the Bishops book, page
201. lin. 8. he says he treats of the same matter there, viz. of the
worshipping of Christ in the Sacrament. Of which not a word, on my word, in
that place, but by occasion of another question about worshipping Gods
footestoole, which S. Augustine and S. Ambrose construe to be the flesh of our
Savior Christ, not any material footestoole, as the Papists would have it, he
shows how the flesh and humane nature of Christ may be worshipped, by the
privilege of their assumption into his Godhead. And he explicates it by the
similitude of a King, and his roabe, which participates in a manner of the
reverence done to the King himself. This do both S. Augustine and the Bishop
manifestly in that place; I say, they show how Christ's flesh may be worshipped
with the Godhead, whereas the Adioynder says the Bishop teaches by this
comparison, that the flesh of Christ may be adored with the Sacrament, and the
Sacrament with it, by virtue of such conjunction. Which is a notable untruth,
as I said before, the Bishop neither insinuating any thing to that purpose in
all that place, and utterly denying it elsewhere, viz. page 195. of the same
book. The Sacrament no where, says he, the earthly part, lib. 4. c. 34.
as Irenaeus calls it, but Christ every where is to be worshipped. And his
flesh too: but as he declares afterward out of S. Austen, p. 201. lin. 8. as
even now I noted. Such conscience in his reporting, or such diligence in his
reading, heed in his observing, uses the Adioynder. But so much of the first
branch of this chapters accusation, concerning the Sacrament. I am to be short
in the rest.

14. ANother is, about the Reward of good works. He says, Numb. 6.
the Bishop favors their opinion in that too. As if we, when we deny either
justification by works, or the merit of good works after justification,
denied reward, recompense, retribution. We acknowledge with S. Gregory in In
cap. 5. M^ spo^si pl^^^ hyacinth^^. Iuxta illud, Vbi ego sum, ibi minister men's
erit. Greg.
his Commentary upon the Canticles, that the hands of the Bridegroom are set
with Chrysolites, that is, that he has many gemmes and precious jewels which
he carries always about him, as it were the rings of his fingers, to reward
his favorites with, now one, then another. But yet again, we cannot but join
with S. Hilarie, saying, That for so much I^ Mat. can. 5.
as we are called to be like the lillies, which neither spinne nor sow, and
yet equal Solomon in all his royalty, it is a similitude of the
righteousness which we have by faith, and the possession of eternal glory,
without the merit of good works. Quibus (says he) nec laborantibus nec
nentibus, extra operis mercedem gloriae candor a Deo indultus est, etc. And
thus, he supposes we are made like the Angels, which condition you know we
are promised, totidem verbis, elsewhere, namely, Luke 20. 36. And yet the
Angels merits are little spoken of in Scripture, man's rather (though no were
avouched, yet the rather I say, of the two) that man may be stirred up, to the
working of good works, with no less zeal, and feruencie, then if the
obtaining of the crown depended merely thereupon. But the Angels hazard and
probation-time being past, nothing is pronounced but ^xactly concerning them,
to whom the glory of meriting must nevertheless belong in all reason, before
we men may challenge it. Yea, but meritum and merces (says the Adioynder) are
correlatiues, and if reward be granted, merit may by no means be denied. It
follows not, good Sir. There is a reward of free mercy, Merces gratuita, and
merces debitae. S. Ambr distinct. (...). Rewarding us above our desert.
Geometrical proportion, not arithmeticall.
as well as of due desert, a reward of liberality, as S. Ambrose
distinguishes, as well as issuing from the rigor of absolute justice, which is
the hirelings reward, whereas we hold by inheritance, and call him Father, as
S. Peter puts us in mind, 1. Pet. 1. 17. or, are children and heirs, as Romans
8. 10, 17, 1^. Romans 9. 7, 8, Ephesians. 5. 1. and 5. 8. Phil. 2. 15. And, 1. Pet. 1.
14. 1. Ioh. 3. 1. 2. 10. and saepius.
S. Paul often.

15. The Hebrew word for wages, (the Adioynders Merces, that he argues from)
signifies (as I have heard) but as much as the calx, the heel in a man's body.
Because as the heel is the final, the bottom of Gods workmanship, so the
work cease when the wages is paid. As Solomon can tell us, that he that
pays aforehand, cuts off the hands, and the legs, meaning that the wages
is the period of the work, and that being paid, all pains are at an end; no
body works when he has received his pay, no more then if his arms, or his
legs were cut off. And the Latin calx, the goal after a race, may perchance
come from thence, (but I define nothing) as the final of that exercise, in
which they rest and breath themselves, that ran before. Consummaui cursum, 2.
Tim. 4. 7. The Greek word (...) therefore must be no otherwise construed in
the New Testament; for the New loves to speak in the terms of the Old, as
they know that know any thing. And so Merces is not so proud as to infer
merit, (as the Adioynder would) but only the reward which the work precedeth,
and the work is concluded by that reward. They have received their reward,
their (...), their wages, Matthew. 6. It is three times there in ver 2. 5. 15.
one Chapter. Do the hypocrites therefore merit in their damnable hypocrisies?
It were a shame to think so. How much better Bellarmine, that awakes at last,
and expounds mereri by impetrare mere? De Romans Pont. l. 3. c. 23. So as no
marvel if our writers abhor from the Chap. 10. number. 6. Luther, and (...),
and their fellows, howsoever they teach that good works may have some reward
(yea, (...) most rich reward) even in the next life, yet they deny that they
merit eternal salvation, etc. and number. 11. apertius. Adioynd.
word merit (as the Adioynder notes) wishing rather it had never been in use:
which is no more then S. Austen of the word Fortune, and yet that the Scripture
uses in diverse places, Retract.
as in S. Luke, and Ecclesiastes, and (...), 1. Cor. 12. 10. Much more
therefore that which the Scripture never uses, as the word merit, though they
translate (...) so, Heb, 13. most vnfittly; unless you will abate from the
sense of merit, (as Bellarmine even now) rather then rack (...) to so
abominable insolence. S. Hierome in his Comm. in Matthew. 10. says that Issachar
by interpretation signifies merces, that is to say wages, a brand for them that
hold by merit, as it is correlatiue to wages, as the Adioynder teaches; there
being (...), the wages of wickedness, or of unrighteousness (no less then
of good works) which who will say we properly merit, unless it be the wages
of woe and condemnation for siune? (...), and (...), is still put in Scripture
in the bad sense, as might be showed more at large if it were pertinent. Ioh.
10. twice together, Luke 15. likewise twice, etc. So as well might S.
Chrysostom say, (...), that we in Romans
must not serve God for pay, but for his own sake. Though it is true, that
Ipse est merces nostra magna nimis, Genes. 15. And does the Adioynder think
that he can merit God? Of merit hitherto.

16. As for the justice, that is incident to the keeping of promise, that there
may be a justice in our rewards whatsoever; such a justice we grant you, we
contend not about it. God; way of rewarding us (when he accepts our pains,
rests well pleased with our endeauours) is full of this justice. Yea, all the
ways of God are just and true, so: God is questionless just in all his
courses. In the creation of the world, in the giving of the first grace, in the
sending of his Son to be our Redeemer; but so as merit creep in never the
more for all that, and much less the Bishop turn praeuaricator, the cleerest
confessor, and the directest champion, (let the trial be his carriage even in
this very controversy) that ever yet encountered you in the cause. Shall I
say, that as Annibal Frontinus stratag.
would persuade the Romans that Fabius was for Carthage, and therefore burnt
not his gardens, when he burnt all the rest, threaping kindness upon him? Or
rather as I have heard some Sophisters in the Schools, when they were puzzled
with an argument, which they could not tell how to answer, they would fall to
trifling and shifting, Haec omnia verissima sunt, concedo tibi cuncta, iam meas
parts agis, etc. but were never a whit the nearer to the assoyling of the
objection, in wise men's judgments: so the Adioynder does here, and in this
whole Chapter. He says the Bishop is turned Popish, and closes with the
Cardinal, because he confutes the Cardinal, (as it were getting within him)
either by his own authorities, or at least by his own Authors, as Gregory de
Valent. here for one. And Seclusa promissione diuina non suppetit aliquis
sufficiens titulus propter quem Deus debeat compensare tale opus vita aeterna.
Valent. 8. 6. 4. The Adiovnder quoting it twice, and still false, one time 9.
for 6. another, 14. for 4. consundent vestigia circa specum ne capiatur.
though I could wish from my heart, that it were true which you say, that the
Bishop were of your mind, that so you might be of the Bishops, Vellem omnes
esse sicut memetipsum, 1. Cor. 7. 7. and Act. 26. 29. I would to God that all
were answerable, and in all points, exceptis ijs quae aut optare aut sperare
dementis est, yet hearken you in a word how much farther both the Cardinal and
certain others have gone in challenging to themselves the heavenly favor
(which is better then the life, then the Kingdom it self, if we believe
David: Misericordia tu^ super vitam. Charitas more.
Psalm. 62. 4.) out of their inherent worthiness, then ever the Bishop (...),
for his divine piety sake, then diverse under him, not only with your
elenches, but with your more forcible engines, I mean your rackes and your
strappadoes, would ever be brought to do. And first the Cardinal, the card that
you sail by, de iustif. l. 2. c. 16. Effectus infusae charitatis est,
reconciliare hominem Deo, and hic effectus consequitur ex natura rei absolute.
That is: The effect of the love of God, dwelling in our souls, is such, as to
make our peace between God and us. And this effect follows absolutely ex
natura rei, out of the nature of that quality, viz. the love of God, as it is
shed abroad in our hearts. The question is, between the Adioynder and us,
whether the favor of God follow upon our good works, or virtuous habits,
seclusa promissione, without the promise of God, yea or no? Or rather in truth,
this is not the question. But the Bishop not only granting this, but mainely
urging it, and thereby either extenuating, or clean overthrowing their
supposed merit, the Adioynder says, that herein the Bishop says no more then
the ranckest Papist of them all: viz. that all merit presupposes Gods promise.
The Adioynders words, cap. 10. number. 8. and 9. We are so far from rejecting the
consideration of Gods promise, that we ground the merit of everlasting life
specially thereupon.
And yet here we have the Cardinal ascribing our friendship with Almighty
God, our peace and our reconciliation with the Lord of all things, (which is
our most immediate title to the kingdom of heaven, and the remoouing of the
mainest bar that keeps us out from thence, or can possibly keep us,) to the
effect of such poor charity as is found inherent in us, ex natura rei
absolute: the promise, either suppressed, or at least silenced; yea so silenced,
as suppressed for certain, renounced plainly. But Vasquez more audaciously and
presumptuously yet, then Bellarmine, (the beast belike waxing prowder and
prowder) in I a secundae, Disput. 204. cap. 4. Deus ipse efficere non potest,
quin per inhaerentem iustitiam sit dignus quisque aterna vita, et si per
absolutam potentiam possit non dare. That is: God himself cannot hinder, but
that every man is worthy of eternal life, out of his inherent righteousness,
though out of his absolute power he may refuse to give it him. I examine not
this Divinity, how God may be unjust by his absolute power, whereas his
absolute power does not give him that leave, to deny his justice, that is
himself, which I suppose he should do, if he denied rewards to them that have
deserved them, and are worthy of them. But by this may be seen, whether the
Bishop be turned Papist yea or no, for standing for Gods promise to ground our
hope of heaven upon, or rather whether Valentia be not turned Protestant, for
holding so precisely, that secluso promisso, we have no cause of confidence.
Or, if that be Popery, which Valentia holds, and the Bishop lays hold on,
that we have no right to heaven but for the promise, whether Vasquez and
Bellarmine savor not of a rancker contagion then so, that advance us to
heaven, and to the highest favor of God, out of the worth of what is within
us, though his promise were no where, though his pactum salis were clean
plowed down. Can there be any thing more contrary then the aforesaid opinions
are between themselves? Or is not the Bishop most constant, while the Jesuits
are thus at odds, like the Armites, among themselves? One of them being so
humble, and so humbly conceiting of his own sufficiencies, as it seems at
least, that you would think he might enter in even through the needles eye;
the others so swelling, as heaven it self, large though it be, is scarce able
to contain them. But if this be their speculation, about infused righteousness,
which is Gods entire work, what do they think of their own works, trow
you, which for certain they will challenge more reward unto, because they are
more voluntary, and of their freer concurrence? And indeed the question was
between the Bishop and the Cardinal, about the merit of works, not of habits.
These, make habits and all to be meritorious, one absolutely ex natura rei, the
other so as God cannot hinder condignitie, though he deny pay. Yet S. Paul not
only vilifies his habit of righteousness, Phil. 3. that I may be found in him,
not having mine own righteousness, but his works of righteousness, Tit. 3. and
which is more then both these, his sufferings for righteousness, Romans 8. He had
played the Auditour, he had cast up his accounts, and his total is what think
you? (...), etc. I find (says he) by computation, or by exact casting, that
the present sufferings of this transitory life ((...), they are so short) they
are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed. He keeps the word, you
see, (...), they are not worthy. Yet Vasquez says, God cannot The monstrous
giddiness of Vasque^, in contradicting; God may deny reward, but not our
desert, says he, whereas our desert is none, but Gods reward most certain. And
to be claimed too, ea quae par est humilitate, as the Bishop most excellently.
That to be disclaymed altogether.
hinder their worthiness, no not only by his ordinary power, but not by his
absolute, (though he may deny the wages by the later of these two, that is
scarce justly, or very unjustly only, as I conceive it.) But what says
Bellarmine? The Apostle (says he) means, that the sufferings here are
temporal, the bliss to come eternal, and that between them there is no
proportion. Now surely a worshipful solution, of an insoluble authority.
Whereas the Apostle does not say, they are not proportionable ratione
durationis, but (...), that they are not worthy, which is the very question.
And was this a sentence worthy of S. Paul's wisdom, to tell us that there is
no proportion between finite and infinite? Who does not know that? We may say
unto him, as he does to Calvine in another place, about the wisdom of Ulysses,
pronouncing for Monarchies; Ad hoc certe pronunciandum non fuit opus sapientia
vel Pauli, vel Apostoli: De Pontif. Romans l. 1. c. 2. The very Centurion, to
whom the Jews had given that testimony, (...), he is worthy, yet he
overthrows it in the same place again, with (...), I did not count my self
worthy, Luc. 7. 7. They thought him worthy that Christ should come to him,
when he does not think himself worthy so much as to come to Christ. And not
to come to him in earth, I say; yet into heaven trow you? to find him out
there too? As he must, if he mean to be saved by his works. But so is merit
and worthiness every way hissed out, so is it one thing for the Jews to ponder
other bodies merits, another thing for the conscience to weigh it self in
impartial balance. The builder of the Synagogue is modester then the Jews
that enjoy his buildings.

17. Many things might be noted in the Adioynders discourse, wherein he choakes
himself, though he indite the Bishop of preuarisation. Number. 7. he says, the
Bishop alludes to the penny in the Gospells, that was given to the laborers,
by which the Fathers (as he confesses) understand eternal life and salvation.
He quotes Hierome in Iovinian, lib. 2. Aug. de Virgin. c. 26. Greg. in Job. l.
4. c. 31. also the Commentaries upon S. Matthew. cap. 20. But if this be so, what
more adverse to himself? For if the penny be but one, and all receive that
common penny, then are we not saved by our works, which all that are saved are
not furnished with alike, but some more, some less, as is evident. It comes
therefore of the goodness of Almighty God alone, giving mercedem diei horario
operi, awhole days wages for an hours work, as the Bishop most godlily. Can
this be but of the free mercy of God, without respect to our merits, yea to our
works themselves, though we entitle no merit to them?

18. Numb. 11. he brings that for an example of meriting by works, Centuplum
etc. Matthew. 19. a hundredth fold in this life. And if God do not give us an
hundredth fold in this life, I mean them that serve him in most devout fashion,
does he not reward merits, or does he therefore come short of paying the score?
Yet the Adioynder says, we merit the centuplum to be paid us in this life,
because our Savior promises so. Whereas how many depart this life daily,
without the receiving of such a pay, the hundredth fold pay, in temporal
commodities? And are merits unrewarded, shall we say, in all these? What is
this but to do as the Apostle complains, Romans 10. statuentes suam iusticiam,
iusticiae Dei non sunt subiecti? [Seeking by all means to establish their own
righteousness, they were not subjected to the righteousness of God.] We slander
God, to flatter men, and wrong his scale to advance ours. Save that all is
Centuplu^, I grant, which we receive here, though never so little, if we
compare it with our merits. Whether it be so then or not, that the Centuplum is
here paid, merit is dashed.

19. In his 9. numb. he brings that out of Romans 4. To him that works, the
reward is imputed not according to grace, but according to debt. Why this?
Because the Bishop had answered his other authority of vnusquisque accipiet,
Every one shall receive reward according to his labor; I say, the Bishop had
answered it most pithily, and most properly, According to his labor, but not
for his labor. It is the square of the reward, but not the formal cause
whereby. In genere comparatorum, non efficientium, as the worthy Bishop most
worthily had explained. By all which their inference of merit is confounded. To
this then he opposes, that wages is of debt, not of grace, to him that works,
Romans 4. 4. Yet they are wont to say, both of grace and of debt: as they have
many more such untempered morterings, and mungrel daubings. Cornelius Muss. in
his Comment. in 6. ad Romans in the very end thus, speaking of life eternal: Si
deum respicias, semper est donum, nunquam stipendium, nunquam merces. In
quantum enim redditur a Deo qui nullatenus debet, omnem meriti rationem
excedit: that is, Eternal life if you respect God, is always a gift, never
wages, nor hire. For in so much as God gives it, who is no way debtor, it
exceedes all proportion of desert or merit.] Yet they have found out a debet on
Gods part; and who sees not that all merit is dashed by Muss. his words, unless
they come in, and show somewhat else, by which they may claim on their own
parts? since God is by no means to be challenged, as he says. Here the
Adioynder would have all to be of debt, and none of grace. Or else what does
that authority avail him out of Romans 4. Wages to the workman, not of grace,
but of debt. He kicks out grace, and casheers it clean, that there may be both
debt, and a pure debt, and so merit. And does not the Apostle force him to do
no less, unless he let go merit? Does he not say in effect, If of grace, not
of debt, if of debt, not of grace; as in an other place he affirms, and that
very formally, If of grace, not of works, else grace were no grace; which is
another place which overthrows Romans 11. 6.
their merit clean, because the Adioynder will have it not to be without grace
at any hand, in his 12, numb. But every body may see that S. Paul does not
apply this Romans 4. to our state as we are justified, but to the natural man
that should work wonders, and win heaven by his exact righteousness, if any
such were. Therefore he diuides the worker from the believer, (...), etc. But
to him that believes on him which justifies the ungodly, his faith is reputed
for righteousness. By which we see the former words do not belong to us,
unless he will have us so to work merits, as not to believe in God, nor to
trust in him which justifies the wicked. And behold what follows, in S. Paul,
how favorable to merits, if we had leisure to stand upon it? God impures
righteousness without works, says he, v. 6. And, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. It is a tale, that they
would tell us here, of the first and second justification. For where there is
blessedness, where this (...), whatsoever is secondarie, is frustrate and
superfluous. We cannot be better then happy. As all the world added to God does
not make him better, no more does any addition increase felicity. Therefore
once justified, and justified for good and all, perfectly justified, there is
no entitling of us to any higher good. And so falls their distinction, which
was coined at first, to uphold their other rotten buildings from falling.

20. The sum is. Wages to the worker without grace, says the Apostle, or
without favor. Let it be so hardly. But that is pure merces then, strict
wages, wages of rigor, nothing strayned, but properly so called. To show that
at other times when the Scripture uses the word wages, it speaks not
properly, nor would be thought to speak so, but in a modified notion only,
imitating wages, because wages comes last, and so the reward to us after (...),
Ephesians. 6. 13. the true Gnekeb of which before. And you shall observe that the
Scripture keeps the phrase, for the most part, whereof the Apostle speaks,
Heb. 12. v. 5. 7. the one in dealing by us, the other in censuring and
pronouncing of us. (...), and, (...). First, (...), rewarding our obedience
far above our deserts. For he deals with us as with Sons. Now inheritances
are not purchased, but freely given to them of the blood, IT IS YOUR FATHERS
PLEASVRE, Luke 12. And again, (...), he calls strabones paetos, looking upon
us through the spectacles of love, and commends our work above the worth. He
may say, (...), they are worthy; but we with the Centurion, (...), I did not
count my self worthy; non minus veraciter quam humiliter, not of lying
humility, but godly sincerity, (the distinction that the holy Fathers have
used long ago to prevent cavil, in this very question.) Though (...), Luke
20. 35. and again, 21. 36. and 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5. expounds (...), not of
dignity, but of dignation, not of them that are worthy, but are reputed to be
worthy.

21. I have to his last, and yet lo I am crossed with another objection
creeping forth like a gloe-worme out of a hedge. Dignus est operarius mercede
sua, the labourer is worthy of his hire. Therefore merit. But this is spoken
of Ministers deserving maintenance at their peoples hands, whom they attend
and serve, Matthew. 10. 10. Luke 10. 7. 1. Tim. 5. 18. not of God who is debtor
to none, nemini debtor, rather all the world obnoxious to him. Are not these
stout probates of the Adioynder for Merits?

22. But now, number. 12. (with which I will end) when he seems to be most acute,
then he is foulest of all other. Because God by his grace helps us to work,
and we cannot work as we are of our selves, therefore we merit by reason of
Gods concurrence. This is more then Pelagius ever meant to dishonor God by,
when he denied grace, and pleaded so strongly for natural abilities. For it is
worse to shoot at God with his own arrows, and to raise merit out of grace,
then out of free will. Shall we see how many reasons fight against this
conclusion? First, we do but little good, rarius exit, scarce one in a
thousand, S. Cyrill (of whom before) Catech. 5. (...),. i. Most things we do
are worthy of condemnation. (This is more then Venial sins.) And describing
the form of their service at Communion, he says of God,' (...). ibid.. i.
God in benefitting us does not a justice, but a thing above all justice, viz.
because above all desert. Indeed, if we be in hell, then Just nos hic, as the
good thief said; but if, in bonis, (...), More then our right.
as Job speaks. Then spotted and imperfect, si forte quid, when it comes at
last, like Jacobs lambs. Sicut pannus menstruatae, sic iustitiae ipsae nostrae.
Thirdly due, though it were never so excellent or exact. Due to our Creator,
due to our Redeemer, every way due, as one that has the dominion over all that
we either have or are. Who of you will thank his servant? says our Savior.
Inter Dominum and seruum non est iustitia, says Aristotle, much less merit,
and merit de rigore. Fourthly, though they were not due, yet because God helps
us, and God assists us, orels they can be none (omnia opera nostra operatus es
in nobis Domine) therefore merit is turned out at that gate too. And yet the
Adioynders Chrysostom. in Matthew. 5. (...), etc. God evermore gives rewards above our
designs (for S. Chrysostom knew no Popish deserts.)
reason for merit is grace, but very reasonlesse. Lastly, Improportionable to
that (...), that down waighing reward, 2. Cor. 4. 17. and Luke 6. 38. mensura
supereflue^s, exceeding (merit.) (...), they are not worthy, as before was
showed out of Romans 8.

23. After all this, it will be said perhaps, nay after all this it is said,
number. 12. in the latter end, that the Bishop nevertheless graunts the
Adioynders doctrine about Merits of works, and diverse other important points of
their catholic relligion. Why then do they carpe his writings so bitterly, I
would feign know, and the Adioynder among the first? They have rayled against
many, they have traduced all that came in their way, the champions specially,
the Iew^lls, the Whitakers, the Casaubones, and who not? Yet never any like the
Reverend Bishop. Patientia tua supergressa est vniuersos. Is this a sign that
he is so wholly of their mind?

24. And though this might serve, for a co^futation of the whole chapter, whose
scope is only to prove, the Bishop to be theirs, or turned from us, and yet
mixed with such ta^t inuectiues every where against his person, which they
would never use to a new-reclaymed friend ((...)) but that they suspect he is
not perfectly Act. 28.
reconciled to them, yet let us view the rest, with all expedition. To some of
them speaking, though perhaps very little, leaving other things and remitting
them wholly to the readers judgment, as content to have descryed them.

25. IN his foureteenth Numb. he belches forth a fresh that fame stale crapula
of his, (it deserves no better) that God is honored in his servants honor. As
if therefore we might adore them too, and keep no measure, or at least defer
relligious worship. Honos seruorum redundat ad Dominum, Quoted by the
Adioynd. here.
says S. Hierome; it is true, but not adoratio. There may be therefore a nimis,
in honoring those whom God most dearly loves. Even the Ass in Aesop kissed
his owner, thinking he did well, but was justly reputed a lowt for his pains.
Yet the Adioynder is earnest for our kissing of relliques in most devout
fashion, Numb. 16. Origin refutes this objection of the Papists, in the Paynim
Celsus, (lib. 8. quoted by me before) that we must worship creatures to please
God, glorify them, to gratify him; the Church which is Christ's spouse lying
with Christ's friends, (the Sodales in the Canticles) for Christ's sake, as the
Bishop most wittily, and no less godlyly retorted after the Scripture phrase,
that makes idolatrizing, whoring, and our Faith to God the flower of our
Chastity. Why does not the Adioynder refute that comparison? For the wife,
though she give entertainment to her husbands friends, yet she must beware how
she give them her husbands honor, which is worship and veneration between
Christ and his Church. Cui gloriam, ei omnia, says Euthymius. And God by Esaias,
had said as much before. In Matthew. Non dabo alteri.


26. But the 15. number. salues this sweetly; I will set down his words.
Relligious honor has been often exhibited to Angels and holy Men, with the
term of adoration, and with the exhibition of a corporal reverence. (So as
he abhors not from relligious adoration of Angels and holy men: But he goes
forward.) Which may be more or less according to the devotion of the
exhibiters thereof (belike he leaves the matter to every man's discretion) to
give more or less thereafter as they are disposed, so that it be in their
mind and intention distinguished from divine honor, due to God alone. In
which intention, consists etc. See we to what this doctrine leads? That we
may give any honor, and to any one, alike; God or man, Saint or Angel,
pilgrim or triumphant, (it is well that the reprobates and the devils come not
in too) only provided, that our intentions be right. They must Why not
Sacrifice too, with different intent^?
be varied, though the act be all one, and then it is well enough, for the rest
the Adioynder will carry you out. For the intention is that which differs
and distinguishes all. And in his 6. Number. he is content to take in the
adoration of the Kings of Persia too, either to justify, or to exemplify this
conceit of his; which Mardocheus is thought to have denied to Haman out of a
godly zeal, and Origin condemns in his 8. against Celsus very directly (as I
have quoted before) and a certain Ambassador, wiser then his fellows, let
fall his ring, and took it up again, with such a bending Plutarch.
of the body as is meet in the like case, when he came in the presence of the
Persian King, pretending worship so, but doing none. So much more tender are
the heathen sometimes, of the divine honor, then the Adioynder Christian, and
Catholic, as he would be thought, confounding all actions of honor and
reverence both toward God and man, so the intention do but turn as it were
upon a pin, which way it should. May I not say, as the Bishop most acutely
urges them (when he examines their position, that there is no peculiar honor
to God reserved, but only sacrifice,) Resp. ad Apol. p. 290. c. 12. Mis. sa
non fit Eucharistiae ne bis fiat. vt quae per Miss^ fiat. Euge, Eugepae.
that by this means we may offer the Mass to the Mass, not only to God, nay
nor only to the Virgin, or to Saints and Angels, so our intentions be sound?
But he says in the conclusion of his 15. Number. that for so much as the Bishop
confesses a certain honor to be due to holy relliques (meaning they should
be honorably laid up in the ground, not ventis and solibus, much less feris
atque alitibus, to be left at random) he cannot with reason exclude from the
same, corporal reverence. And yet the Apostle says, we put more honor upon
our uncomely parts, 1. Cor. 12. 23. even as relliques are buried (...), that
they would have, unless they were hid out of sight. And does corporal
reverence follow to be given, from S. Paul's honor which he allots to these
parts? But the Adioynder is not content with corporal reverence, but he says
we cannot exclude from them ANY corporal reverence (be it what it will be) so
the intention be to do a relligious worship, and not a divine, to them. He
that robs his father Prou 28. ^4.
or his mother, and says it is no transgression, (viz. because he has a good
intention) is the companion of murderers. I say no more; I leave the rest to
the Readers judgment.

27. In his 16. Number. he tells us certain tales of processions, but by the way
implies, that the word procession, is but very late. As now we term it, says
he; I believe the thing then is not very ancient. I showed before out of
Theoderets history, with what manner of procession, Babylas body was removed
by the Christians from Daphne to Antioch. The people cried, all the way as they
went, Confounded be all they that worship carved images. And would this
sentence agree with the Popish processions? But the question was not, between
the Bishop and the Cardinal, about procession, but adoration of relliques. Did
he want matter, trow you, that he stuffes in this, or is the consequence good
from the one to the other? May not I ask him, who is the preuaricator now, or,
how it comes to pass, that he has lost his way?

28. THE Miracles at Sichem affect him much. Numb. 17.
Stultus populus Sichem, the foolish people of Sichem, and not worthy to be
called a nation, says the wise Ecclesiasticus, c. 50. v. 25. and 26. Whom he
professes also to hate before all the world. And in Sicima, not the cakeseruice
performed by the dames, but the next in order that Epiphanius speaks of, was
accomplished by the Samaritans, Haeres. Massal.
in a place like a theater, a mixed superstition, and like this of the Papists.
But this is Lady Aspricoll, that the Adioynder means of: yet the name you
see how ominous, to delusions and fooleries, even of old. Others at Minich for
sooth, and in Valentia of Spain, strange feats wrought at a Priests body
(notable says the margent) that died in April last. For as in Madrigalls, so
in miracles, always the last mock the vulgar most. -- (...) -- Thus the
whores factors would feign draw customers to her burse of bawderies. And F. T.
that he may be the man, offers his service, like Ticelius under Pope Leo, whom
Luther scared. Nay, we are all of us gone at common Law (he thinks) that can
show no miracles so long together in our Church, not so much as a lame dog,
or a sick cat healed in all our Congregations, notwithstanding our lively and
strong faith, that we are wont so much to vaunt of. Thus he. And specially,
since the Bishop grants miracles to have been done at S. Stephens body in S.
Austens time (the Bishop meant he would not reject S. Austens report, and yet
he repelleth their idolatries about the worshipping of relliques sufficiently
otherways: for, non sequitur consequentia a miraculis ad cultum, witness
Bellarmine himself, lib. 4. c. 14. de Not is Eccl.) but, if he grant that
miracles were done then, he must either show why they have ceased since, (says
the Adioynder) or at least prove that all the Popish miracles whereof their
Church boasts, are no better then spectra, and diabolical illusions. A task
not so difficult perhaps, but that the number is so infinite. Though why should
not himself, or one of his fellows, approve the soundnes of them, rather
then we disprooue them, since they bring those miracles for so many arguments
of their doughtie relligion, which they call Catholic, we know to be
counterfeit? The law of disputation being, as I remember, for the opponent to
prove, the defendant to answer only, and to resist. But the Adioynders
discontinuance so long from the Universities, has dispossessed him of these
and all other good notions. Neither do I see any reason, why the Bishop
granting that there were miracles don in S. Austens time, should be bound to
acknowledge their continuance till now, or show a reason of their ceasing (as
the Adioynder would feign charge upon him,) unless they likewise prove, that
those miracles beginning with the Apostles time, continued in the Church
without any intermission, from the primitive till S. Austens days; which as
yet they have not done. For Bellarmine attempting it, Lib. 4. cap. 14. de Notis
Eccl. is both otherwise at a loss, and fails most grossly in the second
hundredth of years. In all which time, he has but one miracle, viz. that of
the Christian soldiers under Marcus Aurelius, obtaining rain at the instance
of their prayers, after a long and great drought. Which some would doubt, Of
this kind see, both others, and Olympia Fu^ (...), Epist. lib. 1. ad Caelium
Sec. Curio^em. Fraterculus men's e fenestra excel^a supra saxa decidit. Sed non
plus mali habuit, qua^ si in molli humo cecidisset. Vide ibid. lib. 2. Epist
Andreae G^leri de obitu divinissi nae feminae, paulo ante^ nominatae, and a
Pontificijs persecutionem passae, eni mo^ienti omnia plena v^debantur esse
pulch^imis floribus, etc. Illud vt ad miracula, hoc visiones pertineat; etsi
non est opus.
whether to call a miracle or no, (a mirandum rather) or if it be miracle, yet
we want not diverse such, nor I think no Church under heaven, according to that
of S. James, 5. 16. The prayer of a righteous man, avails much. How much
more, who^ so many are combined together? And yet Bellar. calling it miracula,
in the plural number, as it were many miracles, presently adds, De quo vide,
etc. falling into the singular number with shame enough; like him that would
call for his men John, having but one in all, and yet making show of great
attendance. Well, omitting Bellarmine, who makes it a miracle if our relligion
last any thing Do notis Eccl. lib. (...) c. 10.
long, which God be thanked, he has not lived to see extinguished, S. Austen
thus delivers his opinion of miracles, de ciuit. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 8. the
very place which the Adioynder quoteth. Quisquis adhuc prodigia vt credat
inquirit, magnum ipse prodigium est, quia mundo credente non credit. That is,
[Whosoeuer calls for miracles in these days, himself is a great monster, that
believes not, when the world round about him has believed.] Meaning, that
after the confirmation of Christ's doctrine by signs and Therefore S. Aust^^ in
the end of the foresaid chap. de Civ. dei, thus: Quid erat in cordibus
exultantium [super patrato miraculo] nisi fides illa Christi, pro qua Stephani
sanguis effusus est? Which was neither for praying to Saints, nor for
worshipping of relliques, Rather the story of S. Stephens death confutes them
both most pregnantly, if the Evangelist be not imperfect in his relation. Act.
8. And, ibid. c. 9. in the very beginning, Cui nisi huic sidei attestantur ista
miracula, in qua praedicatur Christus resurrexisse in carne, (...) So as, new
miracles must confirm old faith only, or else not be regarded.
miracles, such as we read of in the new Testament, Heb. 2. 4. we are to seek
no further, but to rest in that, which being taught us once, or brought us
once, (as S. Iud^ says,) that is, confirmed once for good and all, needs no
other daily demonstrations. What says the Scripture? Signs are for the
infidels, not for the believers, 1. Cor. 14. If faith were current therefore in
the Church of Rome, they would call for no miracles to commend it. And the same
S. Austen again, Tract. 13. in Ioh. insults over the Donatists, and their
pretending to do miracles, and calls them, mirabiliarij, or miracle-mongers,
by contempt. De vnitate, also, Eccles. c. 16. he reiects not the Donatists
only, and their miracles, but such as are said to be done in the Catholic
Church, from having any force to demonstrate the Church, as the Adioynder
would. Non ideo manifestatur Ecclesia, says he, quia haec talia [miracula] in
ea fiunt. [The doing of miracles, though they be true miracles, is no note of
the Church.] This is a flint that Bellarmine mumps at, and cannot get down
with any chewing. To which finally may be added, another testimony of the same
S. Austen, contra Faust. Manich. lib. 12. c. 45. where he preferres the
prophecies that went of Christ in Scripture, before miracles, though never so
illustrious, as which are more subject to cauillation, then Scripture Oracles.
His words are: Etsi attestabantur miracula doctrinae Apostolicae, attamen non
defuissent, sicut etiam nunc adhuc quidam mussitant, qui magicae potentiae
cuncta illa tribuerent, nisi talis eorum cogitatio contestatione prophetica
vinceretur. Magicis enim artibus long antequam nascerentur, prophetas sibi
constituere a quibus praenunciarentur, nemo vtique diceret. That is, [Although
there were miracles which bare witness to the truth of the Apostles doctrine,
yet there would have been some (as there are also now) who would have ascribed
those things to certain Magical arts or feats, unless that wicked surmise
of theirs had been beaten and battered down, with the testimonies of the holy
Prophets: for no man could say (though disposed to cavil) that Christ by
Magic, could appoint himself certain Prophets long before he was borne,
who should foretell of him, etc.] S. Chrysostom says evidently, in 1. ad Cor.
cap. 2. hom. 6. (...), Miracles are forbidden in these days, or, miracles are
at a stay now, choose you whether: for the authority is pregnant against you
both ways. And he affirms, that the Church is the better for being without
them, without sick dogs healed, and lame cattes cured by your
minikin-miracles, done at Minich, and Sichem, Sir. Make your peace with
Chrysostom first, and then come and wrangle with us hardly. The same Father
remembering, that S. Paul had said, that Antichrist should come in lying
wonders and miracles (not yours I warrant you) he notes upon the place before
quoted, that the Apostle speaking of (...), the power of miracles, sets (...)
before it, that is, the spirit, to distinguish the miracles 2. Cor. 2. 4.
of sorcerers and witches, ((...)) who can cure cattes and dogs, I warrant
you, with a wet finger, from such as proceed from the operation of the holy
Ghost. But what can be more powerful, then the observation of the same
Chrysostom upon Tit. 1. that, if we mark well the story of the Acts of the
Apostles, we shall see most men were converted by their doctrine and preaching,
before ever they came to the working of miracles. So John did no miracle, Ioh.
10. 41.
as they confess in the Gospel, and yet drew the multitudes forcibly after
him. Nevertheless John came with a new doctrine. In his last Homely upon the
Acts, the same Chrysostom thus, (that ye may see what a friend he was to
miracles.) (...), etc. This is a great miracle, says he, to bring an argument
from the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. By which reason, I believe, we
shall have more miracles in our Church, then are stirring in the Popish,
whatsoever store of lame dogs are healed there, or sick cats, as this wretch
scoffeth from his chair of scorners. S. Gregory Sa, Scholijs in Euang. Matthew.
the great, as he is quoted by Immanuel Sa. in 4. Matthew. notes most
excellently, that our Savior when he fasted forty days together, not without
a great miracle, yet being oppugned by the devil, repelled him by Scripture,
and not by miracle. Yet then if ever, were miracles to be brought for the
auouching of the truth. Specially since the devil went to tempt him with
hunger, our Savior was to foil him with his miracle of fasting.
Nevertheless, Scriptum est, there carried it, though the devil craftily had
begun with it, to divert our Savior from the use of that which he had
profaned. And the same S. Gregory again, Hom. 29. in Euang. makes it a sign
of the Churches infancy, to be tittled with miracles; as S. Chrysostom had
also said in another place, that the Apostles Comm in Epist. Romans and Cor.
were not always to be conversant with Christ, like the nurse-child with his
nurse, nor fed with pappe, but to try Bellarm. in Apo^ says the church is too
old now, to expect new increase of light, for doctrine. Why miracles then,
which are for a young Church?
their fortunes, and to go abroad into the world, and to shift for themselves.
S. Gregory's words are, Nunquidna^ fratres mei, quod ista signa non facitis,
minime creditis? Sed haec necessaria in exordio Ecclesiae fuerunt. Vt enim
fides cresceret, miraculis fuerat nutrienda. Quia and nos cum arbusta
plantamus, tamdiu eis aquam fundimus, quousque ea in terra iam convaluisse
videamus. At si semel radicem fixerint, irrigatio cessabit. Hinc est enim quod
Paulus dicit, 1. Cor. 14. Linguae in signum sunt, non fidelibus, sed
infidelibus. That is, [Shall I say you believe not now, my dear brethren,
because you do none of these miracles? But miracles were needful in the
beginnings of the Church. To the end that faith might grow up, it was to be
fed with miracles. For even we, when we set trees, we water them no longer,
then till they have taken root. And when once they are rooted, our watring of
them is at an end. Hence says S. Paul, Tongues are for a token, (or for a
sign, or monument) not to the believers, but to the unbelievers.] Thus
Gregory. And he might have added that out of 1. Cor. 13. 8. Whether they be
tongues, they shall cease, etc. meaning miracles; and cease, not in heaven
only, but in the state of the new Testament (for I willingly join with them
that construe it so) that by tongues, we may understand, omne prodigiosum, even
all miracles, the genus by the species, no unusual schematisme. And whereas I
quoted Sa the Jesuit so lately, a man of your function (and no less of your
faction) I think it not amiss to bring to your remembrance another saying of
his. Among his Aphorisms, V. Revelatio, thus he has; that Revelations (which
you abound with, witness Bridget, and Catharine, and diverse more) are not
rashly to be credited or entertained, but submitted to judgment, and tried by
their conformity with the Catholic doctrine. Shall not miracles then abide
the touch stone much more? Which if they do, then is not the doctrine to be
grounded upon miracles, but miracles to prevail as far as the doctrine shall
give leave. For who knows but God does many things to try us, Deuter. 13. and
such assaults are given oft-times to the Church, out of Gods deep providence,
(vt cognoscantur probati, that the approved may be known, 1. Cor. 11. 19.) as
it indangers the very faith of the elect? By all which, and much more that here
I omit, you may see what reason the worthy Bishop had, not to stand upon those
words (which you quarrel him for not setting down) of the Cardinals text, (as
if they were ought to the question, or as if he were to busy himself with
impertinent matters for lack of employment.) For my part, I am content to
insert those words here, as much as they are extant in your Number. 18. Adioynd.
book. Respondes: Miracula diuina, etc. In English thus, that all may take
knowledge of them. I answer, says the Cardinal, that divine miracles are seen
only among the Catholics. And because the Bishop would not rush into this
new branglement, therefore you think he left out those words fraudulently. And
yet Simon Magus made a dead man to wagge his head, when he strove with S.
Peter, (as we read in Eusebius) which is more then to cure a lame dog.
Another heretic removed an olive tree by virtue of his prayers, Apud B^ ann.
360. number 21. cx Anastasi^ Ni^e^.
tainted with the damnable heresy of Macedonius, God forbid that any such
should cleave to us, though malice her self were to censure. Eutychianus the
Novatia^, did a famous miracle under Constantine, whom he drew to favor him,
and to own his acquaintance, by healing certain sicknesses, and by other rare
acts (they call them miracles) which he performed. Namely, that being to sue
to the aforesaid Constantine, for the release of a prisoner (who was in danger
to die, by reason of the many irons that he was laden with, even before he
could make suit for him to the Emperor) he procured his chains to fall off
from him of their own accord, (not without miracle) and afterward obtained his
pardon of Constantine. Witness here of Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 14. And Paulus
another Bishop of the Novatian sect, did another miracle no less strange,
(witness Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 17.) conuincing a certain Jew (who wickedly and
craftily had often procured himself to be baptized) by a miraculous
annihilation, or disparence at least, of the water in the font, even ready for
the baptism. Now believe false teachers the rather for miracles, whether in
straw or in stone; or our doctrine the less, because we brag of no such,
though it lack not this seal, oftentimes, set upon it, by Gods own hand, but
that we have a firmer evidence. S. Austen in his whole chapter de Civit. Dei,
which here you quote, viz. l. 22. cap. 8. never stands for miracles to prove
new doctrines by, but only the old (as was declared before,) and therefore you
shall gain nothing from thence, who allege new miracles to authorize new
articles, as praying to Saints, worshipping of Relliques, and such like
conceits, though we should subscribe to all that S. Austen reports, with no
less promptnes, then your selves, that is more then himself may be well
thought to do. For one time he confesses of the aforesaid wonders, that non
sunt tanta authoritate commendata etc. They are not of such authority as
straitwaies to be believed, though between one faithful man and another.
Another time he says, that as soon as they are told they are clean
forgotten, and no body relates them to them that did not hear them, as they
were rehearsed de libello, nor no body remembers them any long time himself.
His words are: Nec [admodum] innotescunt, neque vt non excidant animo, quasi
glarea memoriae erebra lectione tunduntur. Whereas if they were divine
miracles, why should they not be divulged throughout the whole world, even
where soever the Gospel it self is preached, as our Savior said of the
charity of that good woman, which anointed his feet? Again, Semel hoc
audiunt qui adsunt, pluresque non adsunt, vt nec illi qui affuerunt post
aliquot dies mente retineant, and vix quisquam reperiatur illorum, qui ei quem
non affuisse cognouerit, indicet quod audiuit. Lastly, as for the flowers which
were wont to be applied to Relliques (as you tell us) and from thence drew
marvelous curing virtue, let S. Austen himself judge what you say, or though
himself said it. In the 8. book of the aforesaid work, cap. 27. he allows
not of meats to be set upon Martyrs tombs, for obtaining of blessing. A
Christianis melioribus (says he) hoc non fit. He denies not but it is done,
but he says the better sort of Christians do it not. Much less flowers to be
laid upon their bodies, and taken off again, with hope of virtue to proceed
from them in application to sick folks. For of sanctifying meats to
necessary use, we read in the Apostle, (and the Martyrs might concur to it,
if they were conscious:) but of flowers no where, nor to no such purpose,
specially from the dead. The Christians then might do this in S. Austens time,
but not the better sort of Christians, as he most advisedly speaks; not
Meliores Christiani. Whom you list not to imitate, but choose the worser part,
Deter^ sequo^, is the Papists motto.
and clowt a Relligion out of fond customs, which the judicious of those times
neither allowed then, and much less would now.

29. Now to Number. 19. what shall we do, but take you at your word, that the
Bishop graunts as much concerning holy Relliques, as your selves desire? I will
set down your words, that after them we may ask you, who is the
praevaricator? That they are to be decked, and adorned, laid up with honor and
solemnity, reserved and kept in honorable and holy places, and finally that
they are to be honored, yea and that God does sometimes work miracles by
them, which he cannot deny (say you) to be a notable and divine confirmation
of the honor that is done unto them. Though this last be stark false, that
miracles done at Saints bodies, infer the honor which you challenge to them,
by any probable consequence, as Bellarmine denies about Ieremies body, and was
quoted to you a little before out of his de Notis Ecclesiae, yet insisting upon
the words that you bring out of the Bishop, let me ask you in good earnest,
what makes so much for you in all that enumeration, that you should say, you
desire no more then he grants? Adorning, decking, laying up with honor,
laying up with solemnity, reserving, keeping, in honorable and holy places,
and finally in one word, that they are to be honored: suppose all this, what
is become of your Adoration now? what of Worship it self? The rest are ready
hand; but these (...). The Mountains swell, and a mouse creepes forth. Scias
(says S. Austen, Epist. 44. in the very end) a Christianis S. Austens
Nouerint vniuersi.
Catholicis nullum coli mortuorum: Be it known to you (says S. Austen) that
Christian Catholics (what you are we know not) worship no dead men. Si nullum
mortuorum, nedum quicquam mortui: Neither parts nor partlets, limbs, nor linen
cloths, or what else of theirs soever. Besides that your Valentia told you but
lately, Cultus ne angelorum quidem, obserudnce only. And will you observe
Relliques?

30. As for that you think, that that kind of honor must Eodem Numero.
needs be relligious honor, which is not done for civil respects, but
proceeds out of devotion, and tendes directly to the honoring of God, though
we honor in this fashion even living men, and earthly Saints, whose holiness
may be counterfeit, for ought we know, and whose end may be damnation, whereas
the relligious honor should not go but with beatitude, as Bellarmine
therefore entitles his maine controversy about that point, De Beatitudine
Sanctorum; yet what is this, I say, to adoration? You honor piety it self,
justice, mercy, when you hear or read any thing virtuously done in any of
these kinds, yet not with cappe and knee, as you speak, not with civil
honor, like the Burgess of some town, I hope. Do you adore it therefore?

31. IN your Numb. 20. and diverse following of the same relish, about the
Monkish profession, you say that therein also the Bishop preuaricates. Because
he affirms, that his MAJESTY reprehends the persons of your Monks, and their
personal vices, their Order or foundation not so much. Non institutionem, sed
instituta. He allows then (say you) the institution. And what if he should?
Though Philo does not speak of Christian Monks (in the place that you quote of
him, to show their antiquity) how soever it has so seemed to certain learned
men, but is detected both by Scaliger, ^c Emea. Tem.
and diverse others to be a mistaking, (the description rather falling upon the
Esseni;) yet suppose he should allow it as descending of the Law positive and
agreement of parties, not from divine ordinance, what then? For what can be
more plain, then that fame grant of Chrysostom (where in all reason he was
to grant as little as might be of this kind) that the Monkish profession is
(...), neither belonging to the faith and Relligion Christian, nor doctrine and
preaching. (...). Tom. 6. Savilian. p. 167. Therefore without question not
appointed of God. And in another place he will tell you, Hom. 25. in Epist. ad
Hebr. that what S. Paul writes to the Corinthians, when he exhorts them to the
highest virginity that may be (and in Christian virginity, Sir, all is
contained, you need not be sollicitous for the other two vows: 1. Cor. 7. 34.
the Christian virgin takes care only how to please the Lord, and that she may
be holy both in body and spirit, (...), and, (...), going with her (...)) he
speaks not to Monks, whereof there was none then, (...), not the print of a
Monks foot in all the church, but to laymen and lay-women. As who would say,
he prescribes no stricter rules in all that Epistle (where nevertheless he
shows them the more excellent way, and exhorts to virginity, and to an
undivided connection with the Lord Christ always, such as no Monk of them all
can come nearer to him) yet stricter rules, I say, he gives not to any, (by S.
Chrysostom. verdict) then are observed de facto, and meet to be observed, in the
general of Christianity, emongst all that belong to the mystical body, Men
or women, Clerks, or lay, though your Monks like mungrells are neither of them
both, but Minotaures, and mixtum genus, many times, -- proleque biformis, like
Don John of Crete. And in another place he says, that there is not a maid left
this day in all the Church. (...): in 1. Tim. c. 2. Hom. 8. in extremo. The
honorable state of maidenhead, is quite decayed in the Church. And, (...). The
world abroad laughes at us [Virgins.] Unjustly, trow you? No. (...). For the
maids (that are called maids) have brought this contempt upon themselves.
Numb. 24. The Bishop utterly condemns his own relligion. He confesses it is
void of all Christian perfection, etc.
Yet, you think we have no Church, because we have no maidenhead forsooth,
with your many more god-morrowes, formally vowed now and professed amongst us.
Yea, he tells us of Christ, Epist. 2. ad Olympiadem.
(...), expelling half the virgins, that is five of ten, in the parable of the
Matthew. 25.
Gospel; as who would say, he would happily do the like, if in strict
visitation, he should come among the Nonneries, now a days. Once, he doubts
not to affirm, that, the Virgins being rejected by our Savior Christ, (...),
they that came without virginity (if fraught and flourishing with other fruits
of righteousness) were most honorably and most comfortably received by him. And
are received no doubt daily. Where, because I spoke of the visitations of
Nonneries a little before, you may call to mind, what happened here in
England, long before King Henry the eights days, whom you have not yet
forgiven his dismissing of your sisters, and demolishing their cloisters,
though God knows it was high time: But I mean, under the reign of King Henry
the third (as Matthew Paris, with other historians records) that the
virginity of your Nonnes was feign to be explored, by certain visitors in
Commission (for repressing the scandal) even by nipping of their dugges, to
see if any milk would come out, to detect their incontinencies. Such
unnatural remedies, did the unreasonable courses, then held by your
sister-hoods, drive the Magistrate unto. But it is enough forvs, that
Chrysostom not only censures the professed of his time, which nevertheless
were not half so rank and so degenerate, as have yours been since, but
denies Monkerie to come of God, or of divine institution, when it is at the
best. There was not then (says he) a footesprint of a Monk in all the Church.
And again, Monkerie is no matter of Christian faith or doctrine. What marvel
then, if a plant not planted by God (the heavenly husbandman) Matthew. 15. 13.
be afterward rooted out, when it turns intolerable? And I insist the
willing lier upon Chrysostomes authority, (though I might allege many
others, if I were Under Chrysostom also, and Nect^, Confession auricular was
(...) extrusa, (Medi^ words, de continent l. 1. c. ^7) utterly abolished, by
occasion of the abust. How much more may Monkerie, which is less de Iure
divine, then Consession, to Papists?
disposed) because your Cardinal in his Preface to his Defense of Monkerie,
(where he reuells in his kingdom of Rhetorique most gloriously) has no
greater authority then S. Chrysostomes to confute us, or to countenance the
honor of the Monkish profession. You shall hear his words; Probat hoc
i^primis totius Graeciae eximium decus S. Johan. Chrysostomus. Is and alibi,
and Homilia 8. in Matthaeum, sic. Si quis nunc ad Aegypti veniat solitudines,
paradiso prorsus omnem illam eremum videbit digniorem, and innumerabiles
Angelorum caetus in corporibus fulgere mortalibus, etc. Suppose all this, Sir,
but how long to last? Did not Monks warpe even in Chrysostomes days? Does not
the Council of Chalcedon (not far off from his time) find a difference in
Monks, as if all were not (...), pure Monks, or, (...) Can. 4 in initio
(...), but some mungrell, counterfeit, (...), having Monkerie for a cloak or
a vizard, as S. Paul has his (...), his true Nonne, as you would call her, not
a false sister, 1. Tim. 5. 3. As for (...), they (...), the Monk that lives in
pleasure, and delicacie, and idleness, is dead alive. What marvel then, if
King Henry turned them out of doors? Are we not wont to do so by dead men?
And Remigius most excellently, upon those words of the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. 14.
State succincti lumbos in veritate, having your loins girt about with truth:
With truth (says he) because nothing does so encroach upon the professions of
strictnes, (to their utter disgrace) as dissimulation and hypocrisy, contrary
to truth. Yet your Cordeleirs wear restem pro veritate, a rope about their
loins, (the very habit of hypocrisy and extreme disguisement) in stead of
that Lumbi in veritate
sincerity, which the Apostle here prescribes as the comeliest ornament for a
Monks back. Before S. Chrysostomes time also, the Council of Gangra (an
ancient Council) finds wefts in Monks, (...), pretending holiness to their
deeds of slothfulness, or of cruel unnaturalness, in abandoning their own
parents, under color of conscience, and freedom of contemplation, Can. 16. or
else neglecting their children, as it is Can. 15. And S. Cyprian, auncienter
then any yet named, de Duplici Martyrio (if at least that be his book) he
continues the same distinction, as it were of Ieremies two baskets, the one
full of good and holesom figs, the other most sour and most distasteful (as
commonly it comes to pass, that the corruption of the best proves the
dismallest) so of Monachi, qui vere Monachi sunt, and Virgins, quae vere
Virgins sunt; that is, of Monks which are Monks indeed, and Virgins which are
chaste and Virgins indeed. Neque enim locus desertus, saccus pro vest, etc.
sed caeteris omnibus perditiores se produnt. And, His tectus involucris
sublitet animus valde mundanus. And he expounds to the same sense, Saint Paul's
words even as we do, Bodily exercise profits little, viz. that of the
Monasteries: and that Satan transformed into an Angel of light, deceiues the
simple, with lying gloses, and shows of sanctimonie, quum intus madeant
spiritualibus vitijs, whiles inwardly they lie soaking in spiritual
corruptions. Sibi tamen atque alijs habentur pij: Yet they bear a name, as if
they were holy, as they did in Popery. Then, Talis erat iustitia Pharisaeorum.
And, Itasunt and Virgins fatuae, foolish Virgins, or stinking Nonnes; which
was the place that we set out from, alleging Chrysostom. And do we
marvel now, if King Henry voyded such a Camarine? Or shall we say they were
Monks whom he dislodged, unless Monks indeed? Nonnes and Virgins, unless
Virgins indeed? Was this to dissolve Monasteries, or to disperse
brothel-houses? Yea, would the Fathers formerly cited, have been offended at
such proceedings, though themselves had sat by, and looked on? But let us hear
S. Chrysostom, and how he finishes his tale, where the Cardinal makes us
believe that he praises Monasteries so monstrously. Hom. 8. in Matthew. is the
place. How many things has he there, which Bellarmine durst not mention, for
fear of spoiling his Monks, whiles he sought to grace them all he could, with
a detorted testimony? with their own hands, and of S. Paul's laboring with
his, that we may much more expect that from a Monk, which the Apostle blushed
not, and so great an Apostle, in his own person to practice. And indeed the
old saying was, that a Monk which works not Tripart. hist. lib 8. cap. 1.
V^^^ento aequali^.
with his own hands, is no better then one that robbes by the highway side.
Epiphanius compares the godly Monks, laboring Pa^ario.
with their hands, to bees that humme and make honny both together: so they at
one and the same time, work and toil for the use of men, and withal sing
Psalms and praises to God. A flower in their hands, and a song in their Thymum
and hym^m.
mouths both at once. He that will not work, let him not eat, says the
Apostle. Yours were all for eating, no body at working, not so much as the
easiest works or taskes. Chrysostom, that in former times were of all men
most given to gluttony, (whereupon I suppose it is, that Orus Apollo Niliacus
thus reports, that at the burial In Hieroglyph.
of their dead, they tear in pieces the belly or the maw, of the party
deceased, and cry over it with great detestation, Thou art he that cast this
man away, thou have undone him, etc.) but as I was saying out of Chrysostom,
it is his observation of the Monks that lived in Egypt, that the nation which
was formerly most infamous for intemperancies, was now become the most
abstinent of all other. Do we marvel, if the Cardinal left out this? Or
would this agree with Popish Monks? Palaestine had the prerogative of
senioritie touching true relligion, and the worshipping of God, but that the
Egyptians have gone beyond them for all that, though their punies in time. And
would this make for Captain Bellarmines turn, that stands so much upon his
(...), as S. Chrysostom here calls it, that is, vaunts of his antiquity, and
the matrix Ecclesia? T pity their forefathers, that lived and died under
error, and prefer the truth, though but lately revealed to them, before the
damnable impieties that they were bred and brought up in. Would this become a
Jesuits mouth? Pharaoh once ruffled in his tyrannies, there the Monk Antonie
now flourishes in holiness, and in all manner of Christian and divine virtues,
prophesying also of Arius, and his execrable heresy to ouerspread the Church,
which came to pass but even too truly. Does not this show the force of Popish
Succession? But omitting by-matters, hold we close to the point: that
Bellarmines Monks, and Chrysostomes Monks, are no more like one another, then
Ieremies two baskets were between themselves, in regard of the fruit that they
contained. Which alteration also came to pass, I say, in S. Chrysostomes time,
though afterward it grew to more intolerable excess, during the Popish
superstition, as if hell had broke loose, and the channells of the round world
had been discovered, the Catarractes broken open, or the Angel of the pit had
done his office, as it is in the Revelation, casting smoke, and sending forth
Locusts. These things being so, what marvel now, if he that had formerly so
admired the Monks, (whiles they kept their first standing) turned his style,
and changed his judgment, upon their so base and dishonorable turning? When
the gold became dross^, and the wine was mixed with water, and they that were
clad but even now with skarlet, embraced the doung; that is, vicious
beastlines. I mean the Nazarite, and the Eremite, whiter then the snow, purer
then the Sapphires, in times past; but now scarce to be known as they go in
the streets, the most recreant of all men, no mark, no note of their ancient
continence, which made them venerable. And were they not Monks, trow you, that
would have burnt S. John Chrysostom himself (to fill up the measure of his
other miseries in banishment) as himself declares in his Epistle ad Olympiadem
of that matter? (...) Epist. 13. (...).
(says he,) a fit name for such a rude rabble. Many bulls (might he say)
have compassed me about, and would see fire to me alive. Not unjustly this I
grant, if there may be any just cause of their persecution and vexation of so
righteous a man. Whom he had stung both otherwise, more then in one place, and
especially in his books ad Demetrium, (...), where he thus writes. All Monks
(says he) now a days, have this song in their mouths, and nothing but this;
(...): That is, A place of rest, a place of rest, or sweet repose, (the
blessing of Issachar) this is the first and the last of the Monks wishes, the
total of their desires, etc. And if then so, what since shall we think? How
has the Locust fallied to and fro, with his heauie-gated body, devouring the
fruit, corrupting the pastures? As I doubt not but diverse countries under
heaven have felt (for the noise of them it gone out into all worlds) but ours
without compare, in each coast of which, you may trace the Monks, and the
impression of their feet, or rather the wallowing of their carcasses, unto
this very day, both by the freshnes of the air, and the fatnes of the soil;
though it has been observed by some, that in the choice of (...). Being
their own chusers (which beggars should not be) for constitutions of
Monasteries; and is forbidden by the Council of Calchedon aforenamed, Can. 4.
their seats, like egregious belli-gods, and fulfillers of that verse, Let us
eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die; they preferred rich soil even
before good air, and the satisfaction of their lusts ((...)) before the
prolonging of their lives.

32. Sed facilis materia (as Tullie says to Antonie) in te 2. Philipp^.
and in tuos dicere. And these are Antonians, but rather like that gorbelly,
then the godly Monk known by that name. Or howsoever that be, yet it is easy
declaming I say, against such viperous companions, whose very sent, though they
be gone from us, like the vermin of Egypt after they were dead and laid,
infects our minds as it did once our coasts. The Adioynder nevertheless wants
not his Apology, I know: Ad haec omnia opponitur praeclara defensio. They
should not have numb. 25. 26.
been dissolved (says he) for all that. What then? Reformed, and let stand.
Shall we hear S. Chrysostom once more? (...). And, -- Immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum est etc. And, Mittendum (...) ras. Good for nothing but the
dunghill.
(...). in Genesis c. 18. hom. 42. Desperate diseases admit no cure (Hippocrates
himself forbids it.) An vnredresseable evil is the harbinger of destruction,
without any hope of recovery. What says our Chawcer? When physic will not
worch, Carry the coarse to Church. This was as much as I told you There is but
one place of objection more against our State, concerning the dissolution of
Monasteries (which the Adioynder (...) seems thought not of) viz. the seazing
of the goods of the Abbeys, etc. into their hands. But we answer with S.
Austen, and alias saepe, and lib. 1. contra Gaud. c. 38. Labores impiorum iusti
edent Sap. 10. Also, Non rapina concupis^tur, sed error eve^titur. And in one
word, Verum de his pecuniarijs laboribus further causae est. Yet that with the
malcontents weighs more then all.
before, that King Henry the eight, did but as he should, not only when he
turned begging Friars a begging, but dead men out of doors, dead in floth,
dead in pleasures, a very burden to their biding-places. And least you think
I have misapplied those sentences of Chrysostom, they are spoken by him of the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. Whose case for ought I see, might stir as
much pity in passionate minds, as the Abbeys and the Monasteries does in some
women and fools, even to this day. For can we imagine them to have been any
better, then as the paradises of God, when we lament their desolation and
vastation most? Yet desperate diseases and incurable maladies, were the causes
(says S. Chrysostom) that Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed, which cities
(says the Scripture) were as the paradise of God. So happily the Monasteries
for their surpassing pleasantnes, and delightfulnes. The Council also of
Ephesus implying as much in those words, Can. 8. (...), universal diseases
need the more [effectuall) remedies. There was nothing left now, but to pull
down the house, whose very walls and posts the leprosy had infected. A
violent mischief, a violent medicine; and an universal canker, an universal
caustique, which King Henry applied, and Queen Marie her self was not able
to take off. So the Pardon-mongers, and Indulgentiaries, were not reformed, but
extinguished, in your late Council of Trent, as the Reverend Bishop here most
effectually tells you: because the abuse was such as was thought to be
incorrigible. Nulla amplius spes relicta^ Sess. 21. cap. 9. What says the
Scripture? Faciam huic loco sicut Silo, Ier. 26. Should your privileges be
more, when your enormities were no less? Nay, alas, what comparison? And S.
Hierome Epist. ad Sabinian. Diaconum, Propter peccatum filiorum Heli
constuprantium matronas, locus tabernaculi ipse subuersus est, propter vitia
sacerdotum, dei sanctuarium destitutum. I looked, says the Psalm, and his
place was no where to be found, not only himself (the notorious sinner) but
his very place was gone. Which Livie himself De^. 1.
reports to have been the fashion in those times, to abolish the very
monuments of place and seat, where treason was contrived, (why not then, where
treason with diverse more abominations?) as Jericho might not be built again
(and no more may the Monasteries) like Abimelechs sowing the corne-fields with
salt, to keep out inhabitants, and to doom the grounds to everlasting
barrennes. But let the De vita and Gestis S. Caroli Borr l 1. c. 18. per
Franciscum Reniam Decanu^ ^ae.
Popes own practice hardly decide it, and no mean Popes, but even Pius
quintus himself, that mirror of piety. He dissolved the order of Fratres
Humiliati, and extinguished it clean, for the treasonable conspiracy of one
Hieronymus Farina a priest, (you have many Priests eiusdem farinae,) though
Bellarmine would excuse your Antistites from murders, Apolog.
whereas Queen Mary's Chaplain laid wait for her life, (if we believe
Florimundus) a priest in all likelihood he, Lib. 6. de orig. haeres. c. 10. 3.
and a Popish priest. But Pius quintus, I say, extinguished the whole Order
utterly, (humbled those Brethren, not yet HVMBLED enough) for ones man's fact,
for discharging a dagge at Cardinal Borromees back, as he was praying in his
Oratorie. And the reason that pricked forward this miscreant to such a
wickedness, was nothing but the Cardinals too great severity, in reforming
certain vices of a loose Brotherhood, which this wretch could not endure,
with three more of the principal, that set him on work, and hired him, (as
the Story says,) quadraginta argenteis, with forty siluerlings, as if so
much preciouser then our Savior Christ. For this cause Pius quintus played
King Henry the eight, and reformed them after the sort that you cannot hear
of with patience, plucked them clean up. We read in the same book of no less
then twelve Abbeys at this Cardinals c. 24.
devotion, and one of them at Arona, which was hereditarie to his house,
propria familiae Borromeorum. So as c. 11.
Cardinals can engrosse monasteries, we see, as well as Kings; and the first
that laid the axe to the hewing down of those trees, was our Cardinal Wolsey,
if Polydore say true. Which King Henry finding to have a good sound, went on
with the work. Whom shall we blame?

33. But, if the Bishop grant that the profession of Monks was ever lawful,
though it were but for an instant, he graunts that which all our Divines deny,
viz. vows of poverty, chastity, and of obedience. Also Counsels
Euangelioall, etc. So you think; but it follows not. For vows may be
without Monkerie, and Monkerie without vows; and poverty, chastity,
obedience, constantly kept without them both. As for Counsels, they are yet
further off then so: viz. although all the foresaid were admitted, yet Counsels
distinct from precepts no way follow from thence, which diverse of the very
Papists (not only of the Fathers) have disclaimed. See Gerson, de Consil.
Euang. Tractat. toto. See him again, in Propositionibus oblatis Cardinali
Veronensi, p. 1. Anselme, de Concep. Virg. cap. 1. No man can give God as News
potest red. dear Deo quantu^ debet, praeter solum Christu n.
much as he owes him, (much less supererogate, unless it be in sins:) or
flying light above the Commandments, tower aloft in Counsels. Gulielmus
Parisiensis, lib. Cur Deus homo, cap. 7. Creatura nihil portare potest praeter
ipsa onera mandatorum, etc. The Creature can do no more then bear the burden
of the Commandments, (if at least of them, which S. Peter Act. 15. 10.
says are importable) but not exceed in Counsels. Alexander Hal. part. 3.
Quaest. 56. membr. 7. Lex est vniuersalis, (quoth he) and perfectae iustitiae
regula. That is, The Law comprehends all, the Law is a rule of absolute
righteousness, or, of all that may be well and lawfully done. As we read to
the Philippians, chap. 4. v. 8. (...), and, (...), all virtue, and all praise,
(...), we are bid to do them, therefore they belong to the observation of the
Law, the Law being (...), lex factorum, the law of deeds, as it Romans etc.
is often called. Can any fly over this, not a mud wall, but a wall of
diamond, with his wings of Counsels, and voluntary observations, though never
so nimble and swift otherwise? Gregory Nazianzen, is of the same mind, (to
omit other Fathers) Orat. (...). Ibid. (...). Indeed the Papists do so. And,
(...). Against Counsels likewise.
that is, Let no man bear himself more legal then the Law, more lofty then
the commandment, more straight then the level or rule it self. Therefore
let there be no Counsels, as additaments to the Law. No, though vows and
Monkerie, in suo totali, were granted, in all the whole substance of it, in
poverty, chastity, and obedience. For as here we hear, all is comprehended
under due: whatsoever it be, all is no more then our debt to the law, Monkerie
it self with the appertenances. But again, many observe chastity, poverty,
and obedience, without the Vow: which, perhaps, makes Chrysostom, find
Monastical accuratenesse Comment. in Epist. Pauli saepius.
and strictness so often, even in populous Cities, villages, and towns. Tom.
7. Orat. (...). c. 13. initio ipso. Idem habet in Genesis hom. 43. (...). Nec opus
passeri fugere ad montes. Idem Nazianz. ad Heronem philosophum. Quod solitaria
vita, and (...), and (...), etc. Two great faults.
This is not (says he one time) a doctrine only for them that lodge abroad in
the fields, or in the tops of hills, and steep mountains, etc. as the people
supposed, fondly crying out (as the Adioynder does here) that such perfection
as he exhorted them to in his Sermon, was for Monks only. In another place;
Abraham had wife and children, says he, yet perfecter then any Monk, (...),
more accurate of his ways, more exact in his courses, then (...), they which
at this day have taken up their lodging in the tops of the hills: at this day,
says he, and yet we heard before, how resplendent the Monks were in his time,
like Angels incarnate, ex hom. 8. in Matthew. Of another manner of stamp, I
wisse, then the Abby-coynes in Popery, I mean their Friars, long diuersi
commatis: of whom we read notwithstanding, that they had vera monetaria, Rog.
Hoved etc. Item Rossaeus concl. ad ordines Reip. Gall. de 26. curribus plenis
auro ex vno Monast. (Cantuar.) aggestis: nec tamen opulentissimo, nec vel sic
expoliato. Pro quo citat and Sanderum de Schisin.
true mints, to coin money in. Had Chrysostomes so? or could this have been
heard of without horror then? Lastly, that Monks may be without these three,
viz. poverty; chastity, and obedience, I will not say as I might, for that
yours have been so; Famous for faction first; so as Contention, if she were
lost, must be found in the Monastery, Inter superbos semper sunt iurgia. Sal.
(Ariosto'es device) where was obedience all this while? For poverty, so as
you heard even now, insomuch as they had Which Rossaeus counts inter potiora
Regalia. p. 342. de Iusta. etc. So as now a King and a Monk all one.
mints, and are they for poor folks? As for chastity, I will spare my pen,
and not triumph in your shame, as I might at large, nor unkindly gall the
Readers modesty: suffice it that true Monkerie, unreprovable Monkerie, may
be without these, not only your counterfeit ((...) (...),) as the ensuing
show.

34. Athanasius ad Dracontium, of his times. Multi Monachi sunt parents
liberorum. And, Quisque vbi volet decertet. That is: Many Monks are fathers of
children. Let every man try masteries, as his own mind serves him. Making it
first free to profess Monkerie, or no, and in that profession allowing the
liberty even of getting children. S. August. de Haeres. cap. 40. Catholica
Ecclesia plurimos Monachos clericosque habet vtentes vxoribus, (that is more
then eoniugatos, that by the way I may note somewhat for Ministers marriages)
and propria possidentes. In English thus: The Catholic Church has many Monks
and Clerks in it, (meaning Ministers) that both use their wives, and possess
goods in proper. Of Chrysostom I told you before, Hom. 8. in ad Hebr. that if
marriage and Monkerie may not stand together, all is spoild. Therefore your
Church has spoild all, or there is nothing left vn-spoild in your Church, that
has divided these. As for the Canon that forbids Monks to marry, Calched.
Council. can. 16. it is a great deal younger, and we search truth by the
original times. Besides, how gently does that Canon censure them? And so
likewise the Virgins that marry after profession or dedicatio^. (...), is kept
for (...). The liberty of courtesy or relaxation is reserved for the Bishop
of the place. So as still the Monk may keep his wife, and the Virgin her
husband. As for Poverty; Alvarus Pelagius de planctu Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 46.
Abdication of propriety is not essential to Monkerie. For in Egypt and
Palaestine, the Monks there usually both bought and sold. Yea, Paulus ille
summus Monachus, proprium habuit and testamentum fecit: Paul the Arch-Monke,
had somewhat proper, and made a will. This speaks Alvarus of the Monks of
Egypt, which were those whom Chrysostom so praised even now, and from whom
Bellarmine would commend his own. And for Obedience, which is the third,
Caietane makes such a divorce between perfection, and that, in 2. 2. Quaest.
86. art. 5. that he preferres the Bishop there before the Monk, though the
Monk lives in far more obedience then the Bishop, as we all know. Finally,
cannot the Pope dispense with his own self for continence, poverty, and
obedience? Hostiensis De voto and redemptione voti. And another, The Pope may
renounce his cal^ing, though he have sworn o^ vowed to the con^ Sylv. V^apa.
TERTIO. ex Archidiac. and Aug. de Anchat.
will tell you so, no man disagreeing from him. Nay, how rare a thing is it for
the Pope to obey? Yet you know the Pope cannot cast away the height of his
Pontifical perfection by any means. Yea, he dispences with others too, as
well as with himself; and you approve the practice. Therefore these are not
linked in so near a band, as you would make folks believe; but are separable
from one another, the vow from Monkerie, (ask but Solomon of this,
Ecclesiast. 5. or David, Psalm. 119.) and Monkery from the vow, and Perfection
from them all, while your Evangelical Counsels appear no where.

35. Which things being so, why should you traduce our men so bitterly, in
your numb. 26. Bruno Carthus. sermon. 9. de Ornatu Ecclesiae. Eunuchi qui fiunt
ab hominibus sunt qui custodiuntur in monasterij^s, etc. (so as this comes but
ab hominibus, and is not of Gods ordinance. I mean, the discipline of
Monasteries, for sub disciplina is his word) ^hen he adds, Talis castitas
quiae non est spontanea, non habet magnam retributionem. The secular man's
chastity may be mere rewardable then the Monks. Yet Bruno called the
Paetriarke of Monks.
for abandoning the Monasteries, (that coope of infamies) and taking to them
wives? May the Pope do this out of the liberty of his fanci^, though materia
voti be the same it was at first; and shall not these be borne with, whom the
dangerousnes of the times, and the reformation of their judgments, and the
exigence of the cause acquireth from your slander? Read Theodoret l. 4. c.
26. Ecclesiast. histor. of Aphraates the Monk, abandoning his cell, and going
abroad into the world, to intend preaching. Whose answer to the Emperor
challenging him for it, may be ours to your self, in defense of those men,
whom you carpe so virulently. But you allege Dionysius unto us, de
Ecclesiast. Hierarch. c. 10. and you say, he lived in the Apostles times, and
boldly you call him S. Paul's disciple. Thus you think you may persuade your
scholars within the grate, doubly captiued, (that have neither mind to study,
nor opportunity to search, nor yet judgment to discern) that the doubtful
Dionysius is a man of such authority. Who suppose he were most absolute and
most authentical, what says he even as you relate him? That Numb. 22.
the Monks of his time, made a solemn promise and covenant before the altar,
to renounce the world, and to embrace the monastique life. For these are your
words. And suppose all this. Does this prove that Monks may not marry wives,
or possess goods, or decline your doating-moaping obedience? For we renounce
the world in Baptism all of us, and yet all do not bind themselves in these
three vows; not only ours, but not yours. Have you not many that are baptized
among you, and yet no Votaries? It rema^^es then you prove it, by those other
words, that the Monks of that time made a solemn promise to embrace, as you
say, a Monastical life: Ergo, Monkery includes the three vows, of poverty,
chastity, and obedience. But is this a sound sequel? Or is it any thing but
the Elench of Petitio principij? For shame E. T. bind your broom-stickes
together better, or be advised that you are not for this trade of syllogizing.
When I look in Dionysius, I find there only a promise to forsake vitam
diuiduam, or vitam distinctam, vna cum visionibus; which some would rather
construe of a vowing for marriage, and against the single conte^platiue life;
specially they that were troubled with no more learning or Latin the^ your
self. But whatsoever it be, there is no vow in Dionys. no not of that which we
vow in Baptism, nor again of Monkerie in him that turns Monk. And yet how
small a thing were that, if it could be euicted? or what would that make for the
three vows, which you say Monkery necessarily imports, we deny? Does this
show at all wherein Monkery consists, if the initiate vow, at the time of his
admission, to observe and embrace a Monastical life? For that he will turn
Monk, Ne dederis os tuum (^c. per votu^, vt exp. Hieron. and Gloss.) vt
peccare facias ca^ tuam. (sc. per incontinentiam, cum contrarium pron^iseris)
Eccl. 5.
that he vows perhaps, and yet but perhaps: but after what fashion he is to
observe his Monkerie undertaken, that he mentions not, that is as questionable
yet, as if nothing had been said. Are you not ashamed then to bewray your
dullness so grossly? For these are not things of any deep mystery, but the
blockishnesse of your brain lets you from conceiving them. I say finally,
Dionysius mentions no vow at all. (...) is one thing, (...) another; and your
self dare not expound Greg. Nazianz. in Carmin. seems to condemn all vowing,
and supererogating, yea meriting, in one. (...), etc. The one against one, the
other against the other.
it by any other name, then promise or covenant, which comes short of Vow,
when you have don all you can. Vows are to God, promise and covenant may be to
man. And so is that to be understood, of prima fides, 1. Tim. 5. which here you
clap on too, only to make up measure. What if I should say, it were like
primus amor, Revel. 2. 4. or prima opera, ibid. 5? The first faith, like the
first works; or the first faith, like the first love. Is it not meet expounding
one of these by the other, that are so near in nature, and to be near in
subject? But I stand not upon that, I admit the (...), or the prima fides, to
be an obligation, or profession, before the company, to attend upon such an
office, without vowing to God. But our question is of vowing chastities. And
there the widow must be threescore years old, that was to give her fidem, or
to make profession, also to have been married first, to some husband or other.
You stand for the vows of young striplings Dionys. Carth. in locum Apost. ad
Tim. Ne requira^ votum continentiae a talibus (n^ a viduis quidem, nisi admodum
vetulis) Talium enim sanguis feruet, nec lubricae aetati facile est credendum.
This law was first a little stretched in Conc. Trull. c. 40. But since that,
the Papists have kept no measure. Also Dionys. ibid. expounds Fidem, by
promissionem, not by Votum.
and young damsels, neither formerly married, and God wot far off from
threescore years of age. And will you censure these with the same damnation?
But so much may suffice to have answered of this matter.

36. As for the sentences of Luther that you quote out of him (a nose-gay, as
you think, of somewhat unsavory flowers) they have been explained over and
over by our Divines; they import no such beastliness as you would wrest them
to. Who knows not Luthers manner of delivering his conceits? As Socrates is
said to have had his pi^gues similitudines. And S. Paul, being to make
opposition against the Law, which the Jews so magnified, turns every thing
into a Law: Lex peccati, Lex mortis, etc. sparing no words, giving the raines
to his liberty. So Luther. Whereupon Harding charges him, with denying
magistracy among Christians, because he says in one place, Inter Christianos
magistratus nullus est, or some such thing. Which is no more then Chrysostom
has, Rex and subditus apud Christianos nomina mera sunt, Orat. 2. in Babylam:
King and subject are but mere names among Christians; namely, in matters
between God and the conscience. For, I pray, what difference is there when once
it comes thither? Does not the King as well as the subject beg pardon of God?
And I have observed even the Fathers, to couple marriage with other natural
necessities, which here you carpe Luther for. I hope the Physicians will not
greatly be against this, whom your Medina appeals to, in the trial of this
question, lib. 4. de Continentia sacrorum hominum, controu. 4. and we are not
afraid to follow him. But these flim-flammes would soon vanish of their own
accord, if you would but leave cauilling to disgrace the person, and
indifferently look into the interpretation of our meanings. I have read
another of you that exclaimes against Luther for those words, wherein he
confesses of himself in the bitterness of his soul, that he takes more
delight in eating, drinking, and sleeping, then in the passion and resurrection
of our Savior Christ: Behold an Epicure, says he, by his own confession, a
belly-god, etc. And I remember a good Gentleman, that was stumbled with these
words (cited as it seems in one of your Pampheleters) and thought the
collection to be very sound. No, God knows: but as Anna said to Eli, Ego
foemina tristis cord; so he, I am a man sad at the heart, deploring his
sinfulness, and aghast at his own wretchedness, which the Papists are none
troubled with, specially the Jesuits, that view their face in the glass of
flatteries. As we read in another place also of the same Luther, where speaking
of the good theife, and his noble confession of Christ upon the cross, he
sticks not to say, Certe ego non facerem, Surely this is more then I should
have done, if I had been in his place: Lo, new matter for you to cavil at in
Luther.

37. Now to draw to a conclusion. As for Bucer, he is so far from denying
that we may pray to God for chastity, yea maidenly chastity (though you quote
his Commentary upon Matthew. 1. and Matthew. 19. as containing such conceits, but
most injuriously) as you shall now hear. Upon the 1. of Matthew. his words, (if
any to that purpose there at all) are but these: Discendum nobis est, ne
priuati quicquam nobis in vita deligamus. Praecipue autem ne calibatum
arripiamus temere, hoc est, ad istud viuendi genus non certo Dei iussu vocati,
etc. That is, [We must learn to choose no private [vocation] to our selves in
this life, and especially that we do not betake our selves to the state of
single life rashly, that is, not called thither by the certain appointment of
God.] Does Bucer say here, that we may not pray for continency, or rather that
we must not rush upon it against Gods appointment and command? As the wise man
says, Wisdom. 8. Desirous to be continent (not only as they that observe
perpetual maidenhead, but in any degree) I besought God, and it was a piece of
Wisdom, that I knew even that, that I could not be continent, unless God
gave it me [by special gift.] Which if Bucer had but said, F. T. would have
cauilled him, for saying we might not pray to God for continence, though that
be the very thing, which he professes here he prayed for. And does not Bucer
add, Vt nihil priuati deligamus nobis? sc. inuito Deo: We must choose no
private course at all. By this reason then he forbids us to pray to God for
schollership, for skill in music, in navigations, and the like; which who
would collect, but such a Huddibrasse as this Adioynder?

38. Now upon Matthew. 19. he repeats the same again. Diligenter perpendendum
quod Dominus ait, Non omnes dicti huius capaces sunt, sed quibus datum est. And
after a few words between, thus: Non igitur nostri arbitrij erit caelibes
viuere, ac non stulc^ modo caelibatum vouere sed and impium. Debet enim quisque
sua vocatione suoque dono esse contentus, etc. But the core is at that, where
answering the Papists fond objection, Quod autem pontificiae castitatis
assertores, aiunt, precibus posse impetrari vt detur vnicuique caelibi viuere,
Christo contradicunt, qui ita pronuntiat, Non omnes sunt capaces huius dicti,
etc. Note that same cuique. But I will English the whole. [Where the Papists
say, that by prayer every man may obtain the gift of single life; they
contradict Christ, who thus affirms, That all cannot receive this saying.]
And he shows there are many things which we may well strive for, and wish, and
welcome if we have obtained them; but not formally pray for them; as immunity
from sin, the possession of heaven before our time, etc. Fidelis enim oration
pro eo tantum est de quo animus orantis certus, etc. I am Deus non vult omnes
calibes viuere. Non igitur CVIVSque caelibatus ad gloriam Dei faciet: Quare
neque OMNIBVS pro eo orandum est. That is, It makes not for Gods glory, that
all should be continent (I think a Papist will scarce deny this, unless he
means such glory as belongs to the world to come, when generations (...).
Phys. 2. c. 1. Et mundus absoluitur (...) De Genesis and Corr. 2. c. 10. (...)
lib. 2. de Gener. c. vlt. etc.
shall cease, and nature be at an end, etc.) Then, Wherefore all are not to
pray for it, or, none is to pray that all may be continent. What will they
mislike in this speech of Bueers? Or does not the word all sufficiently acquit
him? Insomuch as if I might defend Bucer, from one exception of theirs by
endangering him in another, I would say that he encouraged us to prayer but
even a little too much, and that pro externis, for outward things, among which
it is apparent that he reckons virginity (viz. as divided from the essence of
salvation:) yea, and lastly, for others as well as for ones self. You shall
hear his words upon Matthew. 8. a place which he referres us to in his before
quoted upon Matthew. 19. An antidote belike, that he fore^aw would be of use
against a Sycophants tooth, though it were F. T. himself. In omnibus
precationibus pro rebus externis pius addet, Veruntamen non mea sed tua
voluntas fiat. Si ad gloriam tuam facturum noueris, sana me, pelle hoc aut
illud malum, and nequaquam absolute, Libera, sana, etc. Quod si spiritus huc
impellat, ac velut incogitantem rapiat, vt certa fiducia exorandi quid externi
vel tibi vel alijs ores, sicut Apostoli multis alijs dona certa spiritus sancti
orarunt (marvel it is if Bucer would deny continency to be one of these
dona, at least Medina so reckons of us, de continent, sacror, hominum, l. 4.
controuers. 3. cap. 14.) indubie exorabis quicquid id fuerit, quia fide orabis
indubia. Credenti autem omnia possibilia, Marc. 9. 23. And again a little
after: Sic sese habebit quaecunque ex Dei spiritu profecta fuerit pro re aliqua
externa precatio, ne de orando quidem deliberabitur, nedum de exorando aliquid
haesitabitur, sed spiritus certus, etc. Quacunque autem de re id exploratum non
habuerit, absolute eam nullus petet, sed adijciet, si ita Domino fuerit
probatum, and ad ipsius gloriam momentum aliquod habuerit, etc. To me this
doctrine seems stranger then the other; I mean about the Spirits instigation
of us to prayer, then that which the Adioynder falsely imputes to him. If Bucer
be no more amiss in his opinion of prayers infallibly speeding upon such an
instigation of the Spirit, then for certain he forbids not our praying for
continency in this place, he is right every way. And so much of him, and of the
matter of Monkerie.

39. THE next point is about the name Catholic: In which I might be short, and
show the invalidity of the argument that they use, to prove themselves
Catholics, because they are called so, or rather because they call themselves
so; as the Scripture says of the name Christian, (another kind of name then
the name Catholic) that not the Christians called themselves so, but were
called, yea, (...), Act. 11. 26. they were called as from God, or by divine
oracle; but no way by themselves, etc. the name that notes us, being to come
from him, of whom we hold by dependence. As S. Chrysostom notes most
excellently, Hom. 19. in Ioh. 1. and alias, Romans 5. Sawl. Inde^ Adam nomina
impos^ris, quia domin abatur ijs.
both otherwise in God, changing names unto diverse, and namely, that the King
of Babylon bestowed new names upon the three children his captives and
servants, in token of their reference hereafter to him, and his dominion over
them only. So unless the Papists would be owned by themselves, and not by
God, their denomination must come from God, and not from themselves. It is he
that calls the stars all by their names, suppose you the generation of Gods
Psalm. 145. 4. Stelleaerationales. Philip. (...). 25.
children, (which shine as stars in a perverse nation) that is in effect, the
Church of God. And so once again, the Papists should not be called by
themselves, after the name that they would be known by; but as we are bidden,
to neglect what men say of us, or by what name they call us, Matthew. 5. so not
to trust to the title that our selves shall give to our selves neither, though
with general consent, and (...), as Aristotle says, by compact, or covenant,
which is the (...) -- Si votet v^, Quem pen^s est, etc. Horat.
greatest strength that names hold by, being but arbitrary when they are at
best, and subject to variation. They shall cast out your name, Luke 6. 22.
(...), as evil; but never a whit the more evil for that I warrant you. For
Christ still calls his sheep by their names, Ioh. 10. 3. (as he did the
stars before) whatsoever nicknames the lewd world gives them; either to
their persons or their profession, calling that (...), Act. 24. 5. and this
(...), ver. 14. of the same chapter. But, quam dicunt isti, which these men
call so, (whose tongue Psalm. 12. 4. Magnificabimus linguam.
is their own, as they say in the Psalm, with it they will prevail,) and no
otherwise. And that with wise men waighes but little.

40. S. Leo Epist. 83. Ecclesiae nomine armatiestis, and contra Ecclesiam
dimicatis. You may think he spoke it of the Papists themselves, and of these
times. You arm your selves (quoth he) with the name of the Church, and
therewith fight against the true Church. Mutemus clypeos, say they in Virgil,
and then, -- Dolus, an Virtus, quis in host requirat? Frustra nobis plaudimus
(said S. Salvian aunciently) communione nominis De Gubernat Dei. l. 7. and
dicit bis codem fere ^oco, Quid prodesse nobis praerogati^ relligiosi nominu
potest. quod nos Cathol^ dicim^ etc.
catholici: In vain do we flatter our selves with our part, or fellowship, in
the name CATHOLIC. Which with the Papists preuailes so much, as if they would
keep possession with that, when they are otherwise lawfully eiected out of all.
Like Hesiods bird, that only stayed behind, (...) -- or lobs servant, Only I
am left to tell thee: or as we say at sea, a floating vessel and abandoned by
her mariners, comes not into the Admirals power to be seized on, as long as
there is any quick thing in it. So the name Catholic preserues from wrack
and final vastation, The [very] name Catholic has always been peculiar to
the true Church: If we believe the Adioynder here, numb. 34. Aug. de Manich. l
3. confess. c. 6.
-- si credere dignum est. S. Austen says of the heretics, that they make
birdlime to themselves, and gummy compositions, out of the sweet names of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to catch simple and unstaid souls: Viscum sibi faciunt, ex
commixtione syllabarum nominis Domininostri Jesus Christi, ad decipiendas animas
simplices, etc. And lib. 1. c. 30. Pro irritament^ nomen Christi. Nisi velit
dicere illectamentum; ve qui Graece for^ (...) Ad^candos s^. simplices. Quod
and sic quadiat vel magis.
Irenaeus says, that the heretics, they oppose the name of Christ to such as
they are offended with, by way of provocation only, as it were to anger them,
and to vex them. Whereas the Papists, they practice the like subtlety upon
such as they have to deal with, by mentioning or opposing to them not the name
of Christ so much, (whom they are not so interessed in, even by their own
confession) as of the Church, the Church: as the foolish Jews were wont to cry
out of the material Temple, Templum Domini, Templum Domini, (but Ier. 7. 7.
no regard to Dominus Templi) so these of the mystical, and the name Catholic
appertaining thereunto, by vsucapion forsooth, by plain prescription, as
Campian dreameth. But Rat. 5.
what are names? or where does the Scripture lead us to build our faith upon
names, or to direct our judgments by the breath and talk of fantastique
people? O thou that art named the house of Jacob, Mich. 2. 7. Named, he says,
but belike means not that they are so indeed, but degenerated from Jacob; from
the seed of Judah, into the seed of Canaan; or Jacobs in claudicatione, but not
Jacobs in benedictione, as S. Austen distinguishes of the counterfetters in
relligion, De praedest. sanct. c. 16.
which is the Papists guise, that can halt with the Fathers, but will not go
right with them. And Esa. 47. 1. Thou shall no more be called tender and
delicate, spoken (as Forerius notes upon that place) Vide and Esa. 48. 1. ex
tralat. 70. (...). Quod per exprobrationem dicitur.
because courtly parasites flatter young ladies, with pleasant words and honny
titles, persuading them that they are delicate, and soft, and tender, and not
fit to tire themselves with too much labor or paines-taking. But the
principal party that they are there intended to, is Babylon; or rather, as S.
Hierome well observes upon that place, not so much Babylon as Babylons
daughter, daughter Babel, as the texe has it, that is, young Babel. Which
besides the Papists, Rhem. in 1. Pet 5. 13. and alij passim. Comm. loci.
catching at the word with all eagerness elsewhere, to range their Peter within
the gates of Rome, S. Hierome also himself interprets to be Rome, and none
rather then the Rome that now is; who as in many other points she resembles
the ancient Babylon not unfitly, so herein most suitable, that she has
Jesuits and parasites in her, which call her Catholic, call her Apostolic,
though she be never so bastard and degenerate. But what says the Scripture
before alleged? Thou shall no more be called tender and delicate. Ecce tu
cognominaris Iudaeus, says S. Paul, Romans 2. Thou art called a Jew. And so we
to the Papists, Ecce tu cognominaris Catholicus. But is he a Catholic that is
called so? Or does not sound faith rather, especially if 2. Tim. 2. 19.
Discedat ab iniquitate, (...), much more (...), as the Jesuits. The characters
of Christianity, being not names, and notions, but as it is in the same
Epistles, 1. Tim. 1. 19. Faith and good conscience: or, Faith and love, 2. Tim.
1. 13.
it be conjoined with virtuous life, characterize a Catholic, as S. Austen
tells us, Quaest. in Matthew. c. 11. not every correspondence with the Church of
Rome, as F. T. would persuade us in his number. 29. or the idle taking on of the
name Catholic upon them, which none so recreant and heretical but may do?
Innaserat in nomen Caij Marij, says. Tully in his 2. Philippie. of a certain
runagate varlet, cuiproinde etiam vncus merito impactus est: and diverse other
rebels both here and abroad, that have counterfeited the names, and withal
the persons of their deceased Sovereigns, to win authority among the
multitudes. Even Barabas was Origin Tract. 2^. in Matthew. 24. Di. cebatur and
Jesus: sed erat latre, ^bil habens Jesus praeter nomen. Baraba^ the first
Jesuit, for who^ the people refused Christ. So now.
called by the name of Jesus, if we believe Origin, gathering it out of the
Gospels, not without some probability. Which not only touches the question now
in hand, about the name Catholic in general, but is a fair warning to our
gentlemen Jesuits, not to trust too much to their usurped denomination, though
they were called, not from the name (as they are) but by the name it self, and
title of the Lord Jesus. Who has not heard what glorious titles the heretics
of old times have usurped to themselves? Were they ever a whit the better
accounted of for that? Or did they prosper the more in their damnable heresies?
Gregorius Presbyter in the life of Gregory Nazianzen, of some that would needs
be called (...), from the height, or magnificence, that they arrogated to
themselves (not unlike the Adioynder that contemnes our Church, and calls it
abeggarly Church, number. 36. his own no doubt so rich, no less then the
Merchants, that are confederate with it, Revel. 18.) (...), says S. Gregory.
The vile wretches call themselves the Loftyes or the Magnificoes. The
Phrygians, or Montanists had their (...), or (...), their Perfect men and
greatest of all, Council. Laod. c. 8. the Nouatians their (...), the very best
of all, Council. 1. Constantinop. can. 7. Of the Angelical and Apostolical,
(so entitled,) heretics, who has not likewise heard? The Manichees had their
Perfecti, and one a father of that sect interpreted his name, (...), as
dropping pure Manna, (a kinsman of the Author mentioned by me before, number. 5.
of this chapter.) At ille (says S. Austen) fundebat insanias, (...) meram: The
Manna was mere madness, which came from the Manichee: contra Faust. l. 19.
cap. 22. The same heretic was so insolent, that when he wrote but a letter,
or an Epistle to his friends (wherein the Pope now imitates him in his Breues
to his followers) his inscription was wont to be, Manichaus Apostolus Jesus
Christi, Manichaus the Apostle of Jesus Christ (like Apostolicam benedictionem
in the Breues aforenamed) witness S. Austen in the afore-quoted work. S.
Peter himself 2. Pet. 2. 1. foretells of false Prophets, that should arise in
the new Testament, to whom he ascribes (...), fained speeches, or forged
speeches, framed no verse. 3.
doubt at their own will and pleasure; and what rather then the names of
holiness that they pretend, whereof we are now speaking? though their cunning I
grant reaches a great (...).
deal further; but by those they shall buy and sell souls, says S. Peter, or
make merchandise of them, as now with the Papists, it is not their meanest
inducement they have to their error, that they are called Catholics. Yea our
Savior himself, Matthew. 7. 15. forewarnes us of Wolves, that should come in
sheep clothing, which how if we should extend to the apparelling even of
names, especially if we join with it S. Paul's like prophecy, of (...), Act.
20. 29. that is, (...), as he speaks else where, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7. Mighty
Wolves, or Wolves in power, or in authority, which fieldome want in the Popish
prelacy; and those (...), rising by succession out of your own selves, v. 30.
And yet for these and many more now, no such covering as the fleece taken from
the sheep back, the name Catholic. I have said nothing of the Cathari (a
name near to the Catholics) yet voluntarily taken by some heretics upon
themselves, (as may appear by the Canon of Constantinople last Cassand.
Consult. ad Art. 7. page 56. Proprium est schismatis, sibi sole nomen and
proprietatem Ecclesiae arrogare. Yet the Jesuits are so confident there, that.
Audito Ecclesiae nomine hostis expalluit. Camp.
quoted) wherein they iumpe with the Papists, whom we call not Catholics as
of our own head, whatsoever Bellarmine and the Adioynder retort upon us, but
apply our speech to their usual fashion, and speak as we would be understood
by them. On the other side, did not the heretics miscall the Catholics, and
strippe them, as much as in them lay, of that glorious name? The Pelagians,
says S. Austen, they called us Traducians; the Arians, Homousians; the
Donatists, Macarians; the Manichees, called us Pharisees; and diverse other
heresies diversely nicknamed us. Lib. 1. poster. contra Julian Pelag. And was
the Catholic cause ever a whit the worse for that? No verily. For as Theodoret
notes most excellently, lib. 3. Histor. cap. 21. of Iulians madness (I mean
Julian the Apostate) going about to change the name Christians, into the name
of Galileans, most preposteiously, since the name Christian cannot be abolished,
((...), says S. Luke, which we read not yet of the name Catholic,) that
nothing could be more frantique then such a project, considering that if he
effected it (as there was small hope) yet there could grow no disparagement to
the Christian sect by the change of their name, no more then if Nireus were
called Thersites, or Thersites Nireus, the one should be the fayrer, or (...),
etc. Idem Theod. Com. in Philip. 4. Non quicunque se sanctum nominat, sanctus
est, sed qui credit Domino Jesus, quique vitam ex eius legibus instituit.
the other more deformed, then he was before: or as if Homer were called
Chaerilus, or Chaerilus were called Homer, there would follow any change of
their veins in Poetry: so here. But as Eucherius says of the honors and
preferments of this world (in his Epistle Paraeneticall, ad Valerian. fratrem)
when they are crossely and unworthily (as often) bestowed, that the thing which
was invented to distinguish desert, is made to shroud it and to confound it: so
fares it in this Metaplasme of names many times: Dignos and indignos non iam
discernit dignitas, sed confundit. And as he had said before in the same book,
Alij nomen vsurpant, nos vitam. Where, the height of the title without
substance answerable in the party owning it, is but as the light of a candle
(as Marius says in Salust) that discouers blemishes, but creates no beauty, in
an ill favored visage, presented to it. Shall we hear what the holy Ghost
says, prophesying of the times which were then to come, and which now have
overtaken us in all liklyhood, (of which I may say with S. Hilary, changing but
a Lib contra Auxent.
word, Male ves nominum amor cepit, or male partium, (as he says parietum)
male Ecclesiam in vocabulis veneramini.) Thou have a name that thou art alive,
but indeed art dead, spoken of the Church of Sardis, Revel. 3. ver. 1. And
Revel. 2. ver. 9. they say they are Jews (spoken of certain miscreants) but
are not, (...), that is, descended from Abraham, Isaac, and We have Abraham to
our Father, Ioh. 8.
Jacob, as they allege, but representing nothing less in their forms of
life. What else do the Papists, I wonder, at this day, entitling themselves
Catholics, and non sunt, though they are nothing less, either in their life,
or doctrine, specially if we hold to Lirinensis his touchstone, of, Vbique,
Semper, and ab omnibus receptum: Whereas they now would confound Catholic and
Roman, because they have much Roman which they cannot prove Catholic. But
we have also further mention in the place aforesaid, of the Throne of Satan,
erected among the faithful; a Metaphor belike taken from the Episcopal
throne, as if Satan might get into that too, ver. 13. concerning Pergamus. And
ver. 9. concerning the Church of Smyrna, having spoken of some that called
themselves Jews, that is, true worshippers of God, and are not (as was said
before) the holy Ghost opposes (...), but the Synagogue of Satan. As who would
say, They go for Ecclesia, but are indeed Synagoga, and pretend Christ, but
belong to Satan, which is the reproof that we charge our adversaries with,
and I think not causeless. Yea in the second verse of the same chapter
(because the Pope in all have would be Apostle or Apostolic, for he claims
the term, and counts it his inheritance) you shall read that some said they
were Apostles, and were not, (whom the Church of Ephesus is commended for
trying, before she would trust, as S. John also biddes us to try the Spirits,
1. Ioh. 4. 1. and soon after he censures the prating Dietrephes, Evil life
evil doctrine: which is Nilus his argument too, against the Pope. cx 1. ad
Tim. c. 1.
and brings him to his trial, He that does evil has not seen God, 3.
Epistle, ver. 11.) (...). How fit was this to be premised before the rest of S.
John's doctrine, throughout the whole mystical book of the Apocalypse,
describing Antichrist such as now he appears? Lastly ver. 23. of the said
chapter of the Reu. The Churches are to know, that it is God, which searches
the hearts and the reins, (as not carried away with names or glorious titles)
unless it be nomen cum fide, the holding of his name with the not denying of his
faith, ver. 13. of the same Chapter. Whereas the Papists leaving to be called
by his name, (the name Christians, which the Scripture only records) may
well be suspected to have renounced his faith too, given him over clean. For
the holy Ghost we see couples them both together.

41. Yet the Adioynder is peremptory, number. 32. that the name Catholic cannot
be usurped by heretics, but, is a most true and proper note of the true
Church, and number. 33. that the name and the thing expressed by the name, do
always so concur, that they are never separated. And again, number. 34. that
heretics, or heretical congregations, never did or could usurp the name
Catholic, but the same has always been and ever shall be peculiar to the
true Church, and that the name and the thing signified by the name, do ever
concur. Thus he. But what such privilege I wonder has the name Catholic,
supra omne nomen, above all names else, or why should that only cleave to truth,
and the truth to it, whereas all other names may be divorced from it? May the
name Christian be rent from the Church, by the furiousnes of Julian laboring
to extinguish the whole body of Christians, and yet Christianity suffer no
disparagement thereby, as Theodoret witnessed in most plentiful manner a
little before, and cannot the name Catholic be borrowed of the Church, by the
hand of some crafty intruder or other, but the Church shall no longer be her
self? Yet the name Christian implies Christ in it, which is the head that we
hold by, and the Prince of our Congregation. Secondly, Scripture records it:
and thirdly, it seems given by divine inspiration, (...); Neither of which
agrees to the name Catholic. No, nor yet to the Gnostiques, a high name too,
and from the abundance of knowledge, which they attributed to themselves. Whom
S. Paul is thought to twit, 1. Tim. 6. 12. giving us withal to understand,
that there may be falsehood in names, (...), that is, the falsely called
Gnostiques. Of Apostolic, Angelike, and if there be any other, I might say
the same. Why should the name Catholic be more sacred Unless they mean,
that Catholic implies multitude, and (...), as the scripture speaks when it
would express (...) Sic. lib. Judith. But that is refuted elsewhere.
then they, why less exposed to heretical usurpation? For Catholic and
Apostolic, either draw in an equality, or at least Apostolic is not
inferior to Catholic: Angelike one would think were above them both. And if
the name Catholic still goes where the true Church goes, how are the
Catholics themselves not Catholics, or not known by that name, as
sometimes it fared, witness S. Austen, but transformed into the titles of
certain newfangled sectaries, Supra allegat.
the Traducians, the Macarians, and the rest of that rabble before rehearsed?
Is it like that the heretics will not call themselves Catholics, as the
Adioynder pretends, when they take from Catholics the very name Catholic,
and cloth them with other of their own devising? Though S. Austen most
directly, contra Epistol. Fundamenti, cap. 4. (the book that the Adioynder
himself here quotes) says, that omnes haeretici se Catholicos dicivolunt, all
heretics would be called Catholics, and Lactantius Institution. lib. 4. cap.
30. that all heretics suam esse potissimum Catholicam putant Ecclesiam, they
think themselves Catholics, and the Catholic Church theirs, in a prime
degree. How then shall we believe that of Cyrill of Jerusalem, (for we will
suppose it to be Cyrills for this once) which Bellarmine first alleged, and
the Adioynder here referres us to, that no heretake will presume to call his
sect Catholic, or to point to his own faction, if the question be asked of the
Catholic Church, as if that word were such a scare to him? Does not this
show, that the Bishop most advisedly answered to those authorities, when he
answered in the words which the Adioynder carps here, that De nomine lis nulla
inter nos intercedit, sed vtripotius e re nomen habeant? We stand not upon the
name (it has been showed in the precedents, that there is no cause to stand
upon names,) but which of us has the most right to inherit the name, the
glorious name (as S. James says) quod inuocatur super nos, by which we are
called? As for S. Austen, he might say, that 2. 7.
tenet me postremo ipsum nomen Catholicae, reckoning the name Catholic among
the last arguments, which persuaded Note that S. Austens last is Bellarmines
first. de not. Ecc. c. 4.
him to continue in the unity of the Church, and preferring like enough diverse
forcibler before it, or else this would have moved him but little. Nay, when
the Bishop tells you that in case it were granted, (for he does but grant it,
we believe it not) that it is true as you say, when search is made after the
Catholic Church, we point to your Church; yet you cannot deny on the other
side, but if the Catholic Reformed be asked after, a man will point to ours,
and not think of yours for any such mention: does not this abate your lofty
swell, as much as the other sond supposall served to prick you up in pride?
For Catholic reformed is a more tolerable addition, and more agreeable to
all good rules of reason, and of faith, then Catholic Roman is at any
Cathelica Catapolica, vt praeclare Episcop.
hand; which is your monstrous contradiction in adiecto (as I may so call it)
even within two words. And as Catholic to Christian, by the verdict of Pacian
(which you are wont so to stand upon,) or Apostolic to Catholic, in the most
Orthodox style, and some ancient Creeds, Credo sanctam Catholicam Apostolicam:
So Catholic to be determined by Reformed Catholic, after that such a sea of
corruptions has flowed in (even by your Ad^ in Institut Cheregati Legati sui
ad Commit Norimberg. Vide Fai^. ^m, etc. S^ in hac sede (non s^ Ecclesia)
aliquot tam annis, multa abominanda fuisse, abusus in spirituali^, excessus in
mandat^, and OMNIA denique in peruers^m mutata.
own confessions,) I pray what repugnance has it either to sound reason, or
to ancient custom, or to any good ground and principle of the Church, or how
does it not justify our Church, above yours, to be that Vbi cubas, which we
so seek for?

42. But Satyrus being cast a shore (you say) amongst a company of
schismatikes, asked if they agreed, with the Catholic Bishops, expounding
himself to mean, the Church of Rome. Where, first you see the prerogative is
not the Bishops of Rome, but the Churches of Rome, if any be. Else why does he
fall so suddenly, from the mention of Bishops, to the mention of a Church, but
that he means a Church The Church of Rome was mentioned by S^rus (...) for
(...) inf^ll b^^nesse, but for her ^^t^sne^.
containing in it many Bishops, and therefore not the Sea of Rome precisely, as
now it is taken? But as for the point in hand, whether the Roman faith, and
the Catholic be all one, because Satyrus interpreted his meaning in that
sort, me thinks the Bishop most completely answers him, and so vntieth the
knot that you would feign tie us in, as he yet tieth you fast enough in a far
tougher knot, at the same instant. Sciebat enim, etc. For he knew (says the
Bishop) that the Bishop of Rome was then a Catholic, a Catholic, protunc,
and at that time punctually; but neither before, nor after, very immediately.
Will you hear what our Adioynders reply is to this? Having repeated the
Bishops words to the effect aforesaid, he thus commenteth, Number. 29. So he.
Wherein he grants consequently, that the Pope is supreme and universal
Pastor of the whole Church; for that must needs follow of his grant, seeing
it is evident, that he who then was Bishop Must needs follow.
of Rome, and whom he allows for Catholic, had, and exercised, a supreme
and universal authority: To which purpose it is to be considered, who was
Bishop of Rome at that time: Whereto the Bishop himself gives us no small
light, signifying presently after, that Liberius was Bishop a little before
him; and sure it is, that Damasus succeeded Liberius, and reigned many Damasus
reigns.
years, who therefore must needs be the Catholic Bishop that the Bishop
means. Perge porro. Number. 30. Now then what authority Damasus had, and
exercised during his reign, (I pray you, let it be observed here, the reign
of King Damasus. For all Jesuits think so in their hearts; but some only
speak Damasus his reign.
it with their mouths, as the Adioynder here twice in his inconsiderate zeal.
And yet by this they exalt the King above the Pope, though it be against their
wills; because purposely amplifying the Papal style, they call it Kingdom, as
ashamed of Popedom, and Priesthood, the inferiors to it. So as Baronius in
his Annals, reckons the years of the world by the Annus of such a Pope, as
Pius, or Clemens, or Anacletus, or the like. Which, in other Chronicles, were
wont to be reckoned by the Emperors only; by the Popes either not at all, or
but accidentally. Insomuch as the Holy Ghost himself, Act. 11. 28. describing
the famine that was over all the world, calculated the time by the Emperor,
thus, (...), under Claudius So, (...), under Pontius (Caesar's deputy) 1. Tim.
c. 13. 10 as not only the years are counted by the Caesar's, but Christ
himself is subject to Caesar's deputy. For the Rhemist, themselu^s (...) (...)
(...), under, in this place. And it appears by his mothers being taxed, Luke
^. (for Partus sequitur vent^^) that Christ was under Caesar in the very
womb. The least and the greatest subject that Caesar had. Jesus inter omnes
scriptur sanctificat omnes. Orig. hom. 11. in cap. 1 and 2. Lucae.
Caesar. But perhaps Peter was not then come to Rome. I go forward with the
Adioynder.) Now then what authority Damasus had, etc. it appears, says he,
sufficiently by that which I signified before, concerning him and his
supremacy, in the fourth Chapter, where I showed that the same was
acknowledged, not only in Affricke, by the Bishops of three Affrican Synods,
who in a common Epistle to him, gave clear and evident testimony thereof, but
also in the East Church, even by the chief Patriarchs thereof, to wit, by
Peter the holy Bishop of Alexandria, who immediately succeeded Athanasius, and
being expelled from his Church by the Arrians, fled to Pope Damasus, and by
the virtue and authority of his letters, was restored to his seat, as the
Magdeburgians themselves do relate, out of the Ecclesiastical histories. And
in the Church of Antioch, his authority was acknowledged, by Paulinus the
Bishop thereof, receiving instructions and orders from him for the absolution
of Vitalis the Heretic. Also afterward, Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, and
S. Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople, were suiers to him, to obtain pardon
for Flauianus Bishop of Antioch, as may be seen more particularly in the
fourth Chapter of this Adioynder, where I have also set down the clear
testimonies of some Fathers, who lived at the same time, and evidently
acknowledged his supremacy.

43. Numb. 31. So that the Bishop granting that Pope Damasus was a Catholic
Bishop, and that the Church of Rome was in such integrity under him, that S.
Ambrose had reason to hold none for Catholics, but such as held union
therewith, it must needs follow, that the supreme and universal authority,
It must needs follow.
which Pope Damasus had, and used, was not usurped, but due to him, and his
Sea, and consequently to his successors. And whereas the Bishop signifies,
that the Roman Church, and Bishops, were not always in the like integrity,
that they were at that time, to wit, neither a little before in the time of
Liberius, Honorius and Liberius, not their raigue, but their time.
nor shortly after in the time of Honorius, because both of them subscribed to
Heresy (as he says) I will not now stand to debate, etc.

44. This is the Laconicall breuity of this Thom: To whom we answer in a word
(as for the repeating of his brave feats exployted in the fourth Chapter, we
remit him to our answer thereunto in the precedents, touching every
particular;) That, if Damasus had exercised such an exoticall jurisdiction, as
he fondly dreameth, (and the allegations do nothing prove,) yet this could
not prejudice his being Catholic, or he might be an usurper notwithstanding
Satyrus his judgment of him. First, because Satyrus meant only in opposition
to the Luciferian schismatikes, whose cause was not the cause of
Ecclesiastical Supremacy. Secondly, Satyrus perhaps might not discern the
error, though the Pope had labored of it, as diverse other good men also gave
way to it, unwittingly. Thirdly, a Pope may be right in his belief, though he
be erroneous in his practice, and so may any body else. For the theife himself
does not think it lawful to steal, nor the man-queller to murder, and yet
they both commit the wickedness. Even so the Pope may be Catholic, though he
should turn cutthroate, I mean Catholic for his faith, as the Papists take
it, and speculations only. Else we know, that S. Austen requires more then
faith, to make one Catholic, and gives bad livers but a censerivolunt, they
would be accounted Catholic, but are not. By which also we may collect the
Apostacy of the Church of Rome, her falling away from the faith Catholic, by
the contagion of evil manners that swarm in her, and non secundum Euangelium,
1. Tim. 1. 11. As Nilus his argument is out of the same chapter, ver. 19. that
they that put away good conscience from them, quickly also make shipwreck of
their faith. Though the Adioynder holds, that the Church and her title cannot
be severed, but (...) and (...), (which the Fathers so couple) the Papists
think it no disparagement to their Church, to have them parted. Fourthly and
lastly, I say, Damasus exercised no universal jurisdiction, nor coueted after
it, for ought the Adioynder has demonstrated. The less Catholic therefore,
See Answ to his 4. chap. before.
the more Catholic Pope Damasus, whatsoever become of Liberius and Honorius,
the one before him, the other after him, not so current both.

45. There follows presently after (says the Adioynder Number. 32.) a large and
liberal grant of the Bishop right worth the noting. In fine, what trow you?
That the Bishop saying, Fatemur omnia, nec de nomine lis, sed utri e re nomen
habcant, he by that confesses, that they have the true sign and note of the
Church, and we not having it are heretics or schismatikes. As if we forsooth
refused the name Catholic, or the Bishop employed any such thing in all his
speech, which not the desperatest wretches but censeri volunt, witness S. Aust.
et si sanari nolunt, lib. 20. contra Faust. c. 23.
they would be called Catholics. As Dioscorus said in the Council of
Chalcedon, Eijcior cum Patribus, Catholicis no doubt, I am cast out with the
Fathers (says he) he means Catholic Fathers you may be sure. And, Qui
profitentur fidem Catholicam, says S. Austen, homil. 10. in Apocal. speaking
of Antichrist and his lewd company. Of whom also he adds, that, Imago eius
(the Image of the beast) simulatio eorum est (is their counterfetting and
hypocrisy) qui fingunt se esse quod non sunt, etc. Lo, the mark of the
Church, as the Adioynder counts it, is the Image of the beast, as S. Austen
construes it, when it is falsely pretended, namely the name Catholic. Shall we
not rest then in the Bishops most grave ponderation, Vtrie re magis nomen
habeant, which of us two best deserve the title? And turn the Adioynders witty
descant wherein he doubles upon the Bishop, with, Ex ore tuo Number. 34. and Number.
37.
te iudico (because we call them Catholics) to, Non ex ore tuote, because his
neighbors word, is to be heard, before-his own, justifying himself? But of
these things hitherto. The ship Euplaea retains her name, though encountered
Athenaeus.
with all cross luck at Sea, to the laughter of the beholders, standing upon
the shore. And notwithstanding the name, yet she is the game of the tempests.
Right so is the case, when Petri celox (as Bembus calls it) iets in her titles
De Guido V. baldo, etc. H^our [her] before the people.
of magnificence up and down, after her other scandalls so palpably laid open.
Not the badge (...), (though prognosticating a calm) but S. Paul's piety,
preserved the ship, sailing to Rome, Acts, 28. as it had the mariners
before, Acts. 27. in despite of the sea. In like sort here: Badges and
ensigns, titles and terms, protect not Churches, but inward worth and divine
grace.

46. IT follows in the Adioynder, Number. 35. And the like I may also say
concerning his grant in another matter, to wit, that our Bishops are true
Bishops, and that the Protestant Bishops of England had their Ordination from
ours, yea from He that says three, dent's not they were ^^ure, but shows that
he loves to speak within compass.
3. of ours (for so he gives to understand) whereupon he also infers that
he and his fellow Superintendents have a true ordination and succession from
the Catholic Church, whereas the quite contrary follows upon his grant.
For if our Bishops be true Bishops (as having a true succession from the
Apostles,) and that the Protestant Bishops have no other lawful ordination but
from ours, two consequents do directly follow thereon; the ore, that we have
the true Church and doctrine, if the Bishop his fellow and friend M. Barlow say
true, who in his famous Sermon (mentioned by me elsewhere) affirms the
successiue propagation of Bishops from the Apostles, to be the maine root of
Christian society (according to S. Augustine) and the maine proof of Christian
doctrine (according to Tertullian) as I have showed amply in my Supplement; and
proved thereby, that M. Barlow and his fellows are heretics and
schismatikes. The other consequent is, that if the English Protestant Bishops
had no other lawful ordination then from the Catholics, they had none at
all; for that at the change of Religion in Queen Elizabeth's time, they were
not ordained by any one Catholic Bishop, and much less by three (as the
Bishop says they were) but by themselves, and by the authority of the
Parliament, as I have also declared at large in my Supplement. Then, Number. 37.
Whereupon I infer two things; one that they have no Clergy nor Church; for
having no Bishops they have no Priests (because none can make Priests but
Bishops) and having neither Bishops nor Priests, they have no Clergy, and
consequently no Church, as I have showed in my Supplement out of S. Hierome.
The other is, that the Bishop and his fellows are neither true Bishops, nor
have any succession from the Catholic Church (as he says they have) nor yet
any lawful mission, or vocation; and that therefore they are not those good
shepherds which (as our Savior says) enter into the fold by the door, etc.
Euthymius and Theophylact. upon Ioh. 10. con strue this door to be the
Scriptures. For by them (says Theop^.) we are brought to God, as through a
door he is brought to speak with a man, that has an errand to him. To the
same purpose Euthym adding, that Christ was the true shepherd, and entered by
the door, quia vtens Scripturis, and secundum eas gubernam. Whereas, the
clamberer up another way, who but the Pope?


47. I answer in one word to his redoubled collections, and multiplied
observations, beginning with the first of his two inferences, and concluding
with his ground from which he sets out, as false as they, and more too. No
Bishops no Priests, says he, because only Bishops can make Priests, and
without both them, without all Clergy, and consequently without a Church, as I
have showed in my Supplement out of S. Hierome. For still we must hear of the
Supplement in any case, or else it is no bargain. But as for Hierome, we may
oppose Tertullia^ to him, that, Quod quis accepit Lib de Baptism.
and dare potest, whatsoever a man has received, he may give again (if
occasion be offered) in Ecclesiastical passages. And so our Savior sets the
Date, against the accepistis, instructing Matthew 10. 8.
his Apostles about the use of their gifts, which they had received of him.
(...), says S. Peter. And, (...) (...). Let every body communicate a gift as
he has received: and, As good stewards of the manifold grace of 1. Pet. 4. 10.
God. Though ordinarily it is reason, that the treasure should be only in the
Bishop, keeping, as the faithfullest depositarie, to avoid evil dealing. 1.
Tim. 5. 22. Nemini cito manus imposueris. And we know jurisdiction is so
restrained in Bishops, by the Adioynders own confession, in diverse places of
this book; yea in Priests too, who are limited to their quarter for Adioynd c.
2. Number. 50. Every Pastor ought to have, not only as much care of the whole
Church, as every other man, but also much more then others, by reason of his
function and office, which does extend it self to the whole Church, it being
evident, that what authority soever any man has in any part of the Church, it
is given him for the good of the whole, and finally tends thereto. Again.
Numb. 52. Whosoever is Pastor in any one part of the Church, is capable of
Pastoral inrisdiction in any other, though he be restrained and limited to a
certain part, to avoid confusion: in which respect the Priests in every
Diocese are Priests throughout the whole Church, and may minister Sacraments
any where in cases of necessity; and a Bishop in any place is every where a
Bishop, and one of the Magistrates and Pastors of the Church, and therefore
has a voice and right of suffrage in all General Councels, though they be
held out of his Diocese, etc.
their ordinary service, though their power conferred upon them originally in
their ordination, extend to every member of the Church. But I speak what may
be done in casu, as I said, and upon an exigent only. Which if ever it was
presented, then for certain when all was so out of frame in the Roman Church.
Though I might quarrel him also for that, where he inferres again thus; No
Priests, no Church. Their Rhem. Test Annot. in Luc. 22. v. 19. and Mat. 26.
ver. 20.
Rhemists note, that our Savior Christ made not the Apostles Priests till his
last Supper. And yet, I hope, Christ and his company were a Church before that
time, and a Church of the new Testament; or else more incongruities will
follow, I believe, then the Adioynder will salve up in have. S. Paul calls
Philemons house a Church. Yet himself was a lay man, as the Fathers hold;
which perhaps would not have been, but that Ambnin locum, and alij qui cum
sequuntur.
a Church figurative may be without a Minister. Why not then a true? I would
but fish their judgments, I am to sift some things for disputation sake. For
though Archippus Com. in Epist. ad Gal. cap. 1.
was a Minister, and Philemons son, (as some think) yet their houses were
distinct, as appears by S. Hieromes Commentary upon this place. Ambiguum est,
vtrum Ecclesiam quae in domo Archippi sit, an eam quae in domo Philemonis
significare velit Apostolus, cum dicit se scribere Ecclesiae quae in domo eius
est: sed mihi videtur non ad Archippi, sed ad Philemonis referendum esse
personam, etc. Yea Haymo says directly, Com. in Epist. ad Gal. cap. 1.
asking why S. Paul salutes no Bishops, Priests, or other Clergymen, writing
to the Galatians, as he does when he writes to other Churches, Quia nondum
habebant neque Episcopum neque Rectorem aliquem, ideoque facilius sedici
potuerunt. And yet Galatia a Church; or many Churches in Galatia; as it is,
cap. 1. v. 2. But so much may suffice to his first collection.

48. the Bishop himself and other his colleagues here of the Church of
England, are neither true Bishops, nor of any succession, mission, or vocation,
viz. because they enter not in by the door, that is, are not ordained by
Popish Bishops, in whom alone the stream of succession runs along, as he
surmiseth; though to this last I shall speak more distinctly by and by: Yet in
the mean while to answer to his wise illation, iuxta prudentiam hominis, as
Solomon biddes us: Pope Nicholas their first was of another mind, as it may
seem at least, by his answer ad Consulta Bulgaroru^, c. 14. where, when the
people of that place would have had a certain Grecian to have lost his ears,
to have his nose slit, and other such disgraces, for preaching Christ, though
to the benefit of the people, yet without any lawful ordination; the Pope
dissents from them, and qualifies the matter by these words of the Apostle;
Sieve occasion, sieve QVOCVNQVE Philip. 1. 18.
MODO Christus praedicetur, non laboro: yea he concludes thus, even of the
general question, out of another Popes mouth his predecessor, (a Pope you see
quoting his predecessor Pope, and the Apostle S. Paul too:) Non quaerite quis
vel qualis praedicet, sed quem praedicet: It is no matter, who, nor what kind
of man it is that preaches, but whom he preaches, viz. whether he preach
Christ or no. Which last words are as strange to me, as contrary to the
Adioynder in this place. And so perhaps is that perverting of the Apostles
sentence before cited. For when we say, Non interest quis praedicet, vel
qualis; we are not to mean it of moral idoneity, or moral sufficiency, but
of Ecclesiastical, as the School teaches. So is the Pope to the Adioynder,
and the School to the Pope, and hard but the truth to them all, contrary. In
the 16. chapter of the said Responsa, it seems the people had executed their
wrath upon that poor caityfe that had fained himself Priest, and cropped his
ears, and done him the despite which before they travailed with, but
questioned whether they might do it lawfully or no. Belike the Popes answer
had not come to their hands, or else passion was deaf to milder advise.
Whereupon in reproouing their hard usage of him, he proceeds thus, to excuse
the matter: Si David esse se furiosum finxit, vt suam tantum salutem operari
posset, quam noxam contraxit, qui tot hominum multitudinem QV OQV O MODO de
potestate Diaboli and aternae perditionis abstraxit? In English thus, [If David
fained himself mad, only to save his life; what fault was he in, that plucked
so many men out of the power of the devil, and from eternal perdition, IT IS
NO MATTER HOW?] Is this good divinity? Or may you plead so, and not we?

49. As for that which he produces out of Bishop Barlowes Sermon to fortify
this point yet a little better against us, it is merely ridiculous; because
when Bishop Barlowe speaks of the succession of Bishops to be the root of
Christian fellowship, and the proof of Christian doctrine, he means as
Irenaeus takes succession, cum charismate veritatis, with the gift Iren. l 4.
c. 43. Charisma veritatis certum.
of truth, which in you is wanting; in your hands, in your mouths, is found
nothing, as the Psalmist speaks. Do we not read in S. Austen, that Judas
Iudae succedit aliquoties, Com. in Psalm. 141. and, lupi agnis, id est,
Apostolis, Act. 20. 29. or nox dici, as Gregory Nazianzene speaks, and, morbus
sanitati, that is, one bad man suceedes another, and good men Panegy^, in
Athanas.
are succeeded by the bad many times, (...) Single succession is a simple
thing. Huge Card. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Deficient a fide; Non successions locali, sed
tamen mentali, and corruptions doctrinae.
neither of which successions avail you any thing, or are to be gloried in?
Neither again are we heretics, for dissenting from them of whom we took our
ordination, as you rashly imply in your numb. 35. For the power of ordination
is not taken away, de facto, from an heretical Bishop, unless he be sentenced
Vide Sylu. V. Ordo, and alios.
and inhibited by authority. And after that too perhaps, the orders are good
that he conferres, though himself do amiss in perverting discipline, and
violating the commission of his superiors. Fieri non debuit, factum valuit, as
the common saying is.

50. Our Bishops in the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, ordained
themselves by mutual compact, being destitute of other help from Welsh and
Irish, which in vain they solicited. And you produce your author, Others
reckon of a Grecian Bishop used in this consecration, Eudoem. Parall. p. 243.
But so do liars agree between themselves. Does not this also increase the
credit of our Register: For that is constant, while the impugners of it are at
variance.
one Homo nihili.
Thomas Neale, a worthy wight, no doubt, though no more be said in conmendation
of him. Yet you add, that he was Reader of the Hebrew Lecture in Oxford
afterward; it may well be. And thus you have approved (as you think at least)
that our men were not consecrated by lawful Bishops and lawfully called, I
mean ordained of them that your selves call Catholics. From whence what
flows? That Clergy we have none, nor Church none, and the Bishop is no Bishop
against whom you write, etc. But these two inferences we have discussed before:
how well they follow out of the premises, though they were granted. As for
the Bishop in particular, that reverend Prelate, the object of your envy, and
the subject of our controversy, I might say much, and yet convince in short;
that the defect of oil, cannot hinder his (...), as the Philosopher said
wittily, that it was not possible that Laert.
Hercules should be debarred heaven, because he was not initiate; so, that the
Bishop should be no Bishop for lack of Ordainers. But the greater his worth,
the more my silence; and his scorn of these reproaches, a magnitudine animi,
non a superbia, as Tully saics of Socrates,) bridles me, even dumb. The sum
is; that when we say, our Bishops were ordained by yours, we mean by such as
were first ordained by your Bishops, though not persisting in their Relligion
happily. They were yours by Primitive ordination, not yours by constance of
profession. And this was enough to make good their act. For the power by them
received through imposition of hands, makes them fit ordainers, not the
steadfastness of their faith, or keeping close to the doctrine: or else every
faithful man might be a lawful ordainer, which you are loath to grant to
every faithful Priest, and much more to Laymen. It were not hard to show who
consecrated the first Bishop in Queen Elizabeth's time, which was Archbishop
Parker. Bishop Barlow (I trow) was one, first Bishop of Bath and Wells, then of
Chichester, who was made both Priest and Bishop in the time of King Henry the
8. And therefore you may be sure, by men of your Relligion, and by Popish
Bishops. Bishop Scory Bishop of Chichester first, and after of Hereford, was
another, who was made Priest in King Henry's time, and Bishop in King Edwards.
Bishop Hodgkin Suffragan of Bedford, made Bishop in Queen Mary's time. Miles
Couerdale Bishop in King Edwards time, etc. So as neither did our Bishops
consecrate themselves, by compact or playing booty, as you maliciously slander
them, and the other Bishops that were used in their consecration, were partly
made Priests, partly Bishops, in former Princes reigns, and those Popish, but
all before the reign of Queen Elizabeth. I might add much more here, as I
have read it taken out of the original Archiues of the Church of Canterbury,
about the judgment of 6. Doctors of the Civil Law, who all subscribed, that
the Commission for their consecration granted by the Queens Majesty to the
persons abouenamed, was justifiable N^te that in the Register there is mention
of two more Bishops, to whom the Commission was directed, then were present at
the cons^cration. Which to me seems to argue the sincerity of the Register,
against the Adioynders ^^al^s exceptions. For el^, why might not this ods have
been silenced? And yet the absence of two does not invalidate the business,
since the Commission is content with any four.
and lawful: viz. William May, Robert Weston, Edward Leeds, Henry Haruey,
Thomas Yale, Nicholas Bullingham. I think, your Neale himself, if he had been
of the profession, and not reading his Ebria, or addicted to lies, rather then
to the laws, would not have dissented from the opinion of so many sages.
Marry, if you mean of Bishop Cranmer; his consecration is more pregnant yet,
and confirmed by sundry Bulls of Pope Clement the seventh, as if need were might
be specified at large. The first whereof was to King Henry the 8. two other to
the elect himself Thomas Cant. the fourth to all the brethren and suffragans
of the Church of Canterbury: the fifth to the Clergy of the City and Diocese
of Canterbury. And so diverse more which here I omit for brevity sake. He was
consecrated, 1533. ann. Reg. Henrici 8. 24. March. 30. by John Bishop of
Lincoln, and John Bishop of Exceter, and Henry Bishop of Asaph. The same day
also, accepit pallium. Yea he paid the Pope 900. ducats in gold for his Bulls.
But as far as I perceive, you cauil not the consecration of Archbishop Cranmer,
but only them that were made in Queen Elizabeth's days, viz. Archbishop
Parker, and the rest. And the reason to me seems to be this, because the Pope
had a fleece out of the ones consecration, and none out of the others, nor
never since. Certamen mouistis Lucan.
opes. All your stirs are for Peter Pence, and smoak-pence, and golden
ducats, and such were, -- irritamenta malorum.

51. This which I have assirmed of the consecration of these two Archbishops,
not only Mr. Mason, of his exact knowledge, will justify to your head, or any
of you all, notwithstanding your brave Appendix at the end of your Adioynder
(then which I never saw a more filly plea) but almost any nouice in the Church
of England. And if my leisure would permit, or that were now my task, how
easily might I detect the sundry absurdities that your Appendix contains?
First, Number. 4. you allege a statute of Ann. 1. Eliz. cap. 1. and Dr.
Stapleton urging it against Bishop Horn, That no Bishop should be held for a
Bishophere in England, without due consecration before had, etc. Yet you argue
in the same place, but more importunately soon after, Number. 9. that both
Stapleton and Harding would never have pressed Bishop Jewel, and the rest, with
want of due consecration, if this Register had been true, or any such thing to
have been showed in those times. But if Stapleton and Harding be so
authentical with you, that whatsoever they once urge us with, is straight
unanswerable, then I confess we are in a woeful case. And yet to say somewhat
in defense of them too, without granting your slander of our first Bishops in
the Queens time, what if the mislike that they had to those consecrations, was
because they were not consecrated by Popish Bishops, (for Protestant Bishops is
of your putting in into Mr. Hardings words, number. 11.) and not such as were
ordained by the Popish? Are you not ashamed to confound these things so
grossly, and utterly to mistake the state of the question? If Harding and
Stapleton therefore were so considerate men, that a false imputation could not
proceed from them, their meaning was this, What Bishop consecrated you, that
is, what Popish Bishop or Catholic Bishop in your sense? But if they meant
that they rusht in, either without any consecration, or basely agreed to
consecrate one another (a devise meeter for boy-Bishops, such as Popery
abounds with, then for godly and grave Prelates of the Church of England)
they were doubtless inconsiderate; and if never before this time, or never in
any any other matter, (which is more then the fame that goes of them) yet for
this one part justly to be so censured. Unless their absence from their
country, and not consulting of the Register, might plead their pardon; in
tanto, I grant, not in toto; but howsoever it be, this is a strange argument
of yours to confront a Register with, the life of things past, the image of
truth, the memory of times, the light of memory, that Harding and Stapleton
would never have been so bold, as to contradict it, if it had been so. Nay
then, why should Queen Elizabeth provide by Statute (as your self here tell
us) and her grave Counselors devise under her (which Counselors you may be
sure neither wanted foresight, and were most faithful to her in all her
proceedings,) That no Adioynd. in Append. number. 4. Citing Stapleton^
Counterblast against Bishop Horn, fol. 301. And therefore you are indeed no
true Bishops, neither by the Law of the Church, neither yet by the Lawer of the
Realm, for want of due consecration, expressly required by an act of
Parliament renewed in this Queens days, in Suffiagan Bishops, much more in
you.
Bishops should go for Bishops here in the Church of England, which wanted due
consecration, if she meant shortly after to set up and authorize, a generation
of Pseudo-Bishops in the same Church, her self? Had not this been to kill the
very life of her intents, and to alienate the people from embracing the
Relligion, that she was minded to promote with all her power? For this Act of
Parliament you say was, Ann. 1. of Q Elizabeth. But both the Archbishop, and
the other Bishops, were not consecrated, till about the beginning of the second
year of the Queens reign. Bishop Parker in December, Bishop Jewel in
January, etc. Now then let me ask you (a ratte trackt to death, by the
apparent evidence and impression Who is the scorpion now that carries the
remedy against his own poison about him? The Adioynders sweet compatison, cap.
10. number. 70.
of your own marks: for I assure you, but for your own text here, I had never
considered of this statute of Queen Elizabeth) let me ask you, I say, Is this
good Logic? Harding and Stapleton (though pricked with passion, and envying
other folks good fortunes) would never have accused Bishop Jewel their
adversary, if the case had not been clear; And is not this much more forcible,
Queen Elizabeth, and her sage Counselors would not have forbid that thing by
act of Parliament, which shortly after she meant to license, and to put in
practice, in the open view of the whole world? But what should I stand arguing
with such a beastly iangler, that calls Bishop Jewels answer to Hardings
question, concerning his consecration, ambiguous and irresolute, etc. (Numb.
10. of his Appendix) because he says, OUR Bishops are made as they have been
ever: Not, WE were made, or I was made? Does he not show that there was no
difference between his making and others, when he says, they were made as
they have been EVER, and so defend himself, as withal to defend all, because
the quarrel was not his (blessed man that he was) but the whole Churches of
England, which he maintained as zealously, as any champion would his own?
Nevertheless you tell us again, Number. 11. (as if you could never say it enough,
because indeed you have nothing else to say) That it is not to be imagined, D.
Harding would be so inconsiderate, as to demand expressly of M. Jewel, what
three Bishops in the Realm laid hands upon him, if there were four, as M.
Masons Register has it? Send over your Page then, or your Squire at arms, or
if you will your Desk-creeper, as it is Number. 13. to peruse and search the
Register of the Office, which M. Mason avouches. You shall find Bishop Jewel
was consecrated by these four, Matthew Archbishop of Canterbury, Edmund
London, Richard Ely, John Bedford; and the consequents and the antecedents
(which you are so doubty jealous of in your Number. 14.) will prove M. Masons
Register, to be a true Register, not disprooue it. Though I doubt not but these
things are known to many, before M. Masons book saw light. And I confess for
mine own part, I had my instructions long since, ex alio capite; albeit I
derogate nothing from his worthy pains.

52. I See I must end as I began. The Supremacy of Princes, and namely of His
Majesty, is the thing that the Adioynder most maligneth. That is their first,
that their last, if they be well looked into. I am well content with it for my
part, Sis T V militiae causa, modusque meae. I know not how my pen can be
employed better. And it were hard if our pens should be slack to plead his
right, (his most due right, Deo, and Angelis, hominibusque plaudentibus) that
bears the sword (with the ieopardy of his life, and the envy of Nations round
about) to preserve our lives, and whatsoever we hold dear or precious in this
world. A word therefore or two that we have prepared for the KING.

53. Though in truth the Adioynder here plays two in one. Not only his Rebels
part, but the plagiaries. He The Bishops preuaricating about the Supremacy,
yea his extenuating, abasing of it, as the Adioynder doates now in the latter
end of his Book.
would both steal the Crown of independent Supremacy from the Kings head,
and withal rob him of one of his best Subjects; his faithful Counselor, his
diligent watchman, his unweariable champion, the B. of Elie. No marvel if he
give his assaults there (meaning ill to his Majesty,) where he knows a great
part of the strength lies (like that Worthyes in his locks) which he endeauours
to purloin and divert another way.

54. The recriminations are diverse, which I will answer briefly, setting them
down in their order, and so conclude. For there is no moment in any of them;
but hungry malice sets the pen on work, which were better quiet, if it knew
his own good: I fuge, sed poteras tutior esse latens. Yet the Adioynder is so
absurd, as (to deface the Bishop, and croppe his garland, cheuvt frustra?) to
censure, after Numb 71. The opinion of learned strangers concerning the Bishops
etc. Adioynd. Hesiod.
all, his very manner of writing (himself such a writer no doubt:) but wot you
what is the cause? (...) -- The Bishops book scorches them without a firebrand,
to the very bones; torments them in an invisible mystical rack; his words,
his matter, his form, his substance, all vexes them, and wrings them, and they
dare not say how, but the tears stand in their eyes, and they pretend
by-matters; they cavil with his style. I come to particulars.

55. The first instance: Because Supremacy is said to be no article of faith.
I answer in one word. The persuasion of it is most wholesome, but the raunge is
not properly within the raunge of the Creeds, or the pale of faith. Whereas,
articulus ab arctatione, quasi quid arctatum, says their own Altenstag.
Lexico Theolog. V. articul. And the word of faith, is both prope, and breue;
that, Romans 10. 8. this, Romans 9. 28. Yea, 2. Tim. 1. 13. we have (...), doubly
distinguished, in ip sit terminis; not only (...), but (...), not only of
faith, but of love, and charity, or dutiful observance. Such is the
Supremary. S. Paul himself may witness for us; who, 1. Tim. 6. 2. calls
obedience to infidels, (even to infidel masters, how much more to Princes?)
(...) one of the wholesome words of our Savior Christ, (the Commenters think
he respects to that word, Date Casari quae Sic Anselm. and Dionys. Carth. in
locur. Bruno etiam, and Glossa, apud Lyran and L^^ich. Had^mer: Papist.
Theophylact, refert ad Discite a me quia mitis and humilis, item ad lotion em
pedu Diseipulorum. Euthymius, fire is est Oecumenius, vocat quide in doctrinam
fidei. Sed intellige vel lato nomine fidem, repote reuelationem omnem diuinae
voluntatis, vel in reductione ad fidem.
Caesaris sunt) yet (...), not (...), but (...), or (...). For if it be
Christ's, it binds howsoever, whether it be of faith, or of love; and in Christo
Jesus, says the Apostle in both places; both 2. Tim. 1. 13. and the 1. Tim. 6.
2; he fetches it from Christ. Yet the Adioynder thinks that we are free to all
things, if they be not of faith; that we may choose whether we will conform to
them or no, though the morality that they imply, be never so ghostly. What then
says he of not stealing, of not committing adultery, of doing no murder, and
diverse such like? For Idolatry, I think, they acknowledge none, it is so
promiscuous in Popery. Are not these things morum, and not fidei? Themselves so
distinguish them, at other times. Bellarmine by name, de Port. Romans lib. 4.
cap. 5. Decreta fidei, and Praecepta morum, are two with him. Also Valentia
(quoting Thomas for it) will have haeresie it self, to be in certain
propositions, which cross Tom. 3. Disp. 1. Q. 11. punct. 2.
not with the Creed, but with other truths of Divinity notwithstanding. How
then if the subjection that we owe to Princes, be but as safe and sacred, as
one of these? and grounded upon the Law first, either moral or judicial; as
Honorapatrem, Honor thy father; much more patrem patriae, the father of the To
confirm this argument; We are to think that when Solomon censures the
despisers of their Father and Mother, Prove. 30. 17. he means the civil
Magistrate by those names, because he awards death and eradication to the
offender: (for the birds pick out the eves of none but carcasses) which is
somewhat too heavy for private faults, and childrens errors, though authority
of Parents did stretch thither; as with with us it does not. Also that when S.
Paul in the new Testament, composes houses and families so carefully (componi^
(...) Iam solerti cura, says S. Austen, contra Faust. l. 5. (...) 9.) which is
evident to observe in sundry his Epistles, he does it as a well-willer to the
good ordering of Commonwealths too, and governments of State: (for the house
is a little Kingdom, and the whole Kingdom is but a great house, etc.) As for
his pressing the duties of Servants to Masters, whether carnal, or converts,
that enforces for Supremacy even of Infidell-Princes, a great deal more; a
Potiori.
whole Country. (My children, says Ezekias, speaking to his subjects, and not
the worst of them, but to the Priests themselves, 2. Chron. 29. 11.) though it
appears not among the articles of the Apostles Creed? Doubtless we may say,
Non est omnium fides, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. and not only subiectiuely, but
obiectiuely: it being one thing (...), another thing (...), as the Bishop most
accurately, and most profoundly distinguished, howsoever our shuttle-pated
Adioynder think of it. (...), are not al one, with (...), in our Church. I say
in ours; for with the Papists every thing is come now to be Suarez would have
the very moment of time, wherein he imagines that Christ was borne, to be de
fide: Com. in Thom. etc. The point now in hand about the Popes ptimacie, and
his succeeding of Peter in the government of the Church, what more de fide now
a days then that? Yea to Bellarm. it is caput fidei, Epist. ad Blacuel. Yet
Canus acknowledges, that quidam viri and docti and pij, have contradicted it.
And again, Quidam fideles malunt favere hareticorum opinionibus quam
Catholicorum, about that point: lib. 6. loc. com cap. 7. Cardinal Contarene
also, lib. ad Nic Theupolum De Potestate Papae: Non sunt veriti viri quidans in
omni disciplinarum genere celebres, ac in Christianae Theologiae studijs
illustres, in magno hominum conventu asserere, ius hoc Pontificis humanum esse,
etc. Great men, and in a great assembly.
de fide; either what their Church once ventes, that same Esa. 18.
cymbalum alaru^, (si None but knows the Popish Churches presumption in this
kind, which was not wont to be so. The Church (says Vincentius Lerinensis,
cap. 32.) does no more then make, vt quod antea simplicitor credebatur, hoc
idem postea diligentius credatur, etc. Not new articles, as the Adioynder
would, cap. 3.
declarat Ecclesia,) or some addle-headed Friar and Sophister does but dream.

56. Nevertheless the Adioynder turns merry with us; and says if it be so,
it may well come into our Pater noster, but never into our Creed, this doctrine
of the Supremacy. As if first there were nothing between the Creed and the
Pater noster, that if it lodge not in the one, it must needs be thrown off to
the other. How if it pitch upon Moses his Law (as I said euen-now) either the
judicial, or the moral, part thereof? Did not the Adioynder complain very
lately himself, that the Bishop was to blame for deriuing it from thence? As
See cap. 1.
who would say, It appears there indeed, and there is no denying; but the
Bishop was not to take the advantage of that place; of none, I trow, but only
the Creed. Else, this is not a matter of bare speculation, or naked
apprehension, as the points of faith may seem to be; but ends in action, and
in observation. The more likely therefore to come of the Law. And is Moses
Ordinances of no force with him, in good earnest? Or is not that of validity,
that descends of the Law? Of the Law, I say, whereof one jot or tittle is not
to fall to ground (as he said truest, that kept it best, and in the point of
subjection, above all other:) no, though heaven Matthew. 5. 18. Luke 16. 17.
and earth should pass away, and the whole frame of nature be dissolved. But
in truth it results out of every part of the Catechism, as I shall briefly
show, occasioned by the Adioynder, The Supreme authority of Princes results
out of every part of the Catachisme 1
and his jolly descant here, that would make it a point not of our Creed any
longer, but only of our Pater noster. And first out of the Creed, (I mean
only consequentially, but sure effectually enough) both in Natus de Maria, and
Passus sub Pontio, as has been showed heretofore, and may quickly be convinced
again. See page 94. huius, in marg. and again, page 481. It was Christ's first
and last theme that ever he established, and much also in the middle of his
giant race, (as the Psalmist calls it, Psalm. 19.) yet not like a giant, be
^lando cum dijs, that is, cum Regibus. For he never declaimed against King in
his preachings; though no doubt, it would have been passing popular with the
Jews; but refused the Kingdom when it was offered him, paid tribute to Caesar
for Peter and himself, exhorted others to do the like of duty; Reddite
Caesari, not Date; and not vestra, or gratuita; but qua Caesaris sunt. So in
many other things he allowed the heathen Princes to dominari eorum, to lord it
among their subjects (only he set a bar in his Apostles way, Vos autem non
sic:) he allowed them that wait upon Princes, to go in mollibus, in soft
clothing; he called his Church by the name of a Kingdom, himself often by
the name of a King, implying his Supremacy; which he would never have done,
but that he was most loyally and reverently affected to regiments, and a great
favorer of the Royal estate. But this was in the middle of his course, as I
said. Of life and death, beginning and ending, we shall see anon. In the mean
while, to conclude out of the Creed against him, and to enforce the argument
last proposed; I demand of the nimblest Jesuit of them all: For So Much as the
Creed records the suffering of our Savior Christ, under Pontius Pilate (an
infidel Magistrate) and by his authority; whether it was well and wisely done
of Christ, to yield to such tyranny proceeding from an heathen; and whether it
contain our instruction or no? And although they dare not for horror say,
that our Savior did unwisely, or any The Wisdom of his Father: And, In whom
are all the treasures of wisdom, Coloss.
way vnbeseemingly, in submitting himself to the authority of an infidel,
from whose power he was doubly protected, as they conceit; both by the sanctity
of his relligion, and (which we deny not) by the dignity of his person (if he
had been pleased to use it:) yet it is plain that they think so, unless they
will allow us to practice the imitation; which they will not, they spit at,
they endure not at any hand. For wherein are we better then Christ? Thou art no
better then Israel, says God in Esaias, Esa. 17. And are we better then (...).
Homil.
he, qui venit ex Israel, and factus est Immanuel, as S. Austen says? Why
should not that become us which mis-became not him? Quod decuit tantum, quid
tibi turpe putes? Does not S. Peter call us directly to the imitation of him,
in this point, 1. Pet. 2. 21. 22? But they (...), etc.
will say he was forced, and then they give us leave to do the like, viz. to
obey when we cannot choose. A sweet kind of obedience, no doubt; which the
Reverend Bishop has most divinely refuted in his Tortura Torti; but in the
mean Page 160. Add S. Prosperum de vita contemplat. l. 2. c. (...). Servi
dominis it a deserviant, vt voluntatem non dominorum solum, sed etiam dei, hoc
ipsum iubentis, efficiant. Non ergo recte servitur, si ingratijs servias. Quod
Papistarum dogmaest.
while, what a blasphemy against our Savior Christ, that he would not have
suffered, if he could have resisted? Yet S. Peter says, (...). And, (...),
he threatened not, he reviled not. Yet, that he might have done, although he
was destitute of vires temporales, which are the Jesuits god. The most
forlorn may threaten and revile, we know. But, (...), dedit locum irae, he
gave place to Romans 12. 19. Vnde sequuntur illa divina. Romans 13.
wrath, he confronted not the Magistrate, but recommended the issue of his
cause to God. Monstrous are the blasphemies which the Jesuits are driven to in
this cause. Could not he have resisted? Who first had whole legions of Angels
to rescue him; who ouerthrewe them that came to take him with a single word,
with Egosum; and lastly promises in plain terms of himself, that he lays
down his life in whose hands he pleases (he made choice of an infidel:) and no
body takes it away from him perforce. But of this enough; let them look to
their answer. In the life of Campian, set out by a Jesuit, (one Robert Turner
as I take it) we read, that he desired to have the Creed rehearsed by the
people at his death. But why so I wonder? For what article of the Creed did
Campian die, when they would charge us most? Where is Rome in the Creed, where
Peter, where the Pope, where any of those things about which they iangle now,
and keep a stir? Rather as we read in another place of the same book, that
their Priests being suddenly discovered in a bay-mow, and eft-soones to be
surprised, they confessed At one Yates his, in Warwick shire. Vita Camp per
Turner.
to one another (as their manner is) and enjoined a very gentle satisfaction,
to say thrice over with greatest zeal, that petition of the Pater noster, Fiat
voluntas tua, Thy will be done; referring now all their fortunes to God, and
resigning the sum of their desires to his will, when they could avoid the
force of civil authority no longer. May not we rather fetch Supremacy from
hence (which those wretches in extremity could not but acknowledge, that we
are not to provide for the safety of the Church, vijs and modis, as they
traitorously reach, and upon that ground disclaim the authority of infidels,
but to commit our cause to him, that judges justly, etc.) Does not the point, I
say, in hand about the Princes Supremacy, spring a great deal clearer from
these words; especially being exemplified by our Saviors practice, and
explained, as of late, by S. Peter's commentary, (that we Vide and S. Cyprian
ex eodem capite praeclare argumentantem in eandem sententiam, tum in Tract
contra Demetrian page 27^. and 272. Gryphian. tum p. 366. 367. and 368. eiusd.
edit. de Bono Patientiae.
must not repugne the infidel Magistrate, nor fly to any higher tribunal in
earth, but commit our cause to God only) then Campians rebellion can be
patronized by the Creed, which he so vainly desired to have rehearsed at his
death? That so we may fetch it not only out of the Creed, which you see how
well we may, without crossing the Bishop, and yet wringing the Adioynder when
he thinks he is safest, but out of the Pater noster too, which is the second
part of Catechism, wherein now we are. Commandments and the Law of Moses, to
them I have spoken sufficiently already, and the Adioynder denies it not. Also
he seems to grant it of the Paternoster, though we should not euict it, as we
have. Catechism: shall we see how this truth appears from them too, that the
scoffing Adioynder may be concluded every way for all his descants? Paul or
Cephas, 1. Cor. 1. 13. nor any of their successors, but into the name of
Christ, and the obedience of the doctrine which he brought, Math. 28. 20. which
we have showed already how favorable it was to Princes; and therefore Baptism
speaks for their supremacy, not for the Popes: So in the other Sacrament,
which (...)
is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in which we are to preach the Lords
death until he come, 1. Cor. 11. 26. we have a far clearer glass of the
aforesaid assertion; for so much as his death was nothing but his submission to
the Civil Magistrate, who unjustly persecuted him to the very death. Which
Saint Paul thinks worth the noting, when he fashions his scholar Timothy,
least he should turn aside to faction, and to Jesuitical garboyles, 1. Tim.
6. 13. Or else what needed S. Paul to name Pilate in that place? But it is
reason that the Supremacy should be confirmed from every place. Yet our
Saviors obedience ended not in death, no not the death of the cross, mortem
autem, Phil. 2. but there is a step after death, wherein also it was most
eminent. In that Joseph of Arimaethea begd his body of the Magistrate, (by his
inspiration no doubt) and adventured not to usurp upon it, no not for the use
of burial when he was dead, without leave. See we what a subject we have of
our Savior? what a proclaimer of the Supremacy belonging to Princes? Both in
womb and tomb, both an embryo and a corpse; both before birth, and after death;
and straight before Straight after birth, he fled from Herod conspiring his
destruction, not resisted, but fled; which was another token of his submission.
And immediately before death, he acknowledged Pilates power to be given him from
heaven, Ioh. 19. All the parts, all the acts of our Saviors life and death,
were full of this practice; full of Reverence to Princes: whom the Jesuits
under. value; yea, undermine when they can.
death, and straight after birth; an early beginner, and a most constant
perseuerer, even somewhat beyond the term prefixed; for vsque ad mortem, was
wont to be the last, Revel. 2. 10. if any man can go further, let him. Shall
we see what follows now in the Adioynder?

57. Marry Sir, if the Supremacy be not a matter of faith, (and yet we have
seen how near of kin to the Creed, though nothing is truer then the Bishops
saying, that it is not an article, nor de fide, properly) but what then does
the Adioynder infer, think you? First, that we may not swear to it; then that
it is not to be gathered out of Scripture, neither expressly, nor by
consequence; also that we may choose whether we will believe it or no: and a
great many more such idle collections, for want of Adioynd. Number. 39. yet he
repeats it again (sick of follies) Number. 4^. and that twice together. How can
he approve that men should be compelled to s^ unto it, when nevertheless by his
own confession it is no matter of faith? Also soon after, It is not to be
ratified by solemn oath, as if it were one of the A^ of our Creed.
setting out from a right ground. (...), says the Poet in Suidas: that is,
(...). So here; All falls to ground, because his ground fails. For, shall we
swear to nothing, but to the articles of faith? How many oaths are taken in
Courts daily, both assertory and promissory; yea and without the Courts too,
that are no way so much as bordering upon the Articles of faith, and much less
of the rank of them properly so called? Insomuch as this one place, if there
were none other in the book, is of force to show the toyishnesse of our
Adioynder; or else his sottishness, or for certain his egregious impudence
and boldness, that dares abuse his Readers in such vile sort, as to persuade
them that they may not swear to the Kings Supremacy; because the Bishop said
it is no article of faith. Does not the Bishop say, it is a point of persuasion
(though it be short of faith,) and that not waueting, but firm, and steadfast,
and undoubted? Therefore also he proves it by places of Scripture; though we
may swear to many things which are not evident by the Scriptures, and we swear
so daily. Shall I not swear that King James is lawful King in his Dominions,
and also Supreme to all persons of the same, as it follows in the oaths both
of Supremacy, and of Allegiance, unless I read it in the Creed, or else in
Scriptures? But, the Divines and the Canonists hold Adioynd Numb. 39.
him guilty of sin, that swears to a thing which he does not certainly
believe. What? unless he believe it by the Christian faith, or the Christian
belief, properly so called? Like as the Incarnation of Christ, his passion,
his resurrection, his ascension into heaven, with the rest of those mysteries,
which either the Godhead in Trinity, or his blessed person contains in it
self? You see what a dizzard either the Adioynder is himself, or forswearing
all shame, chasing away the blood, he would make his Readers. For faith being
Valen. Yom. (...). initio ipso. citans Setum, Haelensem, Gabriese, Vegam,
Medina^, etc. super Polysemo fidei. Can l. 12. Loc. Hebr. 11. 1.
a word of diverse significations, as Canus and Valentia, and the whole crew of
them can tell him, he distinguishes not the faith of intellectual verities
touching the mystery of salvation revealed by God, from that which is a
certain persuasion of the mind, either (...), of the truth of things, (which
Greg. l. 4 Dialic. 1. and 7. Sinefide [sc. humana, satis tamen stab li] nec
infidelu vivit. Et adducit exemplum de muliere praegnante atque in carcere
enixa etc. Quo eodem modo, nos quoque de parentibus nostris credere diet
possumus: fide quidem vel firmissima, extra revelationem tamen, extraque
Scripturam. Item de alijs q^am multis, quos nunquam novimus -- It Is (...); Odyss.
S. Gregory can tell him, that we have of many more then come into the Creed,
yea or the main Scripture either) or, (...), of the lawfulness of any action
which we are to perform; Of which kind it is said, Whatsoever Romans 14. 23.
is not of faith, is sin; that is, whatsoever we do with a perplexed
conscience, wanting full resolution; but not, Whatsoever falls not within the
compass of those principles, by which the Christian religion differs from the
heathen, and are comprised in the Creed. By that means we might not swear
upon the Pater noster neither, (if we may swear to nothing, but that which is
Creed) which the Adioynder meant to leave us, I dare say, of his honesty,
when he had taken away the other. And yet oaths de credulitate also, are daily
taken in Courts, notwithstanding his mustering here of his Canonists to little
purpose; but the oaths de credulitate perhaps in matters of fact, when the case
is doubtful; to the oath of Supremacy we have evidence enough, which respects
not fact, but is the auerring Both assertion and promise in the oath of
Allegi(...), which admits not of credulities, but is every way of assurance,
and steadfast resolution.
of our judgments, concerning his MAJESTY'S iustest title to the Imperial
Crown, and the rights thereof; with promise on our parts, not only not to
oppose, but to assist him and to abet him to the utmost of our abilities.

58. As for that he adds moreover, that if it be not of faith, the Scriptures
no where contain it, neither expressly, nor by implication, etc. what more
rude and more unlearned, just like all the rest? Would the Bishop be so
contradictory, does he think, to himself, (from whom I hope they will not
derogate the praise of so much judgment as to heed his own methodes, though
most maliciously they deprave him otherwise at pleasure,) as to allege
diverse Scriptures for the Kings Supremacy (and yet not impertinently, as he
here crakes, and says he has answered them, but most soundly and most
seasonably, as we before have showed) and then conclude it is no point of faith
properly so See Chap. 1. from Sect., 6. etc.
called, but of persuasion only (yet most grounded persuasion) if he had not
well perceived the vnrepugnancie of these two, and how compatible they are
between themselves, which the Adioynder cannot skill of? But so I have heard
of an old plodder in Logic, that to his dying day could never conceive, how
the accident of blacknes might be separated from a Crow, so much as in
cogitation: and another that was as hardly brought to digest, that every thing
either is, or is not. So here the Adioynder, as if his wits were be-breecht; If
it be not of faith (says he) then it is not in Scripture; neither directly,
nor yet implicitly. Belike not Paul's cloak, or Peter's scabberd, Converte
gladium in vaginam. For it may be they will say it is de fide that he had a
sword. But the truth is, that Peter's sword had a scabberd. Whereas S. Paul
talks of the Kings sword as always naked, never couchant. Romans 13. etc.
both revealed in Scripture, and yet neither of the^ of faith. And to defce^d a
little lower to their other kinds of Scriptures, Tobyes dog, I ween, or
rather his dogs tail, which Tob. 6. 11.
the Text says he wagged, and Campian your Martyr made such mirth with in the
Tower, proouing thence the very point which you now deny, that all is not de
fide which is comprehended in Scripture. But he petulantly and profanely
enough, as his guise was; yet with you a grave disputant in matters of
religion, or a mortified man drawing on to martyrdom. For though nothing be of
faith which is not revealed in Scripture, (as we hold, though you deny;) yet
there are many things in Scripture which are not of faith, as neither we deny,
and your selves hold, at least when you are not captious, as now it seems you
are, to cross your self, rather then you will not carpe another. I say, some
things are not de fide, which are contained in Scripture; not but that we must
believe all to be most true which the holy Scripture contains: but some
things are so without the circuit of our faith, as it is no prejudice to us,
though we take no notice of them; as Paul's cloak perhaps, as Peter's net and
sword-sheath; or if you will, as Tobies dog, and the like: others most
necessary and most wholesome to be received, as our duty to Superiors, our
deportment to Ethnicks, and them that are without, our discreet and laudable
conversation toward all, which the Creed is no rule of (that narrow verge)
though the Scripture in her latitude, think no scorn to be. It See Romans 12.
Ephesians. 5. item (...). Coloss. Tit. Timoth. stuffed with such like theoremes, sanae
doctrinae, but yet not fidei. So is solutio decimarum, so pensitatio tributi,
and diverse more. S. Paul himself enforcing Supremacy by this last, Romans 13.
yet not as of faith, but of godly morality. For the Infidels did it as well as
the Christians.
remains therefore, that the Bishop might argue for the Supremacy either
from Moses Law, or Moses his practice; though it be not (...), but (...) only,
not a matter of faith, but of firm persuasion; which yet is more then
Bellarmines Pie credimus.

59. Nevertheless to infringe the Bishops argument, To the Adioynd. Numb. 41.
you say, Moses did not lay aside his Priesthood, but Aaron and he remained
Priests together. So as from thence we can draw no proof for the Temporalties
pre-eminence above the Clergy, in what degree soever Moses stood to Aaron. But
who ever heard of two high Priests together? viz. Moses and Aaron, both at one
time? Or how could they both be the High Priests, that is, each of them
supreme to all Priests? What greater corruption was in those declining times,
when Anna^ and Caiphas both possessed the seat, if at least Luc. 3. 2. (...).
Vide Comm. and Ios.
such corruption then were? But when covetousness and ambition prevailed most,
and drew them most aside into degeneration, what greater deflexion, I say,
could there be then this, from the original institution? Yea, how could the
Priesthood of our Savior Christ be typically shaddowed and prefigured by two,
whereas he is our one and only High Priest, without copartner? How the Popes
sole-regencie be deduced from thence, as Bellarmine would, and diverse more?
Unless they mean to admit multitudes into the chair; and then where is
Monarchy? Sure, Theodoret in Numer. Quaest. 23. calls Aaron the (...), and the
(...), the root and fountain of Priest and Priesthood; which how could he be,
if Moses were equally participating with him in that preferment, and the
Priestly of spring of succeeding ages, to derive their pettigree as well from
the one as from the other? Where is the unity now that the Papists so hunt
after? Where the reducing of all particular propagations, and spreadings
Ecclesiastical (as they speak) to one original and primitive head? May we not
say that the Adioynder was dreaming all this while, in bicipiti Par^^sso, of a
double head of Priesthood, in Moses and Aaron? For as for the word Cohen,
Psalm. 1. 18. it signifies not the Mor^e. and A^ in Sacerd^ (...). (...).
Priest only, but a principal man, such as Moses and Aaron might be both at
once, though in diverse kinds. So as Caietan in his exposition of Psalm. 100.
says only thus, Aaron fuit summus Sacerdos, and Moses fons sacerdotij
inuenitur, dum ipse consecrauit Aaron. Where we may note three things. First,
that he does not give the name of summus sacerdos, the [standing] high Priest,
to Moses at all, but to Aaron only. Secondly, that Moses was fons sacerdotij.
Yet not to cross with Theodoret, who said a little before, that Aaron was the
(...); but rather that we may hold Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions to be derived
after a sort from the temporal Prince; of which hereafter. For it should seem
he esteems Moses here as a temporal governor, having given away the name of
high Priest to Aaron. Thirdly and lastly, he makes Moses priesthood to be
resigned again, and laid down, in that he uses the word dum, Dum consecrauit
Aaron; which the Adioynder says, is to make it like a ierkin, or a iacket,
Numb. 41. this is his merriment; but we proceed.

60. To the authority of S. Austen, lib. 3. in Leuit. Quaest. Adioynd. vbi
prius.
23. I see not what S. Austen could say more for us, if he meant to plead our
cause most, but that the Adioynder presumes all to make for him, which he can
but finger with Midas. S. Austens words are, Caepisse ab Aaron videatur summum
sacerdotium, the high priesthood may seem to have begun in Aaron. Therefore if
Moses be high Priest in ordinary, he is Aarons juniour, and so subject to him.
Yet the Adioynder would have Aaron to be under Moses, as High Priest, I trow,
under the higher High Priest. Once, there is no difficulty in my opinion,
neither in S. Austens words, nor at all in the question about Moses priesthood,
if we will be ruled by S. Austen. Quid putamus (says S. Austen) fuisse
Moysen? si non fuit sacerdos, quomodo per illum omnia illa gerebantur? si autem
fuit, quomodo summum sacerdotium ab eius fratre coepisse definimus? So that you
see it is definimus with him, not only videatur. S. Austen has laid it down
for a sure ground, that the high priesthood began in Aaron. And as for Moses
his priesthood, it is a matter of question with him, Fuit, an non fuit? was he
a Priest or no? As for that which follows; Ambo ergo tunc summi sacerdotes
erant, Moses and Aaron,. i. Both of them were high Priests, both Moses and
Aaron; I have answered it before, that they were both Cohenim, that is, both
excellent, but in a distinct kind; the word sacerdos agreeing to them both, but
not univocally. Concerning the next clause (which the Adioynder vaunts in)
Aaron vero sub illo, Aaron was under Moses, it makes for us, who hold the High
Priest to be subject to the authority of the Temporal Magistrate; S. Austen
guiding us as it were by the hand, to that opinion, in the words immediately
following, Aaron quidem summus [forte] propter vestem Pontificalem, S Austen
still dispute^ Moses his Priesthood. Resoluts not of it, but in an equivocal
sense.
ille vero propter excellentius ministerium. That is, Or was not Aaron the
higher for the garment that he wore [that is, by way of Priesthood,] but Moses
his better in regard of a more excellent function that he discharged?
correspondent no doubt to the Regal with us. For he is called a King without
any more circumstance, Deuteronomy. 33. 5. Bellarm. idem docet (p^aeter locum ante
citatu^) l. 5. c. 9. de Pont. Romans Moses fint summu^ Princep^ temperalis, that
is in effect, King. As for that he quotes out of Greg. Nazian. Orat. ad Greg.
Nyssen (quoted also by Genebrard in Psalm. 98) that Moses was Principum
princeps, and Sacerdotum sacerdos: (though Genebrard leave out the Principum
princeps, which is most material, and only insists upon Cohen Hacconehim, out
of Aben Ezra:) I answer two ways, that either the latter is but coincident to
the former, and by that to be interpreted, (two words and one thing) or
Sacerdos sacerdatum in regard of his Regal inspection and chiefe-dome; which
is the thing that we now attribute to Temporal Princes; as Constantine is
termed Episcopus Episcop^um by Eusebius.
And indeed what higher calling after the Priesthood then that? The Kingdom
then to S. Austen is excellentius ministerium, if we compare it with the
Priesthood. So as neither Moses was Priest, and yet superior to the
High Priest, by the doctrine of S. Austen; which is the doctrine of our Church,
concerning Supremacy.

61. The Adioynder has almost brought his tale to an end. There are but two
more accusations of the Reverend Bishop, and those very ridiculous; yet suitable
to the shop that the rest were forged in; we will dispatch them in a word.
One, that he dissents from the doctrine of Protestants; the other, that he
agrees not with our acts of Parliament, describing the Supremacy.

62. For his bragges between, I hold not worth the replying to. A Thraso and
the Supplement must be in every leaf of him, or else he is not himself. In
his Numb. 42. The place in Deuteronomie for sooth, is nothing to our purpose.
Nay, all clean contrary, and that he has showed in his ninth Chap. Let the
gentle Reader resort to The pitiful suite of the Adioynder to the Reader. I
have charged both the Bishops with evident abuse of this place of holy
Scripture in diverse respects. And therefore I beseech thee good Reader, to take
pains to review what I have said there, if thou dest not well remember it, etc.
the Answer, if he think so meet, in the 9. of this, 26. 27. etc.

63. Number. 43. Once again you would swear he were a Master of the fence, an
only Myrmillo. What wonderful prizes has he played in his Supplement? But
hear you sir? Ad populum phaleras -- If you be ready with your dance, behold
your stage: Ecce Rhodus, ecce saltus, begin when you will. Does your skill
fail you as Adioynder, that you run to your Supplement, to shrowde you under
the talk of what you have done there? If the examples of Solomon, Ezechias,
and Josias, be nothing to the purpose with you, then S. Austens arguments
Epist. 50. Item vide supra Cap. 1. Sect. 38.
be nothing to the purpose, nor Charles the great, nor diverse more. By name S.
Cyrills of Alexandria: See (...). ad Theodos. in Council. Ephesians. page 229.
editionis To the Adioynd, Sect. 44.
per Commelinum, 1591. (...), etc. Kings to remove profane Churchmen, is a
matter of necessity, (that is, of duty) and brings advantage, not danger to
them.
It was also profitable and necessary in certain other respects to your
royal Majesty, that he should be banished from the holy altars that had
profaned them. And how banished? I will tell your Majesty, alleging what is
recorded in holy The Scripture is to determine this Controversy.
Scripture, for your more assurance sake. (...), etc. The Israelites upon a
time contemning the Ordinances of that wisest Lawgiver Moses, etc. (...), etc.
But after that Ezekias, a holy man and a good, came to reign over them, he
Reformation of Church-abuses, will stand with the office of godly and virtuous
Princes, without usurpation of others right. 2. Chron. 29. 5.
reformed things which were amiss, and after that he had purged the Temple of
God, consequently offered such oblations to God as were due by Law, and
belonging to him. Furthermore it is thus written of him: And Ezekias reigned,
and bespake the Levites, saying: Godly Kings lay their commandment upon
Ecclesiastical persons, to do the duties of their holy calling.
Hearken to meye Levites, make you now clean, and hallow the Temple of the
Lord your God, and cast forth all uncleanness out of the holy places, etc.
And the Levites rose up and gathered together their brethren, and purified
themselves, Sic and paulo post Cyrillus. Ezechias recusavit templum ingredi,
(...), etc.
ACCORDING TO THE COMMAVNDEMENT OF THE KING, to the end that they might
cleanse the house of the Lord, etc. And in the sixteenth day of the first
month they made an end of all, and they went in to King Ezechias, and said
unto him; We have made clean all things in the house of the Lord, etc. But what
is this to Theodosius, or to Christian Kings living under the new Testament?
Nothing at all, says the Adioynder; their date is our. Let S. Cyrill be judge:
Cyrill. (like David's Psa. 2.) Et nuoc Reger intelligite The Adioynder says,
Non nunc (whatsoever they d. d of old) as if grosser now then then
(...) etc. Kings Christian, and loving Chrill, are called to the same work of
reforming their Clergy, that Ezechias was.
(...) The Christian sacrifice is offered by Kings as well as Priests. See Heb.
13. 1^.
(...), etc. (...), etc. (...). Kings repress the slanders fastened upon
Christ by pernicious heretics, while they enjoin Bishops and Priests their
duties.
(...), etc. No dishonor to Kings, to meddle in Church affairs; but a tripple
crown of honor belongs to them therefore, with God, with men, with An^ets.
(...), etc. That is: Consider from hence, O godly king, etc. Yea, your sacred
Majesty has already done the like thing to the glory of Christ. For it is
your custom and fashion to offer sacrifice in the Churches, and with
plentiful hand to contribute always something to the glory of God. But it was
necessary they should first purge the Temple, and clear it from all scandal
and filth, and so you to sacrifice at your due time. Now the dishonor that is
offered to our Savior Christ, is a slander more heinous then any pollution
whatsoever. But you commanded your Priests Cyrill says twice that the
Emperor co^^ d^ Priests.
as I lately said, and lo, they have purged the Church of such filth against
your entrance, that you might inherit the more glory, both with God, with
Angels, and with all mankind. Now let the Adioynder expostulate with S. Cyrill,
for urging Theodosius with the example of King Ezechias, nothing to the purpose.

64. To his Numb. 44. He bids us show by what Commission (as he calls it) the
Supremacy of authority in Ecclesiastical affairs was translated to the Kings
of the New Testament, etc. But why should he task us, to show when this
Translation (as he calls it) was made (unless first he show a Commission for
himself, to enjoin us such trifling piece of work) rather then he or his
fellows prove, if they can for their blood, that the old authority was ever
taken from Kings, and given to Churchmen: he calls them Apostles here, but
his meaning is, Popes, and Termagaunts, and Hildebrands. Yet the new Testament,
I can tell him, is no backe-friend to Kings, whatsoever he think of it. This
has partly appeared out of that which has been said. And The Adioynders
objection answered.
if Kings be Sovereign by the right of their place, Constantine shall not
lack it because Nero has abused it, but Nero shall have it, though
Constantine only employ it as he should; Petrut per abusum gladij sui, ius
eiusdem gladij non anusit. [Nec Caesar egitur] Sa^der. lib. 3. cap. 11. de
clave David.
leaving the other to his judge. (...). And, (...), 1. Cor. 5. 13. God judges
those whom man may not judge; which is so much the terribler, as S.
Chrysostom notes well upon that place.

65. The more excellent priesthood, that he would feign Adioynd. Number. 43.
coin, and setvp in the new Testament, to defy Kings with, is a most
excellent fancy (as he abounds with many of them) vulesse he measure
excellency by no vulgar ell. Which the Jesuits will not; Dextra mihi Deus
est, and telum -- They call the Church indeed a spiritual body (as this prater
does soon after, Numb. 50.) but their cubite Vide Sozom. l. 1. c. 8.
is not Christian, nor their sicle of the Sanctuary; their arm is mere flesh
that they trust to finally. So was not the Apostles, (under whose name they
march;) of whom he that said, (...); 2. Cor. 3. 8. says soon after in the
same Vide patres supra citatos ad longu^, Car. 3. huius. Sect. 11. etc. p. 138.
etc. Quibus add. S. Prosperum, lib. 1. de Vita Contemplativa, cap. 25.
Sacerdos Sanctus nihil gerat ex imperio, etc. Item, Si infirmitates fratrum
viventium carnaliter, curare non polest verborum medicaminibus, sastineat
virtute patientiae. So that a Minister may not go vltra verbum. Vide cundem.
lib. codem, cap. 21. complaining of the Clergy, quod perverso ordine non tam
pascunt quam pasci volunt a grege suo. Et, Vendicamus nobis dominationem
tyrannicam in subiectos, etc. Item, Tam a nobis nonnulli graviter fatigati
depereunt, quam a potentibus huius mundi. Ibid. The true effects of Popish
insolency.
Epistle (understanding his calling, which these are strangers to) c. 10. v. 3,
4. (...); and, (...), etc. If they hold to the first, let them take in the
second. The spirit ioynes them, who shall separate them? And now lastly to his
Numb. 45. and 46. where he The Crocodile quotes the Bishop for it: Id ta^tum
audemus facere (circa Invocationem scil. Sanctorum) etc.
dares do nothing without a precept of Scripture for it (so tender conscienced
he is waxed of late;) Scripture wants no precepts of submission to Princes,
even in the highest Clergyman, and that (a) concerning the most sacred duties;
but Malchus and venture amiseruns aures, Sloth and Surlynesse have no ears to
hear with; they will not suffer them to hear what (a) See in fine bu^ ex
Chrysan 13. ad Romans Sed and Cyrill. sic nuperrime Adioynd Number. 48. Cap. 10.
the Spirit says unto the Churches. Returning into our way, I think it long
till I dissolve his last cauils.

66. Where, seeking to make the Bishop to contradict our Divines about the
extent of Supremacy, he yields him such testimony of consent with them all (in
his very first words) even those that seem to be furthest off, as none greater
shall need for this time, to show how much at ods he is with himself, that
would feign set enmity between the Bishop and others. I make no doubt (says
he) but all the Puritanes of England and Scotland, will subscribe to this, etc.
To what trow you? To the Bishops declaration and defense of Supremacy, God
grant it I beseech him, if our sins hinder not. Wherein is it short then? what
halteth, or what faulteth, the Bishops judgment about Supremacy? First, he
makes it external; then, tantum vt nutritis, only as a foster-father, a
tutour to the Church; to cherish it and to defend it. But more then external
government who has of it, saving God alone, and his holy Spirit? Who can work
upon our inward man? The very Minister and Bishops pierce not hither, with
their Sermons, their Censures, their Sacraments, or what you will. The well is
deep, and they cannot reach it, without another manner of plummet then their
own. Ego vox, says he, and that is all; even the Baptist himself, the most
stout in his generation. Till Christ came, they caught nothing, though they
fisht all night. Nemo pugnauis in valle Terebinthi, donee S. Austens
observation against man's industry, if God be away. Ex 1. Sam. 17.
Dauidveniret ad praelium. What is Paul, or what is Apollos? 1. Cor. 3. 5. and
they are made to be just nothing there, ver. 7. that is, Nothing but Ministers
and external instruments, working so far as God shall give leave, nay grace
rather, and concurrence with their labors; else they are but blunt, and
nothing can be effected. On the other side, if God concur with the
Magistrate, and join the internal hand to the external, (the sword of the
Lord to the sword of Gedeon) no less is done then by the ministers tongue, or
whatsoever more wholesome service he may perform; yea that which the Minister
cannot do with his tongue, the Magistrate ofttimes with his hand brings to
pass. Os gladij, enters farther then gladius oris, with the wantons of this
world, that have set shame far from them; Ebal, then Gerizim, preuailes more;
if that mortify thousands, this ten times as many. Quia meliores quidem sunt
quos dirigit amor, sed tamen plures quos timor corrigit. See S. Austens report
of Epist. 48. ad Vincentium, Quens multi ex ipsis n^ nobiscum, etc. Et Epist.
167. ad Festum.
this, found true by experiment (to spare the enlarging of farther doctrines)
and S. Chrysostom in the Appendix at the end of this Chapter: (...); as the
needle is said to make way for the silk. So that hitherto the Magistrate is
not excelled by the Minister in that which they call internal government. The
Adioynder says, God has communicated this to man, but I rather think he has
reserved it for himself, to be the Lord of hearts, and Bishop of souls,
fingens sigillatim cordaeorum. But if he mean by the internal government of
the Church, the administering of Sacraments, the preaching of the word, the
inflicting of censures, etc. herein I grant the Minister is sole conversant,
the Prince meddles not with the execution; but what derogation is this to the
Supremacy, or who ever of our Divines went farther then so, in this point? So
as hitherto there is neither error (against the truth of God) nor yet
singularity (against the judgments of men) in the Bishops doctrine about the
Supremacy.

67. Now for that, that he calls him ^itium, a foster-father, or intorem, a
guardian, or whatsoever of the same kind; why, he calls him as the holy Prophet
before had called him, and entitled him by that name, when he promises the
greatest benefit that ever befell the Church (I mean of mediate and external
benefits still) Erunt Reges nutritij tui, and Reginae nutrices tuae, Esa. 49.
Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens (whom you contemn; what
marvel when Kings?) thy nursing mothers, etc. Is this a small authority over
the Church, think you, which the Apostle S. Paul borrowes of the Prophet Esaias,
to notify his affection toward the Thessalonians by, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7?
affection, and yet not void of authority and ruie; rule and authority, and
yet loving and fatherly, not tyrannous, not insulting. What is more in the
Pastor, then in the Nutritious; in, Feed my lambs, then, in Nourish my
children? And yet, Not but that Pasce belongs to temporal Princes too, (is
Piulus has confessed, and the Bishop convinced Wide supra Cap. 1. Sect. 36. id
est page 32. etc. To whom add (...), lib. 6. cap 3. acknowledging them to be
capita, heads of their people, ex A nos 6 and (...). King 15. A. lib. 4. cap.
2. He denies not but bare authority makes a member of the Church: by which
claim an infidelt King may challenge headship, though the Adioynder storm at
it. Quam diu aliquit Reipublicae minister est, eiusque authoritate and
potestate fungitur, tam diuillius pars dici and potest and debet, Can.
Pasce implies such a Supremacy with you, as there needs none greater;
Nutricare is nothing, because the Bishop uses it. Unless you think that Peter
may rule them like beasts, because of Pasce oues meas, the Kings government
being more civil and humane, because Erunt Reges nutritij tui, (for you
cavil the Bishop here, for praesidium bumanum, as well as externum:) Which
should provoke our men, me thinks, to embrace the Kings government rather then
the Popes, if they be men indeed; since the one professes violence and
borishnesse of himself, the others mild proceedings are acknowledged by his
adversary. Though again we might say, that our Savior never meant so vilely,
or so basely, as to set his Prelates over us, like keepers over beasts, whom he
would not have to govern, as common Princes do their subjects, Vo^ autem non
sie, but rather more gently. And yet if any list to strain the metaphor to
these rigors; perhaps Nutri (when we have done all) is as much as Pasce, and
enforces as absolute a government as that: a child at those years not much
differing from a beast, nay verily short of it; both for want of judgment, and
so easy to be ouer-ruled; and out of lack of force, or bodily strength, to
defend assaults, and so as easily curbed and subdued.

68. Lastly, I dare affirm, that if the Adioynders malice had but lain that
way, he would as soon have cauilled the Bishop for amplifying, as now he does
for depressing beyond due, the Supremacy of Kings, by the consequence of those
words. He makes but a pupil, nay a perpetual babe (would he have said) of
the Church. And, He will have Kings to take upon them, like governors or
foster-fathers, over a young child in the cradle. Though we have showed before,
that for so much as some read, Erunt Reges dispensatores tui, in that place of
Esaias, the Dispensator though he were no King, is of singular authority over
the pupil whosoever, though happily he be of the Royal breed, (as Ausonius
boasts in a certain Epigramme, that the Princely imps were subject to his
seruler) the Apostle testifying as much, Gal. 4. 1. 2. that the heir himself
differs not from a servant (though he be Lord of all,) whiles he is in his
nonage; but is (...) (that is, under dispensators ((...), until the time
appointed by his father.) This is that which S. Chrysostom says, in 13. ad
Romans (and yet not meaning to mock) that the Priest has a primacy indeed, but
in altero saeculo, in the other world; if the Sea S. Chrysostom. his words at the
end of this Chap.
Pope could be content to tarry for it so long. But howsoever that be, I hope
the Nurse her self may waken the child as well as lull it asteepe; chide it
and sneb it, as well as give it the dugge; yea correct and chastize it, as well
as dandle and hug it; which is all that we strive for in this question, that
the Prince may censure the offending Churchman, and reduce him into order; a
thing that F. T. cannot abide to hear of, and yet complains that the Bishop
minceth the Supremacy. Whereas Supremacy without this cannot stand for
certain, nor yet Defense of the Church, which he allows to Kings, Numb. 48.
but this granted, they are both safe, as much as we desire.

69. Yea, but the Parliament goes further (says the Adioynder) and yields much
more to King Henry the Patres ipsi Niceni can 7. excusa^t (...) patrata. Vide
and Can. 11. vbi excusant de temporibus Licinij. Ezech. 19. 6.
eight, then this comes to. To whom, mark I pray, what I answer briefly.
Suppose it did. Let the Lawyers be consulted that were the authors. We study
not States-matters, as the youth of Rome may do, under the famous conduct of
P. R. and F. T. their leaders; seasoning their lyonets with such morsels even
betimes, and swearing their Anniballs, scarce twelve years old, at the Altars,
to disturb their countries peace in time. Besides, the Papists contest against
the gracious government of the KINGS MAJESTY that now is, and exclaim upon
the Supremacy that he now challenges; which we also defend. What is that to
the times of King Henry the eight? or what are King Henry's times to us?

70. And yet to answer him a little more strictly, in ipsis terminis: It was
ordained (says he) ann. 26. Hen. 8. c. 1. in these words. Be it enacted, etc.
that the King our Sovereign Lord, his heirs, and Successors, Kings of this
Realm, shall be taken, accepted, and reputed, the only Supreme Head of the
Church of England, called Anglicana Ecclesia, and shall have and enjoy annexed
and united to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, as well the title and style
thereof, as all Honiars, Dignities, Preheminencies, Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Authorities, Immunities, Profits, and Commodities to the said Dignity of
Supreme Head of the same Church belonging. Thus far belike the Statute. And
what from hence gathers Mr. Adioynder? I will set down his words. So says
the Statute (quoth he) which must needs be understood to give spiritual
authority, when it gives all that power, Dignity, and Jurisdiction, which
belongs to the Head of the Church, etc. Much for sooth. This spiritual
Jurisdiction haunts them terribly, you see, every where scares them. But why
so good now? For seeing that the Church is a spiritual and Ecclesiastical
body, it must needs be governed by a spiritual and Ecclesiastical power,
residing in the Head thereof, etc. Observe his elegancies: Ecclesia est corpus
Ecclesiasticum, The Church is a Church-bodie first. Is not this delicate? But
then again, The same Church is abodie, and yet a spiritual body, to Mr.
Adioynder, in his most curious descriptions. And yet, I hope, not like S. Paul
spiritual body, after the Resurrection, 1. Cor. 15. which is called
spiritual, because it is pliable and obedient to the motions of the Spirit,
(as we are taught by S. Austen in his Enthiridion) but as it shall please his
wisdom at more leisure to interpret. In the mean while, if the Church
because it is a spiritual body (as he speaks at least) must therefore have no
Head, but one that is endued with like spiritual authority, consider the
consequents, and mark what a confusion they would bring upon life, while they
wilfully pervert our meaning in the question. For how many are heads and
principalls to others, which yet partake not of the faculty that they deal in?
And good reason. For the persons of men living and conuersing in such or such a
Commonwealth, are subject to the governor thereof, and he the Head of them;
without any reference to their particular trades or professions that they
follow. in temporalibus she is) and yet no soldier, nor fit to bear arms?
Platonickes, or Peripatetickes, or whom you will, though he be neither Master
nor Disciple of their sect, no way ingraffed into their society? his place,
may exercise power over them that are Spiritual or Priestly persons, though
himself Patres 6. Synodi, Epist. ad Justinian. Imp. (...). Et Irenaeus apud
Antonium in Melissa. l. 2. orat. 1. (...). Sed and Ambros. Valentiniano iuniori
(apud Theodoret. Hist. lib. 5. c. 13.) (...) suadet. Hugo etiam Cardin, in 1.
Ioh. 5. Spiritus est potentia saecularis. Vim quidem haec Hugo afferens Textui
non vni, sed ne putent Pontificij, Equos nostros esse CARNEM tantum. Add
Cornel. a Lap. Jesuit. in 1. Tim. 3. Salimon fecit duas columnas in Templo,
quarum illa Iachin, id est, (...), sieve direction vt declararet and alia, and
imperium regum Israel circa regimen populi secundum pietatem, puru^que Dei
cultum. Altera vo abatur Bosz. i. (...). Latin executio. Quorum vtrumque
Regibus ad divina necessarium. Et fuit vtraque columna coronata. Denique huc
alludit Apostolus (autumante Cornel) verbis ijs, Ecclesia est columna and
firmamentum veritatis, etc.

be none, (and yet the sounder Antiquity has seemed to descrie some such
thing in Kings) but then the law of God ordaining him moreover a Nursing-father
to his Church, that is, a defender and prouider in all points for the blessed
and happy estate thereof, (as the Reverend Bishop here most godlily argues,
and most stoutly auerreth, though the Adioynder think him cold in the cause;)
he is not only a Head, but a kind and loving Head, one that knows Joseph. And
practicing this, Almighty God will reward him accordingly; if otherwise,
(...), let him thank himself, as the Canons speak. For God will not hold him
guiltless in judgment, though the impatience of men may not wreake their
quarrel. The Adioynder Numb. 47. 48. and 49.
says, the Catholics (meaning the Papists) will not deny this, but that they
affirm and teach that Kings are for the nourishment and defense of the Church,
as much as either the Prophet Esaias, or the Bishop of Ely himself, etc. Which
if it be so, I see not but the question, (even by that which has been said)
may be already at an end.

71. But so is not our labor, thank the Adioynder for Adioynd. Number 50.
it, who mingling his Parlaments here together with his Paralogismes, thus goes
forward. It is further yet enacted (says he) by our Parlaments, that King
Henry the eight, might not only visit all Ecclesiastical persons, and reform
all kind of errors, heresies, and abuses, in the Church of England; but also
assign 32. persons to examine all manner of Canons, Constitutions, and
Ordinances, Provincial and Synodicall. And further, to set in order and
establish all such Laws Ecclesiastical, as should be thought by him and them
convenient to be used and set forth within his Realms and Dominions, in all
spiritual Courts and Conuentions, and that such Laws and Ordinances
Ecclesiastical as should be devised and made by the Kings Majesty, and these
32. persons, and declared by his Majesty's Proclamation under his great Seal,
should be only taken, reputed, and used, as the Kings Laws Ecclesiastical,
etc.

72. Then, Numb. 51. Furthermore, King Henry made the Lord Cromwell his Vicar
general for the exercise of his Spiritual and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
by virtue whereof the said Lord Cromwell ordained Ecclesiastical Laws and
Injunctions, and published them under the Seal of his Vicariate, directing
them to all Archbishops, Abbots, and the rest of the Clergy. And albeit Queen
Elizabeth did not use in her style, etc. Thus he. A fable of the Adioynd. that
Q. Eliz. refused the title of Head, and retained of Governresse As if they are
not all one. Neither was Governresse the title that she delighted in. In the
Records of the Kings Coll. in Cambr. I find Q Marie styled Head of the Church,
etc. So far was Q. Eliz from rejecting it.


73. And what of this? Or how does this show that King Henry the eight assumed
unto himself any Ecclesiastical authority, or Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical,
which is the sum of the Question between you and us? For as for the
assigning of persons to examine Canons, and Constitutions, Provincial or
Synodicall, and to set in order and establesh all such Laws Ecclesiastical as
should be thought meet, etc. I redemaund in one word; What if those persons
were Ecclesiastical men? What inconvenience was in that? Sure nothing to the
contrary appears by your writing, and much less by the Act of Parliament here
quoted. Nam Of (...), that is, the Kings conusance in a Church-mans matters,
and those matters of the Church, see Act. 25. 21. Item Psalm. 72. Domine da
IUDICIUM tuum Regi. Which Procopius quotes upon Esa 49. in this sense.
and quibus non licet cognoscere per se, licet tamen cognitores dare, says the
Law. It might be so here then. Though suppose it were otherwise: Did you never
hear of Epist. ad Nicomedient. Vide Gelas. Cyzie. Siquis Episcoporum
tum^tuatus fuerit, ministri Dei, hoc est, mea executione, illius coercehitur
audacia, etc. Item Hieron. in 49. Eta Reges and Principes, quicquid in pedibus
Ecclesiae terreni operis adhaeserit, suo sermon (let the Adioynder choose
whether censorio, or concionatorie, but one of them it must be) tergunt atque
delingunt. Where I would take sermo, for Iuridicus processus; as verbum it res,
or negatium, to the Hebrews. But by this the King has coerciue power over the
Church. Also Canutus King of this I^and (apud I^gulphum f. 508) minatur
Episcopis severissimam ^m, ni pareant mandatis su^. Cath Divine. f. 146.
Constantine, threatening the Bishops in his own person, and that about their
courses in Eclesiasticall affairs? What he did by himself, why might not
others from him, by his appointing? direct Injunctions to the Archbishops and
Abbots and the rest of the Clergy, which you take in so ill. part here at my
Lord Cromwells hands, that he should presume to do, though King Henry deputed
him, and the Act of Parliament, which you quote, allowed him? Did not Emperors
ordinarily command Bishops? Remember Mauritius Epist. 32. In Serenissimis
Iussionibus suis Dominorum Pietas. Et, ego qui in Serenissimis Dominorum
Iussionibus. Add quod and legem, quamvis fibi displiceret, de mandato tamen
Imperatoris promulgavit, etc. lib. 2. epist. 61. Indict. 11.
to your great S. Gregory, remember Marcian, and diverse more. You heard but
even now what Cyrill says to Theodosius, that he commanded the Priests, and in
an Ecclesiastical matter, to purge the Church from impieties and blasphemies,
and till that was done he would not enter. And if they by themselves thus, why
not by others, such as they please to appoint for them? Neither was that the
meaning of the Act of Parliament, that no Canons should be Canons. without the
Kings. authority (as yo would feign wrest it, to augment your cauills) but
that Justinian. Novel. constitut. 131. (...). Et paulo post, (...). But
without Justinian, they are not (...).
Canons should not be forcible in the nature of Laws, without the Kings
consent, as reason is, and practice has ever been, and the words themselves
import as they are quoted by you, viz. that such Laws and Ordinances
Ecclesiastical, should only be reputed as the KINGS LAWS, which himself, or
they for him, had ratified and approved, etc. What more equal?

74. And what marvel now if Queen Elizabeth claimed as much as her father
King Henry did before her, and the Parliament was not nice to assent to her in
that behalf? For of all the graunts that were made to that Queen, there is
nothing unnatural, nothing uncivil, nothing that we should blush for at this
day. Yes, power (say you) to reform, correct, etc. Visitation is restrained to
Coactiva by the ^ewing.
That is, in foro externo, or power coactiue, vindicatiue power, which is only
the Princes, not the Spiritual man's. For so it S. Austen grants Censure to
Kings against stubborn heretics in the external Court. Non enim poterat
victor and resistentes Regia censura contemnere, etc. Epist. 167. ad Fest.
follows, Any authority that has heretofore been, or may lawfully be
exercised or used, for the Visitation of the Ecclesiastical state, for ORDER,
reformation, correction, etc. Here is nothing but the object Ecclesiastical
persons, that you should be so scandalized with in this period; (for that same
any, is any compulsiue Power, which is propriagladij, witness Bonauenture, Vbi
nota quod cum Bellarm. faciat potestatem coactivam inseparabilem a Iudice
controversiarum, (De Interpret. verb. Dei l. 3. c. 9) and nos ante a
probaverimus ad longum, non esse vim coactivam nisi penes Civilem Magistratum,
omne iudicium controversiarum nullo modo restringendum est ad Clericos, excluso
Magistratu Civili.
and not clauium, in 4. Did. 18. qu. 3. Resp. ad penult.) whom nevertheless
we have proved, and are ready to prove, that they are censurable by Princes
and their subordinate officers, though the beast gnaw her tongue for anger.

75. The same I say to the Statute of King Edward the The words of the Stat.
That all authority of Jurisdiction is derived and deduced from the Kings
Majesty, etc.
6. (mentioned by the Adioynder Numb. 53.) Ann. 1. cap. 2. that the meaning is,
de foro externo, wherein the Priest can do no more then the King will permit
him; though it is true, that any act which the Priest exercises, whether
external or internal, it descends altogether of the Kings jurisdiction, in
regard of patronage and protection, who else might trouble him and molest him
for it, if he were disposed, (though unjustly.) And sometime justly; if the
Priest be male, pert or erroneous.


76. As for giving license that Bishops may be consecrated, that is not all
one with consecrating Bishops. The first of these is Imperial, and Christian
Kings have practiced it, even in the best times: the other ours never did,
never mean to do.

77. Now for granting of Dispensations, Lycences, Faculties, and the rest of
that good ware, which was wont to be set at the Court of Rome, (as the Statute
here insinuates, or rather plainly tells us) may we not be glad that we may
have it somewhat nearer hand, and at a cheaper rate, if we should chance to
need them, and save our labor of trudging to her, whom the voice from heaven
bids us to go forth of, if we belong to God? And why may not Dispensatores
Revel. 18. 4.
give dispensations, by which title the Prophet Esaias called Kings (as you may
remember) but a little before, and they that understand the Hebrew text,
acknowledge as much, even your own men? Or where is Peter made the vnicus
Ferer. Lusti. ante citat.
Dispensator, that all these things should come from him, or by his means
only, (though the Pope were Peter)? Are not all Gods ministers called
Dispensators alike, 1. Cor. 4. 1? And what if the King be one of them
Transcendent (in his Kingdom at least) whom the Scripture is not wont to style
so basely (whatsoever you do) but that it calls him Gods Minister, both (...)
and (...), even as Constantine of himself almost at every word, (...), the man
Apud Gelas. Cyzic. in Act. Council. Nicen.
of God? Besides that if the Parliament gave the King this right, and the Clergy
among others belong to the The Adioynd. confuted by his own allegation, out of
the Acts of Parliament.
Parliament, what think you? may he not exercise it even by virtue of such a
grant at least, and again delegate it to whom he please? I wisse, better then
your Besses, or Abbesses in their Cloisters, to whom you have made over the
spiritual jurisdiction now in ordinary. And Baldus says, the like may be
done by the Pope to any Layman whatsoever, as I have quoted before out of the
Catholic Divine in his Answer to the Reports of my L. Cook. Sometime also to
See page 100. huius.
Knights that wear the spur, as the Register of the Templats, and Order of S.
John of Jerusalem: quoted by M. IV Cambden in his Britannia, Cornavijs.
Templars of Balshall (a commanderie of theirs in Warwickshire) gave to Roger
Mowbray (a temporal Knight, but their bountiful benefactor) power of
pardoning whomsoever of the brotherhood (belike spiritual men and all) in case
they had offended against the Statutes of that Order. Whereas pardoning of
faults, (which are, if any thing, de fore interno) is more then giving He that
has license for doing, incurres no fault at all: but the breach eue^ of humane
laws (vndispensed) is a sin in conscience; by the Papists doctrine.
Lycenses or Faculties ad extra, either for eating of flesh, or marrying out of
season, or neglecting residence, or if there be any such like. But we ground
not the Supremacy upon the Acts of Parliament, which belongs to the Prince by
more original right: It is enough for us, that you can neither foil it by
them; and that you are foiled there, where not withstanding you think to foil
us most.

78. You again deny, with like boldness as before, Adioynd. Number. 54. and 55.
2. Sam. 15. 17.
that Saul was head of the tribe of Leui, though the text say plainly, he was
caput tribuum Israel, head of the tribes of Israel; unless Leui be no tribe.
But, Non omnes Israel qui ex Israel, with you perhaps, Romans 9. 6. All are not
Israel that are of Israel. Not as with the Apostle, according to the mystery
of divine election, but according to your absurd conceit of exemption; as if
Saul had had no power over the tribe of Leui, whom you heard Ezechias coniuring
so lately, and commanding them, and setting them about their work. Is not all
Israel given to Solomon, 1. King. 11. 38? Yet your reason for exemption is,
because the Levites were given to Aaron. By the same reason therefore they are
exempt from Aaron, and only subject henceforth to Solomon. As for the title of
Headship, what can be more pregnant then Esaias, 9. 15. that the prime in honor
being the head (which is the King without all question, (...)) the Leuite is
so Romans 13. Tit. 3. and 1. Pet. 2.
far from the Supremacy, which you talk of, yea or from immunitie either and
exemption, that the false Prophet (the unworthy Clergie-man) is made to be the
tail, by Gods own exposition of those terms in that place. In this sense
therefore Calvin would not have abhorred the name of Head to be attributed to
Kings; (as the Bishop most truly and most directly answers you) no not in
Ecclesiastical matters themselves; of whose judgment in that point I shall
speak soon after, God willing, and avouch his credit (with many more of them,
whom you maliciously call Puritanes) confuting your lies and flaunders against
him.

79. Adioynd. vbi prius.
For as for Saul's guard refuse to do a wicked act at their masters
commandment: yet the Guard was not exempt from Saul's authority: neither will
the Adioynder have it so. This disobedience therefore proves not but Saul was
King as well over the Priests as others.
Saul's commandment to slay Abimelech the High Priest, wherein his subjects
refused to obey his will; It was because the commandment was cruel and
ungodly, in which case we must rather obey God then man, and spare the lives of
innocent persons, though we hazard our own; as the Matrones Exodus 1.
did the young brats of the Israelites, not fearing (says the Text) (...),
Hebr. 11. and for that their name remains upon everlasting record. But whereas
Doeg did that which the others would not do, I mean, slay Abimelech, whom S.
Austen (you say) calls the representer of the earthly Kingdom and society of
wicked men, Com. in Psalm. 51; Representing means in S. Austens language, of
which I have debated with you in the first Chapter more at large; not
authority, but mystery; not standing for the Sovereign, but for the semblant
only. David, David figurauit non Regis solum personam, fed Sacerdotis: David
bore the person not only of the King, David represents the Priesthood, not
only the Kingdom.
but also of the Priest, because he eat of the shewe-bread, which was lawful
only for the Priests to eat of. This may make for spiritual jurisdiction in
Kings then, if you look not better to it. Finally, you must not think that S.
Austen here means by Imperium terrenum, the government of Kings simply in it
self, as if no Civil Magistrate might punish a Priest (though never so high) if
he be a malefactor, but (as your self expound it, in the words of your text,
by Societas impiorum, that is, the wicked of the world; S. Austen also saying
there, One Doeg and many Doegs.
Vnus homo est Doeg, sed and genus hominum est Doeg) of degenerating Tyrannies,
where base flatterers lend their hand to unmanly butcheries upon every hope of
Quid mihi dabis, and good men are promiscuously massacred and made away.
Wherefore S. Austen says more particularly in the same place, that Doeg a
figure of Judas.
Doeg signified Judas the betrayer of our Lord, who was a spiritual man, not a
temporal, as you know. And yet the original of Christ's death proceeded from
him, not from Kings, nor from Civil Magistrates, which is worth your noting.
Though accomplished it could not be without Pilates faint concurrence, and the
rather that our Savior might show his subjection to such a silly one, only
for authorities sake. In this sense the same Father, Com. in Psalm. 1. makes
earthly Kingdoms to be Cathedra pestilentiae, the chair of Pestilence,
(though afterward he accommodate it to False Teachers rather, that is, to
Churchmen.) Not that Civil princedome is so in it own nature, (as Mr. Sanders
would gladly have it, de Clave David, lib. 1. cap. 2. Quod saecularis potest as
non potissimum in laudando and praemijs afficiendo, a The sword rewards no
less then punishes.
sed in occidendo and vitam auferendo vim suam ostentet, which is stark false
and traiterous) but when abused to tyranny and to iniquity. It is called the
Chair of Pestilence (says he,) because the pestilence is a disease that rages
generally, and sweepes away whole multitudes with it, where it comes. And so
this is a vice that every body is sick of, desire of pre-eminence, ambition,
and vain glory, (Regis (...). In burro panno purpureus animu^: as Calvin him
self most excellently notes, (whom they slander notwithstanding as unkind to
Kings.) Instit. l. 3 c. 19. Sect 9.
quisque animum habet, as the Poet could say) more Kinging and stinging then
Kings themselves, if they might be let alone, though they complain of Kings.
Else we are not to doubt but S. Austen is of the same mind that Seneca seems
to be of, lib. 2. de Benef. cap. 20. Quod optimus civitatis status sit sub rege
iusto, and that Brutus was to blame for being weary of Monarchies (who was
justly therefore frighted with the apparition of a Dio and alis.
black dog for his abominable assasinate.) Yea S. Austen himself
acknowledges as much in plain terms, lib. 20. contra Faust. cap. 14. Ibi The
happiness of Kingdoms is in obedience to Kings without contradiction.
regna foelicia esse vbi omnium pleno consensu regibus obeditur; That Kingdoms
are there happy, where all men obey the King with full consent.

80. To your mistaking of our Act of Parliament in your Number. 57. as if that gave
more power of censure to Kings, the^ the Reverend Bishop in his grauest
ponderation of these matters allows, and so the King might excommunicate,
suspend, etc. I answer as before, (for you do but go over the same thing
again as if we had never heard of it, though nothing be more triuiall:)
Excommunications are not coactions, Gerson, etc.
(saving only as they are inflicted contra voluntatem personae;) And the
Parliament gives power only coactiue to the King; though true it is, that
without his countenance, their very Spiritual proceedings cannot well take
place, in a wanton age, and a contemning nation. And if the Kings of our Land
may excommunicate by Parliament, why never do they so? Why do they let that
sword to rust for lack of use? If they may administer any Spiritual
Jurisdiction whatsoever (as you think they may by Act of Parliament) why do
they never practice some specialties of it, at one time or another? never
preach, never baptize, never consecrate Bishops, etc? For you cannot say it is
for lack of leisure; for leisure they have as little to many Temporal
businesses, in their world of employments. And some time at least would be set
apart for these, if it were but to keep their title in ure. As for skill and
sufficiency, you will neither disparage I hope the times past, so much, but
that skill there was enough to indite a Censure, (though who knows not how many
that might be borrowed of?) and for the fullness of perfection in all manner of
faculties that are incident to the wit of man, but especially of the Book
which is delivered him upon his Throne, you may remember who gouernes at this
day. But no doubt, Praxis and Consuetudo est optima legu^ interpres, and they
practice none of this, no not in all their life time; It is a sign therefore
they challenge none by virtue of their Laws, though Parsons, and Saunders, and
the Adioynder cry out never so loud, that they do, for want of better matter,
to stuff their pages, and to abuse their Auditors.

81. THE last point of all is about the Bishops defending Adioynd. Number. 62.
of those whom we call Puritanes, against the scandalous imputation that
Bellarmine charge them with, of dissenting from the Supremacy. Whereunto I
have spoken once before. What can be more godly the^ the Bishops practice, to
defend all that may be defended, even in the adversaries themselves, even in
them that gather with us but in (...).
half, to cherish if need be the dim light, and the drooping candle, and the
smoking flax, after the example of our Savior? As we read of Atticus
Archbishop of Constantinople, that he excused Nouatus, and praised Asclepiades
an old Bishop of the Nouatians, not for love of the sect, I think, but either
to gain the parties, or as not turning from the truth, though with advantage
to his adversaries, Socrat. l. 7. c. 25. But this part is handled somewhat
crookedly by the Adioynder, with cringings and wrenchings, now for the
Puritanes, then against the^, but all to bring prejudice to the good Bishop and
the Truth. Howbeit, nothing is more easy, then the Answer to all. The
Puritanes (says he) defend as good a Supremacy as the Bishop. What then? It
may be, that was the very ground of the Bishops assertion, that the Reformed
Churches maintain the same opinion about the Supremacy, all of them, that we
do. What shame then can arise to the Bishop from hence? Is it not matter of
praise and felicity rather, that we are all of us of one mind, in auouching
the right that belongs to Kings, and oppugning the Papists the opposers
thereof? But let us hear his reason: Quoniam percepimus Ecclesiae and
relligionis nostrae tranquillitatens, etc. Iuram. Scot. Edit. an. 1581. quoted
by the Adioynder. Though this be somewhat ancient to prove the judgment of
these times by, especially for one that takes notice of the Bishops just
exception, Dies diem docuit, etc. See Adioynd. Number. 68.
For they also say (says he) that the King is to govern and preserve the
Church, in externis, etc. And have we not showed before, that as no body can
reach to the interna properly, by his immediate action, not the Priest himself,
but only the holy Spirit of God, so the Vide Chrysostom. in fine huius. Quanquam
loquitur it a and Synodus sexta Constantinop. in Epist. Concilij ad Justinian.
Imper. (...), Seiromaste.
Kings sword is as piercing as another to wound the soul, and to mortify
vice and corruption in us, and to reform us to all piety and newness of
life, the most part being readier to yield for fear, then either to amend for
conscience, or for love of virtue?

82. Neither is that so small a matter as the Adioynder would make of it, where
he says the Bishop ioynes with the Puritanes, that allow the King No more
power then Defensive, and yet Sanders says the Sword is Avenger rather. But
these two numina, Praemium, and Poena, contain the Church, and consummate the
Suprematie.
no more power over the Church, then only to maintain it, and to defend it.
For whatsoever the Puritanes opinion be of this matter, which they may abridge
in conceit, after they have enlarged in style, no body discovering them, (at
least I am not he that can diue into their secrets) the word Defender and
Maintainer of the Church, will stretch to as much Supremacy as either his
Majesty now assumeth, or we avow; and more by much then the Papists will
grant him: yea it is that which they oppose with might and maine, that results
from these very words of Defense and Maintenance. For how can a King defend the
Church, maintain the unity, preserve the beauty, unless he have power to
reform both spiritual faults, (let me call them so for this once). I mean
Though S. Austen make heresies vicia carnis, as the Apostle also does, Gal. 5.
By how much more they shall belong to the Kings correction
heresies, blasphemies, schisms, and the like, and that in spiritual persons
too, even in the loftiest of the crew, who sting their nurse as da^gerously as
another, nay far more dangerously many times, both by their scandalous
living, and especially by their broaching of pernicious doctrins, Aug. Triumph.
p. 9. citat Chrysostom. in Matthew. in eandem sent.
Quia omne malum ex Sanctuario; and the thundrings and lightenings came out of
the Temple, Reu. 16. 18. to signify that the Churchmen are the cause of all
plagues, as Ribera notes well upon that place. In scelere Israel omne hoc. But
the Papists think that Kings are blocks and stocks, like the Heathens images,
that Baruch, speaks of, not to stir but as they are lifted, Ducitur vt
neruis alienis mobile lignum: Nay not able so much as to wipe off the dung from
their faces, that the little birds let fall upon them; they allow them no
actiuitie, no (...) Paulo ante ex Council 6.
pricking censure, which is the very nerve of Defense and Church-maintenance.
Might this conceit stand, it were somewhat that the Adioynder replies to our
argument; but it is so stale and so gross, that the little boys here laugh at
it, though old gray-bearded Papists, and the Adioynder for one, are not ashamed
to reiterate it.

83. But will you hear an elegancie, a queint devise? In his Numb. 63. Though
the Puritanes are defective in their opinion of Supremacy, yet both they and
the Papists are better subjects then the Bishop, (for you are to know, that
still he is the Bishops good friend) because all of us yielding the title of
Defender and Maintainer of the Church to the Kings Majesty, (the title they, if
he will, but not the Thing, as I have showed before, not in due extension at
least, for then there would remain no controversy between us) yet they
believe it as a matter of faith, the Bishop but only as a matter of
persuasion, etc. Thus does he ruminate and re-ruminate his cud again, and go
over his abolita atque transacta, as S. Austen e De Merit. and remiss. pecc.
initio lib.
speaks. But for the Puritanes of Scotland, whom he quotes in his margent, I
find no such thing in the words alleged by him, that they hold the
Supremacy to be a matter of faith, ( Papa potest condere novu^ Symbolum, and
novos articulos, etc. Triumph. Ancon. p. 310.
the Papists Creed I know is not yet perfected, and they may take in what they
list.) Nay, I think, it never came into their minds (good men) to trouble
their brains with such a nice speculation, whether the case of Supremacy be
de fide or no; but howsoever it be, I have answered it before, that our
persuasion thereof is (...); we will never be driven from it, neither by force,
nor by fine words, Errore, nec Terrore, (though the Adioynder think we will
not loose sixpence for the defense of it) f Nec auro Pyrrhe tuo, nec
elephantis. Fabricius apud Plut.
our lives (not only our liuelihoods) being not dear unto us in the
contestation of this iustest quarrel, That the KINGS MAJESTY is the chief
maintainer, chief head of the Church, chief governor and chief defender of
it, in all causes, and over all persons, next under God, and his Son Christ.

84. Yea, But what the Puritanes teach concerning this Adioynd. Number. 63.
point, you have heard in the last Chapter by the testimony of Mr. Rogers,
approved and warranted by all the Clergy of England, to wit, The Adioynder
adds further here (out of Beza as it seems) that Kings cannot be exempted
from the divine domination of the Presbytery, etc. Forsooth, nor from
Confession under a shaven Priest, with the Papists But who knows not that we
have banished the Presbytery here in England, or rather never received it, not
only in extention (as it reflects upon Kings,) but not so much as in single
essence? And yet in France (which was Bezaes own country) Rex causam dixit
aliquando in iudicio, si vera Bodinus. Was he not therefore supreme? So here
perhaps.
that Princes must be servants to the Church, subject to the Church, submit
their scepters to the Church, and throw down their crowns before the Church,
etc. Whereupon I gather (says the Adioynder) two things; The one, that the
Supremacy which (as the Bishop says) the Puritanes do acknowledge in the
King, is to be understood only in temporal matters: The other, that all
reformed churches are also of the fame mind, seeing that they profess the same
doctrine concerning the Kings Ecclesiastical Supremacy that the Puritanes
do, as the Bishop himself confesses, etc.

85. Then Numb. 66. (for I would gladly take in all:) Besides that albeit we
should grant that the Puritanes and Reformed Churches do allow the Teporall
Magistrate to have some power and authority in Ecclesiastical matters, yet it
is evident that they do not allow them that spiritual jurisdiction and
authority, which our Parlaments have granted to our Kings, that they may give
dispensations, licenses, make Ecclesiastical Laws, give commissions to
consecrate Bishops, to excommunicate, suspend, censure, visit, and correct all
Ecclesiastical persons, Reform heresies and abuses, etc. and with this the
beast breathes out his last, or almost his last. To whom I answer in order,
and as briefly as the nature of such objections will permit; Princes may serve
the Church and submit their scepters, subject their Crowns before the Church,
(though all supreme Magistrates do not wear Crowns, that I may tell him
that by the way, and we now by Prince understand all) yea, and Of the licking
the dust of the Churches feet, see S. Hierome before, page 519. It imports
small subjection; superiority rather. And yet here the Church does not
signify the Clergy; yea as some think, it is no where so taken at all in
Scripture. Lastly (if it were) ye the word Church is not once named by the
Prophet Esaias, but he directs his speech to them that are of the Church; the
believers in general.
lick the dust of the Churches feet, as the Prophet Esaias speaks, and yet
retain their Supremacy firm and inviolable. How so? Marry it is a shame for
the Adioynder not to see it of himself, without a guide, remembering who calls
himself the servant of servants, and yet pleades for a Lordship limitlesse
over the Church, (at least the Adioynder will agnise him for his good Master,
though he go for a Servant) but nevertheless we will help him. The one by
love, by zeal, by care; by filial respect and duties of all sorts, to the
great mother the Church of God, teeming and travailing here upon earth, whether
the general to his power, or the particular within the territories where he
reigns and swayeth. The other by understanding the right of his place, and
accordingly also executing and exercising of it, to the control of all that
stands in his way, and to the purging of all scandals out of Gods floare, to
the banishing of sin, to the chasing away of all wickedness with his very
look and browe, as Solomon speaks, or whatsoever may be said in the loftiest
style, for the advancing this high authority, principally destinated to the
benefit of Gods Church, and setting forth of his glory. Do I speak riddles?
or are others of the same mind? Dominotur sacerdotibus Imperator (says S.
Gregory, l. 4. Regist. ep. 15.) ita tamen vt etiam debitam reuerentiam
impendat: [Let the Emperor, on Gods name, bear sway over Priests, but so that
he reverence them as meet is.] And he adds withal, Atque hoc excellenti
consideratione faciat: [And let him so do upon excellent consideration.] But
though the examples be obuious, (for even Joseph was a father to Pharaoh Genesis
41. 43.
his King, that is, reverenced by him, or much esteemed by him, and nevertheless
comprehended under Pharaohs grand authority, as a Subject in the Commonwealth)
yet the Adioynder has no place left for this consideration, as excellent as it
is in S. Gregory's judgment.

86. As for submitting to the Presbytery; Though the Adioynd. vbi prius.
Presbytery be scarce in use, where the Monarchies are of force, at least not
with us, against whom this malice is principally ^elled, (and indeed how can
the Presbyters excommunicate a King, yea or the Popes either, since a multitude
is inexcommunicable, by the verdict Bonavent. in 4. Sentent. Did. 18. quaest.
3. Resp. ad vltimum. Sed praecipue August de parcendo multitudini, ne
eradicetur triticum. Totis tract. contra Donatist. T. 7. Denique and Epist.
Leodiens. Apologet. ann. 1106. apud Schard.
of the School, and every Prince is virtually a whole Kingdom, so many are
agglewed to him in necessary offices, in dearest respects, in the most
enthralling bands of received courtesies and favors, and so many to take his
part of all sides?) Yet suppose this were possible; I answer two ways:
Subjection; That, in the coactiue and external forcible Court; This, in the
internal, spiritual, and conscionable: as the example of S. Ambrose and
Theodosius may show, though not rashly to be imitated, no more then Ambrose
himself did hastily proceed to such a heavy censure, but provoked by
Theodosius his most savage slaughter of so many thousand Christians (graui
fateor de culpa, sed tamen humana) all at one blow, as they were assembled in
the Theater. Jurisdiction crosses not with jurisdiction, (...), as Aristotle
alludes it, between reason and appetite, or one appetite and another, l. 3. de
Anima c. 11. And albeit Theodosius was excommunicated by Ambrose, yet Ambrose
remained Theodosius his dutiful subject at the same time. He that renounced
not Valentinian erring in the faith, and maintaining Arianisme, would much
less cast off Theodosius sinning a sin of fact, though exceeding heinous as
I said before. Lay-presbyters to inflict excommunications, and such like
censures, is it likely that they will exclude the Kings highness altogether
from spiritual government, when they take in such mean men of the lay, and
not rather acknowledge his excellent prerogative?

86. And therefore, though I am unwilling (as Tully said once in another case,
cuiusquam summi viri vel minimum Pro M. Celio.
erratum, cum maxima sua laud atque honor coniungere,) yet because I know you
reckon Mr. Calvin and Mr. Brightman among the mainest Puritanes, whom here you
so chase and hunt up and down, (Eudoemon-Iohannes having said so Paral. p.
383. and 384.
much of Calvin by name, that he is Pater Puritanorum, the very Father of the
Puritanes) omitting other testimonies that I have cited elsewhere, for the
auouching of Caluins integrity in that point, and no way derogating from the
royal Supremacy, no not in Ecclesiastical matters themselves, I will set
down only one or two to acquit each of them whom I last named, and in them
the whole nation (if any such there be) of the Puritanes, because you commonly
repute of these two as the violentest; and withal to clear our cause from
that absurd scandal, which you would willingly raise of us, for the
discouragement of simple souls, as if our own Divines abhorred from the oath
which is ministered among us, (though still you are to know it is no matter de
Eide) and above all to stop your lewd mouths, that would sow bate, and
throw bones, between brethren and friends.

87. Calvin therefore thus, to Francis the first, King of France, in that
incomparable Preface to his famous Which Flor. Rem. says he may call the
Talmud or Alcoran of heretics. Franciscus Horantius says, he wrote it by the
instinct, not of man, but some foul spirit, etc. Both showing in what account
they have the work, though they abliorre from his opinion.
Institutions. Dignares auribus tuis, digna tua cognitione, digna tuo
tribunali. He subjects the whole cause, that was then in controversy between
us and the Papists, to the Kings judgment and iudgement-seat. For he had said
just before, describing the weight of the business then in hand, Quomodo
regnum Christi inter nos sartum tectu^que maneat. Unless that be no
Ecclesiastical cause or consideration, which concerns the preservation of
Christ's Kingdom here on earth. And yet these tall fellows would feign
persuade, that Calvin would not have Kings to be governors and superuisors in
Ecclesiasticis. See the rest of the judgment of that learned man ( Flor. Rem
de Origin haeres. l. 7. c. 10. Sect. 1. Calvinus in conclavi quodam
(Engolismae apud Tilium) plus quatuor millibus librotum tum manuscriptorum tum
typis excusoru^ instructo, ita se continuit (triennio) vt vel intimi amicorum
aegre ad ipsum admitterentur, etc.
learned in the judgment of his very adversaries) lib. 4. Institut. c. 11.
where he handles it purposely, and plentifully enough; Non improbabant sancti
Patres siquando Principes interponerent suam authoritatem in rebus
Ecclesiasticis, etc. For I take up this testimony now out of his Preface,
only because not marked perhaps, nor regarded by others. The like he has
again (to name one more then I thought) Praefat. Com. in Epist. Canon. ad
Edward. 6 Regem nostru^. Memineris has Maiestatis tuae proprias esse parts,
quo integra vigeat relligio, sinceram ac germanam Scripturae interpretationem
ab indignis calumnijs vindicare. Yet Bellarm. says, Rex est accidentalis
Ecclesiae, l. 3. de verb. Dei. c. 9. verb. vlt. and therefore interpretations
not to be looked for from him. It follows in Mr. Calvin, Non enim temere per
Mosem Deus mandal, simulatque Rex populi sui inauguratus fuerit, vt sibi
describendum curet legis volumen (where we see he What marvel, when Tullie
says, de Arusp. Resp. (led by the light of nature) Nihil praclarius quam
eosdem and relligionibus decrum immortalium, and sum Repub. praeesse voluisse
maiores nostros, Sub init Orat.
grounds himself upon that argument, which our Divines, that defend the
supremacy of Princes in causes Ecclesiastical, most rely upon.) And a little
after, In Regio Palatio sacrum domicilium assignat Legisuae Dominus, etc. [The
Bibles lodging is in the Kings Palace, Almighty God so appointing.] This of M.
Calvin.

88. And now next for Mr. Brightman. He in Cap. 8. Apocal. ver. 3. makes
Constantine the great (a temporal Prince you know, and as Mr. Sanders Prefat.
lib. de clave David. Acberat, cum Constantinum delegantem Melciadi, cum alijs
Episcopis, causam Caecilij and Donati, caput Ecclesiae vocat, donat cum titulum
homini non Christiano (here.) Nondum enim baptizatus cum suit Constantinus, vt
patet ex Eusebius. alijsque. Christianus vero esse non potest, qui Christu^ quando
potest per baptismum non induit. Eia. Pergite in maledicta; Quid mirum iam si
Rex Iacabus non Christianus Bellarmino, quamvis baptizatus?
would exaggerate, not so much as baptized, (that by the way I may tell you
Sir, to your Numb. 68. and 69. in defense of Bishop Barlow, whom there you bite
at, and save my labor of answering more particularly, as at first I had
intended, to those your discoursings: That Princes not baptized, nay nor so
much as godly minded (which Constantine then was, whether baptized or no, when
Mr. Saunders takes the exception to him for want of baptism) have the same
supreme right to govern the Church that Christian Kings and professing the
faith have, though by error and transportation they either neglect it and
perish it, or perhaps evil employ it, to the afflicting of her whom they ought
to have advanced and promoted most.) As for their being beads, that are no
members (which is another thing that troubles you) though I have answered it
before, and you have ueuer done with it, yet briefly thus once again; Why not
so, I pray you, as well as a King the head of that company of his
Commonwealth, which either professes some art that he cannot skill of (suppose
Surgeons, Mariners, Musicians, and the like) or practices the wickedness
that he abhors from his soul, (suppose Atheists, Heretics, Drunkards,
and Adulterers.) For first, he is no member neither of these damned societies
last named; nor of those before, which he is a mere stranger to; and yet a
head of his whole Realm, I hope, and of all the companies thereto belonging,
temporal at least, and in temporalibus, even by your own confession.
Therefore an insidell King may as well be head of the Church, as a Christian
King may be head over them, with whom he participates not in their sins and
ungodliness. In the rest of the words that the Adioynder quotes out of Bishop
Barlowe Sermon, it seems he says, that the Puritanes allow the King to be
only an honorable member of the Church. And yet the Adioynder would persuade
us but a little before, that the Papists go as far as the Puritanes about
the Supremicie, etc. Whereas his own argument is here against certain Kings,
No members. Therefore no heads But the Puritans acknowledge their King a
member, in the very words that he cites out of B. Barlow, and an honorable
member, that is happily Supreme. He contradicts himself therefore. As for
their denying him to be Governor, (though it appear not in their words) yet
either their meaning is, he is not to govern after his own lust and fancy,
against the book of God, put into his hands: or Bishop Barlow describes the
Puritans by their old Problemes, which they disclaim daily, as the Bishop of
Ely exceeding well notes.
But now to come to Mr. Brightman, as I said. He makes Constantine to be that
Angel that stands before the altar, Apoc. 8. having the golden censer of
perfumes in his hand, and casting them upon the prayers of the Saints and
righteous, which ascend up before God. Would this man, think you, disdain,
that Princes should be interposers in Ecclesiastical affairs, or challenge
the chief conuzance and arbittement of them to themselves? But I will set
down his own words, because they are pregnant to this purpose. Quid ni ille
INPRIMIS imaginem SACERDOTIS praeferret, in quo maxim lucebat effigies Regalis
dignitatis? Recte ipse de se in coetu Episcoporum, Et ego, inquit, tanquam vnus
e vobis adsum: (...) Though not so (...) by reverence and humility, but at
another time Episcopus Episcoporum. And, Ego Episcopus sum (etiam) extra
Ecclesia^^. i. vbique.
(...). Nec enim negarim me vestrum conseruum esse, quo nomine ego maxim
gaudeo: Socrates lib. primo cap. sep. This he. Where I subscribe not to Mr.
Brightmans interpretation of the Apocalypse, but I allege it to show what it
is like his opinion was of the Supremacy of Kings.

89. Now concerning other States and Kingdoms not enlarging the Supremacy so
far as we do here in England, viz. to give Lyceuses, Dispensations,
Commissions, Faculties, to consecrate Bishops, to excommunicate, to interdict,
suspend, censure, etc. Let the Reader be careful of reading these last words
as they lie in the Adioynder, with due punctation of them, or else he may
chance to fall into the Adioynders pit-fold, which will be his great pleasure
to look on and laugh. For though it run thus, to give Commissions to
consecrate, to excommunicate, censure, etc. yet he means not, I trust, that
our Kings do either excommunicate, censure, or suspend in their own persons,
but give Commissions to Bishops, to consecrate other Bishops, and so perhaps to
execute the other ensuing acts of censure there recounted, as excommunication,
suspension, etc. And yet this is not avouched out of any of our records, but
only nakedly imputed to us by the Adioynder; which if it be true, as I
confess I am not (...), not so studied in the Laws (my profession being
clean another ways) it is to be understood of And this is even the worst that
can be boulted out of those words of the B. so spightfully insisted upon by
the Adioynd. Numb. 67. that the Kings government of the Church is external, so
far forth as it requires and admits and authority For so far he is from
extenuating the Kings Supremacy thereby, that his meaning is, We are to look
for as much help and aid from him, and consequently to acknowledge as much
authority in him, as is humans, that is incident to the power or place of any
man whatsoever, and therefore Supreme without question in his Kingdom. Though
he denies not, but the Church may stand without such help or countenance of
authority (as in the times of persecution) God supporting it, etc which is
most true. Therefore he says, So fore forth as it requires, etc.
patronage and Princely protection, that their acts may go for current and
vncontemned of Christian people, not but that in themselves they are of
validity before God, out of the spiritual power, which he has entrusted his
Priests and Ministers with, though there be no confirmation of the secular arm.

90. Though it might be referred also to the commandments and injunctions of
Christian Kings, whereby they urge Clergymen to do their duties, if happily
they be stacke or unwilling of themselves. For which cause Mr. Sanders says,
that Kings can command nothing which they may not execute, De claue David. lib.
5. cap. 5. and 6. That because we deny to Princes the execution of Priestly
duties, they may take away Government too, in causes, and over persons,
Ecclesiastical. Yet we heard S. Cyrill speaking plainly a little before, for
Theodosius his commanding of Bishops, etc. altogether as Ezechias did the
Levites, who yet might not execute a Levites charge. So Solomon sacrificed
says the Scripture, that is, the Priests at Salomons commandment; not as
Oziah with his own hands, nay not as Vzzah, so much as to handle a holy thing
forbidden. And because Mr. Sanders makes such a piece of work hereof, and
says, there is no instance to be given in all the world, of a person
commannding that which he may not execute (saving only when there is
disparagement in the doing of it, as for a Captain to descend to the mean
offices of the Camp, which Plato forbids; but as for the Ministry, In
Politico.
there is no disparagement in it, no not to Kings themselves (says he) which
we are content to admit) I will reckon therefore some few instances to choke him
withal, and to defend our distinction between Execution and Government, which
is the maine thing to be heeded in the question of Supremacy. in casu, and yet
himself may not handle the sword, as Lib. 2. c. 11. Sand. bis hoc agnoseit,
and repetit idem c. 12. in initio. Negavimus cum Augustino licuisse Petro, etc.
Mr. Sanders confesses in this book? Though it is next to a wonder to see a
Temporal Prince, in his own territory at least, who at no hand may handle a
sword, or strike a blow. Yet they give the Pope this authority to set other
folks swords a work, not only in his Territory, but throughout Christendom.
And I might have set it yet somewhat higher. How was the Judge in the old Law
to put to death malefactors by the appointment of the Priest, (as the Papists
would have it,) Deuter. 17. 9. who yet was not to strike, (for that was the
Judges office,) if no body may prescribe that which he may not execute? Neither
let M. Sanders say, that to strike a blow, or to slay a malefactor, is
disgrace or disparagement; which is rather the sanctifying Fatente and Tullio,
Cat. 1. Non modo non contamtuarunt, sed etiam honestarunt.
of a good subjects hands, to kill a rebel (yea and that sometimes vniudged) if
necessity so require; to omit that this conceit drives fast upon Anabaptisme,
to think that carrying the sword is disparageable or disgraceful, which the
Et Romans 13. and alibi sape, describens (...) ab insigni gladij. Et, Dei
minister (...), (...). Nisi divina ministeria cui qua sordeant; quod ne de
Pontific^ quidem concedendum est, quamvis excelso. (Nec sibi adeo placeat)
Sander^^ tamen in have sententiam multa stultissime, quasi ex Augustino, and de
omnibus Apostolis (...) far glad^^^, nee tamen permissis educere. Lib 2. de
clave David cap. 11.
Scripture speaks of with all honor. As for a Prince in his own Territory,
and therefore bearing the sword, to who^ notwithstanding it is a disgrace to
use the sword, it is a monster as I said, and if he be ashamed of the one, let
him renounce the other; as the poor woman said to King Philip, Si non vacat
andire, nec regnare vacet: So here, Si percutere dedecori est, principari
magis. But how much more will the Pope now think that disparageable 3.
to him, to sweep Churches, to ring the Saints-bell, to wait upon the
chalice, yea to baptize, to preach (for this offends him more then any thing
else) and yet, I trust, he may command all these things to others, to his
inferior Clerks, and Levites, and demie-Clerkes. Yea how 4.
may he For Preaching is actus Iurisdictionis to the Canonists. And the
Scripture gives it so 11. Tim. 2. 12. (...). Connexa sunt. Doctrine genus
(...). Med.
exhort every member of the Commonwealth, every petty artisan, to follow his
trade, (which he may do for certain, if he may but preach, for what more
necessary argument then this for the pulpits?) May he therefore moyle 2. Tim. 2.
4.
himself in those dusty affairs? tanne, weaue, make tents, etc? And yet it is
not disparageable; for S. Paul. and S. Peter, as good men as he, and better too
by his leave, have done it before him, and that after their Apostleship, which
is his false feather, and usurped flower of title, at this day. Nay verily, by
the same reason Ministers might not exhort 5.
either Kings and Princes, or other civil Magistrates, to do their duties, to
govern well, to administer justice, to hear causes impartially, to cut off
malefactors, to root out traitors, to suppress sin by dint of sword, because
all these things are unlawful to them, repugnant to their vocation; and yet
the Ministers voice is a kind of commandment, speaking from the pulpit, (...).
Chrysostom. Orat. 5. in Oziam. Et. 2. Cor. 5. 20. (...). Et. (...) Et tertium,
(...). Planissime tamen ad Philem. 8. (...). Yea, Mr. Sanders himself might
not exhort his Irish soldiers to fight against Queen Elizabeth by this reason,
and yet for what other cause came he thither?
and in Gods stead, as was noted before. (6.) What should I say of calling of
Bishops to We must be ready to (...) (even Churchmen and all) at the Princes
commandment. Tit 3. 1. Therefore Priestly functions are either not good (let
M. Sanders choose) or the King may command and enforce to them.
Synods, of setting them on work to explain the faith, and to confute
heresies? May Christian Princes either not do the first (which the stories are
so full of in the best times) or shall they practice and bear a part in the
second, (which the Papists never will admit?) How did Theodosius dismiss
Flauianus (after so many Popes had in vain assaulted him) (...). Theodoret. l.
5. hist. c. 23.
commanding him to depart and do his duty upon his Bishopric, if no body
may enjoin but that which he may execute? (7.) Lastly, if a Priest should
deny to baptize a young infant that were sick (whose salvation therefore were
emperilled, and as we grant, in the ordinary, but as the Papists think, in
the extraordinary way and all, without any hope of future recovery) if a
Priest were so frampoll, I say, as to refuse to baptize a poor infant in that
case, shall not the King compel him by force; and punishment, and terror of
his Laws? We read in the book of Martyrs, of a certain Knight in Popery,
that put a Priest into the grave alive, because he refused to bury a corpse
that was brought to Church, where there was no mortuarie to be had: such was
their covetousness, Yet alas what comparison between burying of the dead
(which our Savior makes so sleight of, Suffer the dead to bury their dead) and
the administering of Christ's Sacrament, for the saving of a poor soul from
everlasting destruction? It is therefore not the unworthiness of the
ministerial duties, (as Mr. Sanders by his Syllogismes would feign drive us to
say, or else to let go our distinction between Iniunction and Execution) not
the baseness of our office (for we magnify our Ministry, and the Angels are
thought to tremble at the weight of it: Quis ad haec idoneus? said he: viz.
neither heavenly nor earthly abilities put in one;) but the mere distance and
disunion of the two callings (I am loath to say repugnance, though that also
after a sort) which will not permit a Prince to do Priestly offices, though his
power extend to the commanding of them to be done; yea punishing and
correcting if they be not done. Cursed be he that does the Lords work
negligently, said the Prophet of old. And the heathen Poet assumes,

Pectora nostra duas non admittentia curas. Invenal.
we cannot do Gods work and the worlds too. Therefore God will have his work
done by such only, as shall intend nor do no other work then that. For this
cause, government remains with the King, without any entermedling in the
execution of our offices; the execution is ours without any right in Vide cap.
4. Sed and Chrysostom. (...). Tom. 6. D. H. Sauilij. (...);. i. If I should say to
thee, Go and reform a King offending, would thou not say I were mad? viz.
reform him in the coerciue kind. Else, (...), as there it follows. A minister
may do it concionatorie. But a private man, not so much as in words.
Governing or Compelling. And so much to Mr. Sanders why the King should have
S. Austen acknowledges Jurisdiction in the Kings Sword; namely in regard of
Government and compulsion. Adversus Epist. Parmen. 1. c. 8.
Jurisdiction (as the Parliament here speaks) or Superinspection, without
administration or execution; which it seems the Adioynder is no less troubled
with then Mr. Sanders, though he prosecute it not so vehemently. I return to
him; who is now at his last casts.

91. COncerning then our extending the privileges of Supremacy beyond the
custom and fashion of other nations, he brings no proof of it, and therefore
I might contemn it with the same facility that he objects it. -- sic fortis
Hetruria creuit. literally from the King, yet the Kings permission is their
deputation, and so the Supremacy still remains in himself. Pragmaticall
Sanction. And the Sorbone of Paris has evermore curtailed it. Few that
amplify it as fully as the Canonists. Bellarmine himself goes not so far as
Carerius. The As, Bulgaria, Cy^s, Carthage, Iustinianea, etc.
Bishops of some places were freer then others; in Hieron. ad Huagr. and Aug.
in Quaest. vet. and Novi Test. Quaest. 10^. Quidam Falcidius, duce stultitia,
and Romanae civitatis iactantia, etc.
some the Deacons stepped before the Priests. And Council. Nicen. c 18. Council.
Ancyr. c. 13. item c. 18. Council. Neocaesar. c. 13. etc.
diverse things belonging to the quality of each order, are determined by
Councels in process of time, rather then acknowledged by all at first. Does
this therefore prejudice either Bishops, or Priests? No verily. And so all that
dissent about the bounds of Supremacy, are not straight to be reckoned for
enemies to the Supremacy. God forbid. S. James, (witness Eusebius lib. 2.
hist. cap. 23.) Obsecramus te; Obtemperamus tibi; Tibi omnes obedimus. Etenim
omnis populus testificatur de te, quod iustus sis, nec persona^ accipis. And,
which never any of Peter, Quot quot credebant, propter IACOBVM credebant
(Propagatorem fidei, Malleum haeresum.) As for that which follows, Sta ergo
super pinnam templi, vt conspiciaris ab vniuersis, and verba tua omnes
exaudiant; I need not add it, since God has done it; I mean exalted his
MAJESTY to the top of Sovereignty, even of Temple and all; from whence the
Nations farthest off attend his answers, and the world round about craves his
resolution in greatest matters.

92. AND so beseeching ALMIGHTY GOD, to give us as large a heart to understand
our own good, and his MAJESTY'S rare favors and charities toward us, as he
has enlarged the heart of his most EXCELLENT MAJESTY to all Princely
wisdom, and possible virtue; but especially to ouer-cherish his dear spouse
the CHVRCH: Let us thank him also for the occasion of these two labors of the
right worthy Bishop (though in it self it was not so expetible) and make much
of the two pignora that the Church has from him; two radiant lights, two
lasting pillars; (...), (as S. Chrysostom Tom. 5. Edit. Eton.
says of the mother of the Maccabees,) or Pythag. apud Laert. l. (...).
(...), the two doors of the Sun, (as the Philosopher calls a man's eyes in
his body) to let in knowledge and erudition to us; concluding of them, either
with Iustine Martyr, ((...),) (...): or with Clemens Alexandr. (fine
Protreptici,) (...), etc.

To GOD only wise, immortal, invisible, be all praise and glory, through
JESUS CHRIST our Lord, for evermore.
AMEN.
The thirteenth to the ROMANS expounded by S. CHRYSOSTOM, so far forth as
it concerns the SVPREMACY OF KINGS, and the Subjection of all persons to
their authority, of what sort soever; remaining in their Dominions;
Which I thought good to annexe here, not only as a strengthening to diverse
passages of this Book, and namely to the last of all, consisting in the
defense of his MAJESTY'S ROYAL SVPREMACIE, against the Adioynders peevish
cauills; but as an opening of the main controversy about the oath of
Allegiance (which has given the occasion to all these labors, as the
Powder Plot gave just cause to that) viz. that we are to observe it by the Laws
of CHRIST, and his Apostles, toward our King and Prince, of whatsoever
relligion, or profession, they shall be.

VER. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers.
THe Apostle insists much upon this matter, Chrysostom. Hom. 23. in 13. ad Romans
not only in this; but in other Epistles, planting subjection in Subjects
toward their Princes, as well as in Servants toward their Masters. And this he
does, by showing that Christ gave no Laws with the intent to subvert
Commonwealths or States, but directed all to their better government, and
taught us not to rush into superfluous garboyles, and unprofitable attempts.
For Hear this ye Jesuits, complainers of persecution and molestation.
in very truth, the trains that are laid for godly men, and the dangers that
await us for the truths sake, they are enough of themselves, and we ought not
to augment them by superfluous tribulations, contrived by our own
ill-deseruings. Consider also how seasonably the Apostle makes his mention
hereof in this place. For he exhorts to this, when? After he had required
passing accuratenesse and strictness at their hands, after he had made them
tractable both to friends and foes, both to them in prosperity, and them in
adversity, to them in want and them that felt no want, to all in general;
after he had settled a kind of life among them more fit for Angels then for men;
after he had purged choler, and rebated pride, and every way smoothed over
their dispositions most handsomely; then, I say, he brings in this
exhortation. For it stands to reason, that if we may not requite them with
cross dealing and evil turns, that have iniutied us first, much more ought
we to yield obedience to them that are beneficial and kind toward us. But
this string the Apostle touches not upon as yet, till toward the latter end of
his exhortation. In the mean while, he stands only upon such reasons and
arguments as may seem to claim it for a duty at our hands. And insinuating
that he gives this precept to all, not only to temporal men, but to Priests
and to Monks, his very first words import as much, saying, Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers, [viz.] Yet the Pope is not above an Apostle, I
hope, at the highest.
Though thou be an APOSTLE, though an EVANGELIST, though a PROPHET, or
whosoever thou be. For this subjection The cause of relligion does not
acquit from subjection.
is not repugnant to relligion, [whatsoeuer they talk.] Neither says he
barely, Let them obey; but, let them be subject. And the first justification of
this his precept, and that which works most upon godly minds, is because God
has so commanded it. For there is no power (says he) but from God.

What say thou Paul? Is every Ruler and Magistrate appointed of God? I say
not so (quoth he,) neither speak This is against Usurpers and intruders only.
I now of particular Magistrates, but only of the matter of government in
general. For that there should be a Magistracy, and that some should bear
rule, and others be subject, and that all things should not be hurried at
adventure up and down, people raging like waves rolling in the broad Sea, to
and fro; this, I say, is a work particularly proceeding from Gods high
wisdom. And for this cause he said not, (...) Vt hae^ sit legiteme
succedentium in regnum: ille autem and invasor esse alieni iuru queat.
For there is no Magistrate but from God; but he speaks of the general, and
frames his speech thus, For there is no authority, or no power, but from God.
And the Powers that are, are ordained of God.

So, when the wiseman says, [Prou. 19.] That a wife is prepared for a man of
the Lord: he means thus, that God appointed marriage in general, and not that
he is the author of each particular copulation between man and woman. For we
see many that marry nothing auspiciously, many also that come together against
the Laws of marriage, and we must not lay the fault hereof upon God. But that
which Christ pronounced, Matthew. 19. He that made them at first, created them
male and female, and said; for this shall a man leave father and mother, and
shall cleave to his wife, this and no other did Solomon mean in that place of
the Proverbs. For, for so much as paritie induces to strife and dissension
oft-times, Government is necessary.
God therefore has ordained many relations of gouernements and of subiections,
as between the man and the wife, between Paritie begets contention.
the parent and the child, between the ancient and the nouice, between the
servant and the freeman, between the Magistrate and the subject: and [lastly
also] between the Scholar and the Master. And why should thou wonder, that
it is so in men, when thou may observe the same in the creation of thine
own body? For God has not made all the members of it equal between
themselves, but one meaner, another better; and this member to govern, and
that to be governed. Likewise, a man may discern the Government is natural.
same, in the very bruit beasts and unreasonable creatures. As not only in
Bees first, but also in Cranes, and in flocks or herds of wild cattle.
Neither is the Sea a stranger to Monarchy is natural, that is, most agreeable
to Nature.
this good order, but even there also diverse kinds of fishes are ranked and
regimented under the conduct of some one fish, and so make their long voyages.
For, want of government brings inconvenience every where, every where confusion
[both at sea and land]. The Apostle therefore having showed of whom
government comes, inferres in this wise,

VER. 2. Wherefore he that resists the power, resists the ordinance of God.
Lo, how high he fetches this matter, and with what he fears them, and how he
shows that subjection is mere debt and duty. For least the faithful should
say, Why Paul, The Jesuits objection against Paul's subjection,
thou debasest us, and make us vile and contemptible; do thou subject them
to civil Magistrates, that are in the way to enjoy the Kingdom of heaven, and
eternal salvation? [least any one should reply thus, I say] he shows that in
exhorting Answered by himself.
us to be subject to Magistrates, he subjects us to God himself, and not to
men only. For he that is subject to the Magistrates, obeyes God therein.
Nevertheless the Apostle says not in plain terms, that he that obeys
the Magistrate, obeys God in so doing, but he terrifies them with the danger
of the contrary practice covertly insinuated, and frames his argument much
more artificially, saying, that he that obeyes not the Magistrate, confronts
God, who has ordained the Magistrate. And indeed this is his Subjection is
duty in the very best, not courtesy.
project every where, to show that we yield not obedience to Magistrates, as a
matter of benevolence, but of mere duty. For he knew that by this means, he
should the rather tole both infidel Magistrates to embrace relligion, and
Christians to yield their obedience to those Magistrates. The Apostles called
traitors; but their doctrine refutes it, not only their practice: whereas the
Jesuits both practice and doctrine confirms it.
For there was much bruit then, and many rumors were spread, as if the
Apostles had been guilty of sedition and treason, and as if all their doings,
and all their sayings, had tended but to the subversion of the Laws, and
weales-publike. When the Apostle therefore could show them, that Christ their
common Master, gave all his followers this in charge [that they should
establish Magistracy, and encourage to subiection] it was both the easier
stopping of slanderous mouths that A true Apostle need not fear to preach the
mysteries of his Message, before any Infidel-Gouernour: but a Jesuit may,
least there be LVPVS in fabula, as they stick not to call him.
exclaimed against them, as traitors to the State, and himself might proceed
in his course of preaching, and delivering to his auditors, the other doctrines
of Christianity, with so much the more confidence and liberty. Be not therefore
(says he) ashamed of this subjection [whosoeuer thou art]. For God has
appointed it, God has ordained it; and he is a sharp revenger of them that
despise it. Neither will he content himself to take a mean punishment, or
[small] Heavy disasters fall upon Traitors.
revenge of thee, but an exceeding sore one; neither shall any thing be of
force to rescue thee striving against it, but both thou shall endure most
grievous penalties among men, and none shall once so much as take thy part; and
thou God and men take part against the Traitor.
shall be sure to have God thy heavier enemy then whosoever else. All which
things the Apostle implying, adds thus, and says, But they that resist, shall
receive to themselves damnation.

After this he shows what benefit comes by preserving Other arguments [ab
vtili] of being subject to Magistrates.
obedience, as formerly he had showed them the danger of resisting, and
persuades them by discourse in this wise,

VER. 3. For Magistrates are not a terror too good works, but to the evil.
For because he had terrified them, and gone deep with the The Romans always
noted of pride and contumacie to Magistrates. Bern. and alij.
knife, [in launcing their dead flesh,] he refreshes them again like a
discrete Surgeon, applying lenitiues, and he comforts them, saying, Why art
thou afraid man? how have I scared thee? will the Magistrate think thou
chide thee, if thou do well? Is he a fright to them that are virtuously
minded? Wherefore it follows, With thou not then be afraid of the Magistrate?
[or of the power?] do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the
same.

See we how finely he has made them friends? how he has accorded the matter
between the Magistrate and the Subject? Instead of a terrifier, he has
brought him about now, to be a praiser and a commender. How has he dispersed
the former clouds, and rectified conceits that were amiss?

VER. 4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for good.
He is so far from scaring thee, that he praises and commends thee; he is so
far from opposing thee, that he aids thee, and forwards thee, in thy intended
pursuits. Since therefore Even Nero this. Harken you Jesuits; you that think the
bands of all goodness are dissolved, if an infidel Prince be but endured or
obeyed.
thou have a commender, and an assistant of him, why art thou not subject to
him? For whereas thou art well inclined to virtue of thy self, he will speed
thee in thy courses, minister much facility to thee, both punishing wicked men
[that might have been thy hinderers:] and again, by honoring and rewarding
the good, [which are thy guides, or thy companions,] and generally abetting
thee toward the doing of that which thou desire, and God would have done.
Wherefore also he calls him, Monarchs are the Ministers of God for our
salvation.
the Minister of God. Consider, I pray thee: The Minister is perswasiue, the
Magistrate may be coactiue, but both of them deal in the same matters; viz.
matters of the conscience. Quare idem alibi Chrysostom. (vide locum paulo infra)
(...) deum tractidisse nos (...). Et quidem non paulo magis (...), vt cum sic
obiter effingam.
I out of the pulpit here advise thee to continency, to refrain from wicked
lusts, and unlawful pleasures; that which I advise thee, he enioynes thee;
that which I say in my Sermons, he commands thee by his Laws. I exhort thee to
abandon covetousness, and not to invade thy neighbors goods, and he sits in
judgment only to sentence them that are faulty in these kinds. So as the
Magistrate Where are they that see nothing but a sheep in the Lay sore, of
what condition soever? What lacks he of a Pastor, that is a Pastors
worke-fellow, an ayder and assister of him, sent of God for that end? Nay, the
one by his sawes, the other by his Laws. Witness S. Chrysostom.
is our worke-fellow, our helper and coadiutor, and is sent to us Where are
they also that say, earthly Princes are not of God, but humane creatures? crept
out of the dust I ween; Whom Plato makes the prime sons of God, and of the
golden choicest generation.
of God, for this very purpose. In both regards therefore, he is justly to be
reverenced, both because sent of God, and sent (as I said) for this very
purpose. But, if thou do that which is evil, be afraid.

It is not therefore the Magistrate, we seee, that occasions this fear, but
our own wickedness, our own naughtiness. For he bears not the sword in
vain.

See thou what manner of person he deciphers the Magistrate, how he arms
him, and harnesses (...). Sed and alibi in sua verba consta^s. Tom. 5. D. H.
Sauile. (...), etc. (...). Et, Non dicit, (...), sed (...). Bonauent. quidem in
4. Did. 4. Qu. 3. respon. ad obiecta, notat quod nemo vnquam effugit poenam
gladij sub indicecum caetera poenarum genera miraculo effugeret. That we may
see what a prehemine^ce goes with the sword, and how God assists his own
depositum, entrusted to the Kings hands.
him, as it were a soldier, against wicked persons, making him terrible to the
offenders? For he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him
that does evil.

For least hearing of punishments, and execution of the Sword, thou should
fall back again, through faint heart, from thy lately received rule of
obedience, he tells thee once again, that the Magistrate does no more then God
gives him charge, he fulfills Gods Law, he is the Minister of God to punish
evil doers. Nero nesciens sustentat omnia. Wicked Magistrates unwilling hold
up the state. Where is the assistance that they challenge to the Pope, to
ouerrule his tongue against his wit, least he pronounce false, defining in his
Consistory? Or what prerogative is that to this?
For what though he does not know himself what he does? Yet God has appointed
and set it down to be so. If therefore both in punishing and likewise in
rewarding, the Magistrate is only the Minister of God, patronizing virtue,
banishing vice (which is the thing for certain that God would have done) why
should thou contest with him [about subiection] who both brings such a many
blessings with him (as has been lately rehearsed) and strangely promotes
thine own desires? See S. Prosper de vita coute^pl. l. 3. c. 7. In virtutem
plerumque de necessitate proficitur, etc.
For there are diverse men, that beginning to practice virtue for dread of the
Magistrate, afterward embraced it for the fear of God. For dull-witted folks
are not so much moved with things to come, as with matters present. In sum
therefore, e The Magistrate prepares the souls of his subjects, says S.
Chrysostom. Yet the Jesuits say he must be no dealer in soule-matters. f
Magistrates justly termed the Ministers of God.
he that can so frame and fashion the souls of men [committed to his charge]
what by fear on the one side, what by rewards on the other, that they may be
the more capable of the heavenly nurture, he may justly [I trow] be called the
Minister of God.

VER. 5. Wherefore you must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake.
What mean those words, Not only for wrath? Not only (says he) because thou
resistest God, unless thou be subject, neither only because thou drawest
diverse plagues upon thine own head, both from God and men [as assuredly thou
do, unless thou obey] but also because he is thy gracious benefactour in
matters of greatest g The conscience of a good turn, viz. received of God in
his institution of Commonwealths, is that which should move us to be subject
to the civil Magistrate, for conscience sake, as S. Chrysostom. here expounds it.
consequence, having provided for thy peace, and to that end established the
civil government. For infinite many blessings befall communities, by these
manner of Magistracies. Take away them, and take away all; neither city, nor
country, nor house, nor court, nor nothing else will stand, but all will be
ouerturned, all go to wrack; the mightier [like fishes] devouring the weaker,
and them that are unable to resist. So that if there were no anger, or
temporal plague, following the disobedient, nevertheless thou ought to be
subject, even so; I mean, least thou should seem rude and ungrateful to
thy benefactour. [The Apostle proceeds,]

VER. 6. For, for this cause (quoth he) you pay tribute also: for they are Gods
ministers, attending continually upon this very thing.
The Apostle here, omitting the mention of diverse other more particular
benefits, which accrue to commonwealths, from their rulers and governors, as
orderlinesse, peaceablenesse, and also those other services, which both of pike
and pen, peace and war, they continually attend for the good of the whole,
demonstrates all by this one thing. For, says he, thy self bear him
witness, that thou receiuest benefit by him, in so much as thou art content to
pay him wages. See the wisdom and prudence of the Apostle. For whereas their
taxes were so tedious, and intolerable to them, as they were startled with the
very mention of them, he brings them both for an argument of his cause in hand,
and a demonstration of their wisdom, ready to yield before he persuade, [viz.
as convinced by their own voluntary practice.] For why, quoth he, pay we
tribute to the King, what is our scope, what our drift? Do we not pay it him
as the wages of his carefulnes over us, watching for us, and protecting us
[with all his might?] Whereas certainly we would not have paid the^ this fee
from the beginning, had we not known that we were gainers by their government
over us, [and received benefit.] But therefore it seemed good to our ancestors
long ago, and enacted it was by common consent, that we should supply the
necessities of Kings with our purses, because neglecting their own matters,
they mind the public, and employ all their leisure and time, to such end, as
may be most for the preservation of our particular estates. Having thus then
argued from matter of commodity, he brings back his speech again to the
former head (for this was the way, to work most upon the Christians, and their
consciences) and again he shows them, that this is also well pleasing to
almighty God; and in that he concludes his exhortation, saying, For they are
the Ministers of God. And yet to note unto us their continual travel and
pensiveness for our sakes, he adds moreover, attending continually upon this
very thing.

For this is their life, this their occupation, that thou [euen thou] may
live and die in peace. Wherefore in another Epistle, he not only exhorts us
to be subject to Magistrates, but also to pray for them. And yet there also he
insinuates the common benefit that all men receive by them, in that he
concludes thus, that we may live a quiet and a peaceable 2. Tim. 2. 1, 3. etc.
life. For they advantage us not a little toward the constant establishment of
our estates, in so much as they provide furniture for the common defense,
repulse enemies, suppress mutinies, and decide and determine civil
controversies. For never tell me, that this or that man abuses his
Dispossession follows not from abuse of place.
place, but consider the beauty of this divine ordinance, and thou shall
quickly epsy the wonderful wisdom of the prime ordainer of all these
things.

VER. 7. Feeld therefore to all men their dues, tribute to whom tribute is
due; custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor
[belongeth.] 8. Owe nothing to any man, but to love one another, etc.
Still he insists upon the same point, and bids us not only yield them money
and coin [that have the government of vs] but also honor and fear. But how
hangs this together, that having said before, Would thou not fear the power?
do that which is good; here he says, yield fear to whom fear belongs? I
answer in one word; He means the fear of displeasing, or the careful and
industrious fear, not that which arises out of a bad conscience, which in the
former words he labors to prevent. Neither says he (...), but (...),
Subjection is ^^e, and not to be denied; but paid with all ^e.
not give ye, but yield ye; not of courtesy, but of due; and he expresses
eftsoons, the very word (...), debt. For thou do not gratisie him in so
doing; for it is debt and due that thou do. And if thou do it not, thou
shall be censured for a cullian and a wretch. Neither think thou in thy (...).
pride, that it is any disparagement to thee, in regard of thy profession
Christian, (though it be of the strictest) to rise Harken Jesuits that stand
upon your nobility, either of Priesthood, or Christianity.
up in the presence of the civil Magistrate, or to put off thy cappe, when the
officer comes by. For if S. Paul gave these Laws, when the Emperors were
Pagans, how much more should we observe them, now they be Christians? And if
thou say, that thou dispenfest greater matters, then he, [suppose the word
and the Sacraments, or other Priestly functions] know thou, that thy time is
not yet come. Thou art a Hora tua nondum venit. The Priests Su premacie, is in
altero saeculo.
stranger and a pilgrim for the present. The time shall be, when thou shall
appear more glorious then they all. In the mean while, thy life is hid with
Christ in God. When Christ shall appear, then shall thou also appear with him
in glory. Seek not therefore thou thy recompense in this transitory life. But
although thou be to appear before the Magistrate perforce, and that with
great horror, and dread, and appallment of all sides, yet think it no
disparagement to thy high nobility. For God will have it so, and it is his
pleasure, that the Magistrate of his own constituting, should be also invested
with his proper rights and honors. Markest thou also another thing that ensues
hereof? When an honest man like thy self, and guilty of no crime, shall
appear before the Magistrate, humbly, and submissiuely; much more will the
malefactor stand in awe of authority, and thou by this shall win credit and
reputation to thy self. For they are not The more we honor Magistrates, the
more honorable we show our selves; but scorning them, we are base.
subject to contempt, that honor such as are to be honored, but they that
dishonor and contemn them rather. Yea the Magistrate [though he be infidell]
Subjection of Christians is a mean to draw Infidels to the Faith; resistance
alienates. How cross is Chrysostom. (and Christ first of all) to the Jesuits
doctrines, in every point? For they say, if we obey, the faith goes down, our
profession is disparaged, the Infidells will insult, etc. Chrysostom. omnia
contra.
will admire thee so much the more, and will glorify thy heavenly Master, whom
thou seruest, etc. (...).

De Talibus Patrum Expositionibus, sanctarum Scripturarum, intellige Canonem
illum. 19. Council. 6. Constantinop. in Trullo, (vt obiter discat and F. T.
noster, Regum palatia (eiusmodi enim Trullus) locum esse non inopportunum
Ecclesiastico vel Concilio de rebus grauissimis habendo:) (...), etc.
diuinissime.

The Abstract of the Contents of the second Part.
CHAP. 6.
1. FAith to be reposed in God only; not in Saints or Creatures. Page 224.
and 225. 2. S. Hierome perverted to speak for faith in Saints; Of credo in
Ecclesiam. Page 226. and 227. 3. Honor and glory to God and to the Saints,
but in a most infinite disproportion, and therefore inferring no faith in them,
no prayers to them. p. 227. 4. The place in Genesis, Invocetur nomen meum super
pueros hosce, makes nothing less then for innocation of Saints departed. p.
227. and 228. 5. S. Chrysostomes Liturgy has no praying to Saints in it. p.
228. 6. Popular practice is no common place of proof. p. 229. 7. The Adioynder
quoting the Council of Gangra for one point in hand, viz. prayer to Saints,
neither obtains that, and is foiled in diverse others by the said Council. p.
229. and 230. 8. Prayer to God only, is de luce or de lege ipsius naturae. p.
230. and 231. 9. (...), or Currere, is not always to run with the mind to pray
unto, as the Adioynder would. p. 231. 10. We must run to succor
Magistrates, not only against wrong, but though themselves do the wrong to
private persons, if they again turn upon them. p. 232. 11. One thing to pray
to Saints, an other at the memories and Oratories of Saints. Which (...) will
bear well enough in S. Chrysostomes text, according to the learned Bishops
interpretation. p. 232. and 233. 12. Having relliques, and worshipping
relliques, is not all one. p. 234. 13. Mamas his God, worshipped by the
Christians, is not Mamas himself the godly Martyr. Impudent defense of a
corrupt Translation against the original greek text of S. Basil, by the
Adioynder. p. 235. 14. The like concerning Eusebius; and the Cardinals best
excuse is, Non putaram: that the Translator deceived him. p. 236. 15. Adoremus
for adornemus, justified by the Adioynder to be good, because the Italian
prints so have it. ibid. 16. To embrace relliques with faith, is not to
worship them. p. 237. 17. To touch them ((...)) is not to worship them. The
Adioynders Pseudo-Criticks about this answered. p. 238. 239. and 240. 18. We
may pray to God only, and yet to Saints too: The Adioynders (...), or pretty
iugling. p. 241. 19. Ephrems Tomes and Vossius his Grott. ibid. 20. Calling
upon Saints militant to pray for us, is not all one with praying to the Saints
triumphant. Priests and Prayers are for God only, and not for any creature, by
Tolets confession. p. 242. 21. Ephrems divine testimony against praying to
Creatures. His humble confession of inherent sinnefulnes, and that mortal,
remaining in himself after regeneration. p. 243. (Note, that whereas the
Adioynder auouches Ephrems works (quoted by Card. Bellarm.) to be sincere,
which the reverend Bishop notwithstanding excepts against as counterfeit; the
Card. in his Suruay of Ecclesiastical writers, confesses of himself that he
never read Ephrem. It seems therefore not so worthy; else, why should he
contemn him? And yet he quotes him. May we not ask him now, Quis ei
laborat? his own words of the King; but better applied.) 22. The Bishops two
golden Caueats in this Question of Invocation, as it is maintained by the
Fathers; One, that they be brought to speak thereof as de re ad salutem
necessaria, or else not to be regarded (for such is the Papists imagination of
it now) The other to respect not so much practice as sanction. p. 244. and 245.
23. God hears one prayer of our own making, and for our selves, sooner then an
hundredth of other intercessors for us, etc. ex Chrysostom. late. p. 244. 24.
(...) is nothing without (...). p. 245. 25. The Cardinals quotation of
Chrysostom, for Prayer to Saints, enlarged by the Adioynder; which though all
be granted, nothing is proved. p. 246. 26. It is a clear argument of the
Deity, to be prayed unto. p. 247. 27. S. Cyrills weighty verdict, against the
worshipping of Creatures; yea and of the LORD CHRIST himself, but that he is
IMMANVEL, very GOD. p. 248. and 249. 28. Maximus, prays not to Agnes, in his
Panegyricke. p. 250. 29. And much less Nazianzene to the blessed Virgin; nor
yet exhorts others. 250. and 251.
CHAP. 7.
30. THe Fathers Apostrophes convince not for the hearing os Souls departed;
Used by them, used by the holy Scripture, to creatures deuoyd both of sense and
understanding. p. 253. 31. No praying to those Saints, whose condition is
uncertain: Therefore Prayers conditional are but Rhetorical flourishes; and
not to be salued by Purgatory (as the Adioynder would) a fitten by a fancy. p.
254. 32. No danger to say the Fathers played the Orators. p. 255. 33. And
namely Nyssen (of whom see Baronius for this matter (Tom. 4. Anno. Dom. 369.
Number. 65. citaritem Epist. obiurgator. Greg. Naz. ad ipsum. p. 257. 34. Against
pictures and puppets, unmeet for Churches. p. 256. Medina tamen l. 4. contr. 6.
page 310. edit. Venet. Vetus pictura ingentem habet auctoritatem, (viz. ad
probandas conclusiones Theologicas.)
and 257. S. Austens authority there to be enlarged ex l. 1. cap. 10. de
consensu Euangel. Non mirum si a pingentibus fingentes decepti sunt. He
speaks to the Papists. 35. Vbicunque fueris, poruerted by the Adioynder,
restored to his true sense, and the Bishops collection upon these words
maintained. p. 258. 36. The Fathers were professed Rhetoricians. p. 259. 37.
The Bishop answering S. Ambrose by S. Ambrose, uses no derogation to the holy
Father. Conjecture, under correction, of the same place. p. 259. and 260. 38.
The Adioynders blasphemies boldly blending our works with Christ's, botching
and peicing his most perfect righteousness with our imperfect. p. 261. 39. S.
Ambrose not for Merits, though he plainly condemn Motions to Saints. p. 262.
40. God needing no relator, will have no Mediator, but only Christ. ibid. 41.
Prayer is sacrifice; therefore Gods due alone. ibid. 42. S. Ambrose excluding
all created Mediators, excludes not Christ, as the Adioynder fears. p. 263.
43. The Saints not only do not, or may not, but cannot make request for us to
God, as Christ does. And wherein stands Christ's intercession. p. 263. and
264. 44. Adoration and prayer, the highest offices that we can perform to God
himself, by S. Ambroses judgment. p. 264. 45. The Adioynder hunted out of his
eluish shifts, wherewith he would elude S. Ambroses place brought by the
Bishop. p. 265. 46. Mistakes of memory not sonticall. p. 266. 47. The Fathers
with joint consent, define Prayer by our reference to God only; as likewise
the Pater noster does, our Saviors dear depositum, which he bequeathed to his
Church at the request of his Disciples, Luke 11. and is our safest platform
still to follow. p. 267 48. S. Ambrose might have cause to omit the mention of
Saints praying for us, though he deny it not; but not ours to Saints, if it
did concern us. p. 267 49. Paul, Tertullian, Ambrose, against Prayer to
Saints. p. 268 50. Theodosius prayed to God only. p. 269. (Ruffinus his words
of him are, lib. 2. cap. 33. Quam supplicationem pij principis, certi [milites]
a Deo esse susceptam. And again, Imperatoris illam precem quam Deo fuderat.
And least we think he might pray to God at one time, and to the Saints at
another, Ruffinus shows what his custom was: Proiectis armis, ad SOLITA se
vertit auxilia, and prostratus in conspectu Dei, Tu (inquit) Omnipotens Deus
nosti, quia in nomine CHRISTI filij tui, etc.) 51. Churches to Saints, and
Sacrifices to Saints, in the Popish relligion, though they profess against it,
and so condemn themselves with their own mouths for Idolaters. Gregorius de
Valentia his frivolous excuses of this matter. p. 270 52. The Papists bring no
Church-decree for their prayer to Saints, when they crake of the Church most.
What the authority of the Church is, presuming beyond Scripture. p. 271. and
272 53. The pillar of truth. ibid. (upon which place S. Chrysostom. says; that,
Truth is the pillar of the Church.) 54. Epiphanius compares heresy to a shrew;
To be curbed at Like columna Simeonis, first 12. degrees high, then 22. then 36
and more. Vide Cedren. p. 279. Cassander, Wicelius, Tilman: Eredenbach. etc.
first, not let have her will. Most true in this matter about praying to
Saints. The people once attempting it out of a semblance of zeal, the
contagion multiplies to such an intolerable height, as the Papists themselves
cannot choose but rue it. p. 273 55. And yet Theodoret is not absolute for
praying to Martyrs. ibid. large. 56. Parsons scoffing, at some Martyrs of our
Church, of mean occupations. But not Theodoret so, nor the holy Scripture. p.
275 57. Speeding upon Supplication to Saints and Angels, no good argument of
the lawfulnes of that practice. ibid. 58. The Bishop not to blame about
searching this question both by Scripture and Reason, which the Adioynder
himself does by deceit; ill experiments. p. 276 59. Prayer to Saints
necessary to salvation, and again not necessary; The Adioynders giddines. p.
276 60. Neither relation of Angels, nor revelation from God, such as the
Adioynder conceiteth, are of force to make the Saints always fit to be prayed
to. ibid. 61. The Scripture is the touchstone in all controversies. And it it
an idle thing to prate of the Church in any such comparison. But specially for
the trial of matters of this nature. p. 277. 278 62. Practice, Custom,
Multitude, how to be valued against Scripture. p. 280. (1. King. 28. Elias to
Baals Priests, Quia vos plures estis. Idem de se ipso, (...), secundum 70. Sed
and Esa. 41. 14. Ne time (...). Cui respondet Luc. 12. 32.) 63. The Bishops
exposition of S. Austen, is defended against the Adioynders iutricate
Morosophies. p. 281 64. Every King is SVPREAME HEAD in his Dominions, (though
the Adioynder gnash his teeth at it) and that not only to English Protestants,
but to French Papists. p. 282 65. Invocation of Saints, if repelled from
Sacrifice, repelled from Service, and so not to be used. p. 282 66. Slender
advantage of the burial place after death. p. 283 67. More experiments of the
Adioynders skill in Latin. ibid. 68. Whatsoever the burying place advantage
the dead, no consequence from thence of praying to Saints, out of S. Austens
words. p. 284 69. No Popish Purgatory. p. 284. 285. and 286 70. Lawful to
pray for things already obtained. p. 286. (Alphons. de Castro contra Haeres.
V. Purgator. p. 895. Melius respondemus, non semper dubitari de illis quae
potuntur, etc. in eandem sententiam, large: where he graunts we may pray for
deliverance from Hell; (viz. from the jaws of the Lion, and the Tartarean
lake) although we be persuaded that they are delivered already, whom we pray
for.) 71. Prayer to Saints for the just price of a new cloak: The Adioynders
needy proofs from the practice of a poor Cook. p. 287.
CHAP. 8.
72. THe Council of Laodicea is against praying to Angels. Accurseth them
that use it. Brandeth them as for sakers of the L. Christ. And all this by
Theodorets construction of it, in his Comm. upon the Epistle to the Colossians.
In which Colossians S. Paul first reproved that vice, and it remained there
till the time of the Council of Laodicea, (says Theodoret) which was held not
far from the City Colossi. p. 289. 290. 291. 73. S. Chrysostomes notable
enforcing of the Apostles text for praying to God only, and neither to Saints
nor Angels, whom he excludes directly. p. 292, 293, 294 74. The Angel is
Christ. (So Bellarm. himself, de Mal. 3. lib. 5. c. 1. de Christo Mediatore.)
Other Angels reverence godly men, so far they are from receiving worship of
them. And this by Gregory, and their own writers testimony. p. 295 75. The
good offices and attendance that Angels perform to us by Gods appointment,
prove not that we may pray to them, but to God that sends them, and sets them
on work. p. 296 76. Of every man's particular Angel; (Chrysostom. apud Melissam
lib. 2. (...). facit malos mortales non habere custodem Angelum, nisi
tenebraru^; and quod quidam angeli natales (...) a nobis, nosve ab illis.)
Molina's smart devise that several brotherhoods of Friars, have several
Angels forsooth to attend them, etc. ibid. 77. Haeresie a shrew, by Epiphanius
description of her; To be yoakt at first, and not let have her will. She will
have the last word, whatsoever come of it. ibid. 78. Angels not our governors,
specially in the new Testament. Themselves ministering spirits to S. Paul;
Therefore not our Masters. p. ead. and 297 79. The Adioynders wriglings to
shift off the Canon of the Council of Laodicea, but all in vain. ibid. and
298 80. Worship of Angels more directly condemned by the Ancient Fathers, then
of the Saints. The cause why. Yet that falling, this cannot stand, even a
maiori. ibid. 81. Theodoret violates not the Canon of Laodicea, nor his own
doctrine delivered in his Commentaries. He prays not to Saints. And yet if he
did, his rule were to be above his practice. p. 298 82. The Adioynder cauills
the Bishop for oppugning their praying to Saints, by Reasons; yet himself
brings most pitiful ones why we should do so. p. 288. and 289 83. The
Adioynder so impious, as, if the Saints cannot hear us, to question how Christ
himself can in his manhood. Esa. 59. 1. (...); The Adioynder says, Yea. ibid.
84. Unlike comparisons used by the Adioynder. p. 300 85. The Angels discern
not the secrets of hearts. ibid. 86. The Adioynders examples slow to prove his
intents. His authorities rather more; (quoting that for Athanasius, which
quotes Athanasius, quaest. 23. And yet against himself: Cordium cognitor solus
est Deus. Nec enim vel Angeli cordis abscondita videre possunt. quaest. 27. ad
Antiochum.) p. 301 87. Martyrs pray only for the Church in general. p. 302
88. S. Gregory's speculum, and how the Saints see all things in God. p. 303 89.
The Angels are not said to offer our prayers to God. ibid. and 304. 90. The
Rhemists make one Angel to mediate for another, and one heavenly Saint for
another, because else they cannot construe that in the Apocalypse, cap. 8. v. 3.
after their Popish sense, There were given unto him many incenses, that he
should offer of the prayers of ALL Saints. p. 304 91. Substantial service of
God there must be none besides his word, though decent ceremonies be left to
discretion. Caetera disponam. The Adioynders instats to the contrary are
answered. a page 305. ad 309 92. The inditers of holy writ had commandment
for their doing. p. 309. and 310. [vide and Irenaeum, lib. 3. c. 1. Per Dei
voluntatem Euangelium nobis in Scripturis tradiderunt, primo qui illud ipsum
praeconiauerunt, etc. Sed and Aug. de consensu Evangelist. l. 2. c. extremo.
Deus ipse scripsit quae Apostoli and Euangelistae scripserunt; Quia scribenda
illis tanquam SVIS MANIBVS imperauit.] Certe autem manus si consulto agunt,
nihil admodum agunt sine imperio animae; Ergo.) 93. Baptism of young children
has sufficient grounds in Scripture. p. 310. and 311 94. How the Churches
determination stoppes heretics mouths, though the Scriptures are silent. p.
311. and 312 95. The Canon of the Church of England, about the Cross in
Baptism, no way guilty of the Adioynders malepert slander. p. 312. 313. 314.
96. A viuis ad Diuos non sequitur consequentia. And what the reason is. p. 315
97. Only Christ is mediator as well of intercession, as of redemption. p. 316.
and 317 98. The absurd blasphemy of the Jesuits, as if God the Father
commended us to Christ his son; (...). p. 317 99. The book of Daniel makes
not for praying to Saints, or putting confidence in them. Origin against it.
What is done for the Saints sake, is not done for their merits sake, nor to be
drawn to Invocation. p. 318. 319. 320 100. Big words of the Adioynder, that
the granting of The whore grows bolder.
our prayers is to be ascribed to the authority that the Saints have, not only
to their suite. Aptissima muscipula ad idololatriam. p. 320. 101. The Papists
fail in their probations by the Fathers touching prayer to Saints, for all
their jolly crakes. More good Latin of the Adioynders. p. 321 102. The
Adioynders water will sees no beef. He should have testimonies enough (he
says) for praying to Saints, out of the Fathers writings, but that in such and
such ages very few Fathers wrote at all. p. 322 103. The sign of the Cross
has antiquity to commend it, besides authority to command it: Praying to
Saints has neither the one to be respected, nor the other to be obeyed. p. 323
104. Bishops may err. (Chrysostom. (...). Episcopi vexant ecclesiam, sicut Iobum
vxor, and amici sui.) The safest relying (when all is done) is upon Scripture.
Erunt stabula [fidelium] illic. a page 323. ad 326 105. Fathers scattered,
miss of the validity that they have in Synods, (Vide Bell. de auct. Council.
l. 2. c. 2. Episcopos SEORSVM existentes spiritus sanctus non docet omnem
veritatem; and ibid. in fine, Sine dubio SINGVLI Episcopi errare possunt, etc.
Vide eundem, c. 6. Alia ratio est Pastorum in Concilio congregatorum, alia vero
dispersorum, etc.) p. 326 106. Malum ex sanctuario. Sal fatuum. The Churchmen
broach error. p. 327 107. The Scripture winnes the field, though the Fathers
come in at triumph. And so meant S. Austen, when he charges upon Julian, with
the authority of six Bishops, as sufficient to convict him. Else we know six
Bishops are nothing to weigh with the world of faithful besides. Original
sin plain by Scripture, though the Adioynder stone-blind cannot see it. p.
328. and 329. 108. Once again the Adioynders stale trumperies; from Benefits,
and Miracles, to conclude for Invocation of Saints in bliss. But, Ter si
resurgat, etc. p. 330 109. Two witnesses not to be heard against Christ or his
word: nor yet (...). Peter's privy nippe in Galat. 2. as Remigius conceiues of
it. But the Popes for certain, or whosoever is the prime. ibid. 110.
Corruption easily creepes into the Church. p. 331 111. Origens wavering about
Saints praying for us: and, Audivi quendam ita dicentem, etc. But peremptory
that we must not pray to Saints, or heavenly Angels, but to God only through
Jesus Christ. a page 332. ad 339. late. 112. The Bishops testimonies against
praying to Saints, which he produces out of the Fathers, are far more
pregnant then ab authoritate negative, as the Adioynder slanders him. p. 340.
and 341. 113. The Bishops quotation of Athanasius most upright, and most
authentical, though it please Mr. Adioynder, either of blindness, or boldness,
to deny that there is any such text in the book. By occasion of search, not
only that, but seven more places of Athanasius are alleged, all of them
near hand, and to the same effect, viz. that God only is to be adored, and
prayed unto, not Creatures. p. 342. and 343
CHAP. 9.
114. THe Bishop changes words, without changing the question, giving more
light to it. He is not tied to terms, as the Adioynder and they that have no
great store of Latin beforehand. Earthly Monarchy disctaimed in show, but
challenged in substance by the Adioynder and his copes-mates. p. 345 115.
Supererogation. The Bishop swarueth not from the state of the question. p. 346.
347. and 348 116. The Sacrament not at all, Christ every where to be adored. p.
348. 349. and 350 117. Adoration of relliques. The Bishop constant to the
question, though they cavil him for the contrary. Yea, so constant, that they
carpe him for his very constancy to the Kings Apology, with the same breath.
p. 350. and 351 118. S. John was at a fault, worshipping the Angel. p. 351
119. The Adioynder turns all, into courting and complement, between the
Angel and S. John. p. 352 120. The very Popish authors will not permit us to
worship Angels, since the Incarnation of Christ. So as the Adioynder pleading
for it, shows who is the Jew, and the digger up of ceremonies, (like Sara
under the Oak:) as he reniles the Bishop, but most senselesly, every where. p.
353 121. No third kind of adoration. Therefore no relligious to creatures.
ibid. and p. 354 122. Joseph's rod how worshipped by Jacob. p. 355. 356. and
357. 123. The worshipping of the footestoole. Nabuchodonosors adoring of
Daniel. Subjection to Infidells, is no disparagement to true virtue. p. 357.
and 358 124. Awodden reason and a wicked yielded by the Adioynder, why it is
called relligious worship, viz. because done to relligious persons, (But by
that reason God himself should have no part in it, who bears relligion to
none. The Saints so let in, as God himself is shut out by our devout Jesuits.)
p. 359. and 360 125. No adoration, and yet a civil adoration, makes no
contradiction in the sense. ibid. 126. Gregory de Valentia flatly denying
relligious worship to Creatures. p. 360 127. The Bishop not to blame for
expounding S. Hierome by S. Hierome. The Fathers more circumspect when they
deal with adversaries, then when they write at large. p. 361 128. More good
Latin of the Adioynder. Of the figure Catachresis out of Quintilian. His
Rhetorique before he be perfect in Grammar. ibid. and 362 129. Lingere pulverem
is the same in effect with lambere lignum. They both signify humiliation with
reverence. Save that lingere pulverem may seem to beseem Christians better.
The smaller error therefore to put that for the other. S. Hieromes Epistle
full of figurative speeches, which was the only intent of the Reverend Bishop
in that place, and is justified abundantly. p. 363. and 364 130. The Fathers
against keeping relliques, much more against worshipping of them. p. 365, 366,
367, 368 131. The words of Gregory de Valentia more at large, condemning the
relligious adoration of Creatures, not only in degree, but in ipsa specie. The
distinction of Dulia and Latria overthrown, and that both by the Scriptures,
and by S. Austen himself, (though reputed the father of it) as touching the
Popish sense. a page 368. ad 372 132. Relligious adoration granted and not
granted to Creatures by S. Austen: not favoring the Papists, but because the
word relligious is equivocal. p. 369 133. S. Ambrose is not for worshipping
the Cross relligiously. In Kings it is worshipped ciuilly, as Kings themselves
are: yet but per accidens only. Else Helenaes practice is against it, recorded
and explained by S. Ambrose. Howbeit the consideration of it may [happily]
excite us by way of remembrance to worship CHRISTRELLIGIOVSLY, as the Author of
our redemption. p. 373 134. The cross is not the cross, but Christ's suffering
to S. Hierome, by his own explication. p. 374 135. The Bishop answered all
that was worth the answering, of the Cardinals. The Adioynders stout arguing
from Adam to Christ, for inherent righteousness and hasty perfection. p. 375.
ad 378. 136. The Adioynder tangled in his own threads. Perfect remission of
sin, without perfect exhausting of corruptions. The places of Esaias and other
scriptures so to be understood. p. 378. ad 381. 137. The Adioynder faulty of
that which he finds fault with in the Bishop, though most faultlesse, as
appears. Kings graunts are not to be interpreted against themselves.
Constantine Episcopus Episcoporum to Eusebius. Neither King, nor Count, are
precluded from Counsels, by ancient practice. p. 381. 382. 383. 138. S.
Austen has but hearsay. Apparition proves not invocation. (Yet Athanas. ad
Antioch. (the Adioynders own author) against apparition of souls departed,
for great reasons. Quaest. 13.) No trusting to Saints departed, by S. Austens
own rule, and that out of Scripture. They forget us when they are gone hence;
as the Butler did Joseph. His case a figure of ours. Saints merit that Angels
may appear for them, if we believe the Adioynder, and his gross conceits. p.
383. and 384. 139. God appears in a bush rather then any other plant, because
not capable of caruing to make an image of, says S. Isidore. p. 385. 140.
Calvin clipped by the Adioynder most shamefully, even there where he cries out
against false dealing. ibid. 141. In the Bishops book -- placuisse nocet. And
the best passage most spitefully depraved. p. 385. 142. The last judgment not
defeated, though merits were disclaimed. p. 386. and 387 143. Iustus iudex, is
as much as clemens iudex, in the Scripture Phrase. p. 388. (Certe Romans 3. 25,
26. prima iustificatio peccatoris (in qua nullum meritum intercedit, fatentibus
vel Pontificijs) ter attribuitur iustitiae Dei. Et sic forte Psalm. 62. 12. And
thou, O Lord, art merciful: for thou rewardest every man according to his
work. Whereas to reward according to works, comes rather of justice then of
mercy. But there just for merciful, here merciful for just. Alternant enim
vsu Scripturae. Denique Genebrardus ipse in v. 6. Psalm. 23. Sol iustitiae
(inquit) id est, Benignitatis.) 144. Epiphanius worthily alleged by the
Bishop. He remains peremptory against praying to Saints: also against images;
and against the Excessive honor of the Blessed Virgin. She is inferior to
Angels by Epiphanius account of her. Like Thecla, or like John, and no better.
Epiphanius calls for Scripture, to be guided in this question. He renounces
errors, though they be never so old. a p. 389. ad 394. late. 145. The Bishop is
right in reporting the judgment of S. Gregory the great, about the fifth
general Council. p. 394. and 395. 146. The KINGS SVPREMACIE sufficiently
proved out of the 17. of Deuter by the Bishop. Fine foolish exceptions of the
Adioynder against it, are repulsed. a p. 396. ad 403. 147. English fugitives to
blame for deprauing their country, which they should hardly discover (by the
examples of Paul and Joseph) though it were blame-worthie. p. 403 148. The
Cardinal called Dotard. And, justly. ibid. 149. More justly yet; because made
to believe wrong tales about English Puritanes, and then reports them to all
the world. p. 404. and 405. (For my part I have kept the S. Mary's Church in
Cambridge as diligently as another above this 20. years, and have observed so
few omitting to pray for the Kings Majesty in his Title, as if I should say,
one, I should say more then I remember. Yet the Vniuer sitie fashions the
Church abroad; and one of them is glass to view the others face in.) 150.
Three Quaeres of the Adioynder answered. p. 306. 307. 308. 151. The Adioynders
civility toward the Bishop. The Papists hold lying in Sermons, to be lawful.
p. 408. and 409.
CHAP. 10.
152. THe Adioynders pageants. Poly-bombo-machides in campis Gurgustidonijs. p.
410 153. The Bishop granting that Christ is to be worshipped in the Eucharist,
is never a whit the nearer to the Popish prodigious conceits about their Mass.
p 412. and 413 154. Suspensiue wading in the matter of the Sacrament.
Bellarmine himself forbids all to be spoken. Nothing surer then that
Transubstantiation is rejected of all hands. ibid. 155. To the Author of the
Manna. Of S. Cyrill of Jerusalem. Nothing brought out of him, neither for
Transubstantiation, nor yet for the real presence. He condemns Sarcophagy,
or the conceit of flesh-eating in the Sacrament, in plain terms. a page 414.
ad 420 156. As much Transubstantiation in Baptism, as in the Lords Supper,
acknowledged by S. Leo. [Adde thereunto S. Prosper in Epist. ad Demetriadem.
His words are, Fit noua creatura de veteri, and in corpus Christi CONVERTITVR
caro peccati.] S. Cyrill will not have his scholars to believe him, whatsoever
he says of a point, unless the Scriptures affirm it. p. 416 157. The Sacrament
to be worshipped, neither during the act, nor yet after celebration. And yet
Christ, in it. Calvin sober and deliberate in that point. The Bishop dissents
not from the rest of our Divines, about the worshipping of Christ, and the
rather in his Sacrament. a page 421. ad 425 158. Christ is to be worshipped with
the Sacrament, in a good sense; The Sacrament not in any sense with Christ. The
Adioynder throws dirt, but it will not stick. page 425. and 426. 159. About
the Reward, and against the Merit of good works. The reverend Bishop far from
praeuaricating. Their rage against him shows his integrity and sincerity in
the cause. They that hold of merit, hold of [Iudas] Iscariot, by S. Hieromes
Etymology of the name; to whom the Scripture allots (...), but, (...) proves
not merit. Justice proves not merit. Vasquez and others, how far they go in
auouching merits, beyond that which the Adioynder pretends to be the vltimum
in the doctrine of Popery. a page 426. ad 438 160. God is honored in his
servants, if they be honored intra praescriptum. Else not honored, but
dishonored in them. The Adioynder is earnest for his kissing-deuotion; and
namely, toward Relliques (where as kissing Baal is worshipping of Baal, in the
language of the holy Ghost, 1. Reg. 19. 18.) Origin against this fancy:
Christ's spouse must not be too frank in entertaining his mates, though we
should allow him sodales, Cant. 1. 7. (as the Jesuits do socios, and socias,
very promiscuously) The first Jesuits called suij Christi, Christ's fellows,
(that you may know their humbleness from their very cradle) Massaus, and alij.
or participes, Psalm. 45. 7. but, prae quibus incomparabiliter ipse vnctus est.
p. 438 161. The Adioynder allows the same relligious worship to God and to the
Saint in all respects; so the intention do but make the odds. (By which
reason we may also sacrifice, and build Temples to Saints; two things which
themselves reserve as proper to God at other times.) p. 429 162. From the
Bishops most advised grant, that Relliques may find honor with us, the
Adioynder rashly reasons, that we may therefore yield them corporal reverence,
yea any corporal reverence. p. 440 163. Processions. ibid. 164. Of Miracles,
late, a page 440. ad 447. (The sum is; 1. That neither are Miracles requisite
now (of which point see M. Sand. l. 1. c. 12. de claue David, Certe 2. Tim. 3.
8. Resistentes doctrinae, comparantur cum ijs, qui restitere miraculis, quasi
ipse iam successerit in little locum, sibi^ probatio maxima sit. Porro
ostenditur inuicta esse absque alio adminiculo, (...). At forte parum aperte;
Imo (...), oppugnantium; idque velut olim sub Mose. (...). Denique Chrylost in
3. Tim cap. 1. (...). notat Christum non statim vt natus est operatum esse
miracula: Sero qs^ippe post in Cana Galil. Ioh. 2. Et tamen sermones eius
obtinebant pondus iam pueri, vide^anturque digni quos Maria cord conseruaret.
Inter quos porro fuerat, and de Patre eius Deo. Quod dogma maximum. Valet ergo
Doctrina and sine Miraculis.
that SIGNA CESSARVNT; alleging it for areaso^, why the Pope cannot destroy
with bare word of mouth (but only with sword) as Peter did Ananias and
Sapphira (though fondly they fain that his authority is the same) viz. because
miracles are now no more stirring in the Church:) 2. And that if they were
needful, we have our part in them; Insomuch as certain Jesuits in the time
of Queen Elizab. being boarded at Sea by one of the Queens ships, (set out
for that purpose) and they having letters of treason about them, they tare them
into pieces as small as they could, and flung them into the Sea (the wind also
then being very high) purposely to abolish them. Which afterward being
recollected, and set in order again (by the industry of the Queens agents)
disclosed their designs; So as finally one of the principal of that A
Iesuite-Priest acknowledges a miracle in the detection of his Treasons.
confederacy, confessed to the Lords at his Examination, that it was not
without miracle, non sine miraculo, etc. See Mr. Cambden hac dear; Annal. rerum
Anglic. and Hibernic. regnante Elizab.) 165. S. Austens miracles done at the
Tombs of Martyrs (if they were any) yet infer no worshipping of them; neither
in the nature of the thing, nor in S. Austens judgment. Also meliores
Christiani did not then, as the many. p. 448 166. The Adioynders Poperio no way
consequent to the Bishops principles. p. 449. and 450 167. Of Monks, and
Monasteries: from p. 450. to 459. (To whom because the Adioynder challenges
such perfection, add we to the rest, the testimony of Gelasius, Aduersus *
Andromachum Sed quem alij (vt video) Andronicum.
Senatorem, and caeteros qui Lupercalia retinebant (prout extat apud Binnium,
Tom. 2. Council.) Age modo, quid vis dete? Numquid, quia in Monasterio sacro non
es, in plebe sacra non es? (The Plebs is sacra, to Gelasius; Yet he adds) An
ignoras totam Ecclesiam SACERDOTVM vocitatam? All the faithful are Priests.)
168. Evangelical Counsels, Vows, Monkish perfection, etc. a page 460. ad
469. 169. The name Catholic. What virtue is in names. The Adioynders
objections and authorities answered, a p. 470. ad 484. (Oppone and Athenag.
Apolog. (page 6.) (...); vbi scil. non respondet (...). Et (page 5.) (...).
Eusebius. etiam (vt citatur ante opera Iustini Martyris,) citans ipse Iustinum,
lib. contra Marcionem (qui iam quidem non extat) Quod a Marcione (...),
invasere nomen and Christianorum. Sed quomodo? (...). (Vt scil. videas quatenus
nominibus fidendum, cum Pontificijs nostris.) 170. The English Clergy wants no
lawful Ordination. a page 484. ad 494. 171. The SVPREMACIE of KINGS, both in
Temporal matters and Ecclesiastical. Defense Quod hic obiter tractatur de
Mose quod Rex, aut Regis instar, (p. 508 in marg vt and ante p. 396.) quamuis
nondum introducta Regni forma in populum; (etsi olim vellicatum est in
Reuerendo Episcopo a vesanientibus Papistis,) tamen recipit confirmationem and
a S. Hieron. com. in Esa. 51. qui de Abrahamo ipso sic scribere non dubitat.
Nos sumus genus domini regale and sacerdotale, qualis fuit and Abraham, qui rex
appellatus est, and caeteri sancti de quibus scriptum est, NOLITETANGERE
CHRISTO^MEOS
of our Acts of Parliament, as not exceeding the due proportion in their
allotting of Supremacy; of the reverend Bishop also, as not defective therein;
a page 494. ad finem vsque. (For CONCLUSION of this point, and in behalf of
both Nations, (now blessedly UNITED) who^ the Adioynder here severally and
surly taskes, for their judgment about the Supremacy, hearken what Mr.
Cambden in his Annals reports, (a sufficient Author against them, though he be
ours) first for the Scotchmen anno 84. (which is three years later, then that
which the Adioynder here cauilleth them by; that we may not doubt with the
reverend Bishop, but they waxed, and wax daily yet, more and more conformable,
etc.) Regia authoritas hoc anno in omnes subditos tam Ecclesiasticos, quam
Laicos, in perpetuum confirmata: Regem sc. and consiliarios idoneos esse
iudices in omnibus causis; qui autem iudicium declinarent, laesae Maiestatis
teneri, etc. And for the English (whom he challenges as enlargers of the
Supremacy too far, the Scotchmen too little in comparison of them) Anno 59.
(p. 39. edit. Land. in fol.) Cum calumniantia ingenia Reginam sugillarent,
quasi titulum SVPREMT CAPITIS ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE, and authoritate^ sacra in
Ecclesia celebrandi arrogarit: illa edito scripto declarat, se nihil aliud
arrogare, quam quod ad Coronam Angliae iam olim iure spectavit: scilicet, se,
sub Deo, summam and supremam gubernationem and potestatem in omnes regni
Anglici ordines, sieve illi sint Ecclesiastici, sieve Laici, habere; quodque
nulla extranea potestas, vllam in eos iurisdictionem, vel authoritate^, habeat,
aut habere debeat. And this is, either that which Socrates says, Praefat. lib.
5. histor. (...), (adeoque Synodi, atque eae vel maximae) or which, Council. 6.
Genesis Constantinop. Alloc. ad Justin. Imper. Quod POST SVPERNVM MOMENTVM, (as
Hervetus translates it) [summum] humani generis suscepisset gubernaculum. Sed
manum de tabula.
Pntote dxa THe.

