The mind of the Front.
THe Globe terrestrial Natures randeuouze
Heavens all life giving power did first infuse
By secondary causes since preserved,
And multiplied, by doubtful fate preferred.
Time ripens, and time reapes, then sowes again
The plenty of her storehouse to maintain,
Which Death deuoures, whom justly we install
Lord Paramount and supreme head of all
That's sublunarie, serving but as fuel
TO incense the rage of his victorious Dueil.
Crowned with a Laurel (which to avoid we labor)
Marches in triumph; Called, Death^ Gollia^^.
La dance Machabre.
LA DANCE MACHABRE or Deaths Duel by W. C.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby J. Cecill sculps.



A la Royne.
MADAME,
LA Majesty and la douceur le plus souuennt separees comme le ciel l'est de la
terre sont auec un advantage nompareil, si diuinement and inseparablement
assemblees en vous, que pour le present estes la gloire d'Angleterre, comme des
vostre naissance vous estes la splendeur de la France; Quelles mont done la
hardiessed e m'adresser a vos piedes ausquels l'on vient de toutes parts aussy
facilement qu'aux temples and aux autels: Pour y fair des prieres, presenter,
des offrandes and obtenir des faueurs. Car ayant desir de mettre au iour ce
petit Escrit pour ayder aux hommes peruertis de cest sicle corrompu, a
retourner de l'insolence a la crainte du Ciel and de la debanche a la raison
par le sentiment de ce quilz doiuent estre and par la pensee de ce quilz ne
sont pas, la malice leur ayant ferme les yeux de l'ame pour ne veior, and
l'impiete bouche les oreilles pour n'entendre a bien fair, comme dit le Roy
Prophet. Ie ne debuois and ne pouucis l'offrir qu' a vostre Majesty, Que si
plusieurs blasment la temerite de mon entreprise, and condamnent l'orgueil de
ma presomption ce sera trop Madame pour leur fermes la bouche, and leur donner
suiet de lire and pratiquer tout ce quilz doiuent, si V. M. approuue mon
desseing, and sils'se souuiennent que si selon l'opinion de Seneque le seul
judgment d' Auguste vault plus qne les dans de Claudius, et un seul aduis de
Socratte plus quaetoute la liberalite d' Alexandre, l'opprobation de V. Auguste
M. suffira pour effacer riout le default de mon euure and son regard benin luy
donner a plus de luster and de pouuoir que le foleil ne fait de chaleur and de
lumiere a ceste fleur quice turn deuers luy. Ces honorables faueurs don't ie
supply tres humblement V. M. me fauoriser, m'obligeront, Madame, a souhaiter
la longueur de vos iours estre sans nombre, comme le sont vos vertus, Vostre
Esleuation dans le Ciel aussy haulte qu'est vostre exaltation dans le monde and
a desirer l'honneur d'estre pour jamais.

de V. M. Madame Le tres humble and tres Obeissant seruiteur and subjet. Colman.

TO THE GREAT Empress of our little WORLD.
MAdam, may I presume without offense
Upon your Highness favor, to dispense
With this my rude Composure, What I have
I give, and more there is no man ever gave,
Being the first piece ventured on the Stage
Since you were ours, To crave your Patronage,
You cannot with your Honor choose but give
It harbor, and a liberty to live
For its own merit (rightly understood)
Let Enuic censure whether it be good.
What wants he that enjoys all, the wise
Philosopher demands, Then thus replies
Some one to tell him truth, which want I have
Supplied, and humbly your free pardon crave.
All men will flatter my vnpractiz'd youth
In that has ventured to shake hands with truth,
Which never shames the Master. Water these
Young Plants in time they may grow goodly Trees.
Live long the Glory of your Royal Stem,
Heaven crown with an immortal Diadem.
Your Highness most humble Servant and Subject, W. Colman.

The Author to his Book.
Gross food best suits with vulgar appetites,
On choicest morsels few place their delights.
Lascivious Pamphlets evermore take best
When Poems of Devotion few digest.
Brought thou some light-heeld passage on the stage,
Or Planet stricken Lover in a rage,
Then would the Ladies hug thee old and young
Make thee their Morning Prayer and Euen-song,
Take thee to bed at night, and in the morn
Repeat again, the better to inform
Their memories, at every fripping Feast
Thou should be sure to be a grateful Guest.
Didd'st thou discover stratagems of State
How this fell in the nicke and that too late
Then might thou go with confidence to Court
And be applauded there for doing hurt,
So for the rest, but thou shall welcome be
Only to men in want and misery
With such perhaps thou may some hours beguile
And from amidst their sorrows force a smile:
Or in some Hermits melancholy Cell
Reside awhile. Some few there are that dwell
Amongst the monster multitude of men
Will freely entertain thee now and then,
The rest as old Devotion out of date
Will cast thee off, and bid thee hold thy prate.
If any do expect strong lines, Behold
To tell them these sufficient are to hold
Them tugging. Fairly read with that intent
Which they abroad into the world are sent.
Though not performed with that Poeticke fire
The niceness of our present times inspire.
He spoils the operation of a Pill
Conformeth it unto the Patients will.
Each giddie brain I do not seek to please,
But first find out then cure the foul disease
Of wilful ignorance protracting time
Until the doleful signalls fatal chime.
So I commit thee to th'vncertaine fate
Of Censure, may perhaps prove fortunate.
W. C

To his dear friend the Author upon his well fought Duel.
IF from th'aboundance of the heart we speak,
None can be so maliciously weak
To think thee other then thou seem to be
Iu this; th'interiour Character of thee.
Envy may spit her venom, Critickes ieere
But thou art placed upon a rock so near
To heaven, their malice cannot climb so high
But backwards fall upon themselves, and die.
John Peashall.

To his dear friend the Author.
Have you not heard the melancholy note
The Raven sends from her Propheticke throat,
The Lich-owles screcke, the dreadful Thunder rore
The Martial Drum, men wallowing in their gore
A midnight passing Bell or Belmans Song,
The raging Lioness for her lost young,
So sound thy sacred Sonets in our ears
Stirring us up with Music to our fears.
E. H.

To my Friend the Author and his Book.
IF the Grand Rabbis of our modern times
Shall squeese out of thee some poor venial crimes
For which thou shall be solemnly conuented
(As was thy Master) be not discontented
Since both of you are Cannon proof, care not
For Baily, Button, not their Musket shot.
Authority that's crazed, is still most brief
And hangs a true man where there wants a thief.
No fool, the proverb says, unto the oldest
And evermore blind Bayard is the boldest.
Thomas Veridicus.

To the Author upon his Poem.
While other Muses wanton Poems sing,
Thy pen being taken from a Cherubs wing
Teaches the way to bliss, where they and we
Meet in a quire, to adore Eternity
Death must begin our triumph, and the dust
That hangs upon our fleshie garment must
Be first brushed of, the vanities of life
Riches and pleasures, that but sweeten strife
And to the eye of sense makes death appear
Deformed, by thy diuiner raptures here
Are quite destroide, the rugged path made eauen
And men acknowledge thee the way to Heaven.
James Sherlie.

To my worthiest friend Master W. C. on his Book, La Dance Machabre.
FRiend, thou do ill to rank me in this place,
Though I shall honor thee in my disgrace.
For as choice dainties, after grosser food,
Taste better far, then other ways they would:
So men by reading this harsh verse of mine,
Shall relish better these sweet strains of thine.
What boot these lines alas? When every one
May read they praises written in thine own.
Such needless things may make weak people deem,
Thy Book wants sureties to beget esteem.
Here has thy sad Muse, like a dying Swan,
Sung a sweet story, of the death of man.
O, may she live, that glad-deceiued we,
May hear her often sing such melody.
John Crompton.

Sum quod (...) Fui quodes Behold fond man J am what thou shallt be And as
thou art so was Jonee like thee.



Death's Duel. Mors omnibus communis. We must all die.
1
Olympic Odes soft lays fond Lovers breath,
Domestic iarres, nor foreign broiles I bring:
Nor crowned Lyaeus with a frantique wreath,
Twixt life and death the fatal war I sing:
Which whil^t I but recite, me thinks from all
At every accent should a salt tear fall.
2
Assist ye heavenly powers, no other Muse
I invoke, cast down propitious Eyes,
My humble genius with such fire infuse
Our words may fall like Lightning from the Skies
Striking the amazed mortals with such terror
They may not love, but live to see, their error.
3
Stay, not too fast least thou impose an end
To what we briefly have discoursed upon
Before thou truly know what we intend,
Too hasty feeding hurts digestion,
Read note, if not to profit, What Is comprised
Herein, is merely but cpitomiz'd*
4
We highly prize this noble friend, and that,
This boon Companion, and that Parasite
Whose smooth tongued language ever leuels at
Those things which do administer delight:
But in conclusion, Death's our truest friend,
Tells us what we must trust to in the end.
5
Tells us, that we are mortal, that we know
Our last nights habitation, not the next;
That humane pleasures like sweet Roses grow
Amidst a thousand miseries perplexed.
Since joy and grief inseperably go
Nor can we reap our pleasures without woe.
6
The Twins of Fortune, at one instant borne
Both Male and Female, birth-rites due to neither,
Like Turtle-doues they re-salute each morn,
Wander all day, and lodge at night together.
All ages, all conditions, all estates
Know this, discovered in their several fates.
7
The strongest Fort besieged with powerful foes
Till victuals and munition waxes scant
May for a time subsist, but in the close
Must of necessity submit to want:
So youth and nature bare up stiff while,
But in the end, Death gives them ^^th the foil.
8
The life of man is tripertite, the first
Of nature, which is liable to death,
The second, after which all good men thirst,
Of same, commencing with our utmost breath,
The last eternal, consummates our bliffe,
Whither for Death there no admittance is.
9
Blessed Heavens defend me, the Worlds mayor part
Reflect not on whose arrant they are sent,
The Stage scarce enterd, they forget their part,
Turn days to nights, and nights to days ill spent:
Such liberty unto our selves we give,
Till Death, we know not truly how to live.
10
The thief reflects not what it is to steal
Before he sees the Gallows, not the Maid
(Until her belly do the fact reveal)
A th'stolne embraces of her loves dismayed,
The Prodigal reflecteth not upon
A plentiful estate, till he have none.
11
Consider wisely what thou have to do
In this vain World with serious meditation,
How short the time, what is likely to ensue,
And frustrate not the end of thy Creation
Since here is naught whereon thou can rely
But to be borne, to labor, and to die:
12
What though thou do enjoy a greater measure
Of temporal felicity then those
That live reclus'd, for every dram of pleasure
Expect a world of happiness to lose.
There Is but one Heaven, then think not to rejoice
Both here and hence, thou must not have it twice.
13
Unthrifty youth time prodigally spends,
That flies away with vndilcouer'd have,
Mocking our hopes, still future joys pretends,
Takes small content in recreations past.
Imagination sets our thoughts on fire,
And what we cannot have we most desire.
14
So little Children wish would we were men
Freed from the fetters of our pupil age;
Grown old, they covet to be young again,
Pretending in their ways to be more sage
And circumspect, what is not we think best,
And others in their meaner fortunes blessed.
15
The careful Pilot wafting from the Shore
His ful-f^a^ght Vessel, sits at the Stern
Iudiciously to guide what goes before,
And from the hoary-headed Pole does learn
Which way to steer and furrow up the Ocean
With a secure, though unsteady motion.
16
The World's the Sea, and we the Vessels are,
Consideration, Stearesman, and pale death
The Stern, in which we have an equal share.
Swift-footed time still toward us beckeneth
Dappled with age, which careless youth does know,
Yet all too late believes it to be so.
17
But so it is, what ere we do pretend
And fondly flatter our Imagination,
Being as near unto our Iourneyes end
(For ought we know) as aged declination;
Experience tells us; Whence we may presage,
No certainty in youth, nor hope in age.
18
The one may live, the other cannot long,
A possibility on which we build
Our certain ruin, and receive a wrong
That Is irrecouerable, if we yield
Unto such reasons nature will produce,
In her desires evermore pro use.
19
He, whose pulse beats the strongest, has no more
Assurance of his life, then he that lies
Upon his deathbed, and perhaps, before
His dear companion whom he mournes for, dies.
The near allied, whose care the sick attends Ovid.
Sicken themselves, and die before their friends.
20
The Priest does offer holy sacrifice
Upon the Alter for departing souls
Live to be present at his Obsequies
And hear the Sextons Death-bell when it toules:
So the Physician while he Physic gives
T'another, dies himself, his Patient lives.
21
The forward heir, Who thinks that life too long
By which he lives, desirous to see
His Father canonized whilst he is young,
And not go limping to immortality,
Leaves him oft-times, although decrepit, ill,
To be the Ouer-seer of his Will.
22
For honor this, for office that man waits,
A third gapes for a new bought Benefice,
Mean while death with inevitable baits
Cancels their hopes, the Priest the Clarke suruiues,
And many a time and often when he is dead,
Feeds on the Goose that graseth ore his head.
23
Poor wretched man, why do thou captiuate
Thy knowledge, and betray it to mischance,
Striving to hide thy miserable fate,
Which thou may call thine own inheritance;
Naked thou wast deliuerd from the Womb,
And naked shall return unto the Tomb;
24
How soon thou know not, For thou art but here
Tenant at will, although for term of life,
Nor will thy Landlord give a parting year,
Nor be kept out by Laws contentious strife,
What evidence soever thou produce,
Or long prescriptions fraudulent abuse.
25
Why then do thy vain thoughts reflect so much
On Glow-wormes that have neither warmth nor light,
Earth has no real happiness, and such
As careless of their soul, think no delight
But what these bodies taste, time and their grief
Will furnish with repentance, not relief.
26
Who was thy Father? filth and rottenness,
The Worms thy brethren and thy sisters are,
So holy Job does thy descent express,
Thy life a vale of euer-feeding care,
A Summers bird, a fading flower of May,
Tomorrow dead that flourishes to day.
27
The uncertain, certain hour of our death,
The table-booke of humane misery,
Tells us Mortality is but a breath
Shut in or out by casuality
Early, or late, by day, or night, abroad,
At home, or wheresoever we make abode.
28
Think how a tyle-sheard passing on thy way
By accident falls down and strikes thee dead
And that ere long thou may be wrapped in clay
Who even now enioy'st thy downy bed,
He that to such frail evidence does trust
Does carue the water, and ingraues in dust.
29
What though thy house be sumptuous, and thy fare,
Thy wife both virtuous, beautiful, and wise,
Thy children hopeful and obedient are,
Thy servants most obsequious in their guise,
Thy coffers full, thy Lordships round about thee.
Yet thou must go and they must stay without thee.
30
And these upon thy deathbed shall appear
Like to so many glorious miseries,
Or like an Office thou did lately bear
Transferred t'another man before thine eyes:
For certain it is what chiefly does content thee,
In that sad hour to leave shall most torment thee.
31
Then the deboist disorders of thy youth
The unjust detayning of another right
Supported more by strong hand then by truth,
As done but yesterday, before thy sight
In hideous forms appear, which being well
Thou had no time to think on, there is thy hell.
32
Much like a pampered Jade grow'n-belly-proud
Flings up his heels, and his own Master strikes,
Contemnes his poor Companions who allowed
No more then what they dearly earne, Dislikes
Their mild Condition, and through wantounesse
Feeds on the best of their dear purchased gresse;
33
Aspiring thoughts above our fortunes soar,
And true content, Man's chiefest happiness,
By emulation is shut out of Doare,
Valuing our wants by other men's excess
We glance at those in worth and wealth out go us,
Regarding not how many walk below us.
34
Disturb not thine own quiet with a thought
Of what thou wast, or what thou might have bin,
Advancement comes neglected and not sought,
As Monkayes with the chains they are tide in.
Play with the common corrasiues of fate.
Which as they had beginnings have their date.
35
For just Heaven guilty of no ill at all,
From the beginning has contrived it so
That in all ages some shall rise, some fall,
The goods of fortune wander to and fro:
From man to man, and as the Poet sings
Kings come from beggars, beggars come from Kings.
36
It Is strange to see how men from time to time
Flatter themselves with presupposed joys
Not growing in this sublunary Clime,
And feed on hopes, enjoyed, appear but toys,
So that in fine we spend out time in wishing;
Though we have all, yet something still is missing,
37
Which shows, the immortal soul of man, confin'de
Within this mortal Prison takes no rest,
Nor true content in any thing can find
Till it ascend, for ever to be blessed
Above the reach of any humane thought,
Within our muddy apprehensions wrought.
38
All arts may hither come again to School,
And find new matter to insist upon:
Grammarians here find out a general rule
That will admit of no exception,
Then whisper in their ears, we all must die
And tell them that their Maxime's a lie.
39
Here the Logician may with ease conclude
A Syllogism most methodicall
Without distinction figure, form, or mood,
All humane Arguments sophistical,
Death will not dally, nor admit dispute
Be thou never so ingenious and acute.
40
The Arithmetician that can rectify
By daily use and rules infallible
His fractions, add, substract, or multiply,
To number his own minutes is not able.
Though the Musician daily in tune set
His instrument, he cannot pass this fret.
41
The Astrologer that daily notice takes
What Planets reign, what Staries predominate,
Whence he uncertain demonstrations makes,
And does our future fortunes calculate,
No further can transcend, but leaves us here,
Life leads the vantgard, Death brings up the rear.
42
The grave Philosopher that can divine
And pry into th'obstrusest mysteries
Hangs us his Trophies here, and does resign
His knowledge choakt with foul absurdities,
Surceasing farther of his skill to boast,
Concludes here, that all his labor's lost.
43
The industrious Herald that wracks Pedigrees
Upon the tenter-hookes, whereby to show
The antiquity of Names and Families,
Death interrupts, and can no further go,
He only has the privilege to tell
Us, what men were, who lived, and who died, well.
44
Here the Physician with his pills and potions
Astonished stands confounded in his Art.
The Surgeon does his Cataplasmes and Lotions
Apply, no succor or relief impart.
Whatsoever has beginning here, must end,
Or first or last, not can it self defend.
45
No privilege has honor, Parentage,
The wise, and foolish perish both together,
Old men, and Infants, careless middle-age,
Draw cuts by turns indifferent to either,
Rich men, and poor, magnanimous, and cowards,
Play all Mum-chance, all is but a game at hazards.
46
No friend at Court, no quillet in the Law,
No golden bride, the life of eloquence,
Can keep his common Enemy in awe,
No armed Guard to stand in thy defense,
No Supersedeas from a higher Court
Can pleasure thee, or do the Plaintiff hurt.
47
No widows tears, no wronged Orphans cries,
No protestations, vows, nor promises,
No Altars smoking with burnt sacrifice
This Al-commanding power can appease.
The fatal Sisters having spun their thread
Make holy day, and thou art left for dead.
48
Behold thy friends about thee, who informed
By thy Physician that thou can not live,
Study their ends, tears flow as if they mourned,
Corrupting him with promises, to give
Largely that shall thy fatal Penman be,
Each for himself laborious, none for thee.
49
Nor thy poor soul now totally contained
In some small corner of a panting heart,
With death thy other members being maym'd
Acting on this Worlds Theater that part,
To which some sooner then their fellows come,
Calde Exit, such a one whose part is done.
50
Which sometimes lights on a religious King
Or bloody Tyrant, Politician, Fool,
Rich Cormorant, or hungar-starued thing,
Or on some Julius Caesar borne to rule;
Though each a part his several part does play,
In fine, they all go off the Stage one way.
51
A great Commander having in the field,
A hundred thousand men their force to try
Such as the World their betters could not yield,
Viewing his Army, wept; demanded why?
To think (said he) within one hundred year
Not one of these shall to the World appear.
52
Do but consider, be thou never so young,
How many dear Companions thou have lost,
By course of nature might have lived as long,
To enjoy the wanton pleasures which thou do,
Only that Death in courtesy has lent
Thee some uncertain minutes to repent.
53
Repriu'd by Heavens most boundless clemency,
Who like a too indulgent Parent strives
To reconcile us with that vchemencie,
By miracle does often preserve our lives;
Of which most fearful presidents we have,
Yet no impression in our hearts ingraue.
54
You in whose hearts the seed of wickedness,
Whence budded forth man's misery is sow'n,
Prizing your selves and your own worthiness
At higher rates then may be called your own,
As if on Earth you would be Deifide,
The worms shall one day triumph ore your pride.
55
You Mam mon-mongers, horders up of wealth,
Slaves to your own, rich only in conceit
Whose hungry bellies unto all your wealth
Was never beholding for a good meals meat,
Whose death gives life to others, likewise you
Must pay the worms what to yourselues were due.
56
Luxurious wanton delicacies Minion,
Who pampers nature merely, to destroy her,
Yielding thy self a Slave unto opinion,
Thinking thou most, when thou do least, enjoy her:
These are the Barber-Surgeons, whose long trains
Shall one day scow'r thy infectious raines.
57
You the unworthy burdens of the earth
Pine and consume away, yet are not old
Making of Christain Charity a dearth,
Laugh only when you some sad sight behold;
The worms shall suck the rancor from your hearts,
With which you poison your malicious darts.
48
You Gormandizers placing your delights
In choicest morsels evermore to please
Your cloyed unsatisfied appetites,
Nurse up your selves in idleness and ease:
The silly worms rejoice to see you eat
On dear bought dainties to procure them meat.
49
You senseless hot-spurres on each slight occasion
Banish discretion in your frantique fits
Into all mischief making an invasion,
Wise in the judgments of your after-wits
Alas how little will those silly things
Value your terrifying threatenings.
60
You mothes in nature, Caterpillars, men
Only in name and form, like fruitless plants,
Who live but (as it were) to say Amen
To others labors which supply your wants
Equally gross in body and in spirit
Which one day these poor vermin must inher it.
61
What shall I say of the worlds wealthy Minions
Their vncouch'd thoughts and all admired glory
Raised above all meus or their own opinions,
Rotten in dust, forgotten is their story,
Unless perhaps what here so glittering shin'de
Went out in snuff, and left ill sent behind.
62
Whither are those bewitching beauties fled
Subduing them, that all the world beside
Could never vanquish, Are they not all dead?
Nipt in the blossom of intising pride,
Or else grow'n old, like fruit untimely gotten
Their outside withered, and their inside rotten.
63
Produce but one victorious Potentate
Commanding all, lived vncontroul'd of any
That has not paid his fealty to fate,
On whom the fates depended of so many;
The Sun that shines most glorious has its set,
So deaths the Omega of our Alphabet.
64
The grave Philosophers coming to view
The sumptuous Shrine of Alexander made
Of massy gold, did thus begin to rue
Man's misery, and to each other said,
He that of gold possessed so great a measure
Is now of gold become the loathsome treasure.
65
To whosc aspiring thoughts, yet all in vain,
The spacious World presented was, Lo now
Four foot of Earth does quietly restrain,
To whom so many ftubborne necks did bow.
He that so many but last night could free
From death, now cannot help himself, you see.
66
Feared yesterday of all and honored,
The Earth he did oppress now presses him,
Contemned, neglected, and vnreuerenced,
None fears his frowns, nor seeks his grace to win,
Greater then any but last night, now lies
Nor loved of Friends, nor feared of Enemies.
67
O greatness in whose all-commanding pow're
Mercy and Justice are established,
Conn well this Lesson, think upon that hour
In which you must your selves be summoned,
Death feared no colors, For it all commands
Both crowned heads, and Scepter-bearing hands.
68
Who lends mine eyes a Fountain of fresh tears,
To re-deplore man's miserable birth,
The lamentable spending of his years,
His sad return unto our Mother Earth,
Whence; what he is, and whither he must go,
And how men live as if they did not know.
69
'T would soil my paper worse then does the ink
With which I write, exactly to express
What every wise judicious man may think
Of his own base and self unworthiness
From the first act of generation, far
Morelothsome in corruption then beasts are.
70
Which heavens all foreseeing power would have
Contrived so to curb and keep in awe
Our haughty proud rebellious flesh, to save
The immortal soul, which otherwise no law
Could subiugate, since as we are, O wonder,
Nor laws of God, nor man, can keep us under.
71
Trees, herbs, flowers, plauts, produce sweet nourishments
Both toour taste delightful and the smell.
Man, nitts, lice, spittle, stinking Excrements;
Nay, more then that the very beasts excel
Man's temperature, refusing often to do
Those things which we enforce our selves unto.
72
If such the first fruits which our springtide yields
In th'height, heat, vigor, Sunshine of our days
When youth proclaims its glory in the fields
Crowning our Temples with victorious bays,
What loathsome poisonous, and vnfauorie juice
Will bruised Autumnc from the press produce.
73
When crutched age wrapped in her careful Chair
Crow'n white with years not innocence, blames
Disordered youth, whose liu'ry it does wear,
Regardlesse truth to heedlesse youth proclaims
Belch't forth in tedious and distasteful stories
In the dear bought purchase of her knowledge glories.
74
Becomne the certain Almanacke of times
Uncertain motion future qualities
Whose parched sinews quauering does chime
All in to their own funeral Obsequies:
And being dead with base corruption swells,
Senting far worse then any dunghill smells.
75
When thy best seasoned thoughts seem to afford
Thee most content: forgetful what is past,
Or yet to come, ask them but in a word
What it shall be, they' I think upon at last?
Without all question they will answer thee
We shall repeut our present vanitic.
76
Or when thy tongue the hearts interpreter
Strikes up a false Alarm, rauishing
Thy senses like a wanton Orator
With scurrilous impollisht warbling,
Think but on death and it will soon confute
Thy strongest arguments and strike thee mute.
77
Or when thine eyes immodestly shall gaze
On fading beauties curiosity
Which either age, or accident may raze,
And make more ugly then deformity;
Think how that beauty underneath does wear
Deaths pale-faced Liucery, which all mortals fear.
78
And she that takes her false intelligence
From the deceitful Index of a glass
Glad to be cozened in her own defense
Bid her reflect what even now she was
Before that nature was abused by art,
Helps not when death shall come to play his part.
79
It Is not a borrowed look or wanton glance
Of an alluring eye that can divert
The inevitable fury of his Lance
Nor all thy Courtly conges though thou were
Equallin beauty, breeding, and the rest
Of womanish additions with the best.
80
And thou fond Lover look into the grave
Of thy dead Mistress, and her lost condition,
Behold the Saintly beauty lately gave
Such motives of respect and adoration
To thy inflamed thoughts, which did devise
To deifie't, thy self the sacrifice.
81
Calling her eyes the worlds all glorious lights
The splendour of whose Goddesse-like complexion
Gave light sufficient to the darkest night
Vowing thy self a Slave to her affection,
Praiting the loucly tresses of her hairs
Enchanted threads of gold, delightful snares.
82
Which held thee captive, in which bondage thou
Inioy'dst most freedom, as thy self wast wont
With fearful protestations to vow,
Casting each night a most exact account
Of her new purchased favors, now entombed
Lies putrifide, to loath fomnesse consumed.
83
Behold her hands unto thy hands adioyn'd
Whose wanton fingers pretily did weaue
Themselves with mutual amity conioyn'd
Within thy fingers, whose moist palms did leave
In thine the witness of unbridled lust,
Are now consumed to nothing, or to dust.
84
Doc but imagine that she were exposed
Set out withal the ornaments of Art
For thee to sport thy self withal, enclosed
Within thine arms to act a lovers part,
Which so delightful was but even now
Sealing each wanton promise with a vow.
85
No sighs would from fond Jealousy arise
Within thy breast, for fear of her displeasure
No observations how she cast her eyes
On thy corriuall, or in what a measure
She intertain'd his love, but could betide,
Him to repose in quiet by her side.
86
No wanton Poems in her praise are penned,
No favors worn, no drinking of her health,
No challenges her honor to defend,
Nor yet nocturnall visits made by stealth,
No scruants bribed, fond parents to deceive,
But free access without demanding leave.
87
Where the Earths Common wealths men, each poor worm
Into her private Bedchamber repaires
And rudely rifles her religious vrne,
Makes no distinction twixt those precious wares
So highly prized but even now, and those
Which nature does of courser stuff compose.
88
Or when thy lips, hands, feet shall dare to touch
Forbidden fruit, or tread unhallowed patl^^
Or pallet is delighted overmuch,
Or limbs, with curious dishes, wanton bathes,
Which for the present so thy fancy please,
In thy dull grave thou shall find none of these.
89
Think when thy squemish smell not satisfied
With such as nature freely does produce
Takes it in snuff, if that it be not cloyed
With forced perfumes, unnatural styled juice
Whose stinking carcass dead a day or two,
One hardly can approach within the view.
90
No marvel then though artificial care
To natures imperfections we give,
Since to our selves our selves more loathsome are
Then any other creature that does live
Which if we want with speed we buried are
Left our corruption should infect the air.
91
Why are we then so curiously clothed
With borrowed beauties, perriwiggs, perfumes,
Deceitful dressings, that shall soon be loathed,
Even of our selves, disrobed of others plumes,
Put by the veil which modestly does hide
Immodestnature, and behold thy pride.
92
That body which was lately entertained
With all variety of dainty meat,
Soft pillowes, beds of Down, so richly chained,
Wrapped warm from cold, laid open in the heat,
On which the winds were scarce allowed to blow,
Of all the world neglected, lies fullow.
93
Within the limits of a winding sheet
Confined, both breathless, and disrobed of all
Those flattring ornaments from head to feet
If one lament, ten glory in thy fall,
Who by thy long life have been much perplexed,
Although perhaps their own turn shall be next.
94
But yet to die were nothing, if we could
Our foul misdeeds and sinful acts entreat
To stay behind us, then no doubt we should
Speed well enough, but O alas they threate
Our everlasting ruin, and will cry
To heaven for vengeance, when we come to die.
95
Then drunkenness will seem a mortal sin
Which passes now but for good fellowship;
And Lechery be solemnly brought in
As matter of damnation, which does slip
When we are well, but for a trick of youth:
Till death we never truly know the truth.
96
Detraction then, that white-fac'd Devil, sent
From hell, attired in a Saint-like weed
Pretending good, more cunningly to vent
Her malice, and for every grain of seed
Whole measures sowes of Cockell, will (I fear)
Like leprosy upon thy soul appear.
97
Which passes now for table-talke, and serves
Them for discourse, else knew not what to say
To pick a thank, and happily deserves
An inuitation the next holi-day
From those that listen after novelties
And seldom but take up with forged lies.
98
So easy of belief we are in things
Tend to another man's disparagement,
But he that any well-deseruing brings
In question, if he gain tacit assent,
It Is all that he must look for, as afraid
By others worths, our wants should be betrayed.
99
The violating of a Fathers will,
Or trust reposed in one friend by another,
Damned usury now held a venial ill,
Hypocrisy that does all mischief smother,
As black as hell will in thy sight appear,
And with remorse thy very heart strings tear.
100
Each triuiall transgression then will seem
A capital offense, nor shall we be
Backward to crave their pardon we esteem
Our chiefest enemies, in all things free
Both to knowledge and remunerate
All injuries, our tender conscience grate.
101
O could our living actions correspond
But with our dying thoughts, how seldom then
Should we transgress, or violate the bond
Which God and nature has imposed on men
But O our resolutions then too strong
When we are well seldom continue long.
102
Much like a fellon that's condemned to dye,
For misdemeanour sues for a repriue
An humble knee and pity moving eye,
With heau'd up hands (each to excel does strive)
Plead for their Lord, with whom they stand or fall,
Who being enlarged proves often worst of all.
103
What Casar is it when he comes to lie
Upon his deathbed, ready for the grave
But he could wish that he had lived to die
A holy Hermit in some hollow Cave,
And spent those hours in pious meditations
Were cast away in fruitless recreations.
104
What joys us most and gives bese content
Wealth, honor, beauty, valor, sovereignty,
When death approaches, does us most tormen
And trench upon our present misery:
By how much we enjoy whilst that we live,
The greater is the account we have to give.
105
It is not all thy gold can purchase then
A minutes respite to repent, nor all
The drugs Physicians minister to men,
Who do themselves the helps of nature call
Can spin out time (so preualent is death)
To give thee leave to breath another breath.
106
The mighty Monarch of the world, whose power
No humane force can limit, here erects
His ne plus vltra: Look he never so sower,
Grim Death fears not his frowes not force respects,
Inexorable strikes him to the heart,
Kills him stone dead before he feels in smart.
107
The ambitious Statesman with his working brain,
The officious Courtier, with forced complement,
The Grand Madam with all her buxome train
The ingenious Sycophant, the malcontent
To plot, collogue, sport, gibe, repine, desist
At death sad summons with a head I wist.
108
When all thy limbs are wrackt with dying pain,
With cold dead sweat all couerde over, think
What thornie thoughts will then distract thy brain,
How many Cups of Sorrow thou will drink,
And sad repentance, when thou shall behold,
Thy sins as in a Catalogue inrold.
109
What then will pleasure and commodities
Of this vain world avail thee, Princes favors,
Victorious conquests? against thine enemies,
In office great, and by thy own endeavors
Thy Children, Kinsfolks in abundance left,
When thou poor soul shall be of all bereft.
110
Imagine thou wast even now to die
(For so thou art for ought that thou can tell)
And then examine whether nothing lie
Heavy upon thy guilty conscience well
From all impartialitie be free,
Then think each bell that toles, toles out for thee.
111
Use but the selfsame diligence thou would
In case thy body were infirm and ill
For thy souls health (as reason good thou should)
Or for thy friends, how many are there will
Ride day and night nay venture their own lives
To save a friends when for the soul none strives?
112
Does but a finger ache, much more the head
Or stomach be distemperd straight we run
To a Physician and recovered
What diligence those meats and drinks to shun
Procuring such infirmity we use
But proferd Physic for our souls refuse.
113
Neglect th'anointed of our Lord, nay spit
The venom of our malice in the face
Of Church authority and slander it
To make our own disorders no disgrace,
And joy to spy a fault where there is none
In one of them, to mitigate our own.
114
We think all cost too little we bestow
Upon our selves, the greatest enemy
We have, to hasten our own overthrow
But poor half staruen mendicants deny
A slenderalmes, or if some few we give,
Think it sufficient how so ere we live.
115
A certain good religious Prince being ask,
By one of his (a careless Courtier) why
From his delights, he so himself had taste
And did not spend his days in Iollitie
As others did? to whom he little said,
But by example thus his answers made.
116
First placing him upon a rotten chair
Hung up in cords, and underneath a fire,
Over his head a naked sword, a hair,
Supporting it, then said learn to aspire,
And show a cheerful countenance, and be
Merry thy self as thou inuitest me.
117
Who thus replyde, my Lord can I rejoice,
Seeing the fatal period of my life
Present with such variety and choice
Of casualties, on every side me rife,
A rotten seat, a fire underneath,
A naked sword, all threatening present death.
118
Such is my case answered the Prince to him,
My body weak, and does each moment waste,
Hell underneath the recompense of sin,
The sword of Justice over me is placed,
These are the motives why I do retire,
Death, judgment, heaven and hels eternal fire.
119
O foolish man that never wilt impose
An end unto thy follies, yet can say
Unto thy self in private only those
Shall smile in death who never ran that way;
Then wrong not so thy judgment as to do
What thine own conscience pleads thee guilty to.
120
But some the better to advance their folly,
Discourse of death, and they reply, you will put
Me straight into a fit of Melancholy,
Flinging away in anger, or else shut
Their ears, and wish you alter your discourse,
Or basely jest you out on it, which is worse.
121
Others not only grumble when they hear
Of death, but if you chance to bring their age
In question (though perhaps they be not near
Gray hairs) will enter strait into a rage
Challenge your breeding, nothing else digest
But their own commendations, merit least.
122
These are the careless crew of Libertines
Spending their days in sensuality,
Having no other end in their designs,
Of whom thus holy Job does prophecy.
Amidst their pleasures and delights they dwell,
And in a moment are thrust down to hell.
123
O fearful sentence, able to awake
A sin sick soul though nere so fast asleep,
Cause the religious Anchoret to quake,
And every minute his pale visage steep
With brinish tears, sin only life and death
Are separated with a little breath.
124
Authore incognito.
THreescore and ten the life and age of man
In holy David's eye was but a span.
And half that time is lost and spent in sleep,
So only thirty five for use we keep.
Our days of youth must be abated all,
Childhood and youth wise Solomon does call
But vanity, for vanity he says,
Is what befalls us in our childish days.
Our days of age we take no pleasure in,
And those of sorrow wish had never bin.
So age deducted, youth and sleep and sorrow,
Only one span is all the life we borrow.
125
What can the World advance us, though we should
Be numberd amongst those called fortunate,
We are but cast within the finer mould,
And made more brickell, greatness of estate
Does but augment our cares, preferment win
Of popular applause, which nurtures sin.
126
And puffes thee up like to a windy bladder
Tossed in the ayrie Element of fame,
So by degrees thou climst the fatal Ladder
Making thy fall the greater and thy shame.
O feel thy pulse, the horologue of time
Which does each minute more or less very fine.
127
Industrious nature has not been so free
In her indowments thou should be so proud,
Allotting every living thing but thee,
Wherewith they may defend themselves, and shroud
Their nakedness; man only left to reason,
Which once infringde he is guilty of high treason.
128
When hellish thoughts thy easy yielding will
Transport, for profit or for pleasures sake,
Without reflection be it good or ill,
Just, or unjust, that thou do undertake,
Reflect upon the comfort thou shall have
Of the one, or the other, in thy ioylesse grave.
129
Think but how many hours thou have spent
In furbushing a painted piece of clay
When few or none were to devotion lent.
And what small comfort it will be that day:
Thy guilty soul her fatal doom to hear,
Before the Judge of Judges shall appear.
130
But that which does deceive us chiefly is
Vain hope of a long life, deferring still
From time to time (nor think we do amiss)
Consideration of our death, until
Old age but he that is not apt to day,
Tomorrow will be less, more apt to stray.
131
Besides no humane diligence can steer
A course so even through the rugged Seas
Of this tempessuous Ocean, be we near
So vigilant, but whilst we study these,
Now those disasters (boding death) to shun,
Unto our graves with greater speed we run.
132
For fear of some contagious pestilence,
We fly from this place, and relinquish that,
No harbor yields a secure residence,
That is not subject to be leueld at
By millions of mischances, though we fly
From the articke, to the antarticke, we must die.
133
Some scarce on this, on that more freely feed,
For each man's held to be his own Physician,
And all is but to die with greater heed,
Things often repeated makes the deep'st impression.
So death's to him most terrible of all
Takes most pains t'anticipate his fall.
134
The painful ploughman labors to eat,
And does esteem his Physic best of all,
Then eats to labor till he drop with sweat,
Without observing any principal
Of Gallen, or Hipocrates, whom he
Values no more then his old axeltres.
135
But cries rise early, go to bed betimes,
Feed hard, and hardly, labor for disgestion,
And has no leisure to be bad, all crimes
Includes in war, dearth, famine and oppression,
Thinks who scapes them, and observes the rest,
May write a hundred ere he die at least.
136
But what auailes such dull security
Wherein he lives, or rather dreams away
Irreuocable time, when as we see
Him dead and buried ere his grass be hay,
Before the grain which his own hands had sown
Be fully ripe, and is by others mowne.
137
When thy bewitching bed inuites sweet rest,
After the toylesome travels of the day,
It Is but an emblem of thy grave, expressed
In finer colors, and more rich array,
By the soft pillow swelling on each side,
Thy drowsy head, a green turfe specifide.
138
The silken vailes which seem to banish light
Do represent thy hearse, their rings the bells,
Which drawn stand for thy passing peale that night,
The Couerlite which round about thee swells,
Thy rising grave resembles which ore grown
With grass, searce by thy dearest friends is known.
139
And if perchance a bedfellow thou have
According to thy hearts desire chosen,
What is it, but two bodies in one grave,
Repleate with heat: the other cold and frozen:
So far we are mistaken whilst the Suns
Beams scorch; but mark not how the shadow runs.
140
For one of these removed perhaps within
A month or two another does possess
The place scarce cold (as no such thing had bin
Forgot) enjoying all that happiness
Thou for a time call'dst thine; but now interred
Into thy place another is preferred.
141
Besides the certain period of man's life
By course of nature incident to all,
How many fearful, accidents more rise
Then all diseases set together, call
Us hence at unawares, whilst that we be
In th'hight of glory and prosperity.
142
Observe the common currents of the time,
Enquire what news (which nature does desire)
And thou shall hear of some one in the prime
Of youth and nature murdered, or by fire,
Or water, ended, his untimely race
The worlds no mausion but a baiting place.
143
Great Julius Caesar in the Capital
When he had conquered all the world was slain,
Who came more like a God unto his fall
(So did proud Rome her Victor intertaine)
Then a poor mortal, to breath forth his life
By the fell passage of a fatal knife.
144
So did brave Frances Henry third, and fourth,
(Nor let us name the last without a tear)
In whose true noble breast was lodged all worth
That from a Prince might challenge love, or fear,
Whose towering thoughts to such things did aspire,
He may be said a man composed of fire.
145
But why should we the limits of our own
Unhappy Island violate, to find
Examples, as if we had none at whom,
Our second Edward, Richard, call to mind:
Nor let us leave a Buckingham forgotten;
Whose marrow boiling bones are hardly rotten.
146
To you foundmen these lines I dedicate
Who fear to die, whose modern pastimes sway
Your giddie thoughts, t'vnfold the book of fate
And view what we were once and what to day,
And what we shall be, how things ebb and flow
Through obuious paths unfit for us to know.
147
Believe and love, admire and adore,
More knowledge by an humble resignation
We purchase then by often turning ore,
The inscrutable designs of our Creation.
What by experience we may daily learn
Sufficient is man's frailty to discern.
Ouidij Lib. 15. Most exquisitely Englished by Master GEORGE SANDYS.
148
Does not the Image of our age appear,
In the successiue quarters of the year.
The springtide tender, sucking infancy
Resembling, then the iucefull blade sprouts high,
Though tender weak, hope to the Ploughman yields,
All things then flourish; flowers the gaudie fields
With colors paint, no virtue yet in leaves,
Then following Summer greater strength receives
A lusty youth, no age more strength acquires,
More fruitful or more burning in desires.
Mature Autumn heat of youth alaid.
The sober mean, twixt youth and age more staid,
And temperate in Summers waine repaires
His reverent Temples, sprinkled with gray hairs.
Then comes old Winter void of all delight
With trembling steps, his head, or bald, or white,
So change our bodies without rest or stay,
What we were yesterday, not what to day
Shall be tomorrow, once alone of men,
The seed and hope the womb our mansion, then
Kind nature showed her cunning, not content
That our vexed bodies should be longer pent
In Mothers stretched entralls, forthwith bear
Them from the prison to the open air.
We strengthlesse lie when first of light possessed,
Straight creep upon all four much like a beast;
Then staggering with weak nerves stand by degrees,
And by some stay support our feeble knees.
Now lusty, swiftly run, youth quickly spent,
And those our middle times incontinent
We sink in setting age, this last deuoures
The former, and demolisheth their powers.
Old Milo wept when he his Arms beheld
Which late the strongest beast in strength excelled,
Big as Alcides brawnes, in flagidie hide,
Now hanging by slack sinews, Helen cride
When she beheld her wrinckles in a glass,
And asked her self why she twice ravished was.
149
Thus did the heathen rightly contemplate
(Without the abstruse mysteries of faith)
Upon the mutabilitie and state
Of man's mortality; wherein he has
Discreetly taught us Christians what to do,
Reflecting what must certainly ensue.
150
Which if we did so many would not run
Such headlong courses to their own perdition
But strive with earnest diligence to shun
Those things which pass for mirth and recreation,
And not conceive that time lost or misspent
Not dedicated to some meriment.
151
For know that man to Gods own Image framed,
Indu'd with reason, and supernall grace,
Was but here placed by his Creator (uam'd
Lord over all other creatures) for a space,
To serve as't were his prentiship, that he
(His precepts kept) of Heaven might make him free.
152
And not to live and die like beasts, whose souls
Transcend no farther then their bodies go,
Governed by sense, whom nothing else controls
But man's prerogative, and their own woe.
For were it so (which for to think's a sin)
Better for man't were never to have bin.
153
Since not to know what known must be forgotten
(For what we never had cannot be lost)
A great deal better is besides pains taken
To live, with worldly crosses is so saus'd,
That were our pleasures measured with our pain,
Few would the one, the other to regaine.
154
Only the hope of heaven in us has
So great a stroke, by miracle confirmed,
The radical foundation of our faith,
By steadfast hope and charity discerned,
That to a man who weighes all things aright
To die's to live, to live 's but small delight.
155
Yet too too many whom bewitching wealth,
Soule-killing honor, momentany pleasures,
Inuest, with an addition of good health,
Would hardly earths exchange for heavenly treasures,
Such is the dull stupiditie of those
Whose faith no farther then their knowledge goes.
156
Still loath to die, though Charons boat has staid
Full quarter ebb; gray hairs, green thoughts retain,
With no infirmity of age dismayed,
Though scarce the figure of a man remain,
Both Dotards, toothelesse, grisselesse, and bald,
Nasty, crook-backt, in every member gald.
157
These are so coltish that they die their hair,
Wear Periwigs, shave themselves twice aday,
Ingraft new teeth within their heads which were
Writhen from some Hogs chaps; disport and play,
With a youg Pigs nigh, as if nature sent
A fresh supply of what before was spent.
158
But as in weakness, so in wickedness,
Do your old doting women bear the bell
Though nere so much appaild with age, express
Their good will struing ever to excel
Your fondest Wanton, in whose mouths still rise
The Proverb for their warrantie. Life's Life.
159
Dawbing their slaggie cheeks, anoint their nerves,
Stand poring in a glass, expose their dugges,
Provoke stale nature with restoritiues;
Write love letters, dance galliards, with their drugges,
And tempting gold, insight some smooth fac'st boy,
In that which is loves remedy to joy.
160
Tell these of death, that one foots in the grave,
Unto the market (straight they will be bold
To answer) come (so many shifts they have)
The young sheep-skin as soon as does the old.
Thus nuzeld in their sensuality
Toward death and hell they post on merrily.
161
The husbandman t'exchange a barten soil
May with much ease and pleasure be persuaded,
In hope of better, where his daily toil
With equal profit may be richly laded,
But where small profit and less pleasures taken.
That's without great repugnancie forsaken.
162
For he whose lo rooft fortune does afford
Him only necessary maintenance,
And can his mind to such small means accord,
Lives truly happy, and with confidence
Meets death half way, in hope soon to possess
A Kingdom of eternal happiness.
163
Only the poor Religious man enioyes
What we with so much diligence pursue;
Who all things deemes as necessary toys
That under heaven can come within his view.
So that in fine the matter well debated
We cannot say he dies, but is translated.
164
No tempting titles, nor bewitching wealth,
No costly cates, food only to preserve
Decrepid nature, and maintain good health,
The better to enable him to serve
His Lord and maker he desires; whose store,
Does totally consist in being poor.
165
He that's to grapple with his enemy,
Slips of his looser garments, and betakes
Him to his trowses. Superfluity
Of temporal additions likewise makes
Us more unapt and weaker to withstand
Hellish temptations ever more at hand.
166
The greatest Monarch when he comes to die,
And that poor puff of breath he breathes exhaled,
Tell me what is he more then thou or I
A stinking carcassie, withered and appal'd,
Only wrapped up within a finer sheet,
More helps of art applied to keep it sweet.
167
It makes a greater blunder in the world,
More joyful mourning Liueries are worn,
Some few deneires amongst the vulgar hurled,
A score or two of torches more are borne
Before his hearse, more hymns, and dirges sung,
More ceremony used; more bells are rung.
168
And in the Chuch a richer tomb shall have,
Where none but Kings and Queens have been interred
Of his own Line; yet all is but a grave
Before the rest on's neighbors graves preferred,
Most for the golden superficies deemed,
So superficial men are most esteemed.
169
A mercenarie Epitaph his Shrine
Shall grace, more for the Poets praise then his;
Which shall not be engrau'd on yours or mine,
But what advantage has he by all this?
He Is the unworthy burden of a womb,
That nothing leaves behind him but a Tomb.
170
It Is true Kings have their Chronicles, wherein
For one good deed ten bad ones are recorded,
If they have any privilege therein
Let no man grutch it should be them affoorded,
May my good actions with my bad ones die,
Rather then flourish with my infamy.
171
But great ones greater privileges crave,
Wherefore I know not, and grown confident
Do any thing, for which they can but have
Any, though, near so slightly president.
We heed not men's religions but their lives,
Example more then precept edifies.
172
Though we look nere so stern, be nere so stout,
Though nere so valiant, full of active slight,
Though nere so witty, cautelous and young,
The glory of a Nation and delight,
Nature to such security does give
Ten thousand ways to die, but one to live.
173
The poor thatcht cottage can as soon repel
Deaths furious implacabilitie,
As can the Louuer, or the Escuriell,
And with a great deal more facility.
Saint Angelo, Diogenes tub, with like
Success and resolution does it strike.
174
Plutarch upon Scipio.
Deuicto Hannibale, capta Carthagine, and aucto
Imperio, hoc cineres Marmore tectus habet,
Cui non Europe, non obstitit Africa quondam,
Respice res hominum quam breuts vrna premit.
175
Plutarch upon Scipio.
Fierce Hannibal overcome Carthage surpised,
His Empire much augmented's here comprised,
Whom Africa, nor Europe could withstand,
Behold man brought unto a narrow strand.
176
Waue-mounting vessels with a full-stretch^ sail,
Though rigged and tackeld nere so well, at last
When Scilla, nor Caribdis can prevail,
With worms of their own generation waste.
Though all external accidents we escape,
Nature it self will perpetrate the rape.
177
When David felt his bosom swell with pride,
(A man according unto Gods own heart)
Thus he began himself, himself to chide,
Do thou not know poor creature what thou art,
Naked thou camst into the world with pain,
From whence thou naked shall return again.
178
Philip a King of Macedon, we read
With this inscription daily was saluted
Leaving his lodgings, that he might take heed,
The better what with his great weakness shuted.
Remember man that thou art mortal still
To subiugate a Refractorie will.
179
Great Chrales sed fifteen beggars every day,
With his own hands, an antidote for pride,
Which spectacle would Princes duly lay
Before their eyes so many would not guide
The Stern of State so Imperiously, but know
The debt is equal that we mortals owe.
180
Henry the Second King of France was slain
With one poor spill flew from a broken spear
In the hight of triumphs, caused to entertain
His Daughters Nuptial, when he least did fear
Deaths fierce assault who finds as many doors
To enter in* as we have nerves and pores.
181
Tarquin was merry when a small fish bone
Stuck in his throat and choakt him, so we read
Of Fabius with one small hair alone,
Swallowed in milk was instantly found dead.
Set these sad spectacles before thine eye,
And let thy foul misdeeds before thee die.
182
Time past thou can not properly call thine*
Of that to come thou have least certainty*
Not sure to live one minute, so in fine
Amidst of all thy iouiallitie,
One only point of nimble footed time,
Is all thou have to brag on, or call thine*
183
How many go unto their quiet rest,
In perfect health of body and of mind;
Resolved to be the next day at some feast,
Or merriment, expecting there to find
All things that may administer delight,
Who disappointed are by death that night.
184
The joyful Bridegroom to the Church repaires,
With his fair Mistress, brighter then the Sun,
And for no cost that may delight her spares,
Proud of the prize with difficulty won,
Who live not both (although together wed)
To taste the pleasures they imagined.
185
The greedy griping Purchaser often times
Gives earnest for the soil he near enioyes,
And he that plants the Vineyard, prunes the Vines,
All his endeavors totally imployes
To see it flourish neither tastes the wine,
Nor eats the grapes, for which he spent his time.
186
The Clyents fees the Lawyer pleads; the cause
Rests with the Judge in his most private breast
For good or bad success* as he does pause
Upon the matter death does him arrest,
Tells him the verdict under hand and seal
Against himself is past, without repeal.
187
Nugamur mortemque procul, procul esse putamus,
At medijs latet haec abdita visceribus,
Scilicet ex illa qua primum nascimur hora,
Prorepunt iuncto vitaque morsque pede.
Partem aliquam furtim, qua se metitur and ipsa,
De vitae filo quelibet hora rapit.
Paulatim morimur momento extinguimur vno,
Vt lampas olco deficiente perit.
188
We trifle as if death were nothing nie,
When it does lurking in our bowels lie,
For hand in hand from our first hours birth
Death walks withlife, to qualify our mirth,
Stealing each minute though perceived by none,
Part of life's clue, to lengthen out her own.
So by degrees we in a moment die,
As when a Lamp for want of oil grows dry.
189
The Devil casts such mists before our eyes
That what is nearest we think farthest of,
Belief soon enters where desire lies;
Which makes us look on Funerals and laffe.
Although we see our fellows daily die
Promise unto our selves eternity.
190
Obiecting what caused this, what that man's death.
Who else had lived many a fair year,
Reflecting not we draw the selfsame breath,
And liable to those mishaps they wear,
Nor that the young sheep comes from the fold
As soon unto the slaughter, as the old.
191
A thief condemned to die although he go
Unto the place where he must suffer death
Farther then does his fellows, or more slow,
Knows he must die, and his protracted breath
But multiplies his miseries, well knowing
Though he go nere so slowly yet he is going.
192
And when thou waking lie in thy bed,
How often do thou hear the passing bell
For some departing soul not fully dead,
Perchance some friend thou louedst dearly well
With whom not long before thou often had bin
Copartner in some execrable sin.
193
When discontents our vexed souls oppress,
We value it a happiness no more
To breath this loathsome air; forgot, no less
Forward in folly then we were before
Only those freely may rejoice in death
Who with content, drew discontented breath.
194
How many brought (to use the common phrase)
During this momentary Pilgrimage
Even to deaths door, returning in a maze
Make holy vows to heaven, and engage
Their souls for true performance, which within
One months forgot as no such thing had bin.
195
Sea-faringmen, with timorous passengers,
Who sail within an inch of death each hour
When Neptune rores the frighted souls deters,
How Saint like will they out petitions power,
But calm the waves becoming smooth and even
Drink drunk, and swear, as they would pull God from heaven.)
196
How penitent, how humble and submisse,
A sickness shaken sinner thou shall see,
That one would swear he nere would do amiss
Again for all the world, recouer'd he
Sooner forgets it then a child the rod,
And violates his plighted troth to God.
197
Thrice happy souls who only live to breath
The little time of innocence forth,
Whose harmless thoughts did ever sail beneath
The knowledge of the base worlds little worth!
He that is borne to day, and dies to morrow,
Loses some hours of joy, but months of sorrow.
198
Had Pryam died before the walls of Troy
Dismantled wear, or Paris, Helene scene,
He had gone to his Sepulcher with joy,
Old Hecuba been buried a Queen;
Anchises need not to have sought a shore
T'interre his body, had he died before.
199
Do not we daily heaven importune
(Though indirectly through a vain delusion
And greedy appetite) for wealth, which soon
Becomes the Author of our own confusion.
The humble Cottage poverty does guard,
Nor stands in need of either watch or ward.
200
Who would not be a second Cicero,
Or sweet tongued Ovid, or Demosthenes,
Whose too much worth wrought their own ouer-throw?)
Sick men desire what is worst for their disease,
Then death there is nothing we can less endure,
Yet wish those things which our own deaths procure.
201
Preheminencie is but enuies pray,
Be it in wealth, wit, beauty, eloquence,
To want, pride, lust, ambition making way,
Against which there is no bulwark of defense,
Nature nere framed an excellence so great,
Death could not study some way to defeat.
202
It Is strange to see what stratagems men use
To propagate decaying Families.
When nature does her common helps refuse
By rebaptizing their lost progenies,
Their names entayling (for a time good stands)
Upon their female issue with their lands.
203
And sometimes when the lawful lineage that
For many ages has continued falls,
In-steps some bastards peremptory brat
And his propostrous progeny installs.
Death no distinction makes, in whose hands lies
The certain ruin of all Families.
204
Nor private men and Families destroys,
But Kings and Kingdoms throws unto the ground,
Hugh Babels bulk, Jerusalem and Troyes
Admired strength, whose memories are found
Alone in books, so thou proud Rome shall fall,
Who call'st thy self the Supreme head of all.
205
Nothing retains its pristine state, but still
Some change or mutabilitie is found,
New Cities built, the old decayed, nor will
The setleds Kingdom on this massy round
Subsist, but shall to others be transferred
By course of time their memories interred.
206
The World's the rode, and we the passengers,
Are billeted at several Innes, the Crown
Some entertaines, and for Ambassadors
The Angel is reserved, others go down
Unto the Miter, or the Cardinals hat,
Some to the Plough, some unto this, some that.
207
Our iournies end is either heaven or hell,
To which we all must first or last attain,
Heaven prepared for those live and die well,
And hell the wicked destined to restrain,
Not for a certain or prefixed time,
In this most blessed, or that accursed clime.
208
And does not this wise Worldlings you concern!
Who make religion but a stalking-horse,
And can at every alteration Perne,
Nor eat, nor drink, nor sleep a pin the worse.
Whom some untimely death like to a frost
In Summer nips, so all your glories lost.
209
What would thou give when gifts will not prevail,
What would thou do when neither strength nor time
Of doings left, when death shall thee assail,
And blast thy forward hopes even in their prime,
Examine the defects of other men,
And do those things which they would have done then.)
210
You that broach Schisines, and damned Heresies,
Sell your own souls for sensuality,
To magnify your dunghill progenies,
Teach others for your own ends liberty.
Reflect upon the doctrine you will teach
Upon your deathbeds, and the selfsame preach.
211
Wrong not the all believing Laity
Struck with a two hours preach into a qualme,
Think all devotion, zeal, and piety,
Consists in the singing of a Psalm,
And turning ore the Bible, which I fear
More in their hands, then in their hearts they wear.
212
So blind men judge of colors, babies choose
The gaudie outside of a bitter sweet,
But good and wholesome sustenance refuse;
More for their health and weak disgestion mere,
So did Ulysses cunningly obtain
Achilles arms, his arms could not sustain.
213
Be Pastors, and not prators, feed your sheep
With wholesome harmeles doctrine, feed not on them,
Nor let them wade alone into the deep,
If for them you will not pray, prey not upon them,
It is the chiefest ornament of Art
To teach both th'actiue and the passive part.
214
Gull not the World with an unblessed belief,
As great Ones do, if they are not belied,
To think an outward Sanctity the chief
Perfection. Gold before its purified
Retains much dross nor will for current go
Although it seem most perfect to the show.
215
Behold fond worldlings one but even now
In prime of nature and contentious wealth,
Struck with some sudden chance no man knows how,
At unawares; death ever comes by stealth,
Upon his lamentable deathbed lying
With all the postures of a man that's dying.
217
Deep sighs and groans, his color pale and waune;
No moisture left to cool his parched tongue,
The blood dried up which in his blew veins ran,
His feeble limbs with nerves and arctures strong
Unable to support each other now,
And in their several offices to bow.
216
His eyes grown hollow, and his sinews dry,
Hair from his head, nails from his fingers fret
No part escapes, tor mented he does lie,
The panges of death, distills prodigious sweat,
Life to the heart for succor straight retyring
Who first received her, lastly leaves it dying.
217
Mean while the amazed multitude he wills
By his example to be vigilent,
And careful in their ways, whose cares he fills
With wholesome counsel, how they should prevent
This mischief, that occasion, he imparts
In zeal, which never penitrates their hearts.
218
Through obuious paths his wandering thoughts amazed
Sets them on shore amidst his worldly blisses,
On whose vain objects he so fondly gazed,
And now too late ten thousand times he wishes,
His shattered vessel ready to be split,
With more discretion he had governed it.
219
Then you the witness of his youthful folly,
Base Adulators, and Associates
He blames, were wont to purge his melancholy
(For so you call devotion) at such rates
As now his guilty soul forced to be gone
At so short warning grieves to think upon.
220
Doubtful what the event will be, confides
In him alone on whom we all rely,
Whose mercies more then all his works besides,
Who never does a penitent deny
That humbly begs, though it be nere so late
For his transgressions nere so desperate.
221
The soul departed what remains behind,
A loathsome carcass, by the diligence
Of loving neighbors decently inshrin'd,
Which other ways would yield no small offense;
Hard-hearted creatures that can daily do
Such things, which no impression leave in you.
222
Conuaid with expedition to the tomb
Dust unto dust the greedy pillagers
And Commonwealths men of our mothers womb
Impatient blame their slothful Haruengers
Who give us up amidst our funeral rites,
To quench the fury of their appetites.
223
Crawling into the several passages
Of our dead bodies, sometimes throw the head,
At their own freedom work their Voyages,
Throw heart, loins, liver, Epicure like fed,
On which they feast, in which each one resides,
Pitching his tents, as since their progress guides.
224
Our Microcosme pillaged, ransackt, sacked,
Raising the siege leave only in the room
The straggling ruins of so foul a fact,
To time, which they themselves could not consume,
Which often by othersare dug up to find
The hidden mysteries are left behind.
225
Some deuote person purchases thy skull,
On which in's Closet he does meditate,
Says here were lips, eyes, all these hollowes full
Of wanton flesh, and sparkling blood of late,
Now only serves me for a looking glass
To see that I am now what this once was.
226
Thus shall thou be tormented in thy grave,
Flowted and geered, thy flesh consumed, thy bones
Scattered abroad, on which poor mortals have
No more regard then of so many stones
Whose stony hearts such objects never stir
Nor from the least of wickedness deter.
227
Some savage beasts devour, as we do them,
To fowls and fishes others are exposed,
Who by degrees return to us again
First in a thousand several shapes enclosed,
For whatsoever is composed of earth's
The same, throughout innumerous forms and births.
228
Suppose thou have the happiness to die
In thine own Country, at thy proper home,
And in thy fathers Sepulcher to lie,
Preserved for his own Family alone.
He that shall come to seek thee there shall find
Naught but a ruined careasse, left behind.
229
The poor remainder of thy wanton flesh,
Which scarce the figure of a man retains,
No humane application can refresh,
Nor sparkling blood runs in thy parched veins,
Nor unchaste thoughts the wanton heat return,
Wherewith inflamed thy sinful youth did burn.
230
Base is the entertainment thou do give
Thy living friends resort to visit thee,
In stead of sweet perfrmes (when thou did live
And fluent words of course, then deeds more free)
Distilling forth infectious vapors, such
No man thy carcass can endure to touch.
231
By how much more with choice fare thou were fed,
Whilst thou wast living here on earth, thou art
So much the more distasteful being dead,
If secondarie means no help impart,
For the corruption of the best things, think,
Make but the greater and the dearer stink.
232
The most deformedst miserable wretch,
The earth inhabits, breath's the selfsame air,
The selfsame blood our swelling arctures stretch,
Runs in his veins though nere so well we fare,
Though not inflamed with so much active heat,
Nor do his pulses with that vigor beat.
233
Here nature ends her story, fame the rest
Lodged in the living memories of men
Preserues, and he that has deserved best
Scarce scapes the frumpe of some malicious pen;
Which though it cannot to the world deface him,
Will wrack its utmost power to disgrace him.
234
The grave Divine shall flourish in the Schools,
Th'Historian be grateful unto all,
The wanton Poet only amongst fools,
All bodies both Ecclesiastical
And Politic, their chief supporters strive
T'immortalize, their same preserved alive.
235
Of which the soul participates alone
Without the body, not yet glorifide,
According to the measure which the one
Or the others labors benefit confide,
Likewise the soul of him shall tortured be
Leaves works behind him of impiety.
236
Kings have their Chronicles, and so shall those
Lived famous in their times, the vulgar die
Whose obscure lives nor challenge verse nor prose,
Some seek to raise their fame from infamy,
So Hero stratus kindled with desire
Of fame, Dianas Temple set on fire,
237
How impiously provident men are
To purchase a self perpetuity,
Which way it comes they do not greatly care,
So they be famous, though in infamy,
I know not by what fate or fury led
Ambitious to be talked of when they are dead.
238
Steep thy dull soul in that Celestial dew
The heavens distilled upon the drooping earth
For her lost Landlords, through those Stigmats hew
Thy way to heaven, by a second birth;
Advance the Ensign of our Savior Jesus
On which he died, from death and hell to ease us.
239
Then may thou smiling look death in the face
Ten thousand times and never be afraid,
It Is want of faith fore-stalleth offered grace,
And is the cause so many are dismayed.
Striving to have (so stupid is poor man)
As much here of their-heauen as they can.
240
Which men would never do did they believe
What they profess the ploughman would not toil
Were he not sure of something to relieve
His wife and children (when he tills his soil)
The next year after, nor the footman run
But for his hire when the iournies done.
241
If men were confident of heaven and hell,
Other then in a superficial way,
They would not loyter as they do, nor sell
Salvation for the pleasure of a day.
He were a madman would refuse a Crown
For taking up, when it is laid him down.
242
What were the troubles, discontents and grief,
We suffer in this transitory life
Compared with heaven, had we but belief,
'T would break the neck of all contentious strife,
Those frozen Characters the world infest
Of thine, and mine, would be in small request.
243
Churchmen would not be covetous, and more
Ambitious then any other men,
Their Symonie would soon be given ore,
To which the Clarke would gladly say Amen,
Whereby it does appear in fine, that all
Their faith at most is but Apochryphall.
244
The griping Miser would not forfets take
Of other men's estates at half the worth,
Bugger his Gold, nor it his Idol make,
The fruits which infidelity bring forth.
Who would not change, might he continue here,
With God Almightic for his Hemisphere.
245
Court Favorites would not then temporize
For their own ends, embrace all shapes, all forms,
All postures, all religions, sacrifice
Themselves unto the Devil to raise flormes
Amongst the monster multitude, who send
Them with remorslesse curses to their end.
246
The want on Lady would not make her bed,
The common hospital of brutish lust,
Her womb the sepulcher of unborn dead,
Nor lawful heirs from their possessions thrust
By that adulterate issue she bestows
Upon her husband unsuspected goes.
247
The City Mushrum would not swear and lie
Himself into a living, which he leaves
Unto ill prospering posterity,
Who fathers wealth and mothers wit receives,
By which created either Lords or Ladies,
Beget a brood of hopeful half hatched babies.
248
The Machiuillian would not vex his braiue
To put in practice his Atheistical
And damned positions, did he but retain
A faith two steps above historical,
Who holds Religion (till he come to die)
Merely the subject of State policy.
249
The Lawyer would not plead his Clients cause.
As Mules bear burdens fed still as they go,
Or else stand like an Ass, with hummes and haughes*
Tell him he starues it, that he is too slow
In prosecution, when in deed the want
Is only that he thinks his fees too scant;
250
The dainty damsel would not do those things
Her mother would have blushed to have thought upon
And call it breeding; that she Devil brings
All out of order in our Nation,
So impudent our female sex's are grown
That by their garb they scarce from men are known*
251
And thou damm'd Atheist bruter then are brutes
Who daily laud and praise (each in his kind)
Their Lord, which all thy arguments confutes
The hell-hatch issue of a deuillish mind,
Look up to heaven, thou need'st no other story
To speak him God, and manifest his glory.
252
The infant waters gushing from the rocks
Imprisoning cauerns murmur as they steer
Their headlong course, one to another flocks,
And as they draw unto their end more near
More stubborn grow, and more unruly then
Before, which is most incident to men.
253
One soothes another up in wickedness,
And presidents for precepts are maintained
Many oflenders makes the offense seem less,
And custom is not easily restrained,
'ill habits frame excuses, they ingraft
A second nature, hardly to be left.
254
Maintain not then thy silly brother ass
Too high in flesh, for if thou do heel kick
And being suffered to get heart a grass
Cast down his master when the spur does prick,
And reason good that he should so requite him,
Endeavors to make his own Dog bite him.
255
If he begin unmannerly to bray,
Grow belly proud, or wanton in his pace,
Feed him with branne, mix stubble with his hay,
Drink from the fountain, sometimes thou may lace,
This tender hide, disturb him of his sleep
Such things th'vnruly in subjection keep.
256
If wealth abound, be liberal and free,
No man can serve two masters, heaven and earth,
If poverty do pinch, let patience be
The antidote, with a religious mirth,
Let no disaster daunt thee, but rely,
On steadfast Faith, sweet Hope, blessed Charity.
257
Pieus Mirandula whose learning famed
Him through the World for depth of speculation
Seemed as it were thereof to be ashamed,
Little advancing to his souls salvation
Wishing he had the power (to us seems strange)
With some devout old woman to exchange.
258
Seek in the first place what is first to be sought
Nor let thy wandering thoughts at rouers run,
He sails securest that is easily fraught
The work's half ended that is well begun
Even in goodness study by all means
Much more in other things t'auoid extremes.
259
He knows enough that knows how to live well
For as men live most commonly they die
And until death no mortal power can tell
What shall befall him, such variety
Of fortunes we are subject unto all
Let him that stands securest fear to fall.
260
Stain not the beauty of thy noble soul
With th'vgly foul deformity of sinue
More horrid then the place from whence it stole,
But if through frailty it should enter in,
Permit it not a minute there to dwell.
We cannot say he lives that lives not well.
261
Nor can we say he is dead, although he die
According to the common acceptance,
Whose innocence does like incense fly
Up to the Throne of mercy for salvation
Steering a course so solid, smooth and eauen,
The final object of his labor's heaven.
262
Mors dominos seruis, and sceptra ligonibus aequat,
Dissimiles simili condition trahens.
The Lord, the Slave, the Pesant, and the King
Unlike in life, in death the selfsame thing.
FINIS.
Upon the Right Honorable George Lord Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, etc.
I May express a willingness to show
The duty to thy memory I owe,
But O thy virtues soar a pitch far higher,
Then any pen can reach but in desire,
In whom two distinct attributes accord,
To be religious, and to be a Lord;
Few such we find amongst our Noble men,
That grace their honors, not their honors them.
Ambitious thoughts did never break thy sleep,
Nor how to get unjustly, nor to keep.
An humble suitor might know where to find
Your Lordships lodging, constant as your mind.
Nor did you his petition sooner read,
That had the Groom of your Bedchamber feed,
Whose constant servants better by their own
Then any gaudie Liuerie were known,
Whose Coach and horses did more all the year
An old Church-doore, then a new Tavern fear.
No wanton pleasures did thy youth defile,
Nor vain delights thy middle-age beguile,
Old age was not by doting passion led,
With like discretion either managed,
So, that perseverance with immortal fame
Has crowned thy end, the glory of thy name,
And high descent, predestinate to be
A fair example to posterity.
Thy Mannor-house stood not for show or grace,
Nor for a Land-marke, but a Ianding place;
Whose inward uniformity did please
More then the golden superficies.
Instead of Marble pillars at thy door
We did behold whole multitudes of poor
Relieved whose incessant votes did strive
To canonize thee for a Saint alive.
W. C.

AN ELEGY.
Upon the Lady Marchioness of Winchester, daughter to the right Honorable
Thomas Lord Savage, etc.
INstruct my pen with an immortal verse
Whilst holy tears enamell thy sad hearse
Sweet Saint on earth, in Heaven no less we know
Thy beauty here, there goodness makes thee so.
I rather should direct my prayers to thee
Then study to compose an Elegy,
Teaching the world with confidence they must
Perform their vows to thy religious dust
With many a weary step, to know what shall
Unto their long protracted hopes befall.
What newborn sin (that heaven could not devise
To expiate a meaner sacrifice
Then thy dear loss, all other does exceed)
Reigns amongst us? who so freely feed
The fatal sisters? that they made such haste
To finish up their work with so much waste.
How many glorious branches might have sprung
From thee so good, so beautiful and young.
They were mistaken in their count I fear
And numberd every virtue for a year.
W. C.

AN ELEGY.
UPON THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM Lord PAGET Baron of Beaudesert.
THe best intelligence that we can have
Of greatness ever rises from the grave,
There are the curtains drawn, and men appear
Not as they seemed to be but as they were:
And so do thou, who rightly understood
Thoughtst no addition great but to be good,
In which alone t'excell thou did strive,
Living an absolute contemplative.
Abhorring that unsettled generation
Who make a business of their recreation,
Whose glorious titles serve as a disguise,
To cast a mist before the vulgars eyes.
As if that honors essence were to hide
Their folly, sensuality and pride,
No tell-tale Libels after thee are thrown
To stain thine honor, not so much as one
Inuectiue line, or murmuring complaint
Thy ever happy memory does taint,
We need no marble monument to raise
Or recommend thy worth, or speak thy praise
Unto succeeding ages, shall out-liue
All helps that humane hand or wit can give
In the succession of thy noble line
Wherein thy living memory does shine
Most glorious; whilst with wonder we behold
So many goodly Characters enrold
Of thee, whose growing virtues speak the worth
And beauty of the soil that brought them forth.
W. C.

An Elegy.
UPON THE HONORABLE Sir JOHN BEAVMONT Knight Baronet.
A Beanmont dead; he forfeiteth his pen
That writes not an Elegy. For when
The Muses darlings whose admired numbers
Recorded are amongst our ages wonders,
Exchange this dull earth for a Crown of glory,
All are engaged t'immortalize their story.
But thou have left us sacred poesy
Reduced unto her former infancy.
Having (as all things else by long gradation)
Lost her first luster, till thy reformation,
Forcing her back into the ancient stream
Taughts thy chaste muse divinity, a theme
So far neglected, we did hardly know
If there were any (but a name) or no.
Mirror of men who leftst us not a line
Wherein thy living honor does not shine
Equal with that of the celestial Globe
Clad in the splendour of her midnight robe.
Only that Venus never did appear
Within the Circle of thy Hemispheare,
Which so much adds to thy religous verse,
Succeding ages shall not dare rehearse
Without some sacred ceremony, sent
Beforehand, as a divine complement.
The Authors Apology for the title of his Book injuriously conferd by Roger
Muchill, upon a Sermon of Doctor Donnes.
DEath in a fury has the Fellon took
That stole my Title, Done, to grace thy book.
To wrong the living and commit a rape
Upon the dead, how could he think to escape?
I am but too much honored to be styled
Th'vn willing Gossip to thy unknown child.
But he that sought so basely my disgrace
Behind my back; has wronged thee to thy face.
I would revenge thy quarrel but that he
That deals with dirt shall but defiled be.
Live in thy living fame; and let this serve
Not thine, but mine own honor to preserve.
An Epitaph upon Roger Muchill.
HErelies Much-ill that nere did good (who thought
To coozen Death) in his untimely vault.
Harm watch, harm catch, his avarice was such
That at the length, he stole a Pot to much.
But he that would not take his bond before
May take his word, he shall do so no more.
FINIS.

