Prologus
HEre begynnyth the life of the three kings of Colein fro that time there ^ought
our lord god almighty and cam^ to Bedleem (...) shypped him and offied to him.
unto the time of their death / As it is drawn out of diverse bol^es and put in
one / And how they were traulla^e fro place to place / The matere of thise three
kings fro the beginning of the prophecye of Balaam priest of Madians and
prophet that prophesied and said O^^^ stella et Jacob et erurger homo de
israel et ipe d^abitur oim gen^u^ That is to say a slew shall sp^^ge of Jacob
and a man shall rise up of Israel and shall be lord of all folk. as is
contained in the old Testament / Of this Balaam is altercaco^n in ye ^est
parties betwyx the Jews and the Christian men / for Jews say in their books
that Balaam was no prophet but an enchauntour. and through which craft and
the deuylles help he prophesied / Wherefore in Jews writing they call him an
enchauntour and no prophet Again the Jews Christian men allege and say that
Balaam was a Paynym and the first prophet and no Jew and he prophesied to
they in that were no Jews / And he prophesied right gloryously of the
Incarnacyon of our lord and of the coming of these three kings / for if his
prophecye had been by the deuylles craft. the devil would not have forboden to
curse Israel / But god by great love showed to Balaam by an angel by great
tokens or that he grieved god by his evil counsel / Also in the Jews books is
a great question of Job whom god with his own mouth co^mendyth / of whom the
Jews took but little head or none. for he was a Paynym and none Ebrewe /
Ferthermore they say that Job was before Moses law. and that time he dwelled
in Mesopotania. notwythstondynge the scripture says he was of the land of Hus
in Sirie. and dwelled in a town that now is called Sabob. that is fro Damask
a days Iourneye. where his sepulture is seen unto this day / And beside that
same town saint Poul was cast down in the field and there recovered again by
Christ Ihu^ / Also ye Jews keep right naught of the prophecies of Balaam ne of
his words. but in their books set him at naught. of which it were long to
tell /

WHEN the chyldern of Israel were goon out of Egypt and had won Iherusalem
and all the land lienge there abowte. and no man was hardy in all yt counfree
to set against them for dread that they had of them / That time in Inde
was an hylle that was called Vaws. and also they called it yt hill of Vyctory /
And on this hill the ward and the keeping of them of Inde was ordained and
kept by diverse aspyes by night and day for the chyldern of Israel and
afterward for the Romans / So that if any people purposed with strong hand
to entree in to ye land of the kingdom of Inde. anon aspyes of other hills
abowte by tokens showed and warned ye kepers of the hill of Vaws / As by night
they made great fire. and by day great smoke / For that hill of Vaws passyd of
heyghte all other hills of Inde and in all the Eest / And so when any such
tokens were seen by night or day. then anon all manner of men of that
country made them ready for to withstonde if any enmyes came / Wherefore in the
time of Balaam that gloryously prophesied of the Incarnacyon of our lord and
of the sterre and say de) Orietur stella etc (Then all the great lords and
all the people of Inde and in the Eest desired greatly to se that sterre / And
they promised for to give great gifts to the kepers of the hill of Vaws / And
hired them with great rewards and gifts that at such time as they should se
by night or by day far or nere any light or sterre in the firmamente other
wise fourmed than has be accustumed to be seen. that Incontinent they should
show light and send them word / And so long time that comen fame and
pronystifyeng of the sterre was gretely desired and bore thorugh all the
lands of the Eest and also the name of the hill of Vaws / Moreover of the same
hylle rose up a great kynredde in Inde and in ye Eest. that is called the
progenye of Vaws unto this day / And there is not a more worshypful kynredde
ne more noble and mighty in all the lands and all the kyngdoms in the Eest. as
it shall be showed more plainly afterward / And the kynredde came first of
the kynredde of the worshypfull kings blood that was called Melchior that
offryd gold to Tryste Ihesu /

IN the year of our lord a thousand two hundred when the cite of Akon that is
called Acrys stood in Joy and prosperity and was enhaunsed rychely with
princes and lords and also with diverse orders of men of religyon of all manner
of diverse naco^ns and tongues, in somoche that the name and the praysynge of the
cite of Akon or Akers was borne thorugh the world? And moreover all naco^ns
and tongues came thither both by land and see of al manner of merchandise of
the world / So there was no cytee like thereto of nobles ne of worthynes and
of might / Then for the great name and many fold praysynges and merueyles
that were there. the grettest of birth of the progenye and kynredde of Vaws
came out of Inde in to Akon / And when they saw all things there habunde in
more worship than in Inde and in all the countrees of the Eest / Then by
cause of so many playsures they tarried there and builded a fair toure and a
strong castle in Akon for any lord or king / And they brought with them
out of Inde and of the Eest many rich ornaments and Iewelles / And among
all other Iewelles they brought a costle we Dyademe of gold arrayed with
perles and precious stones / And in the hyhest place of the Dyademe stood
letters of gold and a sterre like the sterre that apperyd to the three kings
when they saw Christ with a sign of a Cross beside him / And that Dyademe was
Melchiors king of Nubie and of Arabie that offered gold to Christ / For
thorugh that Dyademe and the merytes of the three blessed kings god almighty
heelyd and sauyd both man and be of diverse syknesses / and what man was take
with the fallyngeuyll. when the dyademe was laid on him anon he was hole /
therefore after ye master and thorder of ye Te^plers gate yt diadem with many
precious Iewelles. of which crown they had great offrynges / But after yt the
order of the Templers were dystroyed where that Dyade me and many other right
precious ornaments became. it was never known unto this day / Wherefore greece
sorrow and lamentacyon was then made in all that country abowte / Moreover
the forsayde princes of Vaws brought also with them out of Inde books which
were wreten in Ebrewe and Caldee langage berynge witness of the life and of ye
deeds of those three reno^med kings / The why the books were after translated
in to Frensshe / And so of those books and of herynge and of sight and of
sermon^s and of Omelies that been drawn out of diverse books. this present
treatise is thus written together and comprysed in one libell or little book /
Also the old kynred of this Progeny of Vaws beren always in their baners unto
this day a sterre with a sign of a Cross on the same manner and in like
form as it appeared to the three kings in time of the birth of our Sauyoure
Christ Ihesu / And so always after that the prophet Balaam had prophesied of
that sterre. the more the fame and desiring of the sterre increased. and the
more greatly it was had in remembrance thorugh out all the land of Inde and of
Caldee. and also the more the people desired to se it in their live days /

When Ezecheas reigned and was king and souereyne of the land of Jews /
Then Ysaye the prophet prophesied gloryously of our lady saint Mary and of
her sone. and said) Ecce virgo concipiet and pariet filium etc (Loo said the
prophece a maid shall conceive and bear a child / In the time of Ysaye king
Ezecheas was grieved with an Infirmite unto the death / And Ysaye the prophet in
the name of god told him that he should deye wherefore Ezecheas turned to the
wall and wept and sorowed. as holy writ tells / And not for dread of death
oonly. but for he had no air. and for the byheste of Abraham and of David and
also the prophecye of Balaam and of Ysaye should faylle and perysshe in him /
Wherefore our lord had mercy on him. And encreaced and prolonged his life:
xv-yeres longer / And Ezecheas asked a token of god thereof / The which token
was this / That the son should goo bakwarde or wythdrawe him against his kind
/ And so god suffered it to be / And when the Caldees saw this merueyllous and
wonderful token in the son and in the air. they merueyled right greatly
thereof / And when they understood that this token was showed for Ezecheas the
king. then they sent him many gifts. and were in purpose and will to come
and worship him / For the king Ezecheas of very Innocence of heart made
dissimulacyon and would knowledge that this token was showed for him / And also
he would not thank god thereof but had a little pride in his heart / Wherefore
god was somdele wroth with him / And therefore god sent to Ezecheas by his
prophet Ysaye. that al those gyftis which were sent to him by the Caldees
should be borne in to Babilonie. as is written in the Bible / For though
Ezecheas were king of the Jews borne. and that wonderful token was showed
for him. yet he was not that man that should arise up of Iherusalem and be
lord of all folk as Ballaam prophesied / And in that time the Caldees and the
Greeks gave them much to Astronomye and had great delight therein / In so
much that every maid and child in men's howses knewen the course of the
sterres and of the planetes And yet always they give them thereto.and specially
kings and princes / For they have masters of that science and give them
great wages to teache them /

AFter Ezecheas reigned Manasses. and slew Ysaye the prophet / And after
Manasses reigned Amon. and after him Josias / And in his time prophesied
Iheremy. and then Ioachim / The same time the Caldees byfeged Iherusalem and
dystroyed if. and bare away all the vessel and the ornaments that were in the
temple of god and in the kings house. and bare them in to Babilonie. as Ysaye
had prophesied before / And they led many Jews prisoners in to Babilonie
the which is fro Iherusalem. l. days Journey / And they were in captivity and
in prison. l. year. to whom Iheremye sent many books of the law and of
prophecyes. yt they should not be forgete. as the book tellyth / And in this
captiuyte of Jews Danyel prophesied under Tyrus king of Perse of the
Incarnacyon of Ihesu Christ. and said) De lapide absciso de monte sine manibus
conscidenciu^ (As ye may here after / Among all other Danyel said to the
Jews) Cu^ venerit sanctus scto^rum sessabit vnctio vestra(: That is to say.
when he that is most holy of saints comyth. then shall your vncco^n sesse /
After this the king of Perse and the Caldees commanded and did write and
translate out of Ebrewe in to Caldee all the books of the Jews laws and ye
prophecies of Ysaye. chore Ieremye Danyel Mychie.and Balaam and other
prophecies / Among all thise books and prophecies they fond ye many things
should be fulfilled by the Caldees and them of Perse. and specially by the
Caldees and them of Perse. and specially after the prophecy of Balaam. yt
said) Oriet^ stella ex Jacob (And for these prohecyes and books of the Jews
and for other causes the Caldees and the men of Perse were the more feruente
and studyenge after the sterre / Whereby we shall understand that all this is
by goddys ordinance and of his habundannte mercy. and also to the strenthynge
of our faith / Balaam that was the first prophet and was no Jew
prophesied by a sterre the first calling and clepynge of them that were no
Jews. when he said) Orietur stella ex Jacob and exurget homo etc (And this
calling of the people god first began and perfourmyd by his birth and by
these glorious kings / And how be it that they of Perse and of Caldee were
Paynemes. yet by these prophecyes and books of the Jews they found and wist
well that what so ever god had promised by his prophets he was mighty to
fulfill and perform it / So they ordained twelve of the grettest clerks of
Astronomye that were in all the countreee. and gaaf them great rewards to
keep the hill of Vaws aforsayde. for because of the sterre that was prophesied
by Balaam And the cause that there were twelve men ordained. was this / That if
so were that one man deyed a another should be put in his stead / And another
cause was that some of them should keep the hill one time / And some a another
time to look after the sterre that Balaam prophesied / Nevertheless the people
looked not oonly after the sterre but after the man that it betokenyd. which
should be lord of all folk / And they of Inde and Caldee came often times to
Iherusalem by cause of marchaundyses and also for playsure / And they for the
most part be learned in Astronomye / For in Inde and in other places abowte
ben many sterres in the fyrmament which may not be seen and perceived by
night plainly / But on the hill of Vaws in a bright weder and clear ben seen
and perceived many diverse and strange sterres / This hill of Vaws passyth of
heyghte all the hills of the eeste / And above it is no more of bread than a
little chapel that is made thereupon / The which the three kings did make of
stone and tymbre / And there ben about this hill many steps for to goo up to
the chapel / And there grow trees and good herbs and diverse spyces abowte
this hill / for else men might not goo up to the hill it is so hye and narowe
/ There is also a pillar of stone above that chapel of a wonder height / On
the heed of this pyller stondyth a sterre gylte and well made and fair. and
tornyth with the wind as a fane / And through the light of the son by day
and of the moon by night the same sterre geuyth light a great way in to the
country abowte / And many other merueylles ben told of this hill of Vaws /

When the time of mercy and grace was come that god would have mercy on
mankind / when the fader of heaven sent down his sone to take flesh and
blood of our lady saint Mary and to be borne of her for our salvation / In that
time ye Emperor of Rome Octauian held the empire of all the world / In the
year of his empire.xlij. as saint Luke tellyth he sent out a co^maundment to
discryue all the world (Exiit edictu^ etc) And the discriuynge was first
under Cirinus that was bysshopp of Syrie / And every man went home to his own
country / Then yede Joseph out of Galilce in to Nazareth in the Iewrie. and
that was king David's land. the which cytee was called Bedleem. By cause
Joseph was of the house and of the meyne of king David. therefore he yede in to
his country with his wife our lady saint Mary great with chil de / So when
they were there. the time was come that our lady should be delivered / And so
she was delivered by goddys own might and mynystracyon of angels.she
wrapped him in clothes and laid him in a mainger. for there was none other
place And ye shall understand that Bedleem was never of great reputaco^n nor
place of great quantyte. but it has a good fundament / For there ben many
caves under the earth / And Bedleem is fro Iherusalem but two miles / It is but
a castle. but it is called a cytee by cause king David was borne there / And
in yt town was sometime an house of Ysaye that was fader to king David. in the
which house king David was borne and enoynted to be king of Israel by Samuel
the prophet / And in the same place Christ was born goddis sone of heaven / And
that place was sometime in the end of a street that was called the Coueryd
street / And this was the cause why it was so called. for the great heete and
brennynge of the son it was so coueryd with black clothes and other clothes
to keep away the heete of the son. and so it is yet to this day / And in
that street was wont to be a markette ones in the weke of old clothes and
other things. and specially of tymbre / In that st^ete stood sometime an house.
and Ysaye king David's fader left a little house before a den under the eithe.
and it was shapen like a little sellar / Ysaye the fader of David and other
after them putt in that cave certain necessaryes that longed to household for
heete of the son / It is also the mane^e in all the country both in cytces
and towns to be certain houses that been called there Alchan. which we call
here Hostrees. and in those houses ben mules. horses asses. and camelles always
ready if so be that any pilgryme. merchant or other man that traueyle by the
way if him need any be for him or for his marchandyse. then he gooth to
such an house as is called Alchan and there he may hyre what be that he
woll have / And then he gooth forth to cite or town where he woll abide. and
there he dyschargeth him of his horse or be and sendyth him in to such an
house that is called Alchan / And there ben beestes on that manner to hyre / And
the master of the house takes the beast and yeueth it meet. and when he may
he sendyth him home again there he came fro / And if so be that no man goo
in to that cite or town in long time. he takyth the same be and ledyth him
out of ye town and settyth him in the way hom ward / And so the beast gooth
forth home with out any ledinge even to his masters house without peril of
beestes or of thieves / So every man that has any such beestes. every man
knows other beestes ben they never so far asondre / And of such houses
lords of the ground have great winning and toll of such beestes hytynge /
And such a manner house was that house a little before or Christ was borne in
/ But abowte the birth of Ihu^ that house was all dystroyed.so that there was
no thing left but broken walls on every side and a little cave under the
earth. and a little unthrifty house tofore yt cave / and there men sold breed
in the same ground It is also ye usage in all the country that all the breed
that shall be sold shall be brought in to a certain place / And of the breed
that is sold in the day the king and the lord of the ground at night shall
have a certain money / And when David was made king of Israel by process of
time Iherusalem was dystroyed and all the country abowte No man took head of
this house by cause it was all dystroyed and no thing left but that broken
house and the cave / And bredde and tymbre that might not be sold on the day
should be put in that house to the next market day / Asses. horse.and other
beestes yt came to the market were tied abowte this broken house /

FOr to speak again of the matere / When Octauian Emperor of Rome had scnte
out his co^maundment that each man should goo to the same town that he was
borne in / Then went Joseph. and our lady rode upon an ass. they came so
late within night to Bedleem as it is before said. therefore all the Innes and
hostries were stuffed with pilgrims and other men. And by cause they came in
poor array they went abowte the cite and no man would receive them / and
specially for they saw that our lady was a young woman sitting upon an ass
heavy sorrowful and full weary. great with child and nyghe the time of her
delyueraunce of her child / Then Joseph ladde her in to this foresaid place
that no man took head of down in to the little derke den / And there our
lord Ihesu Christ that same night was borne of our lady without any disese of
her body / In that house of old time was left a maynger of the length nyghe
of a fadom made in the wall / And by the same maynger was an ox of a poor
mannys tied. And beside the ox Joseph tied his ass / And in the same-mainger
our lady wrapped her blessed son in such clothes as she had.and laid him
upon the heye tofore thoxe and thasse For there was none other place in that
country / In ostryes all the mayngers ben of three or four fete of length.
that an horse or else a another be may have his meet by himself / And such
a maynger was yt that our lady lay in /

THe place where the angel apperyd to the shepeherdes tha^t night that Christ
was borne is but half a mile from Bedleem / And in that same place David kept
sheep in his chyldhede and deffended them from beers and lyens and other wild
beestes / So me books say yt the shepeherdes of that conntree ke pe their
sheep twyes in oo year / And those times are when the days and nyghtes ben
both of a length And that land abowte Bedleem is called the land of byhest /
And yt place in the Eest is mnost part mountayns. for in some place a man
shall not well know Winter fro Somer / And in some place there it is right
cold.and in some place is both Winter and Somer. as it is in this country
after yt the places ben plain or full of hills / For abowte some of the
hills a man may find snow in August. and that snow men of yt country
gadre then and lay it in their caves under the ground / And afterward it is
borne to the markettes. and yt will the lords of the country bye to set it in
basins on their board to make their drink cold / And the poor men that gadre
it carye it in chafe that the heete should not melte it. and the lords that
bye it vncoueren it out of yt chaff. then anon it is resolved and molte to
water For comynly in that country of the Eest is always snow in Septembre and
Octobre / When the son comyth a little low in that country all seeds and
herbs begin to spring and were as they done in this country in March and
April / And in some parties of the Eest men repe corn in March and April.
but most in May. after the place or ground lies hye or low / But by Bedleem
ben many mo good fat pastures and hot than in other places. in so much yt
at Crystmasse barleye begynnyth to were ripe. and then men of diverse
countrees send thither their horses and mules to make them fat / And ye
time yt we call here Crystmas. it is called there time of herbs / And for
asmoche as when Christ was borne peace was in all the world. therefore the angel
said Par hominibus bone voluntatis (And for the heete of yt country abowte
Bedleem. that is the cause yt shepeherdes kept their beestes there yt time of
the year. as they done yet unto this day /

IN those days when ye co^maundment went out from Cezar August as it is
aforsayde / then was Herod ordained and made king of the land of Jews by
the emperor and by the Romans: and yet was Herod no Jew ne king of Jews
borne / But by cause ye same emperor and the Romans had made subgette to
them the land of Iewery and many of the prouynces abowte them un to Inde
Perse and Caldee. so by strong hand they made him king / And all yt country
knew well yt He rode was but a lion and never came of kyngis blood. ne of
Iewry bore. but made king by the emperor and Romans.so yt the prophecy of
daniel should be fulfilled in the tyme^ of the birth of Christ. when he said)
Cu^ venerit sanctus sacto^rum etc (as it is aforsayde / Yet the Jews
contynuynge in their malice and falsnesse said. that long time after the
Natiuite of Christ their vncco^n sessed not. but that they had many kings
after / But yet the false Jews forsake not that Herod came of a Jew on the
fader side and of a Paynym of the moders side. and so he was no very Jew
Wherefore christian men make the Jews utterly confuled of the prophecye of Jacob
their Patryarke. ye said thus) Non auferetur ceptru^ de judah nec dux de femore
cius doner veniat qui mittendus est et ip^e erit expectaco^ genciu^) that is to
say / The septie of Judah shall not be borne away ne the stock of lygnage till
he come that shall be sent. and he shall be that folk shall abide / And many
other questyons of the Jews to the christian men of the vncco^n of their kings
/

When god was borne of our lady as it is afor said then this sterre that was
prophesied by Balaam. and long time abyden and looked after by the twelve
Astronomers of ye said hill of Vaws / The same night and the same hour that
god was borne. the same sterre began to rise in manner of the son shynynge
bryghte / And after yt form of an egle ascended above the hylle / And all the
day in the highest place of the air it abode with out any meuynge / So when
the son was most hot and most high there was no dyfference in shinynge
betwyx the sterre and the son / Nevertheless some books sayen. yt in the same
day when god was borne. were seen many sons. but when the day of Crystmas
was paste. the sterre ascended up in to the fyrmament / And the sterre that
thus was showed was no thing like the sterres that been painted here in
diverse places / For it had right many strakes and beemys more bright brennynge
than a bronde of fire / And as an Egle fleenge and betynge the air with his
wings. right so the strakes and the beemes of that mouyd themself abowte /
And the sterre had in himself the form and the liknesse of a young child.
and above him the sign of a Cross / And a voice was herd in the sterre
saying) Natus est nobis hodie rex iudeorum qui est expectaco^ genciu^ and
dominator eorum ite ad inquirendum eu^ and adorandu^) that is to say / This
day is borne to us king of the Jews that folk have abyden and he is lord
of them god forth and seek him and do him worshypp^ / Therefore for
strengthynge of our faith and to afferme this matere foresaid almighty god whose
prouydence in his ordinance fayllyth not / And saint Poul says) Vocatea que
non sunt tanqua^ ea que sunt) that is to say / God callyth those that been not
as well as those that been of his providence / Thus he did and dysposed. as he
did in the old Testamente. when he gaaf a langage to an ass. and made an
ass to speak to Balaam / He would in the begyn^nynge of the new Testament
give a voice to speak out of a sterie yt the same Balaam prophesied of / When
all the people of that country abowtesawe this wonderful and merueyllous
sterre. and also herd the voys of the sterre. they were greatly affrayed. and
had great wonder thereof / But they knew well that it was the same sterre
that was prophesied of by Balaam. and long time was desired and abyden of all
the people of that country theraboute.

Thus when these three Kings that ye time reigned in Ynde. Caldee and Persidie
weren enfourmed and well assured by the Astronomers and by the prophecyes of
this sterre / They were right glad that they had grace to se that sterre in
their days that was long time prophesied before. and all the people had so
long looked after / Wherefore though each of these three kings weren far from
other. and none of them knew of others purpose. yet in one hour the sterre
appeared to them all three / And then they ordained and purposed them anon
with great and rich gifts and many diverse ornaments that were belonging
unto the degree and array of kings. and also with mules and camels and horses
charged with precyouse tresours and with great nombre and multitude of people
to goo seek in their best arraye and to worship our lord Ihesu Christ that
was borne to be Savior of all the world and the king of Jews that was born
that time. as the voice of the sterre spoke and preched / And ferthermore they
arrayed them much ye more honestely and worthyly / For they knew well and
understood that he was a more worthyer king than any of all the world /
Ferthermore each of these three blessed kings had with them great caryage of
oxen and sheep and other beestes that long to mannys living and sustenaunce.
and other manner things necessary belonging to the office of a chamber.
kechen and to all other offices belonging to a kings astate. and also both
fode for man and be they carried with them / In somoche yt they ordained so
great plentee that should suffyse them well both outward and homwarde / And
every king had people as it had be an host / It is the manner in that country
of the Eesst out take cytees. that in other towns ben many fair Ostries. and
for the most party al maneze vytaylles both for man and best is enough for
the common people. but not for such kings and such great lords that ride
with so great multitude. Beddyng and such other necessaries of chambers.
neither of chapel. ne of kechin is not suffycyent ne honest and therefore
lords have such cariaage with them / And in ye country for the most party
men ride or go by night for bren^ynge of yt son^e and in heete of ye day they
rest / Ye shall understand yt there ben three Indes. of whom thise three lords
were kings / And all those lands for the most party ben yles / There ben
also three great waters and three great deserts or wyldernesses full of wild
and peryllouse beestes and horrible serpents / And in that country done grow
also thise long great redes that been brought in to England. and some ben so
great yt men make houses and ships of them / And each isle is divided and
departed each from other / And each land is full of wild beestes /

IN the first Ynde is the land of Nubie. and thereof Melchior was King when
Christ was born / And there is also the land of Arabie / And in that land is
the mount Sinay / A man out of the red see may lightly saylle out of Egypt
and Syrie in to Ynde / And pilgrims and merchants that from Ynde passen the red see.sayen that all the ground of the red see is so read that the
water above semyth as it were red wine. notwythstondyng that water is as
other water is of color. and it is merueyllously salt / And it is so clear
that in the deppest of all the water men may se fysshes and dyscerne al
things by the botom^ of the sea And that water is three cornerde. and it ebbyth
and flows in to the great see of Occean. and is four or five miles of bread
where it is brodest / And there the chyldern of Israel yede through with dry
fete when Pharao and his host pursued them. and al were drowned man and be
/ Out of that see sourdeth a great flode that rennyth in to a river of paradyse
terrestre.and that river is called Nilus / And this Nilus passyth by Egypt,
and by it comes much rich marchandyse out of Ynde and so passes in to
Egypt. Syrie. Babilonie.and Alisaundre. and so thorugh all the world / And
all the earth of the land of Arabie there the mount Synai is. is merueyllously
read / Stones and trees. herbs and all other things that grow there ben
read for the most party / And there is found gold wonderfully read in
manner of thin and small rotes. and that is the best gold of the world
There is also an hill that is called Bona. and in that hill is found the stone
that is called Smaragdus / And that is cut out with great craft and great
traueyle of the hylle. And that hill is kept be syly and strongly with the
Sowdans meyne /

IN the second Ynde was the land of Godolie and thereof was Balthazar king when
Criste was borne / And he offered ensence to Ihesu / And there was also of old
time in that land yt kingdom of Saba / And in that land growith more plente
of good spyces than in all the lands of the Eest after / And in especyall
ensence more than in all the world / And it droppyth out of certain trees in
manner of gu^me /

IN the third Ynde was ye kingdom of Taars. and in the time of Crystis birth
Jasper was king thereof / And he offered to god Myrre / And that land is called
thyle of Egris will / In that isle grows more myrre than in all ye world
after / And it wexyth like eeres of corn that were burnt with the weder and
it growyth right thycke And when it is ripe it is so soft that it cleuyth on
men's clothes as they goon by the way / And then^ men take small cords and
girdles and draw them all abowte the eeres. and so the myrre cleuyth on ye
cords and on the girdles. and afterward the myrre is wrong out of the cords
and girdles / Wherefore we may understand that this was done of a great
prouydence of the great mercy of god: that these three kings Melchior Balthazar
and Jasper of these lands in whom these good and rich gifts wexed and-growyd
that should be offered to god by the old prophecies / Rather they may be
called kings than kings of other great lands. whereof says David the
prophet) Beges tharsis and insule munera offerent reges arabum and saba dona
domino deo adducent) that is to say / Kings of Taars and of the isle shall
offer gifts kings of Arabie and of Saba shall bring gifts to our lord god
/ Sometime these kings had other names / Melchior was called king of Nubie and
of Arabie / Balthazar was called king of Golie and Saba.and Jasper was called
king of Taars and of thyle of Egris will / and it was called the kingdom of
Taars because it was nexed to ye same isle / And so the names of their kingdoms
ben specifyed in special for dyfference of other cytees and yles of the
country /

TO show again of thise three worshypful kings. of the array and ordenaunce
with rich tresour and ornaments and with great multitude of people as it is
aforsayd / And when they rode forth out of their kyngdoms none of them wist ne
knew of others purpoos by cause of ye long way that was bytwyx each kingdom.
yet the sterre went euenly tofore thise three kings and al their mey ne / And
when theistode still or rested then^ the sterre stood still.and when they yede
or rode the sterre always yede forth tofore them in his virtue and strength and
yaue light to al the^r ways / And ye time was peace in all the world. wherefore
in all cytees and towns ye they ye de by was no gate shyt night nor day. but it
semyd to those three kings and to al their people yt it was ever day and never
night in all those.xiij. days / whefore all men of cytees and towns that
these three kings came by were wonderly aferde and merueyled thereof For they
saw kings with somoche people and bestes and caryage that passyd by them in
great have in the night / But they knew not what they were ne from what place
they came. ne whyther they should goo / But on the morrow they saw the
waygretely defoylled and traced with horse fete and other beestes / Wherefore
they were in great doubt what it should be and great altercaco^n was among
them in that co untree long time after / So ferthermore when these three
kings had rydden through diverse lands kyngdoms. citees. and towns. they rode
over hills waters. valeyes. playnes. and many other diverse peryllouse places
without any dysese or lettynge / For all the way that they rode were it high
or low all semyd to them even and plain and fair way / They took never
herberough by the way night nor day ne never rested themself but to make
water neither their beestes that were in their company. ne neither ete nor
drank after the time that they had take their way till they came in to
Bedleem / And all these.xiij days Iourneyes semyd them but one day / And
thus thorugh the great might of god and the ledynge of the sterre they came in
to Iherusalem the thyrtenth day after that Christ was borne in ye vprysynge of
the son. whereof this is no doubt / For they found our lady and her sone
in the same place and in the cave that Criste was borne in / and he was laid
in an old maynger Also many books tell that they came in to Iherusalem and to
Bedleem in the in the mids of the day. whereof saint Gregory says thus in an
Omelie) Si dimna operacio humana racione comprehendi posset non esset
admirabilis. nec haberet fides meritum cui humana raco^ prebet experimentu^)
that is to say / If the works of god might be comprehended in man's wit
or reason it were no wonder: for faith has no mede where kind reason shewyth
if to man / For our lord god that in the old Testament led Abakuc the
prophet by one here of his heed out of Iurye in to Babilonie and Caldee. that
was a hundred days Iourneye bitwene going and coming to Danyel the prophet
that was in a pytte among wild lyens. and anon restored the same Abakuc in to
his own place again / The same lord god in the new Testament was mighty to lead and bring thise three worshipful kings out of their kyngdoms in ye eest
in to the land of Iewery in twelve days without any dysese or lettynge /
Also our lord Ihesu Christ after his resurrexcyon yede to his dyscyples in to
an house without opening of gate or lock / And as ye fire burnt not ne did
none harm to the three children when they were put in the furneys of fire. ne
no savor of smoke was found in them / Right so in the time of these three
glorious kings our lady saint Mary bare our lord Ihesu Christ that was and is
very god and man / And yet she was tofore and ever after a clean maid / God
almighty might harue brought thise three kings and al their folk out of the
Eest in to Iewerye in a moment as he brought Abakuc the prophet forsayde /
But though god almighty made himself low and was borne in great pouerte and
took upon him manhood and man's freeltee. yet he would merueyllously show his
birth to all the world. in heaven and in earth with the might of his godheed
and of his high mageste /

When these three kings each in his way with his host and company were almost
come to Iherusalem save two mile / Then a derke and a great cloud covered
them and all the earth / And in that derke cloud they lost their sterre as
ye prophecye of Ysaye said) Surge illuminare Ihrlm quia venit lumen tnu^ et
gloria dn^i super te orta est quia ecce tenebre operient terram and caligo
populos) that is to say / Iherusalem arise and take light for thy light is
come to the and the Joy of god is sprongen upon the. for loo. derknesse shall
couere the earth and a cloud the people / When these three kings were nyghe
Iherusalem. then Mechior king of Nubie and of Arabie with his people was
fast by the hill of Caluarie there Christ was done on the cross by the will of
god. there he abode in the cloud and in derknesse / And that time the hill of
Caluarie was a roche of twelve grees of heyghte / And on this hill thieves and
other men for diverse trespaces were put to their death / There was also beside
this hill an high way. and to that high way were three high ways metynge
together / And so for derknesse of ye cloud. and for they knew not the way
they abode there and yede no ferther at that time /

AFter that Melchior was thus come. then next him a little under the cloud
came king Balthazar that was king of Godolie and of Saba with all his host.
and abode beside the mount of Caluarie in a little town which is called
Galilee / And holy writ spekyth much of that town / For the discyples of
god almighty before his resurreccyon and after also were wont always to come
thither togider / In that town god almighty appeared to his discyples after his
resurreccion / As it is wreten in the gospel (Precedet vos in galileam ibi eu^
videbitis) that is / He shall goo tofore you in to Galilee and there ye shall se
him But there is a land that is called Galilee. and that is a great
lordshypp^. and it is three days Iourneye from Iherusalem /

ANd when thise.ij. kings Melcheor and Balthazar were com^ and tarried in thise
places for said in the cloud and derknes. then ye cloud wexed clear. but
the sterre appeared not / So when thise.ij. kings saw yt they were nigh Ihrlm
though neither of them knew other. they took their way to ward the cite /
And-they met together beside the mount of Caluarie there as three ways were
metyng together / Then came the king Jasper king of Taars and of the isle of
Egryswyll with all his oost. And so these three glorious kings with all their
meyne. caryage and beestes met together in this hyhe way / And
notwythstondyng that none of them never before had seen other. ne none of them
knew others persons. ne knew of others coming. yet at their metynge each
of them anon right with greece Joy and reverence kyssed other / And though
they were of diverse langages. yet each of them to their se mynge spoke one
manner of speech / So when they had spoken together. and each of them had
told his Journey and the cause of his way / All their causes were acordynge
in to one / Then were they much the gladder and the more feruente in their
way.and so they rode forth / And suddenly at the vprysynge of the son they
came in to the cite of Iherusalem / And when they knew that Iherusalem was the
kings cytee the which their predecessoures and the Caldees of old time had
byseged and distroyed. they were full glad. supposing to have found ye king
Ihesu there borne in the same cite / And that time was Herod in Iherusalem /
and he and all the cite were greatly dys trowbled of their suddenly coming / For
their company and their beestes were of so great nombre and so great
multitude that the cite might not receive them / But for the most party lay
without the cite al about / Whereof Ysayas prophesied and said) Eortitudo
gencium venerit tibi inundacio camellorum operiet te dromedarij madian and
effa. omnes de saba venient auru^ and thus deferentes and laudem dn^o annuncian
tes) that is to say / The strength of folk comes to the Iherusalem great
plente of camelles shall couere. the dromedaries of Madian and of Effa shall
com^ to the. many folk shall come fro Saba bryngyng gold and ensence and
yeuynge laud to god /

THis Herod was ordained king by the emperor and by the Romans. and he was
but young of aege. and was that time in his palayes in Iherusalem / And then
these three kings asked in that cite of the people where that child was borne.
whereof speaks in the gospel theuangelist) Cu^ natus esset ihu^s etc) that is
to say / When god was born in Bedleem in the cite of Iewery in the days of
Herod king of the same land. three kings came out of the Eest and said)
Where is he ye is borne the king of Jews. we saw his sterre in ye Eest and
we be come to worship him (And Herod herd this and he was dystourbled and
all Iherusalem with him / And he gadred together all the princes and the
priests. and asked of them where Christ should be borne / And they said. in
Bedleem of Iewry. thus it is wreten by the prophet) Thou Bedieem land of
Iewery thou art not lyfyll among the princes of Iewery. of the shall goo out
a duke that shall rule my people of Israel (Then Herod preuely called to him
the three kings and learned of them the time of the sterre that apperyd to
them. and so sent them forth in to Bedleem.and said) Goo and enquyte besely
of this child. and when ye have found him come tell me that I may goo and
worship him (when they had herd the king they yede the yr way / And the
sterre that they saw in the Eest yede before them till they came there the
child was And when they saw ye sterre they were right glad And they yede in
to the house and opened their tresours. and offered to him. gold. ensence.and
myrre / All this is the gospel / And in their sleep an angel came fro god
and badde them that they should not goo again to Herod / And so they turned
home to their country by a another way / Of these three kings why they cam^
first in to Iherusalem rather than in to Bedleem many books in diverse manner
declare / and many causes ben wreten which were to long to tell / But among
all other causes one is. yt king Herod and the Cyteyzyns were so distrowbled
for their soden coming. and also they seenge that these lords were kings.
and their host came out of Caldee and out of the Eest. the which of old
time through suffraunce of god had often times pursued the yr king and besegyd
and distroyed the cite of Ihrlm and that land abowte / A another for they came
fro so far countices to worship the king of Jews that was latly borne /
And by cause that Herod was but an stranger and was made king by the emperor
and the Romans. he was aferde leest he should have lost his kingdom by cause
that Christ was borne / Also a another cause was chise three ky^ges of goddis
ordenaunce came so to Iherusalem without auysement when they had lost their
sterre / For Iherusalem was the kings cite. and always the kings of the land
were most abiding there. and doctors of the law and the Scrybes with their
scriptures and prophecyes were evermore present in that cite / So ye Jews and
the Scrybes knew well long time before. christ should be borne in that place
/ Wherefore Jews may never show cause to excuse them of their false believe /
Of this says saint Gregory in his Omelie) Iudeos profecto. been ysaac cu^
jacob tilium suu^ benediceret presignauif. qui caligans oculis and prophetizans
in presenti filiu^ non vidit cui tamen in posterum multu^ preuidit etc) that is
to say / By this we may understand the Jews. for Ysaac when he was blind
and might not se he blessed Jacob his sone and prophesied of him / And
moreover when he had him in his presence before him he saw him not / And yet
he saw in spyryte many things which should fall to him afterward / In like
manner so the Jews were gretely full of ye spyrite of prophecye / But him that
they prophesied of when they had him among them they knew him not. For they
dispysed him when he was born / And long time tofore they prophesied of his
birth. and not oonly that he should be borne. but in what place he should be
borne they told to Herod / So their knowing and their prophecye shall bear
witness to their dampnaco^n and us help of our believe and cause of our
salvation /

When these three kings were enfourmed by Herod and by the doctors of the
law of the birth of Christ. and of the place where he was borne and were
passed out of the cite of Iherusalem / Then the sterre appeared to them
again as it did before. and so it yede forth before them till they came in
to Bedleem. which is but two miles fro Iherusalem / And fast by that place as
it is before said were the shepeherdes to whom the angel appeared with great
light and showed to them the birth of Christ / And these three kings rode by
the same place there the shepeherdes were and spoke with them / And when the
shepeherdes saw ye sterre they ran together. and said that in such a light
and such a clerenesse an angel appeared to to them and told them of the
birth of Christ and all that the angel said to them / And all that they had
herd and seen they told ye kings. whereof the kings were right glad. and
with good chere took great consyderaco^n of the shepeherdes words / And so of
witness of the shepeherdes and of the voice of the angel that apperyd in the
sterre and was herd the kings had doubt of no thing / Some books in the Eest
say that voice that was herd out of the sterre was the voice of the same
angel that showed the birth of Christ both to the shepeherdes and to the
kings / They say also in the Eest that the Jews bileue in that the angel
that yede before-the children of Israel with a pylar of fire when they yede out
of Egipte. that same angel it was whoos voice was herd in the sterre. and
that yede so forth with the sterre before the three kings / For when the three
kings spoke with the shepeherdes. the sterre more and more began to shine
bryghter and bryghter These three kings were the first of myscreauntes that
byleued on Christ. and the shepeherdes were the first of Jews that byleuyd on
Christ / And all though the kings were no Iewewes yet they said that they
came to worship the king of Jews /

When the kings had spoken with the sheep herdes. then they gaaf them great
gifts and so rode forth to Bedleem / Then anon as they were come unto
Bedleem they lighted down of their horses and changed their array. and
clothed them in the best and rychest clothes yt they had / And as kings
should be arrayed they arrayed themself / And always the sterre yede forth
tofore them / And the nerer that they came to the place the more the sterre
shyned bryghter and bryghter / And then they rode thorugh the Coueryd street
as it is told before till they came to the little house where in Crste was borne
/ And the sterre stood still upon the ground tofore the door / And anon after
the sterre departed himself in so great light. that the little house and the
cave within was full of light / And so anon the sterre ascended up in to the
air. and there stood still always in the same place. as it is said in the
gospel tofore (Et intrantes domum etc) And entering in to the house they
found our lady and her child. and fell down and worshipped him and of fred
to him gifts. Gold. Myrre. and Ensence / Of this came afterward an use in
that country of the Eest / There shall no man come in the presence of the
Soudan. or of a king to speak with him but he have gold or silver or some
other richesse in his hondes / And also or he speak with the Soudan he shall
kiss the ground / And this is used in that country unto this day /
Ferthermore friar Minours when they shall come to ye Soudan or to a king they
must offer to him peers or apples / For they may towche no gold nor silver /
And the Soudan receyuyth the peers or apples with reverence and meekness /
And that time that thise three kings offeed thus to Christ. he was in his
manhede. a little child of.xiij. days of aege / And he lay wrappyd in
clothes of little valewe in his moders lap / As it is wreten in diverse books
she was in person flesshly. and somewhat brown / And in presence of these three
kings she was covered with a poor white mantell. and that she held close
tofore her with her lift hand / And her heed was covered all together save her
face with a lynnen cloth / And she sat upon the maynger / And with her right
hand she held up god almyghtys heed / So after these three kings had
worshypped god and kyssed his hondes right deuowtly. and laid their gifts
beside Crystys heed. what was done with these gifts ye shall here afterward /

MElchior king of Nubie and of Arabie that offered gold to god: he was leest of
stature and of person / And Balthazar that was king of Godolie and of Saba
that offryd ensence. he was of a mean stature / And Jasper that was king of
Taars and of thyle of Egriswill that offered myrre he was most of stature. and
he was a black Ethyopye without doubt / For the prophet said) Coram illo
procident ethiopes and inimici eius terra^ lingent venient ad te qui
detrahebant tibi and adorabunt vestigia etc) that is to understand / Before him
shall fall and bow down Ethiopies. and his enmyes shall lycke the earth. they
shall come to the that dethrahyd the. and they shall worship the steps of
thy fete / But having regard to the persons yt were that time they were but
little persons thoos three kings. in so much that all manner of people had
much merueylle thereof / And that semyd well yt they were come from ferce
countrees / For the nerer the Eeest and the vprysynge of the son that men ben
born the less they ben of stature. and the more feeble and tender. and herbs
ben the hoter and serpents and such worms and peryllous beestes ben the
greter and the more venomous / And all other beestes and fowls ben there more
great than here / Also thyle kings brought with them many rich gifts and
ornaments that king Alisaunder which conqueryd all the world left in Ynde
and in Caldee and in Perse. and all the ornaments that the queen of Saba
found in Salamons Temple. and diverse vessel that were of the kings house and
of ye Temple of god in Iherusalem / The which in the time of dystruccyon of
Iherusalem were borne in to the countrees and lands by them of Perse and of
Cal^dee / And many other Iewelles both of gold and silver and precious stones
these kings brought with them and offered to god /

But when they found our lord Christ Ihesu laid in that Cribbe and in poor
clothes. and the sterre had give so great light in all the place there Christ
was that it seemed as they had ston de in a furnays of fire. they were so sore
aferde. that of all those rich Jewels and ornaments that they brought with
them they took no thing out of their coffres but that came next their
hondes. as it was the will of our lord / And Melchior took out of his tresory
a round appyll of gold as much as a man might hold in his hand and.xxx.
gylte pence.and that he offered to god / Bathazar king of Godolie and of Saba
took out of his tresour ensence as it cam^ next to his hand and he offered that
to god / Jasper as it came to his hand offered myrre to god with weeping teeres
/ So these three kings were so aferde and so deuowte in their offrynge. that
of all the words that our lady said that time they took but lytyl
consyderaco^n / Save oonly to every king as they of fred to god she bowed
down with her heed. and said mekely) Deo gracias) that is to say / Thankinges
be to god / Thappyll of gold yt Melchior offryd with the.xxx. pence was
sometime king Alysaunders the great conqueror / And he did make ye same
appyll of small pieces of gold that he had gadred of the trybute of all the
world / And yt he bare always in his hand / And this appyll was left in Ynde
when he was comen fro Paradyse with many other rich Jewels / Morouer it is the
manner of that country of the Eest when a Soudan or a king passes through a
cite. then every man after his power is tofore his own door hall cast
ensence and myrre in a fire / and what man does it not he is hold a rebel
against the Soudan or king. for thereto is take good head / And this usage in
all the Eest betoke nyth new subiecco^n and daily obedyence both to god and to
their mawmettes. or to a king whether if is do ne to / Also in old time
Martyrs were not only constreyned to worship mawmettes. but also to
worship them with ensence and fire / And this maner^ Sarrazyns ask. always
of Christian men that been in their prison for to come in to their Temple of their
gods. and worshypfully to do sacrefyce to their mawmettes with fire and
ensence /

When almighty god lowed and meked himself and became man for our salvation.
and was borne of the blessed mother Mary. yet he had no need of gifts of the
three kings / Nevertheless the round appyll of gold that was offered to
hymanone as king Melchior had offered it. it was in a moment al broken in to
duste / So we shall understand in figure as the stone that was kytte out of
the hill without mannys hand or any Instrument and brake an horrible mawmette
unto duste and powder. the which the king Nabugodonosar saw in his sleep /
Right so yt stone. that is to say. our lord Ihesu Christ with out any
corrupco^n of sin was borne in to this world / The appyll that betokenyth ye
world through his meekness and his virtue and the streyngth of his godhede in
a moment he brake all to naught / What befell of these yeftes ye may here
afterward /

AS thise.iij. kings had thus performed their way and their offrynge and
done all thing yt they came fore. then as mankind axyth and would they and
their meyne.and their horses and beestes began to ete and drink and sleep. and
all yt day they took their rest and playsur in yt town of Bedleem / For as
it is told before they ne ete ne drank. in all those xiij. days / And then
they told mekely to men of Bedleem of their countrees. and how merueyllously
they came thither by ledynge of the sterre fro ye ferdest part of the world /
and Ferdermore as the gospel says Et responso accepto in so^pnis ne redirent
ad herode^ per alia^ viam reuersi sunt in regione^ sua^) yt is to say The angel
of god warned the three kings in their sleep yt they should not torn again to
Herod. and so by a another way they yede home to their kyngdoms / But yt
sterre that yede before them appeared no more after / And so these.iij. kings
yede all homwardes togider in to their own countrees with grefe Joy and
honor.and they rode forth with all their caryage and people through al ye lands
and provinces yt Olifernes had of old time / And for ye company of people men
of ye country demed ye Olifernes to be come thither again.and when they came in
to any town or Cite they were received worshypfully of all the people / And
moreover they preached and told to the people as they rode all that they had
seen and herd. And so well paid for their vytaylles and spoke so mekely and
goodly that their names and their praysynge was never after forgoten / But the
way that they had rydden to Bedleem ward in.xiij. days thorugh ledinge and
conduytyng of the sterre. they might uneath ride and goo again in two years /
And that was done for men should know what dyfference was be twene goddys
might and mannys power and werkyng /

When Herod and all the Scrybes and other people herd tell that these three
kings were goon home again and were not come to him as he badde them. then
with great envy and malice he pursued after them a great way / And al way as
he rode after the kings he herd all the people bless them and praise them.
and speak of their noblesse / Wherefore this Herod brent and dystroyed al all
the land yt the three kings had rode by.and specially them of Taars and
Silicie. For he put upon the (...) yt they had suffered them preuely to pass
there over the sea.and therefore he brent all their ships and to he all their
good / Also he and his Scribes pursued these kings with great envy. for they
herd ye people tell how wonderly they came out of their lands in.xiij. days
through ledyng of ye sterre / And how they yede home again without sterre or guydes
or Interpretours / For all manner of men that these three kings passed by
suffysed not to tell how wonderfully they passed by them night and day / And
thereof Jews that dwelled in diverse lands and places bare witness her of to
Herod and to all the Scribes and to all ye Jews And so for the wonderful
doing the Paynems yt had no knowing of holy writ. ne of the birth of
Christ called thise three kings Magos. that is to say. wytches / And the Jews
that knew the scripture and the birth of Christ. and the places of envy and
falsnesse excyted the Paynems all abowte to call them wytches. and so it was
brought in to usage that they call thise three kings so yet unto this day and
thereof beryth many diverse books witness / But to put away all manner of
doubts and in repreuynge of all the false Jews. almighty god that is ever
wonderful in his werkynge and glorious in his saints would have the preuyte of
his birthe to be know to all the people / So that this glorious name that was
oonly hid in ye land of Iewery unto his birth / That same name all manner
of naco^ns through all the world should worshypp^ know and praise /

AFter thise three kings were come with great traueylle to the hill of Vaws
before said then^ they made there a fair chapel in worship of the child
that they had sought / And they made covenant to mete together all three at that
same chapel ones in the year at a certain day assygned / and there they
ordained their sepultures / Then^ a little while after all the princes and the
lords and the worshipful knights of their lands and kingdoms herynge of
the coming home of these three kings. anon they rode to them with great
solempnyte and met with them at the said chapel / And with great meekness
and reverence they received them / And when the princes and lords herd how
merueyllously god had wroughte by these three kings / then they had them in
more reverence and love and dread ever after / So when these three kings had
ordained their Testamentes and done what they would. then they took leave each
of other / And each of them with his own people rode hoome unto his own
land with great Joy and solempnyte. and thus each king departed from other
in their persons / but never in their hertes / And when they were rested in
their own lands. then they told and preched to all the people all that
they had seen and done in their way / And they did make in their Temples a
sterre after the same form and liknesse as it apperyd to them / Wherefore the
Paynems left their errors and their mawmettes and worshypped the child
which the kings had sought / And thus thise three kings dwelled in their
lands and kyngdoms in worshypfull and honest conuersacyon till after the
Ascenco^n of our lord Ihesu Christ / And within short time after then came
saint Thomas thappostle in to their countrees /

AFter the time that thise three kings were to me from Bedleem in to their own
countrees again / Then began to rise and spring a great fame of our lady
and of her child and of ye three kings abuote all the country of Iherusalem
Wherefore our lady for dread of the Jews fled out of that little house that
god was borne in and yede in to a another derke cave under the earth / And there
she abode with her child to the time of her Purificacyon / And as goddys will
was diverse men and wy^ men louyd our lady saint Mary and her sone. and found
them all manner necessaryes that them neded / And after when ye faith began
to wexe and increase. then was edifyed there a chapel in ye same cave in
worship of the three kings and of saint Nicholas / And in that chapel there
is a stone which our lady was wont to sytte on when she yaue her child our
lord Ihesu Christ suck / And on a time as she satte upon that stone in
gyuynge to her sweet child suck. there happened to fall down from her teete a
little drop of that most purest and most clean vyrgynall milk on the
forsay yd stone. the which most precious and purest milk that fell from that
blessed vyrgyn is remaynyng and seen there unto this day / And the more it is
shrapyd with knyues. the more wexyth the milk / And it is borne in to many
diverse places by pilgrims Also when our lady was goon out of ye little house in
to ye cave she had forgote her smock behind her in the hay of ye maynger
there our lady lay in / And so both hay and smock were hoole and tressh^
in the same place unto the time that saint Eleyn yt holy queen that was mother
to king Constantyn came to the place / For the Jews of malice and of envy
held that place that Criste was borne in a foul cursyd place / In
somoche-that they would suffer no man nor woman ne child ne be goo in to
that place / Ferdermore when our lady had offered up her child in to the temple
with the turtles and douues after Moses law. as holy writ tells / And
Symeon took him in his arms and said) Nunc dimittis seruu^ tuu^ dn^e etc) that
is to say / Now lord let thy secuaunt be in peace after thy word / The same
time Symeon and Anne ye holy woman in presence of ye Scribes and Pharisees
prophesied many things of our lord Ihesu Christ as holy writ tellyth / And
so great a name was spronge of our lady and of her sone among the Jews that
she might not ne durst not no longer abide in that place for dread of Herod
and of the Jews / And the Gospel says (Angelus dn^i apparuit in sompnis
joseph dicens Surge and accipe pueru^ etc that is for to say / An angel of
god apperyd to Joseph in his sleep and said Rise and take the child and his
mother and fle in to Egypt. and be there till I tell the / For Herod shall
seek the child to dystroye him / Then Joseph roos and took ye child and his
mother and yede in to Egypt by night and dwelled there till Herod was deed /
Our lady and her sone were in Egypt dwelling.vij. years. and it is from
Bedleem.xij. days Journey / And in this way as our lady went in to Egypt she
saw grow dry roses. the which ben called the roses of Ierico. and they
grow in no place of all the country but only in the same way / And thise
roses the shepeherdes of the same country done gadre in time of year and
selltheym to pilgrims for bredde and to other men of yt countrees abowte. and
so they ben-borne in to diverse lands / And in the same place there our lady
dwelled with her sone in Egypt is now a gardyne therein growyth bawme. and it
is allong and broad as a man may cast stone / And in that gardyne ben vij.
wells in whom our lady wysshe her sone and bathed him. and wasshyd her clothes
and her sons clothes / And in that gardine ben many busshes of bawme.and they
ben like busshes of coses. and ben but little higher than a fadom. and the
leaves ben like to Trayfoylles / And to every busshe a christian man one of the
Soudans prisoners is assigned to keep it and to make it clean / And there is a
great wonder and a merueylous of thise busshes. for there may no man keep
them ne dress them but he be a christian man and yt has often times be proved /
For when a Jew or Paynem kepyth them anon they wexe dry and grow no more /
And in the month of March yt Soudan is always abiding in yt gardyne / And
then the rods of the busshes ben kytte like a vine. and then they ben
bound about with coton. and under the kyttynge of the rods and the coton
ben set dysshes of silver.and so the bawme renneth down in to the vessels
through ye coton as water renneth out of a vine / and out of thise dysshes this
bawme is put into a great pot of silver.and that pot is more than vi.
galons / And the Soudan takes all this bawme in to his own keeping specially.
but when any messager is sent from a king for bawme. the Soudan yeuyth him a
little vyall full / And when this baw me is all gadred and dropped out of the
rods. then^e every christian man yt has a busshe to keep takith the rods
that been left and set them in water in a clean pot.and the bawme swy^meth
above as it were fat nesse of flesh / And this bawme is gadred and is good
for all manner of brosynge / And if a man be wounded it woll make him hole
anon / And this bawme is sold to pilgrims of diverse countrees / And so it
is borne thorugh diverse lands abowte / But this bame is no thing so virtuous
ne so good as the bawme that droppyth out of the redes / For that can not be
bought of the Soudan by no manner of wise For and a man take a drop of that
bawme and lay it on a mannys hand anon it renneth and thyr leth thorugh on
that other side. and that place shall never corrupt ne rote after / And that
is called raw bawme. of which bawme it were over long a matere to tell the
virtue thereof / But all the people in ye Eest bileue that yt place is such a
virtue of growing of bawme by cause our lady dwelled there.vij. years and
washed there her clothes and her sons and also bathed him in those wells as
it is aforsayd /

FErthermore as it is aforsayd. that Melchior king of Nubie and of Arabie
offryd to god an appyll of gold and.xxx. pence gylte Of these.xxx. pence ye
may here the beginning and the last end / Thara that was fader to Abraham
did make these.xxx. gylte pence in the name of the king of Mesopotania.
which king was called Nylus / And so by process of time. this Abraham when
he should take his Journey to goo on pilgremage out of the land and country
of Caldee in to the country which was called Ebron which at that time
hyghte Arabie. he took thise foresaid.xxx. pence that his fader Thara had do
make with him / And for those.xxx. pence gylte he purchaced and boughte then
a place for his sepulture and for his two sons Isaac and Jacob / Afterward by
process of time Joseph was sold of his bredern in to Egypt by merchants of
Ismalie for those same.xxx. pence sent in to the land of Saba for diverse
spyces and oynementes for the sepulture of Jacob and so they were put in to
the-kynges tresory / Then by process of time in king Salomons time yt que
ne of Saba offered thise.xxx. pence with many other rich Iewelles in the temple
of god in Iherusalem / So afterward in the time of Roboam king Salomons sone
when Iherusalem was distroyed and ye temple of god spoylled. then thise.xxx.
pence gylte were brought to the king of Arabie and were put in to his
tresorye with many other rich ornaments that were brought out of ye temple of
god / Then^e afterward when Christ was borne. then Melchi or king of Nubie
and Arabie took thise.xxx. pence with him and many other rich Iewelles. by cause
they were of the best and fyneste gold that he had in his tresory / Therefore
he took those with him and offryd them to god in Bedleem when he was born /
Then^ after when our lady saint Mary yede out of Bedleem in to Egypt for dread
of-kynge Herod.she left those yeftes that were offered to her sone as she went
by the way knytte all together in a clothe / It hapnyd after that a shepeherde
that kept sheep in the same country. the which had so great Infyrmyte and
dysese that no leche might heel him / And all the good yt he had he gave to
diverse leches to make him hole. but if would not be / And as he yede with his
sheep in that field he found those.xxx. pence with ensence and myrre in a
clothe together / And those gifts he kept to himself preuely. till a little
before the time that Christ went to his passion / And when ye shepeherd herd
speak of such an holy prophet that heelyd all men of their. Infirmytees with
a word Thenne-he cam^ to god and prayed him of grace and of help.and then
our lord Ihesu Christ heeled him anon at a word. and enfourmed him in the
faith Then the shepeherde offered to god with good devotion the.xxx. pence
with ensence.and myrre. as they were both all togider in the clothe / And god
knew those gifts well enough / And god badde the sheep herd goo in to the
temple and offer all these things on the awter.and so he did goddys bidding
and offered them up to the awter with great deuoco^n / And when the priest of
the temple that kept the offryng saw such an oblaco^n offered on the awter.
in ye worship thereof he reuest him and encensed the awter because such
oblaco^ns were but seldom seen in that temple. he took with great reverence the
rich offrynges and put them in to the common tresory / And a little while
after. that is to say ye third day tofore Crystis passion Judas Scarioth
came in to the temple to the princes of the law and to the Jews and made
covenant with them to betraye his master god almighty / And for his labor
the pryncis of the law and the Jews took out of the tresory those.xxx. pence
/ Then when this was done and Christ was bytrayed through his discyple and
should be deed for all mankind as his sweet will was / Then Judas repented
him. and yede in to the temple again to the princes of the Jews and cast down
again to them these.xxx. pence / And then as the gospel says he went and
hynge himself / Then ye Jews bought with xv. of those pence a field for the
sepultures of pilgrims as the gospel tellyth / And the other.xv. pence the
Jews gaaf to the knights that kept the sepulcre of Christ / Ye shall
understand that the lyknesse of thise.xxx. pence was used in all the country.
both in name and in money from Abraham's time unto the dystrucco^n of
Iherusalem. the which was by Titus and Daspasianus days distroyed / But from
the time of Abraham unto the time of Crystys passion thise.xxx. pence were
never dysceuered ne departed but evermore were bore hole together / And when
Christ was sold for them. anon they were departed and sparpled about in
diverse places / And the cause why these.xxx. Pence were called silver in the
gospel. not wythstondyng they were fine gold / For it is the common usage in
all the country so for to call them / As men call of this country gold
of beyond the sea. as Scutes. motenes. or florens / And yet in the Eest the
same prynte is made both in gold and silver and copre. and is kept among
great lords of that country / And the prynte of these pence is on the one
side a kings heed crowned. and on that other side it is wreten with lettres of
Caldee. the which writing men can not read now / And one of them is
worche.x. shelynges. or better than three floreyns / And many moo merueylies ben
told of these thyrty pence. of whom it were a long process to tell / Also
when our lady and Joseph were warned to come out of Egypt by an angel as ye
gospel tellyth / Then they were bydden to goo in to Galilee. and there they
dwelled in a cite which was called Nazareth / And so the prophecye was
fulfilled (Quonia^ nazarenus vocabitur) that is to say He shall be called a man
of Nazareth / And what Christ did work in earth from that time till the
third year before his passion. the Evangelists openly declare not in their
gospelles /

When our lord Ihesu Criste was styed up in to heaven. after that he sent
saint Thomas thapostle in to Ynde to preche there goddys word / In which Ynde
as it is aforsayd thise three kings ye time regnyd and were lords of those
lands And though it so were that saint Thomas against his will yede in to the
lands of Ynde. yet it was done of great prouydence of god. yt the same
appostle ye put his hand in to goddys side to know ye he was very god ye was
risen fo death to life for saluaco^n of man should go and preche the Passion of
Christ. his Resurrecco^n.and his Ascenco^n to those worshypful kings that
sought our lord in Bedleem in his birth. and there with yeftes worshypped him
/ And as saint Gregory says) Quod omnibus nobis profuit quod hij tres reges
eiusdem dn^i nostri ih^u xp^i infanciam que sierunt et oculis viderunt et
deuotissime muneribus adorauerunt and probauerunt) that is to say / It was
prouffyte to us all that these worshypfull kings and their people sought the
childhede of Christ. and with their eyes did se him. and with their gifts
worshypfully and devoutly honored him and sothly preuyd it / Also ye saint
Barthylmew. Simon and Jude that were Cristis appostles were sent in to Ynde to
preche the faith among all the people / For there ben many parties of Ynde /
And one part of Ynde is more than all the party of the world on this half
of the sea / For this party of Cristendom on this half the sea is no more
acounted in all theest but an hundred days Journey /

AFter yt saint Thomas thappostle had prechid in the kingdom of Ynde goddis
word and had goon abowte all the Yndes and the prouynces and done many
miracles thorugh the sign and token of the Cross and of goddis word / As he
yede about in the temples he found a sterre painted in every temple after the
sterre yt apperyd to the.iij. kings when Christ was borne. in which sterre
was ye sign of a cross and a child above / And when saint Thomas saw the
sterre he asked of bishops of ye temple what is was / And bisshops told saint
Thomas how such a sterre apperyd of old time upon ye hill of Vaws in
tokenynge of a child ye was borne and should be king of Jews. as it was
herd out of ye same sterre / And for that cause these three kings yede out of
their lands in to Bedleem worshypfully through ledynge of the sterre and came
in to Bedleem in.xiij. days. and there offered to the child yt was bore. but
with great traueyle afterward they came home in to their own lands in two
year / And as those three kings hadd done and seen the bishops of the temple
told to saint Thomas thapostle / When saint Thomas herd all this he thanked
god.and with great Joy he preched to the bishops and to all the people the
chyldhede of god. his passion. his resurrecco^n and his ascencyon. and all the
werkis of Christ while he was in earth / Where thorugh the bishops of the
temples and many other folk were converted to Christ and were crystned /
Ferthermore saint Thomas mekely declared and did expowne to all the people the
understanding of this sterre and of the Cross / And he casted out of the
Temples all mawmettes / And he hallowed them in the name and in the worship
of that child Christ Ihesu / And then such a fame began to rise in all
that country abowte of saint Thomas for the great miracles that he wroughte.
that all folk that had Infyrmytees or any other tormentynge of wicked
spyrytes they came to saint Thomas / And he in the name of god and by ye sign
of the Cross heelyd them. and converted them to Crystis faith. and crystned
them. and they that were so converted to Christ did many miracles thorugh
the virtue and sign of the Cross afterward in diverse places there as saint
Thomas had not vysited ne ben /

SO when saint Thomas had thus preched and taught the people / Then he yede
to the kyngdoms of those three kings and found them hole of body and of great
aege / And as Symeon had answer of the holy ghost. that he should not deye
till he had seen Christ goddis sone. and so he abode him till he was brought
in to the temple and there he took him in his arms / So in like wise these
three kings prayed to god that they should not deye till they were renewed with
the holy ghost and with the sacrament of Baptym / So when they herd that a
man that was disciple of Christ was come in to their lands that was called
Thomas. and preached to the people of the chyldhode of Christ and of his Passion.
Resurrecco^n. and Ascencyon. and of those works that Christ did here in
earth. and specially of the sacrament af baptym / Anon notwythstondyng that
they were of great aege and feeble. yet they arrayed them and came al three kings
to saint Thomas with other lords and great multitude of people / And saint
Thomas with great Joy and reverence received them. and declared to them all
that Christ taught here in earth to his dyscyples. and also his passion / And
how he roos from death to life the third day. and also how he styed up to
heaven And how he sent down the holy ghost to the apostles. and many other
artycles of the faith / And specially he told them of the sacrament of Baptym
without which sacrament there may no man come-to the kingdom of heaven / And
when they were thus enfourmyd and Instruct in the faith. then saint Thomas
crystnyd them and more over all ye people that came with them / And anon
thise three kings were replete and fulfilled of the holy ghost / And began co
preche with saint Thomas goddys word / And also they told the people how they
had sought Christ goddys sone in Bedleem in his Natiuyte as it is told before
/ So when all this was done these three kings went with saint Thomas and all
their people to the hylle of Vaws / And there saint Thomas did halowe ye
chapel that those three kings had done made and edifyed upon that hill And
there saint Thomas and those three kings preched again to all the people of
Christian believe. and of the sterre that apppered to ye three kyngis / And such a
Joy and gladness was among the people. and such a name was risen in all the
lands about of saint Thomas and of thise three kings cristned that all manner
of people both men and wymmen came from diverse and far countrees with
great devotion to visyte that chapel that was made on the hill of Vaws / And
for that great concours and deuoco^n that was made to the chapel. those three
kings did make under that hylle a great and a rich cite / And is called the
cite of Seuyll / And that is ye rychest and the best cite of all Ynde / And
yet unto this day in that cite is the habytacyon of Prethyr Ioh^n that is
lord of Ynde / And there dwellyth also the Patryarke of Ynde. that is called
Patryarke Thomas / And why the Patriarch of Ynde is called Thomas. and why the
lord of Ynde is called Ioh^n ye shall here afterward /

When saint Thomas the appostle had preched and conuertyd the people to the
laws of our Savior Christ Ihesu. then he sacred and made these three kings
unto thordre of preesthode and afterward unto Archebysshops / And when they
were put in this degree. then they ordained under them bisshops. priests
and clerks to serve god / And then these forsayde three kings and bishops
hallowed all the Temples in that country in-worshippe and honor of our lady.
and casted out all the mawmettes that were in the temples in that country
about / And to bisshops and priests and Thise three kings and Archebysshops
gaaf many great possessions to mayntene and increase goddis seruyse / Also
saint Thomas taught thise kings and Archebysshops and other bishops and
priests the manner and the form to say a mass. and enfourmyd them also of
the words yt Christ said to his discyples. when he made his supper yt night
that he was betrayed. through which words he made and ordained the Sacrament
of the awter / And also he taught them the Pater noster and many other
things he told them / Also the form of crystnynge and specially charged
them that they should not forgete that And when saint Thomas had enfourmyd
them thus of the Christian faith. then afterward he took martyrdom for the
law of Christ. as it is contained more fully in the story that is wreten of
his passion / There it tellyth how he was slain and in what place / But sothly
in all that country abowte there saint Thomas was slain both men and wy^men
have vysages shapen after hounds. but they ben not heery. and so they ben yet
unto this day /

AFter the death of saint Thomas these three kings Archebisshops yede abowte
citees and towns and other diverse places and ordained many chyrches and put
in them bishops priests and clerks and other mynysters of holy church to
do divine seruyte / And much richesse and great possessions And then the
three kings Arch^bisshops forsook ye vanyte of the world. and ordained them
to abide in the cite of Seuyll. the which they had do build / And they
assygned certain lords to govern and rule their kyngdoms and lands both in
spyritualtie and temporalte / And all people of great love and charity were
obedyent to them. as ye sone to the fader / Then^e the second year tofore
their death these three kings and Archebysshops made a Conuocaco^n of all the
people both spyrytuall and temporal / And had them all to a certain place /
And they warnyd and counseyled the people that they should be perseueraunt in
the christian faith as saint Thomas had taught them And counseyled the people
that they should be all of one acorde and of one will to chose a man among
them that were able and discrete that had love and desire to mayntene the
faith of Crystendom. And that man should be cheyf tofore all other men. as in
spirytualte in saint Thomas stead / And to him all manner of men shall obey as
to their ghostly fader Which man in worship of saint Thomas thapostle should
be called the Patriarch Thomas for ever lastyng memory / And when the Patriarch
were de de then they should come together all in one place and in his stead
chese another. to whom as it is aforsayd they should obey as to their ghostly
fader / Then^e when this matere was thus-spoke among the people they assented
thereto. And of one accord and will they chose a man that was called Jacob. ye
which was come out of the country of Anchioche. and he had always followed
saint Thomas the appostle into Ynde / And this Jacob the people chose and took
him for their Patriarch / And changed his name and called him Thomas / And
this man Jacob was the first Patriarch that was in that country / And so
always they of Ynde be obedient to the Patryarke Thomas as we ben to the Pope
of Rome yet unto these days / And to this Patriarch and so al his successors
these three kings gaaf for evermore wych the assente of all the people the
Tithes of all their lands and kyngdoms / When all this was done and the
Patryarke Thomas then chosen to be lord of all ye people in spirytualte /
Then thise iij. kings Archebysshops and other bisshops of comin assente of
all the people chose a another man ye was discrete to be lord and governor of
all the people in te^poralte / And for this cause. yt if any man would rise or
tempte against ye Patriarch Thomas or against ye law of god. if so were yt the
Patriarch might not rule him by the spirytuall law. then^ should this lord of
te^porall law chastise him by his power / So this lord should not be called a
king or emperor. but he should be called Prethir Ioh^n / And the cause is
this For the three kings were priests and of their possessions they made him
lord / For there is no degree so high as presthode is in all the world. nor
so worthy / Also he is called Prethyr Ioh^n in worshyp^ of saint Ioh^n the
Euangelyste that was a priest. ye most special chosen and loved of god
almighty / When all this was done these three kings assygned the Patriarch
Thomas and Prethyr Ioh^n the one to be cheyf governor in spyrytualtie. and the
other cheyf lord in temporalte for ever more / And so thise same lords and
governors of Ynde ben called unto these days /

When all thing was thus dysposed and ordained by thise.iij. worthy kings.
then they went in to ye cite of Seuyll foresaid. and there they lived two
years / And a little tofore the feast of the Natyuyte of our lord Ihesu Christ
there apperyd a wonderful sterre above the cite / By ye which sterre they
understood that their time was nyhe that they should deye and pass out of this
world unto everlasting Joy in heaven / Then of one assente they ordained a
large and a fair tomb for their sepulture in the same church that they had
do make in that cite / And in the feast of Crystmas thise kings and
Archebysshops did solempnely goddys seruyse. so in the feast of the
Circumsico^n. Melchior king of Arabie and of Nubie said his mass solemply in
ye church / And when he had said mass tofore all the people he laid him
down. and without any dysese or heaviness he yield up his spirit to the fader
of heaven And so deyed in the year of his aege. c. and.xvi.

Then came those two other kings and took up his body and arrayed it in
bishops clothes and with kings ornaments and bare him to his tomb / And
then in the feast of the Epiphanye Bathazar king of Godolie and of Saba said
devoutly his mass and when he had done. without greuaunce of dysese or
syknesse. as the will of god was he deyed and passed to god in the year of his
aege. c. and xvi. Then Jasper the third king took up his body and arrayed it
as the first Kings body was. and with great solempnyte laid and buried it in
the tomb by Melchiors body / The sixte day after this Jasper king of Taars
and of thyle of Egriswill. when he also with solempnyte and great devotion said
his mass. then Christ took his spirit to him and to his bliss / And then
came other Bishops and priests with much people and took his body and arrayed
it worthyly as the other kings bodies were. and bare it to ye tomb there
the other kings lay. And Christ showed there this wonder tofore all the people /
When the body of the third king was then brought and should be buried and
laid in the same tomb between the other kings. anon each of the other two
kings departed asonder and yaue place to their third fellow. and so received
him to lie in the mydyll betwix them both / And so it may be said of thise
three kings as it is radde in holy writ ( Gliosi principes terre qm^o in vita
sua dilexerunt se isa and in morte non sunt seperati etc) that is to say / As
thise glorious kings and Archebisshops loved together in their life. right lo
they ben not departed in their death / And yt sterre that apperyd over the cite
tofore their death abode always still till their bodies were translated unto
Colayne as men of Ynde say /

Long after the death of these three kings. when Christian faith stood in
prosperyte in the worshypfull cite of Seuyll and in all the kyngdoms of the
Eest. then the devil that of all goodness and virtues is dystroyer through his
wyckydnesse. excyted and brought up among the people diverse oppynyons of
heresy / And the persecuco^n of he resye greatly increased in diverse lands
abowte. and also in the cite of Ceuyll that these three kings rested in. In so
much that Prethir John and Patriarch Thomas might not rebuke the people from
their heresies by no spirytuall correccyon nor temporal. And so the people
tornyd again to their old law and wretchyd falls mawmettes and falls goddys /
And forsook the laws of god in somoche that these three kings bodies were had
at no reverence. but almost forgoten of the people / And so the people that
en habyted in the cite of Seuyll that were come out of the lands and kyngdoms
of these three kings. every party took his kings bodi out of the tomb. and
closed them in diverse chestes honestly. each by himself and bare them home in
to their own lands and kyngedoms / And with great worship every land
veceyued the body of their king. and there they abode long time after /

When this glorious Emperor Constantyn thorugh the grace of god and diverse
miracles was converted to Christ by saint Siluester and he was made clean of
his leprehede and was changed both in life and in manners in to a new man.
that is to say in to the law of Christ / And the same time saint Elyne which
was mother of Constantyn the emperor aforsayd was dwelling among the Jews /
And she was al enfecte and defoylled with the Jews laws and with their believe
/ But wonderfully she was converted to the laws of Christ. as it is wreten in
the story of her lyffe and of the finding of the holy Cross it is more
plainly showed / And fro thensforth yt blessed saint Elyne of as mighty
streyngth as she was first in the Jews law occupieng and drawyng to
it.somoche more besily she brenned afterward in the new law and gospel of
Christ Ihesu / And all the holy places yt our lord hallowed there and in other
parties (...) his manhede as she had defoylled by counseyle of the Jews. she
afterward to the laud of our lord I^esu devoutly visyted. honored and
enlarged rychely with great yefces to the confuco^n of the Jews / Wherefore
afterward by miracle when saint Eleyne had found the cross and naylles by
the will of our lord Ihesu. then upon yt same place and upon the mount of
Caluarie and upon the sepulture of Christ. and the place yt Christ apperyd to
Mary Mawdeleyne in lyknesse of a gardyner. all thise places and many other yt
were holy the queen saint Eleyne builded chyrches on / And made ryall and
worshypfull chyrches above all those places.and also she yede in yt place
where thangell apperyd to our lady. and there thangell apperyd to the
shepeherdes that night yt god was borne / And in yt same she did build a
ryall church and named it ( Glia in excelsis (and so it is called unto this
day / And this church was sometime a great Colage of Chanons. which of
special preuilege began all the Hours of the day with Glia in excelsis (as we
do in this country with (Deus in adiutoriu^ (and some men use yt same yet this
day in the same church / When saint Elyne had made the church. then she
went in to Bedleem in to the same place where Christ was borne / And as it is
told before the Jews of envy would suffer no man child ne be to goo in
to yt place. for they held it a cursyd place / And fro yt time yt our lady
saint Mary was goon out of yt place that she bare in her child till saint
Elyne came in to yt place. came never man child ne be / And when saint
Elyne came in to that derke place. she fond the same hay that Christ was
laid in and the maynger and yt clothes yt our lord Ihesu was wrapped in.and
our ladies smock / All thise things our lady had left behind her when she
yede out of yt place in to Egypt. which saint Elyne found both fair and
hoole wound to gyder in the maynger /

ALl these things that be relykes saint Elyne took away with her.sauf the
maynger. and bare them in to Constantynople / And there with great reverence
and solempnyte she put them in to a worshypful church. that is called the
church of saint Sophie / And therein the relykes were kept unto the time yt a
king of France that hight Carolus came unto Iherusalem. and there did many
great bataylles against the Sarrasins / And delyured out of prison all the
christian men yt long time had lived there / and when he had done. he yede home
again by Constantynople.and he saw al these relykes / And with great prayer he
had all these relykes. and bare them home with him in to France.and putt
them in a worshypful church yt is called our lady church of Akon / And there
is our ladies smock and other relykes yt ben worshypped of Christian men there
unto this day / When saint Elyne had made thise chyrches. then she went in to
the cite of Nazareth. and there she made also a fair church / And ordained to
them bishops. priests and clerks to mayntene therein dyuyne seruyse / And in
the cite of Nazareth than gell greted our lady.and it is in the land of
Galilee / And beside Galilee is an hill yt is called Thabor / Upon that hill
our lord Ihesu Criste transfigured him tofore three of his dyscyples. Peter.
Ioh^n.and Iamys. as the gospel tellyth / And this hill is but lytyl of bread.
but it is wonder high / And it is from Jerusalem three days Journey and an
half / And bitwyx Iherusalem and this hill Thabor was all the way ye Christ yede
here in earth with his discyples and preched and taught and did miracles.and
ferder yede he not in his manhede than between thise two places and other
places that were between them but right little of bread and largeness /

When this queen saint Elyne had visited al thise holy places.and had ordained
chirches and goddis mynystres for to serve. and all thing perfourmyd after her
own will to the worship of god / Then began she to think greatly on these
three kings yt had worshipped god in his chyldhede / And she arrayed her with a
certain people and yede in to ye lands of Ynde / When she was there she
dystroyed all the Synagoges and falls mawmettes. and did make chirches and
monasteries / and ordained in them priests and clerks of the christian faith /
And she preached the crysted faith among ye people. the which was taught by
saint Thomas thappostle and the three kings. which faith through heresies was
dystroyed.and she renewyd it thorugh her prechynge / For all the people when
they herd what miracles our lord Ihesu Christ had wroughte by yt worshypfull
queen saint Elyne. of the fynding of the cross and of ye naylles and of our
ladies smock and of the hay. and of ye clothes that Christ was wrapped in. in
his childehode / Then they came to her and worshipped her and forsook their
falls law and took them to the law of god as saint Elyne taught them / And
then she began to enquere of the relykes of the three kings / And with great
traueylle yede abowte to have them / So our lord Ihesu Christ yt evermore is
ready to al men that cry to him in truth and ryghtwysnes / As he showed to
this holy queen the cross and the naylles yt were hid deep in the earth.
right so he showed the bodies of the three kings to her / So this lady had
such a name among the people. yt the Patriarch Thomas and Preter Ioh^n by
counsel of the lords yaue to saint Elyne the.ij. bodies of these.ij. kings.
Melchior and Balthazar to the worship of god and of the holy kings / The
body of the third king Jasper. the Nestorynes had borne it in to the isle of
Egriswill / And by cause ye saint Elyne would not that thise three kings should
be departed.she made great means and great prayers. and yaue great gifts to
the cheyf lords of the-yle. and so she gate the third body. that is to say
of Jasper / And for yt body she gaaf to them the body of saint Thomas ye
appostle which she had that time in her keeping. And the body of saint Thomas
has been twyes boren away from the isle. and ever restored again for certain
causes / And christian men yt have been in ye isle say yt they might never se the
body of saint Thomas / For it is a common prophecye in all ye country that the
body of saint. Thomas the apostle shall be translated to the cite of Coleyne
and put to the three kings / And in what manner this shall be done they tell
and say / In time coming when god will there shall be an archebisshop of
Coleyne yt shall be so wise and prudent and so mighty. that he shall make a
contracte of matrimonye between the emperors sone of Rome and themperours
daughter of Tartarin / And with this contracte and frendshyp the holy land
shall be yelden in to christian mennys hondes / And in ye time shall the body of
saint Thomas be translated and born to Coleyne and laid by the three kings.and
therefore the Heretykes of this isle yt ben called Nestorines taken but little
head of saint Thomas body ne do but little reverence thereto by cause of
prophecye. And then saint Elyne put ye bodies of these three kings together in
a cheste / and arrayed it with great richesse and then brought it to
Constantynople with great Joy and reverence / And laid them reverently in a
church yt was called saint Sohpie / and that same church king Constantyn
did make / And he alone with a little child set up all ye pylars of marbyll
of the same church / And therein was sometime the crown of thorn that Christ
was crowned with / And when ye Turks and Sarrasyns came down to
Constantynople and distroyed a great party thereof. then the emperor sent to
saint Lowes yt was then king of France for socour and help.and then king
Lowes came with strength to the the emperor.and recovered again the most party
of that lands ye the emperor had lost / And for his labor the emperor gaaf him
the crown of thorn. wherefore the Greeks made much sorrow / And so came the
holy crown of thorn in to France out of Constantynople. and ye cy^e is the
chief cite of al ye land of Greece And when thise three knges were brought unto
Constantynople all the people of the country abowte came and visyted them and
with great deuoco^n worshypped them / And there they were long time /

AFter ye thise three worshipful kings bodies were brought unto
Constantynople. king Constantyn and his holy mother saint Elyne deyed / And
against the faith of christian men began to rise a new heresye.and also
persecuco^n of death against all those ye would mayntene the christian faith and
the law of Christ / But in this persecuco^n the Greeks though it were yt they
had many worshipful doctors and bishops of the same country of Greece borne
Yet they forsook the law of holy church and the faith and chose them a
Patriarch by themself. to whom they obey yet unto this day as we do to the
pope / and in this persecuco^n the bodies of thise three kings were had in no
reverence. nor none of the other relikes but utterly set at naught / And ye
Sarrasyns and Turks in this time wanne with strong hand and battle the lands
of Greece and Armonye.and dystroyed a great part of those lands / And then
came the emperor of Rome Mauricius.and through him and the help of them of
Melayne recoueryd-all thise lands again And as it is said among them there
in ye country. through counseyle of the same emperor these.iij kings bodies
were translate in to Melayne / Ferthermore it is in many books in yt country.
yt there was an emperor of Greece which was called Ginamiell.and he sent unto
a relygyous man yt was called Gustorgius in to Melayne upon a certain
message.and then the religious man asked of the emperor to have these three
kings bodies / And by cause ye emperor loved well this man and also he was a
wise man. the emperor granted him the bodies of thise kyngis / And so this man
Gustorgius sent the bodies to Melane.and laid them there in a fair church
of friar Prechours with great solempnyte / And there our lord showed many
fair miracles /

And so at yet we shall leave to speak of the translaco^n of thise holy kings
bodies and speak of another matere in usage of the lands of Ynde /

PReter Ioh^n yt is lord of Ynde and of all the kings yt ben under him on
the xij. day. ye is called the Epiphanie. they array them as kings should
with their crowns on their hedes and with rich ornaments.so they go to their
temple and here mass / and three times yt day they offer at mass The first
offrynge in the beginning of the mass the second after the gospel.and the
third at yt Postcomyn of the mass / And they offer gold. encense.and myrre.
and that with great deuoco^n and mekenes. and also other lords of less degree
offer thries after the yr power / Ferdermore all other men of christian faith yt
ben diuyded in diverse parties and sects. and hold diverse opinyons of
heresies. as Nubiani. Soldani. nestorini. Indi. Grecy. Simani. Ifymum
Nycholaite and Mandopoly. of thise each party has a deuoco^n to the three
kings and to the feast of the Epyphanie. as ye may here afterward / But
first or we proceed any ferther we shall speak of the three kings bodies left
at Melayne /

Then after by process of time the cite of Melane began to rebel against
the Emperor their souereyne lord. which emperor was called Fredericus / And
this emperor sent to the bishop of Loleyne that was called Reynolde for help
of diverse lords of the land. for diverse lords yt were his enmyes took the
cite of Melane and distroyed a great part thereof / And in yt time the great
men of the cite took the bodies of these three kings and hid them preuely in
the earth / Among al other there was a lord in yt cite that highte Asso.and
them perour hated this Asso more than all the people of yt cite / And so it
happed yt in the dystrucco^n of the cite ye Archebisshop of Colayn wan this
lordis place thorugh strong hand.and lay therein a great while / And this Asso
was take and put in prison / Then this Asso sent preuely by the kepers of the
prison to tharchebysshop of Coleyne and prayed him yt he would come and speak
with him / And so when he was come before tharchebysshop he promised him if he
might and would get him grace of the emperor and his love and lordshyp. he
would give hy^ the bodies of the three kings / And when the bishop herd this
anon he yede to the emperor and prayed for him. and gate him grace and good
love of the emperor / When this was done this lord Asso brought preuely the
bodies of ye three kings to tharchebisshop of Colayn / And then^ the
Archebysshop sent preuely these three bodies by his preuy meyne a great way
out of Melayne / And then he yede to the Emperor and prayed him yt he would
grant him the bodies of the three kings / and the emperor granted them to him
/ And then the Archebysshop openly with great processyon and solemnyte
brought thise holy saints in to Coleyne.and there laid them in a fair
church of saint Peter worshypfully / And all the people of the country with all
reverence yt they might received these holy relykes / there they ben worshypped
of all manner of naco^ns unto this day /

And thus endyth the translaco^n of these three kings. melchior. balthazar.and
Jasper /
NOw to speak of thusages in Ynde yt we have begone before as well of Christian as
Heretykes and Sysmatykes. each of them both religyous and seculars fasten on
Crystmas day unto it be night / And each man spredyth his table and settith on
it asmoche meet and drink as may suffyse for his living fro Cristmas day
till the.xij. day / And so of ye that is set on the board they ete and drink
with their wives. chyldern and meyne with all Joy and myrthe ye they can in yt
time / Also they light a candell or a lamp.and that shall brenne both night
and day fro Crystmas night unto the.xij. night beside the same board / And in
the Vigill of the Epiphanie at night every friend gooth to others house / and
when he comes to the door he says (Bona dies) yt is to say Good day / For
if he said (Bona nox) yt is to say Good night. then would he accuse him
tofore the Iustise of ye law as he had done to him a great trespaas / And so
they wake all ye night and goo fro house to house. and ete. drink and dance.
and bear candelles light in their hondes. in tokenynge yt the sterre apperyd
when Christ was born and lad thise.iij. kings in these days to Bedleem.and
there was no night in this time. but it was all one day to them / Also the
xij. day al manner Christian of yt country of what sect ever they ben. come fro
far countrees with their bisshops and preestys. with other relygyous with
crosses of silver and sensers.and goon to the water of flom Jordan which is
fro Ihrlm.v. miles / And when all ye people is come to yt water. then^e every
sect stondyth togider in a certain place by themself / And then^ every sect
takyth his cross and lays it down on ye ground.and redyth a gospel every
sect in his own tongue (Cu^ natus esset ihu^s in bethleem etc (And when this
gospel is radde. every sect with great deuoco^n worshippeth his cross and
offryth thereto as every man is of power / And this is done in tokenynge and
mind of ye three kings yt offered yeftes to almighty god After this they goon
all in procession to ye place where Christ was crystned of saint Ioh^n Bapcyst.
and there they read in latin the gospel (In illo te^pore venit ihu^s a galilea
ad ioh^em vt baptizaret^ ab illo in iordane in isto loco etc) that is to say /
On a time our lord came fro Galilee to saint Ioh^n to be crystened of saint
Ioh^n in this Jordan in this place / And when the gospel is radde. they bless
the water and wasshe their cross in the water / And seek men and blind men
goon in to the water nakyd. and wasshe them.and after ward ben heelyd / And
when this is done every sect goon home again in to their owne-countree / And
between this Jordan and Ihe / rusalem is a little wilderness that is called
Montost. and therein dwelled saint Ioh^n Baptist. and there he preached / And
there our lord Ihesu Christ came to saint Ioh^n to be crystned of him / And in
that same deserte god almighty fasted.xl. days and.xl. nyghtes / Also bishops
and other priests of what tongue or sect that they ben. every day after their
mass they say this gospel) Cum natus esset ihu^s (as we in this country
say (In principio) after our mass. But each sect says in his own tongue and
not in latin.sauf on the.xij. day oonly / But it is radde dyuersly right as it
was done / For in Iherusalem it is radde thus) Aum natus esset ihu^s in
bethleem in diebus herodis. hic regis ecce magi venerunt ab orient hic
dicentes (And in Bedleem and in all the dyocecyse abowte it is radde thus) Au^
natus esset ihu^s in diebus herodis hic and Jude regis etc (Also other christian
men by whoos places these three kings in their going out and coming home
again passyd by / for a special devotion that they have to the three kings
they read this gospel after this manner of four me (Cum natus esset ihu^s in
bethleem jude in ^ebus herodis regis ecce magi regis gloriosi cum marima
festinacione and excercitu ab orient venerunt and per nos transierunt (And
thus all diverse sects read this gospel as it was done among them / Also ye
Sarrasyns ye believe on Machomites law and Turks have thise three kings in
special reverence in all temples of ye country. they were sometime
crystned.and forsook it.and dystroyed all the images in their temples. and
kytte of their noses and dysfygured them for dispyte / But the images of the
three kings they suffer always stand still without any dispyte /

FErdermore towchynge the sects of Heretykes aforsayd / The first sect is
called Nubiani.and those ben of the kingdom of Araby and Nubie. whereof Melchior
was king.and thise ben christian men / And they have a special prerogatyf
tofore al other christian men. for worship of their king / And the priests of
the country when they goo to thawter have crowns of gold or ouergylt on their
heedes And ye they do in tokenynge ye the three kings with crowns on their
heedes offered yeftes to god almighty in Bedleem / and with crowns and myters
sing the yr masses /

There is also a another sect yt is called Soldini. and they ben of the kingdom
of Godolie and Saba there Balthazar was king / They were a party corrupt in
the faith.and they took their names of an Heretyke yt was called Solodinis /
But thise men ben not hold in so great reverence as the Nubiani. for they
keep not the faith so truly as they done / And their preestis when they goo to
mass they beer gold in their hondes to the awter.and the deaken be cryth
ensence and the subdeaken myrre / And this they beer in tokenynge of the three
kings yt offered to our lord Ihesu Christ god almighty in his birth. gold.
myrre and ensence /

Also there is a another sect yt is of the kingdom of Taars and of thyle of
Egriswill there as Jasper was king.and they ben called Nestorini / And they
ben the worste and the cursedest Heretykes of the world.and for the most
party they ben black Ethyopies / And al men of other sects hate them greatly
/ And when ye preestis goo to sing mass. they curse all men yt were of
counseylle. or helping to do away the body of Jasper yt was their king /
Ferdermore thise Nestorines forsook Preter Ioh^n and Thomas their Patriarch and
were rebel against them and against the laws of holy church / So afterward
as the will of god was on a time there did arise in the same land a great
multitude of people. as of shepeherdes and laborers and bond men against their
own naco^ns. ye which called themself Tartarines.and they made a Smythe their
capytayne and cheyf-lorde / And so thorugh strong power they dystroyed all the
kingdom and lands of Nestorines.and slew all the people with out any mercy as
the will of god was / And took castelles. cytees and great towns and all their
goods / And when the Tartarynes had thus conquered the lands and kyngdoms of
the Nestorines. then the Nestorines yede to Preter Ioh^n and promised him yt
they would torn again to their first law and faith of god and be trybutory to
him so ye he would help them / And then^e Preter Ioh^n was in good will to
help them The next night as Preter Ioh^n lay in his bed and slepte ye three
kings apperyd to him. and spoke to hy^ and charged him ye he should not in no
manner help ne socour the Nestorines. for it is goddys will yt they should
utterly be distroyed for their wyckydnes and malice / And when the Nestorines
herd tell yt Preter Ioh^n had such a vysion of the three kings. they yede
abowte to the great lords yt were abowte Preter Ioh^n and yaue them great
yeftes to speak to their lord ye they might have help of him / And then
diverse lords counseyled Preter Ioh^n to take no he de of dremes nor of such
vysions. but to hold his purpoos and promise.and to help thise Nestorines /
And then Preter Ioh^n assented to their counsel and sense his eldest sone
David with a strong oost in helpyng of the Nestorines / And when these two
hosts met together the Tartarines had the vyctory. and slew David and all
his oost.so yt there ascaped none alive / And also they dystroyed many lands.
cytees and castelles that were longing to Preter Ioh^n / And when preter Ioh^n
herd thereof then he was sorry therefore that he did against the co^maundment
of the three kings that apperyd to him in his sleep / And then with great
sorrow of heart he asked god mercy and foryeuenes. and ye three kings he prayed
of grace and help / Then on a time the three kings appeared to the emperor of
Tartaryn as he lay in his bed and charged him yt he should do no more harm to
Preter Ioh^n / And badde he should send to him and make a fynall peace with him
for evermore. but the lands and castelles ye the emperor had won of Preter
Ioh^n to keep them still to himself. for by cause Preter Ioh^n was inobedyent
to our co^maundment / Then the emperor anon though he were a Paynym. yet he
was sore adradde of his visyon / Anon he sent messagers to Preter Ioh^n and
made a fynall peace between them for ever more In somoche that the eldest sone
of these two lords should wedde the tothers daughter ever more after to the
worlds end and so it is yet continued unto this day / So afterward this
emperor enqueryd of the three kings and of their lives and deeds / Then in
mind and in worship of them the emperor ordained that his first sone and all the children of his successors should beer the names of these three kings for
evermore after / And thus the Nestorines were dystroyed and put out of their
lands and kyngdoms / And after ward were fugytyf and dwelling abowte in
diverse countrees always under trybute. as Jews and other nacyons yt ben always
dwelling under trybute / But yet some of them dwell in thyle of
Egriswyll.and pay therefore every year great trybute /

Also there is a another sect that is called Indy. and they ben of Preter
Ioh^ns land.and they ben good christian men / Add the preestis of yt land when
they goo to mass they hang a crown of gold on the awter And the priest.
deaken and subdeaken mete togider in three parties.and so they goo to the awter
/ And this they do in tokenynge of the three kings yt met so denly togider
in an hye way. which was departed in three ways / and so through ledynge of
the sterre they yede unto Bedleem and offered yeftes to god almighty the
twelfthe day after his birth /

There is also a another sect which is called Grecij and there priests have
wives / And they believe on the fader and on the sone. but not in the holy ghost
/ and also they believe and say there is no purgatory / And when they sing
mass they kytte a piece of breed. and that is made four square / And this
breed they put in a dissh^ of gold or of silver.and above yt they lay a
sterre and that is covered with a fair white clothe / And at the Offetory of the
mass they take the dissh^ with thost and with the sterre and set it above on
their heedes.and so with sencers and candelles they goo abowte ye church with
great worship and reverence. and so again to the awter / And then all the
people fallen down to ye ground and done great worship to the sacrefyse / And
thus they do in tokenyng of ye three kings that sought god almighty in
Bedleem. and offryd to him rich yeftes.and through ledyng of a stere came to
the maynger there Christ lay / And there they fell down and worshyped him /

Also there is another manner of sect. which is called Simiani / and they ben
men of Yndore. for yt land about Ihrlm. which of old time was called Pude
is now called Symis / But thise men have but lityl of heresye among them /
and they do great worship to saint Barbara.and watch all her night. as men
do in this country on Mydsomer night / And so then every friend gooth to
other and bears aboute-dyuers seeds which shall be sown in gardynes And
thise men when they shall swear before Justices for any cause. then they swear
by the gospel. and by the three kings / And that they done in tokenyng of the
three kings that sought god in the land of Jews /

There is also a another sect which is called Maronice. and they dwell in
diverse lands about / And their priests and their Deakens and their
Subdeakens have wives / And they say no mass in all the year but at the
feast of Crystmas and Ester / And they say mass of saint Thomas the appostle
and of the three kings / And this they use yet unto this day / Also there is a
another sect which is called Ysimij / And when the priests goo to mass. they
bliss the people. and prayed god rule them and led them. as he led the
three kings by a sterre in to Bedleem to do him worship /

Also there is another sect that is called Maronij / And thise men when they
begin any thing. then^e they say in the name of god and the three kings /

Also there is a another sect that is called Nicholaite And those men use to
give every day three manner of alms in the worship of god and the three
kings to poor men there abowte /

A another there is. and they ben called Mandopoles And they hold no special
faith. they are in heresye. ne they have no priests among them / And ones
in the year they gone together in procession to ye church fasting / And that
shall be on a Sunday.and there they woll here mass in the worship of god and
the three kings / And all those diverse sects and other christian men have many
other special deuocyons to these three worshipful kings. which were long to
tell / And in all the countrees of Ynde and in the Eest and in all the lands
and kyngdoms there these three kings were lords all manner of people have
thyle three kings in reverence much more than men have in this country / And
our lord Ihesu Christ shewyth many miracles abowte in diverse places in ye Eest
through the merytes and prayers of thise worshipful kings. which three kings
now regne in eternal bliss in heaven / To which bliss by the merytes and
Intercessions of those three blessed kings. he ye sytteth above all saints
bring us all / AMEN

And thus we make an end of this most excellenct treatise of those three
glorious kings. whoos corpse rest in ye cyce of Coleyne / Enprynted at
Westmester by Wynkyn the Word /

printer's or publisher's device


