THE LIFE AND DEATH OF Hector. ONE, AND THE FIRST OF the most Puissant,
Valiant, and Renowned Monarchs of the world, called the Nine worthies. Showing
his jnvincible force, together with the marvailous, and most famous Acts by him
achieved and done in the great, long, and terrible Siege, which the Princes of
Greece held about the town of Troy, for the space of Ten years. And finally
his unfortunate death after he had fought a Hundred main Battles in open
field against the Grecians: The which herein are all at large described.
Wherein there were slain on both sides Fourteen Hundred, and Six Thousand,
Fourscore, and six men.

Written by John Lidgate Monk of Berry, and by him dedicated to the high and
mighty Prince Henry the fifth, King of England.

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot. Anno. Dom. 1614.

THE EPISTLE, AS IT was dedicated unto the high and mighty Prince HENRY the
Fifth.
MOST puissant Prince,
whose fame is known so well,
And whose renown
so far abroad does shine,
That it is found
all others to excel,
And equal with that of the worthies Nine:
Borne by descent of right Paternall line,
To be the heir, and th^onor to obtain,
To wear the Crown of mighty Kingdoms twain.
Who even as far as Phoebus in the sphere
Celestial, does spread his beams most bright;
And as Lucina with her face most clear,
The world does compass round, and cast her light:
Art held to be the most renowned knight,
And worthy for the honor of thy name,
To sit on high in throane of Lady Fame.
And ^hold the palm of honor in thy hand,
In triumph for thy noble victory,
For which thou feared ^^^t by sea and land,
And ever with perpetual praise and glory,
Shall for thy conquest fresh in memory,
Sit opposite before her to be seen,
With wreath about thy head of Laurel green,
In former time for Conquerors ordained,
That constantly persever'd to the end,
And valiantly war once begun maintained,
For causes just, and did their right defend,
And thereunto their forces did only bend:
Whose fame's still spread, and was long time agone,
Among whom thou by right may sit for one.
For through the world it is known to every one,
(And flying Fame reports it far and wide,)
That thou by natural condition,
In things begun wilt constantly abide,
And for the time do wholly set aside
All rest, and never carst what thou do spend,
Till thou have brought thy purpose to an end.
And that thou art most circumspect and wise,
And do effect all things with providence,
(As Joshua did) by counsel and advise,
Against whose sword there is none can make defense,
And wisdom have by heavenly influence,
With Solomon, to judge and to discern
Men's causes, and thy people to govern.
For mercy mixed with thy magnificence,
Does make thee pity all that are oppressed,
And to withstand the force and violence
Of those that right and equity detest;
With David thou to piety art pressed;
And like to Julius Caesar valorous,
That in his time was most victorious.
And in one hand (like worthy Prince) do hold
Thy sword, to see that of thy subjects none
Against thee should presume, with courage bold
And pride of heart to raise rebellion,
Thereby to shake off thy subjection:
And in the other Scepter, to maintain
True justice, while amongst us thou do reign.
Then since thou art adorned with Majesty,
Grace, wisdom, pity, and benignity;
With humble heart I crave submissiuelie
That thou will not disdain, but pleased be
T'accept this Book, though rudely done by me:
Thereby thy great and Princely mind to express,
By taking pity of my simpleness,
And in thy high and magnanimious heart,
With natural jngrafted Sapience;
Remember Christ accepted in good part
The wido was alms of two poor single pence,
When she (without expecting recompense)
Gave to the poor with willing heart and glad,
That little gift being all that ere she had.
Let this, if that it may thee not offend,
Example be unto thy Nobleness,
And of thy great benignity, extend
Thy favor unto me with gentleness,
Not to disdain me for my barrenness
Of wit, and though I have no skill in muse,
Let my good will and meaning me excuse.
More then good heart, none can whatsoere he be
Present, or give to God, nor unto man.
Which for my part I wholly give to thee,
And ever shall as far forth as I can,
Wherewith I will (as I at first began)
Continually, not ceasing night and day,
With sincere mind for thine estate thus pray.
First that thou may Gods mercy so procure
Unto thy self, that he may still advance
Thine honor, and that thou may here endure
Thy reign ore us with long continuance,
And all thy Subjects true obeisance:
And that he will vouchsafe to give to thee
All virtues whatsoere may reckned be.
Lenvoy.
GO forth my Book vaild with the Princely Grace
Of him, that is extold for excellence
Throughout the world, but do not show thy face,
Without support of his magnificence:
And whosoere against thee takes offense,
Be thou not stubborn with presumption;
But see thou arm thy self with patience,
And gently yield to their correction.
The Translator to his Book.
ANd since thou art not limbed with trees not flowers
Of Eloquence, but clad in white and black;
Thou must prepare thy self to abide the showers,
Of them that of dislike occasion take:
And when thou likeliest art to go to wrack,
Seem not against them thine error to defend;
But rather yield a little and give back,
And pray them, that they will thy faults amend.
THE PREFACE TO The READER.
MY Muses subject
tending to entreat
Of ancient wars,
and acts of Chivalrie,
Whereby renowned Knights
much honor get:
And with Eternal parises deifie
(Their names and fames,) is forced to require
Thee mighty Mars with Art him to inspire.
Whose fiery nature bent to wrath and thrall,
(As being of complexion hot and dry,
Melancholicke, and furious withal,
For in thy bowels chollor hid does lie)
Does rightly cause all Poets sound thy fame,
And thee the God of wars in stories name.
Since then thou art of warlike influence,
And that my style of battles must indite:
Assist me with some Marshall Eloquence,
That I may frame my hand and pen aright,
With words of Art and arteficiall phrase,
Of valiant Knights to sing the eternal praise.
And if at my request thou dainst to list,
Or grant the thing which I of thee do crave,
Yet for her sake that lovingly thee kissed,
(Black Vulcans wife) and further favor gave;
Vouchsafe thy aid my verse so to infuse,
That I therein fit terms and phrase may use.
Else truth to say, so barren is my wit,
And void of Aureat liquord Eloquence,
That I confess my self to be unfit,
Or able to accomplish my pretense.
Help then God Mars for fair Bellonaes sake,
And of my work vouchsafe protection take.
And thou sweet Clio with thy sisters dear,
Whose chief abode is on Pernassus hill
By Helicon, the fountain fair and clear,
Lend me thine aid, and give to me some skill,
That lofty verse by stately terms may yield
To valiant Knights their honor due in field.
Assist herein likewise, ift be thy will
Calliope, (to Orpheus mother dear,
Who insweet music so excelled for skill,
That with the sound of harp as does appear,
He pleased the monster Cerberus so well,
That he had leave to enter into hell,
To fetch his love out of the infernal lake,
Where Pluto held her for his own sweet-hart,
But with the music he to them did make,
He granted she with him should thence depart.)
And with the dew of thy sweet liquor wet
My tongue so harsh, and in right tune it set.
For thou art said of Rethoricke to bear
The only praise, and patroness for skill,
And eke of music pleasant to the ear,
Thou can direct each instrument at will:
Deny not then (sweet Muse) thy aid to me,
And I shall rest beholding unto thee.
Else will the clouds of ignorance enclose
And round incampe my wits that are so bare,
And cause the rude (to Poets utter foes)
To laugh at me: But such as learned are
I will entreat what faults soere they find
To wink thereat, and keep them in their mind.
And if that in my verses I have erred,
(As no man but may err what ere he be)
I must confess I never yet deserved
To have the praise for excellent Poetry.
For God he knows when I this work began,
I did it not for praise of any man.
But for to please the humor and the hest
Of my good Lord and Princely Patron,
Who dained not to me to make request
To write the same, least that obliuson
By tract of time, and times swift passing by,
Such valiant acts should cause obscured to lie.
As also cause his Princely high degree,
Provokes him study ancient Histories,
Whereas in Myrrour be may plainly see
How valiant Knights have won the masteries
In battles fierce, by prowess and by might,
To run like race, and prove a worthy knight.
And as they sought to clime to honors seat,
So does my Lord seek therein to excel,
That as his name, so may his fame be great,
And thereby likewise Idleness expel.
For so he does to virtue bend his mind,
That hard it is his equal now to find.
To write his Princely virtues, and declare
His valor, high renown, and Majesty,
His brave exploits, and Marshall acts that are
Most rare, and worthy his great dignity,
My barren head cannot devise by wit
T'extoll his fame with words and phrases fit.
This mighty Prince whom I so much commend,
(Yet not so much as well deserves his fame.)
By royal blood does li^ally descend
From Henry king of England forth by name
His eldest Son, and heir unto the Crown,
And by his virtues Prince of high renown.
(For by the graft the fruit men easly know)
Excreasing the honor of his pedigree:
His name Lord Henry as our stories show,
And by his title Prince of Wales is he:
Who with good right, his father being dead,
Shall wear the Crown of Britain on his head.
This mighty Prince has made me undertake
To write the siege of Troy the ancient town,
And of their wars a true discourse to make
From point to point, as Guydo sets it down:
Who long since wrote the same in latin verse,
Which in the English now I will rehearse.
The time when first I took the same in hand,
To say the truth was in the fourteenth year
Of famous Henry King of England
The Fourth by ^^ne, my Princes Father dear.
When Phoebus showed in altitude to be,
Fine three times told, and four and one degree.
When he did in his Chariot down descend
With golden streams into the Ocean strand
To bath his steeds, and light to others l^nd,
That far remote inhabit th'Indian land*
Where when our Summer is clean^ past and gone,
Their spring beg^^s but newly to come on.
And when Lucina fair with paler light
Began in cold October to arise.
(T'enhase the darkness of the winters night,
And glistring stars appeard in crystal skies:)
And then was in the sign of Scorpion,
And Hesperus then westward running down,
His course to hasten against tomorrow bright,
As Lucifer, that drives dark clouds away,
Is said to be the messenger of light,
And shines at the dawning of the day:
When Phoebus early shoes his glistring face,
Ascending from Proserpins obscure place,
Where Pluto sits environed about
With furies of the foul infernal Lake.
In this year, month, and time as it fell out,
This History I first in hand did take.
And of the Troyan wars the truth vntwind,
As in my ancient Author I it find.
For if no Authors had the truth set down
In written Books, of things that are forepast,
Forget fulness would soon have trodden down
Each worthy act, and clean extinct at last.
Which Serpent never cease to assail
The world, to cause all truth on earth to fail.
And had no ancient Histories been found,
But all things unto memory were left;
Truth surely then would soon be laid in ground,
And men of knowledge utterly bereft.
But God intending Satan to prevent,
That has foreseen, and writers always sent
From age to age, still to renew the same,
That truth might always spring and come to light,
And thereby win an everlasting name,
Against the which soul envy still does fight.
But famous Clerks not ceasing truth to show,
By writing leave the same to us to know.
Else time with sith, would soon cut down the grass,
And re^ening death extirpe the root and all,
And nothing whatsoere on earth did pass
Should have record, the same to mind to call.
Nor honor due to valiant Knights be read,
But it with them should rest, and lie as dead.
And so not only name, but fame would die,
And wholly be defaced out of mind.
But Histories explain the same to th'eie,
As daily by experience we may find.
Nere ceasing spite of envy to unfold
The truth of all which may not be controld.
Therein we see of high and low estate,
The life and acts as it were on a stage,
For writers that are wise in heart do hate
To speak untruth, or flatter any age.
For tyrauts being dead they will not fear
To write and show their follies as they were.
And t'yeild each man as he shall well deserve
Be It good or bad, and therefore it i^ best,
For every one that credit will preserve,
In life to virtue cleave, and vice detest:
For after death know this and mark it well,
Clerks will not spare the truth of them to tell.
For such impartial dealing in their days,
Great Princes in them took no small delight
For truly blasing forth their laud and praise,
Their high renown, their power and their might
Their knightly acts, their victories, and fame,
Eternally with glory of their name.
For they still sought to shun the sisters three,
Fraud, Negligence, and Sloth, that none might doubt
Ought was forgot, or more p^t in to be,
Then truth requird, and as the truth fell out.
Else worthy acts were wholly done in vain,
And those that honor sought had lost their pain.
And time by length of years and ages past,
Would have defaced name and honor clean
Of Conquerors, (for what can ever last)
Unless record thereof were to be seen:
Which Clerks (for which they merit and deserve
Continual praise,) have sought still to preserve.
For Histories and Books are said to be
The keys of learning, memory, and skill,
In them, and by them all men plainly see,
What, has forepast, and what is good, or ill:
Witness the fall of Thebes the ancient Town,
In Stacies Book for truth at large set down.
Where you may read and see how Polinece
Was nere content with Etocles a day,
Nor would like loving Brother live in peace,
Till Thebes Town was brought unto decay.
And h^w Tedeus through that mortal ctrife,
And by dissension was bereft of life*
How Oedipus with sorrow, grief, and woe,
Did loose his eyes so bitterly he wept,
And how the Smo^kes divided were i^ two,
Of fires made, when funeral feasts was kept,
Which fire brothers hatred did engender,
And death to both for just reward did render.
Mine author Guydo in like sort does show
(As by his Book most plainly it appears)
Of all the Trojan Princes overthrow,
While Greeks besieged the town so many years:
In very truth, and though it is long since past,
No time, nor age, the story has defast.
For maugre them, you may it still behold
In Books set down most plainly to men's eyes,
For truth by lying will not be controld,
Though enviously some seek it to disguise:
Transforming all the substance of the matter
By feigned tales, dissembling to flatter
As Homer did, who truth would seem to show,
Yet covertly did seek the same to hide,
And by untruth which he full well did know,
With Artificial words does truth deride:
Who seeming Greecians honor to defend,
Does feign the Gods from heaven to descend
In shape of men, and openly were known
To help the Greeks against the Trojans fight,
And many such untruths by him are shown
In sugared words, and phrases for delight:
Pretending so his malice for to hide,
For falsehood seeks in darkness to abide.
The cause why he the Greeks so smothly praised,
Was for that he unto them was allide,
And therefore sought their glory to have raised.
But such as love the truth cannot abide
Against conscience for to praise or discommend,
Where no desert their action may defind.
But Cupid (as the Poets feign) is blind,
And gives his doom more after lust, then law:
So Sicophants as we by proof do find
Commend and praise the men they never saw,
By false report extolling them to sky,
Of whom in heart they know full well they lie:
Whereby such men as never merit fa^e
But just disgrace, are highly magnified:
And they contrary that deserve good name,
Are either not remembered or beli'd:
For favor now does bear so great a s^ay,
That true desert is driven clean away.
Ovidius Naso likewise has devis^
A Book in verse, of Trojan ^^^s to show,
Part true, part false, but in such sort disguisd,
That who so reads it, can by no means know
Which way to sound the deapth of his intent,
His phraise therein's so mis^ically bent.
Like story also Virgill does declare,
When of Aeneas tra^^^les he does write,
Where truth to tell in part he does not spare,
Although s^^^ time he seemth to delight
In Homers course, with Rethoricke to gloss,
And truth with falsehood often to compose.
Dares an ancient Author first was found,
And Ditus eke of Trojan wars to write,
Who both set down the truth and perfect ground,
As being there, and did behold the fight.
And though their books in several language be,
Yet they are known in all things to agree.
The Books in time to Athens being brought,
Salustius cosen, one Cornelius,
By diligent inquiry out them sought;
And being of a mind industrious,
Translated them with great and earnest care
In each respect, as the Authors does declare.
His only fault was, that he did not write
The story full at large as he it found,
But ^ure he did in breuity delight;
Else would he not have spared to show the ground
And first beginning of that mortal strife,
Which cost so many thousand men their life.
And how the Greeks came both by sea and la^d
The number of their ^en, and of their ships,
The manner how they first did take in hand
To plant their siege, (all this he ouerskips.)
How envy was the root and cause of all
The mischief that on Troy at last did fall.
How many Kings and Princes thither went
In warlike wise to win them high renown,
How they agreed all with one conscent
To see the full sub^er^i^^^ of the Town:
What arms they ^are, what men they did retain,
Who in the siege did longest there remain.
How one the other Knightly did assail,
How many valiant Princes lost their life:
How of t they met in field to give battle:
How hatred still increast and bred new strife:
Nor of their deaths ^e ^iteth not the year:
Thus much he leaves out as does appear.
Which lately causd an Author to arise,
Whose truth in writing is not to be bla^'d,
That took in hand this st^^i^ i^ such wise,
As that of Ditus and of Dares named:
He has not sought one sentence to neglect,
Nor yet in ought the meaning to reject.
This Clarkethat wrote so true, so just, so well,
Was Guydo of Columpna by his name,
Who in sweet Rethoricke did so much excel,
That he enricht his story with the same:
So Eloquently has he set it down,
That he deserves praise and high renown.
For which in heart and voice I will not stay,
To give him praise and commendation due,
And with applause in truth, and rightly say,
He was the flower most certainly and true,
Of all that sought this story to compile,
For wit, and sovereignty of style.
Whose treces as I can I will observe,
If God vouchsafe me time and grace to do it,
And grant my labor may of him deserve
The Princely praise that first provokt me to it:
Beseeching all that see it, with heart and mind
Not spare to speak, if any fault they find.
And with good will I shall amend the same,
(For many eyes may see much more then one.)
Correct then freely where you find the blame,
But find not fault whereas deserves none.
And so in hope I shall your favors win,
With your support this story i will begin.
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF HECTOR.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. 1.
I How Peleus King of Thessalie, lost his people, men, women, and Children, by
divine punishment; and after by prayer unto the Gods, obtained others.

IN Thessalie King Peleus once did reign,
For virtue held a Prince of worthy fame,
Whose subjects as mine Author does explain,
Were Myrmidons so called by their name.
Of whose beginning Ovid does rehearse,
The History at large in Latin verse.
And says, that in that Country down did fall
So furious a tempest from the sky,
That it consumed the people great and small,
And left not one, but all di'de suddenly,
Except the King, who desolate alone,
Went wandering in the woods, to make his moan.
Where for a time he walked to and fro,
Lamenting sore in mind his doleful state,
And to himself complaining of his woe,
Began to curse his hard and cruel fate:
Till in the wood he chanst to spy a tree,
For height and thickness huge of quantity.
Which at the foot a hole had in the ground,
From whence of Ants great quantity did creep,
Which when this Prince so desolate had found,
He fel^ upon his knees and sore did weep:
And Paynim-like his prayer began to make,
To move the Gods some pity on him take.
By miracle to show their power as then
In transformation of those Ants so little,
Into the right and perfect shape of men,
Therewith again his Land to fill with people:
And so his poor distressed case to tender,
For which he vowed continual thanks to render.
Which his request as Ovid sets down,
With pity moved God Inpiter did hear,
And by a sudden transmutation,
The Ants did cause in form of men t'appeare:
Who presently arising on their feet,
With all speed went their famous Prince to meet.
Which people by their strength and hardiness,
The Story says, obtained lofty fame,
And anciently for their great worthiness,
As first I said, Myrmido^s had to name:
Who for their great foresight in every thing,
The Poet feigned them from those Ants to spring.
(For as the Ant in Summers heat by care,
Prouides his food in Winter time to live,
This people so their labor did not spare,
Industriously their bodies to relie^e.
In Peace and War providing for their need,
As all men should, the better for to speed.
For if that care and labor we neglect,
Our food and clothes in time for to provide,
We may perchance our folly so derect,
That men our ^loath will* openly deride:)
But to affirm this fable to be true,
Therein I leave the judgment unto you.
And of King Peleus further will declare,
Who as mine Author says, did take to wife
One Thetides of shape and beauty rare,
And lived with her a long and happy life:
From whom descended by paternall right,
Achilles while he lived, a valiant Knight.
(For mong the Greeks none might compare with him,
For valor, high renown, and chivalry,
He would so boldly venture life and lim,
Which caused the Trojans feel his cruelty
Before the Town, which if you list to hear,
Read on this Book, and there it will appear.)
And though that Peleus did the Scepter hold,
Yet was his elder Brother living still,
Whose name was Aeson, but of years so old,
That unto love and lust he had no will:
And was so feeble and decayed in wit,
That for to rule the land he was unfit.
His memory as then became so bad,
And senses all from him were clean bereft;
Who when he saw age him deprived had*
Of means to rule the Land, the Crown he left,
And regal state which he so long had held,
Unto his Brother, in his stead to weld.
CHAP. II.
How King Aeson by reason of his age would no longer rule in the Kingdom of
Thessalie: but caused his Brother Peleus to be crowned in his stead.

YOu heard that when King Aeson did perceive
His senses, eyes, and all his strength decay,
Expecting death would shortly him bereave
Of life and all, he did no time delay,
To cause his Brother Peleus to be crowned,
As his next Heir then living to be found.
And made him King of Thessalie by name,
(For of his body was no jssue left
When he was dead, for to enjoy the same:)
And so of Princely power clean bereft;
He lived a quiet solitary life
In peace and rest, clean void of care and strife.
But as some Authors in their Books explain,
The Gods such grace to Aeson did jmpart,
That they restored him to his youth again
By false enchantment, and by deuilish Art
Of charms devised by Medeas skill,
That could command foul spirits at her will.
For she composed a drink (as it was found,)
By magical confections in such wise,
That casting it upon a barren ground,
Both buds and blossoms presently would rise
As fresh and green as possible might be,
Or any man in pleasant spring could see.
The which for that it seems strange and rare:
And truth to say impossible like wise,
I will it unto you at large declare,
And how she did her diu^lish charms devise:
As Ovid does set down the same to us
With in his book, the which he says was thus:
Medea who by Art and skill knew well,
What herbs would serve to effect so strange a thing*
For that she did in Magic much excel,
Desiring it with speed to pass to bring,
That she might praise obtain; made no delay,
But presently alone did go her way
Abroad into the fields to seek for some,
Such as she lik*t, whereof when she had sped,
And with the same into a place did come,
Which she as then of purpose hallowed:
She made two Altars all of Tur^e, of which,
One unto triple Hecate the witch,
The Other unto youth was consecrate.
And having covered them in decent wise,
With Vervi^ and with shrubs, such as she gat
There in the fields, to offer sacrifice:
She cut the throats of two black Rams, whose blood
Mixed with a bowl of pure white milk and good*
And with as much sweet honey clarified,
She put into two pits of purpose made
Within the ground, and after that she cried,
And certain mumbling prayers softly said
To Pluto and his Wife, the Lords of hell,
And all the Elfes and Gods on earth that dwell.
To spare old Aesons life a little space,
And not in have his wearied lims deprive
Of his most aged soul, and t'giue him grace
To hold the same: That he might longer live.
Whom when she had in that sort long besought*
She wild that Aesons corpse should forth be brought
To her. Whereas with certain carmes she said,
She cast him straight into a slumber deep;
And then before the Altar he was laid
Upon the herbs, as dead; but yet a sleep.
Which done, with hair dispersed about her head,
The Altars she devoutly compassed.
And dipping sticks within the pits of blood,
She kindled them upon the Altars twain,
Betwixt the which at that same time she stood*
And then unto her purpose to attain,
She did with Brimstone, fire, and water pure,
Thrice purge old Aesons corpse that slept full sure.
Mean time the medecin boyld within a pan
Of Brass, which she of purpose had brought thither,
Which at that time to gather froth began,
Where roots, seeds, flowers, and leaves she sod together.
(Which for that strange confectio^ she thought best)
With precious stones that came out of the East.
And gravel fine that in the West she had.
And dew that fell upon a Monday night.
With flesh and feathers of a wicked jade
A filthy witch, (that had her sole delight
In shape of Owl by night, to fly and slay
Young children, or to bear them clean away*
And changlings in their cradles used to leave,)
The singles of a greedy Wolf (that can
As some report, himself of shape bereave,
And when he list take on him form of man.)
The slimes of water-snailes the which she found,
With labor great within the Indian ground.
The liver of a Heart that lives so long.
And of a Crow that loathsome carrion beast,
(The which by cause the nature was so strong,
Had lived then Nine hundred years at least*)
The head and bill: of all which when she had,
An admirable composition made.
To lengthen Aesons aged years withal,
A withered bough (the which not long before
Down from an Olive tree did chance to fall,)
In hand she took, and with the same did pore,
And stir the liquor till the stick wax green,
And suddenly both leaves and buds were seen
To spring thereon, and straight did berrie^ bear.
And where the fire the skum thereof did throw
Upon the earth, where it had drop^, even there*
The ground began as fresh and green to show,
As it in summer did, and flowers to rise
Out of the same. Wh^h wh^^n Medea spies,
She took a knife, and with a courage stout
Did cut old Aesons throat, where presently
His aged blood did all come gushing out,
And with the boy ling iuce did new supply,
Which when to Aesons corpse she had powered in,
His hair that was so gray did straight begin
To turn, and wax as black as any coal,
His lean pale, withered skin grew fair and fresh,
The wrinckles in his face, and every hole
Therein, were filled with young and lusty fresh,
His limbs waxt lith, and all his joints did grow
So supple that he plainly then did show
To be a man of young and youthful years.
At which when to his senses Aeson came,
He was abasht, but casting off all fears,
He knew at forty years he was the same.
And as back from old age to youth he drew,
A youthful spirit did in his heart renew.
By which so strange devise she did restore
King Aeson unto strength and former youth;
With wit and reason as he had before,
In each respect as much (if it be truth,
But be it true, or false, I have not spared,
To write it as the story has declared.)
And after on his wife he did beget
A valiant Son, that Jason had to name*
In whose creation nature did not let
To show her skill, and to incur no blame:
For never man mord perfectly was formed*
Nor with more graces inwardly ado^n'd*
If I should strive here to describe at will,
His strength, his beauty, and his comeliness,
His good behavior, and his perfect skill,
His wisdom, virtue, and his gentleness:
To all and every one both high and low,
Like as mine Author plainly does it show*
My art and wit therein would be to little.
His qualities so pleased men's desire,
That he obtained praise of all the people,
For young and old each one did him admire*
Judge then what he would prove in elder years,
That in his childhood such a one appears.
But while he was of age and stature small,
And far unfit as then to rule the Land,
His Uncle Peleus by consent of all,
Still held the Crown and Scepter in his hand*
From whom in ought he never seemed to vary,
Nor his prcepts at any time contrary.
So diligent was he in every thing,
To please and serve his Uncle at a beck;
(As is the child held under tutors wing,
And seareth to incur his Masters check:)
In heart no^ outward show whats'ere him touched,
He never did repine, nor at it grutcht.
And though his Uncle held his heritage,
And ruled his Princely Scepter at his will;
While he remained still in tender age,
Yet was he never moved unto ill:
Nor once of him a bad conceit to have,
In any wise his honor to deprave.
But Peleus he contrary mind did bear,
And ^ullie had his heart to envy bent;
Dissembling that in face and outward cheer,
Which inwardly was wholly his intent:
(Like Adder lurking closely in the grass,
To sting all those that through the same does pass.)
His heart and tongue contrary each to other.
For with pretense of fair and friendly show,
He seemed to love the Son of his dear Brother,
When inwardly his heart did ouerflow
With malice, though not outwardly espied,
So cunningly he did his malice hide.
For no man could by any means per^ ^au^,
That he to Jason bare an enuinous eye;
(No cause he had) but fear he should bereave
Him of his Crown, and regal dignity:
And at the time of riper years obtain,
The right succession of his fathers reign.
Which he as then unjustly occupied,
And daily did devise how that he might,
On Jason whom in heart he envied,
Work his pretended malice and despite:
Which made him often build Castles in the air,
Like one that lived in fear and great despair.
Still compasing some way or means to find
T'intrap, and take his Nephew in a snare;
Which secretly ^e kept still hid in mind,
Yet ceased not his engines to prepare:
(Like Satan cuery minute* day, and hour,
Devising how man's soul he may devour.)
And as the Sun shines hot when rain is past,
So did his envy burn more fervently;
And vexed him sore till he devised at last
To execute his wilful treachery.
A Lamb in show, a Lion in his heart,
Fell (Tiger like) to play a double part.
A sugared face but false and bitter mind,
None might of him conceive suspicion;
That he should to his Nephew be unkind,
And privily work his destruction:
Pretending love but hatred was the end,
Description true of foul dissembling friend.
His bad intent disclosed might not be,
It was so well concealed within his heart;
(So is all close and privy enmity,)
And yet although he played so well his part:
His envy still increasing more and more*
Did inwardly torment and vex him sore.
Attending time to effect and bring about,
That which he did in heart so much desire;
And so to be clean freed from care and doubt,
(The only joy that envy does require:)
But Jason he did not conceive in mind,
His Uncle would unto him prove unkind.
Their thoughts were clean contrary in effect.
The Cousin simply seeking Uncles good;
The Uncle he all friendship does reject,
Deuifing how to shead his Nephews blood.
Pro^ok't by malice and desire of gain,
The roots of mischief, sorrow, woe, and pain.
For many Realms and Cities old do feel
The poison of the serpent Avarice;
But let all those that cruelly will deal,
Learn this of me, and think it good aduic^*
That what so ever mischief they intend,
It Is sweet at first, but bitter in the end.
And though the world does flatter for a while,
Let not the enu^ous man be proud withal;
For he that thinks another to beguile,
Perhaps may chance in self same pit to fall.
But let us envy leave as fiend of hell,
And of King Peleus further to you tell.
Who all this while imagined and sought
Means how he might attain unto his will;
Till at the last strange news to him was brought*
Which did his heart with admiration fill:
And thereby taking some occasion,
He purposed in mind to work thereon.
The news which at that time unto him came,
(Though strange it were to hear and to be told;)
Was, that in Colchos js^e there was a Ram
Which bare a fleece of pure and finest gold:
And for it was so rich esteemed to be,
They kept it close that no man might it see*
Within that Isle a King of worthy fame,
Long had remained, and yet therein did dwell,
Well stricken in years, and Oeta had to name,
Who in his days (as ancient Authors tell)
Most noble acts archieued had and done,
Whereby much honor to himself he won.
His Pedigree (as Poets list to feign)
Does show he was the Son of Phoebus bright,
Of whom, they say, he did the grace obtain
For to become a brave and valiant Knight.
Let this suffice his Ancestor to know,
And of the Ram now will I further show;
That to be kept where no man should it find,
By Magic art, was shut within a tower,
Whereas two Bulls of fierce and savage kind,
With Brazen feet attended day and hour
To guard the place* that no man might go near,
Out of their mouths still casting flames of fire.
Their eyes like burning fournace shining bright,
From whence great streams of lightning seemed to* start,
So terrible that at the very sight,
It stroke a fear and terror to the heart
Of those that boldly ventured to assay,
To win the golden Ram and bear't away.
For who so would that conquest take in hand,
Must first of all those furious Bulls assail*
And both of them by force and strength withstand,
(Else could he by no means therein prevail:)
And make them came and gentle as a Cow,
And being yok't, force the^ the ground to plow.
That done, he must a second combat make,
As dangerous and fearful as the first,
The which to think upon might cause him quake,
Yet must he not refuse to do his woo^st
Against a Serpent^gly, huge, and fell,
Much like a fiend that comes out of hell.
Which had so ^oule and v^nomous a breath,
That it infected all the air about,
And who so ere it fel^ was sure of death,
All, were he never sovaliant, strong, or stout*
With scales upon his back as hard as steel,
That blow of sword or Lance he could not feel.
And to conclude, he that did undertake
That enterprise, to bring unto an end,
Ere he began a full account must make
Of cruel death* unless himself defend,
And well resist he could in open field
That monster, and by force make him to y^eld.
Which done, and so the Serpent being dead,
The story says, it was ordained by law,
That he that did it slay should take the head,
And all the teeth out of the mouth must draw,
And after cast and sow them in the field,
The which the furious Bulls before had tild.
Whereas upon a sudden men beheld,
Out of the ground a troop of Knights arise,
And every one well armed with spear and shield,
Who valiantly in brave and warlike wise
Stayed not, but met most furiously together,
And fiercely killed and beat down each the other.
And in that sort did presently again,
In self same place where first they began to live;
For so the fatal furies did ordain,
And to each one his desteny did give:
That none should longer life on earth possess,
But all together die in that distress.
By this same way so strange and perilous,
Who so would seek the Ram of gold to gain,
And with the same return victorious,
He must adventure with no little pain:
And take his chance although t*were nere so bad,
For remedy therein might not be had.
For by a law the King did so ordain,
That who so ere aduentu^'d to assay;
To prove his force in hope the same t'obtaine,
Might not turn back, nor take another way:
But forth must go, and though his heart did fail,
His cowardice should him no whit prevail.
Some menaffirme (which of this Ram entreat)
That by the same was meant great store of gold;
Which Oeta valiantly in time did get,
And by enchantment did so closely hold,
That who so ever sought to win the same,
Must first begin those Monsters fierce to came.
The fame whereof did spread both far and near,
Which made full many ventrously desire,
To win the same, although it cost them dear,
(For gold does set a greedy mind o^fi^^)
Through vain report their honor to ad^ance,
Respecting not what unto them might chance.
For neither wit nor hardines of arms,
In that pursuit could any wh^^ av^^^^
Against such accursed and foul infernal charms,
Which made full many Knights therein to fail:
But he that sets his mind on greedy gain,
To have his will regards not death* nor pain.
This news so brought to Peleus pleased him well,
Intending secret use thereof to make,
And of his hidden malice (truth to tell)
The hard and heavy burden off to shake.
For he the reby did suddenly surmise,
Some bad pretense his Nephew to surprise.
For by that means, he had a hope to move
Young Jason valiantly to undertake
The conquest of the golden Ram to prove,
And presently a voyage thither make,
Supposing he nere should return again,
And he thereby be easde of inward pain.
Concluding thus, he does pretend a show
Of outward joy, yet inwardly did hide
The treason of his heart, that none might know
What mischief he full smoothly did provide.
Still spying time convenient and fit,
In painted show his malice out to spit.
With words of Art and eloquence refined,
Persuading men he meant naught else but good,
As knowing well his Nephews willing mind,
In such a cause to shead his dearest blood:
And for to bring his purpose to effect,
He does no longer time therein neglect.
But straight throughout the land of Thessalie,
Commission sends forth presently to call
His noble Peers and all his Baronny,
Commanding them what ever might befall,
Without delay t'assemble and to meet
At Eagee Town, in parliament to sit
For three whole days. Where with a fained face,
And sugared words he does unfold his mind,
And openly before them in the place,
Makes show to be most loving and most kind
To Jason, who as then he did commend,
That none might deem he would his death pretend.
And said, the cause that moved him to the same,
As also that assembly there to make,
Was specially t'aduance his Nephews name,
If so he would that voyage undertake:
And then at large declared it in such wise,
That no man once his treason could surmise.
With countenance so glad, and joyful show
Of fained faith as after did appear,
That they th^^ were in presence could not know,
But that he loved his Cousin very dear:
For which they all to praise him do begin,
Full little knowing his intent within.
Which having done, with fair and smiling cheer,
He did behold Prince Jason in the face,
And spoke to him that every man might hear,
When first he had causde silence in the place.
Such words as might seem outwardly to show,
His heart with joy did inwardly ore-flow.
CHAP. III.
How King Peleus fearing to be deposed by his Nephew Jason, a worthy and
valiant young Knight, counseled him to undertake the perilous and most
invincible conquest of the Golden fleece at Colchos, who was content to grant
to his Uncles desire.

Dear Cousin hark what I to thee shall say,
And think not that I slatter, lie, or feign,
And see thou bear it well in mind away,
For wholesome counsel never comes in vain:
And who so ere does seem it to reject,
The proverb says, his folly does detect.
When as I think on thee I still do find,
Such sudden joy even at my very heart,
That whatsoever sorrow's in my mind,
It cannot choose but presently depart:
And specially when as I do remember,
Thy gifts so rare in this thy age so tender.
For (truth to say) thou wholly art enclind
To virtue, honor, courtesy, and fame,
So that on whether side so ere I wind,
My only ioy's to think upon the same,
And hold my self with all my whole estate,
For thy cause only to be fortunate.
That by thy means am like to live in rest,
And be advanced to honor and renown,
(So that all vice in heart thou do derest)
Whose valor will so much advance our Crown,
That it not only shall the same amend,
But (which is more) increase, and it defend
Against all those that seek with us to strive,
Maliciously our state to overthrow,
And such as cause new quarrels to arrive,
Through pride within their hea^^s shall ouerflow,
This countries peace to alter and deface
Our glory, if they may with foul disgrace.
Who to withstand thou art our only wall,
Our mighty shield, and our protection,
So that whatsoere unto us does befall,
Can us not hurt in mine opinion.
Such trust I do repose in thy foresight,
Thy wit, thy prudence, and thy Princely might.
Which unto thy great honor and renown,
Reported are almost the world throughout:
For that thy fame in every land and town
Is known, and scene with wings to fly about;
Which makes me neither day nor hour cease
To find and seek out means the same t'encrease.
For since that thine, mine honor does augment,
I can no better do then seek to raise
Thy worthy fame with all my whole intent,
That thou may have thy well deserved praise.
Which my desire to tell thee without fail,
Proceeds of love, and does me so assail,
That my insatiate mind can take no rest,
Till I advance thine honor to the sky,
Which as I hope shall turn unto the best.
This purposing, I did my self apply
To find the means to effect my long desire,
And bring to pass the thing which I require.
At last it was my chance to understand
This strange adventure of the golden fleece:
Which if thou dare vouchsafe to take in hand
With courage bold (thine honor to increase,)
And that thou may return with victory,
And so thy name for ever magnify;
I shall esteem my self ^oue others blessed,
And this my Realm (when others shall it hear)
Be sure to live in peace and quiet rest*
For by thy valor great men will us fear.
Of Knighthood then, I pray thee grant to me,
This just request, and I will promise thee
Upon the faith and honor of a King,
That whatsoere is requisite to have,
I will provide the call and every thing,
Both Men and Arms as inuch as thou will crave.
Or any other necessary thing
That needful is, the sameto pass to bring.
And unto thee a further promise make,
That if with cheerful hear^ thou go about,
This enterprise with courage^ undertake,
Thou shall not need to fear not stand in doubt,
Whenever it shall be my chance to die,
To we^^^ the Royal Crown of Thessalie.
Let courage therefore enter in thy mind,
And think thy fame hereby shall be extold:
For he that shrinks for every blast of wind,
In honors Book shall never be intold.
Speak freely then, and see thou do not spare,
Thy full intent and meaning to declare.
When Jason did King Peleus mind perceive,
With joyful heart consent thereto he did,
Not once so wise his treason to conceive,
Nor that in sugared words lay poison hid,
Nor yet that honey sweet was mixed with gall,
To be a potion to deceive withal.
The outward gloss so cunningly was laid,
That poison closely hid, could not appear.
Prince Jason thought all true that he had said,
For he supposed the King of conscience clear
From mischief, falsehood, and from bad intent,
Or that his mind to villainy was bent.
With speed therefore he did an answer make
In few and pithy words, and did declare,
He was content that voyage t'vndertake,
And that no pain nor labor he would spare,
His Uncles mind in all things to fulfill,
With all his heart, his power, and his skill.
Wherewith such joy possessed King Peleus heart,
That much it were to tell or to declare.
And that he might the sooner thence depart,
He did all things in readiness prepare,
Appointing many Knights with him to go,
To honor him the more in outward show.
But for because that Colchos so did stand
Within the Sea, which did enclose it round,
That for to travel unto it by land,
There could no way by any means be found.
The King an order presently did take,
That Argos should a ship of purpose make.
(Who as some Auchors say, did first invent
The Art to Sail by Sea, and took in hand
To make a Ship the first that ever went
Upon the Seas, to sail from land to land.
And Argos (...) the same, as Guydoes book
Declares at large, who list therein to look.)
Which Ship in all points rigd and well set out,
Attending wind did in the harbourlie,
Where many Knights with courages most stout,
Prepared themselves their fortunes then to try,
With willing minds and joyful hearts to aid
Prince Jason: Who therewith was well apayd.
Among the which stout Hercules was one,
For courage and for strength a peereles Knight,
Whose mother was the fair Alcumenon,
In whom God Jupiter did so delight,
That in Amphitreons shape down from the sky
He did descend on earth, with her to lie.
And did on her stout Hercules beget,
Who in his time for valor did exceed;
Whose labors all in Ouids Book are set,
Whereto his praise at large you may there read:
The which for that they seemed both strange and rare,
I will in brief the same to you declare.
The first how with Busiris he did fight,
Whose custom was to wash the ground with blood
Of men, and did orethrow him by his might,
And after showed his fierce and furious mood
Against Antheon, and killed him valiantly,
And by the horns in Candie furiously
A cruel Bull by force to ground he threw.
That don, on strong King Auger he did set,
Whom after long and cruel fight he slew.
And on a mighty Spaniard did not let
To try his force, though it reported were,
That in one shape he did three bodies bear.
And after went unto the gates of Hell,
And there assaild the Triple headed hound
Called Cerberus, most cruel fierce and fell,
Who there to keep the infernal gates was bound.
And having overcome him at the last,
Did tie him in an Iron chainefull fast,
And like a Dog did lead him in his hand.
And ventring with a stout and valiant mind,
The Harpies slew within The Arcadian land.
And after that in Maiden wood did find
A flying Heart, which he did swiftly take,
And by his force a prise thereof did make.
And did the monstrous Centaurs overthrow.
And after killed the strong and cruel Snake
Of Lerna, which in pieces cut did grow
Together still, and double force did take.
And in the Thracian Land when he did see
The pampred Horses mangers filled to be
With flesh of men, in such a rage he grew,
That after he their mangers down had cast,
The Iades themselves in cruel wise he slew,
And to their Master did the like at last.
The monstrous Giant Cacus he orecame
By Tiber. And to his eternal fame,
With stout and Valiant courage he assaild
A Lion fierce and horrible to view't,
Against the which his force so much prevaild,
That after long and dangerous fight he slew't,
And from the back thereof the skin did tear,
Which after for an Armor he did wear.
His valor also did so much excel,
That boldly he adventured to take
The golden Apples from the Dragon fell.
And after did a bloody combat make
Against a fiery Cat with ugly sight,
Which lost her life by his exceeding might,
And entering in Arcadia again,
His fortune was to try his mighty strength
Upon a cruel Bore: which having slain,
He traveled to Atlas Mount at length,
And there it is said upon his shoulders square,
By extreme force the Firmament he bare.
But for because to mind I cannot call
His worthy deeds, each one as they were don,
In Ovids Book there shall you find them all,
And how his fame throughout the world did run.
As also of the Pillars he did raise,
Within the Straights to his eternal praise.
(Which Alexander Prince of great renown,
Who for to conquer all the world did mind,
As Guydo in his story sets down,
With his great host went purposely to find.)
For that beyond the same there was no ground
Inhabited, that any man had found.
Nor Sea to Sail, for then it was unknown,
As being far beyond the Ocean shore,
For never any man that way had gone,
Nor Saylor past that narrow place before,
Which now is called the Straights of Gibraltarre,
Well known to every Nation near and far.
Which Guydo says stout Hercules did set,
And in that place erect unto this end,
The passage of all men that way to let,
And while he lived did valiantly defend.
That none durst be so bold through it to pas,
So great a terror to the world he was.
This now shall serve his puissance to know,
Who in his time of honor bare the prise.
And now again I will of Jason show,
Who joyfully in most courageous wise
Without delay did great provision make,
Of such things as he meant with him to take.
And so began his strange and hard adventure,
As Guydo says about the very time,
When as the Sun in Cancer began to enter,
And parching Summer then was in his prime.
When silly shepherds were full blithe and glad,
To shun the heat, and seek the pleasant shade.
When Phoebus beams most bright and clear did shine
And cast their extreme heat upon the ground
Directly down, and straight as any line,
Whereby the air exceeding hot was found,
And every place great store of Corn did yield,
And men did mow the grass in pleasant field,
And on the hills and valleys let it rest,
Till moisture clean consumed from it away.
And prittie Lasses with their cheerful breast,
Did sing sweet notes at tossing of the hay,
At that same time Prince Jason did begin:
With joyful heart his Ship to enter in.
And with him many a hardy grecian Knight
All furnished, in brave and Warlike wise,
With gilt and graven Armor for delight,
As then it was the manner and the guise.
And hoysing sail, did lanch into the deep,
With purpose their directest course to keep
To Colchos ward. Philoctetes their guide,
Still caring loadstone in their sight to keep.
Whose skill in that same Art both sarre and wide,
Was known to be most exccellent and deep.
As also to prepare for storms and wind
Before they came, which Sailors often find.
For no man more experience had then he*
In both the Pooles, (which every one should know
That takes on him, or will a Sayler be)
And how the Poole Articas still does show
And clearly shine unto us in the night,
But Antarticus never comes in sight.
But Sailors that are provident and wise,
Do think they have experience enough,
When as the stars shine clearly in the skies
For to direct their course by Arthures Plough,
By which they make account they cannot fail
Of any coast, or place whereto they sail:
With help of Loadstone and true compassing,
For Sailors that are expert, wise, and bold,
Whenever they a voyage do begin,
Their course directly by the stars to hold,
That Arthur^ do inviron round about,
Which circle for to put you out of dout
Is called Artophilx by his name.
Which unto Sailors, (when it gives light
If that they be acquainted with the same)
Suffices to direct them in the right.
And bring them safely to their journeis end,
If God from storms and tempests them defend.
To tell you what the ancient Poets feign,
And in their Books of those two Pooles do wright
Although it seem a fable false and vain,
Yet will I set it down for your delight,
With choice for to conceive thereof in mind,
As you best liking of the same shall find.
They say Calixto and Arcadius
Hirsonne, were both in heaven stellefied,
Where they remain as Stars most glorious,
And by devine permission deified.
For that the Goddess Juno did her spy
When she with great God Jupiter did lie.
For which she did her to a Bear transform,
And so she long remaind on earth below
And did her woofull state lament and morn,
Till Jupiter that favor did her show,
(As Ovids Metamorphosis does tell)
To place her in the skies, where she does dwell
Among the stars, and there she is instald,
To be a certain sign at Sea to find*
And by the name of Vrsa Mayor called.
Her Son likewise a star of self same kind,
Was oppositely set, and for his fame
Of Vrsa Minor bears still the name.
Which fixed stars their Pilot knew so well,
(As being in that Art the most expert,
And did in Navigation so excel,
That he deserved great praise by due desert,)
That of his course he could not lightly fail,
If storms and winds did not too much prevail.
And when the greeks with travel overprest,
Had long on Seas been tossed too and fro,
Desiring to relieve themselves and rest
Their wearied limbs, they sought on land to go,
And being cast upon the Tr^i^^ soil
They land there to ease their wearied toil.
CHAP. IIII.
How Jason ^^ ^is Voyage to Co^chos, by fortune was cast upon the c^^st of
Troy, where he were on Land to refresh himself, and his company.

THe Ship at anchor by the Frigian coast,
Until the weather waxed clear and fair,
The Greeks that had so long on Seas been tossed
Went all on shore, to walk and take the air,
Glad to relieve their wearied lims of pain,
And after to return to ship again.
At Sy^eon^ a haven hard by Troy
Where they did stay, and meant there to abide
Not hurting any Woman, Man, or Boy,
A day or two, attending time and tide,
To hoyse up Sail, and toward Colchos wend,
Where first to go they only did pretend.
Not once jntending treason, hurt, or guile,
In any wise, nor troublesome to be,
Unto the country people all the while,
They stayed there for their necessitee,
For that as long as on the shore they lay,
They did naught else but sport themselves, and play.
But Fortune that so swiftly turns about,
Delighting men of pleasure to bereave,
Was the only cause, (though causeles without (doubt)
To make the Trojans falsely to conceive,
The Grecians sudden landing did pretend
Some mischief to their country in the end.
For by such bad and false suspicion,
Most puissant Kings and Princes of great fame
Have brought themselves unto destruction,
And been the only causes of their shame.
Let Troyes example for this time suffice,
Which first did breed upon a bare surmise.
Which was the cause and chief occasion,
As in the ancient History is found,
Of that most famous Towns destruction,
Whose mighty walls were raised unto the ground.
And many men, and many a worthy Knight
Did loose their lives in that most bloody fight.
And many Ladies proper fine and fair,
(Their Husbands, and their Children being dead)
Were heard lament their loss in great despair.
And Mayds in tender years by Grecians led
As slaves in bondage to their pain and grief,
Did live without all comfort or relief.
And only for that fortune does delight,
To show her power, and her majesty,
And make it known unto each mortal wight
In taking vengeance with such cruelty,
As on that famous City she did shoe,
To their destruction, misery, and woe.
Great pity it was that men of such estate,
Both on the valiant Greeks and Trojan side,
For little cause should fall at such debate,
But truth it is and cannot be denied,
That envy having entered in the heart,
From thence does not so readily depart.
For from a little graft does often arise
A fair and goodly tree, both huge and tall.
And he that climeth high may well surmise
If that he slip, to have the greater fall.
And of a spark full small we often see,
And find that mighty fires kindled be.
And as a gnat that is but a little thing
Does often cause the flesh of man to rise,
And swell abroad with pricking of his sting.
So many Princes mighty, strong, and wise,
And famous Towns at mortal wars do fall,
For slight or else for causes very small.
But if they had been well advised in time,
When sparks of envy first began to show,
And sought to quench and kill them in the prime
Full many Cities now that lie full low,
Would have stood still and flourisht till this day,
Which hateful malice brought unto decay.
For when the flame of envy spreads so wide,
That it embraces heart, and head, and vain,
And makes them bnrne so hot on either side,
There is no means to remedy that pain,
But foul and cruel murder, war, and strife,
Bereaving each the other of their life.
And thus death is the ^ine of enmetie.
And though the first beginning be but small,
Th'encrease does breed to such extremity,
That the end bereaueth joy and pleasures all.
As unto Troy we read it so befell
Which makes me sigth the truth thereof to test.
That for small cause such vengeance should proceed*
Unless it were by providence divine,
And heavenly wisdom secretly decreed:
Their fall should cause a greater joy in ^ine.
For Troy destroyed by such occasion,
And finally brought to destruction,
Was the only means that the ancient City Room,
Received her first beginning from the race:
And offspring of Aeneas, that did come
From Troy, when Grecians banished him the place.
Which Town of Room as Authors plainly say
Of all ^he world, once bare the chiefest sway.
Troy likewise brought into so great distress,
And utter overthrow of ancient fame,
Was cause that many Cities did increase,
And diverse Countries first obtained their name.
For Troiaus wanting habitation,
By force did enter many a Nation.
And after long and weary toil orepast,
Aeneas many Countries Sailing by
With all his ships, did chance t'ariue at last
Upon the pleasant coast of Italy,
Who wan the same by conquest and by might;
And made himself the Prince thereof by right.
And after him his Son Ascanius,
Succeeded, and as lawful heir he reigned,
Who being dead, his son Prince Siluius
The Diadem of Italy obtaind:
Of whom did come by right descent and true,
Most worthy Brute that Albion did subdue.
Wwo having woon't by force from Giants fell
And conquest brave, did thereof change the name,
And called it Britain as our stories tell,
And was the first inhabited the same.
With this Aeneas from the Trojan town
Came Francus also Lord of great renown.
Who afterward his honor to advance,
Did build a town both stately fair and great
Called Parris, whieh does stand in midst of France,
The which he made his chief and Princely seat.
And first gave name of France unto that land,
Which he did win by strong and valiant hand.
And Anthenor a Lord of Trojan race,
Began the town of Venice to erect,
Where during life he made his resting place,
And Sicanus (in whom was no defect
Of Trojan blood) as Cronicles do tell
Won Cicile, and long time therein did dwell.
And after him a Prince of worthy fame,
His Valiant brother Siculus did reign
Within that I Will, of whom it took the name
Of Cicile, as records therein explain.
Aeneas having conquered Italy,
Did not himself therewith so satisfy.
But into Tuscan entered which he wan,
And in the I Will of Cicile to his praise,
The regal Town of Naples first began,
Which flourishes so much in these our days
With brave and welthie Merchant men of fame,
Who through their traffic great inricht the same.
And of the Greeks that Troy did help to spoil,
King Diomed, who with most great desire,
When he had spent his time with pain and toyl^
Ten years in war, and thought home to retire,
And there to live and rest secure from harms,
He found his men and country up in arms.
With full intent his entry to withstand,
And to bereave him of his Diadem
And princely state, thrust him out of his land,
Who being thereby brought to that extreme,
Was forced for his relief as stories tell,
To seek another Country where to dwell.
And entering in Callabria by strength,
He brought the Country to subjection,
And there did rule in peace, till at the length
Dame Fortune seeking his subversion,
By Cerces means his grecian Knights did change
Into the form of Birds most rare and strange.
Which presently did fly into the air,
(And ever since continue thereabout)
Their seathers shining bright and very fair,
And called are (to put you out of dou^t)
As we in Isydore the same may read
Among the Greeks the Birds of Diomede.
But as some Authors list hereof to wright,
They say this Metamorphosis was don
By Venus in her malice to that Knight,
Because against Aeneas her dear Son
Feirce Diomede did cast a cruel dart,
As they too fought to strike him to the h^rt.
Which when his Mother Venus had espide
She causd a mistie clowd twixt them to rise,
And therewith did her Son Eneas hide
From sight of Diomedes cruel eyes:
And afterward wroght him that spightfull scorn
And did his men in shape of Birds transform.
And in that sort from time to time they fly,
Unto the place of Diomedes grave,
Where as his body deep intombd does lie,
To show that still a mind of him they have.
For yearly on his day of Funeral,
They flock about that place both great and small.
And there from morn till night you shall the^ find.
It further is reported to be true,
That those strange Birds do love the Greeks by kind,
And utterly do hate and still eschew
The Latins, and do know them well asunder,
When they the^ see. Which seems such a wonder
To me, that I by no means can espey,
Nor yet conceive by any manner way,
The hidden causes of such sorcery;
But this I know, and that I dare well say,
The first beginning of so bad jntent,
Was wrought by art of foul jnchantment.
But faith does teach us boldly to defy,
And flatly banish all jllusion;
Which Satan daily casts before our eye,
To bring us thereby to confusion.
And thus by famous Troyes subversion,
Full many ancient Cities first begun.
And diverse Lands, with many a wealthy town,
By sequel of that war long flourished;
Which fore that Troy was cruelly thrown down,
Lay wast, and were not then jnhabited.
But to declare them orderly by name,
Were labor great for me to do the same.
And therefore to Prince Jason jle return,
That went a shore at Simeont by Troy;
And for a day or two did there soiourne,
The comfort of the pleasant air t'enjoye:
And of his weary toil himself to ease,
Till wind and waves did calm upon the Seas.
But enviously a false report was blown,
And to the King Laomedon declared;
That certain Grecian Knights to him unknown,
To enter in his land themselves prepared:
Well armed at each point, which bred surmise,
They sought t'jnvade the Country by surprise.
Else would they first (say they) a license crave,
And not so proudly land without consent
Of him or his, and no safe conduct have,
Which argued but a sign of bad intent:
Which if the King would not prenent in time,
They said, might prove his prejudice in fine.
For if (said they) he will not seem to fear
Their landing, but defer by negligence,
T'enquire and know from whence they are, and where
They mean to go, and what is their pretense:
He may perchance repent his little care,
Of making have against them to prepare.
For sudden things require sudden sight,
And should not be deferd till mischief fall;
And Dogs are to be feared that first do bite,
And fly upon a man before they braule:
So wisdom does require present speed,
To stop a mischief ere it further breed.
Thus did the Troyans murmr in the town,
And speak thereof each one unto the other,
As in the streets they walked up and down,
That at the length there spread so great a rumor*
That Laomedon did forthwith prepare
A messenger, to know from whence they were.
And without counsel taking in the same,
In have did send to will them to depart;
Or else he said their pride he would so tame,
That stoutest of them all should wish in heart
He had not been so bold, to give the venture
Without his leave, within his land to enter.
The messenger in this sort sent away,
Made have to let Prince Jason understand,
What Laomedon willed him to say,
And to command him to avoid the land:
Who all this while did naught but sport and play,
Attending time from thence to sail away.
The Effect of which his message to declare,
From point to point, verbatim as it was;
As near as ere I can, I will not spare,
And what thereof did after come to pass:
Which in the Chapter following shall appear*
If to the same you give attentive ear.
CHAP. V.
I How Laomedon King of Troy sent to Jason to command him and his company
forthwith to depart out of his Country; and what answer they returned to the
King again.

THe high and mighty Prince of great renown,
My most redoubted Lord and sovereign true*
Laomedon of Troy that bears the crown,
By me his messenger has sent to you:
To let you know he does not well conceive,
Of this your bold arrival without leave
Within his land, thus armed as you seem,
Not once vouch^afing first to know his mind;
As though of him you made so small esteem,
That no resistance against you he could find:
The which to let you well perceive and see,
He does expressly send you word by me:
That presently and that without delay,
Both you and yours depart out of this land
And Troia^ bounds, and get you hence away,
Or else by force he minds you to withstand
And will you nill you, make you leave the place,
If you presume to offer him disgrace.
My counsel is (believe it if you list)
To get you hence in peace and quietness,
For folly great it were for you to resist,
And of mere pride or glorious wilfullnes,
Seek to disturb my Lord feli^itie,
Which now does live in great tranquillity.
And does his kingdom govern and maintain,
With so great wisdom and magnificence
By valor and by might, that twere in vain,
For any to withstand him of pretense.
Wherefore I wish you all if you be wise,
Herein to take and follow mine advise.
And seek not further now to move offense,
Least you procure your peril woe and smart,
And find that true by good experience
Which friendly unto you I do impart.
This is my Lords embassage too you sent;
Conceive it as you will it is his intent.
The messenger in this sort having said
What Laomedon charged him as then.
Jason therewith not very well apayd;
In face and color waxed pale and wan.
Yet soberly with wisdom held his peace:
Not seeming once in chollor to increase.
Nor yet to take offense what ere fell out,
Although it vexed and grieved him at the heart,
But stood as mute: at last he turned about;
And unto all his fellows did jmpart
What message Laomedon had him sent,
And how to him and them he seemed bent.
And willing them about him to draw near,
He thus began his words and speech to frame.
My friends and fellows whom I love so de^^e,
Know that King Laomedon does us blame
For entering (as he says) within his land,
Before we craved license at his hand.
And for that cause a messenger has sent
With threatening words, to let us know his mind,
That to drive us from hence is his intent
If here we stay. Wherefore he does us bind,
And straightly charge eft-foones without delay,
All scuses set apart to pack away.
Behold said he what blindness he doth^^e,
And how he does on honor set his mind,
That unto wearied strangers does refuse
To give them leave a little ease to find
In their distress, who nothing less pretend,
Then him or his in any wise to offend.
But where is ancient liberty become,
Is neigher love, nor kindness to be found?
Both which in Princely hearts should have a room.
And where is honor gone that used t'abound
In Princes mind? who of an ancient right,
Still moved them with care and great delight,
To entertain all strangers that resort
Unto their Courts, or countries whatsoere,
That afterward they might of them report,
What Princely and what noble minds they bear.
But neither love nor liberty are found
In this Kings Court, or country to abound.
For if he were of noble heart and kind,
He could not choose ^ot in them both delight:
And to show forth his great and Princely mind;
He would command his subjects to their might,
To succor men oppressed with woe and grief
And not have sent us hence without relief.
For if that he had chanced from the seas,
By fortune or adventure whatsoere,
T'ariue and set his foot on shore for ease
Where any Grecian Prince does Scepter bear,
With much more honor like to his degree,
He should not fail by us received to be.
But since that he for ought I can epsy,
Has banished out of mind and does disdain,
All freedom, honor, and humanity,
And clean contrary vices does retain,
We must and will his mind herein fulfill,
Because as now our power's not like our will.
For this is sure and so it shall be found,
That this disgrace which to us now is don,
In the end may chance upon himself rebound,
Since that he has of malice thus begone,
And peradventure it may chance fall out,
Ere Phoebus thrice the Zod^ack runs about.
For let him trust and thereof be assurd,
We will him serve, with such as he has sent,
And if I live, and what he has procurd,
He shall not fail thereof by my intent,
Albeit now I set no time nor tide,
Since longer here I mindd not to abide.
Till I have better leisure to soiorne,
And so with stearne and yet with lively cheer,
At that same word began about to turn,
And suddenly unto the messenger
That from the King as then to him was sent,
In this wise he declared his jntent:
My friend (quoth he) know well and understand
The message which as now thou bringst to me,
From Laomedon King of Tr^i^^ land,
Unfit does seem from such a Prince as he.
For by each point thereof I do perceive,
How he does use of strangers to conceive.
And cannot choose but deeply in my mind,
Think much on his great favor to us shown,
And of his liberality so kind,
And gifts which on us now he has bestowne.
Nor can I well let slip out of my thought,
The least reward that thou to us have brought.
For trust me well I can it not forget,
But needs must deep jmprint it in my mind,
How by his honor he so much does set,
As that he studieth only to be kind.
That by thee now does send unto us here,
Such intertainment, great and dainty cheer.
Clean contrary to that we did expect;
From such a worthy famous Prince as he,
But god which does all secrets deep detect,
Can bear us witness jnnocents to be
From any hurtor any bad pretense,
That we ere meant against him to cause offense.
And Gods to record in this case I call,
With my whole heart to justify the same,
(Whatsoever may hereafter chance to fall.)
We have not once deserved any blame.
Nor violently taken any thing
From man, or boy, so may thou tell the King.
But being forced by great and stormy wind,
Necessity compelled us to land
Upon this coast, some succor here to find,
And rest our wearied limbs upon the strand.
Intending but a day or two to stay,
And then again with speed to go away,
Unto the place where we desire to be.
Which thou unto thy Lord for truth may say,
And further that the time he shall once see,
When as perchance more thanks receive he may
From us, or else it may be from some other,
So go thy ways, and farewell gentle brother.
When Jason thus an answer had returned,
And bad the Tr^^an messenger depart:
The noble Knight stout Hercules that burned
With rage, and fury inwardly in heart,
As he was gon^ ^ad him again turn back
Disdainefully, and thus to him he spoke*
Good fellow thou that art the messenger
Of thy good Lord, who has thee hither sent*
Content thy self, and stand thou not in fear,
That here to stay is ought of our jntent,
For that before the Sun shall rise again
We will be gone, and so I tell thee plain.
And not a man of ours on sho^re shall be,
To morrow at this time what e^e befall,
And thereupon my troth I pledge to thee,
And Gods to witness to the same I call.
For we intend no longer here t'soiorne,
But to our ships again with speed return.
As soon as it is dawning of the day,
On pain to suffer foul reproach and blame,
But ere three years shall fully pass away,
Who ever says contrary to the same,
We will return again into this land,
And cast our Ankors here upon this sand.
Take heed thereof and note full well the time,
And let this now suffice and warning be,
That some new change shall follow of this Prime,
Which if Iliue thy King shall plainly see,
And when his power against us shall not extend,
For his safe conduct we will scorn to send.
And then I tell thee plainly for no lie,
We will no more regard him then a straw,
Nor of his words nor threats that are so hie,
The least of us shall stand in any awe.
Till when because we will him not deceive,
We mind not once of him to take our leave.
For that of us he seems to make a jest,
As though we were not worthy better cheer;
But though he now does think to live at rest,
I swear by God he shall abide it dear.
Which in the end shall turn unto his shame:
And see that to the King you tell the same.
The messenger thereto did thus reply,
And said, though for the King you do not care,
This privileged you can me not deny,
In decent terms the message to declare,
Which now to you I bring what ere it be,
Good or else bad, there is no fault in me.
And wheresoere it pleases you to stay,
The choice is in yourselues as being free,
Yet thus much unto you I must needs say
You have no cause now to be wroth with me.
But leave your threatening while you here remain,
And do your worst when as you come again.
For wisdom does require silence now
And secrecy till that you be at large,
And then you may your courage boldly show.
But truth to say it longs not to my charge,
To stand and strive with you or make debate,
Yet better it were betimes, then all to late
For you to shun the harms that may befall.
And at this time I will with you be plain,
For my discharge to tell it to you all,
That pity it were that here you should be slain,
Or offered any point of villainy,
Since that no man whatsoever can deny,
But that your good behavior does declare,
And show you worthy Personages to be,
To govern and command in peace, and war,
And to descend of great and high degree.
But least with words percha^ce I might you grieve
I Will say no more but take of you my leave.
The night ore-past at dawning of the day,
When as the Lark with sweet and pleasant note,
Does strain her breast as much as well she may,
To greet the streams of Phoebus Chariot,
As then beginning in the Orient sky
To show themselves with crimson colored die.
And fair Aurora with her silver showers,
The fragrant Roses had begone to wet,
And all bedewed the blooming silver flowers,
As Lillies, Cowslippes, and sweet Margaret.
And made them spread their leaves both fresh and bright
Which had been closed up by glooming night.
And hony-Suckles mong the bushes green
Perfumed had the air with pleasant sent:
Long ere that Titans glistring beams were seen,
And to our Hemisphere their course had lent,
To comfort and relieve each living wight,
Which by his heat receive their strength and might.
Long time I say, before the Sun did rise,
Prince Jason and his fellow Hercules
With all the speed they could in hasty-wise
Prepared themselves to put unto the Seas.
Commanding every man his way to take,
Abord the ship, and all things ready make*
The Ankor up with merry heart and glad,
They hoysed Sails, and straight put from the land.
For Jason knew the little train he had,
Could not suffice the Trojans to withstand:
As being much more weaker to conclude,
Then Trojans were for strength and multitude.
So that as then war with them to begin
Was not his wisest way to take in hand,
Nor likely was the victory to win,
As having but a small and feeble band.
(For he that hewes above his head too hie,
Perchance a chip may fall into his eye.)
And therefore made great speed to get away,
And having wind at will did sail so fast,
That finding no occasion them to stay,
They did ariue at Colchos safe at last
By Fortunes aid, (although sometime unstable)
That did them help as much as she was able.
In Colchos Isle a goodly town did stand,
Which for the riches, worthiness, and fame,
Was principal and chief within that land
That called was Iaconites by name,
With streets full large and howses very fair,
And seated in a good and wholesome air.
Round compassed with towred walls about,
The which did make a stately show to see.
And strong and deeply ditched all without
To make defense against the enemy.
Wherein King Oeta with his Princely train,
(As fittest place) did specially remain.
(And at such time as Jason thither went,
He found him there with many a worthy Knight,
For whom the King then purposely had sent,
To show his great magnificence and might.
That so his fame reported far and near,
Unto the Greeks for truth might then appear.)
About this town were hills and mountains steep
And valleies fair and pleasant to the eye,
With diverse Rivers sweet, and fresh, and deep,
That every where within the land did lie.
And many a lake, and many a goodly well,
Commodious for their use which there did dwell
And store of Parkes for beasts both wild and ^ame,
And wods and meadows fresh and very green,
With sundry hearb^ and flowers in the same,
Of fair and diverse colors there were seen.
As pleased nature paint and set them out,
As time of year when Summer came about.
For fishing fowling, and for Princely game,
Of hunting and of hauking in the field,
No country in the world did pass the same,
Nor yet more store of fish and foul did yield,
And plenty of each other kind of thing,
As Corn, and grain, that firtile soil did bring.
There likewise did the Birds most sweetly sing,
In time of year with pleasant harmony,
When trees and bushes began to bud and spring,
Procuring with their cheerful mellody.
Great joy and comfort to the wounded hearts
Of lovers, that were peirst with cupids darts.
That certainly when Summer past away,
And winter cold and chill did end the year,
And that the fair delighfull month of May
With Lady Flora did begin t'appeare,
And decked the fields with flowers of strange devise
That stately land did seem a Parradise.
And for all kind of dainty food and fine,
Dame Ceres that the name had always borne,
To be the Queen of plenty, sent them wine,
Flesh, fish, and foul, with every kind of co^^e,
in so great plenty and exceeding store,
No Nation in the world could wish for more.
For what soere Dame Nature could devise
Was found therein, for nothing there was seant,
That pleasure might procure to heart or eyes,
Nor any man therein complaind of want,
So great increase this little Isl^ did bring,
Of all and eke of every kind of thing.
Unto this Town Prince Jason straight did go
With Hercules, and all their noble train,
Who in the way did make a goodly shoe
As hand in hand they marched in rancks of twain,
Each one of stature big and very tall,
Young, lusty, strong, and hady therewithal.
Their countenances sad and full demure,
In so good sort and in such comely wise,
That unto every man it did procure,
Such pleasure to behold their greekish guise,
That all the Town did run in flocks to see,
And learn what country people they might be.
That in such manner came into the Town,
So unexpected of the King and Peers.
And every one went walking up and down
To hearken, and to tell what news he hears.
So rude they were to wonder, stare, and gase.
And gape, and look, as it were in a maze.
For such as in great Towns do use to dwell,
Are commonly jnquisitiue of news.
But of King Oats now I must you tell,
How kindly he those strangers then did use,
And at their first ariuall in the court,
Received and welcomed them in princely sort.
For presently as he did understand
Th'ariuall of Prince Jason and his train,
Of worthy grecian Knights within his land,
He did not seem their coming to disd^^^^,
But rising from his chair without delay,
In person went to meet them on the way.
Receaving them with glad and joyful cheer.
In stately wise as it becomes a King.
And that his bounty might the more appear,
Unto his royal court he does them bring,
With charge unto his officers to see,
They should be served each one in his degree.
And that not any thing what ere should want,
That might procure their pleasure or their ease,
Nor any one in duty should be scant
To honor them, if him they sought to please.
That don he leads them to his Royal place
Where he does welcome the^ with Princely grace.
And passing through a Marble paved yeard,
He went into a stately sumpteous hall,
Wherein no cost of any thing was spard,
That might adorn and beatifi't withal.
The walls beser with Images of gold,
And hanged with Arras costly to behold.
Where being entered in, and he set down,
He does them all in hearty manner greet,
And welcome bids to Iacomtes town,
Each one in his degree as he thought meet.
Commanding straight great store of wine and bear
To be brought forth their wearied limbs to cheer.
The King thus set and plast in Royal chair,
All hanged with rich and costly cloth of gold,
And gilt and set with pearls very fair,
Most sumptious and most stately to behold.
Environed with Lords and Knights that were
At his command, then summond to be there,
Beholding with a gracious countenance,
Prince Jason, and his fellow Hercules,
Their honors more t'encrease and to advance,
Willd them to sit down by him for their ease.
But Jason would no longer time let pas,
To show the King wherefore his coming was*
Which he in words but few, (yet wisely told,)
Began to tell, with such a comely grace,
And so demurely (as full well he could)
That all that were then present in the place,
Admird his wit, his memory, and tongue,
To be most perfect in a Prince so young.
But ere he did begin his tale to frame,
With good advise, and great discretion,
He did in mind premeditate the same,
And to each sentence gave direction,
And did his meaning then so wisely say,
That Oetes his request could not denay.
And so with sto^^ and princely courage bold,
He started up; with due obedience,
And kneeling fore the King, began t'vnfold
Wherefore he came, and showed the full pretense,
Of his so strange and valiant enterprise,
Which in this manner thus he did devise.
Most puissant Prince, and King of Colchos land,
May't please you of your high and special grace,
Beningly now to hear and understand
The cause of my repair unto this place,
And in good sort not taking of offense,
Vouchsafe therein to give me audience.
To use long speech and many words were vain,
And might perhaps breed cause of tediousnes,
Or move offense: but soothly to be plain,
Rejecting rethoritian curiousness,
In brief t'vnfold the some of mine intent,
I must confess that honor has me bent,
To try th'adventure of the golden fleece,
And win the glory to atchiue the same,
And for that cause I passed out of Greece,
In hope t'augment my valor and my fame,
Which if your grace will give me leave t'assay,
I doubt not but to bear the prise away,
And though I know what ever men pretend,
And undertake in hope of victory,
(Unless the gods some savor to them lend,
In whom consists all felicity)
It were in vain for any man to venture,
Or on him take in peril great to enter.
For peace, and war, dishonor eke, and fame,
Do all upon their wills and mights depend,
And no man can withstand them in the same.
What ever fortune shall unto me send,
I will not spare th'adventure now to try
And do my best, for once I can but die.
If that your Grace thereto will give consent,
And grant me leave my force therein t'assay
Unto your laws therein, is my intent
In each respect to yield and to obey,
And crave no favor whatsoere betide,
Hap good or ill, I will it all abide.
Most humbly craving that without delay,
My mind herein your grace will not withstand,
But rather flatly bind me to a day,
The same t'achieue, if so I take it in h^nd.
Speak gracious Prince, and grant to my request,
And lo your Knight at your command is pressed.
While Jason thus his mind did boldly say,
The King that full attentively the while
His speech had marked, with silence seemed to stay
Before he spoke, at last he began to smile,
And friendly him beholding in the face,
Unto him said with glad and cheerful grace;
Young Knight, although thy mind be fully set,
And wholly bent upon this enterprise
So dangerous, that no man can thee let,
Nor hold thee from't; yet follow my advise,
And wisely with thy self resolve in mind,
Ere thou begin't, what danger thou shall find.
For know thou must (though valiant be thy heart)
That this adventure is so hard to win:
(As being wrought and framed by magic Art)
That strength of man can not prevail therein:
But he that dares the same once undertake,
To end his life a full account must make.
No favor, nor no hope for him is left,
That does presume to take the same in hand,
For by the law he is thereof bereft,
(Which by no means he may in ought withstand)
As having choice before he gines to venture,
To leave the same, and not therein to enter.
But once begun, he must therein proceed,
For back he may not turn, what ere betide.
And though he stand in never so great need,
His dome is past, he must his chance abide.
For death is his reward that does begin
And take in hand the golden fleece to win.
So strickt a law binds him that this will try,
Which unto thee young Jason I must tell,
I can by no means change, nor yet deny
To any one: therefore advise thee well,
Before thou ventrest t'vndertake the same,
Least afterward, on me be laid the blame
Of thy so desperate destruction.
Wherefore for my discharge I thee require,
With hearty and with true intention,
To leave the same: and let not high desire
Procure thee to incur thine own decay,
By this so hard and unexpected way.
Since then thou see what danger lies therein,
For that from point to point I have thee told
The truth of all before thou do begin,
Let reason rule, and be not overbold
To take in hand, while time thou have to choose,
Least when thou would, thou can it not refuse.
The time does now afford thee space to take,
Or to refuse th'adventure, which you will,
For look what law God Mars himsefe did make,
I must the same in all respects fulfill.
What ere he be that venters in this case,
Let him be sure, he gets no other grace.
Thus (youthful Jason) whatsoere betide,
I have thee told and openly let know
What danger thou art sure thereby to abide:
Which if I could, I would have kept thee fro.
But truth to say, I can it not deny
To any man that sekes the same to try.
Then to conclude, since now thou do perceive
What danger lies herein, take heed in time
Of her that turns the wheel, least she bereave
Thee of thy life, while it is in the prime.
Do as thou will, thou getst no more of me,
Of weal or woe, the choice consists in thee.
With that the King did rise out of his seat,
When time drue near for dinner to provide,
Whereto the preparation was so great,
That care of all things else being set aside,
Each Officer was busied to see,
That nothing whatsoere, should wanting be.
The tables covered stately to behold,
And Cubbards well and costly garnished
With store of plate, of silver, and of gold,
(Whereof the King was richly furnished)
And Trumpets sounding every man to call,
When as the meat was brought into the hall:
The King set down with in his Royal seat,
With Hercules and Jason at his board,
Great store of sundry kinds of dainty meat,
Were served in as time did then afford:
That done, the Marshall placed all the rest,
Each one in his degree, as he thought best.
Where every man was entertaind so well,
That wonder it was to see their costly fare,
Which in each thing did there so much excel,
By reason that the King no cost did spare,
That all the Court admired his noble mind,
Cause he to strangers showed himself so kind.
And more for to delight their minds withal,
Musitions never ceased still to play
On Citern, Lute, Bandore, and Base-Viall,
Cornet, and Flute, to pass the time away:
With pleasant notes, and in such stately wise,
As it had been an earthly Paradize.
For truth to say, such plenty there was found,
That Oetaes liberality was praised,
And so extold in all things to abound,
That his great fame unto the skies was raised,
For entertaining strangers in such wise,
By all the ways and means he could devise.
To tell each several kind of meat by name,
Or half thereof in order to descrie,
Impossible it were to do the same,
There was so much and great diversity.
It shall suffice to say such was the store,
That wit of man could well devise no more.
And to be brief, the King did so excel
In every point of liberality,
That rightly might be said, in him did dwell
The pattern of true magnanimity:
No marvel then, as it did well appear,
He made the Greeks so great and royal cheer.
And more for to augment his fame withal,
He caused his only Daughter to be brought
Out of her chamber down into the hall,
Whose beauty if the world throghout were sought
Could not be matched, so much it did excel,
That to describ't were hard for me to tell.
Whose Princely presence wrought no small delight,
Within the hearts of all the company,
When in most stately wise each Grecian Knight
She began salute, and no man did deny
Her courteous entertainment to afford,
As she did pass along from board to board.
And chiefly to behold her comely face,
For whitenes like to Alablaster clear,
With Roseat cheeks, yet mixed with such grace,
That no access of color did appear,
Wherein dame Nature played so kind a part,
That well she proved mistress of her Art.
This Princess called Medea as we read,
Was the only child King Oeta had alive,
And rightly in his Kingdom should succeed,
If she her father chanced to survive.
So ripe of years and gallant to behold,
That nature never framed a finer mold.
But notwithstanding this, her beauty rare,
And youthful years, (sufficient to inspire
Her heart with love) yet was her only care
To read and study with no small desire,
All kind of books that might or could be found,
Whereby she learned of every Art the ground
So perfectly, that never yet was found
A man that did attain unto her skill;
Her learning was so great and so profound,
For to discuss of every thing at will:
And nothing what so e're but she could tell,
Concerning things in heaven, earth, and hell.
No secrets of the earthly globe so round,
But she could well disclose them at her will,
The course of Stars and Planets she had found,
And did attain unto so lofty skill,
That by their motion she could truly show,
What should befall upon the earth below.
She was so learned in Astronomy.
The Nigromancian Art she knew so well,
And thereto did her mind so well apply,
That by her charms she called out of hell
The Infernal spirits, and forced them to obey
Her word and will, they durst it not denay.
With words she vsd to say in sundry wise,
(First casting incense sweet into the fire,
And doing of some devilish sacrifice,
With Goat, horns, milk, and blood) her whole desire
She could attain, when time convenient
She knew would be, to work Inchantement.
Such was her skill, and eke so well she had
The heavenly and celestial bodies found
How to discern, that times both good and bad
By them she chose, to make and to compound
Her drugs, whereby she brought to pass her will
In every thing, what ever good or ill.
She could command the winds to storm and blow,
And make the ground to freeze in every vain;
And cause it thunder, lighten, hail and snow,
And when she list it suddenly should rain.
And turn the day full clear to ugly night,
And then again cause Sun to shine most bright.
She could the waters make to rise and rage,
With huge and lofty billoes to the sky;
And then again make calm, and eke assuage
The tempest, were it nere so great and hie.
She could young trees dry up both root and rind,
And them revive again in self same kind.
And in the deepest time of Winter cold,
When buds and blossoms wither and decay;
And every thing does fade and waxes old,
She could the earth make green, and eke array
The fields with flowers of every several kind,
And colors as in Summer we them find.
And when she list she could the Summer clear,
Clean alter and convert to Winter cold,
And make it look with dark and glooming cheer,
Strange, wonderful, and ugly to behold.
Old men she could to youth again restore,
And make them fresh and lusty as before.
And young men that no hair on face could show,
Soon would she cause appear both gray and old.
Such was her skill, that bought on earth below
But she could change, and secrets all unfold.
And trees with fruit she would at will make bare
Of bark and leaf, a secret strange and rare.
She could the Sun and Moon against nature stay,
And cause ecclipses out of time by force;
For no man that is learned can denay,
But they are tied unto a certain course.
(As by the Lord ordained at first it was,)
The which they may nor can by no means pass.
For till the Sun with glistering beams does run,
By usual course unto th'ecclipticke line,
And then is in conjunction with the Moon;
There Is no eclipse as writers do define,
But when the Sun with fiery beams most red,
His mansion has in th'vgly Dragons head.
And that the Moon is seated in the tail
Of Dragon fell, then it is a thing most true,
That an eclipse by nature cannot fail,
But certainly thereof must needs ensue:
By reason of intersecations,
Of circles and of reuolutions.
Which fixed are within the skies aloft,
And cause the shining beams of Phoebus bright,
(As it is seen within the world full often)
To be obscured and shadowed from our sight;
For that the Moon does make division,
By natural interposition.
Between our eyes and Phoebus glistring beams,
So as we may not then behold nor see,
How Tytans flaming Chariot weld his streams,
Which for a time clean darkened seem to be.
But for because Ptholome the King,
Within his Book shows cause of every thing:
Both of ecclipses and conjunction,
Of Sun and Moon, with other planets bright,
That they do hap by common motion.
I will no longer of this matter write.
And though that Ovid in his book does praise,
Medeas skill her honor so to raise,
And does of her such fained fables tell,
Yet God forbid that credit we should give
Unto such fond conceits, as knowing well,
No creature that upon the earth does live,
Has power to work against dame natures course,
To make the Sun and Moon ecclipst by force.
For God that rules all things by his might,
Has so disposd his heavenly creatures,
That they cannot remove by day nor night,
Without his will as long as world endures:
But in a mutual order still are bound,
Continually the world to compass round.
For no eclipse as yet was ever known,
The Moon not being in conjunction,
As I have said, unless that God has shown
A miracle, as in the passion.
For then the Sun was found ecclipst to be,
Against natures course, as all the Jews might see.
For when that Christ upon the cross was nailed,
The Son of life was darkened for our good,
And then of heaven and earth the powers failed,
(At shedding of his pure and precious blood)
And showed signs most strangely to behold,
The glory of his Godhead to unfold.
The earth did quake, great darkness did appear,
The dead did rise (which caused no little wonder)
Within the Church the vale in midst did tear,
Hard stones and rocks did burst and cleave in sunder.
That for the tokens strange and marvelous,
Which then were seen wise Diomsians,
When as he did such sudden darkness find,
(Although that he a heathen was by right)
Yet seemed much astonished in mind,
And flatly said, that sure the God of might,
Did suffer death, or else 'twas to presume,
The world as then would perish and consume.
Thus did this heathen man as then conceive,
When as he did such wonders great behold;
For God his creatures can of power bereave
As being all of him to be contrould.
For he that did all things on earth ordain,
Can heaven and earth of usual course restrain.
As sacred Scriptures plainly testify,
How Joshua caused the Sun his course to stay,
(While he did force his enemies to fly
At Gabaon, for space of one whole day)
Which God did grant unto his faithful Knight,
At his request to show his power and might.
Then think it not strange, if at the passion
Of Jesus Christ, incarnate for our sake,
The heavens showed such alteration,
And bright Sun beams became of color black,
Since he has made both sky, and sea, and land,
And all are ruled by his most mighty hand.
But though that Ovid list so much to wright,
And of Medea tells so false a fable,
And to extol her seems to take delight,
Yet all he said to prove he was not able;
Although she were a cunning sorceresse,
As ancient stories manifest no less.
This shall suffice to show her wit and skill.
And now I will proceed to mine intent,
To tell how she obayd her fathers will,
When as she knew that he for her had sent,
Inuesting costly furniture great store,
That she might cause her beauty seem the more.
For if of beauty women have good store,
They will not fail to play a woman's part,
By skill t'encrease dame natures work the more,
And are therein such mistresses of Art:
That what so er's amiss they will it hide,
That no defect may outwardly be spide.
But she was fair and beautiful in face,
(And in behavior womanly withal)
And set it forth with such a princely grace,
That every man admired her in the hall:
Her entry so maiesticall did seem,
As if she had a heavenly creature been.
King Oeta as the story shows it,
As soon as she into the hall was brought,
Caused her by young Prince Jason down to sit,
For his desire, will, and only thought
Was, how he might him princely entertain,
And so his bounty to the Greeks explain.
But in this point (alas) he seemed to be,
Clean void of good advise and prudent care;
(For wisdom wills us wisely to foresee
Each danger, and against the same prepare)
To cause a maiden light of wit, and eye,
His pleasure in that case to satisfy.
And though his special meaning and desire
Was only for the honor of his guest;
Yet it did set his Daughters heart on fire,
Which burnt within the furrows of her breast,
So sore that it bred his confusion,
And finally her own destruction.
Great folly 'twas so much her youth to trust,
And give her cause of such a motion,
That might provoke and stir her unto lust,
And that through want of good discretion,
To think upon (as reason does require)
A woman's light and mutable desire.
Which any man that is wise no doubt will fear.
For who was ever yet so mad or wood,
(Unless he did so sound affection bear,
As that he seemed careless of his good)
Without good trial women to believe,
or hasty credit to their words to give.
In whom is neither constancy nor trust,
They are so double and so full of wile,
That hard it is t'restraine them of their lust:
And set their minds so much on fraud and guile,
That no man can himself of them assure.
For it to them belongs of nature.
Even from the time they first creep out of cradle,
To be both wily, wavering and light,
Their hearts they are so frail and so unstable,
In youthful years wherein they take delight:
For that while they in growing years are young,
Their inward thoughts agree not with their rong.
Which is the cause that many wise men write,
That wau'ring, change, and mutability,
To women does belong of ancient right,
As framed of mould of instability:
Which all that know them well cannot denay,
(Although it grieueth me so much to say.)
For if you could perceive their inward mind,
And all their slights and wily fetches know,
You might the true and lively pattern find,
Within their hearts (they do so over flow)
Of fond and wavering false inconstancy,
Which here and there with every wind does fly.
For they are of so mutable a kind,
As if that valiant Hercules should prove,
And Sampson, both would not suffice to bind
A woman's heart, that it should not remove:
For as the subtle flames of burning fire,
So too and fro they fly in their desire,
Till they accomplish fully their delight.
For like as nature seeks after form,
And therein takes kindly appetite,
Till she her course by process may perform:
So women's hearts will never refrain from man
In wau'ring lust, devise what means you can.
Nor will they cease till they have all assaid,
Though that their minds to twenty men were bent,
But would to God as nature is appaid
With one form only, holding her content,
And nere desires further to proceed,
But therein rests, and will it not exceed,
That women her example follow would,
And hold themselves content, and still abide
Constant to one, as they in duty should,
But want of footing makes them often slide:
For not content with perfect unity,
They bend their minds to seek plurality.
So much in mutability they flow,
Yet often pretend a kind of stablenes;
Which outwardly by signs they seem to show,
But inwardly is hidden doublenes:
So close and sure, that outwardly with eye
Full hard it is their malice to espy.
For under show and veil of honesty,
Their deep desire is kept full close in mew,
With fained show of simple modesty,
Refusing that which they in heart pursue;
And that an outward praise they may obtain,
They will dissemble, flatter, lie, and feign.
Then must I needs King O^t^s tell thee true,
That in this case thou had too little care,
In that thou did not doubt what might ensue,
But let thy daughter fair proceed so far
Without advise, with strangers so to deal,
To overthrow thy self and common weal.
For by that means thy treasure it was lost,
Thine honor staind, thy country clean undone,
Thy self in thousand cares in sorrows ^ost,
Thy Daughter with a stranger way did run:
And in a fo^raigne land through care and thought,
Was in the end to utter mischief brought.
And with no little scandal to thy name,
By misery, by sorrow, and by grief;
At last was brought unto her death with shame,
And thou thy self berest of all relief,
Might ^it and mourn thy hard and doleful case,
That to prevent it had no better grace.
If thou by wise and provident foresight,
Had had the wit to think on future harms,
And in thy mind would have considered right,
Of women^ soul and most deceitful charms:
Their fraud, their falsehood, and fragility,
And that in them is no security:
(As Guydo in his verse does well declare)
Then surely by thy too much wretchlesnes,
Thou had not with sorrow and with care,
Bereft thy self of all thy happiness,
Thy treasure, and thy only Daughter dear,
Which both at once were lost as does appear.
What could avail the careful providence,
And strange devise framed by inchantement;
The wary heed and double diligence,
By thee song used all danger to prevent,
Against the wily wit of women-kind,
Whose subtilties as right by proof we find,
Are of great force, for will with them is law,
Bee'^ good or bad it must not be denide;
Nor yet do they of any stand in awe,
They are so full of will, deceit, and pride.
For as mine Author plainly does express,
Medea by her wit and craftiness,
Bereaved her father of his treasure great,
And that because she would her mind fulfill;
And Jason to her love by wiles entreat,
Wherein she did use all her Art and skill;
As you shall hear if that ye will proceed.
The sequel of this History to read.
For as she had at table take her seat,
Tweene Oeta and the valiant Grecian knight;
And that she should have fallen to her meat,
Love did her heart with sudden passion smight:
And made her color alter in her face,
And fetch an hundred sighs in little space.
Sometime the blood down to her heart did fall,
And up again into her face would rise;
Sometime she blushed, sometime she showed pael,
Now looked she down, then cast she up her eyes;
Yet still among to beautify her color,
The fragrant Rose was mixed with Lilly flower.
And though the Rose would sometimes seem to flee^
Yet did the Lilly hold her woonted place,
Till nature gave them means again to meet,
And show alike within her comely face:
And thus with cold and eke with sudden heat,
Medeas mind with grief was sore beset.
Sometimes she burnt, sometimes she waxed cold,
And still as she did seek with great desire,
Young Jason in the face for to behold,
Her heart it was set more and more on fire,
With his great beauty and his comeliness,
Which she in heart most deeply did impresse.
His yellow crisped hair like golden wire,
His seemly face, his gracious countenance;
His Warlike look, his valerous desire,
(Which he then showed his honor to advance)
His goodly shape of body, and of lim,
And all things else whatsoever was in him,
Within her eyes and heart bread so great pleasure*
That only to behold and view him still,
She did esteem't taboue all earthly treasure.
And could have spent her time by her good will
In contemplation of his person rare,
For that as then for meat she did not care.
As having wholly lost all appetite,
So much he stuck in her rememberance;
That for to look on him was her delight,
Love had her then so brought into a trance,
And marked her with her burning fiery brand,
That by no means she could escape his hand.
For she was yoked body, heart, and all,
To Jason, who within her heart did lie,
And when that opportunity did fall,
She would at him cast up a glancing eye.
And then again look down unto the ground,
Least men should deem she had some fancies found
For as all women right dissemblers be,
She kept it close with such an outward show;
That by herface none might percerue nor see
What she did mean, nor her intent once know;
Thereby to take the least occasion,
Out of their minds of bad suspicion.
For openly there could nothing be seen,
That should be cause of any heaviness;
Her seeking was to make them all to ween
The reason, why she used such soberness,
Only of simple woman-hood to be,
With honest shame and virgin chastity.
Which both at once within her heart had met,
And caused her that modesty to use:
And outward show on inward thought to set,
In that she seemed her meat then to refuse;
The cause as then not being any such,
But only love which her at heart did touch.
She could so her hypocresie excuse,
And with an outward show of modesty,
Give matter unto fools whereon to inuse,
When as she sought^ abuse her chastity.
For not one word out of her mouth did pass,
Her look unto her heart contrary was.
For maidens seem most commonly to spare,
In outward show to express their inward grief;
Or in their words their meaning to declare,
Of things wherein they wish to have ^liefe.
For while they live in pure virginity,
And by the same are bard of liberty,
They keep all close and will not seem too bold,
To show their minds although it grieve the^ much:
Nor tell the thing which otherwise they would,
Although full near unto their hearts it tuch.
And so although it were with a fained grace,
Medea sat with sober cheer and face.
And yet expressed her meaning with her eye,
So secretly that no man could discern,
The burning fire that in her breast did lie,
The which because it did her much concern:
She could not choose her troubled mind to appease,
But use some words in secret, which were these:
Would God this brave and lusty Gentleman,
Which shows so fair and gallant in my sight,
Whose comeliness not well express I can,
Assured were to me to be my Knight:
That I might once embrace him in mine arm,
Then would I to my will his senses charm.
His hair that shines like to the golden wire,
His limbs compact and framed in co^^ley wise*
His stature as proportion does require.
In seemly height, so well does please mine eyes:
That by my will it would my heart content,
To win his love if fortune would consent.
For that his knightly face for to behold,
^s unto me an earthly Deity;
Though inwardly I feel my heart full cold,
And yet in truth it may none other be.
Alas will he not pity my estate,
And cause me think my self most fortunate?
I would he knew my true and good in^ent,
(Whereof I think he takes but little ^eed)
And how my love to him in fully bent,
Which inwardly does make my heart to bleed;
Yet should I die I date i^ not disclose,
Although for him I fo^le a thousand (...).
But curelesse is my sor^^^^ and my pain,
To friend no^ foe I dare ^^ not unfold*
Nor yet in any fort thereof complain,
To find redress* if any way I could*
And yet I would not any should (...),
But that I would procur't in honest wise.
As openly in time it shall be found,
For that in lawful wedlock unto him,
Is my desire truly to be bound,
And so my meaning's void of any sin:
As being grounded upon faithfulness,
Without all fraud or any doubleness.
Behold how women craftily can play,
To wish a thing, and nothing less (...),
And secretly that no man ought should say,
With face full smooth can shadow their desire:
And hide their lust by wile and subtilty,
With mere pretense and veil of honesty.
And though that to be faithful they pretend,
And that the depenes of their treachery,
They can with outward flourishes defend*
And all their wiles so closely covered lie,
Yet secretly deceit by them is meant,
With sugared words of good and true i^^en^.
As if they did all honesty pretend,
When certainly it is but an outward sho^^
As it is found and proves in the end,
And many men by true experience know:
So well they can say one, and other mean;
And color blew, full lightly turn to green
For under veil of painted stablenesse,
And fained show of honest modesty,
The wily serpent called now ^anglenesse,
Within their hearts full secretly does lie:
For what they most desire in outward sho,
They will deny't, and swear it is not so.
Thus Guydo seems of women to indi^e
Alas that he with them should make debate*
Or cursedly so much of them should (...),
It grieueth me in English to translate
Their foul disgrace, o^^ to justify,
For rather had I for their sakes to die.
And therefore I will crave their patience,
To bear with me, because I write thus much,
My purpose is not for to give offense,
As knowing well they are not any such.
They are so true and perfect in their thought,
That I suppose not one of them is naught.
And further I do think there is not one,
But that in will and heart she will be true,
And keep her self unto one man alone,
But be it some do choose them lovers new:
To say the truth they are not worthy blame,
For oftentimes they see men do the same.
They must provide for new when men refuse,
To love them more, and seek for other change,
And if I could, I would them full excuse,
(For why should men have liberty to range)
And women not, which cannot live alone,
Store is no sore, if they have more then one.
Wherefore I must of them desire leave,
Although I write as matter does befall;
I hope it shall not give them cause to grieve,
When as I follow mine original:
For reason is that punishment should light
On him that does so hard'gainst women write.
And them so much and causlesly offend,
By overmuch inuaying'gainst their kind,
But if I might I would it soon amend,
And him to judgment of the women bind;
That they might him unto his penance set,
For if for to repent he should forget,
I would despair of his salvation,
And think that he straight down to hell should go,
And never should obtain remission,
Unless he did some satisfaction show.
For all is not true that we in books do find,
And if it were, 'twere hard for women kind.
If Guido therefore were as now alive,
So bitter penance he should furely have;
If I were Priest and had him hear to shriue,
That till the time that he were laid in grave,
He should remember daily to repent,
And earnestly in heart his fact relent,
That he so spoke to his confusion.
But let this pass, and now I will proceed,
And mean to make no more digression,
To tell how fair Medea then did speed;
Who taking leave, did presently depart
Out of the hall, with sad and heavy heart.
And Jason when the King likewise did rise,
With Hercules, was to his chamber brought;
Most richly hanged in brave and sumptuous wise,
With cloth of Gold in curious manner wrought:
Where they did rest and take their ease a while,
Upon their beds the time so to beguile.
Mean while (as it already has been said)
Medea was into her chamber gone,
Where to her self she thought upon and wayd
(As she therein sat musing all alone)
How she might ease the sorrow and the smart,
Which her so sore then pinched at the heart.
For love, which had her set in such a rage,
That easily she could it not forgo,
Nor find a ready means the same t'asswage,
For furious Cupid had her wounded so,
With his most fiery shafe within her breast,
That whereso e're she sat she could not rest.
So violent and seruent was the heat,
That still it did her pain and grief increase:
For in her breast there was a conflict great,
Twixt love and shame which either did her press,
To yield unto their wills in some respect:
So that she could not tell which to reject.
For love a Knight of great renown and fame,
Who neither fears, dagger, sword, nor knife;
Like Lion fierce pursued still his game,
And hot and hasty was t'aduenture life:
And there withal most proud in highest degree,
For Cupids chiefest officer is he.
Who does enforce both high and low of state,
In perils great and troublesome to enter,
And brings men by hard and cruellfate,
Unto their ends, and thousand dangers t'venter.
For love of fear nor peril takes no heed,
So that in his proceedings he may speed.
But shame of other nature that consists,
Is always bashful, cowardly, and faint:
And dares not once so much as bend her fi^^s,
Unless it be through very mere constraint:
For cowardice does make her hide her face,
For fear least she should fall into disgrace.
Much like a child of young and tender years,
As having neither courage, will, nor heart,
To give assault, she is so full of fears:
And yet full often has played a peuish part,
And many lovers crossed when they should speed,
By counsel of his foster brother dread.
For fear and shame if they together lie,
Bereave hot love of heart and hardines,
And both together flatly him deny,
The means or any power a word to express:
Or once his mind to open and declare,
To ease himself of sorrow, woe, and care.
For when that love does boldly think to speak,
And is upon the very point t'assay.
And give the venture forth his mind to break,
Sharue s^eppeth out and utterly says nay:
And causes love like Snaile his horns to shrink,
And bashfully with both his eyes to wink.
And by that means he does his suite impair.
And thus is shame still froward and does vary
From hardy love, and puts him in despair,
By help of fear, which both do him contrary.
For if that shame fond love would never cheake,
Love often times his laws would surely break.
For as a horse that seeks to be at large,
In furious wise breaks bridle, bit, and rain,
And strives to free himself from Keepers charge:
Solouers true to ease themselves of pain,
(I^ fear and shame did not their wyls withold)
To Effect their lusts would be too hot and bold.
But all the while that shame is kept in mew,
Within the breast that no man does it know,
No such effect of love there does ensue,
But still it makes an honest outward show.
For did not shame withstand loves lawless lust,
Love out the heart all danger soon would thrust.
And were not shame the keeper and the gaile
Of women's hearts (as Authors plainly say)
It were in vain the Castle to assail,
Or any siege against the same to lay:
For in that case long parle should not need,
For women hate delay, and love to speed.
But shame and fear loves comb so short had cut,
And humbled him so much in heart and mind,
That they had him clean unto silence put,
And he no means to ease himself could find:
And thus twixt love and shame in great distress,
Medea sat in care and pensiveness.
Which she could not by any means endure.
So hot she burnt within her tender breast:
For when as love did her in part assure,
In fine to give some comfort, ease, and rest
Unto her heart, shame put her in a doubt,
With fear to think how that it would fall out.
And thus she stood still more and more in fear,
Twixt love and shame as it were at a stand,
For shame was great, but love more force did bear,
And in the end did get the upper hand.
For fear and shame she durst not once discover,
The fire of love which in her heart did houer.
Which easily she could not well shake off,
And so she sat perplex't without relief,
(Till fortune full disposed at her to scoff,
By turning of her wheel, did ease her grief:
But with unhappy chance as she does use,
All those that put their trust in her to abuse.
For when that men do think to sit at ease,
On top of fortunes wheel, and nothing doubt;
That smiling Lady can them soon displease,
By giving it but one small turn about:
And cause them fall as much as they did rise,
When they least of her treason do surmise.
For she is always false and eke unstable,
Provoking men to things above their reach,
Which though that they t'attaine the^ are not able,
With fained shows she can them finely catch,
And make the^ break their brains both night and day
Bout haddy-wist, when she with them does play
With her deceitful face and flattery,
As she that well cap bring such fools to bed,
And caused them to their own destruction hie,
And when that she to mischief has them led;
She turns her back and with a pleasant smile,
Does joy to think how she can men beguile.)
And striving thus within her self, at last
When reason could not win the field of rage,
And she sometime in musing had ore-past,
At length her inward torment to assuage:
She ga^n both pro and contra to debate,
The matter with her self as still she sat.
And said, in vain Medea thou do strive,
For sure one of the heavenly Gods it is,
That bends his force against thee. Does any live
That ever saw so strange a thing as this?
Is any thing like unto burning love?
Should I my Fathers hests esteem above
All measure hard? truth it is they are hard and sore,
Why should I fear this strangers death so much,
Since he is a man I never saw before?
Why should his peril me at heart so tuch?
Unhappy wench, if thou could find some rest,
And cool the heat which burns in my breast,
It were a good and blessed turn for thee.
For where as grief now seems thee to kill,
Thou might thereby at heart well eased be.
But now a strange disease against my will
Does draw me on, fond love persuades me.
And though by Art what is best for me I see,
Yet do I headlong follow that is worst.
Why should I thus so fondly seem to rave?
And on a stranger dote as one accursed,
And seek a foreign husband so to have?
When as at home to my content and mind,
I may a lover meet for me well find.
But who can tell if he shall live or no?
And yet I pray long life may be his lot,
For without all offense I may pray so,
And wish him well although I love him not:
For what offense has Jason done to me?
Who pittieth not his youth, should cruel be.
What is she but his valor might her move?
But setting that aside, who would not rage,
And burn at heart with hot and fervent love
With Iasons fair and goodly personage?
My heart is touched therewith assuredly.
And if that I provide not remedy,
The burning breath of Bulls will him so blast,
That with the fires his body singed shall be,
And of the seeds that he in ground shall cast,
A strange and vncoath harvest he shall see,
Of armed men, that out the earth shall grow,
Against whom he had need his valor show.
And as a prey he shall likewise be set,
Against the fierce and cruel Dragon fell:
Which things if that I do not seek to let,
Then must I truly say, and show full well,
That Tiger did me breed, and in my breast
A heart more hard then flint or steel does rest.
Why rather should I not with wrathful eye,
His death behold, and in the same delight?
Why move I not the Bulls most furiously,
Against him to hold a fierce and cruel fight?
And all the knights that shall rise out the ground,
Incite to set on him, and him confound.
And that same Dragon fell which nere does rest?
The Gods forbid that I such things should do,
Such treachery I utterly detest,
But prayer is small remedy thereto,
Unless that I do lend my helping hand.
And shall I then betray my native land?
Shall I a stranger save I do not know?
And give him aid that me perchance may leave
Behind him, and into his Country go
And take an otherwise? It should me grieve.
But if I knew he would work me that spite,
And in an other woman take delight:
Die sure he should. But he bears not the face
Like one that would so great a mischief work:
His birth, his valor, and his comely grace,
Show that in him such treason does not lurk:
And me assure he will me not deceive,
Nor once forget the good he shall receive,
Thereby from me. Yet first he shall me plight
His faith and troth (according to the laws)
To marry me, and keep his covenant right.
Why then am I in fear without a cause*
To take this matter presently in hand,
And not delay it off, nor lingering stand?
Jason shall think himself much bound to me,
And gladly for his wife will me retain,
And I thereby much honored shall be
Of all the people, which as now remain
Within the rich and fertile land of Greece,
For helping them to win the Golden fleece.
Shall I then leave my Father and my kin,
And household Gods (to whom such love I bear)
My native soil and all that is therein,
And with a stranger sail I know not where?
Yea: these, and all that ere I have, why not?
My Father's hard, my Countries rude God wot.
The greatest good unto my self will fall,
For that the things which I shall now forsake,
I may full well but merely trifles call,
If I to those compare them which I take.
For Graecians safety honored shall I be,
And dwell in Towns that are both rich and free.
Whose fame does freshly flourish every where,
Among people that in liberal Arts excel,
And which of all things else I hold most dear,
And for all earthly treasure would not sell:
I shall enjoy King Aesons Princely Son,
Whom had I once unto my husband won.
Most happy then I would esteem my state,
And think my self to be aduanst so hie,
That with my head I should be eleuate,
Boue all the stars within the Christ all sky:
But men report that rocks in Seas do meet,
And against nature again in sunder fleet.
And how Caribdis utter enemy
To ships, does cause the waves them ouethrow,
When under sail they chance to pass thereby.
And Scilla, with whom Dogs does ever go:
Out of Cicillia gulf comes barking out,
And puts such as sail by in fear and doubt.
But what skils that, if I enjoy my love,
And in my Iasons arms may safely sleep,
It shall me not in any wise once move,
Though seas be nere so dangerous, foul, and deep:
For while that I my lover may embrace,
Naught can make me to fear in any case.
And if that fear should chance to trouble me,
And make my mind perplexed therewithal,
My fear should only for my husband be.
Dare thou him then so boldly husband call?
Pretendest thou Medea title gaie
To thy offense? thou rather should say naie,
And see what ledwnes thou do go about,
Thereby to shun the mischief dangerous,
Before that worse unto thee chance fall out.
She had no soonner in that sort said thus,
But shamefastnes and fear that by her staid,
Made frantic love to fly away dismayed.
And raging mood thereof was well alaid,
And for the present time put clean to flight,
Till spying Aesons son the flames that staid,
And seemed as they had been quenched quight,
Did kindle, and again began to show,
And with their heat did cause her cheeks to glow.
And scarlet blood within his face did rise.
And like unto a spark of fire that is hid
In ashes, with the whisking wind out flies,
And by that means again is kindled.
So did her love which then was put to flight,
Renew his former force at Iasons sight.
For when she did behold his comely Grace,
And Princely port, she judged him to be,
Much fai^er, and more beautiful in face
Then ere she had, when first she did him see.
For which her judgment sure it does behoue
To bear with her, because she was in love.
Thus as Medea wrought to ease her grief,
She spun the web of her adversity,
For fortune making show to send relief,
Procures her time her mind to certefie,
And to unfold the secret of her heart
To Jason, though it bred her woe and smart.
For thus it chanst, when Phoebus bright did shine,
In th'afternoone at hottest time of day,
As he began then Westward to decline,
And by degrees his fervent heat delay.
King Oeta finding time convenient,
In all the have for fair Medea sent,
And willed her with present speed to go
Into the hall Prince Jason t'entertaine,
And unto him all courtesy to sho:
Whereby she did occasion fit obtain,
(When time convenient served) to discover
Her hearts desire unto her new found lover.
For when as she her father had espied,
With Grecian Knights in earnest speech to be,
And that each man his mind was occupied,
To pass the time. When no man did her see,
In courteous wise to Jason she drew near,
And he to her the like with joyful cheer.
And being set together in that sort,
With lovely look and countenance bening,
Medea glad and willing t'yeeld the fort,
And parle first, well weighing every thing,
With sighs beheld Prince Jason in the face,
And unto him declared her doubtful case.
CHAP. VI.
How Jason by the only help and advise of ( Medea King Oetas Daughter)
enamored of him, acchieued the conquest of the Golden Fleece.

PRince Jason ere I speak to thee (said she)
I charge thee by thy valor and thy might,
Thy courtesy, and true nobility,
And as thou art a stout and hardy Knight,
Desiring much t'aduance thy noble fame,
By valiant acts, and t'magnifie thy name.
That these my words (with rash opinion)
Thou do not censure to proceed of guile,
Deceitfulness, nor yet presumption,
Nor from a woman's heart that is full of wile.
In that I am so bold and do not spare,
My mind to thee at large now to declare,
Without all manner doublenes of heart.
First praying thee unto my words give ear,
And mark full well what I to thee impart,
And fail thou not the same in mind to bear:
For what so e're I say it is for thy weal,
As she that means in truth with thee to deal.
Two things there are that makes me thus proceed,
(That Is seruent love, and common courtesy,
Which both in one so fully are agreed)
To work thy good, that naught I can deny,
Nor yet conceal within my breast from thee,
As ere we part, most plainly thou shall see.
For first I think of very courtesy,
That unto strangers men should take delight,
To show all kind of liberality,
(As being thereto bound of ancient right)
Both in their words and works, and them defend
From harms, as much as power does extend.
And for my part (brave Jason) cause I see
Within thy thoughts the signs of worthiness,
I will not fail as much as lies in me,
To further thee with hearty carefulnes:
(And with that word she fetched a sigh full kind,
For him that so did stick within her mind.)
For thy sweet sake my heart within does bleed,
Because thou seek'st without aduisednes,
The fleece of Gold to win, and to proceed
Therein of youth and wilful hardines:
Which enterprise who so does take in hand,
Is sure of death, and can it not withstand.
So perilous and dreadful is the venture,
That pen nor tongue can well declare the same,
For doubtless who so ere therein does enter,
Finds naught but death, and after to his shame.
Whereas he thinks his honor to advance,
Report shall blase his foul and wretched chance.
So much the end is found to be contrary,
Unto the first beginning of th'aduenter,
For at the last he is certain to miscarry,
Though It first it seems an easy thing to enter:
For wit of man by engine, force, or might,
Although he had experience great to fight.
And had his arms most strong and passing sure,
And knew how to defend himself full well,
And were well breathed long time to endure,
And nere so much in valor did excel:
Or what so ever weapon he could bring,
To strike, to thrust, to shoot, or else to fling.
All were in vain, it could avail him naught,
For neither force, device, nor subtly,
Nor any other thing what ere he sought,
Could save his life but sure he were to die:
For earthly means may him no way defend,
Unless that I mine aid to him should lend.
Wherefore of thee I have compassion,
That wilfully would cast thy self away,
And of thy youth with pure affection,
I should bewail the loss both night and day:
If that thou do with folly seek to try
This dangerous act, where naught but death does lie*
Thy Princely, rare, and noble progeny,
Unworthy is to abide so cruel end;
For certainly it may none other be,
If thou effect'st the thing thou do pretend:
Unless that to my counsel thou will list,
For none therein but I, can thee assist.
Alas good Jason rest thy self content,
And let thy noble courage yield herein,
And to my counsel see thy heart be bent,
Which if thou will before thou do begin,
I dare be bold to swear thou shall prevail,
And of thy hoped victory not fail.
Whereby thou may eternal praise obtain,
And in fames book of Register be plast,
And shall be sure the Golden fleece to gain,
(Which thou to win so great desire have)
In spite of Mars, and all that thee withstand,
If that by my advise thou take it in hand.
Wherefore to me I pray thee give consent,
And that full soon, if thou pretend'st to speed,
And to my counsel see thou do assent,
Which can thee help with all thou stand'st in need.
Speak valiant Knight if that thou will by me,
In this thy hard adventure ruled be.
Prince Jason for reply said Lady dear,
I can but yield you thanks for your good will,
And when occasion serves (as shall appear)
I will not fail with all my power and skill,
(Mine own hearts Queen and Lady Sovereign)
In full effect by action to explain.
How much the love you unto me do show,
Shall bind me while that life in me does rest,
To be your Knight, at your command to go,
To ride, and run, and think my self most blessed,
To be esteemed your true and faithful man,
T'obay your hest in all that ere I can.
With hearty zeal and true affection,
That thus with so great kindness thinks on me,
And of my life have such compassion,
As that you seem in heart perplex't to be
For my mishap, which makes me of right,
To bind my self to be your faithful Knight
While life does last. And that more specially,
Because you take such care me to protect,
And to vouchsafe with great benignity,
Your counsel and your aid in each respect,
To him that never favor did afford
Unto your Grace, in action, thought, or word.
And more to bind me unto you in heart,
Your words so kind so much inflame my sense,
That Cupid with his piercing fiery dart,
Has forced me yield (and dare not make defense)
Against the same, least I should seem ingrate*
To her that has such care of my estate:
Without request or motion on my part,
Nor yet in any manner once deserved.
Then since it does proceed from out your heart,
To take such care that I should be preserved:
I vow to you upon my faith most sure,
In serving you as long I will endure
As life does last, and nere therein shall fail,
Whereto I swear and plight with all my troth,
That life nor death shall any way prevail
To change my heart, for I would be full ^^ath
That foul untruth should enter in my mind,
To do you wrong that shows your self so kind.
Few words therefore to use I do pretend,
And mean my vow and promise to renew,
That till that Parcas does my lives thread end,
I will remain most constant unto you:
Hap good or ill, my resolution's bent,
To Effect and do your will and your intent.
Well then (said she) let wisdom rule thy mind,
And so forecast with care and diligence,
The dangers that are insident to find,
If wilfully thou followest thy pretense:
And think not lightly to orepasse the same,
By fond conceit to win perpetual fame.
For thus much I dare well affirm for true,
That though thou do for honur take it in hand,
Naught but dishonor can thereof ensue,
Which thou by no means shall nor may withstand:
For who against the powers diui^e can fight,
Or once resist their all sufficient might?
And this is sure, that he which does desire
The fleece to win by valor and by might,
Shall nere attain to that he does aspire,
But work his own dishonor, shame and spite*
For though at first fortune does seem thy ^^iend,
Be well assured she will cross thee in the end.
For who so ever seeks to take in hand
This action strange, can by no means escape
The fiery flames, nor yet the force withstand
Of those two brazen Bulls, which when they gape*
Such furious flashes out their throats do send,
That folly it were against them to contend*
For much more dreadful is their dangerous fight,
(Then lightning which down from the skies does fall,
Before the thunderclap on earth does light,
Which often battreth Castle, Town, and wall)
For unto ashes men they will consume.
Wherefore beware and see thou not presume,
The Ram t'assaile, least thou thy labor loose,
But take advise and use discretion
To leave the same, while thou have time to choose
How to preserve thy honor and renown.
And strive not to advance thy worthiness,
By folly, and by too much hardiness*
And cast thy self away, where otherwise
Thou may preserve thy life from danger great.
If thou do ^arken now to mine advise*
Whereto I would thee willingly entreat:
And therefore think what answer thou will make,
Before thou do this danger undertake.
Medeas speech thus ended as you hear,
Jason therewith did grow impatient,
And said, mine only love and Lady dear,
Is this your mind, your will, and your intent,
To counsel me to leave mine enterprise,
And stain my name and fame with cowardice?
A coward might I well be thought and deemed,
That should begin a thing to undertake,
And could nor durst not bring it to an end*
So men a common jest of me might make,
And give report to my confusion,
That I of pride and mere presumption,
Had boasted I would do a thing in word,
Which when it came to effect I durst no^ venture.
Nay Lady dear I swear upon my sword,
I rather had in peril great to enter,
Of life and lim, then cowardly forsake
The enterprise I mean to undertake.
Your counsel to this end is merely vain*
And so good Lady mine I you entreat,
To leave your care herein, for this is plain,
What ere you say, no more of me you get,
But that I mean my purpose to effect,
And fear of danger utterly reject.
For it I should through faintnes of my heart,
Refrain from such an enterprise begun,
And from your Court and pleasant jsle depart,
Ere for mine honor some thing I had done:
While life does last reproach would me pursue,
And shame eternal be mine only due.
For through the world report full soon would spread
That Jason did this conquest undertake;
And that his heart was so possessed with dread,
That he an end thereof durst never make:
But be assured it never shall be said,
That danger could young Jason make afraid.
And there upon my faith I you ensure,
I will perform the thing I have begun,
As long as life and limbs of mine endure,
Although thereby no honor may be woone:
And that mine only guerdon should be death,
Yet had I rather yield my vital breath,
Then be reproacht of cowardice and shame,
For worse report of man cannot be spread,
Then that he has dishonored his name,
It were much better for him to be dead:
For every man should seek and strive t'aspire,
To honors seat with heart and whole desire.
And though it were with loss of life and lim,
Before he would procure his own disgrace,
And breed the means for men to laugh at him,
And so for shame be forced to hide his face:
Then be assured what ever I abide,
No danger shall me cause to start aside.
Then do I well perceive your wilful mind,
(Said she to him) and that you sooner choose
Your life to present danger now to bind,
(And my good counsel utterly refuse:)
Then to your self you will reap perpetual shame.
And yet it is in earnest, and no game,
With Monsters strange vnwarilie to deal,
And hazard life when as your choice is free*
And therefore I am moved for your weal,
In heart and mind your folly great to see:
That leaving all advise, discretion,
Counsel, and good deliberation,
You rather choose hard and cruel end,
And wilfully unto the same will go,
Then yield unto the counsel of your friend,
Which shows that youth and courage ouerslow
Within your heart, and keep your mind in awe,
And make you think your lust to be a law.
Which in the end will breed your woe and grief,
If you persist as now you do pretend,
For be you well assured there is no relief,
From certain death your body to defend:
For neither force nor humane wit can serve,
Your life in this great danger to preserve.
Wherefore in heart I purposelie am bent,
To seek your good and find a remedy,
Whereby you may this peril great prevent,
So loath and grieved I am to see you die,
And rather then your fortune should be such,
I will my father (whom I love so much)
And all my friends for evermore displease,
And utterly abandon them each one,
So that I may procure your joy and ease,
Which certainly by me shall soon be done.
For setting care of all things else aside,
In this your need I mean to be your guide.
And for your sake I will my royal seat
And Princely Palace leave with heart and will:
My honor too, which I esteem so great,
I Will set asid* your pleasure to fulfill.
All this and more (if you to me be kind)
For you lie do, and that you will bend your mind
To recompense the kindness I deserve:
And think it not a thing of small esteem,
From cruel death your body to preserve:
(Though you perhaps contrarily may deem)
But never the less I will so well ordain,
By Art and skill of mine, betwixt us twain,
That fore that we from others shall depart,
I hope all shall be well. If you do rest
Upon this point, that happen woe or smart,
To satisfy my mind you will do your best.
And there upon my aid to you i will lend,
And undertake you shall th'aduenture end.
Good Lady (said Prince Jason) ^est content,
And be assured it is mine only cane,
To satisfy your will and whole intent,
And nothing to omit, nor yet to spare
My life nor lims, all peril to endure,
Your pleasure and preferment to procure.
Then friend (said she) refer to me the rest,
But first to me by faith you shall be bound,
And with your heart vnfain c^^^e protest,
That no untruth in you there shall be found*
And swear you must to take me to your wife,
And hold me as your own for term of life.
This is the thing that I of you require,
If you will do it and hold your word with me.
Yet onething more I will of you desire,
That when to Greece you shall prepared be
To make return, and ready to set sail,
To take me with you hence you will not fail.
And when your father dies, and you succeed
To reign as King, see that you not forget
To show your self most true in word and deed,
And let your heart on me be wholly set,
To maintain me as my estate requires,
And seek no change to please loves fond desires.
And while you live have in rememberance,
My courtesy to you in this your need,
And think with what great hap it was your chance,
To win my heart, when none but you could speed.
For be assured no man that lives has might,
Against the Bulls and Dragon fierce to fight.
Unless of me he first be taught the way,
And means whereby the conquest to obtain;
The which as now my heart will not denay
To tell to you, when we shall meet again.
So much I do my self unto you bind,
For which I ask of you but to be kind.
All this and more (said Jason) will I do,
And what so ever else you shall devise;
And by my faith do bind my self thereto.
So much your face, and sweet intising eyes,
And beauty rare (surpassing all that live)
Have moved my heartall honor you to give.
Your bounty in like sort does so exceed,
In that such care of my estate you have,
That while I live (how ever that I speed)
I Will be your faithful Knight, (else do I eraue)
The Gods to send just vengeance for desert,
If I to you shall bear ^ fained heart.
Conditionally, that you to me fulfill
The promise which it pleases you to make,
And as you say, so use your Art and skill,
That in the thing which I now undertake,
I may prevail and win the victory,
My name and fame t'aduance perpetually.
For truth to say, your beauty is so great,
Surpassing all that ever I did see;
That well it does deserve the supreme seat,
In beauties bower and highest dignity,
Excelling beauties all as much and more,
As does the Rose surpass each other flore,
Which in the Summer among the leaves full green,
(When as the spring has forced out to flow,
The moisture that had long enclosed been,
And caused the soil that'* barren green to show:
And trees and leaus that winters blasts made bare
With buds and blossoms new refreshed are:
And every garden's filled with flowers store,
Of sundry kinds most pleasant to the eye;
And makes the buds Dame Flora to adore,
With joyful and melodious harwonie:
And that the heaueulie dew does moist each place,
And to his sundry color yield his grace.)
Does show to be the fairst of every one.
So nature has you made with good advise,
As she that should deserve the same alone
Of beauty, and thereof to bear the prise,
Above all earthly and each mortal thing,
And of all bounty great to be the spring.
As you surpass without comparison,
All others what so ere on earth do live,
For wisdom, kindness, and discretion,
The praise whereof I cannot choose but give
Unto your grace, as she that unto me,
So courteous and so kind I find to be.
For if in this extreme you had me left,
I were for ever utterly undone*
And of all aid and succor clean bereft.
But your exceeding bounty has so won
And overcome my heart, that while I live,
To pleasure you, my life for you i will give.
Since that to aid me now when I have need,
You spare not your good will to me t'extend,
In liew whereof if I should show the deed,
Of an ungrateful or unthankful friend,
I might of right be counted obstinate,
And held a fool, so to with stand my fa^e*
For he that in extremity should lie*
And knew how to relieve or ease his want,
And would refuse a Ladies courtesy*
I think of wit he should be very scant,
And in the ship of fools deserves to b^^
Preferred and extold to highest degree*
And therefore now I wholly do resign,
Heart, body, life and lim, into your hand,
And till that death shall vital thread vn^^ne,
I will you not in any thing withstand.
And hereby oath I bind my self to be,
Your faithful friend as you have promised me.
And henceforth will not fail in ought t'obay,
What ere shall be your pleasure and your will,
At any time as well by night as day,
Till death shall with his dart my body kill:
Let this suffice to satisfy your mind,
That unto you i will never prove unkind.
Medea hearing him protest and swear,
So earnestly to be her faithful Knight,
And that to her such love he swore to bear,
She was in heart surprizd with such delight,
That for reply ere she from thence did go,
The secrets of her heart she did him sho.
And said, brave Prince, then will I soon ordain
A way whereby we may together meet,
When we will with good leisure twixt us twain,
Take order in this case, and lovely greet
Each other, and by holy Sacrament
Confirm our vows with heart and true intent.
For that as now the time will not permit,
Nor yet afford us place of secrecy,
But when night comes, when evening gins to shit,
In secret wise I will you certify;
The time when as you shall your self convey,
And come into my chamber by some way
In priuatenesse. Where to our great delight,
We may each other lovingly embrace,
Which shall be when as glistring Phoebus bright,
Does Westward wend, and yield dark night his place,
With thick and gloomie clouds to ouer-shade.
Our Hemisphere, and cause the light to vade.
Which time (by favor great which fortune sends
To lovers arue) affoords conueniency
To Effect their wills, and likewise to them lends
Occasion how to speak in secrecy.
Then as I say, my dear and loving friend,
To send for you I purposely intend,
To come to me, when as without all doubt,
In loving wise out minds we will unfold,
And there determine how to bring about,
The thing whereof in part I have you told.
And when we have accomplished our will,
And of our pleasures had the scope and fill,
I will devise how we may meet again
In secret sort, when so it shall us please,
(Who ere says nay) and quietly obtain
Our hearts delights, our comfort and our ease,
Which shall be when that Dame Lucine bright,
Does walk abroad in darkest time of night.
For mighty Jove who secrets all does see,
Full well does know my heart and my intent,
And how to you I will for ever be,
A faithful friend, so much my mind is bent
To love and honor you withal my heart,
If you will do the like for your own part.
Wherewith Prince Jason lowly did incline,
And said to her, Dame set your heart at rest,
And be assured I will my self combine
To you while life does last. For I detest
To be accounted false in thought or deed
Unto your Grace, how ever that I speed.
And though with painted words I cannot gloss,
Nor yet with phrases fine persuade your mind,
I would not have you think nor yet suppose,
In this my vow you shall me faithless find:
But while that breath does in my corpse remain,
I will true love within my heart retain.
And to confirm my deed with heart and mind,
Lo here my hand and faith to bind the same,
Assuring you of certainty to find,
My jove and zeal shall never merit blame:
And therewithal an end of speech to make,
Each for that time of the other leave did take.
Medea straight rose up out of her place,
First having taken leave in stately wise,
And with a brave and passing Princely grace,
Withdrew her self as was her woonted guise,
Into her private chamber, where at will,
She might her mind with contemplation fill
Of her new love, and find means how to frame
The thing which she had purposed in heart,
Without disgrace or blot unto her name:
Yet would she not to any one impart
The least conceit that rested in her mind.
Devising how conveniently to find
The means to send unto her dearest lover,
In secret wise, when night began t'appeare:
But loath she was her purpose to discover,
Unto her maids, so much she stood in fear
To be disgraced, if they should it bewray.
Thus (as she thought) she past the long some day,
Still musing how to bring the same about,
And always castng in her doubtful head,
What lets to stay or stop it might fall out.
And so with flying fancies tossed and led,
She rested sore perplexed in grief and woe,
Still walking in her chamber too and fro.
The midday gone and slide away full fast,
And Titan having fully run his race
From East to West, the Horison had past
So far, that no man could perceive his face,
Nor yet behold his glistring beams so bright,
As being clean descended out of sight.
And Hiren with her mantle all of shade,
At th'euening showed her dark and cloudy cheer,
In twy-light when the day began to vade,
And Hesperus with glistring streams t'appeare;
Amongst the twinkling stars about midnight,
Which to behold did breed no small delight.
Medea who perplexed all alone,
Sat counting every hour of the night,
And secretly unto her self did moan,
That she so long was absent from her Knight;
At last did find a means for to content
Her troubled head. And with a full intent,
Determined the same to bring about:
Although she kept it secret in her heart,
Which trembled like a leaf for fear and doubt,
Till hope stepped forth, and as it is her part
Did comfort her and make her blithe and glad,
But cherisht by fear she began again be sad.
Least her devise which then she took in hand,
Might chance be crossed, and she to shame be brought.
And thus twixt hope and fear she seemed to stand,
Not knowing how to effect the thing she sought:
But her affection, love, and great desire,
Had set her heart and mind on such a fire
Of lust, to see and meet her lovely Knight.
That hope did put her in some good conceit,
At last t'attaine her pleasure and delight,
But bashfulnes her mind had so beset,
That still she feared discovered to be,
And knew not how the same to remedy.
If fortune and the darksome cloudy night,
Had not procured her ease and cheered her heart,
By filling it with joy and great delight,
Wherewith sweet hope stepped in and played a part,
To prick her forth, and caused her to devise,
And calculate when that the Moon would rise,
And with her horns that are of color pale,
Appear in skies at dead time of the night,
To show her face upon both hill and dale,
Whereof she found the course to fall out right,
A quarter of an hour after prime,
Which she perccaued well would fit the time.
And as she was full well beseen in Art,
She knew the body of the Moon to be
Decked over with new light in one forth part,
And passed had by order and degree,
After the time of her conivnction,
One or two signs by Computation:
And so the days full seven of her age.
Which time she being pierst with Cupids dart,
And in her love did burn with cruel rage:
She began to pr^e and listen in each part,
And to each door and window had an eye,
If any one as then she could espy,
Within the Court that was not gone to bed,
Or any man to walk about the same.
So much her mind possessed was with dread,
To blemish or in ought t'impaire her fame.
The least and smalest stirring did procure,
Her panting heart a thousand woes to endure.
For when she heard a whispering any where,
It was as ill as venom to her heart:
Such was her great impatience to bear
The least object that might her purpose thwart,
She wished all had slept full fast in bed.
This woeful life the longsome night she led,
And yet not any one the same might know,
So secretly she kept it in her mind,
Till full midnight when Cocks began to crow,
(Which orderly they do observe by kind.)
At which time when as all was hushed and still,
To bring to pass her purpose and her will,
An old decrepit woman out she sought,
(Who in such case experience wanted none)
To whom in brief she does declare her thought,
And said she did depend on her alone,
To bring the thing she purposed about,
(For skill and age makes the^ forecast each doubt.
Their years to them so much experience show,
And in their mind such subtilty infuse,
That they of love the slights and wiles do know,
And counterminds against them all can use)
To her Medea showed her whole desire,
From point to point, and does his help require,
To take the charge on her to ease her smart.
Which at that time she said increased so,
And to rejoice her faint and troubled heart,
With present speed she willed her to go
To Iasons chamber where as then he lay,
And him to her in secret wise convey.
Which she forthwith (as ready to fulfill)
Her charge received, did presently effect,
And as it was her Ladies hest and will,
(No point of her commission to neglect,)
With soft and easy pace she went her way,
And brought him unto her without delay.
When as the Cock the Astrologer of night,
With cheerful voice at twelve began to crow,
And against his breast his wings to beat and smite,
The time and season of the night to show.
To war^e those that in their beds do rest,
To rise betimes, and too much sleep detest.
Medea to attend upon her Knight,
Stood ready to receive him at the door,
(As she that only plast her hearts delight,
Her saint in her most secret shrine to adore)
Full little lust she had as then to sleep,
Her care was only watch for him to keep.
Prince Jason to her chamber being brought,
Not once perceiud nor seen of any wight.
Medea having got the thing she sought,
In heart was so possessed with great delight,
That secretly she led him on the way,
Into her Close^, where she made him stay.
The woman seeing them so closely plast,
Of three made two (as she that knew the game,)
And out the chamber went in all the have,
Well knowing that her Lady would the same,
And for to gaze and stare upon the moon,
Walked in the court, and left them there alone.
Wherewith Medea shut the chamber fast,
And to her Jason presently did call.
(But as mine Author says she first had plast
Wax candles burning clear on every wall.
Which made the place as bright as if the sun,
Had shon therein at twelve a clock at noone.)
Then to her chest she did with speed repair,
Which framed was of Crystal pure and clear,
Out of the which she took an Image fair,
Of fine and beaten gold as did appear.
Which hallowed was, and consecrate withal
To mighty Jove, whom they their God did call.
Which Image unto Jason she did bear,
Desiring him in solemn wise to take
His oath upon the same, and there to swear
What ere befell he would her not forsake,
But take and keep her for his wedded wife,
From that time forth continuing all her life,
With steadfast heart and faith inviolate,
And that she should maintaind and cherisht be
According to her honor and estate.
(For till that time the story says that she
Had lived a Virgin undefiled and chaste,
In deed, and thought, though then she wholly cast
Her love and whole affection on that Knight.)
Jason upon the Image hand did lay,
And swore to her by Jove the God of might,
He would her will in every thing obey,
And truly keep his word and promise past
Perpetually while life of his did last.
(And yet he did his faith soon falsify,
For all the protestations he had made,
Were vaild and hid with fraud and flattery.
And proved clean contrary as he said.
And so her love, her true intent and mind,
In the end were crossed by him that proved unkind.
For though that constant love he did pretend,
And swore thereto, yet secretly in heart
He meant naught less as well it proved in the end,
And fainedly did play a double part,
With her that simply shipwreck seemed to make
Of all her weal, and only for his sake.
Could she have don more for a man then so?
To loose her Crown and royal dignity,
Her Country, friends, and kindred to forgo,
Rejecting wealth and all felicity,
Her honor, and her Princely name and fame,
Only to shield thee from disgrace and shame.
She that was borne and came of parentage,
So Royal, and so Princely by degree,
And should sncceed in all the heritage,
That Oeta had by regal dignity.
At once did all those honors clean forsake,
And unto thee her self did only take.
Upon mere hope thou would her kindness show,
She did abandon all the joys she had,
And chose to live in exile, and forgo
With thee, her native Country, and was glad
With all that loss thy love so to obtain.
Which she esteemed above all earthly gain.
It grieveth me thou provedst so unkind,
Did she not save and keep thee from distress,
Which thou by cruel death wast sure to find:
Had she not been thy guide: thou must confess
That of thy conquest she was chief effect,
And could thou her so shamelesly reject?
Her bounty was in each sort so declard,
And manifestly tried in the end,
That truth to say, for thee she nothing spard,
Thy life from death, and danger to defend.
Which simply in few words now to explain,
For me to take in hand it were in vain.
For by her means the fleece of gold was won
And conquered by thee, which out of doubt,
Impossible had been for thee to have don,
If by her Art she had't not brought about.
For when thou knewst not how to effect thy will,
She did thee teach those Monsters strange to kill.
And furthermore thou can it not deny,
That to redeem thee from all pensiveness,
All earthly honors she did clean defy,
And left her father mourning in distress,
For loss of his great treasure, and his Child,
Whereof by thee he only was beguild.
Let women all by her example learn,
Not to believe nor credit men too soon,
But wisely seek to find out and discern
What minds they bear, and be not quickly won,
Least that they fall into the like distress
That fair Medea did, by carelessness.
She that accounted was to be so wise,
And deeply learned in Astronomy,
Could she not by her skill and Art surmise,
Nor yet foresee her fatal desteny?
Love against Art in her did so prevail,
That all her skill could her no whit avail.
She was too slow by calculation,
The figure of her breath and woeful fate
To cast, and know the constellation.
For want of care she found it all too late.
Her Art it was false and deceivable,
And in plain words wholly incredible.
For if thereby she could before have known,
What fortune hard should unto her befall,
She would not so her self have overthrown,
Nor have endured such misery and thrall,
As by the story men may plainly see,
Fell unto her by this extremitee.
But first you shall behold and plainly see
How that she did proceed to effect her will.
For Jason having sworn fidelity,
She gave him leave his pleasure to fulfill.
And that same night (as well you may suppose)
Her Maidenhead she willingly did lose.
(Great pity it was that she was so deceau'd,
And yet she meant naught else but s^onestie,
For sure she thought and nothing else perceau'd,
But that his heart was set on loyalty.
And that he would still hold her for his wife,
And keep her so as long as he had life.
But thereof will I not as now dispute,
Yet one thing dare I swear and will maintain
Against any one, that will the same confute,
Though that they then agreed like, lovers twain.
Their minds were different and contrary clean,
For though that she plain truth and love did mean,
In honest sort intending that was just:
(As jnnocent and harmless Virgins do.)
He to perform his foul and fleshly lost
With fair and flattering speeches did her woe.
Yet with pretense contrary to her mind.
But pity it was she proved to him so kind.
As so to trust unto his courtesy,
Headlong to run in danger, woe, and smart,
And be bereaved of her Virginity.
But women are so pitiful in heart,
That fore a man himself for love should kill,
They will not spare to grant him all his will,
And rather save his life then he should die.
Medea so not thinking what might fall,
What ere he did, she would him not deny;
But his desire, his lust, and pleasures all
Obaid with all her power, will, and might,
Wherein she took such pleasure and delight.
That fore she wist, the night was overpast,
And beautiful Aurora began t'appeare.
At which time Jason holding her full fast
Within his arms, said Love and Lady dear,
Its now high time for me to have away,
And get me hence for soon it will be day.
See you not how the light begins to spring,
And day appears with fair and crimson face,
Listen and hear how Birds begin to sing,
And bids us part for^^are of some disgrace.
But fore I go, let me in hearty wi^e
Of you require your counsel and advise,
What I shall do mine enterprise t'achiue,
And bring to pass the thing I so desire?
Speak Lady dear do thou my heart ^eviue,
And for thy sake jle venture through the fire.
That don. I mean with present speed to make
Return to Greece, and thee with me to take.
Where thou shall live in princely dignity,
And thereof be thou not in any doubt.
Thither I say shall thou conducted be,
After I have my conquest brought about.
Tellthen with speed this work, how that I may
Bring to effect before that it be day.
To whom she spoke and said as you shall hear,
Jason my love and only hearts delight,
Persuade thy self thou art to me more dear
Then tongue can speak, or pen devise to write,
And therefore will I bend both wit and skill,
To teach thee how thou shall obtain thy will.
And bring to pass the conquest of the Ram,
By showing thee the dangers of the Isle,
And how to avoid the peril of the same,
Therefore abide and stay a little while,
And find thou shall my words and deeds t'agree
In all and every thing I vow to thee.
And therewithal out of her bed she rose,
And in a costly coffer went to look,
Where as she vsd her treasure to enclose,
From whence a silver Image forth she took,
(Which she did bring unto him in her hand,)
That virtue had, and power to withstand
All Magic Art, and cunning Sorcerie,
And to undo jnchantments strange and rare,
Which was devised by Astronomy.
At such an hour (as those that skillful are,
In stars and planets) know full well to choose,
(Such Images the ancient Clarks did use,
When as they sought by magic Art to bring,
The strange effect^s of Incantations
Unto an end. As Ptolomy the King
Of Egyt land, and other nations
We read have done, and by their learned skill,
Effected many wonders at their will.
This Image she did Jason will to bear
In secret wise about him, till that he
His enterprise had don, and nothing fear,
But his desire should well effected be.
According to th'instructions he should have,
Next ointment pure to him likewise she gave
To keep him from the force of fire and flame,
The which the Bulls out of their mouths would throw
(More sweet then balm) and wild him with the same
His body to anoint from top to toe.
And so he need not fear the flames so great,
Would, should, or could by any ways him let.
A Ring of gold then unto him she gave,
Wherein a stone of value great was set,
That virtue had him to preserve and save
From venom, and the force thereof to let.
That ugly Serpents breath might not annoy
His valiant heart, nor yet the same destroy.
(Within this stone an other virtue rare,
And strange was found enclos*d therein to lie,
For who so ere the same about him bare,
And in his hand did hold it secretly,
From all men's sight invisible should go,
And no man could him see, perceive, nor know
Those stones as ancient Authors do declare,
Are only found in Cicile Is^e to be:
And Uirgill writes that Uenus having care
To save her Son Aeneas, when as he
By Sea unto the Isle of Carthage went,
One of those precious stones unto him sent,
And then again to Jason she betook,
A writing that to him should much avail,
Which foulded was in manner of a book.
And willed him to see he did not fail,
If he desired happily to speed,
With great devotion all the same to read
Ere he the Ram did touch, in any wise,
With further charge he should not undertake,
Nor venture to effect his enterprise,
Before he did his Supplication make,
And on his knees with humble heart and will,
Beseech the Gods his prayer to fulfill
(Therein containd.) And lowly of them crave
To pity his estate, and from distress
And danger great his body then to save,
And further love unto him to expresle,
And for his best and surest remedy,
To save and keep him in extremity.
A Vial full of liquor forth she brought,
The whith all fear of danger set aside,
She willed him when with the Bulls he fought,
As often as with their jaws they gaped wide,
He should it cast into their mouths with speed,
That done, to stand in fear he should not need
That they could hurt or harm him any way,
For that their jaws together fast would cleave,
So as of force they must to him obey,
Then might he them of power clean bereave,
And do with them what ever that him list,
For by that means they could him not resist.
This said when she had showed all her intent,
In every thing how that he should proceed
To escape the dangers that were incident,
It in the effect he would but take good heed,
They did agree and hold it for the best,
To part as then ere men out of their rest
Awaked were, (for then it waxed day,)
And beautiful Aurora began t'arise.
And show her pleasant face in morning gray)
And that no man should any thing surmise,
Or of them have the least suspision,
In twilight ere the Sun on earth had shon,
They took their leaves and parted each from other,
(With kisses sweet as lovers use to do
When as in secret wise they meet together.)
And he out of the chamber straight did go,
And left her still in bed, whereas she lay,
In hope to find her there an other day.
And being gone from her without delay,
No longer time to spend nor to neglect,
Withal the speed he could he went that day
Unto the King, his conquest to effect,
And bring the thing to pass for which he came,
And in this sort he did effect the same.
When as the clouds with crimson color red,
At rising of the Sun began t'appeare,
And early in the East themselves did spread.
And when the Lark with glad and joyful cheer,
And pleasant notes salutes in morning gray
Anrora fair, all th'opening of the day:
(Which orderly fore rising of the sun,
Is wont t'enchase the clowdy darksome night)
When fair Diana bright her course had run.
And Titan with the comfort of his light,
And brightness of his beams ore covered had,
Each verdant hill and valey, and had made
The fragrant flowers with comfortable show,
To spread their leaves and lift their heads on hie.
Jason with all his company did go
Unto the King, (who in great majesty)
As then in council sat accompanied
With many Lords, and Knights on cuery side.
And when that he into his presence came,
with courage bold his Majesty he praid
To grant to him the conquest of the Ram,
As he before had promised: and said,
Since that his coming thither purposely
Was that he might that strange adventure try.
He would as then his vow perform, and all
That there unto belongd without delay
By him should be fulfild, what ere should fall,
Yea though it were his ruin and decay.
Protesting that death near should dant his heart,
Nor move him once to play a cowards part.
Nor any way to do his honor wrong.
And therefore prayed the King in humble wise,
The time therein no longer to prolong,
To grant to him that valiant enterprise,
That in the same he might his fortune try,
To win it, or courageously to die.
When Jason thus had spoken to the King,
And he the while attentively gave ear,
And did in mind confider every rhing,
And all the words and arguments that were
Aledg'd by him. And saw no fear could daunt
His hautie heart, he was content to grant
To his request, though much against his will*
And said, since that he saw he neads would stand
Unto his vow, he would his mind fulfill,
And presently without delay command
That his desire should straight performed be.
And yet he said, I am abasht to see
That thou with so great wilfulness wilt run
Unto thy death, and be the only cause
Of thy decay, when as thou may it shun,
(The which thou oughst to do by natures laws)
For men will put the blame in me and say,
That I by Princely power and force might stay
Thy course, and so by wrong opinion,
And populer report would lay on me
The only cause of thy destruction,
Which God forbid should ever hap to thee.
My counsel therefore is thou should advise
Thy self herein, and do it not despise.
For better it is thine honor to retain,
And safely and securely to retire
Therewith into thy native soil again,
Then with vain hope and over fond desire,
So wilfully to seek to take in hand,
An enterprise which no man can withstand*
This is my doom, my counsel, and advise,
Be ruld thereby, and shun thy cruel fate,
Refuse it not I say if thou be wise,
Least thou repent when as it is too late.
But if thou do persist and wilt not bend
Thine ears to mine advise. The God^ defend,
And save and keep thy life what ere befall,
And unto them I Will pray with great desire,
To be thy guide and shield from dangers all,
That thou may from that enterprise retire,
In safety unto thy land again,
Without whose aid be sure thou shall be slain.
And so (though grieud) to see, I cannot stay
Thy youthful fond desires from th'enterprize,
I Will hold my tongue for more I cannot say,
But wish thou had been ruld by mine advise,
And to the Gods thy enterprise commend,
Beseeching them good fortune to thee send.
When as the King to Jason had thus said,
And by no manner reasons he did use,
Could draw him from his course, not once dismayed,
He did his counsel utterly refuse.
And humbly kneeling down upon his knee,
With Knightly grace did thank his majesty,
That he vouchsaft to have such special care
Of him, and so to pity his estate,
And therewithal such favor to him bare,
That fearing he should prove unfortunate,
And end his days in that strange enterprise,
To keep him from't had given him that advise.
But yet (said he) your grace shall understand,
For th'enterprse which I now undertake,
And mind by force of arms and valiant hand
To Effect the same, I will it not forsake*
For no man's counsel nor persuasion,
Shall turn me from my resolution.
But as the law and statute has decreed,
Which in this case is made to be obserud,
I will therein courageously proceed,
If that my life from danger be preserud:
But whatsoere befalls I Will take th'adventer,
And first (said he) before that I do enter
Into the same, herein this Princely place,
And presence of his noble audience,
I do protest unto your royal grace
That no man can against you take offense,
If that I die in this mine enterprise,
Because I do refuse your good advise.
And of my self do only take it in hand,
Rejecting any counsel whatsoere,
And therefore do protest thereto to stand,
And without dread or any manner fear,
Unto the Gods my self I do commit,
(Hap life or death) and what they shall think fit
T'ordaine for me, I will accept the same
And take it in good part what ere it be,
And neither them nor you therefore will blame,
But willingly will bear th'extremitie,
And thereof I my full account do make,
And so as now (said he) my leave I take,
First of your grace, as duty does me bind,
And then of all this noble audience,
And so with loving countenance and kind,
Farewell unto them all, he went from thence,
And down unto the water side did go,
To Effect his charge as I to you well sho.
When Titan with the fervor of his heat,
And brightness of his beans had driven away,
The Roseat deaw that flowers and herbs did weat,
About the hour of nine a clock that day.
Jason put on a costly armor bright,
And joyfully like to a valiant Knight,
Unto the water side did take his way,
And there alone into a boat did go,
Which purposely prepared for him there lay,
And with the same unto the I sle did row,
Whereas the Bulls the golden Ram did keep,
And presently upon the shore did leap.
And making fast the boat unto the strand,
Withal the speed he could the next pathway
That he did find, marched up into the land,
Till wearied for a while and for to stay:
Down on the grass he sat, and there he thought
Upon the course Medea had him taught,
To hold, when he should enter into fight
Against the brazen Bulls and Dragon fell,
And when like to a wise and valiant Knight,
He had a while thereon considered well,
He rose again and went so long till he
Came to the place where he the Bulls might see.
But there I must digress and to you tell,
That when he first the enterprise began,
Medea grieved, into such passion fell,
That her fair face became both pale and wan,
And with a grieved countenance and sad,
She sat and wept and such great sorrow made,
That all her face and clothes bedewed were
With tears, that from her crystal eyes did fall,
Which only did proceed of grief and fear
By her conceived, when she to mind did call,
What danger he might cast himself into,
If carelessly he should forget to do
As she had said, and taught him ere he went,
And for that cause she was so grieud in mind,
That nothing could her please nor give content
Unto her heart, the which no rest could find,
For sobbing, and for sighthing till in the end,
Into a Terret hie she did assend.
On top whereof there stood a pinnacle,
From whence (the aue being clear and fair,) she might
Without all let or any obstacle
Behold and see her dear and loving Knight:
And there with tears whichout her eyes then ran,
To speak unto her self she thus began.
My dearest friend sweet Jason thou that art
To me so great a comfort and delight,
And the only joy and pleasure of my heart,
If that it were within thy power and might,
To know what grief for thee as now I feel,
Thou would to me continue true as steel.
Meanewhile withal my heart I wish and pray
The gods to make thy enterprise to thee,
So fortunate and prosperous this day,
That thou therein a conqueror may be.
And safe and sound return with every member
To me again. And that thou may remember
To do as I thee taught in each respect,
And to observe it orderly and well,
And nothing therein any wise neglect.
That so thine honor (which does now excel)
May more and more increase. Which unto me
The greatest joy that ere I had would be.
For if to thee ought happen should amiss,
Then might I say fare well my hearts delight,
Farewell my health, farewell my worldly bliss,
Farewell my mirth, farewell my loving Knight,
Farewell my fortune and mine only joy,
And welcome grefe, displeasure, and annoy.
And in this sort she stood, and their she staid,
While Jason fought against the Monsters fell,
Who coming to the place was half afraid,
To see the Bulls cast fire like fiends of hell
Out of their mouths. But to withstand the power,
And force thereof, his body was allore
Anointed with an ointment precious,
That able was to keep him from the flame
And fury of that fire dangerous:
Which from their mouths so furiously then came,
Which otherwise had been impossible,
(For that it was exceeding terrible.)
Or to escape the huge and monstrous smoke
Within the air, did rise so thick and dark,
That it was able any man to choke.
Had not Medea taught him how to warke,
And how to shon each danger whatsoere,
By virtue of the Image he did bear,
For by the same his courage so surpast,
That when the Bulls with open throat did gape,
And fire out of their mouths most fierce cast,
He did their fury easily escape,
And And all the infection of the troubled air.
Soon cleansd and made it show both bright and fair.
For against the foul and stinking smoke and fume
Which round about the air so thick did fly,
And able was man's body to consume,
The Image was a perfect remedy.
And more to keep his mind from fear and dread,
He often times within his book did read.
For that the prayer so great of virtue was,
That it could save him from all wretchedness,
Yet for a further surety in that case,
And to preserve his life from all distress,
The liquor he into the mouths did cast
Of both the Bulls, which closd their throts full fast.
And by the virtue thereof had so glu'd
And shut them up, that presently he staid
The filthy smoke, and it so well eschu'd,
That all the thick and foggy clouds decayed
And vanished away, the crystal sky,
Began t'appeare with fair and chrimson die.
Which don he boldly ventured to take
And draw the Bulls forth by their horns full sone,
Who then against him durst no resistance make.
Which he no sooner had performd and done,
But straight he yoakt, and to the plow the^ bound,
And drove them forth to ear and til the ground,
Wherein they wrought so well, and were so tame,
That what he would, they did, and never staid,
And as he was enjoined to the some,
They plowd the ground, and it in furrows laid,
In such good sort, and made it smoth and plain,
That ready it was t'receaue each kind of grain.
Then like a Champion boldly he did go,
Unto the Dragon fierce and monstrous,
Which was a beast most huge in shape and shoe:
Foul, Horrible, and deadly venomous,
With scales as hard, and strong as any steel,
That dint of sword, or spear ^^ could not feel.
Whose breath then plague was more contagious,
To Effect therewith the clear and pleasant sky:
And his strong poison so outrageous,
That whosoere it touched, was sure to die.
And from his mouth such flames of fire did flow,
That like a burning furnace it did show,
Or like the streams of lightning which from East
Into the West do reach, in time of heat:
So from the mouth of that most ugly beast
The flames of fire did come, and were so great,
And in young Iasons face made such a blaze,
That at the first it stroke him in a maze.
(But thinking on his Ring it was straight gone,
And he of fear and danger out of care,
For in the same there was a precious stone
Of great esteem and virtue passing rare,
Which Isydore does write is only found
Within the rich and fertile Indian ground.
And further says it must he kept f^ll close
About a man, or woman pure and clean,
Or else it will the virtue wholly lose.
Of color it was a passing orient green,
And power had all venom to destroy,
That it could not the bearer ought annoy.
Nor Serpent, Dragon, Adder, nor yet Snake,
Can hurt or harm by venom any way,
If that the same within your hand you take,
And it directly against their eyesight stay.
For presently they cannot will nor choose,
But all their force and poison they must loose.
And in this sort the virtue having wrought,
It presently does burst in pieces small,
In Cicile whence this stone is like wise brought,
There is a worm (which they do B^s^ call)
Most venomous, which when so ere they will
Make tame, or else seek to destroy or kill,
They take a cane, at the end whereof they bind
The precious stone and hold it to the sa^e
Of that small beast, and presently by kind
She does no sooner see it, but in that place
The bowels bursting forth, it there does die,
Such force is found in that rich stone ^olie.
For nature that all things on earth does frame,
And whose decree no mortal wight can move,
Does secretly direct and rule the same,
And by his power received from above,
Such force has given to herbs, to g^asse, to stone,
The causes why none knows, but she alone.)
By virtue of this Ring and precious stone,
He boldly fought against the Dragon fell,
(In whom as then resistance there was none,
Although to fore it did in force excel)
And soon had him bereaved of his life,
And presently did end his cruel strife
With that great beast. Whereof exceeding glad,
With sword in hand he gave him many a stroke,
And chopped his scales that on his back he had,
As if he should have hewd and feld an Oak,
And then cut of his head, and with all speed,
Took out his teeth, and used them for seed,
And presently without delay did sow
Them in the ground, the which he did constrain,
The fierce and cruel Bulls before to plow.
From which so rare and strange a kind of grain,
A fruit more strange did presently proceed,
For as the Gods by power divine decreed,
A company of armed Knights arose
Out of the ground, who sought without delay,
Each other as most stern and cruel foes,
By dint of sword to murder, kill, and slay.
And their most furious combat never left,
Till each his foe of life had clean bereft.
For by the Law it so ordained was,
That each his brother presently should kill,
And that not one of them alive should pass
Out of that place, nor yet should work his will
By force of arms, the victory t'obtaine
Against his foe, but all should dead remain
Within the field. Such was the desteny
Of that strange race, which was no sooner don,
But Jason straight to take the Ram did try,
And with a courage bold laid hand thereon.
(Wherein as then resistance none was found)
And by the horns he pulled it to the ground.
Then did he kill and sheare the golden fleece
Of from the back, (for valor so much deemed
That all the treasure in the Land of Greece,
To half the worth thereof was not esteemed)
And with his prize he did not time delay,
But straight unto the boat he took his way.
And rowed therein unto the other Isle
Not far from thence, whereas upon the shore
Prince Hercules attended all the while,
Accompanied with many Grecians more,
Till that he had his conquest brought to pass,
And when that he among them arived was.
For joy they lept and to their Gods did call,
And yielded thanks for his most happy chance,
That he had so preserved been from thrall,
And to such honor did him then advance,
By Knighthood great to win the golden Ram,
Out of the midst of burning fire and flame.
And fore Apollo fully had run out,
And compassed the earthly globe so fair,
Or from the East to west had gone about,
(For still he was perceaved in the air)
Although with speed he did as then decline,
And on the Seas full watrishly did shine.
Jason withal his grecian Knights did go
Unto the King, with glad and cheerful face,
And unto him the golden sleece did shoe,
The which to wim the Gods had gin him grace.
Whereat the King did seem much to rejoice
In outward show, and with dissembling voice.
Did welcome him unto his Court again,
Glad (as he said) that he so well had sped:
And more his outward joy therein t'explaine,
Into the Palace by the hand him him led,
And entertained him with royal chere,
As if that no dislike in him there were.
And showed pleasant countenance and face,
(As hipocrites can do when as they feign
And think on craft, and rather seek disgrace
To him, whom flatteringly they intertaine
With outward smiling and dissembling show,
When inwardly they wish his overthrow.)
So at that time King Octes entertaind
Prince Jason with a friendly countenance,
And show of joy that he so well had gaind
The golden fleece, his honor to advance.
Although from heart his joy did not proceed,
For inwardly with grief it seemd to bleed.
That of the Ram he was dispoyled so
To his great loss, and whole confusion:
And that he must the golden fleece forgo,
Which in him bred a great division.
Twixt outward show, and his interior mind,
As often we see and by experience find,
That many men of double heart and mind.
And of mere malice hid in their desire,
With smothed face such subtle shifts can find,
To take and cover closely up the fire
Of envy, with the ashes of deceit,
That no man can their wicked purpose let.
But well were he that could their craft epsy,
And know their meaning false and fraudulent,
Wherein naught else but treachery does lie,
For to betray the simple innocent.
And such as by no villainy are led,
Nor in the paths of subtilty have tread.
But when a man a smiling face does make,
With outward show of love, and speaks kind,
They do his words and all his gestures take
To be the effects of his interior mind.
So Jason held himself full well apaid,
Withal the King then did to him or said,
Svpposing that no grudge to him he bare.
And doubtless though the King was griued sore,
And had his heart possessed with thought and care,
Cause he should loose the Ram for evermore.
It had more folly been for him to fret,
When as the same by no means he could let.
And for as then he could not will nor chose,
(Such and so great was his extremity).
But that of force he must his treasure lose
He made a virtue of necessity.
And against his will his mind he wholly bent
To welcome him, though it were with discontent.
And with all kind of common courtesy,
From day to day to show his gentleness,
He feasted Jason and his company,
And not one sign of grutging did express,
Until the time that he did steal away,
And secretly his daughter thence convay.
Mean while the people ran In flocks apace,
From all and every part of Colchos Isle,
Upon the golden Ram to star and gase:
Which some admired, some others seme'd to smile,
Each one his verdit and his Judgment gave,
But to the same men no respect should have.
For they are so unconstant in their mind,
That with each blast they varry like a phane,
And as the moon (according to her kind)
To day th'encrease, to morrow they do wane*
So much they are of nature flexible,
And altogether light and variable.
Some did rejoice that Jason spead so well,
And some admired his great and passing might:
And said he did in valor much excel,
That against the Bulls, and Dragon so could fight,
And conquering the^ returned thence safe and sonnd,
Which to effect till then none could be found.
Some grieved thereat, dislike it ve^erly,
And wholly did repine, that so it was:
Some others said it was done by Sorcery.
Thus each cast forth his verdict in that case:
One saying this, an other praring that,
And every one of Jason seemed to chat.
At last, as though she knew not of the chance,
Medea from her chamber did descend,
Glad at her heart, although in countenance,
A sad and heavy cheer she did pretend.
That no man might her secret joy conceive,
Nor of her mind the least pretense perceive.
And by her wise and good discretion,
Not any one a miss of her could deem,
Whereby she did avoid suspicion,
And every one of her did well esteem.
Her port, and cheer naught else did signify,
But signs of grief, although full secretly
She smild to think how well her love had sped.
Then closely unto Jason she drew near,
And that of them suspision none might breed,
With voice full low, she whispred in his ear*
And willed him in any wise to see
He did not fail with her at night to be.
For that she said she would with him confer
Of matters that concernd them very near,
Which at that time of force she must defer
To let him know, till that he met her there.
Which he suspecting, when as night came on.
Unto his chamber went, where all alone
He found her sitting there, but not asleep.
But wishing with her heart (as I do guess)
By her straight watch which she as then did keep,
With him to parle in great holiness,
Of matters of deep contemplation,
For she was moved with devotion.
To celebrate Dame Venus memory*
And for her sake a Requiem to say
With him alone in her oratory.
(And not as foolish hipocrits do pray
In open streets, that men may them commend,)
The time they did not pass, nor vainly spend,
For glory of the world, nor any laud
Of mortal wights, but closely all alone
Between themselves, not thinking any fraud,
And without any light of Sun or Moon.
That longsome night they past and did not rest,
For sure they thoutht for them it was not best
To think on sleep, ^^ll morning was in prime.
And so the night together they did spend*
With great delight, not loosing any time,
But in what sort I cannot comprehend:
Nor their religious observations show,
But leave that unto them that better know.
Suppose what it was, you get no more of me,
Let him that has good skill and knows the Art:
Or is acquainted with the faculty.
The mysteries thereof to you impart,
And bid me not that am a simple swain,
Snch secret observations to explain,
Or to discourse of that I do not know.
If that in speculation I were seen*
Or had by practice skill the same to show,
It had for me an easy matter been.
But since above my skill it is so far,
I Will leave it unto you. And now declare
How Jason and Medea did agree,
And how it was their purpose and pretense,
That she should into Greece conducted be.
And in so secret wise convaied thence
By him, that Faher, friend, nor any wight,
Should know, or once suspect her sudden flight.
CHAP. VII.
I How Jason after the conquest of the Golden-fle^^^^, taking Medea secretly
with him, returned again into Thessalie.

WHen Iasou had his dangerous conquest wo^,
And bravely feasted was like his degree,
With all the honor could to him be don,
He did devise when oppertunitie
Should serve his turn, to sail away by night,
And take Medea with him if he might.
And so when as a month had passed ore,
He closely caused all things t'ready make,
And as he fully purposed before.
Medea with him secrretly did take,
Withal the treasure that he could convay,
And hoysing sails from Colchos stale away.
Alas Medea, why wast thou in have
So perilous a journey then to make,
And why wast thou so slow before to cast
The dangers thou as then did undertake:
Did thou not prove him faithless and unkind,
For all to thee by oath thou did him bind?
To show he cast thee off and clean forsook,
Constraining thee to weep and mourn in woe,
And how that he another lover took,
And for his wife would thee by no means know:
And caused thee thy golden locks to rend,
And woefully thy doleful life to end.
It were in vain the same now to recite,
(Since it is past) or show what did befall
To Jason in reward of his despite,
Who likewise fell into no little thrall:
And lost his life (for his unnaturalness)
In bloody war with grief and great distress.
This shall suffice th'vnfortunate estate
Of lovers twain, to set before your eye,
And t'show they lost their lives by cruel fate,
Because they set their minds on vanity:
For of beginning that is not virtuous,
The end for certain proves but dangerous.
If they at first the peril had forecast,
And not so rashly run into the fire
Of burning lust, they had not at the last
Reapt just reward of their so fond desire:
But he that is careless mischief to foresee,
Will surely fall into extreamitie.
For as a medcine ministered to man,
When that his body's mortifide and dead;
By no means help nor ought avail him can.
And as the stomach weak, or wounded head,
Cannot be eased by any potion,
Herb, stone, receipt, salve, or confection,
That any Surgeon what so ere does know,
Or learned Doctor in the world can give,
When as the body's laid in earth full low.
Or what avails it to strive t'relieue*
A beast whose carrion corpse lies dead on ground,
And all together cold and sencles found.
In my conceit and simple fantasy,
Twere vain, as dame Experience does us teach,
For naught as then can help or remedy
Health to procure, or dolor to impeach:
For that which im performed in time and date,
More virtue has then that which comes to late.
Right so it is (and sure it is no fable)
He that thinks not on danger till it fall,
But trusts unto worldly hopes unstable,
In stead of sugar sweet tastes bitter gall
Mixed with deceit, and does at last repent
His carelesnes, and life so negligent.
That he the same could not in time forecast,
Nor in his mind resolve it to prevent*
Till in the snare he is caught and holden fast,
And cannot shun the peril eminent.
Which shows that lust (not reason) did obtain,
The highest seat within his head so vain.
As Jason and Medea well did prove.
But how so ever Jason sped thereby,
The story says (through fond and foolish love)
Medea only felt th'extreamity
Of danger, woe, perplexity, and grief,
And dyed at the last without relief.
Because she did not warily forecast
What might fall out, ere she her journey took
With Jason: for which cause she made such have,
That Father, friends, and Country she forsook.
But since that it was done of wilfulness,
Without good counsel or aduisednesse,
Mere folly it were her miseries to wail,
Or grieve at her so hard and lucklesse fate,
Since that as now full little it would avail:
But sure she chose an hour unfortunate,
When as the Moon by constellation,
With some bad planet had conjunction.
Let it suffice that secretly alone,
To bear her dear friend Jason company,
To ship she went, and th'Isle of Colchos soon
She did forsake, to sail to Thessalie:
And in the night full closely stole away,
With as much treasure as she could convey.
And having wind at will with gladsome cheer,
They put to sea and passed many an jsle,
Where least the voyage tedious should appear
Unto Medea, Jason all the while
With Hercules, still held her company,
With fained show of love and courtesy.
And with dissembling face seemed for her sake,
Much to rejoice, (as lovers often can do)
And thereof use an exercise to make,
Till that they have their losts attained unto*
As Jason did Medea soon deceive,
And her of her virginity bereave.
Forsaking her when least ^^e did suspect,
He would have played so treacherous a part,
In so vild sort, and her so soon reject,
With such a cruel, hard, and stony heart,
And left her in great misery and woe.
But here of her I mean no more to thoe,
For that mine Author more to write does spare.
But if at large the story you will see,
Onid^^s Naso plainly does declare,
The misery and great extreamitie
Wherein she fell, and with what great distress,
She lost her life by Iasons wickedness.
And how that she by him two sons did bear,
The which she killed (although against natures kind)
Because that they like to their Father were,
And for that Jason falsely changed his mind,
And cast his love upon another Dame,
Whom Ovid says Cerusa had to name.
And clean forsook Medea his true wife,
She falling in a rage and extreme grief,
In cruel in wise, bereft her self of life,
And died distraught, dispairing of relief.
Of this her end if more you seek to know,
Read Ovid, who the same at large does show.
And now will I my style directly turn,
To let you know what was by Jason done,
When he in Greece arrived. Whose heart did burn,
With rage and anger against Laomedon:
Till he could find a mean how to requight
The wrong received from him, with like despite.
When Jason with his train all landed were,
Upon the pleasant coast of Thessalie,
And that King Peleus knew his being there,
Accompanied with all his chiualry:
He went out of his Court with him to meet,
And did him in most friendly manner greet.
But yet with outward show and countenance
Of fained love, as seeming very glad,
That his so great good fortune was t'aduance
His honor and his house, and that he had
By Knightly force so much extold his name,
And home return with victory and fame,
From Calchos Isle. Yet gladder had he been,
(Although in outward show he did explain
The contrary) that he had never seen
His safe return to Thessalie again:
A nd yet to play a right dissemblers part,
He welcomd him, although against his heart.
Admiring how he could so soon obtain,
(By that adventure strange and perilous)
The fleece of Gold, and ^ome roturne again,
In so short time, and so victorious:
But covertly his treachery to hide,
Without delay all scuses set aside.
To Jason he resigned presently
His Kingdom, which to him belonged of right,
With Scepter, Crown, and ^^ga^^ dignity,
And all his Sovereignty and might.
(His promise to observe, which when he went,
He made to him, though otherwise he meant)
Supposing that he nere should come again.
(But he that for another digs a p^^,
May fail in his imagination vain,
And be the first himself that falls in it:
As Peleus did which sought his nephews end
With deadly hate, yet seemd his loving friend)
Which Jason did accept without delay,
And thanking him with loving face and cheer,
Besought him to give ear what he would say:
And his request indifferently to hear,
Concerning Tooyans wrongs done as he went
To him and his, when he no hu^t them meant.
And said, my Lord, when as we sailed by
The coast of Troy, a tempest in the air
Began to rise, with such extremity,
That we of life were wholly in despair:
And in that care, necessity, and grief,
We forced were to land there for relief.
Not minding any injury or wrong,
Unto the King in any wise to do:
But t'ease our selves, and then to pass along,
To Colchos Isle where first we meant to go:
But Laomedon not therewith content,
A messenger in have unto us sent.
(Pretending of mere malice us to grieve)
And churlishly bad us depart from thence,
Or else he said by force he would us drive
Off from his coast, as taking great offense:
That we would seem to enter in his land,
So suddenly with sueh a warlike band.
When we naught else but peace and friendship meant,
As glad to be relieved in our distress,
Not having any kind of bad intent
That should him move to seek us to oppress.
Now then my Lord, since he did so abuse
Both me and mine, and seemed us to refuse
A place of rest, from danger us to save,
Against the laws of common courtesy,
I humbly you beseech that we may have
Your aid of men and money, both to try
By force of arms if that we can requite
The Troyan King for his so great despite.
For truth to say, my mind and will is bent,
To sail to Troy with all the speed I may.
And to destroy the Land is mineintent,
And cruelly Laomedon to slay:
According to the vow that I did make,
When I was forced the Troyan soil forsake!
Is that it please your Grace to give consent
To my request, and lend your helping hand,
And doubt not ere that many months are spent,
But maugre Troy, and Troyans, all we will land
With all our power of Grecian chivalry,
And soon requite the Troyans cruelty.
When Peleus did Prince Iasons mind perceive,
Without delay he said it should be so,
A^luring him he did so well conceive
Of his intent that he himself would go
With him, and all his company to Troy,
By force of arms that Country to destroy.
Whereto his whole Nobility agreed,
And none of them unto the King said nay,
But promised their aid with present speed,
Preparing for the same without delay:
Of which their Journey chief Solicitor
Was Hercules the worthy Conqueror.
Who in all have his forces to prepare
In readiness, to Sparta straightway went,
(Which is an Isle from Thessalie not far,
And subject to the Grecian government,
Wherein as then two Princes great did reign,
King Castor, and King Pollux, brethren twain.
Whom Poets in their Histories do set,
Brethren to be ^^ Helena the fair,
Whom Jupiter on Led^ did beget,
Whose beauty was esteemed to be so ^are*
Which Helena (they write) conceived was
In Tyn^^^^^ an Isle, which as men pass
Along the se^s, ^^^s by Sic^^^^ Land,
And that her name Tyn^^^^^ of that Isle*
Was also cald^ (...) longer i will not stand
Their pedigree to tell, but speak a while
Of Hercules, to show how he did crave
The aid of those two Kings as then to have,
To go with him unto the Town of Troy,
With all the power they had, whereby he meant,
The same by force and valor to destroy.
To whose request they straight did give consent:
And promised in readiness to lie,
Till he to them the time should certify,
When he would put to Sea. Wherewith content:
He thanked them, and did no longer stay,
But straight his course unto Messena bent,
And there arrived about the break of day:
And to the King called Telamon did go,
The cause of his repair to him to shoe.
Whose coming when he knew, he was full glad
To see him, and in brave and Princely wise
Received him. To whom when as he had
Such honor done, as he could well deuise^
He promised to aid him with all speed,
With money and with men what he should need,
And personally himself with him to go.
Which Hercules accepting in good part,
Did take his leave (his Princely mind to shoe)
And yielded thanks to him with all his heart.
And entering Ship, returned to Thessalie
To tell King Peleus, and to cer^^^^
How he had sped. Beseeching him to write
To all the Lords and Barrons in his Land,
And them command with all the have they might*
In readiness to make a warlike band*
And to provide a counsel wi^e and grave,
Which he that goes to war, he said must have*
For that the wit of him that's grown in age,
Is more then strength without experience,
But when as force is joined with counsel sage.
It is a bulwark strong for our defense,
And he that long a trauailer has been,
And by experience many things has seen,
Is meet in peace and war to rule and guide.
For unto age, experience great^ and ^^^*
Belongs of right (...) (...) does (...)
That strength and courage youth should best (...):
And when both youth and age with one consent*
To work and join together are content.
In any cause of equity and right,
Men need not fear with glistering sword and shield,
(By help of God the giver of all might)
Against their foes to (...) in the field.
For neither fame of Knighthood, not the glory,
Not yet the conquest, nor the victory
Of war, are got or woone by multitude,
But as experience says of right belong
To counsel, wisdom, and to fortitude,
Therefore (said he) let us revenge our wrong
With courage bold, since that our cause is good,
And for our honors spend our dearest blood,
And that we may our valors bravely show,
We will avoid the multitude of number,
And of our warlike Knights choose but a few,
Wherewith we shall our foes much more incomber,
Then if we had an army huge and great,
For many in a field each other let.
This good advise King Peleus did allow,
And whatsoever Hercules had said,
To Effect the same did make a solemn vow.
Then Hercules to have and get more aid,
To Pilon went, wherein a Duke of fame
As then did rule, that Nestor had to name.
A Prince for wit and valor magnified,
(Yet of a hasty, fierce, and angry mood)
And in some sort to Hercules allied:
Whose coming when he once had understood,
He was contented for his Nephews sake,
The Troyan war with him to undertake.
(So Hercules the day and time would set)
And personally himself therein to be.
Then Hercules no further time to let,
With present speed returned to Thessalie,
Whereas the Graecians Navy then did stay,
Attending time from thence to sail away.
Where after counsel taken they did agree,
That Peleus should be general of the field,
And that each Lord and Prince of high degree,
While that their Trojan war did last should yield
To his command, as Sovereign of them all,
And so they stayed till wind did them befall.
CHAP. VIII.
How Jason, Hercules, and the Grecian Princes, assembled to make war against
the Town of Troy, to revenge the discurtesie done to them by Laomedon King of
Troy, when they sailed to Colchos.

WHen as the temperate dewes of Aperill,
With many a sweet and comfortable shower,
Into the ground full deeply do distill,
To raise the grass and beauty of each flower:
And Phoebus mounting the celestial sphere,
In Aries does place his beams most clear.
And in the spring which yearly does befall,
When as the calends of the month of May,
Do celebrate the Equinoctial,
And make an equal length of night and day.
And every branch and tree to spring are seen,
And after vading hew show fresh and green.
When Snow that on the mountain tops does lie,
By heat of Phoebus beams dissolues away,
And when a vapery balm ascends on hie,
Out from the pleasant flower at prime of day:
And that the root by Winter cold kept in,
Recovering sap to spring forth does begin.
And mount into each flower, herb, and tree,
And by the force of Sols most burning heat,
Infuseth in each branch humidity,
Assisted by some showers of rain most sweet.
When silver springs cast forth their current stream
Into the Rivers glistring against Son beams.
And ere the Son new green had sent again,
Unto each herb and grass upon the ground,
When as the pleasant Nightingale t'explaine
Her joy within the shadie woods is found,
With sweet and amorous noats a loud to sing,
And makes the eire with sound thereof to ring.
To welcome in the fair and pleasant spring,
Which does delight all creatures that are
Upon the earth, and comforts every thing,
Which Winter hard ore-whelmd with cold and care:
And when the winds did lessen, calm, and swage
The Seas, that by cold Winters storms did rage.
At that same time the Graecians did begin
To enter Ship, and toward Troy to sail,
Well rigged, manned, and furnished with each thing,
That for the wars might them as then avail,
And when the weather served them to go,
They put to Sea with brave and warlike shoe.
And made such have by aid Neptune them lent,
That in few days they saild unto the Town
Of Troy, (whereto their course as then was bent)
At evening when the Sun was almost down,
And there cast anchor, thinking it the best,
Within their Ships that night to take their rest.
And when the Lark did in the morning sing,
With pleasant noats to welcome Phoebus bright,
^o set their men on land they did begin,
And marked their ground and raised their tents upright
Before the Town of Troy ere they it wist:
(For that they might as then do what they list.
And set a watch mean time in every place
To guard their Camp, until the Sun most bright
Had in the morning showed his glistring face,
And on the tents had cast his crimson light:
And then they all agreed with one consent,
To make repair unto King Peleus tent.
And being there as then together met,
King Peleus causing silence to be made,
When every one in his degree was set)
With courage bold unto them spoke, and said,
Most worthy Grecian Princes high and low,
Whose Knightly force the world throghout does know,
Reported is as far as shines the Sun
In any place, it never yet was seen,
That Graecians have an enterprise begun,
Which by them has not well effected been:
And they victoriously with Laurel crowned,
As in the ancient Histories is found.
Then valiant Lords and Princes of renown,
Think on the wrong that unto you was wrought,
By this discourteou^ King Laomedon,
When as no ^urt to him by you was thought:
Which to requight since now you do pretend,
See that your selves you valiantly defend.
And let us now with all the speed we may,
Prepare our battles in a readiness,
And setting on them straight without delay,
Show forth our valors and our worthiness:
But let me first three things to you declare,
Which at this time for us most needful are.
One is, that by discretion and advise,
Our battles we in such sort do ordain,
That no disorder may amongst us rise,
That by the same advantage none be taken
Against us by our foes, to our disgrace,
And we thereby constrained to leave the place.
The second is, that we our valors show,
And let no manner fear possess our heart,
But stoutly let us against our enemies go,
And see we play the valiant soldiers part*
Courageously in battle to endure,
And to our foes eternal shame procure.
The third and last is, that we strive to gain,
The fame and name our Ancestors have held,
And valiantly the victory obtain
Against our foes, and drive them out the field:
For if by Knighthood through our hardines,
We vanquish them and put them to distress,
We win not only praise and high renown,
(Which to a valiant mind is chiefest bliss)
But if we once may enter in the Town,
Of treasure great we surely cannot miss:
Which in the same is now there to be found,
For certain it is it does therein abound.
Which maugre all our foes we will convey
Into our ships, and so with joyful cheer,
When wind and weather serves without delay,
The same with us into our Countries bear:
Therefore in hope this treasure now to win,
With courage bold t'assaile them lets begin.
Whereto most valiant Hercules replied,
And did King Peleus counsel much commend,
And said it is truth, and cannot be denied,
That of beginning wise proves happy end:
But now to bring our purpose to effect,
My counsel is that we do not neglect,
(Before that it appears to be day)
To muster all our men upon this plain,
And being armed with all the speed we may,
Our forces to divide in battles twain,
Whereof the one King Peleus the grave,
The other stout King Telamon shall have.
And I my self and Jason secretly,
With one third part of our approved bands,
Will closely among the vines and bushes lie:
For when as Laomedon understands,
That we prepared are to give battle,
To issue forth of Troy he will not fail.
T'encounter us with all his power and might,
Supposing against our forces for to prevail,
And when with us he comes down to fight,
Duke Nestor with the first wing shall assail
And set on him, and Castor next shall go,
To aid them when occasion serves thereto.
And with the third King Peleus still shall lie,
To aid them both, and while he is occupied,
And little does suspect our policy,
Ere we by him or his shall be espied,
Jason and I will closely wheeele about,
And take the Town of Troy, I do not doubt.
At unawares: whereof we cannot fail,
If that we work with good advise and skill,
And against our foes shall presently prevail
With little loss, and soon obtain our will.
This is the counsel I can give (says he)
And it is the best if you will credit me.
Whereto they all agreed, and every one
With speed did arm themselves, and all that night
Did rest, till that the Sun in morning shone,
And then with courage bold set forth to fight
The battle with the Trojans in such wise,
As Hercules did them before advise.
CHAP. IX.
Of the battle fought by Hercules and the Graecians, against Laomedon King of
Troy, wherein Laomedon was slain, and the Town of Troy taken, sacked, and
utterly rased to the ground.

THe news to King Laomedon once sent,
That all the Graecians power were come on land,
And marched in great have with full intent,
T'assaile and give him battle out of hand,
And to subdue, and utterly destroy
Himself, his Country, and the Town of Troy.
He nothing fearing them nor all their might,
Made no delay but presently went out,
Accompanied with many a noble Knight,
And all the power that he could make throughout
The Land of Troy, and being entered,
Into the field whereas he mustered
His men, and them in sundry battles plast,
(As he for that time thought convenient)
Straight marched forth, and with his army past,
In order against the Graecians: fully bent,
With all his force courageously to fight,
And drive them thence again if that he might.
(Clean void of fear, nor yet in any doubt,
That Hercules an ambush closely laid,
And secretly with it had marched about
Behind the Town, and purposely there stayed:
T'assault it when Laomedon was gone
With all his power, against the Greeks, and none
Or very few left in it to keep the same.)
And had not gone far forward but he spied,
The Grecian host that bravely against him came,
At t'head whereof Duke Nestor first did ride,
And fiercely on the Troyans force, set.
Where when on either side the battails met,
And with their swords and spears together ran:
The Encounter at the first so hot was found,
That it was the loss and end of many a man
On either side, that gasping on the ground
Among the trampling horses feet did lie,
And there did end their days in misery.
At which time all the field throughout did sound,
With noise of drums and furious strokes that w^^^
With swords and Lances given, and all the ground
Did shake with horses feet, that fiercely bear
Their masters on their backs, some deadly hurt,
Some trailing them sore bleeding through the d^^
In great distress: and then you might have seen
The fair green fields dyed into crimson red,
With streams of blood, the which that day had been
Between the Greeks and Trojans fiercely shed.
For many a valiant Knight then lost his life,
And certainly in that same mortal strife,
The Graecians had been all discomfited,
They were that time pursued so furiously,
If Castor with his Knights which he then led,
Had not come in to help them speedily:
And at that time so valiantly assaild
The Troyans, and so much against them preuaild*
That many a worthy Troyan Knight was slain,
And such was then the fight, that where before,
The Trojans victors were, the Greeks again,
Recovered ground and beat them back so sore
That they were forced dispight their hearts to (...),
If Laomedon had not spedily,
Relieved them and furiously assaild,
The Greeks and made such way on every side,
And in shortspace so much against them preua^^d
That they before him fled and durst not bide
His strockes, that were so terrible and strong:
For who soere he hit was laid along,
Upon the ground: and riding to and fro,
He made away before him like a lane,
And among the thickest of the prease did go,
And never left until that he had slane,
So many Greeks that by his valiantnes
He put them once again to such distres,
That they to shun his sword away did fly,
And likely had at that time lost the field,
If Peleus had not come and valiantly,
With trenchant blade which in his hand he held,
Assailed, wounded, and unhorsed, and killed
The Troyans so, that all the plain was filled
With them that he alone had overcome.
And in such furious wise road too and fro
From place to place, that glad to make him room,
The Troyans began t'recoile and durst not show
Themselves to him, nor come within his sight*
And at that time he showed such passing might,
That cleving sheilds, heads, arms, and legs in sunder,
He made such havocke among the Troyan bands,
That to behold him every man did wonder,
And glad was he that could escape his hands,
He put them to so great extreamitie.
But when King Laomedon saw them fly
Before King Peleus sword, it did him grieve,
And riding back amongst his troops did pray
Them turn again and he would them relieve,
And they content at his request did stay:
And where before they had begun to fly,
He made the Greeks recoyle so furiously,
That in despite of all their power and force,
The Troyans had the vpperhand and slew
Great store of Greeks, and many did unhorse,
And made them fight on foot, till Nestor knew,
Laomedon that fought so valiantly,
To be the King of Troy, and presently
Road toward him, and when the King did see
Him come so fast, he turned his horse about,
And spurd it in such have so might lie,
That every prick he gave the blood gusht out
The horses sides, and when with him he met,
His puissant Lance into his breast he set,
And ran at him with such a mighty force,
That with the blow his Lance in pieces brake,
Yet hurt him not, nor moved him off his horse,
Wherewith Duke Nestor stepped a little back,
And to requite Laomedon therefore,
Did with his Lance which in his hand he bore,
Give him through shield and breast a mighty wound,
Supposing that therewith he had him slain,
Because as then he fell upon the ground,
But he no whit abasht rose up again:
And drew his sword, and like a valiant Knight,
Advanst himself against his foe to fight.
Yet raging fore that he so dangerously
Must fight do (...), and in such sort did stay,
Till that a young and (...) Knightpast by
Called Cedar, (newly knighted that same day)
Who seeing King Laomedon to fight
On foot in danger great, with all his might
At Nestor ^an, and valiantly by force,
While he with King Laomedon did fight
Upon a sudden (...) him off his horse,
But he rose up again with great despite:
And did himself in furious wise defend
Against the King, that many a blow did spend
On him, and he the like on him again,
For on each other cruelly they smot,
And long twixt them the fight did so remain,
Till that the King at last advantage got:
And such a blow on Nestors Bever stroke,
That there with all in pieces small he broke
A circle all with Pearl richly set,
Which he that time about his Helmet ware,
And then a second blow at him he set,
And with the same his crest in sunder care,
And smote it off, whereby Duke Nestor stood
Before the King his face all bathed with blood.
And surely had (no doubt) been slain as then,
By th'ands of King Laomedon at last,
Had not the Greeks with many thousand men,
Come thither to relieve him in great have:
For he was stricken down unto the ground,
Among the horses feet where they him found.
At which their coming Castor furiously,
A mighty Lance into his hand did take,
And unto Cedar road courageously,
To be revenged on him for Nestors sake:
But ere he could get to him in the way,
Segnerides a Troyan Knight did stay
His course, and of his purpose did him let,
And with a Lance smote Castor such a stroke,
(Which with a great carriere he did set)
That it there with in many pieces broke:
And Castor to requite him for his pain,
Did with his Lance give him the like against.
But in such sort that with the same he gave
Him in the breast a deep and deadly wound,
Wherewith young Cedar began such grief to ha^^;
When as he saw him fall unto the ground:
That in despite of all that him behe^^,
He did by force from Castor take his ^^rie^d.
And with hissword a mighty blow him st^ake
Upon the face, and vounded him full deep,
And then his horse from him likewise did take,
And to his Squier delivered it to keep:
Whereby as then he was in such a case,
That he was taken prisoner in that place.
The which when Pollux did perceive and knew,
The Troyans had his Brother Castor taken,
He did them with a valiant pursue,
And after he great store of them had slain,
Despite of them, he resoued him by force,
And made him mount again upon his horse.
And in that angry, fierce, and raging ire,
Upon the Troyans furiously did set,
(For with revenge his heart did burn like fire)
And as with furious mood by chance he met,
The brave and valiant Knight Eliatus,
(Of stature mean, yet stour and valorous.
And yet as then but of a tender age,
Nephew unto the King Laomedon,
And Son unto the King of great Carthage)
With all his force he has him overthrown;
And with his Lance in pieces twain did cleave
His heart, and so did him of life bereave.
Whose fall when King Laomedon did spy,
With inward grief his heart began to bleed,
And when his death he could not remedy,
He swore he would revenge that cruel deed:
And straight he caused a horn full loud to sound,
Which being heard, there did enclose him round
Seven thousand Troyan Knights in rich array,
All making solemn vows revenged to be
For that Knights death, and straight without delay
Upon the Greeks with extreme cruelty
Most furiously did set, and made them fly,
And caused many dead and wounded lie
Within the field, so that the Greeks at last,
Not able to resist the Troyans might,
Were forced to retire from thence as fast,
As at the first they hasty were to fight:
And certainly the victory had lost.
But that there came a messenger in post
Unto the King with sad and woeful cheer,
The news to tell, how that the Greeks by force
Had woone the town of Troy, and entered were,
And young and old had slain without remorse:
Whereat he began most pittiously to weep,
And from his heart did fetch a sigth most deep.
For that as then before him he did see
The Grecians strong and ready to assail
Him once again with all extreamitie,
And in the town (his courage more to quail)
Another host to set on him behind,
Which made him so perplexed in his mind,
And put him to so great extreamitie,
To think upon his hard and sudden chance,
That feign he would have ^ound the means to fly,
But as aside his eyes he chanc'st to glance,
From out the town the Grecians he be held
Come marching against him proudly in the field
And in great have the Giant Hercules,
Like raging Tygar wild and furious,
Entering amongst the thick'st of all the prease,
With courage bold and heart most valorous:
Of new began the Troyans to assail,
And with his sword to hew both plate and male.
His blows they were so terrible and strong,
That nothing could withstand his passing might,
Whereby he laid full many a Knight along
Dead on the ground (for Troyans with the fight,
Which they against the Greeks all day had held,
So wearied were, that scarcely they could weld
Their weapons to defend themselves withal)
For as he road amongst them here and there,
You might behold here ten there twenty fall
Down at his feet, that soon they forced were
To break their ranks, and every man to fly
To save themselue from his great cruelty.
And so dispersed, for fear they shunned the place,
Abandoning their King unfortunate,
Who being left in that distressed case,
Could not withstand his hard and cruel fate:
For when as he with fierce and furious look
Laomedon espied, his Lance he took:
And setting spurs unto his horse in have,
He ran at him as hard as ere he might,
And with a blow unto the ground him cast:
Which done, with speed down from his horse he light*
And with one stroke smote of his head in have,
Which scornefully unto the ground he cast,
Among the horses feet in cruel wise.
Then in a rage he took his horse again,
And staring with most fierce and fiery eyes,
Like Lion fell he ran upon the plain,
And killed all that met him in the way,
And brought full many Troyans to decay.
That like to sheep amazed and in fear,
(As destitute of governor or guide)
Not able his great cruelty to bear,
Did run to save their lives on every side:
The Grecians likewise in great multitude,
In every place so fiercely them pursude,
That scarce a man alive of them remaind,
But all were slain or else did slip aside
To save themselves. Thus victory obtaind,
The Grecians straight unto the town did ride:
Which presently they razed to the ground,
And al^ the treasure which therein they found,
They took and bare't into their ships in have,
Dispoyling Temples with great violence,
And to the ground their Pagan Gods did cast,
(For no man durst against them make defense)
And merciless (great pity to behold)
With bloody swords they killed both young and old.
The tender child that mothers breast did suck,
Escaped not their extreme cruelty,
For from the mothers arms they did them pluck,
And violently caused them to die:
Their maidens fair they did reserve for prise,
And with them did their beastly lusts suffice,
Regarding neither beauty, birth, nor name.
And when the houses all destroyed were,
They razed the walls, and quite defast the same,
And Laomedons only daughter dear,
Fair Exion, whose beauty did excel,
To go with them by force they did compel;
Who by them all was given to Telamon,
For his reward, (by Hercules his consent)
Because that he first enterd in the town,
Wherewith he seemd to be as well conten^^
As if that all the treasure they had got
Within the town had fallen to his lot.
And yet he did himself therein abuse,
For being home returned from victory,
To take her for his wife he did refuse,
But with her as his concubine did lie:
Regarding neither state nor high degree,
Nor her descent from Princely majesty.
For if he had her taken to be his spouse,
He could not have disparaged his estate,
Considering that she was of Princely house,
And royal blood, although unfortunate
Upon his word and courtesy t'relie,
That kept her but his lust to satisfy.
But Telamon therein thou wast to blame,
To do a Princess fair so great despite,
And make her to the world anopen shame,
When as thou should have showed thy self her knight
And rather in defense of her to die,
Then that she should have suffered villainy.
For through thy bad and foolish government,
So hot a spark of envy did arise
In Troyans hearts (which to revenge were bent)
That nothing could to quench the same suffice,
For envy old once rooted in the heart,
Does sieldome, or else never thence depart.
And if it burn within and flames not out,
Nor makes show of fume nor smoke at all,
The greater cause men have thereof to doubt,
And where it lights it will have the greater fall.
Which you within this History may see
At large in every point set down to be.
When that the town was burnt and laid full low,
And all the walls unto the ground was cast,
And nothing thereof left to make a show,
But it was spoyld and utterly defast:
The Grecians did no longer time delay,
Unto their ships their treasure to convay.
But being richly laden with great store
Of silver, gold, and costly jewels rare,
(That not the meanest man of them was poor)
When wind did serve and weather waxed fair,
They (...) ^iles return again to make
To Thessa^^^ and with them then did take
Fair ^^on, and many a proper maid,
And sa^^ing forth with prosperous wind and good,
It was not long (through gentle Neptunes aid)
But they (...) with glad and merry mood
At their d^^sired port, where on the sand,
Great multitudes of people then did stand
To welcome them, with glad and joyful cheer,
Rejoicing at their victory obtained,
With loss of so few men as did appear:
And cause they had such store of treasure gained,
Their Country to enrich for evermore,
They gave great thanks unto their Gods therefore.
Thus happily with triumph and renown,
They being home returned did live in peace,
And throughout every City, land, and town,
Their honor and their fame did still increase:
So that the compass of the world throughout,
Each Nation to offend them stood in doubt:
And feared them. For certain it is they had
A multitude of men within their land
And wealth and treasure great, the which they made
(When s'ever they took any thing in hand)
As common to them all, whereby they were
A terror to all Nations far and nere.
Till fortune chanst to whirle her wheel about,
And turned their peace into such bloody war,
As after in few years it did fall out,
When they and Troyans once again did jarre:
Which at this time I mean not to declare,
Desiring that herein you will mespare:
And give me leave to rest a little while,
For herewith I do mean to end this Book,
And at another time direct my style,
To perfect that which first I undertook:
Which in the next t'accomplish I intend,
If life and leisure God to me will lend.
Mean time if that by rudeness I offend,
The gentle readers pardon I will crave,
With promise any fault I make t'amend,
If that the least instruction I may have:
And so in hope your favors you will extend
To me herein: my first Book thus shall end.
FINIS.
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF HECTOR.
THE SECOND BOOK.
The Preface. CHAP. I.
THe envious vain which fortune flattering,
Does use in this uncertain state of life,
Where all things fickle are and wavering,
Addicted is so much to war and strife:
That whatsoever course a man does run,
The sparks thereof by no means he can shun.
For she is still so false and mutable,
That he which on her wheel does highest clime,
And thinks his estate secure and stable,
(At some uncertain hour, day, or time,
When least he does suspect a change of state,)
She casts him down, and makes unfortunate.
And with a smooth and double flattering face,
Makes show of love when least she is to trust,
That well were he that had the power and grace,
To see and find her frauds and wiles unjust:
And all her engines and her snares well knew,
Which daily do increase and still renew.
The which in truth full well affirm I can,
So many and so diverse are of kind,
That hitherto not any mortal man
Could ever them avoid, that I can find:
For though unequal balance she does bear,
With counterfeit and false dissembling cheer,
And look most smooth and full of flattery,
She can man soon beguile and clean bereave
Of all his bliss in twinkling of an eye,
Her nature is so ready to deceive:
And when she changes high to low estate,
With fleering look she stands and laughs thereat.
And yet often times she seems to be true,
For unto some a while she is favorable,
And then when as she list to change her hew,
To othersome she is deceauable.
Such skill she has in transmutation,
That one she will raise, and other throws down.
To some she gives renown and victory,
And does exalt their honor and their fame.
And some she causes most deceitfully,
(Though undeserved) t'incurre perpetual shame.
To othersome she is gentle and bening,
And gives them luck in all and every thing.
On some she frowns, and has them in disdain,
And by her power imbaseth them full low.
And for to show that earthly hope is vain,
She can the state of Princes overthrow:
And make them stoop for all their great renown,
And high and mighty Emperors cast down,
From off the mount of high felicity,
(To make them feel her rankor and disdain,)
Into the vale of great adversity.
The rich she makes poor, and then again
Of poor makes rich, and as it is her kind,
Sets one before, another casts behind.
Some one she makes run, another halt,
The third she plungeth in extremity,
The fourth she does to honor great exalt,
So that in her there is no security.
In some man's mouth sweet Nectar she disti^th*
Another throat with bitter ga^^ she fil'th.
And thus this wilful Lady as we find,
Within her power great store of potions has,
And every one of strange and several kind.
For she to some with false and fained faith
Gives pleasant wine, but when the sweet is past,
(As it is her use) she gives them a taste
Of Aloes, and of bitter wormwood drink,
And corfiues which do fret and pierce most deep
Into men's hearts, when as they little think
That fortune them beguiles and luls a sleep.
And thus if in this Queen of Variance
(Whose joy does ever end with some mischa^ce.)
Men put their trust, let them besure at last,
Of what estate so ever that they be,
She Will overthrow them with some sudden blast,
And clean bereave of all felicity.
As by example of Laomedon,
We may perceive brought to confusion
For little cause, or truth to say, for naught,
Wherefore let every man by him take heed,
A quarrel to begin where none is sought,
Least that like him destruction be their meed.
For little fire with ashes covered,
When men suppose it quenched and wholly dead,
May chance break out, and on a sudden burn,
And when as men the same do seek to cease,
Full often in their faces it does turn,
But he that medleth least, lives most at ease:
Therefore let Kings and Princes every one,
A mirror make of King Laomedon.
And see they use no kind of violence,
Nor suffer any one to offer wrong
To strangers, when they give them none offense:
For though their power and force be great and strong
Within their land, when least they think on it,
(As he was served) they may their rigor quit,
And yield the like to them in other place,
When as perchance (unto their overthrow)
They shall of them receive but little grace.
Wherefore I wish when as they hear or know,
That strangers in their Countries are arrived,
Let them with love and honor be received.
And wisely think and hold it to be true,
That to a stranger courtesy to show,
Unto a noble mind belongs of due;
For sure it is, as every man does know,
That nothing does their honors more augment,
Then when their only care and will is bent
For to relieve, to cherish, and to comfort,
With all the love and honor that they may,
Such strangers as unto their Courts resort,
That they of them may well report and say:
The contrary whereof much strife has wrought,
As in this present History is taught.
The town of Troy that first was built, thus spoiled,
The people slain, and many forced to fly*
The remnant with great woe and sorrow toiled,
Int'exile led, live in captivity:
And Exion, as you have heard me tell,
Went into Greece with Telamon to dwell.
For whom there rose such bloody war and strife,
And so great vengeance taken for it in the end
On either side, that thousands lost their life:
Which to declare I purposely intend,
If you vouchsafe it patiently to hear,
And for your good the same in mind will bear.
So hard and fatal is our destiny,
That no estate can permanently stand,
For every man ordained is to die,
And alterations chance in every Land:
And through the world where ever that we be,
We hear of naught but war and treachery.
Which serves to put us in rememberance,
That many wars and battles great are fought,
And many woes and miseries do chance,
And moved are for little cause or naught:
And diverse things for matters small, or none,
At first begun, breed much confusion.
Each one does seek another to destroy,
And bloody minds are greatly to be feared,
Man cares not his brother to annoy,
And all because we take no better heed:
But envy reigns so much in every age,
That naught but blood and death can it asswsge.
By it, although the causes were but small,
If truth were known, on the ancient town of Troy,
Both old and new such miseries did fall,
That at the last it did them both destroy:
Where during their so long and bloody strife,
Full many a valiant Knight did loose his life.
And Kings and Princes died by dint of sword,
Which to recount my hand does shake for fear,
Least that my barren wit should not afford,
Fit terms and phrases the truth for to declare,
Unto my most renownd and sovereign Liege,
Of all that past in that long ten years siege.
Which if that he with patience please to hear,
And not disdain my rude and simple verse,
And in his sacred wisdom with it bear,
While I this woeful History rehearse:
(Whereof no doubt I have, since that of grace,
Sweet mercy in his heart he does embrace*
And that he is a Prince of Majesty,
Whose virtues are so excellent and rare,
That to addict his mind to piety
It is his only study and his care.)
With his support I will here undertake,
A true discourse unto you now to make.
What did befall unto the town of Troy,
(That newly was erected once again,)
When Greeks did it the second time destroy,
As Guydo does the same at large explain.
And if my verse for want of skill seem lame,
Let me entreat you to correct the same.
But blame me not, since that the fault's not mine,
For as you know the English tongue is harsh,
And wants words to make up perfect rhyme,
Where it in many places is too scarce.
And truth to say, my wit will not aspire
To follow Guydoes phrase as I desire.
Who in his Latin verse does so exceed
In Rethoricke, that my translation
Requires a far more fine and subtle head,
To follow him in like construction.
Verbatim as a learned Gramarian,
Or as a skillful Rethoritian,
I only take upon me to declare
The History according to the sense,
And truth thereof, which is my chiefest care,
Least I thereby to some might breed offense.
And truth of verse I likewise set aside,
As wanting one therein to be my guide.
And to correct and mend them that are wrong.
My only seeking is truth to declare,
Regarding neither verses short nor long,
For curiousness therein I do not care.
Pretending not in any thing to varry,
Nor yet my Author Guido to contrary.
Nor from him disagree in truth of sense,
But to conclude our meanings all in one
And to agree therein, for Eloquence
Or Rethoricke, I you assure there is none
In me, your heads with phrases fine to fill,
Nor yet have I in painting any skill.
With colors fresh and gay to please the ere,
I naught can use, but sad and mournful black,
And therewithal my self will satisfy,
Which in good part I you beseech to take.
And so in hope your favors I shall win,
I will proceed the story to begin.
WHen as the noble King Laomedon
Was slain in field by cruel Hereules,
When as the Greeks did first destroy the town,
He had a son and heir as Guido sa^es,
Called Priamus, a Prince of courage stout,
Whose fortune was at that time to be out
With Hecuba his wife, and did assault
A Castle strong, wherein a Lord did lie,
Which at that time did stubbornly revolt,
And long before had warred cruelly
Against the town of Troy with force and might,
(Yet subject was unto the same by right.)
Where Priam and his sons in camp did lie,
Accompanied with many a worthy Knight,
(Their power and force against their foes to try,)
And it besieged round both day and night.
With vow the same by fierce assault to win,
And to destroy them all that were within.
(For he as then was strong and valorous,
Young, lusty, and of fierce and hawtie heart,
And therewithal so stout and ventrous,
That fear of death could never make him start.)
And to be first that in the field did enter
Against his foes, his life therein to venture.
Whereby hewan great honor and renown,
And for his time was held a worthy Knight.
Till Fortune from her wheel did cast him down;
And in his fall did show her power and might:
To change and alter things as she thinks good,
Respecting neither poor nor Princely blood.
This Priamus by Hecuba his wife
Eight goodly, fair, and Princely children had,
(Which all were slain and died in the strife
And bloody war that Grecions against him made:
Whereof there were five sons, and daughters three,
Which I will name each one in his degree.
The first and eldest Hector had to name,
Whose worthiness as far abroad does fly;
(And is extold by Trumpe of Lady Fame.)
As Phoebus does r^n compass ^out the sky
In one days space, for authors certify,
And say, be was th^^oo^ of chival^ie.
Of Knighthood true the only Sovereign,
And Mirror bright and clear of Nobleness,
And did therein unto such hight attain,
That no man can sufficiently express
The great and valiant acts he did archiue,
Surpassing all that ever yet did live:
And therewithal he was most virtuous,
Discreet, and wise, and friendly to each one.
Of whom the deeds and prowess marvelous,
Reported are, and have been long agone
By many ancient Authors fore our days,
That write of him to his eternal praise.
The second Son by birth and Dignity
Was Parris called, who did exceed so far
In person, beauty, shape, dexterity,
And was esteemed therein, to be so rare,
That in his time as far as I can hear,
Upon the earth there never lived his peer.
Who likewise was a stout and worthy Knight,
And in a bow had such delight and skill,
(Wherewith he used commonly to fight,)
That where he aimed, he would be sure to kill.
None ever did surpass him in the same,
And Alexander was his other name.
Deiphobus was the third Son by degree,
A Knight of worthy same and great renown,
Strong, hardy, and of courage frank and free,
Exceeding wise, and of great discretion,
A counselor in peace and war most grave,
And in the field a Champion bold and brave.
The fourth of them was Hele^^^ by name,
Who only gave his minds unto his book,
And was so much addicted to the same,
That pleasure in no other thing he took.
Whereby so wise and learned he became,
That all men did admire him for the same.
The Fist Son was a hardy valiant Knight,
Although the last and youngest of them all,
And puissantly against his ^oes did fight,
Whom Troy^l^s the history does call:
And for his valiant heart and courage brave,
The name of second Hector men him gave.
So many valiant acts hy him were don,
While that the Grecian war continued,
Whereby so much renown therein he won,
That after Hectors death he was so feared,
And did the Greeks so cruelly assail,
That naught against the Town they could prevail.
Yet Uirgill in his Book of Troyan war,
(By him called his En^idos) says thus,
That Hecuba unto King Pryam bare
Two younger Sons, the one Polidorus,
Whom (when the Grecians first did take in hand
Their bloody war, and entered in his land
As then but young) he straight did send away
Unto a King that was his trusty friend,
With store of treasure great, with him to stay
Till he might see what jssue and what end
The war would have, as then but new begone
Between the Greeks and him, before the town.
But he in whom he did repose his trust,
When as he understood King Pryams state,
(Desirous of the gold which makes men thurst)
Did cause the Trojan Prince unfortunate,
To be bereaved of life most cruelly,
And buried in a place full secretly,
Hard by the Sea, so deep within the ground,
That no man could his treason great epsy,
Nor never afterward his body found.
And so the Proverb old did verefie,
(Who so on gold does set his only care,
To win the same no mischief he will spare.)
The second of those two called Ganimed,
Upon a time did hunt for his disport,
And straying in a wood by fortune led,
God Jupiter (as Uirgill does report,)
Up to the skies did suddenly him take,
And there for ever Butler did him make.
The eldest of King Priams daughters three,
Cerusa named, the story does declare,
Was married to a Lord of high degree,
Aeneas called, a man of beauty rare:
(Whose Father was a Duke of noble fame,
And Uirgill says, Anchises had to name,
And on the Goddess Uenus him begot.)
For this Aeneas honor and his fame,
Uirgill compild a Book wherein he wrote
His travells all at large, and does the same
From his departure out of Troy begin,
And shows how he all Italy did win.
(Long after that the great and famous Town
Of Troy destroyed, and clean defaced was)
And what great conquests were archieu'd and d^n
By him, as he along the Seas did pass.
And how that first at Carthage he did stay,
Ere that he further forth went on his way,
Whereas Queen Dido pierst with Cupids dart,
Of him became so much enamored,
That for because from thence he did depart,
For love of him her self she murdered.
All which and more in Virgill you may see
In Latin verse, at large declard to be.
King Priams second daughter had to name
Cassandra, as the ancient stories says,
Who by her wit attaind so lofty fame,
That she was holden for a Prophets:
Her skill in Arts of all kinds was so much,
That like to her there nere was any such.
For future things she could declare and show,
And what was done within the world so round,
Before it came to pass she did it know,
Her learning was so deep and so profound.
Her manner was religiously to live,
And only to the same her mind did give.
The third and youngest daughter Policene,
For shape and beauty past her sisters twain,
Who lived all her days a Virgin clean,
Till she by Pirrhus cruelty was slain
In presence of her Mother, to fulfill
And satisfy his fierce and bloody will.
And Priamus as you likewise may read
Had thirty valiant bastard children,
All sons which did so much in arms exceed,
That in their times they proved valiant men.
Whose names to show as now i will overpasse,
Till that occasion serves in other place.
WHile Priam so the castle did enclose
To win the same by force, and daily sought
All means he could to overcome his foes:
The woeful news unto him there was brought,
How that the Greeks the town of Troy had won,
And killed his father King Laomedon.
The walls and howses thereof clean cast down,
The people all slain with great cruelty,
And left naught standing upright in the town,
But all on ground did flat and even lie.
And Exion made to Thelamon a prey,
Who had her captive led with him away.
He was in mind so much astonished,
And sudden woe his senses so did strain,
That for a while he seemed as one were dead,
And inwardly did feel such mortal pain;
That he did think his heart within his breast
Would cleave in twain, so much he was oppressed
With sorrow, grief, perplexity, and woe,
And therewithal the tears did fast distill
Out from his eyes, down to the earth so low;
That sure if that he might have had his will,
He rather would have chosen there to die,
Then to have felt so great extremity.
(Wherewith he did on fortune much exclaim;
That she to him was so deceaueable,
To work him such disgrace and open shame,
And showed her self to be so mutable,
With most despightfull, stern, and cruel face,
As one clean void of mercy, and of grace.
For she of envious heart and spightfull thought,
In cruel wise did show her fell intent,
And all at once her malice on him wrought,
As unto his destruction fully bent.
(So wavering and unconstant is her mind.
Wherein her greatest pleasure she does find.)
For which forthwith he made no more delay,
But with a heavy heart, and face full pale,
He did put off his fair and rich array,
And never ceast his fortune to bewail
With mournful cheer, still casting down his head,
And in that sort a doleful life he led.
Apparelling himself in mournful black,
And minding there no longer to abide,
In all the have he could the ^iedge up brake,
And presently to Troy ward forth did ride
With all his host, who likewise were full sad,
And for his loss and theirs, great sorrow made.
And when the town so much defast he found,
And that the walls that were so huge and strong,
So plain and even beaten were to ground,
And nothing stood, but all was laid along.
The towers that reached almost up to the sky,
And builded were so fair and sumptuously,
Clean overthrown with great confusednesse,
His people slain, and Sister led away,
And all made wast like to a wilderness,
For grief, and woe, he wist not what to say:
Such and so great was his extremity,
But at that time he could't not remedy.
Which made him most extremely sob and weep*
For nothing could his sorrow great assuage,
And from his breast to fetch great sighs and deep*
And in that woeful plight and furious rage,
His men and he a mournful life did lead,
And in the same three days continued.
Till at the last when clouds of sorrow back
Began to clear, and storms of woe to cease,
And that their mourning somewhat seemed to slack
And causd them in their minds to find some ease.
For when the floood of war is gone and past,
An ebb of joy does follow it in have,
Still to lament and mourn does not amend,
But more impair, and though we use to wail
And weep for friends, our sorrow once must end,
For after death tears will then naught avail.)
King Priamus abandoning all care,
Devising how he might the town repair.
Determined in that great extremity,
To show himself a Prince of courage brave,
And making virtue of necessity,
Courageously his credit then to save.
(When as his sorrows great orepassed were,)
And that the air began somewhat to clear,
And void the mists of his adversity,
And that the prime of woe and heaviness,
Night past and gone, was forced away to fly,
By sonne-shine of some new found joyfulnesse.
For that the friend of woe and misery
Is joy, when men have past extremity.
When he had grieved in mind a little space,
And long endured sorrow, woe, and smart,
(And that his care did somewhat overpasse)
He roused himself, and plucking up his heart,
More joyful to his soldiers did appear,
And so hegan to work as you shall hear.
CHAP. II.
How King Priam Son to Laomedon butl^ the Cutie of Troy again, much
stronger, greater, and fairer then ever it was before.

KIng Priams sorrow great, and grief ore-past,
As unto you before I did declare.)
He purposed upon the ground made wast,
Where as the ancient monuments first were:
To build a town much stronger then it was,
Which to effect he did no time let pass.
But straight sent forth into each Country,
For certain men or wit ingenious,
And skillful work: men in Geometry,
That could invent works fine and curious:
As Masons, Cervers, Carpenters, and all
That skillful were in Arts mecannicall.
(And wheresoere he could once know or hear
Of any expert workmen of that kind,
He would not spare to send both far and near,
Nor never ceast until he did them find.)
For such as could devise a stately wall,
With battlements, and rauelings great and small.
For men that were of fine and subtle head,
The Marble stone to pollish with the grain,
And Alablaster white, and Purphier read,
To hew, and cut and make them smoth and plain,
For gravers of all kind of Images,
And such as Art of painting did profess,
And cunning were their works to beautify
With colors fresh, that long time would endure.
And that could make an Image with an eye,
As if it were a lively creature.
And counterfeit in metal, wood, and stone,
As curious work as ere Pignalion
Devised, or as Histories do tell
Apollo could invent, for he did frame
Darius Tomb, the which did so excel
For wormanship, that none ere past the same.
Which the emperor commanded him to raise,
That men thereby his worthy fame might praise.
He sent likewise for ioyners that had skill
In Cedar, Cipresse, and in Walnut-tree,
To work and with imbossed flowers to fill
The creasts that round about the walls should be.
And whosoere in building was erpert,
And praise deserved therein by desert,
Or had the name in workeman-ship ^excell,
The King would his direction therein have,
How far or wide soever he did dwell,
Or what soever wages he would crave.
No cost he spard in any kind of thing,
That he his work unto effect might bring.
Intending such a sumptuous Town to frame,
That it should pass all others whatsoere,
And in most spacious wise to build the same,
For widenes, breadth, and length, that it should bear.
And with so high, so thick, and strong a wall,
That when soever war should him befall,
The enemy by no means might it take.
And to begin he made them dig the ground,
(Whereas the walls should stand that he would make
To compass and enclose the City round.)
Within the self same ruind place, whereas
The ancient town of Troy first builded was.
Enlarging them much more then first they were,
By many miles, for that the town new made
He purposed should greater compass bear,
Then the ancient Town in circuit ever had.
And in so wholesome air the same did place,
That it unto all men delightful was.
The compass of the walls so shaped out,
The workmen did begin to build the same,
Which being raisd and set up round about,
They marked the streets, and did the howses frame
Of great and goodly stones, both square and rosid
The like whereof was no where to be found.
In all the world, (for buiding passing fair,)
If that the same throghout you should have sought.
The workeman-ship so curious was and rare,
That for to beautifi't it wanted naught.
I am too simple witted to define,
And tell how they did work by rule and line.
Or to discribe the same in every part,
But well I dare affirm and witness bear,
It was so framed by cunning and by Art,
That of the like I nere did read nor hear.
And that it might have great prosperity,
High honor, fame, and much felicity.
As soon as it was made he did it name
As it before was called the town of Troy,
And sole^ly did dedicate the same
To Neptune, with great triumph, feats, and joy,
(On whom the Trojans chiefly did depend,
And therefore hope't he would the same defend
The length which in the walls it did include,
Right forth was three days journey and no less,
As much likewise in had in Latitude,
Which both compared the compass do express,
And show to be just nine days fully out,
Ere that a man could travel in about.
The like to it was never mentioned
Nor spoken off in any History,
Before or after to be edified,
Wherein so great a length and breadth did lie.
Nor yet so fair and beautif^ll to see
As Guido does report the same to be.
The walls in hight three hundred Cubits were,
Imbatled and bull warked for fight:
And in their thickness such proportion bare,
That Cannon sho^^^ (...) them had no might.
And all the walls and howses in the town
Were Marble mi^^ with Alablaster stone.
Which made it show so fair and delectable,
That since this earthly globe did first begin,
No City unto (...) comparable,
That ever mortal man did enter in.
And at the end of every wall was plast
A Crown of gold, with precious stones inchast*
And round about the walls were towers set
Most beautifully and fair of Marble clear,
And Alablaster fine, and shining jet,
Which against the sun so glistring did appear,
That as by them men longst the walls past under,
It stroke into their minds no little wonder.
To enter in the town the story says,
Six beautiful and goodly gates there were,
Whereof the first was called Dardamides,
The second did the name of (...) bear.
The third of them was called Helias,
The forth it had the name of Cethe^^,
The fifth Trojan, the sixth of them and last
Antinorides called. And on each side
At th'entring in of every gate was plast
Two towers of stone, that were both spuare and wide
Before the which great Images did ^^and
Like Giants fell, with Pollaxes in hand.
And seemed as if the entry they would let,
To every one that through the gates did pass.
And on each terret likewise there was set,
The shapes of Tigers, Lions, Bears, and Ass,
Bores, Bulls, and Hearts, (with great and spacious
Fierce Dragos, Elopha^ts, and Unicorns, (horns)
All made of Copper, Latin, and of Brass
So finely and so cunningly contrived,
That to behold them pleasure great it was,
For that they showed as if that they had lived*
And seemd to threaten, grin at, and menace,
Such as did stand to look them in the face.
About the town for safeguard and refuge,
Were many Bulwarks plast assaults to bear.
And at each gate Portcullices most huge
Of Iron strong, in warlike wise there were.
And for more strength the gates of brass composd
The which within with massy bars were closed.
And crossed with stakes, deep pi^cht into the ground,
And chained up for safety and defense,
So that no way there was, (...) be found
To enter in the (...) by violence.
The gates once shut, ^ot it by strength to take,
Or forcibly ^battery to make.
The howses in the ^owne were finely plast
In even streets, not scattered here and there,
Not one of them in height the other past,
But all alike, just (...) (...).
Most cunningly devisd and framed each one
Of Marble, and of costly Burpheir stone.
To tell you of the curious Masonrie,
Of graven kno^^, and Antic^e works most brave,
Devisd to please the fine and curious eye,
I know my self too little wit to have:
And though I would them name in english verse,
Yet would it be too long time to rehearse.
They are so many, strange, and rare to tell,
For that between the stones and mortar were,
(So much they did in su^ptuousnesse excel.)
Thin plates of Copper gilt thrust in most fair,
To make them join by level and by line, (shine.
Which among the Marble stones most clear did
Against the Sun, when as his Orient light
With radiant beams did from the crystal sky
Smite on the gold, and made it glister bright,
And give a show most beautiful to th'eie.
The streets likewise were set so large and wide,
With just and equal distance on each side,
(By workmen worthy praise for rare devise,)
That no infectio^s air once them annoyd*
Within the town, nor any mists did rise,
But presently again did soon avoid.
Because there was so great and wide a space
Within the streets, the same away to chase
By wind, whose blasts most sweet and comfortable,
Did yield so pleasant air within the town,
Which to the Trojans was so delectable,
As in the streets they passed up and down:
That unto them it was a great comfort,
When as they walks abroad to play and sport.
And through the town in every street was made
Long galleries, that stood on pillars strong
Of Marble stone, (which such douises had
Of Pinacles, and arches wide and long,
That they most fair and beautiful did show,)
Devised ^rie ^^e head for men to go.
When as it chanst to rain, ^^d hail, or snow,
As also under them to sit and walk,
When storms of wind in bolshous wise did b^^*
And therein to confer, consult* and talk,
As merchants use in towns for common we^e,
To meet about their merchandise to deal.
The howses covered were clean over head,
(As being flat above that men might go
Thereon,) with plancks, and over that with lead,
With spouts full^ong the water forth to throw
Into the streets, from whence it past away
Through grates, which did the same from thence co^^ay
The streets were smothly pau'd in chequer wise,
With pollisht stories of colourred and white.
And any Trade whatsoere man could devise,
King Priam vsd and sought all means he might
To bring't into the town, where men did see
Each several Art in several streets to be.
That so they might for more commodity,
And better means to sell and vent their ware,
Work by themselves at their one liberty,
As goldsmith rich that se^lles the jewels rare.
Th'imbroderer, and weauers of each kind.
The Mercers in whose costly shops men find
Rich cloth of Gold, of Arras, Tapistrie,
Of sendall, and of Taffetie most fair,
And every other stuff which usually
The weauers make, and commonly men were.
Smiths also, that could make and forge full well
Darts, Daggers, swords, and spears of perfect steel
Pollaxes, bills, and knives most sharply ground,
And arrowe heads, with other weapons more
That in the fields are vsd, were therein found.
Of Bowyers, and of fletchers eke great store.
And such as make coat armors fair and brave,
And ensigns which in field men use to have.
And every other kind of furniture
For Marshall men, which commonly we see
Worn in the war, and daily put in ure.
And every other Art that named may be
Was in that town most plentifully found,
So much it did in every thing abound.
And through the town a River swift and clear
Did pass along, deviding it in twain,
Which on each side great store of Milles did bear
In time of need to grind each kind of grain:
The name whereof was Xa^tas as I find,
Which did abound with fish of every kind.
Which River was so cunningly conuaid,
That in the arches built upon the same,
Great store of pipes of lead were closely laid,
Whereby into the houses water came,
And served many Conduits in the town,
And scowr'd the filth away as it ran down
In channels which did run clean under ground,
Whereby they were washed and scowred clean:
That neither filth nor dirt was to be found,
Nor in the town could any way be seen*
And was convaied thence so secretly,
That no man could the passage thereof spy:
Whereby you might have gone throughout the street,
And neither dirt, nor dunghill once have seen,
Which made the Town so pleasant and so sweet,
Because that it was kept so fair and clean,
That it was void of all corruption,
Pestiferous air and foul jnfection.
Which often by their force and violence
Do breed continual foul and noisome smells,
And are the only cause of pestilence.
A River like to this (as Virgill tells)
Within the town of Room devised was,
Called Tiber, which through the midst thereof does pass.
To people this so great and famous town,
The Troyans being but in number small:
King Priam sent to each place up and down,
In countries far and near, to move and call
All men to come and to jnhabite there,
Respecting not from whence they came, or were*
And made them free to traffic and to deal
Within the Town, as native Contrymen.
By that means to enrich the commonweal
Of his new Town. Which being done, and when
It did begin with people to increase,
And that they lived in pleasure, wealth, and peace;
King Priam moved with gseat affection
Which unto Mars the God of war he had,
Determined of pure devotion,
In honor of his name, there should be made
A yearly Iusts, where valiantly on horse
Each Knight should show his power, strength, and force.
Within the town, to win renown and fame,
And to that end a place he did ordain
All raild about, of purpose for the same,
Which half a mile in circuit did contain.
To wrestle in, and at the Barriers fight,
With plays in the Isle of Greet of ancient right.
Were long since found, and only dedicate
To Mars their God, for they did then believe
By doing so he would preserve their state,
And in their need would aid them and relieve,
The like did noble Priamus fur^ise,
And to that end-those triumphs did devise.
Men said within this town was first found out
The game of Chests, so subtle and so wise,
Which who so plays (believe it without dout,)
Must drive out of his head all fantasies:
It is so full of shifts, and subtlety,
And more and more a man may still devise.
Whereby if men should study all their days,
To learn the skill of this so curious game;
He never could remember half the plays,
That are and may be used in the same.
It does consist of such diversity,
Of wards found out by skill and subtlety.
Of Trojans as mine Author testifies.
Which his supposed mere oppinion,
Iacobus de Vitriaco denies,
And in his Book for truth makes mention
How that a grave Philosopher and wise,
Called Philometer, first did it devise.
In Caldea with policy he wrought
To stay a tyrants fierce and furious mind.
And though from thence it into Greece was brought.
They say likewise the Trojans first did find
The plays of dice and tables daily vsd,
Which since that time had been so much abusd.
For that in them there is so great deceit
By false and cousning dice, and wrangling play,
Which many use the simple sort to cheat*
That much debate arises night and day,
Among ihose that daily exercise do make
Of play and game, and pleasure therein take*
For if the dice do favor men a while,
And give them leave to win by happy chance:
An other time again they ^them beguile,
Which makes the players fall at variance.
For that when as they think to mend their state,
By play at dice they prove unfortunate.
And many that are plunged in distress,
And by their play made needy poor and bare,
By play sometime attain to great riches,
And some man's joy procures an others care,
And by a chance at hassard or passage,
Ones glad and laughes, an other he does rage.
For if one win, another does contrary,
Like as the bones are thrown out of the hand
An Hundred times a day, they are seen to varry
And no man can his chance at them withstand.
Wherefore I wish each man such play to shun,
Least that he loose, and so may be undone.
In Troy likewise they used comedies,
In Theaters for pleasures and delight:
And many strange and stately Tragedies,
Which usually were played both day and night.
The difference whereof that you may know,
I will in brief the same unto you show.
A Comedy does many times begin
With actions, that dislike at first do cause,
But at the last as men proceed therein,
They end in joy, with gladness, and applause:
And only speaks of men of mean degree,
And such as fallen are in poverty.
A Tragedy contrarily does treat
Of matters which do prosperously proceed,
And shows the lives and hearts of persons great,
As Princes which in honor do exceed,
But ends with sorrow, grief, and misery,
That happens unto them before they die.
And also tells how fortune does beguile
Full nany Kings, and Emperors of fame,
Whose acts she seems to favor for a while,
But at the last she brings them unto shame,
And turns their glory into misery,
To make of them a woeful Tragedy.
The manner how their Tragedies they played
Was in this sort, whereas they did devise,
(Within a Theater, as first I said,)
To set an Altar made half circle wise,
Which on the top a lofty pulpit bare,
Wherein there stood a Poet to declare
With Eloquent and Rethoricion phrase,
The noble deeds of Kings and Princes great,
And eke the fame of Conquerors to raise,
Which in their lives by valor they did get.
And how that they with laurel crowned were
For their deserts, as stories witness bear.
An'd liud in honor great, tell Parchas fell
Did end their lives, by stroke of Atropos.
And afer that in mournful wise did tell,
How piteously each one the same did lose,
And were by Fortune brought unto their end,
Against whom it is but folly to contend.
And how the fine of all their worthiness,
Their honor, fame, and magnanimity,
Was only sorrow, and great heavines:
Procured by treason false, or subtilty,
By murder, poison, or by enmity,
Wrath, or despite, or some extremity.
And how their flood of joy was not so hie,
But that at last it had an ebb as low.
And how that Fortune by her subtlety
To show her spite, had wrought their overthrow.
All this with face full pale the Poet said.
And while that he within the pulpit staid,
Their jssued forth out of another place,
Men purposely disguisd and clad, which played
With ghastly and with pale and deadly face,
By signs, all whatsoere the Poet said.
Twixt whom no difference was in any thing,
For What the Poet spoke, or loud did sing,
They on the ground the same did represent,
And showed by outward gestures what had hapt
To Princes in their lives, and how they spent
Their days on earth, till fortune them intrapt.
And suddenly orewhelming their estate,
Did end their lives by death unfortunate.
These sports they used commonly to play
When Birds for joy in woods and bushes sing,
In pleasant months of April and of May,
To see the tree and flower begin to spring.
Thus have you heard how Tragedies began,
And in what place they first were played, and when.
Now will I show how Priam did proceed,
(When as the Town of Troy erected was)
To build a stately Palace with all speed,
Which did the rest of all his works surpass.
And high upon a rock did place the same
In midst of Troy, and Ilion did it name.
The form whereof was round as any ball,
Well wald about with Marble fair and clear:
And other costly stones mixed therewithal,
And did in hight six hundred paces bear,
With Towers high and great, that whose would
Mount up the same, might round about behold
The Country far and near, as it did lie,
And all the walls within, and eke without
Imbost with knots and flowers most curiously,
And richly guilt, and painted thoro^ghout.
Whereon when as the Sun shines clear and bright,
The gold did cast a most exceeding light.
And in the midst of this his Palace fair,
A sumptuous great and stately hall there stood,
(Which did in length and breadth like distance bear)
All framed of Cedar tree and Heban wood,
(Which Heban tree they say is only found
In Ethiopia, and the India ground.
Which color has as black as any jet,
And being cut, and wrought, does wax so hard,
That it will not consume with any wet.)
The pauement under foot was marble squard,
Both white and gray, which chequor wise did lie,
And made it show most beautiful to th'eie.
Within this hall was plast a royal throane,
Which was King Priams seat Maiesticall,
All made of Jasper and of Purphire stone,
Most richly guilt to beautifie't withal.
At foot whereof a sumptuous table stood,
Half Ivory, and half of Heban wood,
And on each side thereof were diverse chaires,
Wherein King Priams counselors did sit,
There to consult about his chief affairs,
As often times they used were to meet.
Two daynty Tables framed of Heban tree,
Stood longst the walls with bords of Iuorie.
And opposite against the regal chair,
At the other end an Altar made of brass,
^nchased, gilt, and graven passing fair,
There stood, whereon an Image great there was
Of massy gold which Priam placed there,
In honor of his God called Jupiter.
This Image fifteen Cubits high was made,
Besides the weight, that equal substance bare,
And on the head a Crown of gold it has,
Wherein were plast great store of Jewels rare,
As Rubies red, and Saphirs Christa^line,
With many oryent pearls round and fine.
And among the rest a Carbuncle most bright
And passing clear was set in midst of all,
Which at all times did cast so great a light,
That night and day, that great and spacious hall,
Did show as bright, as if that son, or moon
Within the same continually had shown.
Which rich and stately Image was so well
And cunningly composd in every part,
That from the head to foot it did excel
^n skillful work, deuisd by curious Art.
Who therein did not once seem to deny,
His aid and help the same to beautify.
And framed thus, it was to represent
Great Jupiter one of the Planets seven,
(The which as Poets fainedly invent,
The Pagans thought to be a God in heaven.)
Which Priam held to be of power so great,
That he in him his whole a^^iance set.
To him he prayed in his necessity,
And had in him so firm affection,
That only to his fained Deiti^,
He did addict his whole devotion.
Supposing by his virtue, power and might,
To be preserved from harms both day and night.
And only unto him he did commend
The care of his estate and dignity,
Believing that he would him still defend
In all distress, and with prosperity
Uphold his throane by his protection,
Such was his fond and vain opinion.
This Image and this Palace Ilyon,
Thus being made, and fully finished,
And every thing brought to perfection,
Which Priam had forecast and purposed
Full many years in his new town of Troy:
He raignd in peace, in honor, and in joy.
And long might have possessed this happy state,
If fortune had not changed her smiling cheer,
(As all things subject are to cursed ^ate)
And brought him to decay, as you shall hear
By sequel of the story, where is shown
how he and his in ^ine were overthrown.
CHAP. III.
How King Priam sent Anthenor into Greece, to have his Sister Exion restored
home again.

OH cursed fiend which lurkest in the breast
Of man, inflamed with thy most furious fire:
And never suffrest him to live in rest,
Till that thou have jncenced him with ire
To take revenge for wrong, wherein thou ioy'st,
Not caring though all other thou annoy'st.
Thou seed of strife and root of all offense,
Why causest thou old sores again to smart
With rancor, and through foul jmpatience,
When thou once creepst into an envious heart,
Provoking it no time nor hour to cease
From hateful thoughts, nor seeking any peace?
What need thou thy malice to unfold,
The ashes of discord again to sift,
And causing a new debate to rise of old,
And half forgotten envy? But thy drift
Is only to procure the woe and fine,
Of those that to thy nature do incline.
Why have thou wak't King Priam from his rest,
And with thy poison foul incenst his brain,
That he in mind and heart should so detest
A quiet life, and through persuasions vain,
Procured him to seek revenge in have,
Upon the Greeks for harms so long forepast?
For where as he in peace did rule and reign
With honor great, and no man him annoyd;
The Serpent Envy entering in his brain,
By no means would from thence again avoid:
But with such deep impression there did rest,
And did so much inflame his furious breast
With his inveterate malice new reviu'd,
That by no means he could the same forget:
Whereby for ever after while he lived,
He brought on him and his such trouble great,
That wheretofore h'enioy'd a happy life,
His bliss was turned to bloody war and strife.
For Priam in his riches glorying,
(Wherein as then he took no small delight,)
Imagining his state so flourishing,
His Town of so great puissance and might,
His warlike Knights so many and so strong,
That no man could, no^ durst him offer wrong.
Was so possessed with Envy, and with Pride,
That hap what would he had in heart forecast,
To take no rest until that he had tried,
How he might be reuengd for wrongs forepast.
Which to effect with full intent and mind,
He did a time and fit occasion find
To summon all his Lords and Knights each one
To make repair, (all scuses set aside)
Upon a day perfixt at Ilion.
Which his command not any one denide,
But there with speed did presently appear,
Where all his sons likewise assembled were,
But Hector. Who from Troy as then was gone
Into the Province of Panomie,
Which Priam held in his subjection,
A new rebellion there to pacify.
The which not long before was raised among
The Country people there for certain wrong.
But Hector well advised and patient,
Loath to revenge, where mercy might take place,
With courtesy so wanne them to content,
That he appeased them, and offering grace
And pardon unto all that did repent,
Each one with satisfaction home he sent.
Such was the great and noble princely mind
Of that most brave renowned and valiant Knight,
Always unto his subjects just and kind,
And rather did in mercy more delight,
Then use the force and rigor of the law,
When as in them no great offense he saw.
Mean while the King that held an open court,
With entertainment great and Princely cheer
Did welcome all that thither did resort,
Which being done, and they assembled were
In open hall, he did with courage bold
And words most grave, his mind began t'vnfold
And said, my Lords assembled here as now,
Whose loyalty I have no cause to doubt,
I am assurd not any one of you
But well does know what unto us fell out,
When as the Grecians causeles did invade
Our Town, and what a spoil thereof they made.
And how with extreme barbrous cruelty,
They murdered our Subjects every one:
The memory whereof cannot but lie
As fresh within your thoughts, as it were done
But the other day, for it may not out your mind,
If to your Country you be kind.
For sure in my oppinion I suppose,
Naught can you move unto forgetfulness
Of harms forepast, by your most deadly foes,
Nor can you be without great heavines
To think thereon, for I must plainly tell,
Out of my heart I can it not expel.
For yet me thinks I see it with mine eye,
So fresh it is and yet does still remain
within my breast, and ever there shall lie.
(The which) I hope you likewise do retain,
To think how they have slain our Ancestors
(If while they lived were valiant warriors.)
Our City burnt, and brought unto decay,
And left it wast like to a wilderness,
And borne and taken forcibly away,
All that they found, our goods, and our riches.
And slain my Father King Laomedon,
Without all cause or just occasion.
Amends whereof we lawfully may crave,
And both with reason, and with conscience,
Which all the Gods, I trust will let us have,
Since that by us was offered none offense.
But among all their so extreme cruelty,
One thing there is which chiefly grieueth me,
When as I call to mind their villainy
In offering such wrong to Exion,
With whom, as with his concubine does lie
The proud and hautie Grecian Telamon,
Abusing her with great dishonestie,
Not caring for her state nor high degree.
Nor if she was the daughter of a King,
Which unto me can be no little scorn.
But they as seems, respect not any thing,
Judge then if she that is so highly borne
Be used so, with what extreamitie
Poor wives and mayds, of them abused shall be,
With others of your friends and your alies,
Within their hands as captives then did fall,
Assure your selves what wrongs they can devise
To do to them, to vex you therewithal,
They will not spate to use them in their lust,
For in the Greeks there is no truth nor trust.
For neither beauty, age, ne high estate
Do they respect, but all like slaves do live,
So that in heart I cannot choose but hate
Their cursed race, and you likewise must grieve
As well as I, for you as well as me
It does concern. Therefore revenged to be
Should be your care, and bend your only thought
To find the means your wrongs for to redress,
For long ere now the same we should have sought,
And have relieved our friends from their distress.
Let us therefore join all with one consent,
And in our hearts jmprint a firm jntent
Of all their malice, rapes, and cruelty,
To be revenged, for if that we unite
Our minds in one, it cannot choose but be
A doubling of our strength, and we shall fight
With courage bold, for vengeance does belong,
As reason is, to him that offers worng.
And though till now we have deferred it,
Yet doubt I not but we a time shall find,
To yield to them such measure as they mete,
And use both them and their in self same kind.
And all the Gods I hope will us assist
In our just cause, and the in wrong resist.
You know our Town is strong, and walld about
With high and mighty Towers for the war,
The like whereof in all the world throughout,
Is not to find that with it may compare.
So that we may be well assured therein,
That the enemy by force shall never win.
Of men and valiant Knights we have no want,
For all you know what number we can make:
Our store of victuals also is not scant,
And whenever we shall undertake
To enter war we need not be afraid,
But we shall likewise find some foreign aid
To help us to revenge our open wrong.
Wherefore I think that now the time is fit,
(Since that we know our selves to be so strong)
To ^et on them, and not still jdle sit,
For valor bids us make no more delay
To be revengd, hap what so ever may.
The Proverb says, delay may danger breed,
For by delay men often times are crossed,
And to take time when time does fall with speed,
I never heard by it that men have lost.
And since we nothing want, why should we pau^^
And stay revenge in our so just a cause?
But least we might too hasty be esteemed,
And wilful thought to run so carelessly
Unto the war, which always has been deemed
A doubtful thing. We will not doggedly
Bite ere we bark, but first to Greece we will send,
To know if that they will our wrongs amend.
Which if they seem unto us to refuse,
And obstinately will deny the same,
Then may we justly force and power use,
And no man for it can, nor may us blame.
But first we will, with courtesy assay,
To see if we can win them by that way.
But if that they refuse with gentleness
To hrare us speak, when as we are content
To ask amends, with peace and quietness,
I hope in the end they shall the same repent:
For better it is by peace to have redress,
Then seek for war with vnadvisednesse.
Therefore let us with patience yet endure
Our wrongs; and our great injuries sustain
In humble wise, until we may procure,
That they to us an answer send again*
For though it be my whole and full desire,
And that our just occasion does require,
In furious sort of them to take vengeance,
I will as it were in mere forgetfulness,
Put all their wrongs out of remembrance,
And clean expel all grief and heaviness
Out of my heart, and of them ask no more,
But that they will again to me restore
My Sister that unto me is so dear.
There by to stint all bloody war and strife,
And for the rest we shall with patience bear,
And never cal't in question during life.
Which to fulfill ^ purposely am bent,
If you thereto will give your full consent.
Speak then my Lords, are you content to stay
Till that they answer make to our request,
Say all with one consent, your yea or nay,
And what for us to do you think is best.
For I do mean Anthenor straight shall go
Unto the Greeks, our mind herein to show.
Of whose discretion, courage, and advise,
You need not once to doubt, for I have known,
And found him by experience to be wise,
When he of other messages has gone.
And therefore I of him my choice do make,
And think him fit that charge to undertake.
The King thus having spoken as you hear,
The Lords and all the Nobles did agree,
That Lord Anthenor should the message bear
From them unto the Greeks, and straight should be
Dispatched, and with instructions sent away,
With charge he should no longer time delay,
But wind and weather serving straight set sail,
Who having his instruction, and at large
Informd therein, as careful not to fail
In any point that should concern his charge:
Did presently take ship for Thessalie,
Where being landed with his company,
He went to seek the King called Peleus,
Who at that time the story says, remaind
Within a City named Monosius,
Of whom he was at first well entertaind.
But when that he the cause did partly know
Wherefore he came, he willed him to show
The Effect of his Embassage and his charge,
And with a frowning look and visage fell,
Sat still till that Anthenor did at large
With courage bold the same unto him cell,
With words most grave, and such as fitting were
For time and place, and spoke as you shall hear.
Priam the most renowned King of Troy,
My Sovereign Lord, his Princely Majesty
Wishing to your grace prosperity and joy,
In friendly wise saluteth you by me.
A messenger expressly by him sent,
To show to you his will and his intent.
If you vouchsafe to give me audience,
Wherein if that in ought I shall offend,
I you beseech to heer't with patience,
And let the law of arms my guilt defend.
For as you know Ambassadors are free,
To tell their message what soere it be.
Your Grace I think does yet remember well,
What wrongs of late by you and yours were done,
In Trojan Land when ye with hearts most fell
And cruel minds the same did overcome,
And how without cause or occasion,
You brought them all unto destruction,
The City burnt, and utterly thrown down,
Their riches by you taken and borne away,
How that the noble King Laomedon
As then was slain, and would your rage not stay,
But in your fury, Children, Wives, and men,
Were all destroyed, and murdered as then.
Some Mayds except, which to fulfill your lust
You led with you into captivity.
Which injuries so great and most unjust,
(Deserving name of barbarous cruelty)
You may suppose cannot forgotten be,
And yet among all this great indignity,
One thing there is, which does King Priam grieve
M^re then the rest, which is that Exion
His sister Captive here in Greece does live,
And held a Concubine by Telamon
Dishonestly, not like a noble Knight,
Whose care should be with all his power and might
To save and keep poor Ladies in distress:
But regarding naught her high degree,
By no means will this open wrong redress,
But he still persisteth in his villainy.
Which his so great and foul an oversight
(Most noble King) belongs to you of right
To look into; and with a Princely care,
Seek to restrain as much as in you lies,
Such foul misdeeds, and as a friend you are
To Telamon, see how you may devise
T'amend and to redress the injury,
Wherein consists true Nobility.
This thing has caused King Priam now to move
Your Grace with this embassage by me brought,
For to entreat in friendship and in love,
That by your mediation may be wrought
The means, that Exion may delivered be,
Out of her thraldom and captivity.
Which recompense so small he does request,
For all the wrongs that unto him were done
By you and yours, so much he does detest
To live in war and strife, which for to shun
He is content all quarrels to surcease,
Desiring only her return with peace.
Which his request so lawful, if you will
Procure King Telamon to grant with speed,
He you assures his promise to fulfill,
Or else he must by force of arms proceed:
Which by this means he does desire to stay,
And this my Lord is all I have to say.
When Peleus had Anthenors message heard,
His heart was so possessed with wrath and ire,
That on him with a furious look he star'd,
With eyes enfiam'd as red as any fire:
And with dispightfull and incensed heart,
Upon his feet did suddenly up start.
Disdainfully rejecting the request
By Priam made, and setting him at naught,
Said, that both him and his he did detest,
Even from his very soul and inward thought:
Commanding Lord Anthenor not to stay,
But presently to get him thence away,
On peril that thereafter might befall*
Which he in have did presently obey,
And unto him his company did call,
With whom he made no longer time of stay:
But thence did sail directly to a ^owne
Salerne named, which longed to Telamon.
Whereas the King and all his Lords then were,
And to the Court Anthe^or straight did hie,
Where when he did before the King appear,
At first he entertaind him courteously:
And without seeming once to take offense,
With present speed did grant him audience
For Exions sake, who then stood by his side,
For otherwise in heart he sore abhord
All Troyans, and by no means could abide
To see or hear of them, nor yet afford
A friendly thought of them, such was his rage
Against the^ conceau^d, that nothing could't assuage.
This nere the less, he was content to hear
Anthenor speak, and patiently to stay,
Till that he had with words that see mely were,
Declared what as then he had to say:
Who having to the King his reverence made,
With courage bold unto him spoke, and said,
Most noble Prince since that it pleases your Grace,
To hear the message which as now I bring
With patience, and t'afford me time and space,
For to declare the same, and every thing
That Is given me in charge, I will not stay,
But tell it you as briefly as I may.
Know then great King (without offense be it done)
That Priam King of Troy my sovereign Lord,
Desirous strife and bloody war to shun,
Entreats you in friendly wise t'afford
This favor unto him, to be content,
And thereto give your full and free consent:
That Exion may her liberty obtain,
And be delivered from Captivity,
Whom you do hold as I must tell you plain,
In slavish wise not like to her degree,
And to her great dishonor and her shame.
For which, although he may you justly blame,
Yet he content all wrongs to pacify,
And peace and love with you and yours to hold,
Desires that you will him not deny
This his request, and that vouchsafe you would,
For to restore her unto him with speed,
Which doing you shall act a Princely deed.
And save your honor now imblemished,
By wronging her whom you so much abuse,
Wherein you have so long time been misled,
That truth to say, you can it not excuse:
Yet he is content to lay this wrong aside,
And many more, so that you will provide
To send her unto Troy without delay,
And this is all the sum and full effect,
Of that I had in charge to you to say,
The which if that you seem now to reject:
It will old hate and enmity revive,
Speak now my Lord what answer you will give.
When Telamon had heard Anthenor speak,
And knew King Priams will and his desire,
He did into such extreme chollor break,
That both his eyes did shine like flaming fire,
And in his face was not a drop of blood,
So that with cheeks most pale and angry mood
He looked aside, and turning up the white
Of both his eyes, with most disdainful smile,
Gnasht all his teeth, and seemd his tongue to bite,
And after having paws'd a little while,
With furious voice showed forth the mortal hate,
That burnt within his heart most obstinate.
Saying, my friend what ever that thou be,
I muse in heart what strange and sudden thing
Has moved Priam thus to send to me,
And that thou dare so proud a message bring:
I think thee but a fool or else stark mad,
That of thy self so little care have had,
To put thy life in danger for his sake,
With whom I never had nor have to deal,
Nor he with me, and this account do make
Never will have, and so thou may him tell:
And as we have acquaintance very small,
He may be well assured, I neither shall,
Nor will do any thing at his request,
For that it wholly is against my mind
With him to deal, and let that be his rest,
Which by experience plainly he shall find,
If so he list to try if that he may,
Fetch her by force of arms from me away.
This well I wot that but a while ago,
I crossed the seas with many Grecians more,
And saild to Troy, and if that thou will know
The cause? it was, for that not long before,
Laomedon had us a trespass done,
And for the same the Town by force we won,
And slew the King, and all that with him held,
Not cowardly, as you perchance suppose,
But Knightly meeting him in open field.
And for I entered first upon our foes
Into the Town, by full consent of all
The Grecian Lords, unto my share did fall
This fair and Princely Lady Exion,
Of whom I presently was there possessed,
And since that time have held her for mine own,
And euerwill, let Priam do his best
To fetch her hence, and therefore it is in vain
For thee to send for her, I tell thee plain.
For be assured, and trust me if thou will,
Thou getst her not from me if that I may,
And rather shall my dearest blood be spilt,
And many thousands more, before that day
Shall ere be seen that I will her forsake,
Though all the world her quarrel undertake.
Think thou I will so easly let her go,
Whom for to win much of my blood was lost,
And for her did receive so many a blow,
No sure, for that full dear she has me cost:
And in good faith i will let her if I can,
From going from me to another man.
So dear her person and her seemly grace,
Her beauty, bounty, and her comeliness,
Her fair and passing amiable face,
And all her Princely gifts I must confess
Are printed in the closet of my heart,
That while I live from thence they shall not part.
Let Priam therefore do the uttermost
That he can do, he shall but loose his pain,
For never did a thing so dearly cost,
As she shall do ere he have her again:
For naught can her redeem but sword and spear,
And deep and ghastly wounds that mortal are.
For there shall sure be raised such a strife
And deadly war ere she restored be,
That it will cost full many a man his life.
This is the answer that thou getst of me,
And bid thy Master when he list begin,
But I suppose he will but little win.
And for thy self, as first to thee I told,
I think thee mad, and more presumptuous
Then thou should be, that dare be so bold
To bring this message so audacious,
The noble Grecians therewith to offend.
But let him thee no more unto me send
On peril of thy life, that may betide
To thee for thy reward, and now get hence
With speed I thee command, for if thou bide
Here longer in my sight to breed offense,
Thou know the price (who ever says nay)
Therefore be gone, and see thou make no stay.
Anthenor hearing this, without delay
Straight entered ship, and put to Sea in have,
And sailed to an Island named Achay,
Where when that he on shore had anchor cast,
He heard that both the Kings as then abode
Within the Isle, and presently he road
Unto their Court, which was not very far,
And there he found the^ both, to whom with speed
He showed the cause that made him to repair
To them as then, and so began to proceed
With words most grave and courage bold and stout,
To tell his mind without all fear or doubt.
And said, my Lords, whose power here extends
For to command, may't please your Graces both
To know, that Priam King of Troy me sends
To you in Princely wise (as being loath
To give offense) your aid and help to have,
T'obtaine a suite that he would gladly crave
Of Telamon, who against all equity
Does hold his Sister Princess Exion
As Concubine, with great indignity,
Whose liberty and restitution
To him again, is only his desire,
Which to effect he humbly does require
You would vouchsafe your aid therein t'afford,
Not doubting but as you are discreet and wise,
That by your mediation and good word,
King Telamon will follow your advise:
And Exion shall to him restored be,
Out of her long and hard captivity.
Which his request he prays you not deny,
As you are Kings, for valor, high renownd,
Discreet, and wise, and of great majesty.
And he shall think himself to you much bound,
And all his former wrong he will suspend,
For that to live in peace he does intend.
As he that is right prudent and discreet,
Forecasting what may after come to pass,
And sees what perils and what dangers great
Do follow war, which never is nor was
Without confusion, misery and woe,
As Histories unto us plainly shoe:
Which to eschew he thinks it the best
And wisest way, for every man t'auoid
The hateful path of strife, and it detest,
For by it many a Country is destroid:
Which by this means he is in hope to shun,
And that has made him do as he has done:
In peace to crave your aid, that Exion
May be with speed sent home to him again.
And though you may suppose that cause there is none,
Why he should you request to take this pain
In his behalf, let this be his excuse,
That Princes ought to punish all abuse.
And by all means should seek the same to stay,
He in like case desires your Princely aid,
And hopes you will it not to him denay,
And he will think himself full well apaid:
This is the sum of his petition,
Which he referres to your discretion.
When both the Kings, Castor, and Polux had
Attentively heard what Anthenor spoke;
King Castor suddenly like one half mad,
Into such choler and impatience brake,
That by no means he could his fury stay,
But in most wrathful wise to him did say:
I know not friend why thou of us should crave,
To have amends for trespass by us done
Unto the King, to whom we never gave*
Cause of offense. But when Laomedon
First offering wrong to us, we did invade,
And of his Town a noble conquest made.
Wherein we did but right and equity:
For had not he first offered offense
To us and ours with great indignity,
We nere had sought for any recompense,
Nor he nor his been brought unto their ends.
For which if that thy Master ask amends
At our hands, tell him it is all too late,
For we with him desire no unity,
Peace nor accord, but rather mortal hate,
Dissension, strife, and utter enmity:
Which he may chance hereafter for to feel,
If that he dare presume with us to deal.
For we so little do his friendship prise,
That what he says or does I do not care,
Therefore if that he will follow our advise,
Let him prepare to enter into war,
And it may chance to breed his own decay,
And so from us thou may unto him say.
And for thy self it seems unto me,
Thy Lord and Master Priam loves thee not,
That sent thee messenger to us to be,
And thou thy self have foolishly oreshot,
To take on thee so perilous a thing,
As to the Grecians tidings such to bring,
Whereby thy life thou have endangered:
But be thou ruled by me if thou be wise,
(Unless thou art clean void of fear and dread)
And get thou out my sight I thee advise:
For if thou stayst, mine anger is so bent,
That thou may chance thy folly to repent.
Anthenor to avoid the Court was glad,
And presently with speed from thence did go,
And entering ship such have from thence he made,
That though the wind contrary then did blow,
He put to sea, and failed prosperously
To Pilon, where Duke Nestor then did lie,
And there did hold a sumptuous Princely Court:
Of whom he craved leave submissiuelie,
To show the cause that made him then resort
To him, and there withal to signify
King Priams mind as he had gin him charge,
From point to point as fully and as large,
As he had done to other men before,
And all to one effect, so that in vain
It were for me to show it any more,
Or to recite it word for word again:
For his conclusion ended still in one,
As you have heard concerning Exion.
Whereat Duke Nestor did so fret and fume,
And in so great a choler then did grow,
That all the blood did presently consume
Out of his face, and he as pale did show
As ashes, and so grieved was in heart,
And therewithal did feel such inwardsmart
Through wrath and ire, that so possessed each vain
And joint he had, that he did seem to shake
Like Aspen leaf, and hardly could refrain,
Upon Anthenor straight revenge to take,
Like Lion fell that hunteth after pray,
Whose furious course no man as then can stay.
So much his mind from him was alienate,
That t'yeeld himself by no means then he might,
And at his heart he was so passionate,
Which boiled with such ranchor and dispight,
That all that him beheld would judge him mad,
So strange a look and gesture then he had.
At last, in midst of this perplexity,
Into a sudden choler out he brake,
And with a voice distraind from cruelty,
Unto Anthenor furiously he spoke:
With countenance so gastlie to behold,
That sure to make a man to fear it would.
Saying, thou friend that can so smoothly gloss,
I think thou know not well whom thou have told
Thy needless tale, nor yet do thou suppose
Who that I am, that dare be so bold
Thus to presume mine ears so to offend,
Pretending that King Priam did thee send
Unto the Greeks, to ask them in his name,
Redress for wrongs that nere by us was done,
And turnst on us the merit and the blame,
For injuries wrought by Laomedon
To us and ours, and in presumptuous wise
Accusest us with most notorious lies.
Which thy abuse most odious in mine ear,
So much does fret and anger me at heart,
That by no means I can endure't to hear,
And but I know a messenger thou art,
And that I do mine honor more respect
Then thee, I would in cruel wise correct
And chastise thy so great temerity,
For by the rigor of our ancient law,
I should put thee unto th'extreamity
By horses wild throughout the streets to draw
Thy body vild, and it in pieces tear,
To teach thee and all others how to bear
Such frivolous tales to any Prince or Lord,
Unless thou better know the man before.
So much by me thy message is abhord,
And Priamus thy King in heart much more:
In whose dispight this should to thee be done,
For just reward of thy presumption,
If thou were used as well thou do deserve.
And now be gone out of my sight with speed,
If thou thy life from danger wilt preserve,
For that the sight of thee to me does breed
Both in mines eyes and heart so great offense,
That I can take no rest till thou go hence.
Anthenor hearing this thought it the best
For him not to reply, but to be gone.
And with all speed he went and did not rest
Till that he entered ship and left Pilon,
Directly sailing unto Troy in have,
But presently the clouds began ouer-cast,
The Seas to roar and rage in furious wise,
The wind to blow, and waves most high to swell,
And fearful lightning flasht out of the skies,
And thunderclaps upon the ship down fell
With so great force, that maine mast began to crack,
And both the yard and it in sunder bracke.
The ship with billows tossing too and fro,
In fearful wise now mounting up most hie,
And then again descending down so low,
As if that under water it would lie:
So fearfully the heavens then did frown,
That they expected still when they should drown.
For every man made full account to die,
And to their Gods began vows and prayers make,
And with devotion great on them to cry
For aid and help, with promise t'vndertake
On pilgrimage to go in Paynim wise,
If they escapt, to offer sacrifice.
At last the skies as then as dark as night
Began to clear, and Seas did cease to rage,
And Phoebus with his clear and shining light,
Did suddenly the tempest great assuage,
And not one man within the ship did perish,
Wherewith their hearts began again to cherish.
And presently the Gods sent them such grace,
That having well escapt their danger great,
They did arrive at Troy in little space,
And safely every man on shore was set:
For which Anthenor straight without delay,
Unto the Temple went therein to pray.
And thank his Gods for his deliverance,
The like did all the rest with humble heart,
Rejoicing much for their so happy chance,
Which done, he did with speed from thence depart,
And to King Priam presently did go,
The Effect of his proceeding there to shoe.
Whom he as then found sitting in his throne,
Accompanied with his Nobility,
To whom he did at full and large make known,
What he had done, and what extreamitie
He had escapt amongst the Grecians fell.
And first unto King Priamus did tell,
How Peleus vsd him most discourteously,
And hardly could endure him in his sight,
And how with visage fell most cruelly,
King Telamon in rage and great despite
Disdained him, and his request denide,
And Priam with most threatening words defide.
And how the proud and hawty brethren twain,
Castor, and Pollux, in most furious wise,
Commanded him to get him thence again,
And not to slander them with false surmise,
Of wrongs by them supposed to be done
To Troy and Troyans, when the town they won.
And lastly how Duke Nestor cruelly,
Like to a man out of his wits distraught,
Did rage and rail at him despightfully,
And Priam and his message set at naught:
And in what peril of his life he was,
Before that he from every place could pass.
When Priam heard Anthenor thus declare,
What ill success amongst the Greeks he had,
His mind was so possessed with despair,
That it him wholly out of comfort made:
Either by peace or war then to obtain,
The means to get his sister home again.
For well he says by proof that it was in vain,
For him to deal with them by courtesy,
And that thereby he never should obtain
The thing he sought, so great hostility
He found in them, that more he did entreat,
The less they it esteemed, or by him set.
Which grieved him for that he saw no way,
But by constraint he must be forced to use
Another course (which gladly he would stay,
If that he might) since that they did refuse
His proffered peace, and stubbornly deny
To grant the things, he sought so courteously.
And that naught else would please their appetite,
But bloody war engendered of discord
And ranchor old, their chief and sole delight.
For peace and friendship they so much abhord,
That to give ear to equity and right,
They would not grant through malice and despite.
Which did so much torment King Priams heart,
That fire of envy kindling in his breast,
He vowed from thence it never should depart,
Nor would he be content nor take no rest,
Till that he were revenged on his foes,
Although that he thereby were sure to lose.
And in the war most like a valiant Knight,
What ere befell aduentur'd life and lim,
For to maintain his honor and his right,
While that one drop of blood remained in him:
Intending first a Navy forth to send,
There with by sea the Grecians to offend.
And boldly to assail them on the land
With fire and sword, their haughty pride t'abate.
And whosoever durst or would withstand,
To kill and to destroy. Such was the hate
Which he as then conceived in his mind
Against Grecians, that to him were so unkind.
But tell me Priam what hard desteny,
What trouble new, what hateful influence,
What great despite, what infelicitie
Out of the skies by sudden influence,
Descended is (thy sorrow to increase)
That should be cause thou can not live in peace?
What sudden chance, what fortune hard and sharp,
What wilful lust, what foolish hardiness,
Has made thee on the strings of war to harp?
What careless thoughts, what unadvisedness,
Has put thy mind out of tranquillity,
To make thee weary of prosperity?
Do thou in bitter gall more pleasure take,
Then honey sweet, that wilful motions
Should canse thee peace and quietness forsake,
To yield unto thy hateful passions:
Clean void of wit, of reason, and of sense,
And wholly without discreet providence?
What should thee careless make, not to foresee
The things that after might to thee befall,
And not to shun the great adversity,
Which through thy folly brought thee into thrall?
Sure it was the mists of error made thee stray,
The crooked paths of the ready way.
Where were thy guides, discretion, and advise,
That should have kept thee from sensuality,
And counseld thee in time for to be wise?
But sure it is not in man's ability:
Nor can he from his wilfulnes refrain,
When sudden wrath thereto does him constrain.
Thou first should have forecast thy destenie,
And by good counsel wisely have been led,
And not have wayed thy security
In balance that does hang but by a thread:
And rather have dissembled all thy woe,
And clean forgotten wrongs done long ago.
And still have borne it in thy memory,
That daily by experience we do see,
That while men seek revenge for injury
Done long before, they often deceived be:
And with a double harm ere they are aware,
Fall suddenly into another snare.
And wrongs that clean forgotten were and dead,
Renewed are by trump of flying fame,
Through salse report and rumor that is spread,
And often hurt man's honor and good name:
Especially when he does rashly run
Upon revenge, not carring how it is done.
And by his pride and ouer-hasty mood,
Does work his own destruction and decay.
Remembering not the proverb old and good,
(Which unto men discreet and wise does say)
Let him that is well be sure to keep him so,
Least afterward he does himself beshrow.
And he that walks on plain and even ground,
Needs not to fear nor doubt a stumbling cast,
Unless of carelesnes (as often is found)
He overthrow himself by too much have:
And wilfully adventures to have a fall,
As having of his state no care at all.
So must I unto thee King Priam say,
That all too retchlesse thou have ever been,
The care on fickle fortune so to lay
Of thy secured peace, for it is seen:
And known to be her custom commonly,
That when a man trusts most assuredly
In her that is so blind and so unstable,
She will to him then most inconstant be,
And as she always was deceaueable,
Bereave him soon of regal dignity:
And with a trice down from her wheel him throw,
Her power and force unto the world to show.
Against the which it naught availes to strive.
For when a man thinks his estate most sure,
And that in peace and welfare he does live,
She can (when he thinks least) his fall procure:
Therefore let no man hope for happy chance
At fortunes hand, so full of variance.
Nor hazard his estate upon her wheels,
Unless he cares not how the same does go,
Nor whether well or ill with him she deals,
For never man did her so constant know:
That he might say, he had continued
In one estate, and never varied.
Let Priam King of Troy unfortunate,
Example hereof be, that wilfully
Without advise orethrew his own estate,
And brought himself into such misery:
That he, his wife, and all his Sons being ^laine,
His noble City was destroyed again.
And all his Country round about laid wast,
And wholly brought unto confusion,
The memory whereof while world does last,
From age to age, and by succession
Shall both in books and songs recorded be,
That men thereby may learn, and plainly see
What comes of rash conceit and wilfulness,
When men will run upon extreamitie,
And put their happy state in doubtfulnesse
By war, wherein there is no security?
For he that therein seems most fortunate,
Often unawares does soon'st receive the mate.
For harm once done, too late is to amend,
And sieldome does a wrong of hatred done,
Procure to him that does it happy end.
Let men therefore be wise, and seek to shun
King Priams course, and so their steps direct,
That they in time their error may correct.
To show how he into this error fell,
Which bred his utter ruin and decay,
Then must you know that wrath and envy fell,
Burnt so within his breast both night and day:
(Upon the answer that Anthenor brought)
That he could never rest till he had wrought
The means to be revenged (if he might)
Upon the Greeks, and so in have he sent
For all his Lords, and many a noble Knight,
To summon them unto a Parliament:
Commanding them therein to make no stay,
But with all present speed to come away.
Where being come, and all together met,
The King with words most grave and courage bold,
(When every man in his degree was set)
His will and his intent began to unfold:
What caused him that assembly there to make,
And in this sort unto them then he spoke,
And said: my Lords, I know your minds so well,
That long discourse at this time shall not need,
The cause of our assembly for to tell,
And therefore to the point I will proceed:
And unto you as briefly as I may,
Declare the effect of that I have to say.
You know full well how that not long ago,
By counsel of you all I sent to Greece,
Anthenor, on embassage for to shoe,
That my desire was with love and peace
To have my sister Exion home again,
But all my suite and labor was in vain.
For that the Grecians most discourteously,
With threatening words and speeches full of dread,
Received and used him so despightfully,
That hardly he escaped with his head:
Desying us most proudly for the same,
To our no small dishonor, and our shame.
Which daily more and more will still increase,
Unless that we some remedy procure.
For whereas we do seek for love and peace,
And all our wrongs would patiently endure:
They offer war and flatly us deny
A small request to grant or satisfy.
And for the harms that they to us have done,
They say they will no other order take,
But for amends our Country t'ouer run,
And bloody war on us and ours to make:
Which their desire increases our despite,
But would to God their hearts were so contrite,
To cease all strife, and friendly to accord,
That all the mischief and the cruelty
That bloody wars does commonly afford,
Might be converted into amity:
But they (alas) are so possessed with pride,
That they disdain all peace, and us deride.
Still threatening us in most despightfull wise,
But God forbid that all on us should light,
Which they suppose, and against us do surmise:
But since they seem to show so great despite,
And unto us pretend such cruelty,
We must be forced of necessity,
By help of God their furiousnes to stay,
And in our own defense most boldly stand,
Since that our cause is just; Which that we may
The better do, let us with heart and hand,
Joined all in one most firm and full decree,
On them with might and maine revenged to be:
Which if we do, we doubt not to prevail.
For where men's minds agree not in consent
Of victory, they shall be sure to fail:
But when unto an unity they are bent,
They cannot choose but nappilie proceed,
And help each other when they stand in need.
My counsel therefore is, that we agree
And join in one consent for to withstand
The Grecians, and the more assured to be,
(Before that we begin to take it in hand)
I dare affirm our strength and forces far
Exceeds the Grecians power, what ere they are.
Our skill in arms is great, as well you know,
Our Knights they are most valorous and stout,
Great store of horse and footmen we can show
Well armed for war, and this we need not doubt,
But that our town is most invincible,
And for our foes to win't impossible.
Therefore I do intend (by your consent)
With all the speed I can for to prepare
A Navy well appointed, to be sent
Into the Grecian Land, which shall not spare
(In our behalf, and to defend our right)
T'invade the same, and with our force and might
To burn their towns, and lay their Country wast,
And use them as they well deserved have
At our hands, for injuries forepast:
For by my will they shall not one man save,
But cruelly put all unto the sword,
For they the like unto us did afford.
And let not their forepassed victory,
Against us woone, be cause to make us doubt,
For they that often in field are forced to fly,
Do many times with courage bold and stout,
Courageously turn back and fight again,
And in the end the victory obtain.
Such is the chance of war, wherein there is
No certainty, but oftent mes it is seen,
That he that this day victory does miss,
The self same day the Conqueror has been:
And he that held the field victoriously,
By him that fled before, been forced to fly.
For no man may in war himself assure,
So fickle and unconstant it is found;
For Mars this day will to a man procure
A conquest great, and cause his honor sound
By trumpe of Fame throughout the world so wide:
And when he list he can for him provide
A sudden fall, (and like the summer flower
That vadeth with a blast, and is consumed,
And clean distroyd) in minute of an hour
His honor stained, (which he at first presumed
Could never fail) and cause it to decay,
And all within the space of one short day.
And where before his name was magnifide,
(Even as the ebb does follow flood apace,)
(As by experience often it has been tried,)
Full suddenly he cannot as much abase:
For though this day the Sun does shine most clear,
Next day to us perhaps it will not appear.
When thick and mistie clouds the Sun does trouble,
And for a time obscure his radiant beams;
Even so of Mars the chances are most double,
And mixed with a number of extremes:
Now up, now down, now low, and then aloft,
As fortune will, whose mind does change full often.
For when she list she will make a man ascend
Upon her wheel, his honor to advance,
And suddenly she will cause him to descend
And much again, by some unhappy chance:
This day she will exalt him to the sky,
And next abase in twinkling of an eye.
Turning her wheelevnstable like a ball,
She smiles on some, and others she does flout,
And while one mounts another has a fall:
For every man when it does turn about,
Must take the chance that she on him will thrust.
(But he that knows her frauds and wiles unjust,
Will soon perceive sweet honey mixed with gall,
In all her actions what so ere they be,)
For honor and renown, mischife and thrall,
Peace, bloody war, and every dignity,
Are at her will and pleasure for to grant,
Let no man therefore in his fortune vaunt.
For though the Grecians against us did prevail,
When they my Father slew, it may so chance,
That now they shall of their good fortune fail.
Therefore let every man himself advance,
And as you are renowned for hardiness,
Valor and might, show forth your worthiness.
And unto fortune do your selves commend,
And let no fear your manly hearts possess,
But boldly fight your Country to defend,
As I persuaded am you will do no less:
Now let me hear your answers hereunto,
And what for me and mine you mean to do.
This said, the Nobles all with one consent,
Made answer unto him, and did reply,
That they with hearts and minds were fully bent,
In his and their just quarrel for to die,
And venture goods and all that ere they have,
The honor of their Country for to save.
For which the King did thank them heartily,
And gave them leave each one for to be gone,
And went into his chamber presently,
Where solitarilie and all alone,
He sat still musing how to bring to pass,
The thing that wholly his desire was.
For he thereon did only set his thought,
So much his mind upon revenge did run,
That though his own decay thereby were wrought,
Yet would he not the danger thereof shun:
And so resolved, made this conclusion,
With present speed and resolution,
To send for all his Sons legitimate,
And those likewise that basely borne were,
To take advise of them 'bout his estate,
And none but they alone, that he might hear
What counsel they to him as then would give,
His troubled mind with comfort to relieve.
Concerning his pretense of war to make
Upon the Grecians for their cruelty,
Which he did mind in have to undertake.
Who being all assembled privately,
And every one set down as his degree
And age required, the flower of Chivalry.
Prince Hector (who as then returned was
Out of the Province of Panomie)
Next to the King in order took his place,
Whom when he did behold with watrie eye
And sighs full sore and deep from out his heart,
He did unto them all his mind impart.
But ere that he as then a word would speak,
A flood of tears from out his eyes distild,
Fast trickling down upon his aged cheake,
So much his heart with grief as then was filled:
At last as't were a man with sobs dismayed,
With heavy heart these words unto him said,
My dear and loving sons, as I suppose,
You all record and freshly bear in thought,
How that the Greeks our old possessed foes,
In cruel wise their furies on us wrought:
Slaying my Father King Laomedon,
Burnt even with the ground his ancient town,
Put all his subjects to the sword, not one
Escapt their rage, and in captivity
Led wives and maids, and among them Exion
My sister dear, who in extremity
Still there remains, to our no small offense,
And your reproach that fetch her not fro thence:
The which to shun nature me thinks should move,
And cause you in your hearts to feel much grief,
That she whom you cannot all choose but love,
Should there remain so long without relief:
And with most great dishonor of her name,
Endure the abuse she does unto your shame.
Alas my Sons, why seek you not the way,
To be revenged for this great jniurie,
Upon our foes, and that without delay,
And her relieve in her extreamitie:
In truth me thinks (since that you are so strong)
You are to blame to drive it off so long,
And thus from day to day the time defer,
By Knightly force and valor great t'assay,
With might and maine upon them to make war,
It grieueth me you seem so long to stay,
To grant to my request, whose whole desire
And heart against the does burn like flaming fire.
With hatred, (as you plainly may behold)
Till that I be revenged with present speed,
The which if you regarded as you should,
And resolutely in your hearts decreed,
While you have strength and valor so to do,
You would not be so hardly drawn thereto.
Remember how it was I did you beget,
And fostred you with care as tenderly
As I could do, and now you are thus great,
And held to be the flower of Chivalry:
You should of nature for my sorrows grieve,
And with all speedy means for to relieve
My troubled mind and great adversity,
Since that you see it does torment me so,
And that the cause concerns both you and me,
Whom nature bind, to feel one self same woe:
And as he spoke, and thus to them did mourn,
His face unto Prince Hector he did turn,
And said, Hector my Son, my chief and only joy,
My trust, my sole delight, my eldest child,
And here sucessiuelie to reign in Troy,
(Of whom my hopes as yet were nere beguild)
Thou that art named the root, the spring, the well
Of Chivalrie, and do therein excel
Thy Brethren all, whereby thou do obtain,
The soveraigntie of high renown and fame,
Esteem not I thee pray my words in vain,
But yield and give consent unto the same:
And do the thing for which I long so sore,
For in thee is my trust, and in no more,
This thing to effect and wholly bring about.
And for that cause I make thee General
Of all my force, and herein make no doubt,
But that thou will go forward therewithal:
And yield t'accept of this my just request,
For in thy valor only do I rest.
And unto thee it chiefly does belong,
As being wise, and full of government
Flowring in youth, active, and passing strong,
And have thy mind to honor only bent:
Though young in years yet of discretion,
Beloved of all, and of most high renown.
And all thy younger Brethren shall obey
To thee, and at thy will be always pres^,
With thee to live and dye, and therefore say
If that thou will consent to my request:
And let me hear thine answer hereunto,
That with all speed we may prepare thereto.
When Priam thus had showed them his pretense,
Hector (the pattern of Nobility)
Bowing his knee with humble reverence
Unto the King, (as full of courtesy)
His answer gave with sober countenance,
The Effect whereof was this in full substance.
My most renowned Lord and Father dear,
Since that it is your pleasure and your will
That I should speak, and you are pleased to hear
Attentively, I shall your mind fulfill:
And such good counsel as my wit affords,
I Will give to you in few and pithy words.
True'tis my Lord, that natures laws do bind,
And still provoke man's heart for to aspire,
(And all Gods creatures else of several kind)
With earnest and most resolute desire
To seek revenge, for wrongs by them sustaind,
And specially such men as have attaind
Unto the honor of Nobility,
For unto them it were great reproach and shame,
And wholly against their state and dignity,
To suffer wrongs done to their name and fame:
For every trespass must considered be,
And wayd according to the quality
Of him against whom the jniurie is wrought,
(What way or means soever that it be)
As also of the person that it sought,
For it is more grief to men of high degree
To suffer hurt or harm by adventure,
Or any wrong unjustly to endure:
Then unto men of meaner quality.
And jniury maliciously contrived,
Is more offense to Princely Majesty,
And men from high Nobility derived:
Then unto such as by their wealth aspire
To worship, though the world does the^ admire.
This well considered of, much bound are we,
To seek by force our honor to increase,
Since we descend of Royal pedigree,
And let us not from just revenge surcease:
For beasts that are by nature void of sense,
Desire the same, and seek their own defense.
And for my part I know assuredly,
That none of all your Sons was ere more pressed,
Upon the Greeks to be revenged then I,
And hereupon my faith I do protest:
That with despite against them I burn like fire,
And thirst their blood with all my whole desire.
For as I am your eldest by degree,
So am I moved most with angry mood,
And long by valor and by chiualry,
With sword in hand to shed the Grecians blood:
Which they percha^ce shall feel ere that they ween,
When time does serve, as shortly shall be seen.
But first I must advise you to have a care,
(Ere you begin to effect this your intent)
And think and way how great the dangers are,
Which unto bloody war are jncident:
And long not the beginning for to see,
But study on the end what it may be.
Which if you do you can by no means fail,
For counsel given in my opinion
Is little worth, and nothing may avail,
Nor yet deserves commendation:
Which does not tend t'advise men seriously
To think upon future adversity.
For though that men at pleasure bring about,
The first beginning of their tragedies,
Yet oftentimes it commonly falls out,
That they do end with great extreamities:
And what availes beginning fortunate,
That after causes strife and great debate.
I say therefore great wisdom it is to doubt,
At th'entring into any enterprise;
What issue may thereof in the end fall out,
Which who so does I hold him to be wise:
For that beginning is most fortunate,
Where midst and end continue in like estate.
But when they do not happily proceed,
It Were better wholly from it to abstain,
Then t'hazard man's estate when there is no need,
For who so does, assured is to gain
Naught else but mischief and adversity,
And end his days in great extremity.
Let not your Majesty I you beseech,
In any wise with me displeased be,
Nor yet to take exception at my speech,
For there is no spark of any thought in me,
To give a cause unto you of offense:
For that I speak is only with pretense,
To counsel you to see that wilfully
You enterprise not that which in the end,
By misadvice may chance unhappily,
And be the cause in fine your self to offend:
Nor of your foes too small account to make,
For so men oftentimes themselves mistake.
But think how they hold in subjection
All Africa, and Europe, wide and long,
With many another warlike Nation,
And that they are most valiant Knights and strong:
Esteemed of all the world for worthiness,
Abounding in great wealth and happiness.
So that with your support I dare bebold,
T'a^^irme that danger it is them to displease;
And if our quiet state disturb we should,
It Is to be feared we must our selves disease:
And say that Asia should us aid to fight,
It is not like unto the Grecians might.
And though our Aunt the Princess Exion,
Against all right be held by Telamon;
It is not fit for her redemption,
To bring us all unto destruction:
My counsel's not to buy her half so dear,
For that perhaps all we that now sit here,
And many more might also for her right,
In doubtful wars loose both their lire and lim,
And after long and many a bloody ^ight,
Perehance shall nere get her away from him:
Which were no wisdom as it seems to me.
And it may hap ere long time pass, that she
Her fatal course and days on earth will end,
And then what shall we reap for her to strive,
And with our Grecian enemies contend?
But only ever after while we live,
Be sure of mortal war and enmity,
Sorrow and grief, and all extremity.
My counsel therefore is, that we endure
Our wrongs forepast without contention,
And not unto ourselves more hurt procure,
For it is a point of great discretion:
Think not my Lord I speak thus much for fear
Or cowardice, but yet I say that it were
Great folly to commit our happiness
(Since that we now ^iue in security)
To fortunes hands, so full of doublenes,
And bar our selves of all felicity:
This is (said he) all that I did pretend
To say to you, and so his speech did end.
When Hector thus his mind declared had,
And with most grave conclusion so did close,
The wise discourse which be to them had made:
His second brother Paris therewith rose,
And to the King along discourse did make,
Which in these words with courage bold he spoke.
And said, my Lord, if it like your Grace to hear,
And give me leave to speak, then must I say
And will it prove, you have no cause to fear,
(Nor would I wish you long the time delay)
With brave and valiant heart to undertake,
Upon the Greeks asodaine war to make:
Therewith their pride and malice to confound,
Since that you know yourselfe to be so strong
Of valiant Knights, and that we do abound
With plenty of each thing that does belong
Unto the wars, and how our town most wide,
Is able all their proud assaults to abide.
And which is more, invincible to win.
Besides all this, great Princes many aone
(Our friends, so were this war with them begun)
Will us assist to their destruction:
Let them therefore be nere so bold and stout,
I see no cause at all, why we should doubt:
Nor reason why we should our selves dismay.
Therefore if you my counsel now will take,
I think it best you should no time delay
Your Navy to prepare, and if you will make
Me General thereof, I you assure,
That I will such a speedy means procure,
That Exion shall recovered be full soon,
And in such sort it shall by me be wrought,
(That I esteem it easy to be done.)
For I devised have within my thought,
By Knightly force with strong and mighty hand,
To ravish some fair Lady in that Land
Of high estate, and without tarrying,
(Despite of them when as I have her won)
With all the speed I can, to Troy her bring,
That so you may have restitution,
By change of her whom you long so to see,
And this shall soon by me dispatched be.
All were the Grecians nere so strong and bold.
And that hereof you may be out of doubt,
I will in brief to you the means unfold,
How I with ease will bring the same about:
And hope thereby your mind so to content,
That you will rejoice that I was thither sent.
For that the Gods of their benignity,
Have showed to me by revelation,
Which way the same may well effected be:
And to that end I had a vision
Not long ago, as in a sleep I fell,
Which if you mark, and it consider well,
You need not fear to fail nor yet to care,
To get her home, whom you so much desire.
The manner of my dream I will declare,
And in most humble wise your Grace require,
With patience to abide till I have done,
And I will it in brief soon overrun.
Your Grace remembers well to what intent,
By your command and with commission large,
Into the Indian land of late I went,
For things that are committed to my charge:
And I as then took on me to effect,
Which that I might the time no whit neglect.
When Titan with his beams most fair and clear
From Gemeny his furious steeds did chase,
And in the sign of Cancer began apeare,
(Which called is Lucinaes mancion place)
When as the Sun was in the highest degree,
Which in the midst of Juno we find to be.
At that same time as soon as day I saw,
When Phoebus began to show his radiant light,
Commanding Pirrous up his wane to draw,
And Dame Aurora beautiful and bright,
Began her face out of the East to show,
And cast on herbs and flowers her silver dew,
I rose out of my bed with present speed,
And full intent on hunting forth to go,
For that within my heart I had decreed,
Some honor unto Cupid then to show:
And Lady Venus that day magnify,
Which called is the Queen of Venerie.
And reverently the ancient rights observe,
Of Cinthia named the fair bright shining Moon,
And her in all submissiue wise to serve,
The which by us the better to be done,
My mates and I for pleasure and delight,
Determined to rest and stay till night
Within a wood, to play and make some sport,
(As best beseems men of youthful mind)
And pleasantly our selves to recomfort,
For that day unto Venus was assigned,
And hallowed to her sacred deity,
With honor and with sovereign Majesty.
Which every one observed both small and great.
For on a Friday it was when forth we went,
And when within the pleasant woods we met,
To hunt for game (as it was our sole intent)
With labor great we rode both too and froe,
So long till many a fearful Bucke and Do
By strength were kil^, as we them chanst to find,
And among the dales and valleys steep and low,
With hounds did chase the Heart and tripping Hind,
Till Phoebus glistring in his chair did show:
Just in the midst or the Merid^en,
When as the beams most burning hot did shine,
And we upon our chase most busied were.
As I by chance strayd from my company,
Who in the woods were scattered here and there,
A mighty Heart did start forth sodenlie,
From out the thickets hasting to the green
With most swift pace, which when that I had seen,
I spyed my horse, and after gallopt fast,
Up hills, down dales, through bushes thick and thin,
And yet for all I made as then such have,
I could by no means ground upon him win:
But maugre all I did to my despite,
In little space it was gone out of my sight.
Into a wood that Ida had to name,
Wherewith I waxt so faint that I did stay
To rest my self, and so left off the game,
And for because that I had lost my way:
(And that my horse whereon I then did ride,
Foamed at the mouth, and swet on every side.
And all his flanks in every place were staind
With blood, that with my spurs from him I drew,
So hotly in the chase I him constraind,
The Heart that ran so swiftly to pursue:
With hope in the end he should by me be caught,
But all that I could do availd me naught.)
When a among the thick and lofty trees so green,
I found by chance a sweet and pleasant shade,
As smooth and plain as ever man had seen,
I lighted off my horse and fast him made
Unto a tree, and weary as I was,
I ^ayd me down upon a tuft of grass
Hard by a river side, whose streams most clear,
Like cristall fine did cast a radiant light,
And all the stones and sand that therein were,
Appeared and shone like gold most pure and bright:
Where presently with my great weariness,
A heavy sleep did me so sore oppress.
That since I first was clad with earthly mold,
I never slept so fast. And suddenly
As I lay still, me thought I did behold
God Mercury descend down from the sky,
And stood by me, which put me in a fear,
For he as then his crooked sword did wear
Gi^t to his side, and held within his hand
His charming rod, about the which did wind,
Two ugly Snakes, (with which his pliant wand,
He used to work all things unto his mind:)
And at his feet me thought there stood a cock,
That crowed each hour as true as any clock.
And in his mouth were pipes that played so shrill,
And with so sweet and pleasant harmony,
That both mine ears and senses they did fill,
With many several kinds of melody:
So that I did assuredly surmise,
That I had been in earthly Paradise.
(In this strange sort appeared Mercury,
And much more strangethen I can well declare,
Like as Fulgence in his methologie
Of him does write, wherein he does not spare,
In pleasant verse full of variety,
His shape to show as you therein may see.
To moralize his shape, you must surmise
His rod so straight which never stands bent,
Does signify men politic and wise,
Who by their good and careful government
All dangers do prevent before they fall,
And by that means preserve themselves from thrall.
His pipes so sweet and pleasant to the ear,
Significantly unto us do show,
The eloquence which daily we do hear,
And Rethoritian phrases that do flow
Out of men's mouths of great discretion,
Whereof that God is the only pateron.
The Cock that does so lovely chant and crow,
And justly keeps each hour of the night,
Does signify and rightly to us show,
The watch fullness and the interior sight
Of men, that by their care and diligence,
Drive from their minds all sloth and negligence.
His sword that crookes like to a Fawchion,
Which neither forged was nor made in vain,
Does serve to force such as have straid and gone,
Out of the way of truth to turn again:
The serpents which about his rod do wind,
Are like to diverse crosses which we find,
And daily see do lie in wait to stop
The way of truth, by hatred and disdain,
And of the same the branches so to lop,
That by their will it nere should grow again:
And so poor truth constrained is to fly,
And in a hole lie hidden secretly.)
And with this winged God there did appear
As then to me, three Goddesses most bright,
The which so fair and passing comely were,
That I in them did take no small delight:
To see and to behold their beauties rare,
The names whereof to you I will declare.
The first whereon my gasing eyes I cast,
Was Venus fair the Goddess of delight;
Next unto her Dame Juno fore me past,
A Goddess of no little power and might:
The third and last that showd her self in place,
The wise and valiant Goddess Pallas was.
Fair Venus to procure the more delight,
To those that unto her obedience show,
Above her head had Pigeons fair and white,
Who flickering with their wings about her flew.
To show to us that by the same is meant,
That as those birds are meek and innocent.
So lovers that are faithful and do mean
T'obserue God Cupids laws, and truly give
To love her due, should be so pure and clane
In deed and thought, that while that they do live,
No manner of disliking, nor of blame
Should be in them, their credits to defame.
The freshnes of the Roses fair and red,
Which in the Summer show most pleasantly,
And in the Winter are so pale and dead.
The thoughts of lovers young do signify,
And such as in hot love do burn like fire,
With fervent hope t'attaine to their desire.
When love at first within their hearts bears sway,
Until the time of old unwieldy age,
When lust is past and seems to decay,
And does begin no more in them to rage
Through feeblenes, when spring of youth is gone,
Which by good proof to many men is known.
Venus therefore we often distiled see,
To sit within a flood of water deep,
To show what trouble and adversity
Is found in love, and how that it does keep
Men in despair, with fancy them to feed,
Till hopeless they remain in doubt to speed.
Pallas me thought in the one hand then did bear
A shield, the which of metal pure was made.
In the other hand a sharp and warlike spear,
And round about his head a Rainebow had
O^ colors three, red, green, and perfect blew,
And as it seemed to me before her grew
An Olive tree, which showed most fresh and green,
And in the verdant branches thereof sat,
The vgliest Owl that ever eye had seen,
With staring eyes, and face most brawd and flat,
Whereof the morrall with the restile show
As they in order stand. Then must you know
The ^^^eld which Pallas bears within her hand,
Does signify the power and passing might
That (...) has by wisdom to withstand
All (...) and manly against the same to fight.
A^^ that ^er speares^ smoth and sharply ground,
Was forged by just revenge, for to confound
And overthrow unjust and wicked men;
And for that mercy should with rigor go,
The sta^e thereof is shau'd and smothed clean,
Least merciles right should just rigor shoe.
The Olive tree ^^tokens sign of peace,
Which does ensue, when bloody war does cease.
The broad faced staring eyed ugly Owl,
The which against death and bankets funeral
Of custom has by kind to s^ritch and howl,
Does show that death is the only end of all.
The glory of the world, and happie's he
That daily bears it in memory.
The Rainebow where such several colors were
Of diverse kinds to beautifi't withal,
Does show what sundry chances are in war,
Wherein some win, some loose, some fall.
Like constant, and light wavering green,
Variety so great therein is seen.
Iun^ as learned Fulgentius to us tells,
A (...)* with barren womb and dead,
And alwa^^ (...) in Rivers, and in Wells,
To whom the Peacocke proud is sacared,
With Argus eyes imprinted in her tail,
The which she spreads abroad like to a sail.
The waters said to be in wells and floods,
Do represent the cares and troubles great
That men endure, to scrape and gather goods,
Not sparing pain nor toil the same to get.
But whosoere within those floods does row,
Let him beware, for after they do flow,
By course of time, as it is most true
(Directed by the Moon their governesse,)
There will an ebb with present speed ensue.
The fear is most, when Cinthia does increase,
And orderly attain unto the the full,
Least Fortune chance the feathers way to pull
Of men that do abound in riches great,
(For she is Queen of mutabilitie.)
And Argus eyes that in the tail are set
Of Peacocks proud, are said to signify
Such niggards hearts as commonly are blind,
And only on their riches set their mind.
Remembering not, that it with them does fare
As with the ebb, which soon does pass away.
(Whereof they seem to have but litte care.)
For as the Peacocks feathers fresh and gay
Do often shed, and from her tail do fall:
So riches when men think them sur'st of all,
Will suddenly consume and wast away,
And unawares their master clean desie,
For that in them there is no certain stay.
And as the Goddess Juno's womb is dry:
So are the greedy covetous hearts of such,
As on their riches set their minds so much.
That nothing whatsoere will satisfy
Their greedy thoughts, possessed with fear and woe,
Least they should fall in want before they die,
And yet at last they must it all forgo.
Thus riches breeds to the^ continual care, (spare*
That while they live, do naught but pinch and
But he that has a free and liberal heart,
Does scorn to pinch and live so niggardly:
But kindly unto others will impart
Such as he has, when opportunity
And time does serve, and does in heart detest,
(Like greedy gut to hide his gold in chest.)
And thus these stately Goddesses all three,
Did show themselves in shape as I have told,
And for their guide had winged Mercury,
Who standing still a while did me behold.
At last his rod upon my lips he laid,
And in these words did speak to me, and said;
Sir Paris, lift thine eyes up now, and see
These goodly Dames that down from skies descend,
And in their several shapes appear to thee,
Are come a certain strife; twixt them to end.
And thus it is as they with all the rest
Of great celestial Gods, wear at a feast
With Jupiter, in his most heavenly bower,
And not one failed but all as then were there,
Except the Goddess Discord, who did lowre
And fret therefore, and such despite did bear
Against those Dames, that for revenge the sought
And at the last in this wise she it wrought.
She did by Art and skill an Apple frame
Of massy gold, and round as any ball,
With Grecian letters graven upon the same,
Which said let her that is the fairest of all,
Take this for her reward, and bear't away,
And let the rest not once thereto say nay.
This Apple she unto the feast did bring,
And when they were set down about the board,
With countenance stern she did it thereon fling,
And without more delay or speaking word,
Went out the hall as fast as ere she might,
And suddenly there rose so great despite
And envy for the same between these three,
To know which of them all has greatest right,
(For every one of them does think it is she
That best deserved that golden Apple bright.)
And among them yet there is so great disdain,
Which of them is in beauty Sovereign,
And best desires to bear away the game?
That night and day they never cease to strive;
And wrangle, chide, and brawl about the same,
And all their hearts in manner seem to riue
And burst for spite, until that they do see
Which of them shall obtain the victory.
Such envy reigns in hearts of women kind,
That every one is jealous of the other,
And none of them but thinks within her mind,
That she deserves the praise before another.
And all of them in their opinions,
Do think their beauty passes every ones.
For not the fowlst amongst them all that are,
If that their face within a glass they see,
But does suppose their beauties to be rare.
But I think him a very fool to be.
And one that has in colors small insight,
That chooses sallo, wyellow, for a white.
And that man's eye deceived is full soon,
That usually does stay till it be night,
And then does choose his colors by the moon,
For colors are refined by fier-light:
And some encreast by wine and costly cheer,
And some with oyntme^ts sweet their faces clear.
And many times by false jllusion,
By night some do show beautiful and fair,
But such as have tried that conclusion,
Often find them foul by daylight in the air:
It Is good therefore to choose (by my advise)
In morning when a woman first does rise.
For then her beauty best is to be tried,
And follow Ouids counsel in that case,
Who says, when drugs and pots are set aside
Then choose, and thou shall truly see her face:
Least (as he says) thou may deceived be,
And think thou see, the thing thou do not see
For at this day such practices are rife,
(And known and vsd too much in every place.)
And thus began the malice and the strife,
Between these Ladies three, who for that case
By one consent descended from the sky,
The quarrel of their beauty there to try.
The doom whereof committed is to thee
Sir Paris, that so wise and prudent art,
See that therein thou well advised be,
For from it by no means they may not start:
But must abide all three by one consent,
Without delay or strife to thy judgment.
But first before thou take this thing in hand,
Or any word out of thy mouth be heard,
Thou shall do well from me to understand,
What each of them will give thee for reward,
If thou do Judge her beauty to excel
The other two, now hark and I will tell.
If thou unto Queen June do it give,
She will reward thee highly for the same,
With riches store, and while thou here do live,
Will thee advance to honor great and fame,
And in all these will prosper thee so well,
That thou in them all others shall excel.
If unto Goddess Pallas it befall,
To have his golden Apple for her fee,
And that thou judge her the fairest of all,
For thy reward she will assure to thee,
That thou in wisdom, wit, and government,
Shall be so perfect and so excellent,
That even as far ^^ Phoebus gives light,
And in the world since that it first began,
There never was a more courageous Knight
Then thou, nor nere was known a wiser man.
Thus riches, honor, wisdom, fortitude,
May be at thy command, if thou conclude
Thy judgments on their sides; therefore beware,
And herein take advise, and do not loose
These gifts that are so noble and so rare,
While thou to leave or take have time to choose,
I speak not this to move thee therewithal,
To judge amiss, or to be partial.
And if to Venus thou this Apple give,
Thou shall for thy reward have to thy wife
The fairest Dame that now on earth does live,
Or ever man did see in all his life,
Which thou by valor great in Greece shall win.
Now be advised, before thou do begin
To judge aright, and see for naught thou spare,
Least after thou repent for doing so.
Wherewith amazed I began about me stare,
In doubt to think what I therein should do,
At last I spoke and said to Mercury,
That I by no means would their beauties try,
Nor judge thereof, unless they naked there
Before me stood, that at my liberty,
I might behold, if every member were,
As fair in all respect and each degree,
As outwardly their faces fair did show,
And then my doom they presently should know.
When they had heard me speak they gave consent,
And did agree my mind therein t'obay,
(And straight to strip themselves were all content,
The which to do they made no long delay)
For they had all decreed before they came,
That in no point they would deny the same.)
When naked all before me there they stood,
And that I did behold them at the full,
And vewed every part, it did me good
To see their bodies fair and beautiful:
But when mine eyes on Venus bright I cast,
For her without delay my judgment past.
And unto her the Apple gave with speed,
As fairest of them all (excepting none)
And as at first it was by them decreed,
I should not partial be to any one,
So did I judge her beauty great to be,
Much more then the others two in each degree.
For as me thought her eyes most fair and bright,
That cast forth streams so clear and delectable,
Were like the star that shines to us by night,
Called Hesperus, and so most amiable
Fair Venus showed her self, ye it was true,
I could not choose but give to her her due.
Whereat this Goddess fair did much rejoice,
And in her heart therewith did seem to glory,
That of her beauty rare I made the choice
T'excell the rest, and that the victory
By judgment, unto her as then did fall,
To be the fairest and beautiful'st of all.
And as the winged God to me did say,
What should be my reward of Venus part,
She said she would perform without delay,
And from his vow and promise never start:
And saying so the Goddesses all three,
Did vanish and depart away from me.
And Mercury with wings began to fly,
And soaring up with speed his way did take,
Directly to the clear and cristall sky,
And suddenly therewith I did awake
Out of my deadly sleep, and up I start,
And mounting horse from thence did straight depart.
Now my good Lord, whom I both love and dread,
Ift please your Grace your self herein t'advise,
And unto that which I have said take heed,
You will it not esteem, nor yet surmise
To be in vain, by Venus to me said.
And therefore I wish you not to be afraid,
But boldly let me go to Greece in have,
With some great power of men about the thing
Which I have said, and ere long time be past,
I doubt not but the same to pass to bring:
And as by Venus I am promised,
Of some fair Lady certainly to speed.
That by exchange of her you may obtain
An easy and a most assured way,
To get your Sister Exion home again,
This is (said he) all that I have to say,
For my advise and counsel to your Grace,
And so sat down again into his place.
But Priam what should cause thee to forget
Thy self so much, that thou should be so vain,
Thy hope and trust upon a dream to set?
I cannot choose but needs must tell thee plain,
That shallow was thy wit and thy discretion,
To trust unto a false illusion.
As that thou all care had set aside,
To follow after dreaming fantasy,
It Is sure that reason then was not thy guide,
That thou upon mere follies would rely
As Paris did, that Pallas did neglect,
And sacred wisdom wilfully reject.
And some also carelessly re^us'd
With riches and with all her offers great,
And she that has all men so much abused,
(And at whose hands their's nothing else to get
But pleasure, and the fond delights of love,
Which only do a man to folly move)
Fair J'enus called the blacksmith Vulcans wife,
(Whose service though it does naught else procure
Unto a man, but bloody war and strife,)
By him preferred was, but it is most sure
That Paris in his judgment was unjust,
And that his mind was wholly set on lust.
Whereby the great and famous Trojan Town,
When it had long been vexed with bloody war,
Was in the end brought to confusion
By Paris means, that had so little care,
When it was offered him, his choice to make
Of wisdom, gold, and valor; and to take
A Woman that was cause of all the woe
Which unto Priam afterward befell.
A^ in this Book hereafter I will shoe,
And now on dreams I will no longer dwell,
But to my matter seriously proceed,
And show you what by Priam was decreed.
Upon the dream by Paris then declard,
But first of all in brief i will let you know
What Diophebus said, who having heard
His brothers speech, stood up his mind to show:
And gravely with a countenance benign,
Obedience made, and spoke unto the King,
And said, my Lord, if every man should doubt,
And in his mind forecast and deeply way,
Concerning future things what might fall out:
It would be cause to make men often stay
All actions whatsoere, and never bend
Their wits nor wills to bring them to an end.
Nor would they seek their valors forth to show,
For he that doubts, dares nothing undertake:
For if a man before that he does throw
His Corn into the ground, should recknoning make
How many grains thereof consumed would be
By Birds, or by some other Casualtie:
I'would make him fear his ground to sow again.
Let us lay all such foolish doubts aside,
For I esteem and hold them merely vain,
And counseil now no longer to abide,
Nor slack the time, but with a Navy strong
Send Paris into Greece for to revenge our wrong:
This I dare affirm and boldly say,
That he has counseled you and us full well,
Which no man to speak truth can well denay.
So that I think and must you plainly tell,
Great error it were his purpose to contrary,
And therefore let him now no longertarry.
But thither with a warlike Navy go,
That we may quit them for the villainy
Which they unto us and ours did show,
In former times with extreme cruelty.
And for the better execution,
And getting of our Aunt, fair Exion,
Whom they do hold from us by force and might,
And long have done to our no little shame,
And that against all equity and right,
Which wounds my heart to think upon the same:
For remedy whereof I must needs say,
There is no better means, nor readier way
Then to send forth a strong and warlike band,
With him to Greece, that forcibly he may
Some Lady take, within the Grecians land,
And mauger all their might, her thence convey,
And bring her unto Troy, with present speed,
By which so brave exploit, and warlike deed,
You may have means to satisfy your mind,
By changing her for Princes Exion.
This is the readiest way that I can find
For to procure her restitution.
Which my good Lord I hope you do intend,
(Quoth he) my counsel I will end.
Which said, his brother Helenus did rise
Out of his seat, and with due reverence
Unto the King, as being learnd and wise,
Desired him he might have audience
To speak, and to declare unto them all,
What future danger might on them befall.
And so with sober countenance and sad,
He spoke and said, my Lord may't please your grace
To give command, that silence now be made,
And that I may have license for a space,
Without deceit or guile to show my mind,
What I by secret Art and science find.
Hereafter will fall out, wherein as yet
I never failed as well your grace does know,
And sure I am you do it not forget,
For whatsoere I took on me to show,
Did come to pass as I did tell it you,
And you likewise did find it to be true.
And by Gods leave I will not spare as now
To tell the truth without all flattery,
For I have taken an oath, and made a vow
That from my mouth there shall proceed no lie,
I say therefore with true intention,
And as it will follow in conclusion.
If you to Greece my brother Paris send,
I know it well by Revelation,
(Though he effect the thing you do pretend.)
In fine twill be our own confusion.
For so I find by true Astronomy.
And never yet in any Prophecy
Was I deceau,d in future accident,
Nor any that did put his trust in me.
Then since all things must have their true event,
I counsel you by me forewarned to be:
And by no means for malice, nor for pride,
Seek not revenge what ever may betide,
Against the Greeks: for if that you proceed
To Effect the thing which you as now intend,
And as within your mind you have decreed,
Which is that you to Greece will Paris send:
Know for a truth and full conclusion,
Twill be the cause of our destruction.
For by that means will certainly befall
The overthrow of our most ancient Town:
Wherefore the howses, Palaces, and wall,
Shall be destroyed and cruelly thrown down.
Few words me thinks herein should now suffice
To men that are esteemd to be so wise.
Wherefore if you respect your own estate,
Or do regard my words, I do not doubt
But that you will before it be too late,
Bethink your self ere worse to us fall out.
For better it is for to refrain in time
From your pretense, which yet is in the prime.
They hastily t'agree and give consent
Unto a thing that can us naught avail,
And in the end will make us all repent.
For this is true, and by no means can fail,
Twill be the death without exception,
Of all of us that are within this Town.
First, you my Lord, the effect thereof shall try,
And by the Grecians fury end your life.
Your noble Queen that by your side does lie,
And long has been your true and faithful wife,
Shall end her days by extreme cruelty,
In sorrow, woe, and great extremity.
Your subjects all most woefully shall pass
By dint of sword, and none from it be freed,
For silly Infants then shall find no grace,
If that in your intent you do proceed,
And wilfully a war begin to make
Against the Greeks, and fondly undertake
To trouble your most peaceable estate,
And so procure the ruin of us all.
I say no more, but ere it be to late,
And fore this mischief does on us befall,
My counsel is, against it to provide,
And set all foolish willfulness aside:
Especially when death as I Iaue told
Will be the end, and final destenie,
(If that this dangerous purpose you do hold,)
Which all too soon both you and we shall try.
Whereof be sure, for it will fall out so,
If Paris in this Greecian voyage go.
And therewith having given his advise,
With heavy cheer and pale and deadly face,
(As by his countenance sad they might surmise.)
He sat him down again within his place.
At which his words astonished they were,
And all their hearts were stricken into a fear.
So that to speak not any one was bold,
But every man as mute, his lips held close,
Till Troylus did them so sad behold,
With courage stout, out of his place arose:
(Who like a valiant and courageous Knight,
Desiring naught but against his foes to fight,
And manfully with them his force to try,)
Then with a mind exceeding light and glad,
He did behold his Fathers heart to die
With fear, and all his brethren there so sad,
And all the rest to look with heavy cheer:
T'incourage them, he spoke as you shall hear;
And said, My Lords most valorous and strong,
Whose wisdoms and discretions well I know,
Why should you offer to your selves this wrong
That suddenly such signs of fear you show?
Are you perplexed within your valiant breasts,
And feared at the words of coward Priests?
For all of them as you full well shall find,
By nature are addicted unto rest,
Desirous from their hearts (by very kind)
To live at ease, and travel do detest.
Abhorring war, and only do apply
Their minds to lust, and filthy gluttony.
And care for naught, but how they may devise
To fill their guts, and please their appetite
In eating, drinking, and in avarice,
They have their only joy, and sole delight,
And all their study is on lust and ease,
For nothing else their greedy minds will please.
Now fie for shame why are you so dismayed,
And set abashed thus with inward grief,
To hear the words that Helenus has said,
Whom I dare swear does shake as it were a leaf,
And tremble, but to hear us speak of fight,
And which is more, against all law and right?
In prejudice of th'immortallitie,
Does take on him the truth to certefie
Of future things decreed in heavens hie,
As if he had a spirit of Prophecy
Given unto him alone in special,
And that he were in science coequall
With all the Gods, and in him had the skill,
By wisdom and prescience to declare
When unto men shall happen good or ill,
But I suppose that none so simple are,
V^^e^^e they want their senses to believe,
That any man that on the earth does live,
Has knowledge to divine of things to come,
Nor yet can show the fatal destiny
Of any one, (although that there be some
Which take on them to do it, but sure they lie.)
For that such things conceald in secrecy,
Reserved are to Gods own privitie.
Men may divine, but naught it will avail
To credit them, for as it does appear
None of them all but does in judgment fail,
Wherefore my counsel is good, Father dear,
And brethren all, this fear aside to lay
Out of your hearts, and let not that dismay
Your courages, which Helenus has told,
Let him within the sacred Temple lie
If that in heart he fears, (as no man would)
To help us to revenge our jniurie,
And spend his time in contemplation,
And fast and pray with great devotion
In those most holy places, days, and nites,
And study upon his spells, and charms:
And let such as are lusty valiant Knights
Employ their green and youthful time in arms,
That they may know the better how to weild
A sword and lawnce when as they come in field.
Against their foes, for to revenge their wrong,
And give command to Paris straight to go,
As you pretend well furnished and strong,
With all your ships, his puissant force to show
Upon the Greeks, our jniuries to requite,
Which to our shames, are vnrevenged yet.
And with that word he did sit down again,
And said no more, when all that present were
Did much commend his wit and warlike vain,
And said that he deserved praise to bear,
For valor, high renown, and chivalrie,
And with applause extold him to the sky.
Wherewith the King gave thanks unto them all,
Dismissing them as then; and presently
To dinner went in his most sumptuous hall,
Withal his sons, and his Nobility,
And having dined, as soon as he did rise
From Table, called his sons in secret wise.
Prince Paris and Deiphobus his brother,
And bad them straight into Panomia hie,
And take with them great store of Knights and other
To aid them and to bear them company,
And therewith speed a Navy to prepare
To put to Sea, upon the Greeks to war.
And next day after Priam hastily
Appointed all his counselors to meet
In Ilyon, and they accordingly
With speed did come, and when they were all set,
The King commanding silence to be made,
In pithie words spoke unto them, and said,
My noble Lords, and Counselors most grave,
The cause that I for you as now have sent,
Is your advise and counsel wise to have
About our Grecian wars, which my intent
I did jmpart to you not long ago,
And now again the same do mean to show.
It Is not unknown unto you all full well,
How that the Greeks against us so enviously,
In most dispightfull wise, like Tygars ^ell,
Did execute their cruel tyranny:
The which is yet so fresh within my thought*
That I cannot forget it if I might.
Which day by day increasing more and more
Within my breast, it does so much torment
My grieved heart, and vexes me so sore,
That in my mind I cannot becontent,
Especially when as I think upon
My dear and loving Sister Ex^^^.
Who by them still is held in servitude,
Which many times constrains me to weep,
And does all joy ou^ of my heart exclude,
And makes me fetch most extreme sighs and deep,
Whose cruelty we have too dearly bought,
And yet of late in friendly wise I sought
To them, to grant me one thing and no more,
(In recompense of all the wrongs I had,)
Which was my Sister Exion to restore
To me again, but they an answer made
Contrary to my expectation,
In scornesull wise and great presumption.
Refusing that so small and just request,
And with proud threats and brags did me defy:
And said, that in their hearts they did detest,
In any thing my mind to satisfy.
But as we learn by rules of Surgerie,
We must with Irons sharp seek remedy
To cut away dead flesh, which often does lie
Within a wound, and will by no means heal,
Though nere so many ointments we apply:
Even so we must be forced with them to deal.
For since peace can procure no remedy,
It Is our best way to use extremity.
Therefore by your advise I do jntend,
As soon as ere I can without delay
A Navy to the Grecian land to send
With Paris, to find means if that he may,
Despite of all that dare him there withstand,
Some Lady fair by force take in that land
And bring her unto Troy, and so constrain
Them spite their hearts t'exchange fair Exion
For her, before they get her home again,
Which by us cannot fail for to be done,
If that the Gods to us be favorable,
And this my counsel be acceptable
To you each one, as well as't pleases me.
For when a thing concerns the whole estate
Of Subjects, and their Princes dignity,
It Is reason they both should thereof debate.
And that before they do thereon decree,
They should with one consent agree.
For things that merely touch the comminalty,
Of right should be approved by them all,
And therefore (by you all advised to be,
What I should do,) this counsel I did call:
Now let me hear (said he) what you will say,
And therewithal his speech as then did stay.
This said, a Knight Percheus called by name,
Stood up (who was as Ovid tells us,
The son of that most worthy man of fame,
In his time called the great Euforbius)
(In whom as Ovid fames, transformed was
The soul of learned and wise Pithagoras.)
And in most humble wise these words he spoke:
My sovereign Lord, may't please your noble grace
To give me leave (and no displeasure take,)
In this most high and honorable place,
With faithful zeal my mind now to declare
And give you my advise, I will not spare
To tell the truth, for favor nor for dread,
And to my power advise you to beware
Of danger that as now begins to breed,
For doubtless this t'affirme I boldly dare,
That if you mean to do as you pretend,
And Paris into Greece of purpose send;
You will repent the same ^re long time pass,
For that my Father called Euforbius,
(Whose skill in Art so true and perfect was,
And therewithal most wise and virtuous,
Who future things by his prescience knew,
And could divine what after would ensue:
And plainly tell by true Philosophy,
The Event of future Fortune ere it fell:
For nothing whatsoere of secrecy,
But he it knew, and could the same foretell,)
And all men esteemed him wise and sage,
When he was just an hundred years of age.
I do remember well would sit and weep,
And let fall tears upon his beard so gray,
And many times with sighs full sore and deep,
And mournful wise would to me speak and say:
If Paris once be sent to fetch a wife
By force in Greece, it will breed such mortal strife
Against us all, that this most noble Town,
By Grecians force and extreme cruelty,
Shall be destroi'd and utterly thrown down:
And nothing shall procure our safety,
But Grecians swords shall all of us devour,
So much (said he) shall fortune on us lowre.
Wherefore I you beseech now every one,
(Without offense at that which I have said,)
Let all revenge for former wrongs alone,
And your pretended voyage likewise stay,
And let not malice be the cause to cease,
The pleasant course of your most happy peace.
Nor let us not commit ore hastily
Our happiness to fickle Fortunes hand,
Ne yet disturb with ancient enmity
This state which now so flourishing does stand.
For if that to the same you give consent,
There Is none of you but shall it sore repent.
And if thereto your minds so much are bent,
That by no means this voyage you will stay,
Let some man else in Paris place be sent,
That so perhaps the better speed you may:
This is (said he) my counsel in this case,
Which I thought good to give unto your grace.
Which said, they all began to shoot and cry
Against him in most fierce and furious wise,
And ra^l'd at him and at the Prophecy,
His Father told, and said it was all but lies.
Which after proved in conclusion,
To turn unto their own confusion.
For that is before ordained, shall sure fall out,
And state of things with fate is so inglewd,
That whatsoere must be, without all doubt
Will come to pass, and may not be eschewd:
Which cau^d them all t'agree in one consent,
That Paris into Greece should straight be sent.
(Their destiny was such they could't not shun)
And having all agreed thereon, they rose,
And for that time their counsel it was don.
But when it was known abroad as Guydo shoes,
Like woman clean distraught of wit she fared,
And wise and learned Cassandra thereof heard.
And said, alas what will you do?
And in most doleful wise began to weep,
And said, shall Paris thither go?
Which words she did pronounce with sighs full deep,
And falling in a swound with extreme pain,
Infurious wise began sore to complain.
And woefully gave many a grievous groan,
And for to die, she could not then with hold
To mourn and make great lamentation,
And tare her hair, and both her hands did fold,
And said, alas (a hundred times and more)
Oh fortune fell why is thy rage so sore
Against us bent, that with most angry frown,
Thou weau'st the web of our adversity?
And plotting the utter ruin of our Town,
Procur'st our deaths with great extreamitie
By sword of vengeance, (worse then pestilence,)
Increasing of hate and extreme violence.
Oh woeful Troy, what is thy gu^lt alas
That thou must be destroid and brought to naught?
What have thou done, or what is thy trespass,
That for the same such vengance should be wrought?
Oh Priam noble King, what fault have thou
Committed against the Gods, that they as now
Provoked are such vengeance great to throw
On thee, and on thy whole posterity?
Oh Mother dear, Queen Hecuba also,
Tell me I thee beseech the certainty,
What manner crime, and other great offense
Have thou committed, to have such recompense?
For to behold the days so terrible,
When all thy sons in cruel wise shall die
By dint of sword, and death most horrible:
Why will you not alas your minds apply
To hearken to my counsel now in time,
And seek how to prevent while it is the prime,
These dangers great before they do proceed
Unto the full effect and period?
Which by the Gods is certainly decreed,
And by no means nor way may be withstood;
Unless that we another course will shape,
The doom of the incensed Gods t'escape.
The memory whereof does so torment
My grieved mind, that I cannot jndure
The woe I feel. And therewithal she went
To Priamus her Father to procure
Some remedy, and fell upon the ground,
And wept as fast as if she should have dround
In floods of tears, which trickled down her face*
And as her pain would her permit, she spoke
To him, and cried in that most woeful case,
Beseeching him some remedy to take
In that extreme, as she that too well knew
What danger by the same there would ensue.
But all her tears and cries did naught prevail,
For Priam would no answer thereto make,
For as men say, what shall be, cannot fail,
But in due time the full effect will take.
And fortune with her smoth dissembling face,
Offended (as it seems) with Trojan race;
With malice did in heart against them burn*
And waighting to entrap them by a wile,
Upon a sudden gave her wheel a turn,
And that she might the sooner them beguile,
She hastened them to their confusion,
With wilfulness, and jndiscretion
Against the Greeks a quarrel to undertake,
And thereupon their counsel they did hold,
And did agree that voyage then to make
Into the Grecian land, fall out what would.
But if they had been ruled by good advise,
Of those that did persuade them to be wise.
And follow Hectors counsel which he gave,
And Helenus advise retaind in mind,
And well obserud Percheus sentence grave,
Which after they to be most true did find:
And lastly to Cassandraes Prophecy,
Had bent their ^ares, and holden't for no lie:
They had not fallen into such misery,
As afterward they did, but had liu^d still
In honor, and in great felicity.
But Fortune that will always have her will
Who ere says nay, was cause that moved themso
In have upon their voyage for to go.
And with looks smoth and full of flattery,
And sugared words with venomous intent,
To show her double heart and treachery,
Pretending good, but unto mischief bent.
And watching time against them to prevail,
With Faith in face, but fraud within her tail.
So much intised them to give consent,
That Paris should in have to Grecia go,
That by no means they could themselves content,
Till that they had agreed it should be so.
Whose Voyage in the chapter does ensue,
I will at large declare and show to you.
CHAP. IIII.
How King Priam sent Paris, Diophebus, and others into Greece, to be revenged
for the rauishing of his Sister Exion, and how they being in Grecia ravished
fair Helena wife to Menelaus, and brought her with them to Troy.

WHen time approacht that Titan began to lead
His chariot twixt the stars of Hiades,
(Which have their seat in Taurus horned head,)
And in the glistring stars called Pleiades:
Whereof six do continually appear
Unto our sight, the Seventh for shame and fear
Does hide her head, still thinking on her crime,
And therefore dares nor show her beams so clear
But keeps back, and will not in due time
With her fair sisters openly appear,
Because that she with an earthly God did lie,
And was found with him in adultery.
And since that time she has so bashful been,
(And for her fact ashamed as does appear,
That seldom in our sight she will be seen.)
And when the Sun in the celestial sphere,
Between these stars in full sixteenth degree,
Of Taurus heat was justly found to be,
And in the sweet and pleasant month of May
When Flora fills each meadow, hill, and dale,
With fair and dainty flowers fresh and gay,
And Zephyrus with his most pleasant gale
Does aid to cloth them there in liueries new,
And makes their blossoms show with lively hew.
And bid us to be merry, light, and glad,
That they new fruit upon them gin to bear,
Against Antumne when as harvest in his had,
And ripened grapes upon each Vine appear.
In that same month when men for their disport,
Do walk abroad themselves to recomfort,
Rejoicing to behold the trees so full
Of blossoms sweet, in hope that they will bear
Good store of fruit, to gather and to pull,
In ripening time, and season of the year,
In midst of the fresh and pleasant spring,
When little Birds delightful notes do sing.
Paris and Deiphobus that were gone
In have into Panomie, purposely
To mustar men and make provision,
And all things for the Navy, speedily
Return to Troy, and in their company
Three thousand valiant Knights of great activity
And twenty two fair ships well furnished,
With all things that to them belonging were,
Who having all provided that should need,
King Priam did no longer time defer,
But willed Lord Aeneas, Anthenor,
And Polidamus, and many Trojans more
To arm themselves, and preparation make,
With Paris on that voyage for to go:
And when they came their leaves of him to take,
In pithie words he did unto them show
The full effect of his intention,
Was chiefly to recover Exion.
For when that Voyage especially he made,
And so the time no longer to delay,
When Paris and the rest together had
Their leaves of Priam taken, they went their way,
And entering ship, did presently set sail
(In Venus name,) in hope she would not fail
By aid of Jove, t'assist them in their need,
And entering Sea, with weather fair and clear,
And wind at will, they sailed with great speed,
That in short time they unto land gr^w near.
For nothing in their voyage did them let,
And yet by chance upon the Sea they met
A Ship wherein King Menalaus then was,
That Sailed unto Pyilon there to see
Duke Nestor, and the time with him to pass,
Suspecting not each to other foes to be.
Within those ships, the which King Menalaus
Unto King Agamennon brother was,
And husband to Queen Helena the fair,
That sister was unto the brothren twain,
King Castor and King Pollux, Knights that were
Of great renown in arms, and did attain
Unto such height therein, that for the same
No Grecian Knights did ere deserve more fame.
Who at that time remaind within a Town
Called Strinester, their chief and princely seat,
Wherein they jointly raignd with great renown,
For that the love between them was so great
That they could not jndure to live alone,
And with them was the Princes Hermione.
(A Lady that in beauty did excel
The daughter of their sister Helena.)
And yet although as then it so befell,
That they together met upon the Sea,
And that they saild close by each others side,
Yet were their hearts filled with inward pride,
That neither to each other one made show
To call or ask from wence they came or were,
But past along, and for the wind did blow
Directly with the Trojans, and did bear
Them swiftly thence, they did within a while
Ariue before an old and ancient Isle,
Which Cithera is called at this day.
And there within the haven did anchor cast,
Where presently not making any stay,
Apparelling themselves, they did in have
Set foot on land with resolution stout,
And hope to bring their purposesone about.
(Within this Isle an ancient Temple was,
Most pleasant and most beautiful to see,
For that in sumpteous work it did surpass
All other whatsoere in that country,
Which honored was of all both far and near
Throughout the Land, and once in every year
A solemn feast was kept within the same,
Where many men with great devotion,
In honor of the Goddess Venus came.
To whom they use with superstition,
(Which by them was obserud from age to age,)
To bring great gifts, and went on pilgrimage,
And every man did offer sacrifice,
Where while they kneeld and most devoutly said
Their Orations to her in Parum wise,
The Image unto them an answer made
Of every thing whereof they stood in doubt,
Resolving them, how that it would fall out.
This custom they do use continually
Within that Church so sumptuous and so brave,
And did observe the same most reverently,
(In hope that they the better speed should have.)
And as the Gods would hau't, their fortune was
To go on shore the self same day when as
This yearly feast was kept in solemn wise,
Whereto great store of Grecians flockt and came
From every place to offer sacrifice,
And other rights t'obserue about the same.
The which as soon as Paris did epsy,
He took with him some of his company
And with them to the Temple went his way,
Apparelled in brave and sumptuous wise,
T'obserue the ancient rights there vsd that day,
At Uenus shrine and t'offer sacrifice,
And kneeling down with great devotion.
Before her Altar made his Oration,
And on it laid great store of Jewels rare,
Oriental pearls, rich stones, and heaps of gold,
(For at that time he would not seem to spare.)
Which made the Greeks admire, and to behold
His beauty, sumptuous port and Majesty,
And in their hearts to muse what he might be.
For as the story says, he was so fair*
That no man might therein compare with him.
And therewithal so fine proportion bare,
For comely shape of body and of lim,
That there was never seen a brauer Knight,
For all men to behold him took delight.
And pressed in heaps about him for the same,
Desiring much his name and state to know,
And for what cause as then he thither came,
And prayed his men the same to them to show:
But they did make their answer in such wise,
That no man by their speech could ought surmise.
Yet some of them not fearing to declare,
The truth both of his name and dwelling place,
Did boldly tell, and thereof made no spare,
That Priam King of Troy his Father was,
A Prince of mighty force and great renown,
And that he thither came for Exion.
And thus of him they did enquire and spoke,
As they together were, and every one
Of several minds did several verdicts make,
And all of them were in suspicion:
But chiefly they in whom no judgment were,
For every man desires news to hear.
And whilst of him the speech went far and near,
And past from man to man in Greecian land,
Queen Helena at last thereof did hear,
And when as she the same did understand,
And truth thereof for certainty did know,
Of those that went and came both too and fro,
She could not rest until that with her eye,
She found report and sight in one t'agree,
And for that time determined to try
The truth, and those brave Troyan Knights to see:
(But more (God knows) of mere intention
For Paris sake, then for devotion.)
She fained on a Pilgrimage to go,
Unto the shrine of Venus bright and clear,
That unto her some honor she might shoe:
And when all things for her prepared were,
And she adorned most like a stately Queen,
She went to see, and likewise to be seen.
For what should move her else with such desire,
And in her heart put such a motion,
To go to see new sights; but secret fire
Of wanton lust? and no devotion,
Upon the Goddess Venus then to call.
And as the manner is of women all,
Delighting to be there where great resort
Of people are, and t^shew themselves at plays,
And at each common pastime and disport,
That men their beauties may commend and praise:
And at their better liberty to see,
How they may find an opportunity
To Effect their wills, and always lie in wait,
In places where their minds and thoughts are se^,
In covert wise their wanton looks to ^ait,
And privily like favor there to get
From those they love, by glauncing of the eye,
And for to show what in their hearts does lie.
With touch of hand in secret among the prease,
Or pinch on arm, or on the foot to tread,
Of those whom they do like, they never cease,
Till of their wanton purpose they have sped:
For against their wills there is neither wit nor might
That may prevail: for be it wrong or right,
They Will have their wills who so says yea or nay,
For to withstand their lust no man has might,
Thus much of them does Guido boldly say,
And throughout all his Book takes great delight,
Of women-kind to speak naught else but ill,
The which to write is sore against my will.
And't grieves me that I must of force rehearse,
The bitter words which in his Book are found,
Whereby he does their honors so reverse;
For that I am to women so much bound:
And since they are all so courteous and so kind,
I dare notspeake of them more then I find
In Guidoes Book, which when I read, did make
My very heart and senses all to tremble,
And with the fear I had my hand did shake,
To think my words with his I must resemble:
But to amend his fault, as loath to abide
Too long in speaking ill, he seems to chide
With Helena, because that then she went
With fained show of great devotion,
Her offering unto Venus to present,
When as she had another motion
Within her heart, the which she should have stayed,
And in these words his mind he spoke, and said:
The greatest cross that man on earth can find,
And of all woes beginning, and the root,
Is the deceit and fraud of women-kind,
Against the which to strive it does not boot:
For when as lust does in their hearts prevail,
Some mischief does ensue without all fail.
Which no man can by any means restrain,
Whereof let fair Queen Helen sample be,
The which could not her inward lust refrain,
But needs would go the Troyan Knight to see,
Whom he had never known in all his life,
For which there did arise such mortal strife,
That thousands for her sake were after slain,
And brought unto their ends by cruelty.
But Helena, in sooth now tell me plain,
What ugly ghost was it that moved thee,
To leave thy loving Lord and husband so,
And all along on pilgrimage to go?
Did thou at home live discontentedly,
That needs thou must go seek for company?
Thou rather should have stayed privately
Within thy house, and not so carelessly
Have left the same in absence of thy King:
But sure thou wast too wilful in that thing,
And negligent, to think what might ensue;
Thou oughtst to have kept thy self out of thy bounds,
And not have taken thy flight within thy mew,
But thou wentst out like Hare amongst the hounds,
There to be caught of very wilfulness:
For true, it is, and so thou must confess,
That thou could not thy wanton lust refrain,
And wilfully thy fained vow would keep.
But oh how many women have been taken
In such a snare, when fitter it was to sleep
Within their beds, and not abroad been found!
Was It ever heard that any ship was drowned,
Or cast on rocks, and all in pieces rent,
Or tossed in seas by weather foul and ill,
If that unto the sea it never went,
But always kept within the haven still?
So he that no occasions will eschew,
Nor fear what danger after may ensue,
Cannot but needs must of necessity,
At unawares, when least he does suspect,
Fall into trouble and adversity:
And he that is so foolish to neglect
His way, and of his footing has no care,
Let him take heed he falls not in a snare.
For when as any harm is done and past,
It is too late thereof for to repent:
If Helena had in her mind forecast
What after might ensue, and been content
To stay at home, bad rumor had not run
Of her throughout the world as it has done.
Which her mishap men pity may of right,
That she the cause was and destruction
Of many a valiant, brave, and worthy Knight,
And likewise brought unto confusion
Her husband, and full many thousands more,
That in her quarrel fought, and did therefore.
Thus Helen unto Cithezon did go,
In all her brave and Princely ornaments,
And solemnly (although with fained shoe)
Her offering made, with many rich presents
Unto the Goddess Venus, on whose name
She called, cried, and prayed t'accept the same.
When Paris this advantage had espide,
With all the have and speed that ere he might,
Unto the Temple presently he hide,
Where he of her no sooner had a sight,
But he was pierced through with Cupids dart,
And stricken in love even at the very heart.
So much he mused at her great seemlinesse,
Her goodly face, and her intising eye,
Her fine proportion, and her comeliness,
And last of all, her great and rare beauty:
Presuming that for fame and feature,
Nature nere framed a fairer creature.
So Angel like to him she did appear,
And therewithal she was so amiable,
That in his sight she seemed as if she were
A heavenly Goddess, fair and admirable:
For in his heart he did himself assure,
That she could be no mortal creature.
So fair and so celestial she did look,
In every part, whereof most curiously
Within his heart a perfect view he took,
And well beheld and marked advisedly,
Her golden hair like to the radiant streams,
Which do descend from Phoebus glistring beams.
Her beautiful complexion clear and bright,
Her cherry checkes like to the Damask Rose,
Mixed with the leaves of Lillies pure and white,
Her christ all eyes, which in them did enclose
A Paradise of pleasure and delight,
And able were with their transparant sight,
This amorous heart clean through and through to pierce
All which with other parts in her that were,
If I should take upon me to rehearse,
As Guido does from head to foot declare
The same at large, with eloquent devise,
My english tongue thereto would not suffice:
For that our speech and Latin are unlike,
I likewise want the Art of Portraiture,
And have no skill in copious Rethoricke,
For to describe so fair a Creature.
And of the Muses nine I know not one:
Therefore I must unto you every one,
Excuse my self, though not of negligence,
For that no want of will there is in me,
But only for default of eloquence,
And unto Guido send you there to see,
How orderly he did declare the same,
So that to take it on me I were too blame.
But I will to the point proceed and show,
How Paris still his eye on her did cast,
And in the temple walked too and fro,
Till having well bethought himself at last,
To ease his heart enflamed with Cupids fire,
He did approach unto her somewhat nier:
And still full of this color went and came,
So deeply was his mind with love possessed,
And Helena for her part did the same,
And privately in heart could take no rest:
But still on him by stealth did cast an eye,
Though outwardly none could her well epsy.
For as she thought she never saw his peer,
Among all the men that on the earth did live,
For comeliness and beauty passing clear,
Nor that to her contentment more did give:
So that on nothing else she set her mind,
But how she might a fit occasion find,
And have the means and opportunity,
Conveniently with him a word to speak,
In other place at better liberty,
Which was the only thing that she did seek:
And still her countenance changed. For Cupids fire
In both their hearts had kindled like desire.
And clothed them with Venus liverie,
And yet no message twixt them then there went,
But privy looks glauncing from the e^e,
Assured them what each to other meant:
And made them wish in heart, that secretly
An amorous combat twixt them they might try,
And their desires unto each other shoe.
At last as Paris by degrees him gat
Up higher, and unto the place did go,
Whereas the fair Queen Helena then: sat:
In secret wise together they did speak,
And as they might their minds to other break.
Declaring what did punish them at the heart,
But this was done least that it should be spied,
When as the press of people did depart,
And such as stayed were busy occupied
To stare upon the temple, and to gase
About the same, as people in a mase,
To see it so adornd in sumptuous wise,
And while they spoke not any one might hear
A word that past, least that they should surmise,
That twixt them any bad intent there were,
Nor what their secret speech as then should mean.
At last it was agreed by the Queen
And Paris with one full and free consent,
What time they should together meet again,
And so they both out of the Temple went,
(Though loath) with hearts repleat with lovers pain,
And that they might avoid suspicion.
When Paris from Queen Helena as gone,
With present speed unto his ship he went,
Where having stand a while, without delay
For all the Troyan Lords and Knights he seat,
To whom in pithie words he began to say,
My Lords and friends in brief to you to tell,
The cause unto you all is known full well,
Wherefore to Greece my Father has us sent,
And what Commission to us he did give:
You know it was the full of his intent,
That we should seek to take and to relieve
My noble Aunt, the Princely Exion,
Out of the hands of proud King Telamon.
The which to do I can devise no way,
How it by us should well effected be,
For no man can this unto me denay,
That he is mighty strong in his Country:
And well alied with friends on every side,
And has an heart abounding with such pride,
That to leave her by force he does disdain.
The best way then that I can now devise,
(Since with him so to deal it is in vain,
And that our power thereto does not suffice:
Because we are not able to withstand
His force, nor with him fight within his Land.)
Is, since that fortune has us hither brought,
And caused us by adventure here to land,
(When as God knows it was not in our thought)
At Venus home, that not far hence does stand,
And wherein at this time there is great store
Of Jewels, Gold, and other treasures more,
The which the Greeks unto it hither bring
By sea and land, and there both rich and poor,
To Uenus use to make their offering,
And her therein most solemnly adore:
And that the fair Queen Helen now is there,
I think that it the best course for us were
To bear her hence by force, and prisoner make,
And having put the Grecians to the foil,
Their gold and treasure forcibly to take,
And them of it and of their lives to spoil:
Which having done without all tarrying,
The same into our ships this night to bring.
Whereof we cannot fail who ere says nay,
And to that end (said he) let us ready make,
And without further respect or delay,
Our armours and our weapons to us take:
To set on them with all our force and might,
Which said, within their ships they staid till night,
Till Phoebus did on earth no more appear,
But was gone down as it was his woonted guise,
And glistring stars did shine most bright and clear:
Before the Moon that time began to rise,
They all went forth their ships in brave array,
And to the temple straight did take their way.
Intending not long in the same to tarry,
And so in have they entered Citheron,
Where going straight unto the Sanctuary,
(Without all manner of devotion,
To Venus done in her Oratorie,
For it was then out of their memory
To worship her, they had no such intent,
But only for to rob and spoil the same,
Whereto as then their minds were wholly bent)
All what so ere unto their hands then came
They took and bore away, and nothing left
Within the Church nor I sle, but them bereft
Of all their Jewels, precious stones, and gold,
Their relics and their vessels sacared,
And every other thing what ere they could,
Were it profane, or were it hallowed,
They made it prey, and in their furious mood,
Did kill and slay all those that them withstood.
And many that with ghastly wounds did bleed,
Which they received had to save their right,
As prisoners to their ships with them were led,
(Not able to withstand their puissant might:)
Which after lived in long captivity,
With sorrow, grief, and great extremity.
While Paris earnestly for Helen sought,
Whom when he found in courteous wise he kissed,
And joy fully within his arms her caught,
For she seemed not to strive nor to resist:
But yielded unto him without delay,
For It had been but mere folly to say nay.
Her heart being woone before that he came there,
She could not strive, (for women it is not fit)
And for that cause to yield she had less fear,
And he with such good words as then were meet
Did comfort her, and therewith did her bear
Unto his ship, and letting her stay there
Well guarded by his men returned again,
To make an end of his desired pray.
Not far from thence within a pleasant plain
A Castle stood, where many soldiers lay
To keep the same, who waking gave a shout,
And suddenly at once did issue out,
Andran in have to rescue Citheron.
But ere they came the Troyans had their pray,
And with the same unto their ships were gone,
Wherewith the Greeks did make no long delay
But followed them, and then began to fight
On either side, with all their force and might.
And Tygar like each other slew and killed,
Till many dead within the field did lie,
For neither unto other then would yield,
But at the last the Greeks were forced to fly:
For that the Troyans doubled them in number
With multitudes, and did them fore incomber.
And made them run back to the Castle gate,
In hope to save themselves therein by flight,
But all in vain for them, for it was too late,
The Troyans were of so great force and might,
That to resist it could them not avail,
So cruelly they did them then assail.
And furiously did put them all to death,
Not sparing one, but all they ouertooke,
By dint of sword did yield their vital breath,
And when the field by force they had forsook,
The battle by the Troyans being woone,
In fierce and furious wise he then begun
The Castle straight to ransacke and to pill,
Wherein they did great store of treasure gain,
And having done their pleasures and their will,
With that and all the rest they did obtain
In Citheron, unto their ships they went,
And as it was their purpose and intent.
The wind as then being good and peaceable,
They sailed toward Troy without delay,
And having weather fair and comfortable,
They did arrive within the seventh day
That they put to the sea, at Tenedowne,
A Castle standing near unto the Town.
And presently out of their ships they went,
And with all speed the King advertised,
(By messenger whom they in have then sent)
Of their return* and how that they had sped:
The which when Priam heard he was full glad,
And in his heart such joy and pleasure had,
That their affairs so well had fallen out,
That in all have by his authority,
He caused it to be published round about
The town of Troy, with great solemnity:
Comanding that for those good news they should,
In sumptuous wise a solemn feast day hold.
To thank their Gods in meek and humble wise,
And on their Altars with devotion,
To offer them great gifts and sacrifice,
While Paris staying still at Tenedon,
Did welcome, feast, and Princely entertained
Queen Helena, that wept and sore complained.
And evermore bewaild her fortune fell,
That so among strangers comfortless alone,
She was constraind against her will to dwell
Far sequestered from friends, and knew not one,
To whom she might declare in privitie,
The grief she had for her Captivity.
And still she wept and waild with pittious cheer,
That floods of tears down from her cheeks did rain,
Distilling from her eyes most fair and clear,
And through the great extremity and pain
Which she then felt, she sighed bitterly,
And with a woeful voice did often cry.
To think how she had left King Menelaus,
For which she wished death her heart to ease,
And for that cause became so furious,
That nothing could her grief and woe appease:
And more t'encrease and multiply her pain,
When as she thought upon her brethren twain,
Her Husband, and her little Daughter dear
Fair Hermion, whom she did love so well,
Her face with grief did pale and wan appear,
Which other times in beauty did excel
The Lilly flower, and much the same surpass:
But then her roseat color changed was.
And more and more her grief did still increase,
That in her face she was clean altered,
And by no means her sorrow would surcease,
But in most doleful wise that life she led:
Till Paris to relieve her heaviness,
Went unto her, and with all gentleness,
And pleasant words somewhat appeasd her mind,
And said, alas most fair and noble Queen,
Why are you to your self so much unkind?
I surely think that purposely you mean,
And will your death and final end procure,
Or else you would not such extreme grief endure*
Nor causlesse shed so many a brinish tear,
That with the same you wet your outward weed,
And show your self like unto one that were
A penitent, lamenting her misdeed:
Alas fair Queen, alas, why do you so?
Let all this grief and sorrow now clean go.
And live no more sweet Lady in distress,
But leave your woe and chearish up your heart,
And think no more upon this heaviness,
But as it is a prudent woman's part,
Be glad, and what so ever you will crave
Of me or mine, be sure you shall it have.
Let pass I say these salt and brinish tears,
For it is in vain in sorrow still to live,
And here my faith I plight to you and yours,
That I will you maintain, keep, and relieve,
In better sort then ever yet you were
By Menelaus, and therefore have no fear.
For I will do what I to you protest,
Upon the faith and honor of a Knight,
For falsehood in my heart I do detest.
Wherewith the Queen as well as then she might,
Fayning sighs with water in her eyes
Did answer him, and spoke in lovely wise:
I know (said she) whether I be loath or leefe,
Unto your will I must not now say nay,
Although it be to my no little grief,
For she that is bound, of force must needs obey:
And since that from your hands I cannot fly,
I rest content with my Captivity.
Which (against my will) constraines me here to dwell.
For it belongs not to women-kind,
In foreign soil to strive or to rebel,
Where they are like no favor great to find:
And that their cause shall not maintained be.
But if you list in heart to pity me,
And in your mind conceive so good a deed,
As to extend to us some charity,
While that you live you shall the better speed:
For he that helps man in necessity,
And comforts them that are in woe and grief,
Shall never fail of comfort and relief.
Then Lady dear, quoth Paris, I assure
Unto you now, that what so ere you crave,
I will the same at your desire procure,
And thereof in your heart assurance have:
And that in such abundance as you list,
For no man shall your will and heast resist.
And therefore be no whit at all dismayed,
But comfort take and certainly believe,
That I will do what ever I have said,
And now (said he) all sorrow clean remove:
And saying so, he led her to a place,
That purposely for her prepared was.
Where, after certain speeches twixt them two,
In secret wise when they together were,
He did begin her plainly there to woe,
And unto her did say, my Lady dear,
(Think not I call you so, to please your mind,
But from my very heart as you shall find.)
And therefore entertain within your thought,
What I to you shall speak, and thus I say,
S^th that by gods decree you are hither brought,
(For no man can their will and power stay)
I dare affirm that you were not accursed
Therein, and that they do it not for the worst,
But for your good, and so you must it take,
And since there is no other remedy,
You must of your necessity virtue make,
And be as glad, and live as merrily,
As if you were within your native land,
For now I give and plight to you my hand.
That here you shall at pleasure all things have,
How dear so ere it does unto me cost,
And what so ere your heart can wish or crave,
You shall it have, and hereof dare I boast,
That this our land, (as well it shall be found)
In every thing does plenteouslie abound.
And much more then within the Grecian land,
And though that far from th'I sland called Achay,
You are as now, since you cannot withstand
Your fortune, you must not your self dismay:
For that with more and greater majesty,
Honor, duty, wealth and dignity,
You shall be served here, then there you were.
And cause you must your husband now forsake,
And against your will his company forbear,
For which you seem such sorrow here to make,
Your care therein by me shall soon be eased,
For that if you therewith be not displeased:
In stead of him I will your husband be,
And love and honor you with all my heart,
If you can likewise think so well of me:
And till that death by force shall make us part,
I will be true both in my word and deed,
For in my heart I fully have decreed,
To be to you as loving and as kind*
As dutiful, as friendly, and as true,
As ever you King Menelaus did find,
And in all things will yield to you your due:
And here my faith and troth to you I plight;
To last until that death with dart me smight.
And though my words do seem but rude and plain*
I hope for that you will me not disgrace,
Nor any whit this my request disdain,
Since I descend and come of roy all race,
And am as noble of degree and blood
As Menelaus, and in each point as good;
And will to you more faithful be in love
Then ere he was, and never change for new,
For nothing shall my heart from you remove;
Then since this I protest to you is true,
I pray you now leave off to wail and weep,
And let some comfort in your bosom creep:
For little does avail this woe and grief,
If you consider well your own estate,
And thank the Gods that send you such relief
In your distress, and think you are fortunate
To hap so well, and this is all I crave,
That love for love of you I now may have.
Alas (said she) can it possible be,
That I which have my friends abandoned,
And live in sorrow and adversity,
Should not be grieved, and wish that I were dead?
I see no cause why I should cease to erie,
Nor yet my cheeks from brinish tears to dry.
It cannot be, for sure it were against kind,
That my so sore and great extreamitie,
I should so soon abandon out of mind,
And that the thing which touches me so nie,
And is the only cause of this my smart,
Could be so lightly cast out of my heart:
And for whose sake I am as now constrained,
To sorrow for our separation:
But since the Gods for me have thus ordained,
That I should love in this strange Nation,
I am content to take it patiently,
And to their heasts t'ob^y submissiuely.
For folly it were to strive against their will.
Wherefore as now my self I will provoke,
(Although it seem my very heart to kill)
For to submit my neck unto this yoke:
And against my will of mere necessity,
Obey to what so ere you will do with me,
For It would not help if that I should't refuse.
And thus somewhat he did her grief appease,
And yet what ere she said, she could not choose
But think thereon. But what should she disease
Her self so much, since it is a thing most sure,
An heart of ^^int could not so much endure.
For it is the common use of women-kind,
Till they have wept and wailed at their will,
Nere to surcease nor to content their mind,
But when they have of sorrow had their fill,
And wearied are therewith, they will as fast,
All sorrow from their hearts as lightly cast:
And soon lay hold on comfort in their grief,
A man their hearts may easily disseuer,
From woe to joy, from sorrow to relief,
There is no storm that can endure for ever:
For as the learned write, things violent,
By natures course cannot be permanent.
When storms are past the Sun much brighter is,
And shines hotter after then before,
So by the speech and counsel of Paris,
Fair Helena as then did weep no more.
For as the fair and pleasant morning bright,
By custom and by kind does follow night:
Right so in time her heart began to cheer,
And of her tears the floods likewise to dry,
And having clean abandoned all fear,
She lived in Troy with Paris joyfully:
As in the Chapter following you may see,
Whereas at large it shall declared be.
CHAP. V.
How Paris was received into Troy at his return out of Greece, and how he was
married to Queen Helena.

WHen Helena had left her mourning cheer,
And that her rosent color showed again,
Within her face most beautiful and clear,
And had forgotten all her grief and pain:
Paris that was in heart so amorous,
In have did send unto King Priamus,
For horse and men, apparel gorgeous,
And diverse costly jewels of great prise,
That Helena might show more glorious,
And enter Troy in brave and sumptuous wise:
And all things he desired being sent,
Without delay to Troy with her he went.
And by the way King Priamus them met,
Accompanied with his Nobility,
And many fair and gallant Ladies great,
And maidens by their birth of high degree:
And with the^ store of knights that were most brave*
And Citizens which their attendance gave.
To welcome Paris, who as then did ride
With all his prisoners, two and two before,
And he, and Deiphobus on each side
Of Helena, to honor her the more:
And after them the Lords of high degree,
And all the rest most orderly to see.
And tweene each rank did leave a little space,
That so their train the longer might appear,
And in that sort they road an easy pace,
Till that by Priam they encountered were:
Who met them in a fair and pleasant plain,
And in his hand took Helens horses rain.
And so conuaied her into the town,
Where store of people flockt on every side,
And all the way along ran up and down,
To gase and look upon their new come bride:
The Trumpets sounding in most stately wise,
Which made their echo mount up to the skies.
And many another kind of Instrument,
In sundry wise played several melody
Before them as into the Town they went,
So that to hear the pleasant harmony,
It Would make man's heart to leap and mount for joy.
And when they all were entered into Troy,
King Priam at his Palace did alight,
And by the hand did take the Grecian Queen,
And straight with all convenient speed he might,
Led her into a Chamber well beseene:
Commanding all his Officers to see,
That all what ere she need prepared should be.
And calling for a cup of wine, he drank
Unto the Queen to welcome her withal,
Forthwith she did in humble wise him thank,
And so he went again into the Hall
Till supper time, and left her there to make
Her ready, and her ease mean while to take.
But of the joy that was within the town,
In every place where people sat together,
And in the streets of Troy walked up and down,
And spoke thereof the one unto the other:
My style is all to rude of it to write,
So much they did in heart and mind delight.
That Paris safely home returned is,
And in his voyage sped so luckily,
And of his men not any one did miss,
But all had escaped death most happily:
And to fulfill their joy upon next day,
As Guido in his Latin verse does say,
They did the time no further off prolong,
But with all speed to Apolloes Temple went,
And fore the Lark that morn begun his song,
Together did with full and free consent,
Give faith and troth, and knit the wedlock band
Between them two, for evermore to stand.
Whereto the King himself did give consent,
And all his Lords and Nobles in likewise,
The Commons also were therewith content
And greed thereto, in favor of Paris:
And so the wedding feast most royally,
Continued was with great solemnity
Within the town of Troy for eight days space.
To write each kind of revell, sport, and dance,
The several sorts of mirths that then there was,
The brave attire and lofty countenance
Of Courtiers proud, and lovers amorous,
The privy grutching of the jealious.
The runnings and the tilts on every day,
The diverse courses served at the feast,
The several kinds of music that did play,
The Largis given, the overplus did rest,
When all was done whole thousands to suffice;
My English will not serve for to devise,
Such terms and phrases as sufficient were
To show the same. But when the certainty
Thereof did come unto Cassandraes ear,
A thousand sighs she fetched and began to cry:
And woefully did tear and rent her hairs,
And in this sort her face all wet with tears,
Said wretched Troy, why erst thou in this case,
And give consent unto this villainy,
Why art thou now become so void of grace,
As to maintain so foul adultery:
And suffrest Paris thus to wed and wiue
Queen Helena, whose husband is alive?
Oh woeful Troy too cruel is thy fate,
The time is come thou shall destroyed be,
To shun the same it is now all too late,
For many Fathers shall their children lee
This day in health, the next day shall be slain,
And midst the fields lie wounded in great pain.
And many wives in sorrow great shall weep,
To see their husbands lie in open field,
Their bodies pierst and cut with wounds full deep,
And there in grievous wise their breaths to yield:
Alas how can they choose but sore complain,
And yet must be content and this sustain.
Oh wretched Mother, woeful is thy case,
To loose thy children without remedy,
And see them slain each one before thy face,
And shall not helped though nere so loud thou cry:
Alas (good Queen) what grief shall thee surpresse,
And yet shall and no ease in thy distress.
Oh Troyans blinded with security,
Why will you not be ruled by my advise,
And to avoid the Grecians cruelty,
With speed make separation twixt Paris
And Helena, and their foul act abhor,
And her again unto her Lord restore.
What, think you that his theft and cruel deed,
The Grecians will forget and not require?
No, no, assure your selves without all dread,
The sword of vengeance shall most sharply bite
For his offense, and will endure the smart,
When as we shall behold in spite our heart,
Our Palaces and houses all cast down,
And cruelly destroyed before our face,
And lastly the subversion of our town,
Which at the Grecians hands shall find no grace:
Alas, alas, most wretchlesse Queen Helaine,
Unhappy woman causer of our pain.
Bold misadvis'd, and merely without grace,
Thou only art procurer of our care,
And sole disturber of our happy peace,
And kindled have the brand of cruel war:
For thou alone art ground and root of all
The mischief that on us is like to fall.
And shall see many a doleful funeral,
And mournful feasts held herewithin this town,
Thus did Cassandra loudly cry and call,
To every one as she went up and down
Throughout the streets, and boldly to them told,
What by that means unto them happen should.
Still crying out alas and welaway,
Are you so hard of heart that you naught fear?
And no man could her furious course then stay,
Till Priamus the King thereof did hear:
Who that she might no more such crying make
About the Town, he did her cause to take,
And being bound with chains in prison cast,
Where she remained long time in misery,
(And no man for her words and counsel past,
But lived all in great security:)
Where I will let her lie to weep and mourn,
And to the Greeks my style again return.
The most unhappy time being come, and while
That fortune wild the Troyans to be glad,
And with dissembling face on them did smile,
For which great joy and triumph then they made:
Supposing that all things would fall out we will,
Not thinking on the turning of the wheel
Of her that is as wavering as the clock,
And when men trust her most will turn aside,
And suddenly unto them give a mock,
For in deceit she has her only pride:
And loves to hide her beauty under cloud,
Against whose might there is no man can him shroud
For when she fawnes, she is least to trust upon,
For in her smile the Troyans little thought,
That she pretended their confusion,
And by that means which they as then had sought:
For they supposed of that to be secure
Which they desired, and should the Greeks procure
To yield unto their wills and not resist,
Supposing by that thing by Paris done,
They should be forced to do what ere they list.
But when report thereof abroad did run,
And tidings unto Menelaus was brought,
Of all the wrongs against him by Troyans wrought.
Whilst he with Nestor did at Pirrha stay,
Where he received news most certainly
What they had done in the Island Citheray,
And what exceeding rage and tyranny,
They did upon his men there execute,
As also of the assault and hot pursuit
That on the Greeks they made that fled away,
And how they spared no man nor womankind,
But killed some, and took the rest as pray,
And all the gold and treasure they could find:
And when he heard how they had taken his wife,
Whom he did love as dearly as his life,
And more, if more might be, a thousand fold,
His face did look with pale and deadly hue,
And therewithal his heart did wax so cold
With sorrow which therein did still renew:
That with much grief being cast into a sound,
Like senseless corpse he fell unto the ground,
And could upon his feet no longer stand:
Which when Duke Nestor marked, and saw him strive
Twixt life and death, he took him by the hand,
And speedily did him again reviue:
Wherewith he sighed and said, now woe is me,
That of my wife I should bereaved be,
Which was my only joy and my delight.
Come death I say and with thy cruel dart,
(Since fortune has to me done this despite)
In pieces twain now cleave my woeful heart:
For I cannot endure that Helena
My Queen should thus from me be borne away.
Farewell my joy, farewell my chiefest bliss,
Now strangers have thee in possession,
And I the thing I love do so much do miss,
And must endure't with extreme passion:
Would God I knew how that they do entreat
My Helena, that was to me so sweet.
Now thou art gone the thought of thee me slayth,
And I must live in sorrow, grief, and woe,
Expecting still my end by cruel death.
And therewithal he said, that he would go
To Sparta, therein comfortless alone,
His great and grievous loss to wail and moan.
But Nestor would not leave his company,
But went with him for consolation,
By all means seeking how to pacify
His mind; and having great compassion
On his distress, did make no longer stay,
But did him to his Country thence convay.
And being there arrived with woeful heart,
By letters sent in post to every place,
He did unto his brethren twain impart,
His great mischance, and sad, and woeful case:
Desiring them to come to him with speed,
To aid him with their counsel in his need.
And first to King Agamemnon did write,
And to King Castor and King Pollux send,
Desiring them with all the speed they might,
In his distress their aid to him to lend:
And when they came and saw his countnance dead,
Like to a man with thought half murdered,
They could not choose but for his sorrow grieve,
And by persuasions sought the same to ease,
But when they saw they could it not remove
Out of his mind, nor him no whit appease:
King Agamemnon wisely began to speak,
And in these words his mind to him did break;
Brother (said he) what woe, what heaviness,
What deadly grief does thus torment your mind,
And as it seems your senses all oppress
So furiously; and we no case can find,
You should do thus? but grant it to be true,
That cause for to be grieved is given you:
Yet you should be so armed with providence,
That what so ere dislike were offered you,
You should thereat not seem to take offense,
And make as though thereof you nothing knew:
For that a wise man in adversity,
Should joyful countenance show, and secretly
Conceive in mind the thing that does him grieve,
And privily within his breast enclose
His wrath and ire, that none might it perceive,
Nor let it once be known unto his foes:
For it is the counsel of the provident,
That when man's heart with fury thinks to rent,
He should not seem to be possessed with ire,
Till that he finds fit occasion,
To kindle and reviue the burning fire
Of vengeance, when his foe thinks not thereon:
For grief showed outwardly, by proof we find
Two things does breed, which are of several kind;
First, it provokes thy friend to sigh full sore,
(For nature binds him to lament thy grief)
And it does cause thy foe rejoice the more,
(For he is glad when thou do want relief:)
Wherefore when grief most in thy heart does lie,
Show cheerful face to cross thine enemy.
And make as though thou do esteem at naught,
The thing which does thee most torment and vex,
And evermore remains in thy thought,
Ye though it does thee nere so much perplex:
And where thou have most cause for to complain,
There make best show, and joyful countnance feign.
For into tears although thou should distill,
And never cease tormenting of thy mind,
Yea though thy self thou should therewith kill,
Thou could but little ease and pleasure find:
For vengeance nere was taken, nor honor won,
By any thing that man that way has done.
For though it lasts long, it brings no gain,
It Is said the man that can dissemble wrong,
(Although it be with inward greet and pain)
Is subtle, and of valiant heart and strong:
And he that can be peaceable in smart,
Does well declare he has a noble heart.
For he that weeps like women in their rage,
And thinks by words and tears to ease his pain,
His sorrow and his grief shall nere assuage,
And by no means to honor shall attain:
Let Us not with words, but with our weapons fight,
And hold our tongs, and manlike try our might.
Words are but wind, and water it is we weep,
And though the storms and floods of either two
Do multiply, and us in sorrow keep,
They do no good but still increase our woe:
And to our foes (when as that they do ^e^^e
That we do make so sad and heavy (...)
It does increase and multiply their joy,
And gives them cause much more to laugh at us;
Wherefore let not this sorrow thee annoy,
Which now does seem so to torment thee thus:
For it is said, the courage of a Knight
Is proved, when as with mischief and despite
He is not feared, nor in adversity
Does not himself faint-heartedly submit
To any danger what so ere it be,
Nor does impair his honor any whit
Through foul despair, but hops always well,
And has a mind as firm as any steel,
To Effect the thing that he does take in hand,
And his desire at last to satisfy;
For this from me I pray you understand,
That he which in himself has fantasy
T'assaile his foe, and venture life and lim,
What ere befall or happens unto him,
And takes the chance that unto him is cast;
He commonly nere fails in victory,
And having dangers all clean over-past,
In fine obtains praise eternally:
And now it is time to speak in words but few,
Good brother mine your valor forth to show,
To cheer your heart, and for to make you strong,
The forces of your foes for to withstand,
And to revenge your domages and wrong,
And we thereto will put our helping hand:
And all with one consent, and force, and might,
Assist you in your need t'obtaine your right.
And in despite of all that shall us let,
Within the fields before the Town of Troy
Will plant our siege, and there our tents up set,
And ere we part will it utterly destroy,
Albeit as now I can appoint no day.
Therefore let us with all the speed we may
Send messengers into the Grecian Land,
The Princes of the same to certify
Of these your wrongs, and crave their helping hand
T'assist you, and the same to remedy:
And so full well revenge your self you may,
And this is all that I to you can say.
King Menelaus therewith somewhat appeased,
Began more cherefull countenance to make,
And with his heart and mind thereby was eased,
All outward grief did presently forsake:
And seeing that by care he could't not mend,
To all his friends throughout the land did send.
And first his Kin and allies he did move,
By showing them what had chanced unto him,
Desiring them of courtesy and love,
His case as it were their own for to esteem:
And with their powers assistants to him be,
To aid him in his great extreamitie.
His letters seen and read, there did resort
Achilles, and Patroclus Princes stout,
Diomedes, and others to his Court:
Who having heard what things had fallen out,
Did all with one consent and will agree,
Upon the King of Troy revenged to be.
And in that case and enterprise referred
Themselves unto the prudent government
Of valiant King Agamemnon, preferred
By them (with all their full and free consent)
To be the chief Commander of their host,
Provided at each several Princes cost.
With faithful vow and promise to maintain
And follow wars, while life and means should last,
Against their foes triumphantly to gain
Renown and fame when vital days were past:
Thereof to leave perpetual memory,
From age to age, to their posterity.
But ere they did assemble all their men,
And bring them to the place by them assigned,
Queen Helena had two valiant brethren,
King Pollux and King Castor, grieved in mind
To think thereon, their ship did rig in have,
And with the same to sea did hie them fast,
Accompanied with many a valiant Knight,
In mind t'oretake the Troyans on the way,
And to recover Helen by their might,
But Gods decree no mortal man can stay:
For ere that they three days had sailed along
The Grecian seas, the wind did blow so strong,
And such a darkness rose within the skies,
That it did seem as day had turned to night,
And therewithal so great a storm did rise,
That billows huge against the ship did smight:
And then a great and mighty clap of thunder,
Stroke down their masts, and broke the^ clean in sunder.
And with the furious blasts of Eolus,
The wave so high did mount unto the sky,
And made them swell so huge monsterous,
That every man made full account to die:
And after they had tossed too and fro,
Sometimes aloft, and then again as low.
The waters green and white so sore did rage,
And seemed to boil with fury of the wind,
That nothing could th'vnpiteous tempest swage,
Nor yet procure the Grecians ease in mind:
For what so ere resistance they would make,
At last the ship in many pieces brake.
And rent in twain with great extremity,
Whereby not one escapt, but all were drowned,
And in the raging Seas cast furiously,
And of them all not any one was found
To save their lives, except the Brethren twain,
Who as in Stories Poets of them feign,
The Gods did in the heavens deifie,
And in the skies did place them there to be
A star in the air by name of Gemini,
And as the learned in Astronomy
Affirm, it is by Constellation,
Of Mercury the house and mansion.
Which is both male and female in his kind,
The Eagle and the Dolphin in it rise,
And in the same just three degrees we find,
The Dragons tail exalted is likewise:
In Man it is said to rule the arms and hand,
And among the signs the third in place does stand.
Thus were these stout and valiant brethren twain,
In heaven pla'st (if that we may believe
The fables of the Poets fond and vain)
Which earnest did the valiant Grecians grieve:
And was to them beginning of their woe,
And to the Brethren twain their overthrow.
CHAP. VI.
How the Grecians assembled to be revenged of the Troyans for rauishing of
Helena.

ERe that mine Author Guido does declare,
What Grecian power did against the Troyans go;
It seems he had a great and special care,
The form and shape of every Prince to shoe:
Both on the Greeks, and on the Troyans side,
The which while he amongst them did abide
In time of truce, beheld with great delight,
Omitting neither port nor seemelinesse,
Beauty, nor yet deformity that might
Be seen in them, but as he does confess,
Has made a true and right description,
Of every one in his proportion.
And first he sets down Queen Helens shape,
As Dares has described the same at large,
Wherein no point thereof he does escape,
But tells the truth his promise to discharge:
And says, she had a scarre upon her face,
And yet it did her beauty not disgrace.
He says, King Agamemnon was a man
Of body strong and good proportion,
Of stature tall, of color pale and wan,
And flegmaticke of his complexion:
Unquiet, and impatient in his breast,
Eschewing, and refusing ease and rest.
So much to war and strife his mind he gave,
And yet he was to virtue wholly bent,
And therewithal a Prince most wise and grave,
Learned, discreet, and passing eloquent:
Whereby amongst the Grecian Princes all,
He was elected to be General.
King Menelaus was valiant, stout, and strong,
Of courage, and of heart victorious,
His stature middle-siz'd, twixt short and long,
Of good proportion, and desirous
Vnquietlie to live in war and strife,
Then to possess great wealth with quiet life.
Achilles was of stature huge, and tall,
With sholders broad, and breast both big and square,
Fair faced, and right seemly therewithal,
And in each part the like proportion bare;
With eyes most great, deep, broad, and very quick,
And a brown hair that curled, it was so thick.
In Arms most fierce and right courageous,
And did in strength the Grecians all surmount,
And yet of look was passing amorous:
Of liberal mind, and made so small account
To give large gifts, and royally to spend,
That all men for the same did him commend.
The valiant Grecian Tantalus was strong,
Of body huge, and good proportion,
Indifferent gross, and neither short nor long,
Of sanguine color and complexion:
Vnsteadfast eyed, and wavering in his head,
Abhorring strife whereas he saw no need.
Of word and promise true what so ere he made,
And never any quarrel took in hand,
Unless that he a good occasion had:
And when he knew and well did understand,
His cause to be both lawful, just and right,
Then would he show himself a valiant Knight.
Oileus Ajax was of body great,
And in apparel rich and curious,
Whereon his heart and mind was only set,
And yet of shape both huge and monstrous,
With arms so great, and sholders broad and square,
And waied so much, no horse could well him bare.
His stature it was high and very tall,
Unwieldy, and unseemly to behold,
Of speech he was both rude and rusticall,
And cared not how his mind he did unfold:
And though to aid the Greeks he did his part,
Yet was he but a coward in his heart.
Another Ajax (surnamed Telamon)
There was, a man that learning did adore,
Of body straight and fair complexion,
His hair cole black, and turning up before:
Who did so much in eloquence abound,
That in his time the like could not be found.
In Music sweet his time most part he spent,
Wherein he took such pleasure and delight,
That he did his own instruments invent,
And yet he was a brave and valiant Knight:
And one that hated pride and flattery,
With honor, seeking fame and victory.
Ulysses was a Prince of power and might,
That lived in great fame and royalty,
And yet he took great pleasure and delight,
To use all kind of fraud and subtilty:
Of double, hollow, deep dissembling heart,
And well could play a perfect liars part.
With face that made a show clean void of guile,
And words full smooth when nothing less he meant,
Much given to mirth, yet sieldome seen to smile,
In counsel he was grave and provident;
Right eloquent in speech, and did with speed
Full often aid the Greeks in time of need.
Diomedes was valiant, fierce, and tall,
Of countnance proud, and passing strong and bold,
Broad breasted, and most stern of looks withal,
Deceitful, and his promise nere would hold:
So hasty that his hand he could not stay,
But strike he must who ere stood in the way,
If once to wrath and anger he was bent;
Desiring strife, still shunning rest and peace,
Unto his servants most impatient,
And never from contentious thoughts would cease:
But quarrel still (though it were but for a straw)
And held his will and pleasure for a law.
In lechery his whole delight he plast,
And was so given thereto, that where so ere
He did become, on love his mind he cast,
And from the same could by no means forbear:
But spent therein full many a night and day,
Which at the last procured his own decay.
Duke Nestor was of stature somewhat tall,
And well composde of members in each part,
Crook sholdered, his middle very small,
Exceeding strong of hands, and valiant heart:
In counsel wise, well learnd, and politic,
And yet of nature was so choleric;
That neither friend nor foe he could refrain,
He was so given to melancholy,
And would with no man flatter nor yet fame,
Nor for the time his anger mollify;
Which nere the less but little space did last,
For as it lightly came it lightly past.
Prothesalus was gallant, fresh, and gay,
Of seemly shape, and beauty passing rare,
Wherein no man surpast him as they say;
Quick sprighted, light, of courage passing rare,
Exceeding swift, and therewithal most strong,
And heart so fierce that he would take no wrong.
The valiant Grecian called Neptolemus,
That had his hair as black as any Iet,
Was of proportion made right curious,
With eyes that were exceeding broad and great:
His breast most large, and somewhat stooping back,
And used much to stammer when he spoke.
An Orator he was but turbulent,
And willingly would plead in any cause,
For that he was of nature wholly bent
To study, and to learn the Grecian laws:
Where in he took great pleasure and delight,
And yet he was a most courageous Knight.
Pallamides King Naulus Son was strong,
Of valiant heart and courage passing great,
Of face most fair, of body lean and long,
And fierce upon his enemy to set:
Familiar, courteous, wise, and tractable,
In all his actions just and laudable.
Of great account, and only had the name
For bounty and for liberality,
Amongst the Grecians all, which caused his fame
To spread abroad into each Country:
Whereby in fine great honor he obtained,
And for the same perpetual praises gained.
The worthy Polidamus was so fat,
And big of body, belly, and of bone,
And so unwieldy that most part he sat,
And could not well sustain himself alone:
Exceeding proud of heart, and very sad,
And sudden or else nere showed countnance glad*
King Machaons stature was indifferent,
Twixt short and long, his forehead broad and hie,
Most proud and fierce, to choler wholly bent,
And so much given unto jmpatiencie;
That nothing but revenge his mind would plea^^*
Whereby he sieldome slept or took his ease.
Next after these of Cresida he tells,
But here my pen is dashed, for long ago,
My Master Chawcer that each one excels
In Rethoricke, her shape so well did shoe;
And thereof such a fine discourse does make,
That folly it were for me to undertake
To write thereof, or add unto the same;
As knowing well that when that I have done,
I shall deserve no praise but rather blame,
And yet I can the same by no means shun:
For if I write it not I must truth leave,
And of the truth the History bereave.
If I presume to slip and let it go,
And not as Guido does write orderly,
Or undertake the very same to shoe,
Which Chawcer has declared so learnedly:
Full sure I am therein to make offense,
Either by folly, or by negligence
And so am plunged twixt two extremities,
Great cause I have to find fault and dislike
Of Atropos, that among her cruelties,
Durst with her knife the thread in sunder strike
Of Chawcers life, chief Poet of Britain,
That first did cause to flourish and to rain
The golden drops of Rethoricke so sweet
Among Englishmen, their speech to clarify,
And their dull wits with Eloquence to whet.
(But who lives near so long at last shall die.)
I must be forced his aid herein to crave,
And read his book, to see if I may have
Some words of Art from thence to place with mine,
Which are so rude, so bare, so plain, and course,
For as the Ruby red that bright does shine,
Set in a Copper Ring, is nere the worse,
But beautified the more, so is his phrase
When it is compared with wrighters of our days.
It Is known so well, and is so excellent,
That it is in vain the same among ours to set,
For all our pain is as it were misspent,
When as we seek his style to counterfeit:
Well may we do it on mere presumption,
But when all is done there is no comparison.
Yet for all this I must it not deny,
(Craving excuse) but as I first began,
Proceed to end the Trojan History,
And do the best that possibly I can
To Effect the same; and now of Cresida
I will declare her beauty as I may.
Yet must I under Chawcers whings still hover,
And plainly tell that Rethoricke I have none,
Nor eloquence my learning to discover,
But letting all curiosity alone,
(As Bayard blind does boldly give the venture,
And never fears what peril he does enter.)
To show my simple skill I will not spare,
And thereby some prospect unto you give
Of Colchos daughters beauty passing rare,
That while she in this earthly mould did live,
Was held to be an excellent fair creature
For form of face, and comeliness of feature.
Wherein none did surpass her in her days,
Her stature and proportion was but small,
Her hair that shind like Phoebus glistring rays
In comely wise did on her shoulders fall:
And at her back in tresses hung behind
Which often she did't with golden hearlace bind.
And but that both her eyebrows joined in one,
You could no fault at all in her epsy,
And that was all her imperfection,
To speak of her fair, clear, and rolling eye,
Whose glistring beams was of such force and might
And from the same did cast such peircing light,
That whosoere them earnestly beheld,
Could not withstand their power, but must confess
Their extreme beauty had them forced to yield
Unto her love, and with her seemelinesse
She was endowed with great sobriety,
Well spoken, wise, and full of modesty,
And therewithal gentle and tractable,
And yet my Author Guydo plain does wright,
That in her love she was too variable,
And took too great a pleasure and delight,
To give her mind unto unsteadfastness,
And womanly to all new fanglenesse.
Lastly he says how that the Percian King
Came to the Greeks, with many a worthy Knight,
And with him diverse thousands more did bring
To succor them with all his power and might:
And that he was of body tall and long,
Yet very fat, and therewithal most strong.
Red hair and beard, and deep and fiery eyes,
And in his face great store of warts he had,
His countnance stern, and often times would rise
Into such rage that he did seem half mad,
Which did in him so deep jmpression take,
That therewithal his body it would shake.
Thus much I find that Dares does declare
Of all the Grecians shapes and personages.
But of the Trojans he no pains does spare,
In cerious wise at large them to express;
Omitting none, as you may well behold,
The Chapter next ensuing does unfold.
CHAP. VII.
The description of Priam and his sons, and daughters, and of the arrival of
the Greeks, at the Temple of Diana.

ANd first he shows how King Priamus
Of body was both slender, tall, and strong,
Of countenance and look right gracious,
Delighting much in music and in song,
And therewithal was most desirous
To hear such ditties as were amorous.
A seemly Prince and of great hardines,
Clean void of fear, abhorring flattery,
And with low voice his speech he did express,
Of word most true much given to equity,
And never did refuse to any wight,
To do him upright justice, law, and right.
No favor nor no love made him decline,
Nor lean unto the greatest or the least,
His manner was full sone in morn to dine,
And of all Kings he was the worthiest.
One that esteemed each worthy Knight and true
Or any valiant soldier that he knew.
On whom he did bestow great store of gold,
And did advance them unto dignity.
And spared not his treasure to unfold
Among them, to show his magnanimity.
And by that means in such wise with them dealt,
That every one his bounty largely felt.
Of many sons he had, the eldest was
Hector, the famous Prince and worthy Knight
Who all the world in valor did surpass,
Such was his courage, hardiness, and might:
The very root and spring of Chivalry,
As ancient Histories do certify.
And therewithal so sober, wise, and sad,
Courteous, demure, and full of gentleness,
That in his time no Prince more honor had,
And truth to say, he did deserve no less.
Forvertue did so much in him abound,
That throughout all the world he was renownd.
Of flesh and bones he was so well compact,
And rightly formed in proportion,
And every lim so perfect and exact,
That no defect has found in any one.
Huge made he was, and of just hight and length
Thereto complete and of surpassing strength.
Lively, well breathed, and able to sustain
Against his foe a long and furious fight.
So that no mortal man could ere attain
Unto the fame of that most valiant Knight,
For his surpassing strength and courage bold,
If unto him his due ascribe I should.
Wherewith he was so wise and so discreet,
And lovely, (though a Prince of high degree.)
To rich and poor that met him in the street,
That all men praised his great humility.
A Prince that used few words to any one,
And showed good countenance unto every one.
That all men joyed when as they him beheld,
Unto his Trojan Subjects he was kind:
But when as he once entered in the field;
His foes did him a furious Lion find.
So valiantly he could himself maintain,
And by his might their forces all sustain.
No man was ever able to endure
The moile of the pain that he would take:
(For as the story plainly does assure,
And thereof does a large relation make;)
He near had fear, nor did in fighting fail,
Nor with faint heart his enemies assail.
Of all the valiant Knights that ever were,
He was the best, for virtue, prowess, and might,
And did the prize of honor from them bear,
The which he might by valor claim of right.
For none could ever equal him therein,
Since that this earthly globe did first begin.
In whom Dame nature did so much prevail,
And like a skillful workman fashioned
His mold, that not one thing did in him fail
But was complete, save that he stammered.
But had no other imperfection,
And was of sanguine pure complexion.
His brethren Deiphobus and Helenus,
In each respect and every property,
Were both so like unto King Priamus,
That twixt them three was no diversity,
Except in age, he old, they young and light,
The first, he was a strong and valiant Knight,
And in his wars did many a valiant deed:
But Helenus to learning wholly bent,
Of feats of arms and prowess took no heed,
But in all Arts became so excellent,
And had such knowledge in Astronomy,
That he could tell what future things should be.
Of Troilus to speak, it is most sure
There never lived a more courageous Knight:
Nor likelier in Arms for to endure,
As having therein pla'st his whole delight.
Of body well compact, of stature tall,
Young, lustly, fresh, and hardy therewithal.
So valiant, strong, and stout a Champion,
That equal unto him near any was,
For none with him could make comparison,
So much he did in worthiness surpass.
For which his great and most exceeding might,
He was a second Hector called by right.
He did behave himself so valiantly
In that great war against his enemies.
In love he did persevere constantly,
And was therein most secret, firm, and wise.
Of face most fair, and of a pleasant cheer,
Wherein no alteration did appear.
He was so firm and constant in his heart,
And therewithal so loving and so kind,
That nothing could dissuade nor make him start
From that which he had once decreed in mind.
So true he was in word, and so upright,
And to his foes he was so stern a Knight
And fierce, that they could not his force withstand,
Unto the Greeks it was confusion.
When as he held his bloody sword in hand,
And to the Trojans their protection.
For that his Knighthood was of such account,
That no man might in valor him surmount.
Though all the world they should have sought throghout
What shall I say (to make his praises last)
More then I have? but that amongst the rout
Of Greeks and Trojans all, none him surpast,
Unless it were his jnvinsible brother
Hector alone, and never any other.
King Priamus son called Paris, was a Knight
So beautiful of flesh and blood to see,
That for to yield to him his due and right,
I must confess none was so fair as he.
Whose crisping looks that shined like golden wier,
Made all men his great beauty much admire.
His sole delight was shooting in a bow,
And hunting in the woods to chase wild dear,
And did therein such skill and cunning show,
That he all Archers past that ever were.
And was a Knight of great renown and fame,
Whose valiant deeds did well approve the same.
Aeneas that King Priams daughter had,
Was light of lims, and ey^d bright and clear,
Well brested, and of good proportion made:
Stern of his look, yet glad in port and cheer,
And in the Town of Troy held great estate,
In all his actions wise and temperate.
A man surpassing in great eloquence,
And did so much his mind to study give,
That he thereby attaind great sapience,
And of all those that in the Town did live.
In lands and goods he did them all surpass,
Such and so great his gold and treasure was.
Anthenor was a slender man and tall,
Right circumspect, and of good government:
Discreet, and wise, and elopuent withal,
Copious in words, and one that much time spent
To jest when as he was in company,
So driely that no man could it epsy,
And therewith held his countenance so well,
That every man received great content
To hear him speak, and pretty jests to tell,
When he was pleasant and in meriment:
For though that he most commonly was sad,
Yet in his speech some jest he always had.
His son called Polidamus was most strong
Of person, and of shape in each degree,
Like to his Father tall, and somewhat long,
Gentle and true, and soon would moved be
To anger, though he kept it covertly,
And yet it would be gone full suddenly.
King Merdon was large brested, huge and tall,
Upright and well compact of bone and l^m,
And of so good proportion therewithal,
That none therein might well compare with him*
His hair it was as yellow as the gold,
And finely curld, most pleasant to behold:
Demure and still, and kind to every one,
And passing strong all actions to assay,
Never using rigor unto any one.
Delighting much in pleasure, sport, and play,
And one that wondrous feats in Arms achieu'd
While he amongst the Trojan Princes lived.
Queen Hecuba was fair, but pale and wan,
In members and proportion strongly made:
Enclining more unto the shape of man
Then woman, such a manly corpse she had.
Right virtuous, wise, discreet, and womanly,
And did behave her self most prudently
In all her actions unto every wight.
In jesture mild, demure in countenance:
And while she lived did take a great delight,
Her servants, and her favorites t'aduance.
Unto the poor most pitiful and kind,
Bestowing alms with glad and liberal mind.
Andr^macha Prince Hectors faithful wife,
In shape was like to Hecuba his Mother,
And was so chaste and virtuous all her life,
That in her time there was not such another.
And did in good behavior much delight,
Her stature tall, her breast round, fair, and white.
With ruddy cheeks, not over colored,
And peircing eyes most beautiful and clear,
Her hair like gold, her lips were soft and red,
And always did of color fresh appear,
Wherewith she had a countenance right sweet,
And poor and rich in friendly wise would greet.
And gave good words to all and every one,
Perferring all poor suitors as she might,
And by her will there did not any one
With heavy heart depart out of her sight.
And every man whatsoere, stood in need
Of aid from her that was sure thereof to speed.
To them that had committed an offense,
She was so given unto compassion,
That gladly with all care and diligence,
She got their pardon and remission.
Such was her care her Subjects to preserve,
And of each one good words and praise deserve.
Cassandra was a Princess beautiful,
And did in body good proportion bear,
Her color white, her countenance bashful,
And in her face great store of warts there were,
Whose only joy and chief felicity,
Was chaste to live in pure virginity.
And virtuously shu^'d imperfections,
Which naturally do reign in women kind,
And by leaving of all bad occasions,
She did so much on learning set her mind:
That reading Books was her felicity,
But most of all to learn Astronomy.
A Prophetess she was, and could foretell
What future things should happen and would be,
And therein while she lived did so excel,
That she was thought one of the Cybiles three
That lived on earth, whose fame so much surpast,
And shall do while this mortal world does la^t.
Of Polycene to speak it were in vain,
Or to declare the great perfection
Of beauty whereunto she did attain,
And it were in me a great presumption,
To seek therein your minds to satisfy,
For it above my simple reach does lie.
Since nature in the framing of this ma^d
Vsd all her Art, and to self-will was bent,
And by all means she could devise, assaild
To make her beauty seem most excellent,
And to her self said in her proud conceit,
Behold and see my workmanship so great.
For as the son above the clouds in sky
Shows passing clear; so is it in my might
My work to adore and beautify to the eye,
By mixing of like fair and white,
With ruddy rose in such equallity,
That no excess in them you may descrie.
And for to prove my saying to be true,
A pattern of my Art you may behold
In Polican, which if you mark and view,
I dare affirm is not to be controld.
Whom I must say, and know it very well,
In beauty does all others much excel.
Thus did this Dame, of her most proudly say,
And sure she did not lie, for true it was,
Her beauty full as much, as does the day
Excel the night, all others did surpass.
Her body straight, and middle fine and small,
Her hands exceeding white, her stature tall.
And every other member whatsoere,
With due proportion was so fashioned;
That great simplicity in me it were,
(That am of Rethorick unfurnished)
Her beawty to describe, for sure it was much,
And truth to say, there never was any such.
And therefore think it best to make an end
With her, for that mine Author says no more
Concerning this: But does his purpose bend
To show their Knightly valor and their power,
While that the siedge did last, as you shall find
In this discourse; and thus he tells his mind:
WHen cold and shiuering winter began decline,
And drew his frostie face from off the ground,
Which made each tree and flower to mourn and whine,
When they in the air so cold: no comfort found,
When Titan had clean passed Aquarie,
And Pisces, in the Month of February,
And to the horned Ram his course did bend,
And on the mountain tops his beams did smite,
And to each plant and tree did vigor send,
And caused the flakes of snow that are so white
To melt, and made the water to distill
Down from the same, the valleys low to fill.
When th'^ce which then upon the Rivers flowed
Dissolved and with heat began to melt,
And with their streams the meadows overflowed,
And to each ditch and pit their largess dealt.
When as the most delightful time of spring,
With new fresh green did comfort every thing,
By Phoebus gentle heat and temperature,
Which then assends the sphere celestial,
When March to Trees and hedges did procure
(...) ^lossomes, and th'equinoxiall,
^hen as both day and night are of a length,)
Was halllowed and began to show his strength.
At that same season sweet and amorous,
The Greeks to show their puissant force and might,
(As they that were of hearts courageous,)
Assembled many a stout and hardy Knight
In Athens, where a Navy huge they had,
And there their preparations all were made
To sail to Troy, whose number was so great
That never since this fatal world began,
So many Knights at once were known to meet,
Nor has it ere been seen by any man,
That such a Navy was assembled,
As by the valiant Greeks as then was led.
Whereof to show and make description
What every Prince unto the same did bring,
My Author says, that King Agamemnon
A hundred ships with men and every thing
That needful was, prepared at his cost,
To join with that most huge and famous host.
King Menelaus the causer of that fleet,
From Sparta brought threescore great ships and tall,
Prothenor and King Archelaus there met
With fifty ships, whereof some great, some small.
From Sithmene with Duke Achedaphus,
Came threescore ships, and with him Helenus.
The Kings Epistraphus and Thedaus,
Together brought full fifty ships complete:
King Telemon Ajax and Amphimachus,
Duke Theseus and Earl Dorion, with a great
And puissant Duke that was by name called Tentar,
With that same fleet their fifty ships did venture.
Nestor a Duke of furious mind and thought,
Whose choler was not easy to appease,
Full fifty ships from Piron with him brought:
King Thoas, and the King of Dianes,
A hundred ships had in their company,
Well fraught with Knights of great activitie.
And Thelamon surnamed Pel^^^
Had 36 ships in his leading,
King Polidete and stout Amphimacus
Did thirty ships from Calidonia bring,
King Merdon and Idameus from Creet,
Fourscore good ships had with them in that fleet
Ulysses King of Thracia with him had
Fifty fair ships well furnished with men;
Duke Meleus and Prothecatus both made
Provision of great ships in number ten.
And from the Isle of Philiarcha, strong
Prothesilaus brought 50 ships along.
Machon and his brother Polidrus,
Twenty two ships did bring well furnished
From Trincico and out of Phicius;
Achilles did in his conduct then lead
Just Fifty ships; and from th'isle Rhodomus
Came twenty ships with King Thelapobus.
And with a valiant Duke called Antipus,
From Hesida Eleaven ships there came
In company of Duke Amphimachus,
That partner was in furnishing the same.
Polibethe^ the stout and valiant King,
Did fifty ships from Recha with him bring.
And Duke Lifuisus bare him company,
Diomedes unto this army brought
Fowerscore great ships out of Caledony,
And with him came two Knights that honor sought,
The one of them they did Thelemus call,
The other was the mighty Duriall.
And with the valiant Knight Poliphebus,
Came seven ships well rigd and furnished,
And in that puissant fleet King Phineus,
Eleauen ships at his command then led,
Prothoyelus of Demenesa King,
Did fifty ships with him to Athens bring.
King Carpenor from fertile Capadie
With fifty ships in likewise thither came;
King Tricorius from his country
Called Borsa, to win honor great and fame,
wenty two ships unto that fleet did bring
Well furnished with men, and every thing.
And many ships more in that fleet there were,
Then Guydo in his Book does mention,
(For that in honors works it does appear,
Whereas he seems to make description
Of all the Grecians ships) they were so many
Ahat never the like fleet had been seen of any.
Accounting those that with Palamides
Came to their aid, the number to augment,
Which being ready their to put to Seas,
And to the Trojans full destruction bent:
With many a valiant Lord, Earl, Duke, and King,
In Athens where they were assembling.
King Agamemnon general of all
That fleet, a Prince discreet and very wise,
When as his charge to mind he began to call,
Did study how he might best way devise,
In that most cerious business to proceed,
With honor as they fully had decreed.
Esteeming it a point of wisdom great
To foresee all with care and diligence,
Their enterprise that nothing might it let,
Nor hinder their determined pretense:
That as with honor they began the same,
It might so end to their eternal fame.
Least that through have and misadvisednesse
They might oreshoot themselves and be deceived,
And by orewhelming pride and wilfulness,
Of their conceived glory be bereaved.
He caused all the Lords and Princes great
Which in the host together then were met,
To hold a counsel with him in the field
Without the Town of Athens, where each one
His reasons and his arguments might yield
About their wars, as then in question:
And when they all together did appear,
He spoke and said to them as you shall hear.
My Lords and Princes all whose worthiness,
Is such and of so great account and fame,
That in good truth I cannot but confess
The world is filled with glory of the same:
For without doubt the flower of Chivalry,
Is met together here in company.
For who ere saw so great a multitude
Of valiant Knights assembled at one time,
So young, so fresh, and all so well endued
With courage bold, and in the very prime
Of Youth, as we amongst us can afford,
And are together come with one accord.
So that if Fortune be not to contrary
In this same war by us now taken in hand,
And that the Gods cause us not to miscarry,
And our pretense of purpose do withstand:
We doubt not but great honor we shall gain,
And of our foes the victory obtain.
For sure I deem him wholly without sense
And worse then mad, that dares oppose or set
Himself against our power to make defense,
Or any ways our enterprise to let:
Or privily seeks to do to us despite,
Or wrong* but we full soon would him ^require.
For I could in this great assembly find
An hundred Knights and more, so fierce and bold,
And that do bear so valerous a mind,
That with their forces only durst and would
Adventure for to take this war in hand,
And valiantly our enemies withstand.
Presume then what our forces joined in one
May do, against the Trojans to requite
The wrong that they of late to us have done,
For all you know how with their power and might,
They entered into Greece and bare away
King Menelaus dear wife, Queen Helena,
With many prisoners more, and all the gold
And treasure that in Cithera they might
Lay hold upon, with reason then we should
Not only seek revenge for that despite:
But boldly war against them undertake,
And I suppose we shall them so awake,
That they shall fear hereafter while they live
To be so bold, to dare to take in hand
The like attempt against us, or seem to give
Occasion of dislike to Grecian land:
For which offense by them done to us so late,
Our hearts within do burn with deadly hate.
The heat whereof converts them to such ire,
That it renewes our rage and deadly pain,
And day by day so sets us on fire,
That we by no means longer can refrain,
But with all speed our mortal power advance,
For this our wrong on them to take vengeance,
As rite requires, and so just cause allows
Us for to seek revenge upon our foe,
And therefore let us now perform our vows,
And valiantly with courage against them go:
That we such terror in their hearts may strike,
That they shall ever fear to do the like
In time to come, if by our patience
We should as now with their great folly bear,
And overslip this notable offense,
For never yet wast known no man did hear
That Grecians wronged were in name or fame,
Or any thing done against them to their shame
But they acquit it to their enemies grief,
And now to speak the truth in this respect,
I must in few words tell you and be brief;
It stands not with our honors to neglect,
Or overslip the offense so lately past,
Least in our teeth hereafter it be cast:
And to our heirs reproach it might be said,
Their Fathers durst not once revenge their wrong*
And of the Trojans forces were afraid,
Which may not be, since that we are so strong,
And all agreed with one consent and will,
Our whole desire in this point to fulfill.
And therewith of such puissant power and might,
That no man can nor may with us compare,
Nor ever durst presume against us to fight,
But they were sure in time the loss to bear.
But lately when the Trojans made a venture,
And suddenly within our land did enter
Unawares to us, and with great spoil then went
To Troy again, with their presumption:
I doubt they shall full hastily repent,
For it is known to all and every one,
How that of late the Greeks with number small,
Upon the Trojans for cibly did fall,
When as their King Laomedon was slain,
(That father was unto King Priamus,
Who now within the Town of Troy does reign,)
Which at that time was clean destroid by us,
And all we found therein put to the sword,
And those to whom we mercy did afford,
And saved their lives, and from death them did spare
Yet lived in woe, (and may not be recur'd,)
Still among the Greeks in servit^de and care,
How cap they now against us be a^hurd,
And hold us fight (with all their chiualry,)
When as we have so huge a company.
For if so small a number did prevail
Against them as then, it is likely now we be
So many thousands, we shall no^es ^a^^^
To win on them anoble victory.
And yet I know the Trojans do not spare
Their forces against our commings to prepare.
By all the means they can for to withstand
Us and our power* if that they may endure,
Against us to let our entry in their land,
And to that end their friends they do procure,
In every place whereas they are a^ed,
Determining the utmost to abide.
And therefore since we are like to find them pressed
And ready to encounter in battle,
My counsel is, and so I think it best,
That ere that we out of this Haven sail,
(To the end this journey may be prosperous
And fall out well and happily for us.)
To send to Delos Isle, which little space
From hence does lie, so offer sacrifice
Unto Apollo Patron of this place,
And there to crave his answer and advise,
To know how we in this our war shall speed,
If that you all thereto be so agreed.
This counsel given, their full conclusion
Was t'agree thereto, not one said nay,
Nor against the same made contradiction,
Determining as soon as ere they may
To do it with as much convenient speed
As well they might, and therein did proceed.
CHAP. VIII.
How Achi^^es and Patroclus ^^^e sent to Delos to re-ceiue answer from their
God Apollo, to know how they should speed against the Trojans.

WHen Agamemnon in such wise had said
His mind, as you have hard the Greeks agre'd
With one consent, no time should be delaid*
And presently amongst themselves decre'd,
Achilles and Patroclus both should go,
That God Apollos answer for to know.
And with all speed they say^d to D^^^^ Isle,
Where having wind and weather prosperous,
They did arrive within a little while.
Which Island as the stoty tells us,
Does lie among the C^^l^d^ I sle^, whereas
The say^ers f^nd so many rocks to p^^se.
And in the Sea called Hellespont does stand,
Whereof to make a full description,
Like as mine Author Guydo takes in hand;
I must aw^ile make some d^gression
And from the sequel of my (...) vary,
Although I mean therein not long ^^^y.
Within this Isle as I^ydore does wright,
Latona did two goodly children bear
By Jupiter her friend (who in despite
Of Juno when as they in discord wear,
Got her with child, as Ovid testifies,
(If that we may give credit to such lies.)
Whose names Apollo and Diana wear,
And after men therein did dedicate
A temple, that Apolloes name did bear,
And unto to him was wholly consecrate:
Where from the time of the foundation,
They honored him with great devotion.
Because his beams that are so bright and clear,
( Noes flood orepast which all the world oreflow'd,)
In that same Isle were first seen to appear,
Diana likewise first her self there showed,
And to the world did give her glistring light
With radiant streams, and horns most sharp and bright
Of which their apparition as men say,
This Isle that is thereby so great of fame
Was Delos called by Grecians at that day,
And ever since that time has borne that name.
Which word in Greek does signify, to show
Or to appear, as learned Clerks well know.
And thus Apollo first was honored,
And by the Greeks great reverence to him done,
Who with devotion likewise worshipped
His sister fair Diana called the Moon,
That was by them a Goddess held to be,
And did in hunting take felicity.
And so Diana fair that shined so bright,
And (...) in that Isle were worshipped,
(Because the first appearance of their light
Upon that place by radiant streams was spread,)
And among the Pagans honored and esteemed,
And great and mighty Gods by them were deemed.
Unto this Isle is given another name,
For by the Greeks it is called Ortigia,
Cause Curlewes first were seen within the same,
For by the word Ortigias as they say,
The Grecians do a Curlew understand,
That first engendered were within that land.
Some do Apollo Titan also name,
Who long before that he was made a sta^^e,
So much and such high honor wan and same,
When he against great Jupiter made war.
By other some likewise he is called (...)*
And many give him name of Phito^s.
For that unto his honor great, and glory,
He slew the serpent Phiton with his bow,
And of him wan a noble victory,
When they two fought here on the earth below.
For which his conquest Cupid did so rage,
That by no meames his wrath he could assuage,
But in dispight an arrow did discharge
At him, wherwtih he peirst clean through his sid^,
And in his heart did make a wound most large,
That caused him much sorrow to abide,
And of Phiton thus brought unto his end,
Men say the Phitonesses do descend.
Which women are that future fortunes tell,
And things foreshow; as we in scripture find,
That one did raise the ghost of Samuel,
At Saules desire to please his wicked mind,
And in this Church the which is now so old,
There was a mighty Image all of gold,
Wherein the Devil by his policy
A foul infernal spirit placed had,
The which gave answer with great subtlety,
To each demand that unto him was made,
And not the Image dumb as people thought,
And by Illusion foolishly were taught,
And thus into great error they were brought.
And in the same did wilfully persever,
Addoring stocks and stones, and never sought
Unto the eternal God that lives for ever.
And in this wise Idolatry began,
And through the world was vsd by sinful man.
Whereof I mean a true discourse to make,
And show how long it did among men remain.
And when they left and did the same forsake,
The holy scripture tells and shows us plain,
That at the birth of Christ our Savior,
All Images (which God does so abhor.)
Down from their Altars fell and brake in ^under,
And they were then esteemed as things of naught,
Which moved man unto no little wonder,
For when for Christ King Herod strictly sought,
And cruelly by persecution
Brought many Children to destruction,
An Angel in a vision did appear
To Joseph as he slept, and bad him have
And into Egypt Christ and Mary bear,
Till Herod's cruel wrath was overpast:
And when as Christ in Aegipt entered,
The Images in pieces shiuered,
And suddenly did fall unto the ground,
As holy scripture does us certify,
And Esaias long before as it is found,
Fore-showed in his ancient Prophecy.
That when as Christ in Egypt should descend,
All worshipping of Images should end.
But as the Jewish histories do say,
Ismael, Abraham's bastard Son should be,
The first that made an Image all of clay
With his own hands, and used Idolatry.
And Heathens said, Promotheus did invent
An Image first with full and sole intent
To worship it, and use thereof did bring
Among men on earth, which after did increase,
For Sinulachrum signifies no thing,
But only a similitude to express
The form of men, and does the likeness bear
Of them, when as upon the earth they were.
And by that means and wicked fond devise,
The Heathens did adore the shapes of men,
And to them vsd to pray and sacrifice.
Some do affirm King Belus first began
Within his land t'erect Idolatry,
As all the Assirian Histories specify.
And after his son Ninus for his sake,
Moved thereunto by great affection,
Did of pure gold his Fathers Image make;
Whereto with foolish fond devotion
And ignorance, he offered sacrifice,
And unto it did pray in Pay-nim wise.
And not content to do it himself alone,
Commandment gave throughout all Babylon,
And all Th'assirian land, that every one
Should honor him as God, and call upon
His name, and say, that he was Deified,
Which of no man in time durst be denied.
And not long after that, within a while
A foul infernal spirit therein crept,
Who seeking man by all means to beguile,
In such an error blind the people kept:
That whatsoere of him they sought to know
Or ask, he did it plainly to them show,
And answer made unto each man's demand,
Whereby in fine through all that country
The people did obey to his command.
And offering unto God great injury,
Still more and more did into error fall:
This Image Belus, and some Bell did call.
Some Belphegod and some God Bala^^,
But most of all the people commonly
The name of Beelzebub did give to him,
Of Bell and Zebub which does signify
The God of Flies, and by this meane^ we find
Idolatry crept in amongst mankind.
For some upon old Saturn vsd to call,
(Who while he lived on earth was King of Creet,)
And did esteem him to be principal
Of all the Gods, and from the Planet great,
That has so large a circle in the heaven,
(As Poets feign) that name to him was given.
This Saturn by his skill did well perceive,
(For that he could of future things foretell)
That he a son by Juno should conceive,
That our of Creet by force should him expel:
When he did once attain to perfect age,
Which made him fall into so great a rage;
That to prevent the mischief as he thought,
When it was borne, he did expressly will
His wife that it to him should straight be brought.
But she in doubt and fear he would it kill,
In stead thereof a stone unto him gave,
And so her silly infants life did save.
Which stone with over great melancholy,
(Supposing it indeed to be his child,)
He did devour and eat up gredily,
And so for all his skill he was beguild.
Three sons he had as stories witness bear,
Who Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto were;
And but one daughter Juno called by name,
The eldest son all men did most esteem,
(Called Jupiter) attained to so great fame,
For of him all the world so well did deem,
That they called him the God of fire and air,
As being Saturnes eldest son an heir.
The Paynims did likewise great honor bear
To Mars, whom they the God of battles call,
And also to Apollo bright and clear
The cherisher of herbs, and trees, and all
The flowers and fruits that earth does us afford,
And (as I said) in Delos him adord.
Some unto fair Dame Uenus used to pray,
Esteeming her a Goddess of great might,
That power has t'asswage, and to delay
The fervent heat of pleasures fond delight;
And t'ease the hearts of lovers that complain,
And are fast bound in Cupids fiery chain.
As she whom they did think great rule to bear,
In every place throughout the world so wide,
Because there is no country whatsoere,
But has her mighty force and power tried.
And next to her, to Mercury they praid,
Which is the God of Music as they said,
And of all Eloquen ceand Poetry
Esteemed to be the only pattern:
Some others did unto Diana cry
And called for help, which is the forked Moon,
Which oftentimes is named Lucina bright,
And was esteemed a Goddess of great might,
And Lady of all mutabilitie:
Because she is addicted unto change,
And wholly given to variety,
Delighting much in woods and wells to range,
And so are those of such a quallity,
That under her have their nativitie.
Their whole delight is in new fanglednesse,
And wavering still in their affections,
Do addict their minds unto unsteadfastness,
And by this meames in sundry Regions
Idolatry began, and much increast,
And calling on the name of God, decreast.
For as I find the Moors or Morians
On Iubam long adored and worshipped:
The most Idolatrous Egiptians,
With great devotion Isis honored,
Who was the first that unto them did show
The manner how the land to till and sow,
And how they should their letters make and frame
Thereby to read and wright, for which th'extold
And did so highly magnify her name,
That for a Goddess great they did her hold.
And Jupiter was worshipped in Creet
Whereas he had his chief and sovereign seat,
And did command with great authority.
And for his arms an Eagle volant bare,
And called the God of all the earth and sky,
Who as the Poets feign and do declare,
His kingdom large in three parts did divide,
Whereof himself did rule the heavens wide.
The Seas to Neptunes government he gave,
And to his brother Pluto did befall
The ruling of the earthly Globe to have,
Whom Poets called the Sovereign God of Hell.
This Jupiter aforesaid Deified,
And throughout all the world so magnified,
In Creet to his perpetual memory,
They did for him a Tomb and Image make,
And on him never ceased to call and cry,
And wholly unto him themselves betake.
The Latins with much care and diligence,
Unto the Fawnes did use great reverence.
By them called Gods, (if it be credible)
That live in woods and groves most fresh and green,
The which are said to be invisible,
And by no living creature can be seen.
The Romans did adore one Querinus,
Who as they say was called Romulus.
That first did build the walls about their town,
And through his valor and great worthiness,
From shepherds state attained to high renown, seen
And as their stories says deserved no less,
Whose spear head pitched into the ground, was
To spring, and bring forth buds and blossoms green.
And for the virtues that in him were known,
The Knights of Room that were of noble fame,
And had in countries strange their valors shown,
Were usually called Querites of his name,
And so he was by Romans Deified,
And in their Temples praised and glorified.
Th'athenians did unto Minerva yield
Great honor, likewise was Pallas named,
Who in his hand did bear a christ all shield,
And as it is said, did in contention stand
Against Neptune, with her women on her sid^,
And he with men, wherein they did abide
Long time to, know which of them two should name
The noble town of Athens, which as then
Was held to be a place of worthy fame.
Wherein there dwelt great store of learned men.
At last t'agree, each should some wonder show,
That every man might judge and plainly know
Which of them best might claim the same by right,
And straight out of the earth there did appear
An Olive tree (which Pallas by her might
Had caused to spring) that leaves and blossoms bear,
And showed as fair, as pleasant, and as green,
As ever any man in spring had seen.
Neptune to show his power and great command,
Did make a well of water to be seen,
And suddenly there presently to stand
In place, whereas nere any fore had bin.
The which when as Apollo great did see,
(Whom they had made their Judge therein to be)
That discord and contention to surcease,
Considering with him self that Olive tree
Does signify love, amity, and peace.
And water does foreshow the contrary:
His sentence he forthwith for Pallas gave,
That she to name the town should th'honor have.
Who thereupon did make no long delay,
But with demure consideration
Did Athens call the same, that is to say,
An everlasting place, an habitation.
For wisdom there did first begin to flourish,
And that same town all learned men did norish.
Within the town of Pauie they adored
Fair Citheron, and with great holiness,
Her aid and help continually implored,
(Of whom before I did somewhat express,)
And in the same with great solemnity,
Her Image stood upon an Altar hie.
All guilt and painted brave and curiously,
Where as she naked stood in water clear,
With three fair Nymphs to bear her company,
That there to serve her still attentive were.
And round about her flowers for delight,
Of color azure, red, and Virgin white.
And on her head to beautifie't they set
Great store of Roses red, fair, fresh and sweet,
That placed were about a Chaplet,
And all her body down unto the feet
Anointed was with Balm, that did excel
For costlines, and oils that sweet did smell.
And by her sat God Cupid with his bow,
Wherein he did an arrow always bear,
Who for because he is blind, and does not know
At whom to aim, often shoots he knows not where,
And yet lets fly, and cares not where he hits,
As one that were clean void of sense and wits.
The Naxiens worshipped Bacchus God of wine,
And unto him their offerings daily made,
Whose liquor is most precious, pure, and fine,
To comfort hearts of men and make them glad:
And does refresh the color in the face,
And causes then to speak with lively grace.
And makes men often times themselves forget,
And without wisdom or discretion,
To utter that they should keep secret,
For where as wine once has dominion,
It makes them unawarely disclose
Their secret thoughts and minds unto their foes.
Some men that serve God Bacchus for a season,
Are many times so mad and without dread,
That they are like to men clean void of reason,
And some of them so giddy in the head,
That being void of power, strength, and might,
They cannot guide themselves to stand upright.
And yet will prate and prattle like a pie,
And till the force of wine in them is spent,
They look with color pale and daizled eye.
So women that to wine and drink are bent,
Compared are to beasts unreasonable,
And by men said to be detestable,
And far unfit to come in company,
When as they can no reason well aford,
Nor use an honest kind of modesty,
And which is worse scant utter any word.
And thus does wine with men full often fare,
And causes them to quarrel and to jar.
And furiously when as there is no need
To fight and braule, but wisdom men forewarnes,
And wishes them the force thereof to dread,
Bids them strive to shun such drunken charms;
And by restraint their feeble brains to spare,
Ere they therewith be taken in a snare.
And like to Aspen leaves begin to shake,
As if they had a fever tertian.
Some others when their heads begin to ache,
And to a fever falls quotidian,
To them it seems the house about does turn,
And that the air and Elements do burn.
And when they have lost use of head and hand,
Are so much distraught of sense and wit,
As that they fear to drown upon the land,
They do like unto senceles creatures sit.
And drowfily begin to i^wne and gape,
And play with strawes, and counterfeit the Ape.
And sit and nod with drowsy drunken head,
(Which in that case so heavy is and sad)
As if thereon they had a cap of lead.
And they whom Bacchus liquor has so made,
And are of such a drunken disposition,
Are fittest men for his Religion.
Who it is said has soveraigntie
Of honey, milk, and balm so precious,
But has the most and greatest dignity
Ore Grapes, and Vines. This God pernicious
Is also by the Vintners much esteemed,
Because he is to them so good a friend.
The Lemicians used to rely upon
Black Uulcan, whom the God of fire they call,
Who was a Smith by his profession,
That forged the thunderbolts which use to fall,
With huge and fearful noise down from the sky,
And furiously from East to West do fly.
This Uulcan married Venus, that so rare
Of beauty was, and held her for his wife
Long time, to whom a jealous mind he bare,
So that twixt them there arose a mortal strife,
And for that cause he watched her so nie,
That at the last he found her secretly
With Mars the God of war, her valiant Knight
Laid closely dallying with her in a bed,
Whereat he did conceive so great despite,
That to her shame her falult abroad he spread,
And therein did the Goddess much abuse,
But God forbid that men should seek t'accuse
Poor women for a matter that is so small,
For if they do such things of gentleness,
They are therein for to be borne withal,
And let no man esteem of them the less,
Least he in the end to them grow odious,
As smotery Vulcan was for doing thus.
And yet among Paynims he was Deified,
But for that he so churlishly did let
Their pleasant sport when as he them espied,
Therefore I have him last in order set
Among the Gods, that honored were as then
Of jgnorant and supersticious men.
And thus this foul Idolatry began
As you heave hard through false opinions,
And was continued long on earth by man,
Still erring in his fond affection:
Which is most false as scriptures plain do show,
And such as learned are full well do know.
For by the rule of holy writ we learn
How to despise those false opinions,
And all such superstitious to discern,
Which are the Devils mere jnventions:
And not long after that the world began,
By him put in the head of wicked man.
For when the Angels first created were,
He that of them was highest in degree,
(Of whom the Prophet Esaias witness bare,
And says, such was his supreme dignity.
That all the great and goodly Ceders green
In Paradise, so fair were never seen.
Nor any Phirre nor Palm Tree could attain
Unto his hight, no more could any tree
What ere it was that stood within the plain
Of Paradise, to him compared be,
For beauty, and for comely feature,
For he surpast each other creature.)
When by his pride and great presumption,
He said he would be like to God on hie:
And in the North place his dominion,
He was cast down from heaven suddenly:
And unto his most great and foul despite,
Bereaved clean of Gods most glorious ^ight.
And so confind into the pit of Hell,
With horror and with great confusion,
For ever there perpetually to dwell.
Of whom it was said when he from heaven was thrown
How did thou fall oh morning star so bright,
From mo^gst the radia^t stones that cast such light.
Whom men for brightness Lucifer did call,
And Christ himself does say and witness bear,
That he from heaven saw foul Satan fall,
Like to the fiery streams of lightning clear.
Whom Jews called Bemoth, which does signify
A cursed beast and full of cruelty.
And is the serpent called Leviathan,
Whereof most learned Isodore does wright,
That is so great an enemy to man,
And takes all his pleasure and delight
To haunt the Seas and waters troubled,
Of whom King David to us Prophesied,
In his divine and most spiritual song,
Wherein he does set forth to us that beast,
The fiery and most furious Dragon strong,
That has his habitation, and does rest
Within the Seas, among Snakes and Adders vile,
Devising how he may mankind beguile.
The which a Monk called Br^ndon once did see,
(In vision when upon the Seas he was,)
Into a fearful pit cast down to be,
And there was bound his cursed days to pass;
Until the last and great, a general doom,
When Christ with power to judge the world should come
This cursed serpent he that did devise
(As in the holy scriptures we do find)
To come to Adam, when in Paradise
He was, and cause he hated all mankind,
When as occasion fit he did epsy,
Deceived him by devilish polecie.
And that he might the better work the same,
He took on him the shape of serpent sly,
With maidens face, and in that manner came
To E^a, and with great subtility
And face full smooth, himself to her did go,
And of her did desire the cause to know,
Why God did them forbid to touch and eat,
The fruit that on the tree of Life did grow,
Of which, he said the virtue was so great,
That it would make them good and evil know
And be as Gods, and so to her did give
Two Apples, which she took and did believe
What he had said, of which when she had fed,
And unto Adam given thereof to prove,
As he alleged their eyes were opened,
And for their guilt God did them straight remove:
And from terrestrial Paradise did throw,
Commanding them the earth to till and sow.
With sweat of brows their living there to get.
And thus this most accursed fiend of hell,
His mind upon all wickedness did set,
And into such a rage against mankind fell:
That taking face of woman for a while,
By his false tongue he did them so beguile.
And used that filthy beast to work his will,
And spoke in her; and often does the like,
I^ them that are possessed with spirits ill,
And forces them to fall in such dislike
Of God and all his works, that furiously
They curse and blaspheme God most horribly.
This wicked serpent called Leuiathan,
Continuing in his purpose as we find,
To Effect his cursed will against silly man,
Devised to speak in Idols dumb and blind:
And caused man on them to cry and call,
And them to adore with worship spiritual.
As they did use in Delos to implore
Apollos aid. But David does declare,
That we should all such jmages abhor,
And that the works of man's own hands they are:
This shall suffice to show how, where, and when,
The worshipping of jdols first began.
And I suppose that Guido meant hereby,
To show the same, as thinking it was not known
Unto the world, and for to certefie,
How at the last it was clean overthrown:
As also that such as unlearned be,
Thesequell of the same might plainly see.
And now I will proceed and briefly show,
That when Achilles, and Patroclus were
Arrived in Delos Isle, they straight did go
Unto Appollos Temple, there to hear
What answer he would give them in that c^^^
So doubtful, where they stayed a little space,
Before they did begin to sacrifice,
Consulting with the priests what course to take,
And after mature, counsel, and advise,
From them received, they did their prayers make:
And certain rich oblations did present,
Wherein when they much time and long had spent
Devoutly fore the Altar: at the last,
Appollo did his ears to them decline,
And after certain days were overpast,
Made answer unto them with vow divine:
And said, Achilles thou that now art sent
To me, by all the Grecians full consent;
Return in have again and to them show,
That their desire accomplished shall be,
And that to Troy they all shall safely go,
And there take land, though with some difficulty,
But at the last shall against their foes prevail,
And after they have fought many battle,
At ten years end the town of Troy shall win,
And cruelly put it unto the sword,
And noneshall escape of all they find therein,
But such as they shall mercy then afford:
For Priamus, and Hecuba his wife,
And all their Sons in that same mortal strife,
The Grecians shall unto confusion bring,
And slay them all, and having done, the town,
The houses, walls, and every other thing,
Shall be defast and utterly cast down:
This is, said he, decreed by heavenly doom,
And in due time most sure to pass shall come.
Achilles with this answer was full glad,
And thanked God Appollo with his heart,
For his so good and gracious answer made;
And ere he out the Temple did depart,
By fortune Bishop Calchos thither came,
To sacrifice and pray in Priams name.
And for to know what issue he should have,
In that his war against Grecians taken in hand,
(This Calchos was both learned, wise, and grave,
And one of great account in Tr^yan land:
A man that did in science much excel,
And could both strange and future things foretell.)
Who offering to the God due sacrifice,
(As in that case their usual manner was)
And praying on his knees in humble wise,
(Wherein he did some certain hours pass)
Apollo without tarrying or delay
Spoke unto him, and in this sort did say:
Calchas, Calchas, (twice calling him by name)
See that to Troy thou go not back again,
For if thou do it will turn thee unto blame,
For know for truth, and so I tell thee plain:
(Wherein thou may believe and credit me)
Ere long time pass it shall destroyed be.
For sure it is, and they cannot notwithstand:
Therefore thou shall unto Achilles go,
And with the Grecians join in heart and hand,
And stay with them, for I will have it so:
For they (as I have said) shall victors be,
And thereby win great fame and dignity.
For so the Fates their honors will advance;
And thou to them by counsel wise and grave,
Shall be a helper, aid, and furtherance
In their affairs, and of them thou shall have
Thy maintenance. Wherewith he straight arose,
And presently unto Achilles goes.
Of whom with honor great and reverence,
He was received according to his estate,
And to him showed his mind and full pretense,
And thereupon became confederate:
And vowed to be good friends one to the other,
And so went out the Temple both together.
And speedely made preparation,
To go from thence, and presently set sail
For Athens, where they did arrive full soon,
(For neither wind nor weather did them fail)
And landing there, did make no long delay,
But in all have the very self same day,
Unto the Greeks a full relation made,
What they had done in Delos bout their charge,
And what to them the God Apollo said,
Declaring all and every thing at large;
And how that they in those their wars should speed,
And that the Gods together had decreed,
The Troyans ruin and destruction.
And also what Apollo likewise spoke,
And unto Calchas said, and had foreshowne,
And willed him agreement straight to make
With Greeks, and not to Troy return again,
But with them ever after to remain.
Where at the Grecks reioyc't and were full glad,
That of the Gods such favor they had found,
And after that with one consent they made
A league, and unto Calchas straight were bound,
And he to them, with promise on each side,
As friends for ever after to abide.
Which done, each one unto his lodging went,
Till next day in the morn, when glooming night
By force of Phoebus beams away was sent,
And Sun began to shine most clear and bright:
When as the Grecians offered sacrifice
Unto the Gods in most submissiue wise.
And did devoutly hold a solemn feast
In Paynim wise, and in remembrance
Of th'answere which they had in their request
TO Apollo made, and with great reverence,
Gave thanks to him with glad and joyful cheer.
The Troyan Bishop Calchas did appear
Before them, and down on his knees did fall,
Desiring them to give him audience,
To speak his mind in presence of them all,
And that thereat they would take no offense:
Which being granted, they did silence make,
And he with sober countnance to them spoke.
My Lords and Princes all assembled here,
Whose fame and honor great so much is sprad
Throughout the world, that Nations far and near,
Continually of you do stand im dread:
Is It not your purpose unto Troy to go,
And there against your foes your strength to sho^?
Why then do you defer the time so long,
And still within the town of Athens stay,
Since that you have an army huge and strong?
Assure your selves nought's gotten by delay:
For it is the means to work your hinderance;
And not the way your purpose to advance.
For think you, while that you so long abide
Here in this place, and make so much delay,
That Priam for himself will not provide,
And does increase his forces night and day:
And has his spies here among you secretly,
That your proceedings to him certify.
Me thinks this course you take is not the best,
For be assured King Priam is so wise,
That while you lie here still and take your rest,
He will not cease by all means to devise
To help stimselfe; delay is dangerous,
And may unto yourselues be perilous.
And thus I prou't, for all the while that ye
Within the town of Atheni still do stand,
You give your enemy means and liberty,
To make your self the stronger to withstand
Your forces, and at leisure to provide
Great store of men your coming to abide.
Therefore I say, you ought to have more care,
Since that as now it is by you all decreed,
Against your foes to go, and to make war,
And do it with as much convenient speed
As possible you may withal your might,
For when the Iron's hot it is time to smite.
For if you stay until that it be cold,
And do your time neglect to work thereon,
Then will it neither plie, yield, bend nor fold.
Therefore I wish you all for to be gone,
And while you do in hearts and minds accord,
Without delay, each man straight go abord:
And make no stay to march against your foe,
That has to you so great a trespass done.
How many days have you as now let go,
And months ore-past, and carelessly ore-run?
How often has Titan from the East to West,
Compast the world whilst you here take your rest.
And have consumed your time so precious?
How long and often has the pleasant air^,
Caused by the gentle wind called Zephirus,
And seas that have so often been calm and fair,
But overslipt by you, while you lie here?
It makes your foes suppose you do it for fear,
And gives them cause t'esteeme the less of you.
Believe me, (as to you I now am bound)
I will not spare to give you counsel true,
Remember then (I say) how you have found
The Gods to favor you in this respect,
And still will do it, if you do not neglect
Their grace, and by your great ingratitude
And sloathfulnesse, provoke them to agree
An other doom against you to conclude.
For if that they do you so careless see,
Think it not strange if they do change their minds,
And unto you at last should prove unkind.
I counsel you therefore now to be gone,
And see that you no longer tarry hear,
And ere the time of harvest does come on,
While that the weather is both fair and clear,
And pleasant Summer bideth in his heat,
And fore the Winter comes that is cold and weat:
In season fresh and green put to the seas,
And in the name of all the Gods proceed.
(This is my counsel take it as you please,)
For since thereon you fully have decreed,
Make no delaie, but each man go to ship,
And let no longer time thus over-slip.
CHAP. IX.
How the Grecians Navy putting from Athens were distressed by tempest at Sea;
and how they took the Castle of Saranaba belonging to the Troyans.

CAlchas thus having spoken as you hear,
The Grecians thinking his advise so given
To be most true, all that assembled were,
Agreed upon the self same day, at even
To enter ship, and Agamemnon then
By sound of Trump did summon all his men,
To make all have they could to part away,
Who being also willing to be gone,
Did speedily take ship without delay,
And having pleasant wind at will, full soon
Put forth to sea with all their warlike band*
And presently were out of fight of land.
(To tell how many ships they had were vain,
Because it has already been declared,
But sure it is most evident and plain,
That nere tofore of like fleet has been heard*
Nor such a number of most valiant men,
As in their host assembled were as then.)
And being on the seas in weather clear,
Full suddenly the wind began to rise,
The air waxt dark, and they therewith did hear
Huge thunderclaps ^ebound out of the skies:
Which with such fury on their ships then stroke,
That many Masts and Yards in sunder broke.
The waves likewise did rise so huge and hie,
And such a storm of rain and hail did fall
Upon the Seas, that it did make the sky
To show as black as pitch; and there withal
The lightning in their fearful faces flasht,
So mightily, that they were sore aghast.
And every man began to call and cry
Unto their Gods in that most fearful case,
And made account assuredly to die;
But Colchos who in knowledge did surpass,
When he had made and said some Orasions,
By divelish charms and inchantations,
Did cease the storms and cause the Sun shine clear,
Which made their heavy hearts exceeding glad,
And told them how the cause of that great fear,
And tempest sore which they endured had,
Was for that fair Diana, discontent
With them, because their course to Troy they bent.
And put to sea ere they did her adore,
Or offered any sacrifice at all
Upon her Altars, or her aid implore,
Which made her in so great a rage to fall:
That if he had not found the means to appease
Her wrath, she would have drowned the^ in the seas
Wherewith King Agamemnon presently,
(Believing Colchos counsel) with all speed,
Perceiving that his fleet not far did lie
From th'Isle Aulides, suddenly decreed
To land therein, where by good fortune he,
A little Chapel found therein to be,
That was unto Diana dedicate.
Whereto with all the speed he could he went,
To offer sacrifice (thereby t'abate
The Incensed Goddess Wrath) and after spent
Long time in prayer, until that it appeared,
The seas of storms and tempests all were cleared.
But some men say and for a truth declare,
(As Ou^d long discourse thereof does make)
That Agamemnon did as then not spare,
His daughter Effigenia to take;
And on the Altar naked did her lay,
Supposing with his virgins blood to stay
Diana's wrath, and he therewith would be
Appeased with them, but she loath to behold
The virgin put to such extreamitie,
(The bowels of her mercy to unfold)
Invisibly from thence did take the maid,
And in her steed a Heart on The Altar laid,
Which Agamemnon thereon offered,
And with the same the Goddess satisfied.
Which having done and all things finished,
That thereunto belonged, in have he hyed
Unto his ship, and having weather clear
Put to the sea again, without all fear
And by her aid and help, whom some do say
To be man's guide and chief direction,
When on the sea or land, by night or day,
He travaileth, and her protection,
By such as skill have in Astronomy,
And seek her fame t'extoll and magnify.
Reported is, and found most strong to be,
When as she keeps this her situate
Within his tents and twelfth house by degree,
For in those two she is most fortunate:
And does her clearest light on earth reflect,
If that she be conioynd with good aspect.
Of any other fair and happy star,
Which unto men that travel is bening,
And in short time saild on the seas so far,
With wind so good that soon it did them bring
Unto the coast of Troy, where on the strand,
A Castle strong at that same time did stand:
Ditcht round about, and wal'd exceeding hie,
With diverse Towers therein both round and square,
And hard by it a haven there did lie,
Which many faddomes deep of water bare:
Where ships might safely anchor and abide,
And against all wind and weather safely ride.
(Which Castle though that Dares has forgot
To name it, yet some Authors do it call
Saranaba) where Grecians failed not
To enter, and their ankors there let fall,
Despite of all that offered to resist,
(For at that time they might do what they list.)
Which only were the garrison of men,
That in the fort (to keep and hold the same)
Were placed by King Priamus as then,
Who valiantly (to their eternal fame)
As Soon as they espied the Grecians enter,
Came forth, and to resist them did adventer.
With full pretense their landing to jmpeach
With all their power, if that it might prevail,
But it was as then too far above their reach,
For then the Greeks did them so far assail,
That they could not against them long endure,
Though they supposed and did themselves assure.
(Because the Grecians long at sea had lain,
And wearied with sailing too and fro)
The victory with ease they should obtain,
But yet they did not find it to be so:
For it fell out with them unhappily,
Because they did it unadvisedly.
For when that they together fiercely met,
With pikes and other weapons for the war,
And that their powers upon each other set,
The Grecians did exceed the Troyans far
In number, and as then did plainly show,
That Troyans to withstand them were too few.
And had a far unequal match then found,
To fight against a power innumerable,
And yet they would not yield one foot of ground*
Till many of them were wounded, and t'weake
The Grecians fierce and angry moods to stay,
That spared them not in cruel wise to slay,
And showed not any mercy what so ere.
So that of force they were constraind to run,
As fast as ere they could in extreme fear,
The fury of their foes as then to shun:
(For truth to say, and briefly to conclude,
They had against them too great a multitude)
And by constraint abandoning the place,
To save their lives unto their Castle fled,
The Grecians hotly following them in chase,
And leaving in the field great numbers dead:
Pell mell with them, got to the Castle gate,
Whereas perforce (unto their cruel fate.)
They entered in, and did it fiercely win,
And without mercy slew them every one,
And all the treasure that they found therein,
Unto their ships did bear; which having done,
Intending there to make no longer stay,
They brake the Castle down and did it lay
Flat on the ground, which being clean defast,
And not a stone left standing, they decreed
To go from thence, and making all the have
They could, did sail to Tenadon with speed,
A Castle then within the Troyan land,
That six miles from the town of Troy did stand;
And not far distant from the sea was set*
Within a fair and pleasant plot of ground,
And air most wholesome, fresh* and very sweet,
Environed with spacious plains, and round
About it grew all kind of corn, and vines,
(Whereof they made great store of pleasant wines)
Fruits, herbs, and flowers, of fair and several kinds,
And every other thing that man could wish,
To serve his turn, with store of Hearts and Hinds,
Calves, Hogs, and Sheep, and every sort of fish
That surging seas does yield: so that it might
Be called a place of pleasure and delight,
In which the soldiers lived in all content.
Whereto when as the Grecians did arrive,
And fore it boldly did themselves present.
The Troyans hoping them from thence to drive,
Most part of them well armed with speed went out,
And casting forth a huge and hideous shout,
Marched valiantly against their foes (as then
Upon the land, in fair and rich array,
And with so great a multitude of men,
That all the strand and field along the way
Unto the Castle walls, was covered
By them,) but yet the Troyans without dread
(Demanding not wherefore they came, nor what
They sought as then within the Troyans land)
Assailed them with so great courage, that
The air at their encounter hand to hand,
Did sound with noise of Drum and trumpets brave,
And with the strokes that either side then gave
On helmets, shields, and arms, from whence the fire
In sparks flew out, and many a man was slain,
And some lay wounded grovelling in the mire,
Some bleeding and in great and deadly pain*
Their Horses running maisterlesse about,
And all the field, and all the way throughout
Was filled with legs, arms, heads and hands of men,
Smitten off, and fiercely hewd and cut in sunder,
And thousands on each side were slain as then
(But on the Grecians part the greatest number:)
The Troyans did so fiercely them assail*
But all their force at last could not prevail,
Against so great a power and multitude
Of Greeks, that then were forty at the least
Against one of them, so that for to conclude,
They were constraind (as being overprest)
With all the speed they could for to retire*
(Though wanting neither manhood not desire)
To fight against their foes, and in great have,
As many of them ^^ could escape a^ay,
And save their lines, by force through the enemy past,
And to the Castle go^, and that same day
Some road in po^st* and with no little fear,
The news unto thetowne of Tr^ye to bear.
And need they had^^ fly with all their might,
For in the chase the Gr^^kes did them pursue
Unto the gates, and never left till night,
But many of them in incruell wise then flew*
That straggling here and there did chance to light
Into their hands, as they were in the flight.
Nor any one of what degree so ere
Was spared by them, nor ransom would be taken,
Such hatred to the Troyans they did bear:
And when they had great nombers of them slain,
They did besiege the Castle round about
So closely, that they could not issue out.
Which dove, the bulwarks presently they won,
And then with fierce assault they did assay
To scale the walls, but they within full soon
Mounting thereon* their furious moods did stay:
And drove the^ thence with so great force and might,
Of stones, long bows, and blows of coutl^s bright*
Pikes, Cross bows, darts, and wild-fier which they cast
Down from the walls, and did the same defend
So valiantly, that spite their hearts at last,
When as the Greeks with ladders did ascend,
They were by the^ thrown headlong down the wall,
And forced with great despite on ground to fall.
Till at the last the Grecians gins did frame,
Wherewith against the Castle stones they threw,
And in such wise they battered the same,
(That Troyans hardly could their faces show)
And then again their ladders reared upright,
And mounting up used all their power and might
To enter on their enemies forcibly*
But Troyans naught abasht, with valiant mood
For their defense at them let arrows fly
From off the walls, and mightily with stood
Their fierce assault, and beat them off again,
At which time many Grecians proud were slain
By push of Pike, and huge and mighty stones,
Which from the walls they cast, and therewithal
Did break the Grecians necks, and bruise their bones,
And spite their hearts constraind the^ down to fall
Upon the ground, in pale and deadly hew,
But once again the Greeks ^h'assault renew.
And with so great a number did ^^saile
The Castle on all sides, that in the end,
The Troyans forces clean began to sail,
And were no longer able to defe^^d
Themselves, when no succo^^ they perceived,
They waxed faint, and so at men bereaved
Of all relief, they did the best they might
To save their lines, but Gre^^^^^ valiantly
Did enter, and in rage and great despite,
Killed all that were within most furiously*
And when the Castle strong they had so woone,
They plast their ensigns on the walls, which done
They ransackt it, and what so ere they found,
Gold, treasure, and each other costly ware,
In packes and fardels they't together bound,
And to their ships with present speed it bare*
And breaking down the Castle, made it plain
And even with the ground, and so again
Returned unto their ships, and when they had
Refresht and eased themselves, and to declare
They joy for victory gaind, great triumph made
Their General, whose chief and special care,
Was to reward each one in his degree,
Caused all his Captains to assembled be.
And all the treasure they as then had won,
Brought forth and laid in open view, he made
To rich and poor like distribution:
But most to them that best deserved had,
And ventured life and lim for honors sake,
But he himself no part thereof would take.
As having more desire to win their hearts,
Then to have their goods, for he that is liberal,
And among his soldiers willingly imparts
His treasure, into danger nere does fall:
And bounty wins their hearts, and does them move,
Their Generals to honor and to love.
CHAP. X.
How Agamemnon assembled all the Nobles ^^^ chief Commanders of the Grecians,
where vp^^ deliberation taken amongst them, they sent (...) and Diomedes,
Ambassadors onto Priam Ki^^ of Troy, to demand restitution of Queen Helena,
and the domages done by Paris in the Temple of Cithera.

THe treasure dealt among them as you hear,
Commandment was by Agamemnon made,
That against next day the Princes should appear*
Before him to confer, and when they had
Taken rest a while, and that the radiant light
Of Phoebus glistring face, did shinemost bright
Upon the earth. The Grecions on the land,
And Agamemnon plast in royal seat,
With all his power which bout him then did stand,
And all the Princes there together met:
And placed were each one in his degree,
Silence once made, and opportunity
Then offered; The King with princely grace,
And pleasing terms, as being eloquent
And very wise, rose up out of his place,
And show to them his will and his intent:
The Effect whereof in substance does appear,
Hereafter as you presently shall hear.
My Lords (said he) you know and must confess,
That we of right and mere necessity,
Compelled are at this time to redress
A wrong to us done by the cruelty
Of Troyans, unto whom we gave no cause,
To break the ancient God of peace's laws.
True it is that we (as all the world does know)
Are of sufficient power, force, and might,
And are esteemd and known of hie and low,
To be the men that able are to right
All wrongs whatsoere, and both by sea and land,
To Effect such things as we shall take in hand,
Despite of all that against us will resist.
Yet I suppose, and't ever has been seen,
That power which in it self does not consist,
Nor is puffed up with pride, has always been,
And to the Gods is most acceptable,
And longest does remain upright and stable.
For is there any one amongst us all,
But knows for truth, and can full well express,
What harms and griefs do oftentimes befall,
By envy, pride, and devilish wilfulness?
And when by pride men take a thing in hand,
The Gods incenst, their actions do withstand,
And cross all those that are superbious.
For truth to say, it is avice abhord
Of every man, and held most dangerous,
For pride naught else but mischief does afford*
(Yet must we not for pride esteem or hold,
The valor in a man of courage bold.)
For he that unto pride his mind does give,
Or does converse with one that is proud in heart,
And takes delight with such a man to live,
Can neither will nor choose but have his part,
Of all such crosses as to pride befall,
Which commonly despised is of all.
And nothing does impair man's honor more,
(Of what estate so ever that he be)
Then pride. Wherefore let us the same abhore,
And from it, as from cruel viper flee:
And wholly race it out of heart and mind,
And so we shall the Gods more gracious find*
Especially when as our quarrel's just,
And that we ground it upon equity,
But if that pride and envy should us thrust
Into a war without necessity;
Or lawful cause, but only of mere hate,
The end thereof would prove unfortunate.
But all you know that we as now are here,
With full consent within the Troyan land,
To be revengd for wrongs that long since were
By Priam done to us, and for to stand
Unto the trial of our cause by might,
Wherein we know we do naught else but right.
And to that end we have begun t*nvade,
And wasted, spoyld, and overrun his lands,
Destroyed, and rane his Castles strong, and made
Occision of his men with warlike bands:
And many other harms committed have,
(Whereof himself the first occasion gave.)
So that if he did hate us heretofore,
(As by fore passed actions it appears)
I dare well say he hates us now much more:
And that if to revenge himself it were
Within his power, you presently should see,
What strange revenge by him would taken be.
And yet it is sure that they full well do know,
And hear of our arrival in their land,
Although thereof they seem to make no show,
And what by us is done they understand:
For that as yet it is fresh in memory.
So that if they were strong us to defy,
They would soon march to meet us in the field,
Yet certain it is their town is huge and great,
And by all men invincible is held,
And filled with Knights therein together met,
Of their allies; so that ere we begin,
I know we shall small vantage against them win.
For he that in a quarrel just does stand,
And fights to defend his Countre^,
Within a town in his own native land,
And has great store of faithful friends that be
To him allied, more vantage has thereby
To aid himself, then has his enemy.
For oftentimes the Raven does withstand,
And fights long with the Fawlcon in his nest,
Before the Fawlcon gets the upper hand,
And has the means to fly and take her rest,
While that the Fawlcon does for her attend,
For birds will in their nests themselves defend.
I speak not this (and so I pray conceive)
To put your valiant hearts in any doubt,
Or once your minds of hope for to bereave,
Of bringing this our enterprise about,
Which is, to spoil and utterly confound
The Troyans and their town, though it abound
With men and means against, us to resist,
And to defend themselves for certain time,
For ^re we from our enterprise desist,
Which now you see is merely in the prime,
We make no doubt but to destroy them all,
And bring them to their ends what ere befall.
But the only cause why I these words nowvse,
Is to diswade you from presumption
And pride of heart, least that you should abuse
Yourselues herein by indiscretion:
And wisely in this case so well provide,
That reason, and not will, may be your guide.
And ere we stir from hence such order take,
That we may reap great commendation,
And of our wars a happy end soon make,
For th'onor of the Grecian Nation:
For often we see the want of good foresight,
I special cause to breed a man despite,
When as he undertakes any thing,
Without forecasting what thereof may fall,
And in the end does him to ruin bring.
It stands v^then upon in mind to call,
What issue may ensue of our intent,
Least that in fine it makes us repent.
You know how first King Priamus did send
To us to have his sister Exion,
(By fair means, and to peace did seem to bend)
Who yet is holden by King Tolamon:
And how that we with one consent denied
His small request, and boldly him defied.
Which unto us not any vantage brought,
But only was the means of our despite,
And afterward no little mischief wrought*
For if that we by provident foresight,
Had not denied; all harms had been eschewd,
That after by the Troyans were pursude,
At Cithera, nor yet the treasure great
And costly jewels woone by Paris, had
Been carried unto Troy (their regal seat)
Nor slaughter of our men by them been made:
Nor yet the woe that Helena procured
In Grecian land, so long therein endured.
Nor any wrong to Menelaus been done,
If we (I say) had well considered
Thereon, and him restored Exion:
Nor had we been so foolishlie misled,
To spend our treasure and our goods in vain,
To come to fetch Queen Helena again:
With no small costs or charges to us all,
And dangers great, as you may well suppose,
And yet we know not what may chance befall,
Or whether we in fine shall win or lose:
Since that nothing on earth is permanent,
But unto alteration still is bent.
And for that fortune all things can subvert,
And to a good beginning give bad end,
All dangers therefore from us to divert,
And wisely to begin that we pretend*
My counsel is ere further we proceed,
To send unto King Priamus with speed:
To will him to make restitution
Of Helena, as reason does require,
And of all other wrongs unto us done
By Paris, unto which our just desire
If he consent* we may return to Greece
With honor, and all further troubles cease.
But if he seem this offer to refuse,
And wilfully rejects our demand,
Then shall we have occasion just to use
All rigor whatsoere within his land:
To spoil his town, and lay it flat on ground,
And utterly both him and his confound.
And two things will our action justify,
The one is, that our quarrel just and right,
(Which to be so no man can well deny)
Will maintain us, and boldly for us fight,
And us and ours will lawfully excuse,
But them condemn because they did refuse
Our just demand to them first offered.
The other is, that through the world so wide,
All men will say, that we were justly led
To take revenge, and will hold on our side:
And them perpetually for ever blame
Of wilfulness, to their erelasting shame.
And all extremes that by us shall be used,
Against woman, child, or man of each degree,
For causes fore aledg'd will be excused
I^ ^s, and we shall wholly freed be:
Though that we kill and spoil them every one,
And show no mercy unto any one.
But yet before we enter thereinto,
My counsel is, this offer should be made
To them, and that with speed the same you do:
And by this means (as I before have said)
We shall great praise and commendation gain;
Which said, he sat down in his thrown again.
But among the Grecian Princes many were
Of cl^ane contrary minds, and would not grant
That any should such message from them bear
To Priamus, least he should brag and vant,
That they to him had sent to crave amends,
And m^tion made with him for to be friends.
Yet such as more experience seemd to have,
To Agamemnons counsel did agree,
And to the same their free consents then gave,
That Diomed and Ulysses sent should be,
Their minds unto King Priamus to shoe,
Who straight without delay to Troy did go.
At such time as the Sun with radiant light,
(Had past along the whirling Hemisphere)
At noone-time with his beams exceeding bright,
Upon each hill and valley shone most clear:
And when unto the town of Troy they got,
They entered therein and stayed not,
But straight unto King Priams palace went,
(For that the streets directly led them to it,)
Not showing any man what their intent
As then might be, nor asking leave to do it:
Intending without fear or any dread,
In their Embassage boldly to proceed.
(And (truth to say) no man did them resuse
To enter nor to pass along the street,
For t'may be that as then they did not use,
For pasports or safe conducts to entreat
For messengers: but such as in that sort,
To any Prince or Country did resort,
Had leave to enter freely without doubt.)
And at the last they came to Ilyon,
The which with admiration, round about
They viewed well, esteeming it alone,
Surpast all others both in breadth and length,
Beauty, exceeding richness, and for strength.
And yet they wondered more (thogh't did the^ good)
Within the court all pau'd with lasper stone,
To see a tree in midst thereof that stood,
Which like unto the Sun for brightness shone:
But could not judge it to be natural,
Or made by workmen artificial.
Or framd by divellish inchantation,
Or cunning of some learnd philosophy,
Or whether it was but mere illusion,
And did appear that it was not to the eye:
And long they stood much troubled in their mind,
To see if that they could by reason find,
The ground of such a wonderful devise,
But it was too hard for them to comprehend,
So that if nere so long they should surmise,
Or on the same whole years in study spend,
To find the truth thereof it was impossible,
And yet to all men's sight it was visible,
And palpably for to be felt with hand.
The stock whereof was gold most bright and clear,
Which straight as any Mast or Palm did stand,
And did a huge and great proportion bear:
The height twelve cubits at the least and more,
And many branches great and small it boar.
Which large and wide all ore the place did spread,
And such a breadth it bare, that round about
The court therewith was wholly shadowed*
The branches and the leaves thereof throughout
The tree in paires together coupled were,
The one ol gold, the other silver clear.
The fruit it bare was precious stones most fine,
Of colors white, green, red, and sapphire blew,
Which on the same exceedingly did shine,
And every day the blossoms did renew:
And on it hung with colors variable,
Which to the Grecians seemd most admirable.
Who having long beheld it, at the last
Went forward with intent to effect their charge,
And never staid but through the palace past,
So long, till that into a chamber large
They entered, whereas King Priamus
Sat in a throane most rich and sumptous.
Accompanied with his Nobility,
Who all along the chamber on each side,
About him sat with princely majesty,
On whom the Greeks (which did exceed in pride,
With visage stern, and froward countenance,
As having then but small rememberance
Of honor) looked most boldly in the face,
And without any courtesy or word
Once offered, sat down and took their place,
Right opposite against the counsel board:
And there regarding not the Majesty
O^ Priamus, nor his Nobility,
When they had paws'd awhile, with courage bold
Ulysses began unto King Priamus,
The Effect of their Embassage to unfold,
So stoutly, and with words presumptuous,
That all that were assembled did admire
His pride, and mused what he would then require:
And said, let it as now no wonder be,
That we do use no kind of courtesies,
Nor honors at our entry unto thee,
To whom we are most deadly enemies:
For where as ranckor and disdain takes place,
Great folly it were to show a flattering face.
And truth to say, whereas the heart with fire
Of envy burns, and bears a deadly hate
Unto a man it never does desire
His welfare, but subversion of estate:
To him and his, and therefore i will not spare,
The Effect of our embassage to declare;
As it to us delivered was in charge,
From Agamemnon our brave General,
Whereof in brief our duties to discharge,
We tell thee plain, and so we do to all
That here assembled are this present day,
That he has sent to thee for Helena.
Whom thou from Grecians forciblie did take,
And against all right and by mere violence,
Broughtst her to Troy, of whom he wills thee make
Deliverie unto us, and straight from hence
To send her to her Lord King Menelaus,
Without delay, excuse, or further pawse.
He also asks restitution,
Of all the wrongs and injuries that were
By Paris in the Grecians Country done,
When he to ravish Helena was there;
And thou the same not only do maintain,
But Paris in his error do sustain.
Whereof he wills thee without delay,
To make amends, as reason does require,
And so thou may the Gods from vengeance stay,
If thou do grant to that he does desire:
(Whereto we counsel thee if thou be wise)
But if thou seemst this message to despise,
And wilt refuse to grant unto the same,
Assure thy self, and thou shall find it true,
(Wherein none but thy self shall bear the blame,)
Both thou and thine hereafter shall it rue:
Unless herein some order thou do take,
For naught but cruel death an end shall make
Twixt thee and us of this contention,
For thou and thine in fine destroid shall be,
Without all pity or redemption;
And which is more, and say I told it thee,
Thy town which now is built so huge and strong,
Against our force shall not continue long.
But we will beat it down and lay't fulllow,
And utterly in great despite and rage,
The houses, walls, and towers thereof orethrow,
Unless our angry moods thou do assuage:
Seem not therefore our counsel to despise,
But show thy self herein for to be wise.
When Priam heard the Grecians with such pride,
Before his face their embassage declare,
And in a manner seemd him to deride,
As though for him and his they did not care:
(Much moved thereat, and yet his fury staid)
Unto Ulysses spoke, and thus he said;
I wonder much that thus within this place,
You dare presume to make your proud demand,
And (which is more) so boldly to my face,
As if that you the power had to command,
And me constrain your message to obey,
And that thereto I durst you not denay,
Nor yet deny what ere you do require.
I tell you plain it does offend me much,
To hear your proud and insolent desire,
And (which is more) mine honor so does tuch:
That (truth to say) I hardly can refrain
To be revenged on you: but i will restrain
My wrath as now, and in my bounds will hold,
Yet nere the sooner grant to your request:
For know you shall, I will not be controld,
Since you and yours I utterly detest.
And briefly for to answer your demand,
It does not with the regal honor stand
Of any King, to grant to your desire,
Although he were in great extreamitie;
And (truth to say) great wrong it were to require
That at his hands, which you demand of me:
And hardly can I think (though you proceed
To do, as you do vaunt you have decreed)
You shall therein so much against us pre^aile:
For if it please the Gods, I tell you plain
I will such order take that you shall fail
Of your expected hope, and little gain
Thereby, although with vows you have it sworn,
And seem as now both me and mine to scorn.
For your request as every man may see,
To ask of me a satisfaction,
Is without ground of truth or equity,
Since you your selves gave first occasion,
By killing noble King Laomedon
My Father, and destruction of his town,
With slaughter of his men, and many more
Great injuries, (which if the truth were known)
All causlesse, you have done us heretofore,
Which overlong as now were to be showen:
For which my heart with grief is so possessed,
That while I live it nere shall be at rest,
Till that I be revenged for the same,
And for my Sister Exion (if I may)
Whom you (although to your no little shame)
Led Captive into Greece, and to this day
Still hold her there, not like to her degree,
Which you may well suppose much spiteth me.
And yet for all these wrongs you ask amends
Of me, that not long since, to live in peace
(Sent unto you to the end we might be friends,
And that all former enmity might cease)
To pray you to send Exion home again,
Which you not only seemed much to disdain,
But spightfullie my messenger abused,
And threatening him with death for coming there,
My just demand to you then made, refused.
Wherefore since that to me such spite you bear,
I will not hear nor grant to your request,
So much I do your pride and you detest.
And die I will with honor in the field,
Before that to one point of your demand,
In any wise I will consent or yield.
And to that end I let you understand,
That th'onelie thing that I as now do crave
Is war, not peace with you and yours to have,
Since you against us have used such cruelty.
And know you shall that for your bold attempt
To threaten me, you presently should die,
But that the law of arms does you exempt
From death, because Ambassadors you are.
Wherefore in have it were best for you prepare,
With speed to go from hence out of my sight,
And void the town as soon as ere you may,
For that to see you hear it is such despite
And grief to me, that I can hardly stay
From just revenge on you, such is the rage
That moves my heart, and by no means will swage.
King Priamus this answer having made,
Diomedes with scornful smile then rose,
And in disdain spoke unto him and said,
If that our presence now (as I suppose)
Be to thy heart so great a grief and pain,
And makes thee rage, when as we are but twain:
Then for a truth we let thee understand,
That thou shall never while thou live want woes,
To see so many Grecians in thy land,
And all of them thy stearne and deadly foes:
Whose number are an hundred thousand strong,
That will be here before thy gates ere long.
Against whose mighty power invincible,
Though thou far stronger were the^ now thou art,
Us to resist it were impossible,
Wherefore I wish thee play a wise man's part,
And be advised, for it will thee naught avail,
To strive against the^, for sure thou can not fail,
Both thou and thine to die by Grecians swords,
Thy town destroid and all that longs thereto,
Although thou seemst to use such hautie words,
And with thy tongue speak more the^ thou can do:
But better it were such boasting speech to leave,
And unto our good counsel credit give.
When Diomedes proudly with disdain
Had spoken thus, some Troyans in a rage,
Drew out their swords, and would him straight have slain,
But Priamus their furies to assuage,
Rose up, and with a countenance severe,
On pain of death commanded them t'forbeare
From wronging such as for Ambassadors were
Sent unto him, or t'offer them offense.
For though (said he) a fool will not forbear
To speak without discretion, wit, or sense;
A wise man must from rash attempts surcease,
And wincking at such folly, hold his peace.
For if a fool speaks vnadvisedlie,
And by that means does move dissension,
A wise man should not hastily reply,
Nor shun no kind of indiscretion:
For unto fools it properly belongs,
For to bewray their folly with their tongues*
And wise men should be wary what they say,
And well advised in all their actions,
And both their hands and tongs discreetly stay,
From giving cause to nourish factions:
For fools by custom indiscreetly speak,
And oftentimes into great choler break.
But wisemen can dissemble what they hear,
And till that time and place convenient be,
With th'vnadvised rage of folly bear,
Which lasts not long, as commonly we see:
And for my part I do you all assure,
That rather would I wrong my self endure,
Then to permit the least offense that is,
For to be done by any man what ere,
(For things which they suppose to be amiss)
To any messenger that now is here
Within my Court, for it is not fit that we,
For every small offense revenged should be.
For many times wrongs rashly offered,
When little cause or none to do it there is,
Whereof some great revenge has followed,
For hastiemen of woe do never miss:
Wherefore I charge you every one sit down,
And see that no man by presumption
Attempteth for to wrong in any wise,
Th'Embassadors of Grecia hither sent,
Nor furiously in malice against them rise:
But let them freely show the whole intent,
And scope of their embassage whatsoere,
And sit you still, while we with silence hear.
With that Aeneas rose out of his seat,
(Which next on the one side of King Priam was)
And in a furious rage and choler great,
Said to the King, with license of your Grace,
I think when one without advise does speak,
That he not only well deserves a cheake,
But punishment, that men by him may take
Example, how in open audience,
Such vproares and dissentions they do make,
Thereby to offend your royal Excellence:
And (truth to say) it might so come to pass,
That I the bounds of reason might surpass
In this respect, and hastily commit
A great offense, whereby your royal Grace
Might censure me to die therefore; but yet,
Ift were not for your presence in this place,
I would revenged be upon these twain,
That have so proudly spoken in disdain
Of you, (for it is a most unseemly thing,
To hear a fool with great presumption,
(In presence of a high and mighty King)
Take on him without all discretion,
To speak that which to him might breed offense,
And prejudice to his magnificence.)
To teach him how in better sort to learn
To use his tongue, and when to hold his peace,
And of the persons better to discern,
To whom he speaks, and not with such excess
As he has done, that now before your Grace
So prowdly spoken has, to your disgrace.
For which I counsel him if he be wise,
Out of your Graces sight with spreed to go,
And not to stay long here, upon surmise,
That what so ere presumption he does shoe,
The law of arms is his protection:
For if he do he will feel the smartfull soon.
Wherewith Diomedes disdainfully,
In proud and hawty words, and yet but few,
Did to Aeneas suddenly reply,
Saying, thy speech sufficiently does show,
That without doubt thou art exceeding wise,
And that the Prince that follows thine advise,
Or unto thee his secrets does impart,
Can never err, nor do ought that is amiss,
Because thou of so good a judgment art,
That wilfully without all good advise,
Prouok'st thy Prince the laws of arms to break:
But would to God I might once with thee speak
Alone, when opportunity does serve,
That I might thee requite for thy great skill
And courtesy, as thou do well deserve,
Which if I live assuredly, I will,
And thereof make account, for if we meet
In field, with other terms I will thee greet.
But wise Ulysses rising up then spoke,
And seeming Diomedes speech t'excuse,
Unto him said, now further words to make,
Or longer here more arguments to use
Mere folly it were for us: and to the King
He said, since thou will do no other thing,
Nor make no further answer then thou have,
We Will stay no longer here, but straight be gone,
And make relation (what twixt us has past)
Unto the Grecian Princes every one:
And how we find thee obstinately bent
To hearken, or to grant to their intent.
And so without delay to horse they mount,
And to the Grecians armies road in have,
And there to Agamemnon did recount
All what King Priam said, and what had past
Twixt them in Troy, whereby the Greeks did see,
The Troyans purpose and intent to be,
Not once to yield Queen Helena to send
To them again, but valiantly to fight,
And against their foes their City to defend,
And if they could by valor and by might,
Drive them from thence, which though it pleased the^ not,
Yet since they saw that such had been their lot,
To undertake that hawtie enterprise,
And that there was no other remedy,
They did consult what ways they should devise,
To help themselves in their necessity
Of victuals, and all other things beside,
Whereof in have they did themselves provide.
But first before I show what means they made
To help themselves, whilst they fore Troy did lie,
I must declare what is of Aeneas said
By Guido, who for truth does certify,
His father Duke Anchises was, and that
He on the Goddess Uenus him begat.
And how that after Troy was clean defast
And overthrowen, he sailed from thence by seas,
And having past by many Coasts, at last
At Carthage did arrive, where for to ease
Himself he stayed, and then took ship again,
And sailed so long that with great toil and pain
His ships arrived in Italy in the end,
The which by him was wholly conquered,
And that Augustus Casar did descend
From him, that was so highly honored,
For many Conquests valiantly atchiu'd
By him, while on this earthly mowld he lived.
And Iustine that was Emperor a while,
(Within his book Autentikes called by name,
The Rubrikes of Aeneas did compile
In memory of him, because he came
So long a journey into Italy,
And conquered it for his posterity.
Which long time held the same, and did defend
The regal state thereof by valiant hand,
For Casar did (ast's said) from him descend,
And first jmperiall Diadem in that land
Did wear: and by his policy and wit,
Ordaind the civil laws to govern it.
What further of Aeneas traveling
You seek to know: in Uirgill, you may see
The same at large, who writes every thing
By him atchieu'd, though some persuaded be
That Virgill was long dead and buried,
Before his book was fully finished.
CHAP. XI.
How Agamemnon sent Achilles, and Thelephus, into the island of Messa for
victuals; and how they of the Isle withstood the Greeks, and fought with them;
in which battle the King of Messa was slain, and Thelephus was made King of
Messa, by consent of all the Nobility of the Island.

YOu heard how while Ulisses did soiourne
With Diomed in Troy, what there had past:
And also what King Priam did return
For answer to the Grecians: who in have
Upon the same a general counsel call,
Where in the full assembly of them all,
King Agamemnon spoke to them, and said
My Lords (as well you know) it is now high time,
That care by us should speedily be had,
(And chiefly now while we are in the prime
Of our affairs) for things that needful are
To serve our turns, while we maintain the war
Against Troy; and first, that good provision
Of victuals should be made, for if we fail
Thereof, it will be our own confusion:
Which to prevent, and better to prevail
In the enterprise which we as now pretend,
My counsel is, that presently we send
(If you think it good) unto an jsle hard by
Called Messa, where great sto^^ of victuals are,
From whence we may in our necessity
Our selves thereof provide, without all care
Of sending into Greece, and to that end
I pray you name whom you will thither send.
With which advise the Grecians all consent.
Agreed amongst themselves that Thelephus
And with him stout Achilles should be sent
To th'jsle of Messa rich and populous,
For victuals to suffice them and their host,
And for to bring it thence, what ere it cost.
At which time in that fertile Island raignd
King Tenteran, that valiantly by might
The Scepter and the Crown thereof obtaind,
And had with justice, equity, and right,
Long ruled in the same in peace and rest,
Till Grecians did his quiet state molest.
Though some men do affirm that Messa lies
Within the bounds of the Sicilian King,
And that the name of Messa signifies,
Abundance great, and store of every thing
Which therein grew, and that it had the name
From Messena, a City in the same.
Exceeding rich and plentiful, from whence
Great store of ships and vessels laden were
With victuals, which they did convay from thence
To every place and Country far and near:
Which for such wares as to that jsle they brought
They did excange, and of those people bought.
And some men say, that Messa named was
Of Messanus a King that ruled the same,
Who in his time all others did surpass,
For riches great, exceeding power and fame:
This shall suffice in breife to let you know
What Messa was: and now I will you show,
That when the Grecian Princes had decreed,
That Thelephus and Achilles should be sent
To Messa with three thousand men; with speed
They put to seas, and ere long time was spent
Arrived there, and straight their men did land.
But when the King thereof did understand,
He marched with an army to the strand,
And there with horse and footmen valiantly,
The Grecians power by force sought to withstand,
Giving the onset most courageously;
And against them did a cruel fight maintain,
Wherein great numbers of their men were slain
On either side, and many wounded were,
That bleeding on the ground in great distress
Lay, never likely arms again to bear:
And in so great a rage and furiousness
Each party did against the other fight,
That long it was ere that perceive you might,
Advantage twixt them both; so equally
The battle went, and at that time was fought:
Till in the end the Grecians valiantly
Drove back their foes, but it availed them naught:
For presently they were constrained to run,
And back t'retire with speed again, to shun
The fury of the enemies that were,
Three to their one, that cruelly then slew,
And made to fly in great distress and fear,
Which at that time they could not well eschew:
But when with angry mood Achilles saw
His men so fiercely slain, and forced to draw
Back to the strond in great extremity,
With trenchant blade in hand he entered
Amongst the thickest of the enemy,
(Where many of his men in field lay dead,
And others wounded sore, away did fly)
And there behau'd himself so valiantly,
That in short space he had recovered
The field again, and in most furious mood
Feld, wounded, and before his feet lay dead,
All that he found, or him as then withstood:
And therewithal his men so comforted,
And by his valor great encouraged,
That where before they fled and lost their ground,
Their enemies were forced to retire
And fly to save themselves, and none was found
That durst withstand his fierce and furious ire:
For who so ere he met was sure to die,
And none escapt, such was his cruelty.
And sure if that his valor, worthiness,
Exceeding force, and courage passing bold,
Had not prevailed against the hardiness
Of Tentrans men, without all doubt they would
That day in field have slain the Grecians all.
But he like to a strong and puissant wall
Withstood them, and their ranks so fiercely brake,
That maugre all their power, he made them lie
In heaps before his feet, and way to make:
And at the last when as he did epsy,
King Tenteran a brave and valiant Knight,
Like Lion fierce defend himself in fight,
And here and there the Grecians so oppressed,
That many of them by him were fiercely slain,
And beaten down, and that he never ceast
To overthrow all that he could attain:
He did not stay, but with most fierce desire,
And heart that burnt with rage as hot as fire,
Made way through thick and thin, and round about
Him killed his foes so fast on every side,
That at the last he found King Tentran out
Whereas he fought, and with exceeding pride,
Gave him a blow so fiercely on the crest,
That't made his head bend down unto his breast.
And then again his blow redoubled,
And with the same so deeply did him wound,
That therewithal most grievously he bled,
And with a third blow stroke him to the ground:
And then from off his head his helmet rent
In furious wise, with purpose and intent
To strike it off, and to that end did heave
His hand on high with bloody sword to give
The Fatal blow, that should his life bereave.
(So much the slaughter of his men did grieve
Him at the heart, which he perceived was made
By him alone, and that he only had
Been cause thereof.) But ere the blow did fall,
Young Thelaphus that did by chance perceive
What he would do, to him in have did call,
And stepping forth did on his shield receive
The stroke, and did Achilles friendly pray,
At his request his furious mood to stay:
And for a while in Knightly courtesy
To grant him life, since wounded sore he lay
Before his feet, and ready was to die.
For every Knight (says he) his wrath should stay,
And on his foe some pity ought to have,
When he in humble wise does mercy crave.
To whom Achilles said, I marvel why
You seem to crave that I should mercy show
To him, and spare his life, who furiously
With pride (which in his heart did overslow)
Would not unto our just request give ear,
But without cause did arms against us bear?
And with disdain and mere presumption,
The Grecians in most furious wise assaild,
Though now against his expectation,
He finds that it has him naught availd:
And he himself is fallen into the snare
Which for us (as he thought) he did prepare.
Though we deserved no such thing at his hand,
As having no intent him to molest,
Nor yet by force t'invade him or his land.
So that if now he finds himself oppressed,
He can it not deny, but must confess
His rash attempt deserved has no less.
But Thelaphus again did him require,
Of knighthood to take pity on the King,
And for that time to grant to his desire,
For while (said he) my father was living,
He and king Tentran were confederate,
Though here as now he lies in woeful state,
With pale and deadly face upon the ground,
Expecting when his soul shall hence depart:
And for that heretofore I have him found
To bear a noble mind and Royal heart,
When I by chance past through his country,
Where he with all his Lords and chivalry,
(Received and feasted me most Royally
In every place where I did ride or go
Within his land.) So that humanity
Binds me the like unto him now to show:
And in my mind his courtesy to bear,
Least men should say, that to unkind I wear,
Which might hereafter turn to my disgrace.
Wherefore that I in part may him requite,
I you beseech take pity on his case,
And spare his life as yo'are a noble knight.
Whereto Achilles presently did yield,
And there before his soldiers in the field,
King Tenteran unto Thelaphus did give,
To do with him as he should think it best.
Who to behold him in that case did grieve,
And at his heart with sorrow was oppressed
To see there was no other remedy,
But that of force he could not choose but die.
And when the son unto the Western part
With speed declind, the battle at an end,
And Tenteran did feel great pain and smart,
Yet no relief his woeful state could mend,
For that his wounds still more and more did bleed*
His men made all the have they could with speed
To bear him thence unto his court with ease*
And to that end they for a litter sent
And laid him in it, and while he past the prease,
Thelaphus and Achilles by him went,
And to his Royal Palace him contraid,
Where in his bed when as they had him laid?
Perceiving that he drew unto his end,
For that his vital spiri^s (...) to fail,
And nature unto him no force could lend,
Nor surgery, no^ Phisike, ought prevail,
Nor any comfort no^ relief was left
To him, as then of worldly joys bereft*
For Thelaphus and Achilles he did send,
And with a voice most feeble, faint, and weak,
And sighs and tears fast drawing to his end,
In woeful wise he did unto them speak,
And said, my Lords, health, honor, high degree,
All worldly joy, and great prosperity,
I wish unto you both with all my heart,
But specially to thee Prince Thelaphus,
Who at this time such favor does ^mpart
To me, and art so kind and gracious,
That in my pains so grievous and so strong,
Thou seek'st my life if it might be to prolong,
But now alas there is no remedy
But die I must, and can it not withstand,
For as you see here prostrate I do lie
Expecting th'hower, when from deaths cruel hand
The fatal blow will come to pierce my heart,
And that my soul out of my corpse shall part;
To make an end of all my misery,
Which so much more increases in my heart,
To see the hour of death approach so nie,
And that out of this world I must depart,
And leave no heirs within this Isle to reign,
The Crown and Scepter thereof to maintain
When I am dead, which by that means (alas)
I fear will soon be spoyld and ouer-run,
Which I full loath would be should come to pas,
Since that at first with labor great I won
And conquered it, and ever since by might
And warlike force maintained have my right
Against all my foes, for many yea^es now past.
Yet once it had been lost without recure*
And I from thence had utterly been chaste,
But that I did the aid and help procure
Of Hercules the stout and valiant Knight,
Who by his extreme force and passing might
(Which at this day is fresh in memory,
And while the world indures shall ever be)
Orecame and vanquished my enemy,
And did again restore this Isle to me.
And while he lived the fear of him was such,
And every man respected him so much,
That spite of all my foes, I did enjoy
My Scepter and my Crown in peace and rest,
And no man durst by word and deed annoy
My quiet state, nor me in ought molest.
Whereby it does appear this little Isle
Belongs unto the Kingdom of Cicile.
Where Hercules did place two pillars great,
(Which at this day are extant to be seen)
And for perpetual memory there set,
To show how far he in that land had been*
Which pillars some men called Columnia,
And others did them name Herculea.
Which Island once was in subjection
Unto the Mores, and long time so remaind:
But after by the valiant Romans won,
When they th'jmperiall diadem obtaind
Of all the world, and by their puissance
Their names and fames did far and wide advanc^
And after many valiant Conquerors
Succeeded had each other by degree,
And of the Town of Room been Emperors,
And therein ruld with power and Majesty:
One Frederick the second of that name,
That sometime was an Emperor in the sam^
And King of Cicile by inheritance,
Because he did a great affection bear
Unto that Isle, and in remembrance
Perpetual of him, therein did rear
And make a huge and mighty Tower of brick,
With wal^es that were exceeding strong and thick.
And cause the air was pleasant, good, and sweet*
And that therein great store of flowers were*
Some Authors do report he named it
The new fair land, which name long time it bear*
And was therein by use continued,
Till that the Emperor Frederick was dead.
But to return unto King Tenteran,
When he had vs^ ^^e speech which you have heard,
And that he did perceive his life began
To draw unto an end, and therewith feared
The stroke of death, with pale and deadly cheer
To Thelaphus he spoke as you shall hear:
My son (said he) since I from hence must pass
And leave this world, (for neither force, nor might,
Entreaty, presents, pardon, nor yet grace
Can save my life) as equity and right
Requires the same, here in the audience
Of all my Lords, to clear my conscience,
I tell thee, that the worthy valiant Knight
Thy Father Hercules, once conquered
This ^^and by his valor and his might,
And when that he therein had stablished
A perfect peace, and all things quiet were:
Because he did to me affection bear,
He freely did assign and give to me
The regal crown and scepter of the same,
With all the Princely power and dignite
That thereunto belonged, or he could claim,
And of him I it held I must confess,
So that his state therein was nere the less.
And now for love of him since I must die,
I give to thee that which from him I had,
Which is the Crown and sovereignty
Of this same Isle, and likewise as he made
Me King thereof, I also thee create
King in my stead, to maintain the estate
And dignity thereof while thou do l^ue,
And to thine heirs for ever to remain,
(Though) I confess the thing which I thee give,
Before unto thy self did appertain
By true descent and right paternall line,)
As Hercules did giu't to me and mine.
And to that end he said unto them all
That round about him stood, I do declare,
That since the Gods out of this world do call
Me hence without an heir, and that you are
Left destitute of one to be your guide,
(To the end that you all care should set aside,)
I here do make my will and Testament*
And by the same do grant assign and give
My scepter, crown, and regal ornament
To Thelaphus, to hold't while he does live,
And after to his heirs by true descent,
Which since it is my will and my intent,
I pray you all, as soon as I am dead,
Without delay let it performed be,
And set the regal crown upon his head,
And honor him as you have honored me.
And after having written what he said,
He pawsd a little while, and then he praid,
And heartily desired Thelaphus,
That presently as soon as he was dead,
Of Knighthood for to be so courteous,
To cause his body to be buried
With royal pomp and Princely funeral,
Fit for a King, and then turned to the wall,
And suddenly fell Parcas cut in twain
This thread of life, and made him yield his goast.
(Which as the Poets in their fables feign,
Straight took her way unto Th'lizian coast.)
Whose body feared, and balm'd without delay,
King Thelaphus a tomb of Marble gray
Caused to be made in rich and sumptuous wise,
Whereon in golden letters he did place
An Epitaph, (the which he did devise
To show how Tentran died, and what he was,
And how he gave his crown to Thelaphus,)
Whereof the effect, In verses six, was thus:
Here lies King T^ntrans body in this tomb,
Who by Achilles cruelly was killed
In fight, but ere of death he had his dombe,
By testament to Thelaphus he wild
And freely gave the Crown and Sovereignty
Of Messa Isle, and so in peace did die.
Which being done, and every other thing
Performed with great pomp and royalty,
And Thelaphus of Messa crowned King
By full consent of the Nobility:
And fealty and homage to him made,
As they before to T^ntran promised had,
Achilles straight unto his ships did carry
All things that he would ask, desire, or have,
That for the Grecians turns were necessary,
As Corn, and Wine, such as the soil there gave*
Flesh, fish, fruits, fowls of every kind such store,
That he could not desire nor wish for more.
And order with King Thelaphus did take,
That he should there remain to rule the land*
And when occasion served provision make,
Of such things as the Greek^ in need did stand,
That at all times in their necessity,
Of victual they well furnished might be.
Though willingly he would have gone again,
With him to Troy, but that Achilles pra^'d
And heartily desird him to remain
In Messa, that he might the Grecians aid
When they in any need should stand, and straight
With all his ships with victuals fully fraught,
He sayld to Troy again, and soon did land
At Tenadon, and there relation made
What entertainment they in Messa found,
And how King Tentran then resisted had,
And valiantly the Grecians power assaild,
And without doubt against them had prevaild.
(As having three men to their one) but he
By valor slew King Tentran in the field,
Who being brought unto extremity,
And at the point of death, himself did yield.
And how before he died, he did consent
And order took by will and testament,
That Thelaphus should king of Messa be,
Whereto the whole Nobility agreed,
And Crowned him with great solemnity.
And how that he had left him there, when need
Requird to make provision
Of victuals, and of munition.
And lastly showed what victuals he had brought
With him from thence, to serve them presently,
Assuring them they need not doubt that ought
Should want to aid them in necessity.
Wherewith the Greeks well pleased, did much esteem
Achilles for his valor, thanking him
That he therein had been so dilligent,
And brought his charge unto so good a pass,
Which done, he road unto his tent,
Where he with great applause received was,
And welcomed of all his men, as glad
That he from Messa safe returned had.
But now for that mine Author turns his style,
And leaves the Grecians power at Tenadon.
And of the Tr^^^ns actions for a while
Does speak* to show what they mean time had don
To fortify themselves against their foes,
And then at large particularly shoes
What force they had procured, and severally
The names of all the Princes does declare
That came to Troy, and there courageously
Their aid did lend to Prians in the war.
Which he so long and valiantly maintained
Against the Greeks, and finally obtained
(Although at last it was his destruction)
Eternal fame, which death could never deface,
Nor tract of time put in oblivion,
But among the rancks of worthies does him place*
I will them orderly each one declare,
And show what several names and arms they bare.
And first he says, three Kings of noble fame
Came unto Troy to aid King Priamus,
Their countries he omits, but does them name
Andrastrus, Tapor, and King Pandarus,
And with them full three thousand Knights they brought,
That valiantly against the Grecians ^ought.
And from the Isle of Coleson there came
Five thousand knights that by four Kings were led
The first of them King Carras had to name,
(A Prince for valor great much honored)
The second called was Ima^ius,
Nestor the third, the fourth Amphimacus.
From Licia land with Glaucus Valerius,
So there came his son and heir Prince Sarpedon,
(Both were alied to King Priamus)
Who in those wars great fame and honor won,
And with them three thousand knights did bring,
Well furnished for the wars of every thing.
Out of the famous rich Larissian land,
Two Kings there came to aid the Troyan,
Who with the^ brought (the Grecians to withstand,)
A thousand Knights: and from Licacian
The valorous Euphenius their King,
A thousand armed Knights with him did bring,
By Hupon and by Epidus together
Five hundred Knights to Troy conducted were:
King Remus also did with him bring thither
Three thousand Knights that silver arms did bear
Out of Tabaria Isle, which distantlay
From Troy, a tedious, long, and dangerous way.
Four Dukes likewise with all their chivalry,
And Earls eight (that great experience
Had in the wars) came in his cumpany,
Who without any manner difference,
When as they armed were within the field,
Did bear a crest of Gold upon his shield.
Whereby the King and all that with him came
Were known, although besides the^ many a knight*
Upon their shields and pennons bare the same,
When they did enter in the field to fight.
From oriental Thracia the King
Called Pilex, just a thousand Knights did bring.
And Alchamus a Duke that with him came,
A hundred Knights in his conduction had.
Pre^em^ssus a King of worthy fame,
Great preparation in Panomie made,
Of men and arms to aid King Priamus,
With whom a valiant Duke adventurous
Called Stupex was, and in their company
A thousand Knights, all armed and furnished
With darts and spears, wherewith they usually
Do fight, and are so well e^perienced
With them to throw, that when they list they can
Directly strike and kill both horse and man.
By nature they are wild and furious,
And of most cruel, fierce, and angry mood,
Yet valiant Knights, and very ventrous,
In fight to spill and shed their enemies blood.
Their countries full of woods and desert ground,
And naught but trees and groves therein are found.
For howses very few or none there be,
Their lodging is in woods and groves, whereas
It Is said men often and commonly do see,
(When they along and through the same do pass,)
Most strange and fearful sights of monsters fell
Not much unlike the furious fiends of hell.
As Satyrs, Faunes, by corns and incubus,
(And such like shapes of dum Gods as we,
In Poets books of tales incredulous,
Do read within the woods and groves to be,)
Which often times put men in such a fear,
That they do seem as out their wits they were.
From Boetine Isle three Dukes together came
In company, all Princes valorous.
The one of them Amphimus had to name,
The other two Samus and Forcius.
And with them full twelve hundred Knights they brought
That valiantly against the Grecians fought.
From Boetine land which does so much abound
With Spices, gummes, fruits, Corn, wine, and store
Of rare and wholesome roots, which there are found,
Whereof no country has the like, nor more.
Two brave and valiant Kings together came,
That Boetes and Epristius had to name,
And with them just a thousand Knights there were,
And from the land called Paflagonie,
The which as ancient Authors witness bear,
So far remote in th'Easterne parts does lie,
That as they say, it is impossible
To travel to*t, and cal't invisible.
Nor that it is not to be seen nor found*
But only for because it is so far,
And yet it is said the country does abound
In silver, gold, and precious stones ^ost rare,
And that upon a River great it lies,
(Which issues from terrestrial Paradise.)
By name called Tibris nere to E^phra^^^,
Which Philomene a giant huge and fell,
Whose admirable stature Guydo says
(All other men for greatness did excel*)
A thousand Knights in steel all a^med were*
And every one a goodly shield did bear*
Of Cu^rboilie all guilt and farely set
With precious stones, which forth the Rivers clear
That issue out of Paradise are fet,
And from the Ethiopian land that nere
To India lies, came many a valiant man
With Perses, and King Menon (he that wan
So great renown and honor by his might,
And with him valiant Sigamon his brother,
Who also was a stout and hardy Knight.)
As Barons, Earls, Dukes, and many other,
Besides three thousand Knights all armed in steel
Which caused the Greeks full often their force to feel.
And from the land of Therdo there came
With valorous and wise King Theseus
(That sole and Sovereign Prince was of the same)
His most renowned son Archilagus.
(Who both were of King Pri^^s royal blood.)
And just a thousand valiant Knights and good,
Besides two Kings of great renown and fame,
And passing rich of gold and every thing
That man can wish, yet none of them does name,
But says that that they did from Agrosta bring
A thousand valiant chosen Knights to fight
Against the Greeks, to try their force and might.
And from Lissinia land which fa^re did lie
From Troy, with prudent King Epistrophus,
(Whose fame throughout the world abroad did ^^ie
As known to be a Prince most virtuous,
Discret, right wise, and provident withal,
Well learned in the Arts called liberal.
In war approved a stout and valiant Knight,
A counselor in peace exceeding sage,
And at that time a man of passing might.
Although as then he was well stricken in age,)
A thousand Knights there came in company,
The proud and hauty Grecians to defy.
Besides an Archer strange and monstrous
That with him came, who such proportion had
That to behold him it was marvelous,
For from his Navill upward he was made
Like man in shape, and downward like a horse,
And therewithal of most exceeding force.
His upward part like man proportioned,
Had skin as black as cole, and rough as bear,
And was with curled hair clean covered;
His eyes like to a burning furnace were
As red as fire, his face most horrible,
And look exceeding fierce and terrible.
His ugly shape and devilish countenance
Was such, it did the Greeks so much dismay,
That whensoere he did himself advance
To set on them, they fled and ran away,
And stoutest of them all for fear did quake,
He did so great a slaughter of them make.
Within his hand a bow he always held,
Which he so well could use and had such skill,
That whosoere he hit to ground he feld,
And thousands of the Grecians he did kill.
That they of him were in no little fear,
As in the story you at large shall hear.
Thus many Kings and Princes of renown,
From diverse strange and several countries
Far distant from the famous Trojan town,
Assembled were therein, as enemies
Professed against the Grecians, and to lend
Their aid unto King Priamus their friend.
Who with them brought well furnished for the war,
Thirty two thousand Knights adventurous,
(Besides their Squiors) that arms and pennons bare
And showed themselves in field couragions
Against their furious foes, and to conclude
There nere was seen so huge a multitude
Of Knights and Princes great assembled
Within one town, not counting those that came
From India, nor such as were borne and bread
In Troy, and dwelt as then within the same.
Which were so many and so great a number,
That for to think thereon twould make men wonder.
And more, if that it be considered right,
It is most sure that since the worlds creation,
Or Phoebus on the earth did cast his light,
There never was seen in any Nation
So many Kings and Princes met together,
As on both sids at that same time were come thither
For all the flower of chiualry was there,
Kings, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Knights, and Squien,
And all their power of men that arms could bear,
With full intent and resolute desires,
Within the town, for to defend their right:
Without the town, to win it if they might.
Let them that read and do peruse this book,
Consider for what cause this war began,
And if without impartial eyes they look,
They shall perceive that many a valiant man,
For small or no occasion lost his life,
In that so needless, strange and bloody strife.
For truth to say, for naught this war began,
And naught there was on either side obtained,
For though the Greeks the town of Troy then wan,
Yet if it be considered what they gained,
The storyshewes that when that all was don,
Their reckoning made, they lost more the^ they won.
For many thousands of them there were slain,
And lost their lives before the town of Troy,
And never did return to Greece again,
The honor of their victory to enjoy.
And those that lived and back to Greece did go,
Did after end their days in grief and woe.
And on each side the flower of Chivalry,
Most woefully did end their fatal days,
With hundred thousands in their company,
And altogether (as the story says)
That bloody quarrel then did undertake,
For naught, but for a silly woman's sake.
Great pity it was so many Knights should die,
And headlong run unto destruction,
To end their days in extreme misery,
For small, or rather no occasion:
Bettet it were at first to end or cease,
A quarrel of no moment, then t'encrease
In malice, and revenge for naught to take,
For wise men should forecast what harms might hap
nd seek an end of small debates to make,
Ere that they fall in wavering fortunes lap,
And so procure their own decay perforce,
And after wish they had taken another course.
It is a use among men when fire does take
In any house or place, to ring a bell,
Or else some other noise or sign to make,
Thereby to warn such as about them dwell,
To lend their aid in that extremity,
And speedily to seek for remedy
Before it does increase to greater fire,
It Were then too late and folly in a man
That comes to help, to ask or to inquire
Which way the fire in the house began,
And to neglect the quenching of the same,
When time does serve for which he thither came
For danger does require no delay,
And he that is wise does commonly forecast
Such dangers as may fall in time, to stay,
For it is too late when as the time is past.
But now i will leave the Trojans for a while,
And to the Grecians army turn my style.
You heard that while the Grecians did abide
At Tenedon, how that they all decreed
To send to th'isle of Messa, to provide
Such victuals as their puissant host should need,
While they made war within the Trojan laud,
And how Achilles took that charge in hand.
Now while that he was gone and stayed there,
The noble King Palamides arrived
At Tenedon, with thirty ships that were
All filled with valiant Knights the which revived
The Grecians hearts, as glad to see him there,
For that not any one of them but were
Sore grieved that he stayed so long behind,
As one they much esteemed and honored,
And many of them great fault with him did find
That he had not at Athens mustered.
Suspecting him of partiality,
But he to clear himself, and satisfy
Their minds, declard in open audience,
The cause why he to Athens did not go,
According to his promise and pretense,
And for to prove the same to them did show,
That sickness only had procured his stay,
And forced him to absent himself away,
So long from them, where with they satisfied,
Excused him for that which he had shown,
And for because they much on him relied,
And honored him as second unto none.
Among all the Greeks for bounty, power, and wit,
As being one for all attempts most fit:
For whatsoere he once did undertake,
Most valiantly he would the same effect,
And spite of all that could resistance make.
Nere leave it off, nor any wise neglect,
Tell that he had acchieu'd his enterprise.
And in regard they knew him to be wise,
And of the greatest reputation
Amongst the Greeks that then assembled were,
They did intreare and pray him to be one
Of those that sit in counsel for the war:
Which he accepting, they straight ways agreed
For to besiedge the town of Troy with speed.
But among the^ question grew what time they might
Unto the town of Troy most safely go,
Some said they thought it best when it was night
In secret wise to hoyse their sails, that so
Without resistance of the enemy,
They might take land with most security.
But others said great dangers might ensue
To them to sail the River in the night,
And specially because they hardly knew
The ready course, and that by chan^r they might
For want of light out of the channel stray,
And so cast both their ships and men away.
Thus being of contrary minds they stayed,
And for that time made no conclusion,
But put it off and still the same delaid,
And took not any resolution,
What they would do, but lay still where they were,
As if their hearts had been possessed with fear.
Till valiant Diomedes (grieved to see
Them lie so long at rest in Tenadon,
And that they could not among themselves agree,
Nor fall to any resolution,
For to besiege the town of Troy with speed,
As they at first and firmly had decreed)
Said unto them, my Lords whose worthy fame,
Throughout the world both far and near does fly
I cannot choose but needs I must you blame,
And discommend your great prolixitie,
That let the time thus pass as you have don
For now a year is almost overrun,
And yet you stir not hence in any wise,
But still lie here and give your enemies cause
To think you do it for fear and cowardice,
And which is worse, allow them time to pause
On their affairs, and at their liberty
Taugment their strength, with opportunity
Us to withstand and valiantly resist,
Whereof assure your selves they will not fail,
For they not any day nor hour have mist
To seek for aid against us to prevail,
And bar their gates and make their walls most strong,
For to withstand asiedge both great and long.
And which is more, they have their spies to see
And hearken what we do here in our host,
And do affirm and boldly say, that we
Dare not effect the thing whereof we boast:
And longer that we in this sort still lie,
It gives more courage to our enemy.
But if we first had held another course,
Ere they had known thereof, and ventured
To land our men before their town by force,
We had the same long since round compassed,
And straight besidge with this our puissant host,
And done that, which ere it is done, more will cost.
For be assurd ere we approacht the strand
T'vnship our men, the^le issue out amain,
With all their power our landing to withstand,
And valiantly the fight against us maintain,
By force and strength ere we the shore shall get,
To drive us thence, if that they can us let.
Whereas long since we might with ease have got
The victory, but now by our delay
We must take that which fortune does alot,
And with more loss to us, do what we may.
For now the time's delaid, it is most sure
More danger unto us it will procure.
What should I say, but tell you in good troth
That our delay and cowardice will be
The cause of our great danger, which full loath
And sorry I would be in heart to see.
And if therefore my counsel you will take,
I think it best that presently you make
All speed you can for to be gone from hence,
And ere the Sun in morning does appear,
Hoyse sails and put to Sea, (with full pretense
And courage bold, clean void of any fear.)
To Sail to Troy, and there land openly,
What ere falls out, for know assuredly
Without resistance by the Trojans made,
(Who valiantly will issue, us to beard)
There is no landing for us to be had,
And yet you must not therefore be afeard:
But set all fear and cowardice aside,
And stoutly whatsoere falls out abide.
Which said, the Greeks consulting thereupon,
Determined with courage bold to make
What have they could, and preparation
For to be gou, and straight their course to take
Unto the town of Troy, as does appear,
And in the Chapter following you shall hear.
CHAP. XII.
How the Grecians landed before Troy, where they were valiantly fought withal
by the Trojans.

WIthin the former Chapter you did hear,
How that the Greeks in counsel being set,
With full and whole consents agreed were,
All scuses set apart, naught should them let,
With speed unto the town of Troy to sail,
And there the Trojans valiantly t'assaile:
And that end to the next day they begun
To go abord their ships, with courage bold,
And when they had all things prepared and don
That needful were, they did a counsel hold,
T'ordaine among themselves, and to agree
How many ships should in each squadron be.
And which of them in for most rank should go,
What course they should upon the Seas observe,
How they would land that no man might it know,
(Thereby their men from danger to preserve,)
Whereto they did assign a special mark,
And so when as by singing of the Lark,
(Which commonly is fore the Sun does rise
At dawning of the day,) they did awake
And put Sea in brave and warlike wise,
And to the town of Troy their course did take.
And first a hundred ships well furnished,
With store of men and arms the way did lead;
Whose pennons and rich streamers to behold,
Which on the seas did show most clear and bright
When they did them against the Sun unfold,
Gave unto all that saw them great delight.
For nere before upon the waves so green,
The like triumphant sight had not been seeene*
An other hundred more sayld orderly
In rancks, to second them that went before,
(Whose sails most proudly in the wind did fly,
And spread abroad) wherein there was great store
Of valiant Knightts well armed with sword and spear,
The Trojans to withstand without all fear.
Next afder them in order bravely ranck't,
The rest of their huge Navy followed,
The which on either side was strongly flank't
With squadrons of great ships well furnished
With valiant Knights, whose number was so many,
That like to it had nere been seen of any
Upon the Seas, and sailing so together,
(Assisted by Neptune and Eolus,
That sent them both fair wind and pleasant wether,)
Their voyage was to them so prosperous,
That in one tide a sight of Troy they had,
Whereto with all their sails hoyst up they made
Whose waving when the Troiaus did behold,
And saw that they drew nere unto the strand,
And by their countnance well perceived they would
Despite of them (if that they might) take land.
In have they armed themselves, which having don
They mounted on their horses, and did run
As fast as ere they could unto the strand,
Attending neither Earls, Prince, nor King
To be their guide nor over them command,
But furiously out of the gates did fling.
And in so great a number to behold,
That when the Greeks the^ saw, their hearts were cold,
And stoutest of them all was much dismayed,
To find so many Trojans on the land
(Well armed) that all most resolutely stayed,
With courage bold their coming to withstand.
Whereby they knew and certainly did see,
No landing for them there as thou to be:
Unless that with the Trojans they would fight,
And valiantly adventure for to land,
Or else like cowards take themselves ^o slight,
And fall into their deadly, enemies hand:
For other refuge for them none there was,
But through the Trojans sword^ and pikes to pass.
Which when King Pr^thesilaus did behold,
(Who of an hundred ships the conduct had)
He said, that in despite of them be^ould
Set foot on land, and to that end ^e made
His ships and men in readiness to venture.
By force, upon the same strand to ente^.
But when his Ships set forward to ariue
As nere unto the shore as well they might,
The wind did in their sails so stifely drive,
That on the land by force i^ did them smight.
And some of them upon the gittie stroke,
Which presently in many pieces broke,
And most part of the men and ships were drowned,
And scattered here and there contusedly,
So that but very few of them were found
To make resistance against the enemy.
And those that escaped and saved themselves from hurt,
And got to land, all clad with mire and dirt:
And for a while their enemies withstood,
Were by the Trojans slain so cruelly,
That all the Sea was stained with the blood
Of Grecians, that upon the sands did he
Dead bleeding, and sore wounded to the death,
Attending the end to yield their vital breath.
And at that time the arrows flew so fast
And thick into the air, that all the sky
Did show as if it had been ouercast
With some dark cloud, and still and furiously
The Trojans fought and evermore renewed
Their number, and the Grecians so pursued,
And for the time so hotly them assayld,
That what defense soever they could make
Availd them not, for Trojans still prevaild,
And valiantly constraind them to give back.
With loss of many men and great disgrace,
And finally perforce to leave the place,
Whereas they fought with much extremity,
And grief to see their landing prove ^o bad,
Unfortunate and dangerous to be,
And yet for all that they endured had,
They fainted not, but still continued
The fight on shore: for they were seconded
By fresh supply of men that entered
Next them, and with three hundred ships arrived
Upon the shore, where being ankored,
When as they had the wearied Greeks revived
That faintly fought scarce able to withstand
The Trojans force, they did begin to land,
First placing all their crosoowe shot before,
And next to them their archers orderly,
And such as pikes and other weapons bore,
On either side, with full intent to try
The Trojans might, and bravely to adventure,
Despite of them upon the shore to enter.
Where twixt them at the first the fight was hot,
And dangerous, till that the Greeks let fly
Their arrows out their bows and cro^bowe shot,
As thick as hayle, and with them furiously
The Trojans slew: and first then to withdraw
Themselves aside, which when the Grecians saw,
They left their ships, and ^^uing out amain,
Upon the Trojans valiantly did set,
And by that means did win the shore again,
Which for that time the Trojans could not let,
Though they with howes and arrows fiercely shot
To drive them back, but it availd them not.
And then the fight most hotly did renew,
When as the noble King Prothsaulus
Did enter among the Trojans, and pursue
Them with a courage stout and valorous.
And in the thickest of the press did slay
Them down so taste, that each man gave him way
And shunned his blows, so many of them were slain
And wounded sore, whereby the Greeks dismayed,
Began to be encouraged again,
For had not he by force the Trojans staid,
Without all doubt they had before them fled,
And at time that been wholly vanquished.
But what availd his valor and his might,
Or courage bold, when as seven thousand men,
Were forced on the Grecians side to fight,
Againgst an hundred thousand Trojans, then
Already on the strand them to assail,
That wonder it was they could so long prevayle
Against so huge and great a company,
With so few men; but sure you must suppose
It was because they saw no remedy,
(For at their backs the Sea did them enclose,
And fore their face stood the enemy,
So that they thought it best for them to die:
And cowardly with shame their lives to loose)
For running back they must of force be drowned,
And so resolved, they fought against their foes
As long as any way or means they found
To aid themselves, though it was more then they might,
(For other refuge their was none in sight.)
But all the force they vsd did them no good,
The Trojans were so many and so strong,
And slew them (so that men might see their blood,
Upon the shore in streams ran down along,
And at the last drove them unto the strand,
Whereas they were constrained there to stand,
(Wext weary, and in great distress, and grief,)
Fighting to save their lives (most desperately,)
And there had all been slain without relief,
Or put unto some great extreamitie,
Had not Prothenor and stout Archelaus
Set foot on land like Knights chivalrous,
And aided them, but with great difficulty,
The Troiaus shot so fast and did a^sayle
Them on all sides with extreamecruelty,
Yet at the last the Grecians did prevail,
And mauger all their might the shore they wan,
And then with valant courages began
The Trojans hard and freshly to pursue,
In furious wise and with great cruelty,
And then again the battle did renew,
So hotly, and with such hostility,
That all the strand was died into a red,
With blood of those that on each side lay dead.
And therewithal Duke Nestor entered
The battle with his Knights in order plast,
And proudly and in haughty manner led
Them to assail the Trojans in great have:
At which time many a valiant Knight was slain
And wounded sore, and horses in the plain
Lay dead, and many masterlesse did run
About the field, and then the arrows flew
So thick and close, that for a time the Sun
Did seem Ecclipst, so dark the air did show,
And many Pikes and Lances broken were,
And many steeds their masters way did bear
Sore bleeding dead, amaisd, and in a sound,
The air also with noise and cry was filled
Of men that lay half dead upon the ground,
And still they fiercely wounded, hewd, and killed
On either side, and though it grew to night,
Yet would they not surcease nor end the fight.
Sohotly on the other did pursue,
For Prothenor and Archelaus nere left
The Trojans with their Trunchan blades to hew,
Till many of them they had of life bereft,
In hope at last the victory to get,
So much their minds upon revenge were set.
And therewith fierce King Agalus did land,
To succor and relieve the Grecians,
And with him King Attailu^ with a band
Of valiant Knights, that charged the Trojans,
(To whom they were inveterate enemies,)
On every side and in most furious wise,
Killed, wounded, hewd, and beat them down so fast,
That for to save their lives they were compeld
To sound retreat, and fly away in fiast,
So many of them were slain within the field.
And more had bin, had not new troops come down
Of fiesh and valiant Trojans from the town.
All richly armed, and every one his shield,
Wherein they bare devises several,
Who were no sooner entered in the field,
But on the Grecians valiantly they fall:
(With hearts that burnt as hot as any fire,
With envic, hatred, wrath, and furious ire,
To be revenged on them for wrongs forepast.)
And at that time so many of them they killed,
And charged them so hotly and so fast,
That to conclude, the Grecians left the field:
And were compeld to fly unto the strand,
To whose relief Ulisses then did land.
Who valiantly (withal the company
He brought with him, and those that were on land
Before he came, and by the enemy
Had forcibly been driven to the strand.)
With courage bold the Trojans did assail,
And did so much against them then prevail,
That where before they had the upper hand,
He made the Trojans forcibly retire
With all the speed they might, and leave the strand.
And with most burning rage and furious ire:
Pursued, drove, and chaste them to the plain
Before the town, where many of the^ were slain
And wounded sore, and like a Lion strong
That seeks for prey, with glistring sword in hand
He entered among the thickest of the throng,
Where all he met, or durst against him stand,
He wounded, killed, and from their horses threw,
That glad was he, that could his blows eschew,
Till Philomen the strong and valiant King
Of Paslagon, did enter in the field
With all the Knights that he to Troy did bring,
To aid the Trojans against the Greeks, beheld
Ulisses such a massacre to make
Of them. In hand a mighty lance did take,
And bravely setting spurs unto his horse,
In furious wise did run at him so fast,
That with one blow which was of mighty force,
Both man and horse unto the ground he cast.
But presently Ulisses rose again,
And mounting on his horse, road through the plain.
And on the Trojans set so furiously,
That many of them as then by him were slain;
Which when as King Philomen did epsy,
He took a lance and ran at him again
So mightily, and such a blow him gave,
Therewith, that it his shield in sunder claue,
And pierst his armor through, but bur^ him not,
And yet the blow unto the ground him stroke,
But presently upon his horse he got,
And in his hand a mighty lance he took,
And therewith at King Philomen did run
So swiftly, that ere he the blow could shon,
He pierst clean through his shield and armor bright
And in his breast did give him such a wound,
That sideways from his horse he fell, and light
Upon his head, which first did touch the ground,
And therewithal most grievously he bled,
Wherewith his men supposed he had been dead,
And took him up and laid him on a shield,
Whereon with danger great they did him bear
Clean through the Grecians host out of the field,
Whereof when as the Trojan Knights did hear,
They were abasht, because they did believe
He had been dead, and for him much did grieve:
For if that mighty Philomen had not
Been wounded so by fierce Ulysses hand,
Without all doubt the Grecians had not got
So easily out of their ships to laud,
Nor yet so many Trojans had been slain,
As then lay dead both on the strand and plain.
For while that they the fight did long maintain,
And valiantly the Grecians did assail,
And sought to drive them to the strand again,
Ere that they could by force therein prevail,
More Grecians in great number got to land,
And forcibly the Trojans did withstand.
Conducted by four Kings of great renown,
The first King Agamemnon (general
Of all the Greeks,) and proud King Thelamon,
King Thoas, and King Menclaus (cause of all
That deadly war) at whose aproach you might
Behold the death of many a valiant Knight.
And at that time the broken lances flew
Into the air, and cloven shields did lie
Upon the ground, and then they did renew
The fight so hotly, strong, and furiously:
That in short space the strand, and all the plain
Lay full of Knights, and men that then were slain.
And though the Greeks at that time did abide
Great loss of Knights, yet cause they were so strong,
The greatest loss fell on the Trojans side,
Who nere the less fought valiantly and long,
And held the Grecians ^^ort for all their might,
Till that the valiant, fierce, and worthy Knight
Prothesilaus, (Who all that day had fought
Courageously, and many Trojans slain,
And with his sword in cruel wise had wrought
Them great despite, both on the strand, and plain)
To rest himself, and take the air did ride
Out of the field unto the water side,
Where when he did off from his horse alight,
And saw his men he dead upon the ground,
Who at their landing had been slame in fight,
And others by the raging waves then drowned.
He could not choose out weep to think thereon,
And for a while sat musing still alone,
And more he them beheld, the more he grieved,
Till at the last (when he by proof did find
That by ^^^ grief they were no whit relieved,
Nor he himself the q^uetter in mind.)
Such su^^a^ne ire^^s valiant heart possessed,
That from that time he could not be in rest,
But vowed to be revenged if he might,
And to require their deaths upon his foes,
Orels as it becomes a valiant Knight
Courageously his life with them to lose;
And ^o resolved, Ieapton his horse again,
And furiously road straight unto the plain,
And entering among the thickest of his foes
Assailed them, with trenchant blade^^ hand,
And valiantly beat down and killed all those
That met with him, or durst against him stand.
And in short space he did so many stay,
That every man was glad to run away*
Like sheep before the wolf, their hues to save,
But he still wounded, killed, and beat them down,
And like a stout and valiant Champion drove,
And followed them all most unto the town:
And by that means the Greeks then victors were
And Trojans fied before them in great fear.
Till Persius King of Ethiopia,
Out of the town with many a valiant Knight
Came ryding in great bast, and made them stay,
And then began a fresh and furious fight,
Wherein great store of Grecians then were slain,
And many of them lay wounded on the plain.
The Trojans at that time so siercely fought,
When by the Ethiopian Knights they were*
Relieved, so that where as before they sought
To fly away, to save their lives in fear:
They made the Greeks loose all the ground again
Which they before had won upon the plain.
And with their horse and footmen did assail
Their enemies so strongly and so close,
That all the Greeks could do, might not prevail,
But that at last they were constrained to lose
Their ground, and back unto the strand to fly
In great despair, and much extremity*
And without doubt had there been drowned and ^^^^
Had not the valiant King Palamides
With new supply refreshed them again,
(And thereby did their heavy hearts appease*)
Who at that time with all his Knights took l^^d,
Where having horsed them upon the strand,
And ranckt his men, he entered valiantly,
With so great force amongst the Trojans,
And them assaild with such dexterity,
(That where before they slew the Grecians
And drove them down before them to the sho^^,)
He killed and wounded many of them so sore,
And kept them to it so close, that neither side
As then advantage had, and so it held
Until that King Palamides espied
Stout Sigamond in midst of the field:
Who all that day most like a valiant Knight,
Behau'd himself against the Greeks in fight,
Courageously, and beat them down so fast,
That glad they were to shun his blows and fly,
And by his prowess only where he past
Great store Grecians slain by him, did lie.
To whom he road and furiously when as
Amongst the thickest of the Greeks he was,
He gave him with his lance so great a wound
Into his side, that being deadly hurt,
He fell off from his horse unto the ground,
And there all groueling in the mire and dirt,
(His armor with his blood clean covered read)
He left him among the Trojans pale, and dead.
And forth he road and killed, and wounded sore
All those he met, or that before him stood,
And like unto a wild and cruel Bore,
With sword in hand, dyed, in the Tr^^^^^ blood.
He made them leave the water side again,
And drove them all before him to the plain.
Where with his Knights that still about him ^^^^
He did assail them in such furious wise,
And by his valor put them in such fear,
That among them there was heard great noise and cr^^
Of those that wounded sore could not withstand,
The blows of fierce Palamides strong hand.
Who all that day had fought so valiantly,
And wounded, killed, and bravely beaten down
The Trojans, that at last he made them fly
In all the have they could unto the town:
With cries and shouts, and in great fear and doubt,
Whereat Prince Hector moved, in have came out
With countenance fierce, (like Mars the god of war
As being of all Worthies, worthiest
That ever any earthly woman bare,
And of all men the strong'st and hardiest.
For as the Sun with beams most clear and bright
Excells the stars, so did this worthy Knight
Surpass all other Knights that ever were.
And sure it was a most delightful sight
To see him armed, so bravely he did bear
Them, when he road into the field to fight:
Wherein he was a Lodestone, and a guide
(To all and every Knight both far and wide.)
Who entering richly armed into the field,
Upon a lusty, strong, and goodly steed,
Did for his arms bear on a golden shield,
Three furious Lions passant as I read.
(But what the colors were I do not know,)
The which did make a fair and gallant show
Upon the breast of that most worthy Knight.
When as with all his troops he entered
Amongst the Greeks, at whose aproach the sight
Of him alone abasht them all, he led
Them through the thickst of them so furiously,
And therewithal such mighty blows let fly:
And killed, beat down, and wounded them so fast,
That no man could his mighty force withstand,
And in despite of all the Greeks he past
Courageously with glistring sword in hand,
And severed all their rancks, and never left
Till hundreds of their lives he had bereft.
Still ryding too and fro throughout the field,
And beat and bare down all that in his way
He found, and at the last as he beheld
Prothesilaus, (who valiantly that day
Killed and pursued the Trojans furiously,
And beat them down with extreme cruelty.
(Such mortal hatred unto them he had,)
And to his valiant chivalry took heed,
And saw what slaughter of his men he made,
He was so moved, that straight he turned his steed
To him, and with his bloody sword he gave
Him such a blow, that it in sunder claue
His helmet and his head, and did not rest
But past through every sinew, bone, and vain
That were within his body and his breast,
And forcibly did cut him clean in twain,
And with that fatal blow and deadly wound,
His body in two parts fell to the ground
On each side of his horse. Which done, he road
Amongst the Grecian Knights courageously,
And bathed his trenchant sword within their blood.
So that as far as ere they could him spy,
They fled to save their lives, for none durst stand
To feel the weight of his victorious hand.
They feared it so, and more did it admire,
It it was so strong and of such passing might,
And for that cause they asked, and did inquire
What Knight he was that did so bravely fight:
Supposing that in all the world so round,
A worthier Knight was not for to be found,
Unless it were Prince Hector. And at last
They felt too well by proof that it was he:
(Who in his days all other Knights surpast,
As the only Myrror of all chivalry.)
For none of all the Grecians durst adventer
Against him hand to hand in fight to enter.
Of all that day so terribly he beat
And drove them down before them to the strand
Sore wearied, wounded, breathless, and all wet,
Close to the Sea, whereas he let them stand.
And like a most triumphant Knight went back
To Troy again, his rest a while to take.
Who being gone, the Greeks somewhat releast
Of former fear, perplexity, and grief,
Began again to vow and to protest,
If fortune would vouchsafe them some relief,
With valiant hearts to venture life and lim
Upon their foes* the field again to win.
The which from morning that the fight begone,
With great and extreme labor, loss, and pain,
Eight times that day they valiantly had won,
And lost the same as many times again.
For as Dame fortunes slippery wheel turned round,
So they that day did win, and lose there ground.
But Hectors valiant entry in the field,
Was the only thing that did them most dismay,
Who spite their hearts ^^ such a bay them held,
That none of them before his face durst stay:
For he alone, with sword in hand did drive
Them to the place where first they did ariue.
And closely held them there with great despite,
As long as he did in the field remain,
Which was till that it began to draw to night,
At which time he returned to Troy again.
But then more Greeks upon the shore ariu'd
With cruel fierce Achilles, which revived
And comforted the Grecians hearts so well,
That they again assaild the Trojans,
And by Achilles aid (which did excel
In valor all the other Grecians,)
They beat them back and drove them to the plain,
And by that means did win the field again.
In which conflict Achilles did pursue
The Trojans in such wise, that he only
For his part many hundreds of them slew,
And at that time had in his company
Three thousand knights in glistring armor bright
Who likewise were so hot and fierce in fight,
That with their Prince (the only champion
Of all the Greeks) they ^lew their foes so fast,
And cruelly not sparing any one,
That many of the Trojans fled in have
To save their lives, such was their rage and ire
Which in the Grecians hearts, did burn like fire,
Against the Trojan Knights, but specially
Achilles took great pleasure and delight
To beat them down, and to behold them lie
In heaps upon the ground, and with despite
That day to die and bath his sword in blood,
(Which in the plain ran like unto a flood.)
Such hatred in his heart he did conceive,
And still increast it with such cruelty,
That nothing but their deaths could it bereave
Out of his mind, the which to satisfy
He never left with all his Knights so fast
To kill, beat down, and wound them: that at last
With dreadful noise and cries he made them run
Unto the gates of Troy, where while they fought
To save their lives, and therewithal to s^un
His fierce and cruel blows, it holp them naught.
For that mean time the Grecians got to land
Withal their power and force, and from the stra^d
Marched with so great a multitude of men,
That the only sight of them did terrify
The Trojans fearful hearts, but much more when
They saw that with most great extremity
They could not choose but must perforce abide,
A hard and cruel fight on every side.
Which by the Grecian Knights courageously
Was given, so that with hearts discouraged
And clean dismayed, they were constraind to (...)
Into the town, where as they entered:
Achilles did so hotly them pursue,
That many of them before the gates he slew.
And at that time made such occision
And slaughter of the Trojans, that at last
It would have been their whole destruction
And utter overthrow, if that in have
The worthy valiant Knights and chivalrous,
Paris, Deiphobus, and young Troielus,
With many Trojan Knights in company,
Had not come forth, to aid them in their need,
Who against the Grecians fought so valiantly,
That in short space despite of them they freed
The Trojans from distress, and did constrain
The Grecians to retire in have again
Back from the walls: for worthy Troielus
So valiantly himself that time did quite,
And showed a heart so stout and valorous,
That whosoere with sword or lance he hit,
He did him either wound, cast down, or slay,
And causd the Greeks for fear to make him way,
And by that means the Trojans succored.
At which time when Lucina clear and bright,
Showed forth her face, and day surrendered
Her place unto obscure and glooming night:
Achilles with the Greeks road to his tent
To rest himself, the Trojans likewise went
Into the tow^e of Troy, where as in have
Their gates were shut and barricadoed sure
And round about their walls great watches plast
That able were long against their foes t'indure.
Mean time King Agamemnon wisely chose,
And pointed out a place for to enclose
His army, and intrencht it round about
With ditches, walls, and palisadoes strong,
And for each Prince and Captain quartred out
Their lodgings, and their courts of guard, and moog
Them did appoint his officers to see,
That every man in order plast should be
Within the same, and presently they made
Their tents, and rich pavilions to be pla^st
And speedily set up, and such as had
No tents wherewith to shroud themselves, in have
Built cabins, shades, and cotages to keep
Themselves from wind and weather, and to sleep
And rest therein, and all that night vnshipt
Their horses, and their furniture for wars,
And no occasion, time, nor hour ore-^^ipt
Their victuals to unlade, and to prepare
All other things, and to their tents to carry,
That which for such a siedge was necessary.
Which don, their ships in warlike wi^e they plast
Within the Port, and then with cables strong*
Upon the land to getties made them fast,
With full intent to hold a siedge so long,
And puissant, before the tovne of Troy,
That in the end they would it clean destroy,
And utterly deface* which to effect,
Each one with vows protested for his part
While life should last all danger to reject,
And with a courage stout and noble heart,
There to remain and resolutely lie,
Till it were performed, or valiantly to die.
And so with burning fires bright and clear,
And minstrels that both loudly played and song,
That night they held a watch by such as were
Fresh*men, and had not fought all that day long,
Appointing new supplies for to relieve
And second them, if the enemies should give
Them battle, or assail them in the night.
And such as at their landing wounded were,
And those that all that day had held the ^^ght,
And valiantly the Troyans force did bear,
Did rest, and in their tents and cabin^s slept,
While others in the camp straight watches kept.
And so till that with clouds of crimson die,
The sun began in th'orient to apeare,
And spread his beams throughout the Cristall sky
The valiant Greeks abandoning all fear,
Encamped laid attending the event
Of doubt full wa^re, with full and whole intent,
To Effect their wills, what ere to them befell:
Where for a night i will leave them in the field,
And orderly at large unto you tell,
What further course on either side was held
During the siedge without, and eke within
The town. And so my third Book i will begin.
FINIS.
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF HECTOR.
THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I.
I Showing the first battle fought between the Trojans and the Grecians after
they had planted their siedge before the Town; wherein Hector behaved himself
most valiantly above all others.

WHen with avading, pale,
and deadly light,
Auroraes face lay
covered ore with shade
Of th'obscure cold, and dark,
and glooming night.
And in her cheeks a ruddy color had,
As blushing sore for shame for to be seen,
Because that she too long ^n bed had been
With Phoebus her most dear and chosen Knight,
For which she was so much abasht, that she
Did for a while absent her self from sight
Of any man, until such time as he
With Flego^te his lusty steed had gone,
And swiftly mounted boue the horrison.
And with his radiant beams most bright and clear
Had comforted her heart, with shame oppressed,
And made her change her sad and heavy cheer.
That is, when Titan mounting in the East,
The dawning of the day once past, did rise
And show his face within the crystal skies.
Hector the most renowned champion,
Who for his valor great (surpassing all
That ever lived,) the chief command in town
Next Priam had, and also General
Of all the Knights assembled at that time
Within the same: When day was in the prime
Commanded all that in the town then were,
Both Princes, Kings, Knights, squiers, and every one
That able was to fight and armor bear,
Without exception unto any one;
In have to meet him with their troops of men
Before Dianaes Temple, which as then
Stood in the midst of Troy, within a plain
Of great and spacious breadth, wherein he meant
To mustar them, and also to ordain
Such battles as he would should forth besent
That day against th'incamped Greeks to fight,
To drive them thence again, if that he might.
In this fair plain in midst of Troy so set
At his command, in brave and warlike wise,
The Trojan Princes all together met,
Each with such standerds, pennons, and devise
As usually in battle they did bear,
And on their coats of Arms, and shields did wear.
To tell what arms each Prince and Knight then had,
Would be ore long and tedious to declare,
Most sure it is* each one provision made
Of every thing that is needful for the war:
Each several people, Province, Land, or nation,
Bearing such arms as was their ancient fashion.
Some had their Canvas Cassocks or their Iacks,
That plated were with steel, and some then came
With ancient Almaine rivets on their backs,
Their sleeves of male and goriets of the same:
Some coats of male, some caps of steel did wear,
And in their hands a bill or holberd bear.
Some in their complete arms were bravely clad,
With Poldrons, and with Vanbras, and what more
Thereto belond'g, and on their heads they had
Their Caskets, with their Beavers close before,
Through which (being shut) they might their foes be hold,
And let the^ fall to breath when as they would.
Some gantlets had, some not to overlade
Themselves with arms the easier to fight,
Had quilted Iacks that were of Canvas made,
And covered ore with silk most brave to sight:
Some Iepons had, some hauberions, and some
Into the field with Cassocks long did come
Down to their knees, and in their hands did bear
Round Targets made of bone or else of wood,
The which all ore with Leather covered were:
And some their enemies furious force withstood
With shields of steel, of length from head to foot.
Some with their bows and arrows fiercely shoot.
Some with their swords, some with their darts in hand
Some with a four squared headed Pollax fight;
And some with Cros-bows and with Pikes do stand
Prepared to show their valor and their might:
And every one desiring for to do it,
Stood ready there on horsbacke, or on foot,
After the manner of his Country.
And while they staid each one his arms did mend,
In every place whereas necessity
Required the same, the better to defend
His body: but in terms of Art to show
What there unto belongs, or let you know
More touching this* I must my self excuse,
And pardon crave if therein I do miss;
For sure it is not the thing which I do use,
A Pen (and not a Pike) my weapon is:
It Is want of skill breeds imperfection
In me, to make a right description
Thereof, in marshall terms as some men could,
But unto him that is wise I will refer
My self herein, and pray him that he would
His censure mildly in this case defer:
And such defects as he shall justly find,
To wink thereat, and bear them in his mind.
When Hector had them all well viewd, and saw
What power assembled in the field there was,
With speed he did each one command to draw
Aside, and then in ranks he did them place;
Which done, in marshall wise he did ordain
His battles orderly within the plain.
And then he caused the gate Dardanides
To be vnbard, and to be opned wide,
Intending thereat against his enemies
To salie forth, and valiantly to bide
A battle whatsoever did befall.
And then his Bastard brother he did call;
That had to name Cincinabor the stour,
And valiant Glaucus Prince of Licia Land,
To whom (by him) of purpose chosen out,
He did appoint the leading of the band:
Which first that day against the Greeks in field
Should fight, to which they willingly did yield.
And in that wing a thousand knights there were,
Which purposely he chose out of them all,
And did command them valiantly to bear
The forefront of the battle, and to fall
Courageously upon their Grecian foe;
Which said, out at the gate he bad them go^
Who with their banners spread that shined bright,
Their armors and their sheilds that glistered
Against the Sun, did make a goodly sight,
When they upon the enemy were led.
But least that they should be oppressed by might,
And overlayd by multitudes in fight;
To second them, he did appoint a band
Of valiant Knights that just a thousand were*
Commanding it in readiness to stand
To succor them, and Grecians force to bear
If need required. The charge whereof he gave
Unto the King of Thrace stout and brave.
And with him joined his Son Ar^^^ag^^,
A Prince endowed with good qualities,
For he was wise and very vertuoues
Strong and most hardy against his enemies:
Those two the second wing together ^^d,
And valiant (...) followed.
The battle that next after issued
Out of the town against the enemy,
By Hector was commanded to beled,
By two brave Kings of worthy memory:
The one the Phrigian King called Zantippus,
The other joined with him called Alcanus.
In it three thousand knights well armed there were,
All resolutelie bent to try their might
Against the Greeks, and every one did bear
A several arms, which was no small delight
To those that stood to see them pass, arraid
So gallantly, with banners broad displaid.
Then Hector called his brother Troyelus,
(A Knight of great desert and worthy fame,
And one that was so stout and valorous,
That every man extold him for the same:)
To whom he gave the charge and government
Of those that he within the third wing sent.
That day against the Greeks wherein there was
Three thousand brave gallant and Knights, that were
All young and of courageous hearts, such as
At other times him company did bear:
Who as he passed forward, Hector staid,
And lovingly spoke unto him, and said.
Brother (quoth he) my care of thee is such,
(Moved thereunto by perfect amity)
That though I know thy valor to be much,
(And therein take a great felicity)
For every man for it does thee commend,
And shall do till this mortal world does end.
Yet when I think upon thy valiantnes,
And called to mind thy young and tender years,
Which commonly are given to wilfulnes,
I fall into a thousand kind of fears;
Least that thy courage fierce and violent,
Should make thee of thy life so negligent,
By over great presumption of thy might
And pride of heart, that it would thee persuade,
With ease to shun what ere on thee should light,
And out of all extreamities to wade:
Regarding neither hurt nor safety,
If once thy youthful blood should moved be.
Reposing trust in fortune mutable,
Which turns her wheel now up, then down again,
And evermore is cross and variable
In war: when men thin^^ honor to obtain.
Which causes me full oftentimes to wake
When I should sleep, and care for thee to take.
Fearing thy great and hasty wilfulness.
But dear and loving brother I thee pray,
What ere befalls thee in thy hardiness,
To have regard unto thy self this day:
And following of thy enemies, take care,
Thou entrest not into their troops so far,
That thou can not relieve thy self again.
Let reason rule thy hot and furious mind,
And bridle thy affection with her rain,
Least thou an unexpected danger find.
And give our enmies cause to laugh and geere,
At thy so great misfortune, brother dear.
And so beseeching Mars the God of war,
This day and evermore thee to defend
From all mishap, and of thee to have care.
Against thy Grecian foes I do thee send
To try thy force, wishing with heart to thee,
As to my self, triumphant victory.
To whom this valiant, fierce, and hardy Knight
Young Troyclus, (whom no adversity,
Could ever daunt) with heart most fierce and light,
Made answer with most great humility:
And yet with countnance glad and joyful cheer.
Saying my Lord, and my good brother dear;
Ift please the Gods I will to you obey,
And what advise so ere of gentleness
To me you give, and shall command or say,
I will the same fulfill with readiness:
For it is not my desire nor my intent,
T'infringe one point of your commandment,
But willingly with heart to effect the same,
As far as in my power it lies to do;
So loath I am for to incur the blame,
Of any disobedience showed to you.
And truth to say, my heart it sore would grieve,
And therewithal of Hector took his leave.
And forth he road so like a valiant Knight
Amongst his men, and entered in the field
With so great grace, that it was a goodly sight
To look on him, who on an axure shield,
Three Lions passant on it did bravely bear,
And against the Greeks road forward without fear
Young Troylus gone, Prince Hector did ordain
The fourth ward, and the conduct thereof gave
To Hupon and Andelius brethren twain,
Both Knights courageous, valorous and brave:
This Hupon of Larisse land was King,
And many men with him to Troys did bring,
To aid them in their wars that were so long,
And sure he was a very valiant Knight,
Of stature huge and tall, and passing strong,
And no man was like unto him for might,
In all the great and spacious Troyan town,
But only Hector that brave Champion.
And against his foes he was so fierce and fell,
That he of them brought many to the ground,
Who spite their hearts did try his force too well.
Hector with these two brethren forth did send
His bastard brother called Dimarechus,
A stout and valiant Knight adventurous.
And to them, to conduct with standards brave,
And to be led when they should come in field,
Twice sure and just three thousand men he gave,
All Knights well horst and armd with spear and shield:
Who taking leave of Hector courteously,
Road forward to the field courageously.
The fifth ward which next orderly did stand,
(Into the field against the Greeks to go)
Was given unto the King of Cesoyne land,
(Whose name it seems the Author did not know)
And to his Brother called Pollidamas.
Those people named Cesoynes did surpass
The common sort of men, for stature tall,
Proportion, strength, and great dexterity;
For which they were admired and praised of all
That them beheld and marked earnestly:
The color of the shield the King then boar
Was only gules, and nothing in it more.
Who when his charge of Hector he had had,
His leave he took, and with his brother road
Courageously before his Knights, that made
A gallant show when they in order stood.
Mean while Prince Hector ceast not pains to take,
The sixth ward with all speed he could to make,
Which he unto King Protemense gave,
(Who both in force and wisdom did excel)
And to a Duke called Sterepes, to have
The conduct of the people that did dwell
In Poenie land, and them to guide that day,
Which people use of custom (as men say)
Their enemies in furious wise t'assaile,
Only with bows and arrows sharply ground,
On horseback, without arms or coat of male,
And the^ clean through their armors sore to wound:
And Hector with those people also sent,
His Brother Deiphobus to the intent
They might security into the plain
Where they should fight, and so they went their way.
But ere they past, Prince Hector did ordain
A band of men to go with them that day
Well armed into the field, (least they should venture,
Among the Greeks so nakedly to enter)
And be orethrowne) which band of men he took
Out of those Knights that from Agresta came,
And that they should the better to them look:
And for to be conductors of the same,
He did appoint two valiant Kings to ride
Along with them, and by them to abide
During the fight against the Greeks that day;
The one of them King Esdras had to name,
The other was King Philon, but to say
Where they did dwell, or from what place they came
I cannot, for mine Author does not show,
Because (as I suppose) he did not know:
Or else I think he had it clean forgot.
He says that rich King Philon sumptuously
Apparelled, sat in a Chariot,
The which was made of pure white Ivory;
With wheels of Heban wood most finely wrought,
Which wood out of the Indian land is brought.
And as men say is hard as any stone,
His Charet within was all inchast with gold,
And precious stones and pearls upon the bone,
And was so rich and sumptuous to behold:
That as I think the like was never seen
Before, nor since within the world to have been.
Two Knights this Chariot drew, and some did rid^
About it strongly armed with spear and shield,
For to defend their King on every side;
So he and Esdras road into the field,
Accompanied with stout Pithagoras,
That one of Hectors bastard brethren was.
Who of that wing to have the chief command,
Of purpose sent him out with them to go.
The battle that next ready plast did stand,
Hector upon Aeneas did bestow:
Which had no other Knights within the same,
Then those that with Ewphemy thither came
So far out of their native Country,
For Hectors sake to aid King Pri^^^^,
The which were Knights of great activity;
Good horsemen, and exceeding valorous:
Who being bravely horst and furnished,
Their Coronell Aeneas followed.
And went out of the town courageously,
As if each one God Mars himself had been;
Hector mean time the eight ward orderly
Ordained had, and rank't it out, wherein
No other Knights nor men but Persians
(That thither came to aid the Troyans)
By him were plast; which wing he did command
Unto his brother Paris to obey
As Captain over them; and when they stand
All ready to set forward on their way,
Hector, his brother Paris kindly staid,
And lovingly spoke unto him, and said:
Brother, the thing that I of thee require,
And which for thine own good to thee I move,
Is, that I do thee heartily desire,
(If thou thine own security do love)
When thou this day in field against thy foe
Shall fight, see that thou ventrest not to go
Too far amongst the thickst of them, least they
Intrappe thee unawares, as sure they will,
If that they can by any means or way,
For their inveterate hatred to thee still
Increases more, and does their hearts embrace
So ferventlie, that nothing can it race
Out of their minds, but thy destruction.
Which to prevent, be thou not far from me
In any wise, least when thou art alone,
They should some hurt or mischief do to thee,
Before that I could come to thy relief,
Which unto me would be no little grief.
Keep therefore near to me at any hand,
That I may aid and help thee in distress,
And doubt not but we shall our foes withstand,
How furiously so ere on us they press:
To whom his brother Paris answer made,
And said, that he in mind resolved had
Unto his hests in all things to obey.
And so his leave of Hector having taken,
Withal his Knights in order road his way
Out at the gate, while Hector did ordain
The battle that the ninth and last should be,
Wherein he plast the flower of Chivalrie.
For in the same five thousand Knights there was
Most worthy men, and of most great renown,
And such as for their valor did surpass
All other Knights that were within the town:
And all of them right Troyans by descent,
Borne in the town. This battle Hector men^
Should by himself into the field be led,
And of his bastard brethren chose out ten
To ride with him, whom he much honored,
As knowing them to be right valiant men;
And such as for their prowess and their mights,
Of all men were esteemd most hardy Knights.
And when he had his battles made and plast
In order, as before I have set down,
And all of them one after other past,
In brave and warlike wise out of the town:
Like Mars himself for courage and for for^^
He mounted up upon his gallant horrse
Called Galathe, (the which is said to have been
The goodliest horse for stature, shape, and hair,
Swiftness and strength, that ever had been seen
In any place, and therewithal so fair
An^ tractable, that with a reine of twist,
A man might rule and turn him as he list.)
And thereon richly armed from top to toe,
(Which glistred like the Sun it was so bright,)
Road through the town with such a gallant shoe,
That all men to behold him took delight:
Unto the place where Priams* Court did hold,
And there from point to point unto him told,
What battles and what men he had sent out
Into the field against his Grecian foe,
And fifteen hundred valiant Knights and stout,
I have (said he) ordaind with you to go:
That shall attend your royal Majesty,
And guard your person where so ere you be.
And likewise all the footmen that do stay
Within the town, excepting no degree,
Commanded are to wait on you this day,
With whom I humbly pray your Majesty,
Out of the town into the field to go,
And there your self in warlike wise to shoe,
Not far off from the place where we shall fight,
But suffer none of them to go aside,
Nor leave their ranks, but there with all your might,
Between us and the town I pray you bide,
In order ready pressed us to relieve,
Whereof if need require we shall you give
Advise, for that still twixt us men shall go,
T'advertise you with all the speed we may
Of our estate, and unto you to shoe,
What likelihoode on either side this day
(By aid of Mars the God of war) may be,
Against their foes to have the victory,
For you shall be our Castle and our wall
To succor us in our extremity,
Besides all this (which is the principal)
You must take heed and very careful be,
That the enemy in ambush does not lurk
Behind the town, and treason against us work.
While we to fight on this side busied are
Against our foes, whereof in any wise,
Let me entreat your Grace to have a care,
That to prevent and work by good advise:
That our affairs may fall out happily,
And so we may obtain the victory
Against our foes. If they entrap us not
By unexpected fraud or violence,
The which I hope shall never be our lot.
Let these my words (said he) be no offense
Unto your Grace I humbly you desire,
Since all is for our good which I require.
Wherewith the King well pleased and satisfied,
With countenance benign and cheerful heart,
When he had paws'd a while, to him replied.
Hector (said he) since that my trust thou art
And sole support, what ever thou do say,
Or shall desire, I will it not denay.
For next the Gods in thee I do repose
My welfare, hope, and my security,
And by thy strength and power against our foes,
I only do expect our safety:
And therefore do commit into thy hand,
The sole command and rule of this my land.
And as thou do ordain so shall it be,
For no man shall thy will in ought deny,
And to the Gods I humbly pray for thee,
To save and keep thee from adversity:
And that thou may return with victory,
That so the eternal praise and memory
Of thee may be enrold by trump of fame,
Throughout the earthly globe both far and near,
Perpetually for th'onor of thy name;
And so farewell (said he) mine own Son dear.
And Hector taking leave no time delaid,
But went unto his Lords that for him staid.
As he that was their valiant General,
The very root of perfect nobleness,
The ground of ancient Knighthood, and withal
The lively pattern of true hardiness,
Valor and strength almost invincible,
For that as much as it was possible,
For nature to adorn a man withal
Was found in him, and therewithal he wa^
Endowed with a Grace maiesti^all,
Yet meek, and did in government surpass,
For upright justice, temprance, policy,
Wisdom, discretion, sense, and clemency.
The arms which then this Troyan Cha^pion bore
Triumphantly upon his warlike shield,
And standard both (as Guido says) was or
A Lion rampant gules, which in the field
Was so well known and feared, that the enemy
From it as from deaths pi^^cing dart did ^^^e.
And through the streets in order brave did ride,
With trumpets, and with drums that loudly played,
And diverse warlike instruments beside,
As penons rich and ensigns fair displaid:
And many people flockt in heaps about,
To view and see those warlike troops go out.
Thus Hector with courageous heart and mind,
Like Mars himself into the field did ride,
And though the battle which he led, behind
The rest aid go, yet would he not abide
With it, but through the ba^^^s all did pass,
And never staid till he the for most was*
And at the head of all his troops did stand,
Not once abasht so many Greeks to find,
In battle rankt ^^th shield and spear in hand
Him to assail, but with a valiant mind,
No whit of them nor their great force affeard,
Resolud to be the first that would them ^eard.
Mean while the Ladies gallant, fine, and gay,
(Within the town of most and great'st account,
As fresh beseene as flowers in month of May,
Upon the walls and towers of Troy did mount:
And round about Queen Helena the feign,
And Policene King Priams daughter, there
Did stand to see and to behold the fight,
Although of them the greatest part did fear*
And were abasht in heart at such a sight
Of armed men as then assembled were:
That some of them of very tenderness,
Some of mere love, and some of kindness*
Amas'd and pale in face and countnance were,
Least they should loose their lover o^ their Knight;
And some their faces hid for extre^me fear,
And durst not look upon the armor brigh^,
In which their fear i will leave them for a while,
And to the Greeks direct my wearied style.
And of them make a brief relation,
How they that day their battles did ordain.
But first I must with exclamation
Cry out, and of dame Ignorance complain,
That dares presume so boldly in my light
To stand, and with her shadow dim my sight.
For she it is that only makes me err,
For want of marshall terms and phrase to write
Of battles, and of things concerning war,
When as I would in order them indite:
And of an army pitched in field should speak,
But Cha^cer's dead, and can me neither cheake,
Nor counsel give how to direct my phrase,
Who did in perfect Rethoricke excel
All other Rethoritians in his daie^,
For he had drunk and tasted of the well
Of Hellicon, which on Pernassus stands,
Wherein as yet I nere could dip my hands.
Nor once get leave to mount upon the hill,
To see the same, one drop thereof to taste,
Although it was full sore against my will,
But it is too late to call back time that is past:
And since it is so, I do not greatly care,
(Though rude I be) unto you to declare,
In simple terms, such as my wit does yield,
(Which, to say truth, are rusticall and plain)
What order Agamemnon in the field
That day did take, his battle to ordain
On Grecians side, as having no intent,
That any man should find him negligent,
For it was no time as then for him to sleep.
Therefore with all the speed he could devise,
He did prepare that day the field to keep,
(As he was valiant, politic, and wise:)
Against his foes, twenty six battles great,
Which he in ranks most orderly did set.
The government whereof he did commit
Unto such puissant Kings and Princes brave,
As he for valor thought to be most fit
To take that charge, the first whereof he gave
Unto a Prince of honor great and fame,
Which G^id^ says, Patroclus had to name.
Which was composed of Myrmidons most strong
And puissant Knights that came from Thessalie,
And only to Achilles did belong,
And with them joined the same to fortify
Such Knights as he himself did thither bring,
All strongly armed. And with this valiant wing,
He was the first that on the Grecians lide
Began the fight against their enemy,
The cause why he the Myrmidons did guide,
Was, for because Achilles then did lie
Sore wounded in his tent, and came not out^
That day, for that his Surgions were in doubt
If he should stir, his wounds that were so sore
And very green, would festar, ranckle, bleed,
And trouble and torment him more and more,
Which to prevent, it was by them decreed
To keep his bed, and for to ease his pain
To lie therein, till they were whole again.
And so unto Patroclus did commend
His Knights, because he was of royal blood,
And his assured, true; and perfect friend,
Exceeding rich, and much esteemd for good:
And great discretion, wit, and courtesy,
And one in whom he wholly did rely.
For twixt them both there was such entire love,
Affection great, and perfect amity,
That nothing could out of their hearts remove,
The constant and assured fidelity:
Which mutually they did t'each other bear,
Whereby their hearts together linked were,
And knit in one as they were bound together,
For will and wealth was one betwixt them both,
And what so ere the one did, or the other,
It was confirmd on either side, as loath
To move dislike, or coffeehouse breed
Twixt them, that had resolved and full decreed,
To live and die true friends in heart and mind,
Which to their ends they strictly did maintain.
The second ward to Menon was assignd,
(Who in that war great honor did obtain)
And to the worthy King Idumenes,
To whom was joined a Duke called Menestes.
With full three thousand men well furnished,
And all the Athenian Knights in armor bright.
The third by King Ascalaphus was led,
And Philomene his Son a worthy Knight,
Who both in proud and stately wise together,
Conducted those that from Cuman came thither.
King Archelaus the fourth ward did command,
And with him was Securidan the stout;
And Prothenor, who with that warlike band,
All three together valiantly went out
Against their foes: and had within the same,
None but the Knights that from Bo^tia came.
King Menelaus a worthy Prince, was made
Conductor of the ward next following,
(And lift in tal^) which in it only had
The Knights which he did thither with him bring
From Sparta, and the Isles about the same,
Who likewise (as his subjects) thither came.
And of the battle next and sixth, the King
Epistrophus was chief Commander made,
And with him stout King Gelidus, to bring
The same into the field, which in it had
The Knights that came out of the famous Isle,
Which by the Geeekes is called Fordessle.
The seventh battle next ensuing, led
By worthy famous Thelamon Ajax King
Of Salamine, was only furnished
With Knights that he unto the siege did bring:
And with them were four Earls of high degree,
Whose names I find (the story says) to be
Theseus the first, the next was Doxeus,
Polixarie the third, the fourth was he
That all men called stout Amphimacus.
The eight ward Agamemnon did decree,
Should by the King called Thoas forth be led,
With many Knights well armed and furnished.
The ninth ward Cileus Aliax did command.
The tenth was led by King Philoctetes.
Th'eleaventh (the which next orderly did stand)
The most renowned King Palamides,
(King Naulus son of whom the Greeks did make
So great account) into his charge did take.
Before the twelfth Duke Nestor (full of pride
And melancholy humors in his mind)
A very stout and valiant Knight did ride.
The thirteenth to King Honux was assigned,
(That was Ma^berethes Son by true dissent)
Who with it to the field most proudly went.
The fourteenth battle that day for to guide,
The subtle King Ullsses was sent out.
And with the fifteenth ward to field did ride
King Humelus a worthy Prince and stout.
The sixteenth unto Duke Caribulus,
A Knight of great account and valorous,
Committed was to lead: and in that band
The Knights of King Prothesalus did go,
(Whom Hector slew that day the Greeks did land)
T'incourage them to be revenged. And to
King Rodus was assignd the seventeene.
The eighteenth to the King of Occe^ene.
And of the nineteenth stout King Zan^^ppus
Of Lidia, leader was. The tweentith band
Commanded was by King Amphimacus.
Philoctetes King of Lariffia Land,
The one and twentieth band with him did lead.
The two and twentieth by King Diomed.
The three and twentieth Agamemnon gave
Unto Aeneas King of Cyparie,
The leading and command thereof to have,
That day against their Troyan enemy.
And with the four and twentieth ward did ride
Prothecatus a King* the same to guide.
King Carpenor of Carpadie was made
Conductor of the five and twentieth band,
A noble Prince that great experience had
In war and peace both on the sea and land:
And valiantly himself he did defend,
Until the Troyan wars were at an end.
The six and twentieth battle, and the last,
That was sent out against the enemy,
King Agamemnon General of the host,
(A puissant Prince of great authority)
Reserved for himself, and in it led
Great store of armed knights well furnished.
The battles thus ordained, the Greeks were led
In order to the field, where as they staid
Each Prince and chief Commander at the head
Of every band, with ensigns rich displaid,
And streamers wavering in the wind, that shone
In brave and warlike wise against the sun.
At which time many a creast and helmet fair,
And richly gilt and graven, there were seen,
Wherein great store of strange devises were,
And plumes of feathers, yellow, red, and green,
Black, blew, and white, with other colors more:
And some that day for love of Ladies bore
Their favors on their Crests for to be seen,
And to encourage them that day to fight,
Courageously as if that they had been
In presence and before their Ladies sight:
And doleful noise of Drums and trumpets shrill,
Which with a fearful sound the air did fill,
As messengers and signs of shedding blood,
Were ^eard in every place throughout the Camp,
And prancing steeds with fierce and furious mood,
Upon the ground their feet did beat and stamp:
And neigh and some at mouth on either side,
Attending signs of battle with great pride.
Both Greeks and Troyans longing sore to try,
Their knightly force and valors in the field,
Each one that day against the enemy,
And ready pressed with furious look beheld
Their deadly foes there standing in the place,
Which from each other was but little space.
Till that the battles first in order set,
On either side removed and forward went,
And in most furious wise together met,
Where Hector that in heart was discontent:
And foremost on the Troyans side did stand
Upon his horse, with mighty Lance in hand.
Whose wrath and ire by no means could assuage,
(Like fierce and cruel Lion that for pray
With hungry mood does hunt) in furious rage,
Against the Greeks first onset gave that day:
And ran so fast upon his gallant steed,
That with his spurs he made his sides to bleed.
His Knightly heart so much was set on fire,
With mortal wrath and hate revenge to take.
Which when the Greeks did see, with great desire,
They also for their parts like have did make
To Advance themselves, and first without abode,
Patroclus that the foremost of them rode.
In proud and hautie manner spurd his horse,
T'encounter Hector fiercly in the field,
And with a spear that was of mighty force,
Road unto him, and hit him on the shield,
So great and strong a blow, that with the same
He pierst it through (with such a force it came)
But hurt him not at all, for that it brake,
Yet with the point through plate and male did pass,
And did a hole within his harnas make,
But neither breast nor skin of his did race:
And though with most great violence it came,
Yet could he not stir Hector with the same.
Nor make him once out of his sadle rise,
Nor backward nor yet forward for to yield,
Nor yet t'incline himself in any wise
Upon his horse, so fast thereon he held:
But Hector unto his confusion,
Most like a strong and puissant Champion,
Cast down his spear, and with his sword in hand,
In furious wise unto himself he swore,
That spite of all that durst or would't with stand,
Patroclus at that time should die therefore:
And therewith such a blow unto him gave,
That with the strength thereof his head he claue
In sunder to the breast, and then again,
A second blow him gave withal his force,
Which finally his body claue in twain,
Wherewith Patroclus tell off from his horse,
With pale and deadly face upon the ground,
As he that had received his mortal wo^^^
In presence of his men, and in the sight
Of all the Greeks, and then without delay,
Hector off from his horse with speed did light,
(And like a Lion fell that seeks for pray)
Determined in his heart that burnt like fire
Against his Grecian foes, with great desire
To spoil Patroclus of his arms that were,
So gallant, rich, and sumptuous to behold,
As being set with precious stones most clear
In chaste, and richly gilt with purest gold:
For then great Lords and Princes used to bear
Most sumptuous arms when as in field they were*)
And to that end while he was busied,
With covetous desire to take his pray,
(In sight of all the Greeks) his horse he led,
In one hand by the reine, and thought to lay
The body of Patroclus on the same,
But ere't was done King Menon thither came.
And with three thousand Knights enclosed him round,
Who all together hotely him assailed,
Whereas so great resistance then he found,
That of his purpose at that time he faild:
And forced was to let Patroclus lie,
For to resist the force of the enemy.
Which caused him in boiling rage to fall,
To whom King Menon fell and furious,
The spoke and said in presence of them all,
O greedy Wolf and Tygar ravinous,
O Lion fierce and beast insatiable,
Whose avarice is most unreasonable
Upon this prey, as now thou shall not feed,
Go seek elsewhere for other carrion,
For fifty thousand men have all decreed,
This day to work thy sole destruction:
And that they may in their intent prevail,
Thy hateful pride at once they w^ll assail.
And then in furious wise on him they set,
With Lances, swords, and other weapons more*
And on him as upon an anvile beat.
On every side, behind, and eke before:
With full pretense his horse from him to take*
And what so ere resistance he could make.
For all his valor, force, and puissant might,
He was constraind to fall upon his knee,
But like a most courageous hardy Knight,
By passing strength and magnanimity,
Despite of all the Greeks, he did by force
(...) up again upon his gallant horse.
And to King Menon road with furious mood,
And heart possessed with extreme cruelty,
(Wherein his sole delight and pleasure stood)
And without doubt had slain him presently:
If that three thousand knights chivalerous,
With Theseus, Glaucus, and Archilagus,
Had not in time to rescue him come thither,
Who all with one consent and great despite,
Agreed to follow Hector, and together
In furious wise to kill him if they might:
But nere the less who s^ere did him assail,
Was surely killed, for naught could him prevail
Against his puissant arm and trenchant blade,
So that the Greek that met with him that day,
Need take no care for ransom to be made
To save his life, for ere he escaped away,
He was most certain without doubt to die,
So that for fear, each one from him did fly.
Whereby he had the means to break the prease
Of those that did enclose him round about,
And where so ere he road he did not cease,
To kill and beat them down till he got out,
And made a path before him smooth and plain,
Until he came unto the place again,
Whereas the body of Patroclus lay,
To spoil him of his armor if he might,
And fore him on his horse to beare't away,
In view of all the Greeks to their despite:
And at that time had surely had the same,
But that King Idumeus thither came.
And with him brought two thousa'd knights of ^ree^,
(Where he was King) that did enclose him round,
And valiantly on all ^ides on him set,
While he unarmed Patroclus on the ground:
And to them came a king called Merion,
(Although at last to his confusion.)
And ere that Hector could about him look,
Despite of all his valor and his might,
His gallant horse perforce from him they took,
Whereby he was compeld on foot to fight:
But yet his knightly heart they could not fear,
For with his sword he slew all that were near,
Or him withstood: and at that time began
To hacke and hew the Greeks on every side,
And t'cu^ off arms and legs of horse and man,
That none of them before him durst abide:
For he in little space had fifteen slain,
Of those that forcibly would him have taken.
And such a slaughter began amongst them make,
That many of the^ shrunk back and would not stay,
Mean time they did Patroclus body take,
Which Merion on his horse did bear away
Unto his tent with sad and heavy cheer,
And still the Greeks with Hector fighting were.
Who all the while upon his feet did stand,
And some of them that neer'st on him did press,
He made to feel his strong and heavy hand:
Yet what so ere he did they would not cease,
Nor leave t'enclose him round on every side,
Presuming in their hearts with hawty pride,
In the end at some advantage him to take,
Supposing that he could not long sustain
Their puissant force, or from their hands escape,
Nor likely was, his horse to get again:
From which they sought by all means him to let,
And therefore all at once upon him set.
And specially amongst them there was one,
More earnest and more busy then the rest,
(Whose name as Guid^ says was Carrion)
That Hector in most furious wise oppressed:
And still inforst himself, and would not cease
T'assaile him when he was in most distress.
Environed by Greeks on every side,
Till that by chance a valiant Troyan knight,
(Who all the while with Hector did abide,
When he on foot enclosed with Greeks did fight)
Two darts in hand did take, whereof the one
He did directly cast at Carrion.
Which with such force stroke him into the side,
That with the blow it claue his heart in twain,
And stayed not there, but forcibly did slide
Out through his arms at the other side again:
And with that mighty, great, and fatal wound,
He presently fell dead upon the ground
Before an hundred knights, who all together
With him had vo^'d and sworn with great despite,
The death of Hector by one means or other.
The second dart this worthy Troyan knight,
Cast at a Grecian Knight, that in the field
Began Hector to approach, and through his shield
And armor bright did strike him to the heart,
And then unto the Troyans he did call
And cry alowd, to come from every part,
With speed upon the Grecian Knights to fall:
That had enclosed Hector round about,
And without danger great could not get ou^*
Wherewith the valiant hardy C^^cibere,
(One of King Priams Bastard childeren)
And diverse other Troyan Knights that were
At his command, in have did come, and when
They saw that Hector midst the Greeks unhorsed,
S*vnequally to fight on foot was forced,
With fury great together they did set
Upon the backs of those that him enclosed,
And unawares by that means did them let
Of that pretense which among the^ they supposed,
For presently when they the Troyans saw,
Three hundred of their Knights did them withdraw.
With sudden fear abasht and fled away,
When thirty of their men had first been slain,
And Hector maugre all that durst say nay,
Upon his gallant horse got up again:
And entering in the thickest of the prease,
In furious wise did ride and never cease
To kill and slay with bloody sword in hand,
And merciless to cut and hew in sunder,
All those that against him in the field durst stand,
(That to behold his valor it was wonder)
And only for because they did him stay,
And hinder from Patroclus arms that day.
And therefore in most cruel wise he shed
The blood of many a worthy Grecian Knight,
Who in great fear and terror from him fled,
But he on whom with trenchant blade he light,
Was sure to die, for it was to him much good,
To see his sword died red with Grecians blood.
And on them in such sort revenged to be,
For that like Lion fierce that hunts for pray,
He did so kill and follow them, that he
The Grecians pride did much abate that day:
For as they fled the blood in streams was seen,
Run from their wounds along upon the green.
Till Menestes the Duke of Athens came,
With just three thousand Knights well furnished,
And richly armed, and all of them the same,
That he from Athens brought: the which he led
Of purpose to the left side of the field,
Where Troyelus that time the fight then held.
With none but Phrigian Knights, and all that day,
(Like to a ravening Wolf that greedily,
With open mouth does follow after pray,)
Did kill and slay the Greeks so cruelly,
That they were glad to fly and shun his sight.
And while he was most earnest in the fight
Against his foes (with stout King Za^tip^^,
That did himself most valiantly behave)
And with another King called Alchanus,
(That likewise was a hardy Knight and brave)
Who with their trencha^t blades all three did wound
And kill so many Greeks, that all the ground
Whereas they fought was covered ore with blo^^,
And bodies of the Greeks whom they did slay,
But specially young Troyelus that road
That day upon a horse of color baye,
(Such havocke of them made, that well was he
That from their fierce and cruel blows went ^^^e.)
Menestes that with furious look beheld,
What slaughter on the Grecians then was made
By Troyelus that day within the field,
Such wrath and cruel ire in heart he had:
That with a mighty spear coucht in his rest,
He ran and hit young Troyelus in the breast
So puissantly, and with so great a force,
That maugre all his might and valor great,
At unawares he threw him off his horse,
In midst of all his foes that him beset
Clean round about; where he on foot did fight,
And like a hardy, fierce, and valiant Knight,
Most bravely did assail his enemies,
And them also with valor great withstood,
Although he was in great extreamities,
And danger of his life, for that he stood
Amongst the horses feet, almost ore-run,
And found no way how he the same should (...).
For round about him enemies he saw,
That hotely him assaild on every side,
And by no means he could himself withdraw
From thence, nor long their puissant force abid^^
For Menestes still more upon him pressed,
And gave him not the means to breath, nor ^^^t,
In hope at last he should be overcome.
And still the number of the Greeks increast,
And such as wearied were, gave others room
To fight, whereby with multitudes oreprest,
And with exceeding toil sore wearied,
They took him and as prisner forth him led*
Till that a valiant Knight of Troy that stood,
And saw him by the Greeks so led away,
Sore grieved and much abasht in furious mood,
Unto the Troyan Knights did speak, and say:
O worthy Phrigian Knights whose honors spread
Throughout the world, and long has flowrished,
For shame let it not now ecclipsed be,
And merely by your fault and negligence,
That stay still here as in a mase, and see
Not how the Greeks by force and violence
The gallant Knight Prince Troylus have taken,
Without relief, as't were, by you forsaken.
Which will redownd to your perpetual shame,
For if the flower of worthiness be led
Away by force and not relieved, the blame
(And worthily) will turn upon your head:
For if with speed you do him not relieve,
Men will report, and verily believe,
That only by your means it came to pass,
That Troyelus this day had this mischance,
And by the Grecians prisoner taken was*
Let us then to that end our selves advance,
And valiantly our honors herein save,
That no discredit we thereby may have.
Wherewith the worthy King called Alchanus,
Was so much moved in heart, that presently
(Like to a Lion fierce and furious)
He took a spear in hand, and suddenly
Did spur his horse as fast as ere he might,
And after road, till that he had a fight
Of those that young Prince Troyelus prisner led,
And with his spear ran at a Grecian Knight,
And pierst him to the heart, that he fell dead
Upon the ground, and then again did smite
Another Grecian Knight with such a force,
That he not only cast him off his horse,
But with his mighty Lance did pierce him clean
Through's body, sholder bone, and armor strong,
So that the steely point thereof was seen
Out at his back at least a handful long:
And then the Phrigian Knights as thick as hail,
Came riding down, and did the Greeks assail,
With so great courage and dexterity,
That maugre all resistance they could make,
They did procure Prince Troyelus liberty,
And him out of their hands by force did take*
And helped him to his horse again with speed,
Whereof as then he had no little need.
And with them also was King Za^^ippus,
Who when he saw Duke Menestes, with speed
(And with a noble he^^t and valorous)
In furious wise he spurd his lusty steed*
And run at him with spear in hand so fast,
That with the blow through shield and male he past.
With so great force, that without doubt he had
Been slain, if that his arms had not been good*
But Menestes was furious, wood, and m^d,
And raging, fre^^ing, ^^ming, chasing stood:
And like an Aspen lea^e with anger shook,
Because the Troyans Troyelus from him took,
Despite of him and all his Chivalty;
And foming like a Bore at mouth did ba^le,
And to th* Athenian Knights aloud did cry,
To will them on the Troyan Knights to fall:
And be revenged on them for that disgrace,
Before that they should stir out of that place.
Wherewith they all at once with fury great,
The Troyans did assail right valiantly,
And for their parts they likewise did not let
To fall upon the Greeks couragioussie:
And then began a fierce and furious fight,
And did so fiercely one the other smight.
That fire out of their sheilds and arms did fly,
And sparkle all abroad in fearful wi^e,
And many a valiant Knight that day did die,
And in the field cast our most doleful cries:
Of life or death they took as then no heed,
For that they had determined and decreed,
Each other to destroy, confound, and kill,
And furiously to work their enemies bane,
And at that time the battles that stood still
On every side, came down into the plain:
And with most pale and deadly faces met,
And on each other valiantly did set.
With hot and burning jre, so that as then,
Naught else but blows of Lances, sword, and dar^,
Were heard and seen within the field, and men
Did shout and cry alowd, and on each part,
The fight began in such sort to renew,
That many a man in fine the same did rue.
For Hector like a most renowned Knight,
So furiously still on the Greeks did set,
And with most puissant blows and passing might,
Did kill, beat down, and maime all those he met^
And merciless, with extreme cruelty
Did them confound, that pity it was to see.
And Menestes with heart repleat with spite,
Because his pris*ner Troyelus had been taken
So forcibly from him, and that in fight
His men had then so many of them been slain:
Where so ere he road in furious wise did slay,
Beat down, and wound, and fore him drove away
The Troyan knights, that he might take revenge,
For th'iniuries that they to him had done,
And as he round the field about did range,
(Like Wolf for prey) and here and there did run
In furious wi^e to kill his enemies,
He met a Troyan knight called Miseres.
(Who in despite of all his Chivalrie,
His pris*ner worthy Troyelus had taken
By force from him that day, and set him free,
And some of his Athenian knights had slain)
And knowing him again by the arms he bare
Upon his shield, before he was aware.
And ere of him he once took heed or care,
He spurd his horse, and ran at him in have,
(And among the ranks of Troyans that were there)
Him to the ground out of his saddle cast.
Then to the field on Troyans side there came
A valiant King that Hupon had to name,
That with him full two thousand knights did bring,
Who on the Greeks in furious wise did set,
And to encounter them, for Greeks a king
Called Prothenor, courageously did meet:
And Archelius the noble warrior,
That of Boetia Land was Governor.
Who with the aid of valiant Prothenor,
The Troyans did assail as cruelly,
As he had been a Tygar or a Bore,
And Prothenor himself courageously,
Did also many a Troyan fiercely slay.
But Hupon by his valor great did stay
Their furious moods, and through his Chivalry,
Not only did the Troyans then defend,
But in most cruel wise, and furiously
Brought many Grecian knights unto their end.
And thus twixt them the fight then equal was,
Till that the worthy knight Polidamas
Anthenors son, (that valiantly did ride
Before his knights) amongst the Greeks did enter,
And bravely them assaild on every side,
And by that means did break their ranks asunder:
And cruelly killed many a Grecian knight,
For they could not resist against his might,
He was so hardy, stout, and furious.
And for to second him the worthy king
Called Remus, that of knights chivalerous,
Three thousand to the field with him did bring*
Into the battle came, and there did fight
So valiantly, and with such force and might,
That all the Troyan knights that him beheld,
Took great delight, and were exceeding glad,
To see him kill and chase the Greeks in field,
And that such havocke of them there he made:
Whereby as then great noise of strokes and cries,
Within the field was heard and began to rise.
And while king Remus in this sort still ^ights,
And on the Greeks in furious wise did set,
King Menelaus with all his Spartane knights,
Into the battle proudly came, to let
And to restrain king Remus in his course,
And to that end set spurs unto his horse,
And valiantly upon king Remus set,
And Remus likewise against him road as fast,
And with their spears so furiously they met,
That each the other to the ground did cast:
For in their course they did so fiercely run,
That neither of the^ each others blows could shun.
Mean time the valiant knight Pollidamus
(Who only sought to honor to attain,
As he that was both stout and valorous)
Met with Queen Helens Nephew in the plain,
That was a mighty Duke called Mereus,
A Prince both gallant, young, and virtuous.
Most richly armed and of good carriage,
And for his time a stout and valiant knight,
(For he was then but twenty years of age)
Yet much renownd for valor and for might:
But by hard fortune it fell out (alas)
That this brave Troyan knight Pollidamas,
Ran at him with a spear so furiously,
That piercing through his arms and coat of male,
He struck him to the heart, and suddenly,
He fell down dead with color wan and pale:
Which when as old King Menelaus beheld,
And saw him lie dead groueling in the field,
That sometime Nephew was to Helena
His wife, he fell into so great a rage,
That presently he made no more delay,
But in some part his choler to assuage,
He ran at stout King Remus in despite,
And with his sword stroke at him with such might
Upon the head, that he could not sustain
Himself upright, but fell unto the ground,
Wherewith his Knights supposing he was slain,
For that the blood did run out of his wound.
(And he as dead upon the ground did lie,)
They took him up, and with him began to fly
As fast as ere they could, and would not stay
Till that the valiant Knight Pollidamas
Unto them went, and stopped them in the way,
And by no means would suffer them to pass,
Except those that by him appointed were,
King Remus to the town of Troy to bear.
Then to the field on Grecians side there came,
King Celides a valiant Prince and stout,
Whom Dares does report to have had the name
Amongst the Greeks, and all the world throughout.
T'excell all men without exception,
For beauty, shape, and good proportion,
Behavior, grace, and countenance bening,
For every part of him was most exact,
And finely made, so that not any thing
To grace a man withal, in him there lackt,
For nature had him framed of such a mold,
That all men did delight him to behold.
Which made the gallant Amazonian Queen,
(For passing beauty held to be the flower,)
To love him so when once she had him seen,
That she did choose him for her Parramour,
And loved him so dearly at the heart,
That from her thought he never could depart.
Who being as I said a gallant Knight,
As soon as ere he entered in the field,
And saw whereas Pollidamas did fight
Against the Greeks, and at a bay them held;
He set his spurs unto his horses side,
And in most furious wise to him did ride,
And with his spear did give him such a blow,
That with the same (which came with passing might
Off from his horse he did him overthrow,
But to requite him for it the Trojan Knight
Pollidamas with pale and furious face,
Ere Celides departed from the place,
Drewout his sword and smot him on the head
So cruelly, and with so great a might
That he therewith off from his horse fell dead
Upon the grrund, unto the great despite
Of all the Greeks, that could him not relieve,
For which in heart they sore did fret and grieve.
And while the Greeks and Trojans thus did fight,
And each the other killed in every place
Throughout the field: Hector the valiant Knight,
Like Lion fierce, before him did them chase,
And furiously did wound, beat down, and slay
The Greeks so fast, that forced to give him way,
Like sheep before the greedy woolfe they fled.
For against his trenchant blade no Greeks durst stand,
For with the same their blood so fast he shead,
That glad was he that could escape his hand.
And at that time such vengance he did take
On them, that they compeld were to forsake
The field whereas he fought, yet would he not
Leave off to kill, and chase them, till in fine
As he road here and there it was his lot,
Among the valiant Knights of Salo^ine.
T'incounter with King Theseus in the way,
That many a Trojan Knight had slain that day.
And as to him in have he began to ride,
The valiant Knight King Tentar thither came
With spear in hand, and while he looked aside,
In furious wise ran at him with the same.
And with the blow clean through his arms did pierce
And wounded him, but while with courage fierce,
Hector to be revenged for that despite
(On Tentar,) turned his horse about in have,
He wisely road as fast as ere he might,
Till he out of his furious sight was past,
Wherewith his heart was so possessed with ire,
That in his breast it burnt as hot as fire.
And when he felt his wound to ache and smart,
He did within himself so rage and fret,
That for to ease the collar of his heart,
What Greek soever after that he met,
Or that durst be so bold him to withstand,
Was sure to die by his victorious hand.
And among the rest one special there was
That proudly and of purpose him withstood,
Whom with his sword (which through his arms did
He claue unto the heart with furious mood, (pass)
At which most puissant stroke the Greeks did tremble,
But nerethelesse they did in troops assemble,
And him enclosed round on every side,
Upon him such a fierce assault to make,
(Which they supposd he could not long abide,
That at the last by force they would him take.
And more and more there number still increast,
Which on all sides t'assayle him never ceast.
So that to all men's ^ight by likelihood
He could not from their hands escape alive.
And while in so great danger there he stood,
And still with them did ^^ght^^nd bravely strive,
Like to a Lion fierce and furious.
The worthy Grecian King called Theseus,
Of courtesy and of mere gentleness,
In heart was mou^d to see him in that case,
And pitying his heard and great distress,
As fearing what in fine might come to pass,
Because he stood in danger of the wrack,
In kind and friendly manner to him spoke.
Oh valiant Knight, and root of hardiness,
Oh spring of manhood, stock of Nobleness,
And the only pattern of all worthiness,
Why art thou now so careless in distress?
To save thy life by Knightly providence,
When as thou see thou can not make defense
Against so huge a number of thy foes.
Among whom thou art in danger to be slain,
For they on every side do thee enclose,
And have all means of succor from thee taken.
And yet thou will not help thy self at all,
But staist to see the worst that may befall.
For which all men in heart may well complain,
To see that such a worthy valiant Knight,
Who by his valor Knighthood does maintain,
And unto Marshall men is the only light.
And as it were th'v pholder of their law,
Will not himself from danger now withdraw.
But wilfully thy life wilt rather loose.
Great pity it were that thou should here be slain
Withdraw thy self therefore whilst thou may chose
For if thou die not now thou will be taken,
Thy prowess great compels me to pray
Thee, that in this distress thou will not stay.
Which words when Hector heard, and knew they came
Out of a heart repleat with courtesy*
He bowed his head, and thank't him for the same,
As to his friend, and yet his enemy.
And then perforce and mauger all the might
The Greeks could use, most like a valiant Knight
With bloody sword in hand he brake the press,
And through the thickst of them did bravely ride,
And got from them, and still he did not cease
To kill, and beat them down on every side.
And in his way Pollidamas he found,
That valiantly stood fighting on the ground,
Against two Greecian Kings, whereof the one
Was Menelaus, a worthy valiant Knight,
The other fierce and furious Thelamon,
Who likewise was a Prince of passing might.
And Thelamon ran at him with such force,
That with his spear he threw him on his horse.
And forcedihim against both of them to fight,
On foot, that they revenge on him might take,
And with most furious blows they did him ^^a^^e
Upon his crest and helmet, which they brake.
And then the beauer from his face they ^^^e,
And when that it uncovered was and bare,
And by that means he could it not defend*
With that advantage which on him they had,
They took him suddenly and did him send
Unto their tents, and him a prisoner made.
But when as Hector did behold and see
Pollidamas in such extremity,
With full intent to succor him in have,
He spurd his horse and furiously did ride
T'oretake the Greeks, and wheresoere he past
With sword in hand made way on every side,
Till in the end he got unto the place
Whereas distressed Pollidamas then was,
Clean succourlesse, and without remedy,
Or hope of aid from Trojans in that case,
Till that he did on Hector set his eye,
That thirty Greeks had slain in little space,
And made them give him way for all their pride,
For none of them durst fore his sword abide.
Nor against him stand, so that by valor great
And Knightly force, he made them all to fly,
And by that means Pollidamas did set
Free from their hands, again at liberty.
Then to the field came King Epistrophus
With many worthy Knights and valorous.
And with him Menelaus and Thelamon,
And each of them great store of Knights likewise,
Who with their troops of Greeks all joynd in one,
The Trojans did assail in furious wise.
(To get themselves an everlasting name
Of honor and of glory by the same.)
And with their power of Greeks that were so strong,
They drove the Trojans fore them in the field,
And entering among the thickest of the throng,
Against them a hard and furious fight they field:
Despite of all their valor and their might,
Or Hectors Knightly prowess that did fight
So valiantly as then, and with such force
(That none but he himself could ever do it,)
But cowardly the Greeks did kill his horse,
And then he was constraind to fight on foot:
Which unto them procured but little good,
For there was none that then about him stood
But he did kill, and wound them grievously.
And though by them he was enclosed round,
And on all sides assailed furiously,
He made them to recule and give him ground*
And on his feet so fiercely fought that day,
That none of them durst hand upon him lay.
For if they did they were assured to die.
And when his valiant brethren him beheld,
And saw him fight on foot so furiously,
Inclosd by Greeks in midst of all the field,
And to defend himself against them so well,
(As any ravening Tiger fierce and fell,
That furiously does fight to save her whelp.)
They all together brake into the prease,
And Hector on all sides began to help,
And first upon King Thelamon did ceaze.
(For him against Hector busiest then was found,)
And gave him many a great and bloody wound.
While that a valiant Knight called Dixdaron,
Among the Grecian troops did boldly ride,
And there a gallant horse by force he won,
Which having got, he did not long abide
B^^ brought it unto Hector where he stood
Among the Greeks all bathed in their blood.
Whereon in have he mounted gallantly,
And among the Greeks like Mars himself did ride
And many of them did kill so furiously,
That at that time he did abate their pride.
Then Deiphobus entered in the field,
And bravely against the Grecians battle held,
With th'archers of Bohemie which he brought
With him to field, whose arrows feathers were
With Peacocks glistring tails, wherewith they fought
And did so fiercely shoot, that in great fear
To shun the same the Greeks retired back,
And Trojans by that means did courage take.
And then Deiphobus valiantly did race
And beat King Tentrans helmet from his head,
And with his sword did wound him in the face
So cruelly, that in a manner dead
Hefell of from his horse with extreme pain,
And then the Trojans furiously again
Assaild the Greeks, and put them to a stand,
And once again were masters of the field.
But Theseus with the Knights at his command
Withstood them still, and them too hardly held,
Till Hectors bastard brother Quintiline,
Whose arms as clear and bright as sun did shine.
And the most valiant King called Modern^^
Assailed, and with extreme cruelty,
Together fell upon King Theseus,
Who nerethelesse with great agilitie,
Against them both himself did long defend;
But notwithstanding all his force, in the end
They brought him unto such extremity,
That without doubt they had him surely flaine,
If Hector (moved thereto by courtesy,)
Had not with speed cried out to them amain,
To pray them for his sake their hands to stay*
And save his life, whereto they did obey.
And for that time assailed him no more,
For Hector called to mind what courtesy
To him was shown the self same day before
By Theseus, in his hard extremity,
And therefore with the like did him require,
As it is the part of every courteous Knight.
For which King Theseus thankt him heartily,
As glad he had escapt by such a chance.
Then in the field King Thoas valiantly
On Grecians side his standard did advance,
And with him King Philoctetes came thither,
Who with the^ brought great store of knights together
And with that great and new supply of men,
The Trojans did assail, and Thoas ran
(At one of Priams bastard children,)
Whom Guido ^aith was called Cassibelian,
And to him gave so great and sore a wound,
That he therewith fell dead upon the ground.
Which blow when Hector saw, he grieved sore,
And for his brothers death great sorrow made,
And to himself he did protest, and swore
That he would never rest till that he had
Revenged his brothers death if that he might
Upon the Greeks, and then with great despite,
He entered among the thick'st of them in have,
And furiously all those that in his way
Did stand, he killed, or maimed sore, did cast
Them off their horses backs, and all that day
So valiantly did fight against his foes,
That many a (...) thereby his life did lose.
Then to the field Duke Nestor proudly brought
Five thousand valiant Knights in armor bright,
That furiously against the Trojans fought.
And on the Trojans side the worthy Knight
King Esdras, with a courage stout and bold,
And Philon in his stately chair of gold,
With all the valiant Knights and chivalry,
(That for to aid King Priam thither came)
Out of Agresta land with Iacony
The Prince and heir thereof, and with the same
Courageously upon the Grecians ran,
At which time many a brave and worthy man
Was fiercely slain and maimed on every side,
And from the men that on the ground lay dead
And wounded sore, with gashes long and wide,
The field all ore was died in color red,
With streams of blood that men therein might wade,
Such slaughter at that time twixt them was made.
At which time Philon fought most furiously,
And did by valor great the Trojans aid,
And many a Greek that day did cause to die.
But while thus fighting valiantly he staid,
At unawares he was enclosed round,
And suddenly himself in danger found:
For that the Greeks so compast him about,
That he unlikely was from them t'escape,
For by no means he could from thence get out,
But that in the end they would him either take,
Or kill outright, but that Prince Iacony
Unto King Esdras loudly began to cry,
Saying, my Lord, by our great negligence
King Philon at this time will sure be slain,
For against so many Greeks there is no defense,
But that he must needs die, or else be taken,
If we relieve him not if that we can,
And so in have they altogether ran,
And in despite of all the Greeks by force,
They did release King Philon from their hands;
Who glad thereof, did mount upon his horse
And road with them unto the Trojan bands:
That then with all their power, force, and might,
With Hector that most brave and worthy Knight,
Deiphobus, and Pollidamas, and other
Courageous Trojan Knights that had decreed
With one consent, and valiantly together
The Grecians freshly to assail with speed,
Of purpose, if convenient means they found,
With all their puissant power t'inclose the^ round.
That few of them should escape with life from thence,
And to that end did fiercely them assail,
And did compel the Greeks with small defense,
(For that as then their courages did fail.)
To loose their ground, and to retire with speed,
And finally were driven into such need,
That mauger all their might they had that day,
Been utterly brought to confution,
And forced in the end to run away,
If that King Menelaus and Thelamon,
When as they saw them faint and half afraid,
Had them not then encouraged and staid,
And made them once again themselves defend,
Till that Aeneas and Duke Eufrenus,
Against the Greeks did valiantly descend
With other troops of Knights chivalrous,
And freshly them again did sore oppress:
And Hector also by his worthiness,
Like Lion fierce with stern and cruel face,
Did put them to so great extremity,
That like to sheep that cruel woolfe does chase,
They were compeld with fear from him to fly.
As glad his strong and trenchant blade to shun,
And from it for to save their lives, to run.
The which when valiant Ajax did epsy,
He had in heart so much compassion,
To think upon the great extremity,
With cruel slaughter and confusion,
(The which the Greeks as then did feel and find)
That when he turned his back and looked behind.
And saw so many Grecian wings that staid
And were in order pressed within the field,
Which banners large and pennons fair displaid,
And all that while the cruel fight beheld,
And saw how Hector had the Greeks in chase,
Yet stirred not one foot out of their place.
(Although in them the flower of chivalry
On Grecians side there was, that able were
The Trojans to withstand, and valiantly
To be revenged on them, and for to bear
The furious charge of their fierce enemies.)
In all the have he could, to them he hies,
And loudly unto them for help did cry,
Whereatin have the wearied Greeks to aid,
They marched forward against the enemy,
With ensigns rich and pennons brave displaid.
And when they and the Trojans fiercely meet,
The earth did shake and tremble with the feet
Of horses, that in furious wise did fling,
And gallop in the field, and then did rise
An^^eous noise wherewith the air did ring
O huge and mighty strookes, and fearful cries
On either side, and many a Knight was seen
With deadly wounds lie gasping on the green.
Then Aiox against Aeneas fiercely ran,
And he against him as willingly did ride;
(For twixt them both such enmity as than,
And hatred great there was on either side*
That naught but death their furies could assuage,)
And did together meet in such a rage,
That with the blow that each the other hit
Most puissantly withal their force and might,
Each other to the ground they bravely smit.
And up again they rose on foot to fight,
And there a valiant combat twixt them tried,
Where as they both great danger did abide
Amongst the horses feet upon the ground.
Till that Philocletes that bravely fought
That day on Grecian side, had Ajax found
And him another horse to mount on brought,
And did assail the Trojans valiantly
That other wise had had the victory
Against the Greeks, but that Philocletes
Withal his Knights them man fully withstood.
And first of all as The Author Guido says,
At Hector with a spear he fiercely road,
Which with the blow in many pieces brake,
But stird him not off from his horses back,
For though he had received so great a stroke,
(That well might have orethrown avaliant Knight
He sat as stif and sturdy as an oak,
And with his spear Philocletes did smite
Through armor, shield, and body, that withal
Sore wounded to the grouud he made him fall.
That off his life his Knights were much in doubt.
Then to the field King Humerus, and eke
Ulisses came, and with cen thousand stour
And valiant Knights, and many a worthy Greek,
The Trojans did assail so furiously,
And with great multitudes of new supply
Upon them set, that in despair and fear,
And wearied with so long and cruel fight,
They began for to recule, and readdy were
To turn away and take themselves to flight,
It Paris had not come with more supply
To rescue them, and at his entery
Into the field, the King of Frizia met,
(That unto King Ulisses was of kin,)
And in such furious wise upon him set,
That without more ado he ran him in
Through armor, shield, and body, with his spear
Whereat the Greeks full sore abashed were.
And for his death Ulisses grieved so
That in a rage and with extreme despite,
He did a spear at Paris fiercely throw
To pierce his heart, but it to low did light*
Yet nerethelesse it went with such a force,
That with the strength thereof it killed his horse,
And he thereby fell flat upon the ground,
Wherewith Ulisses fiercely did assail,
Him as on foot he stood when he him found
Among the horses feet, but he did fail,
For Troylus bravely met in the beard
And furiously with shorpe and trenchant sweard,
Wrought him so strong and puissant a blow,
That in his face a cruel wound he made,
From whence the blood like to a spring did flow*
But King Ulisses naught therewith dismayed,
Made small or no account thereof at all,
And to revenge himself did fiercely fall
On Troielus, and with his sword did race
His helmet from his head, and to him gave
A deep and cruel wound upon the face,
Wherewith the Greeks began again to have
More courage, and were in good hope to see
The Trojans shortly brought t'extremite,
And clean orethrowne, they were so sore oppressed,
If Hector with a valiant troop of men,
And Deiphobus, Paris, and the rest
Of his most stout and worthy brethren.
And Troielus likewise for all his wound,
(That ever more a valiant Knight was found.)
Had not together ioind, and fiercely ran
Upon the Grecian troops, and first of all
Hector the most renowned Knight began,
With sword in hand so furiously to sall
Upon the Greeks, and with such cruelty
To kill them, that from him they all did fly,
(Like to the silly fearful sheep in field,
That from the ravening woolfe themselves do hide
And run away for fear they should be killed.)
For none of them before him durst abide,
For still he did them fiercely hac and new,
And more and more the slaughter did renew.
So that as then their harna^les were staind
With drops of blood, (which he that day did shed)
As thick as if that blood from skies had raind,
And still like unto swarms of bees they fled
Before his face, and by no means would stay,
For glad was he that got out of his way.
And as the story says of him that day,
He always was the foremost in the field,
And at the head of all his troops did stay,
T'abate the Grecians pride, till he beheld
The Knights that to the battle he had brought
Were scattred and clean out of order fought.
And when he had fought valiantly and long,
And saw the Greeks did still renew their force,
And by that means began to wax more strong:
In have he clapped his spurs unto his horse,
And to his Trojan Knights again repaired,
Who at that time in manner all dispair'd,
For want of him, but when they did him see,
Full soon again they were all comforted,
And with great signs of joy and amity,
With all their hearts him gladly welcomed,
Which at their hands he thankefully did take,
And unto them in courteous wise he spoke.
And praid them in their valiant minds to way,
And wisely to consider and forecast
What injury the Greeks from day to day,
Unto them did, and had done long time past.
And how that if the victory should fall
That day to them, they might bid farewell all
The Trojans honor, glory, and renown:
For then (said he) naught else would be our lot
But th'overthrow of us, and of our town,
And all the ancient honor we have got
Unto our selves, and our posterity,
(In former times,) would clean Ecclipsed be.
Vulesse this day you show your selves like men,
That well deserve the honor you have got,
Wherefore I heartily pray you all, that when
Against your Grecian foes you fight, give not
The smallest cause for them in any wise,
T'vpbraid you with the fault of cowardice.
But valiantly assail them all together,
And shrink not back for fear least you should die.
For die you must at one time or at other,
Whereto they all consented willingly.
And without more delay past through a vale,
And unawares upon the Greeks did fall.
Where Hector spard not one what ere he was,
But killed and manned all without remorse
That with him met, wheresoever he did pass,
And mauger all their pride and might did force
Them to recule, and fly out of his ^ihgt,
Till that the most renownd and valiant Knight
King Theas, to the field came in again,
And furiously upon the Trojans ran,
(Who that same day in cruel wise had slain
King Priams bastard son Cassibelan.)
But as he busied was on them to set,
By fortune he with all his brethren met.
Who all at once and with one full consent
Enclosed him on every side, and were
Unto his utter ruin wholly bent,
And having thrown him off his horse, did tear
His Helmet from his head, and meant to ^^ight
It off, if that the fierce and valiant Knight
Menestes Duke of Athens had not been,
Who with his Knights came riding hastily,
And him out of the danger he was in
Set free, and to procure his liberty,
With spear in hand directly as a line,
He took his course and ran at Quintiline,
That busi est was King Theas to have slain,
And with the strength and puissance of his blow,
(Which Quinteline as then could not sustain,)
Clean off his horse he did him overthrow.
And made his brethren also to withdraw
Themselves from him, the which when Paris ^aw
He bent his mighty bow, and fiercely shot
At Menestes, and hit him in the side
Upon a rib, which though it killed him not,
He had a wound thereby both large and wide
Which hurt him sore, and grievously did bleed,
And yet thereof he took but little heed,
Cause he as then was bent so earnestly
To aid King Thoas standing on the ground,
Amongst the horses feet, and like to die,
His body bleeding sore with many a wound.
And without helmet bare upon his head.
But Menestes clean void of fear or dread
Delivered him from that extremity
And saved his life, when out of hope he was.
But Hector full of wrath and enmity,
(As he that for his valor did surpass
All whatsoere,) made such destruction
Of Greeks that day, as he road up and down.
That all men sore abasht from him did fly,
For they upon his face did fear to look.
Whose valor when King Humerus did epsy,
Into his hand his mighty bow he took,
And ^yming right shot Hector in the face.
But ere that he could get out of the place,
Hector for to requite him for his pain
Ran straight at him and gave him such a blow,
That with his swor^ he claue his head in twain.
Whose death when as the Grecian knights did know
They blew a horn, which made so great a sound,
That presently there were together found
Seven thousand Knights, that all on Hector fell
And him in closed, but he without abode
(As one that did in valor great excel,)
Despite of all their power through them road,
And ^lew all those that in his way he met,
Or that durst venture him therein to let,
And never staid, but hastily did ride
Unto the place where Priam all that day
Did with his troop without the town abide,
(Whereas he purposely with them still lay,
Till by advise from Hector he did know,
When he with them into the field should go.)
And coming to his father did him pray,
That with three thousand Knights he would him aid
And against the Grecians go without delay,
Who presently with all his Knights did ride
Into the field, and there the Greeks assaild
Most valiantly, and against them so prevaild:
That in short space so many of them were slain
And overthrown by Priam furiously,
That at that time the field and all the plain
Were covered with dead Greeks, and they did fly
With speed before his face, as glad to get
Away from him, so hot on them he set.
And then as Hector valiantly did ride
Throughout the field the Trojans to relieve:
And Alax likewise on the Grecian side,
Some aid and succor unto them to give,
Like Lions strong, they both together met,
And on each other did so fiercely set,
That with their mighty spears and puissant force,
Th'incountred so magnanimiously,
That each the other bravely did unhorse,
And against their wills upon the ground did lie.
And at that time King Menelans did fall
Upon a worthy Trojan Admiral,
And killed him with his sword, and so began
A cruel ^ight and slaughter to renew
On either (...) And C^lyd^^^us than
Infurious wise King Thoas nephew slew.
And Madan like a stout and valiant Knight,
With sword in hand so cruelly did smght
A Grecian King called Cedeus in the eyes,
That with the blow, one eye he clean smote out.
And Sardellus a Trojan Knight likewise,
As he from place to place did range about,
Upon a Grecian Lord so fiercely f^ew,
(Whom Guydo names not) that he him ^lew.
And at that time Margariton a Knight
O^ Troyans side, with wrath and furious ire,
Most valiantly with Thelamon did fight.
And he also with him with like desire.
But Thelamon did smight him to the ground,
And gave him with his lance a deadly wound.
And Pha^i^ll the worthy Trojan Knight,
With spear in hand and fierce and furious mood,
King Prothenor off from his ^orse did smight,
And thus King Priams sons as then withstood
The Grecians in such wise, that all that day
Most cruelly they did them wound and ^lay.
(To be revenged on their inveterate foes)
And by that means in that most furious fight,
Great store of Grecian Knight is their lives did loose.
And then King Anglas with his spear did smight
Menestes Duke of Athens on his shield,
But nerethelesse still on his horse he held.
And for because no lance as then he bare,
With sword in hand he did to anglas go
And with it furiously his beauer ^are
From off his face, and with the self same blow
He cut his nose clean off, or very near,
Whereat a while he stood as in a fear,
To see the blood run down his face so fast,
That with the same his ar^o^all was died:
But like a stout and valiant Knight, at last
He spurd his horse and road somewhat aside,
(To stench it if he might) without the field,
But when his brother Dea^or it beheld,
And saw him by Menestes wounded so,
He ran at him in fierce and furious wise,
And hit him with his spear so great a blow
That down he fell, and ere that he could rise
Another of his brethren did come thither,
And they all three assay led him together.
With full intent to kill him if they might,
And to that end on him most furious ^^Spand^^.
But Menestes (that was a valiant Knight,)
So gallantly their fierce assault did boar.
And sought so well that wonder ^'was to see.
But Thoas ^h'eldest brother of the three
Most busiest was, from him his life to take,
And with most furious rage and cruelty,
His helmet at the last in pieces brake,
And brought him to so great extremity:
That without doubt he surely then had died,
Had not King T^n^^an bin, that him espied.
Who grieuing to behold him in that case,
Ran hastily to aid him if he might;
But when he gotten had unto the place
Whereas they fought, and like a valiant Knight
Did bravely him relieve out of his pain
And great distress, it was labor all in vain.
For Hector who as then by chance came thither,
And saw King Tentran fight so valiantly,
Assay led him, and Menestes together,
And there had slain them both assuredly
If Ajax had not been, that him espied,
And with a thousand Knights unto him hied.
And with them all at once did him assail,
(To save them from his fury if they might,)
And Hector of his will then made to fail.
But Paris like a hardy valiant Knight
With the renowned and worthy Persian King.
And with five thousad Knights that he did bring
Unto the fied, perceiving their intent
To aid his brother Hector straight did go,
(And being to revenge then fully bent,)
He presently did cause a trumpet blow,
Whereat the valiant Knights that Hector led
That day into the field well furnished,
Came speedily unto him at his call
Against the Greeks, ^on to enforce the fight,
And to relieve their valiant General,
And so with extreme fury and despite:
Gre^^ store of Grecian Knights that day they slew,
And in such sort the battle did renew,
That many a Greek in heart was grieved sore,
To see the loss and great destruction
Upon them made. But Hector evermore
Such valor showed, that he himself alone
A thousand Grecian Knights that day did slay,
And made the Greeks to fly and run away.
Not daring to behold his furious face,
That wholly unto cruelty was bent,
And while that he so furiously did chase,
His enemies not far off from a tent,
It was his chance King Mereon to behold,
Whom when he did epsy with courage bold
And countenance stern, unto him spoke, and said,
Traitor thy glass and fatal course is run,
Thy life must end, no time shall be delaid,
For that before into the West the sun
Descends down, know that assuredly
With this my sword thou shall not fail to die.
Because that thou so hardy wast this day.
(When as I thought Patroclus arms to have,)
To hinder and bereave me of my prey,
For which thy bold attempt naught shall thee save,
And therewithal down from his horse he light,
And with his sword his head clean off did smight
And thought his armor likewise to have had.
But while that to disarme him he began,
Menestes Duke of Athens that was glad
To be revengd on Hector, at him ran
When as his back was turned, and suddenly
At unawares did wound him cruelly,
And pierst him through the armor in the side,
Whereat the blood in streams ran out a maine,
The which when Hector felt he straight did ride
Out of the field, and for to ease his pain
He caused one to search and dress his wound,
And for to stanch the bleeding fast it bound.
(Mean time Menestes closely got away,
For to be freed from Hectors furious force,
Intending not to meet him all that day.)
Which done again he mounted on his horse:
And to the field returned with much more
And greater rage then ere he had before.
For that his heart so furiously did fret
And burn with wrath, that entering in the press,
In cruel wise whosoever that he met
He killed, beat down, and wounded merciless.
And spared none of what degree so ere,
So that from him the Grecians fled for fear.
And in that fur^e great and cruelty,
Wherewith the Greeks as then he did oppress.
(As Guide does declare and certify.
And as his Author Dares does confess,
If that we may believe the History,
Which truth of things sincerely, should des^^e)
After he did his latter wound receive,
Not reckoning those whereof I spoke before,)
With his own hands he hid of life bereave
A thousand Grecian Knights: and more and more
He did pursue them with such cruelty,
That all his sword was turned to crimson die
With Grecians blood. So that his chivalry
So much by them was feared, that every one
Of high and low estate from him did fly,
And among them all there was not any one,
That after all that day durst him withstand,
Or offer to resist him hand to hand.
And yet although that Hector slew them so,
And valiantly held them at such a bay:
Their General Agamemnon would not go
Into the field to aid them, all that day.
Whereby as then the Greeks were sore oppressed,
For Hector like a Lion did not rest,
To kill, and wound them in such a furious wise,
That they constrained were for aid to fly
Unto their tents, with many shootes and cries,
The Trojans following them courageously,
By traces of their blood along the way,
And in their tents great store of them did slay.
And did from them much of their treasure take,
And bare it unto Troy victoriously,
And of them there such havoc then did make,
That that same day they had most certainly
Been utterly orethrowne for evermore,
By Trojans that oppressed them so sore;
And valiant Hectors valor and his might,
Who all that day most valiantly had fought,
And with the aid of many a Trojan Knight,
Unto such great extremity them brought:
That had't not been by their own foolishnes,
And pride of heart, with ore-much carelesnes.
Without all doubt they verily had gained
A great and most triumphant victory
Against the Greeks, and therewithal obtained
Dominion, rule, and Sovereignty
Ore them, and all their land continually,
Which well might have indurd perpetually;
If^ had not been for hard and cruel Fate,
The which in things begone with wilfulness,
Is always pressed and ready to debate,
And strives to make them end with wretchedness,
By her most envious disposition,
Unhappy chance and resolution.
And turning of her light and slippery wheel,
Which ticklesse is, and full of ^icklenesse,
That it will not stand when as a thing is well,
For fortune's wholly bent to wilfulness.
Great pity it was they were so ouershot,
And at that time themselves so much forgot,
And would not their good fortune then pursue,
(And chiefly Hector that renowned Knight.)
That would not mark what after might ensue,
And to prevent the mischief if they might,
Which at that time did press on them so nere:
But sure it is, too much they blinded were
(That day in field when as victoriously,
They saw themselves triumphantly to be
Set on the top of fortunes wheels so hie.)
That of mere negligence they could not see
What danger might ensue, and all for lack
Of providence, which did them clean forsake,
And made them loose that great and special grace
Which fortune offered them, (although unstable
Sometimes she be,) and set before their face.
For in a man it is not commendable,
(If fortune seem on him to laugh and smile,
And with fair show does favor him awhile,
To succor and relieve him in distress,
When he therein most deeply plunged does lie.)
So great good hap to loose by wilfulness,
And Fortune to let slip so carelessly,
When as she does impart to him such grace:
For when he would, she will him not embrace.
An other time when he of her has need,
And ready is down from her wheel to fall,
Nor yet will care to stand him once in steed,
Or to vouchsafe to succor him at all,
But in regard of his ingratitude,
With frowns, and mocks, and mowes will him delude
When he does think himself secure to be.
For she so much is bent to wilfulness,
Deceit, and guile, and extreme cruelty;
That when a man with foolish carelessness
Her favors most uncertain does deride.
Another time t'shall be to him denide,
When he desires most the same to have.
For at some time (it is a thing most sure)
She graunts some man the thing that he does crave
And ^tmay be, that he never shall procure
The like again of her, though he should live
A thousand years, and nere so much would give
T'obtaine the same, as most unhappily
To worthy Hector it befell that day,
That needs would spare the Greeks so wilfully
And proudly favord them, when as it lay
In him to overthrow them, and to kill
And utterly destroy them at his will.
And by his valor great triumphantly
With honor, and renown, to have entered
Into the Town of Troy with victory,
Which he that day too much by folly led,
Resused and could never more attain
The like advantage while he lived again.
For as he road and cruelly did slay
And wound the Greeks on every side, he met
With valiant Thelmon Ajax in the way,
Who furiously and with great envy set
On him, like to a Lion fierce and wood,
And though that he his kinsman was by blood*
And therewithal a young and gallant Knight,
Yet did he bravely venture to assail
His Nephew Hector, and with him to fight
Couragioosly, presuming to prevail.
To cast him off his horse, and yet they were
Of blood each unto other very nere.
For he was son unto King Thelamon,
A worthy Grecian Prince and valerous
That him begat upon fair Exion,
That sister was unto King Pria^^us.
And so he did the first occasion take,
To move the Greeks that war on him to make.
And to that end first with a sturdy spear
At Hector ran, and he at him likewise,
And each the others blow did bravely bear,
(Like two most fierce and and hardy enemies,
For both of them in valor did excel.
And then like Lions fierce, and Tigers fell,
Upon their horses fought with sword in hand,
And cut and hewd each others armors strong.
And each his enemies fury did withstand
Most valiantly, the which endured so long
Between them both, till that by providence
Divine, or else by natural influence,
(Which dives into the mind of man so far,
And searches both the heart, and every vain,
Of those that of one blood and lineage are.)
They moved were their rancor to restrain,
And thereby both their furies molefied,
Only for that they were so nere ali'd.
Though neither of them then the same did know,
Nor yet the least suspicion thereof had,
Till nature it unto them both did show,
And them in heart of foes as friends had made.
For naturally blood will to blood be kind,
And friends to friends where ever they the^ find.
Which was the cause that Hoctor moved in mind,
Of Knighthood, and of inward ame^ie,
When he in Ajax did such valor find,
Unto him spoke, and said in courtesy,
Nephew, if thou the Grecians w^l^ forsake
And come to Troy, I dare well undertake
Of thine alies, and noble kindred,
Thou shall received be with cheerful mood,
And welcomed without all fear or dread,
And specially by those of Royal blood.
And such as are of Princely high degree,
The which me thinks great pleasure were to thee,
And naturally thou should in heart be glad
To live among thy friends that wish thee good,
Since that no greater joy there ean be had
Then to restore thy self unto thy blood.
For by the valor great that thou do show,
(Which naturally within thy heart does grow.)
I know thou art of Trojan blood descended:
Forsake the Greeks therefore withal thy heart,
That long and often times have us offended,
And willingly against them with us take part,
I pray thee do me not herein deny.
But Ajax answer made, and did reply
And said, since that by birth he was a Greek,
And from the time of his Nativitie
Among them had been bred and fostredeke,
And had received the order and degree
Of Knighthood there, and arms for the^ had borne
And thereto had protested, vou'd, and sworn
For to be true to them, and to their Nation.
He said he would observe and keep their hest,
And would of blood make no exception.
Only he did of Hector then request
That if in courtesy and gentleness
He would of Knighthood and of worthiness,
Show unto him so great affection
To cause the Trojans forces to retire,
And to withdraw themselves into the town,
And leave them and their tents (at his desire)
And for that time their furious fight to stay,
And to assail the Greeks no more that day.
Since unto them (says he) it may suffice
That in the field they have the victory,
And by their valors great in Knightly wise,
Have overcome the Greeks triumphantly.
He said he would the same most kindly take,
And him thereby to him beholding make.
Which Hector straight did grant, (although alas
It Was done with two much have and wilfulness,)
And suddenly ere Ajax thence did pass,
Made no delay, without advisednesse,
But caused a Trompet in the field to blow,
To give the Trojan Knights, thereby to know
That it was his will they should themselves withdraw
(According to the custom of the war,)
And of the old and ancient Marshall law,
Which always has been used near and far.
When they most hot and earnest were to fight,
And against the Greeks to show their force and might
And had them forced to fly unto the strand,
Intending there with full and great desire,
(For that the Greeks could not their force withstand)
To kill them all, and set their ships on fire.
And so to work their whole confusion,
Which they without all doubt that time had don
If Hector had not had compassion
On them, and causd the Trojans to retire
Unto the town, without discretion,
(T'accomplish that which Ajax does require.)
And fight no more against the Greeks that day,
The which at last did breed his own decay.
With th'vtter ruin and subversion
Of Priamus, and all his whole estate,
And finally the towns destruction.
But sure it was their hard and cruel Fate,
For no man can withstand the just decree
Of God, though nere so great a Prince he bec.
CHAP. II.
^ How the Grecians made suite to King Priamus to grant the^^^ truce for eight
weeks, which he agreed unto, and of their ba^tailes after the truce was ended.

THus have you heard, as G^^do does declare,
What twixt the Greeks and Trojans had b^n don,
That day in field, and how the Trojans were
By Hector (when they had the battle won,)
Commanded to retire, and go their way
Out of the field, and fight no more that day.
To whom although they willingly obayd,
(Because he was their Prince, and General
Of all the host, and might not be denaid.)
Yet had they known what after should befall,
Without all doubt they would it not have don:
(But no man fatal Destiny can shon.)
For from that time they might assuredly
Say farewell honor, victory, and fame,
From Trojans taken by perverse Desteny,
And Fortune that most false and cruel Dame.
Who unto them a mortal foe still wa^,
But for a while i will let that matter pass.
And now I will proceed and further show,
That when the Trojan Knights the field did leave,
(Upon the sound of Trompet that did blow,)
And did themselves of victory bereave,
(Supposing that they did it for the best^)
They went into the town to take their rest.
Where having shut their gates and made them fast,
When they had well refresht themselves, that night
They laid them down to sleep, which being past
(When Phoebus shone next day most clear and bright
And with his beams reflect their hemisphere,
And made Auroraes glistring face t'appeare.)
All those that had no wounds, and arms could bear
Of purpose did prepare themselves to enter
Into the field, (as they commanded were,)
And valiantly against their foes to venture,
To overcome them that day if they might,
For it was decreed by Hector overnight,
That fore the Sun that morning did appear,
As Soon as ere they wakt they forth should go,
And to that end no time they did defer,
But speedily themselves in arms did shoe
Within the large and spacious plain, whereas
The Temple of Diana placed was.
And therefore Hector staid. But ere they went
Out of the town of Troy into the field,
The Grecians early in the morning sent
To Priamus, to crave of him to yield
And grant unto a truce, that should abide
For two months space, which he not once de^^de
But with consent of Hector and the rest
Of all his Marshall counsel, did agree
And willingly did yield (at their request,)
That it on his behalf observed should be.
And they likewise did promise for their part
To do the like, and so they did depart
Unto their tents, where while the truce did last
They buried all their men that had been killed
When they did land, and on the day forepast,
According to the Pay-nim laws they held.
And which by them observed was as then,
Where all the bodies of the meaner men
Were burnt; and clean consumed to ashes pure.
And such as were of great and high degree,
Had other kind of Princely sepulture,
According to their state and dignity.
And in that sort the time did ouerpasse,
Till the two months of truce expired was.
In which time it is said Achilles made
Much sorrow, and such grief in mind conceiud
For his dear friend Patroclus death, that sad
And full of woe he was, and clean bereaved
Of joy, whereby great lamentation
Long time he made with much affection
For him, and since he loved him (as I say)
To have him still in memory, he made
A tomb to be set up of Marble gray,
To bury him therein. (For then they had
A custom to intombe and bury those
That Princes were, and richly to enclose
Their bodies fair in tombs most bravely made.)
And so Patroclus, and Prothesilaus
Were buried in solemn wise, and lay
Together, yet in several tombs, and thus
The Grecians in their tents without still lay,
While Trojans in the town likewise did stay,
To cure their men that wounded were in fight,
And to recover health and strength again
To those that s^re diseased were, and might
Not stir themselves for dolor, grief, and pain.
And in that cruel fight much blood had shed,
And ere the two months truce was finished,
Such diligence did use that every man
Was whole and sound, but Priamus the King
Made so great sorrow for Cassibellan,
That he would not be moved for any thing
To cease his grief, but still he sobd and wept,
And while the corse above the ground was kept,
He caused a tomb of metal curiously
Ingrau'd and wrought for to be made, and when
It Was finished, and with solemnity
In Venus Temple set and placed, then
He held a great and stately funeral
For him, and there accompanied with all
His Lords, unto God M^^^ were offered
His honors, as his helmet, sword, and shield,
And last of all his brave and gallant steed.
The which when as Cassandra beheld,
And saw how all the company did cry,
And made great moan and sighed bitterly
For him, and with great lamentation
For all their friends that likewise had been slain
And lost their lives in fight before the town,
She was so grieved that she could not refrain
To cry, and said alas and well away,
That ere we saw this cursed doleful day.
Oh most unhappy wretches that you be!
Is It possible that ere you should endure
The troubles and the woes that you shall see,
The which the Greeks unto you will procure,
While they besiedge you round on every side,
And seek to be revenged on your pride.
Most certain it is, and that full well I know,
You can it not avoid, for without doubt
They will to you no grace nor mercy show,
But ere that many years shall come about,
They Will kill and slay you cruelly each one,
And never leave the siedge tell it be done.
Alas, alas, why do you not in time
Seek with your Grecian foes to make a peace,
While that the war as yet is in the prime,
And fore the sword of vengeance merciless,
And old and young does execution,
And brings this town unto destruction?
When all the streets therein with children small*
In woeful mothers arms heapt up shall lie
With ghastly wounds, and faces dead and pale,
Slain by the Grecians furious cruelty.
And Maidens into Greece shall captives go,
And there bewail in misery and woe,
Their servitude, and loss of this our town
That is so rich, so famous, and renownd;
Which by the Greeks shall sure be beaten down,
And utterly defaced to the ground:
And we perforce with patience must it bear,
Alas, we buy Queen Helena too dear.
Since for her foul and unadvised rape,
All we shall die a death most pittious,
Young, old, rich, poor, not any one shall escape,
The wrath of them shall be so furious
Against us, and ours, and there is no remedy,
But only death to end our misery.
And thus did she with pittious noise and cry,
Forewarne the King, her brethren, and all
Within the town, into what miseries,
By pride and their presumption they should fall:
And like to one that is mad, in every street
Run up and down, and told it all she meet.
Till Priamus her furious mood to stay,
Did cause her to be shut in prison fast,
And bound with chains, and in that sort she lay
Close kept, the while the Grecians siege did last:
And could not once be heard, for no man would
Believe nor credit her, though truth she told.
For neither wisdom, nor discretion,
Counsel nor wit, advise nor providence,
Truth, reason, nor yet good persuasion
Can ought avail, whereas no audience
Is given thereto. For were man nere so wise
In counselling by wisdom or advise,
And could by perfect art and learning know,
What could in time hereafter come to pass,
And would the same unto the world foreshow,
The obstinate would count him but an ass:
For counsel with a fool prevails naught,
Nor truth likewise how dear so ere it is bought.
As we may by Cassandra see full well,
Who though she did such wholesome counsel give
To them of Troy, and did the truth foretell
Of their decay, they would her not believe,
But cast her into prison; Where a while
I Will leave her, to the Greeks to turn my style
And now will show how king Palamides,
(While that the Greeks these two months still did lie)
Was so possessed with envies foul disease,
That he disdaind and grudged scornfully
At all the Grecian Princes that gave voice;
And of King Agamemnon made their choice,
To be the chief and General of that host,
And of so many Kings and Princes great
That there assembled were from every coast
Throughout the world, and said he was not meet,
Nor worthy of so great authority,
And that himself of greater dignity
Among the Greca^^ns was, and bare more sway
Then ere he did, and fore them all dem'd
To follow him, or his command t'obay,
And said he would no longer there abide,
To yield to him the least subjection,
Since he was not at his election.
Affirming that when choice of him they made,
There was no more but three Kings present there,
That thereto gave consent and voices had,
And thirty Kings at least then absent were:
And therefore swone it was not his intent
Nor will, that he should have that government.
(Here may you see and perfectly behold,
What mischief breeds by contention,
Mong Princes and Commanders great that should
Agree in one without dissension:
But envy and desire of rule is cause,
That makes men break the God of peace his laws.
This cursed vice is cause of troubles great,
And mischiefs that in many Countries be:
For when in Princes hearts it once does get,
And makes them contend and disagree,
That Kingdom cannot prosper nor increase,
Till they agree again and live in peace.)
The which the Greeks considering well, forbear
To give consent unto Palamides,
And wisely sought by good advise and care,
To stop the course of envies sore disease:
And wrought so well with him, that in the end
He was content t'agree, and not contend
With them therein, but willing was to yield
Unto their choice, and did from strife surcease.
But now i will show how they did meet in field,
On either side again when as the peace
Was ended: and their battails did ordain
Before the town of Troy upon the plain.
The truce expyr'd, King Agamemnon made
A muster of the Greeks in general,
And with all speed as soon as ere he had
Perused them, he did the Princes call
Together unto him, and forth of hand
Appointed unto every one a band,
By them to be conducted against their foe.
The first whereof Achilles forth did lead,
With Myrmidons which made a gallant shoe.
The second band was given to Di^mede.
Before the third King Menelaus did ride.
Duke Menestes the next and fourth did gi^de.
And after them there followed many more,
All full of gallant Knights; but who they were
That guided them, the Story does not shoe,
And every one of them rich standards bare:
And in that sort they marched forth in have,
In order as their General had them plast.
Hector likewise for his part was not slack,
Within the town his battles to ordain,
(But at that time how many he did make,
It is not said) and sent them to the plain
Against the Greeks: the first whereof he gave
To Troy^lus, conduct thereof to have.
With whom great store of worthy knights did ride,
And after went the rest in order plast
With Hector, who no longer would abide,
But mounting on his horse road forth in have
Before them all, and when he entered
Into the field, and saw Achilles lead
The forefront of the Greeks, he spurd his horse,
And with his Lance in rest most furiously
Ran at him with a great and mighty force.
The which when as Achilles did epsy,
He set his spurs unto his horses side,
And valiantly against Hector forth did ride.
And ere that they their course performd and met,
(Like two most gallant knights and excellent)
Their puissant Lances in their rests they set,
And gave each other strokes so violent,
That forcibly they both fell to the ground,
(As many times it is often seen and found,
When two brave knights of equal strength do meet.)
But Hector strongst and nimblest of them both,
Rose first, and on his horse again did get,
And left Achilles there exceeding wroth*
And mong the Greeks in furious wise he rode,
And killed and slew all those that him withstood.
For with his sword such cruel blows he gave,
Unto the Greeks in breast, sides, legs, and head,
That who so ere he hit was sure to have
His mortal wound, and on the ground lay dead:
And ever as he road it did him good,
To bath his sword within the Grecians blood.
And in that sort he still pursued his foes,
And many of them in furious wise had slain,
Before that from the ground Achilles rose,
Who mounting up upon his horse again,
Did enter among the Troyans valiantly,
And where he road, did slay them cruelly.
And beat and bore down all that ere he met,
And made such slaughter among the^ every where
As he did ride, that no man durst him let,
For all before him to the ground he bare:
Till that in such his great melancholy,
He met with Hector riding suddenly.
And when as each the other did behold,
Without delay their spears in hand they took,
(Like two most brave courageous knights and bold,)
And to each other gave a p^issant stroke:
But Hector hit Achilles with such force
Upon the breast, that he fell off his horse.
And while that still upon the ground he lay,
And ere that he again got on his horse,
Hector advanst himself and did assaie,
Despite of them by force his horse to get:
But such a troop of Grecians came with speed,
To aid and help Achilles in his need,
That he could not his purpose then attain,
And by that means with great extremity,
Achilles got upon his horse again,
And meaning to revenge the injury
He had received, did straight to Hector go,
And with his sword gave him so great a blow
Upon the head, that with the mighty force
And strength thereof, he was constraind to fall
Out of his sadle back upon his horse.
But presently, and in despite of all
The Greeks that him assaild by force and might
He reard himself, and like a valiant knight,
With heart repleat with anger and desire,
To be revenged of him for that despite,
In furious wise with extreme wrath and ire,
He stroke Achilles with such force and might,
That with the blow he gave him in the head
A cruel wound, wherewith full sore he bled.
And yet although the blood ran down his face,
No whit abasht, but like a valiant knight,
He would not unto Hector once give place,
But still maintaind a fierce and cruel fight
With him, the which made all that saw't to wonder,
For every blow they gave did sound like thu^der.
And neither of them would the other spare,
But like two savage Tygars in their rage,
Each other strong and sturdy strokes they bare,
And by no means their chollers would assuage:
So that without all doubt assuredly,
It they held on with such hostility,
And in that cruel fight did long endure,
(They both behau'd themselves so valiantly)
In the end the one or both of them must sure
Have died there, without all remedy:
Which had great pity been, for they were both
Exceeding valiant knights, and of great worth.
And while that they so fiercly fought together,
And neither would unto the other yield,
The Greeks with many warlike troops came thither,
The which when as the Troyan knights beheld,
They likewise marched forward, and did enter
The field, against their foes their lives to venture.
And at that time so fiercely met together,
That with the prease twixt them on either side,
They did constrain those valiant knights to sever
Themselves, and each from other way to ride:
And then into the field came Diomede,
With all the knights that he as then did lead.
Who had no sooner entered in the place,
But with him stout and gallant Troyelus met,
And they encountering bravely face to face,
Upon each other valiantly did set:
And ran together with such mighty force,
That each of them the other did unhorse.
But Diomede first on his horse did get,
And suddenly Prince Troyelus assaild
(As he on foot did stand) with fury great,
But he whose valiant courage never faild:
So bravely him at that time did withstand,
That Is enemy got nothing at his hand.
But Diomede with great dexsteritie,
Sitting with much advantage on his horse,
Lift up his sword and suddenly let fly
A blow at Troyclus head with so great force,
That his rich circle full of iewe^s, stroke
Clean off his Helm, and it in sunder broake.
But that could not young Troyelus dismay,
No^ make him once give place or step aside,
For with his sword he presently did slay
The horse whereon proud Diomede did ride:
And by that means constrained him to fight
On foot with him, and like a valiant Knight.
Upon his foe in furious wise did set,
Whereas between them both they stoutly showed
Their most courageous hearts and valor great,
And each the others ha^nas hackt and hewd:
And rent and tore't like Lions fierce and strong,
And in that sort their fight continued long.
Till that the Greeks came thither, and by force
(While they on foot did fight so furiously)
Caused Diomede to mount upon a horse,
And there withal the Troyans speedily
Brought Troyelus a horse likewise to ride,
And being mounted both again, defied
Each other, and the fight continued
In equal sort, without advantage great,
Till it fell out at last that Diomede
By policy or fortune chanst to get
Advantage by some means on Troyelus,
(For no man always is victorious.
Nor yet in peace or war like fortunate,
For it is the doubtful end of bloody war,
Now up, now down, still subject unto fate,
And therefore let each man himself prepare,
(Since fickle fortune is so full of doubt)
To take his chance when as it falls out.
And at that time laid hand upon his horse,
(being then enclosed by Grecians round about)
And took him for his prisoner, and by force
Among the prease began to lead him out:
Accompanied with many a Grecian knight,
To guard and keep him as they went by might.
For though it then fell out that Troyelus
Was taken perforce by Diomede in ^ight,
He might by fortune prove victorious
Another time, and him therefore requite:
For that as it ^ell out in little space,
He had not led him far out of the place.
But multitudes of Troyans him assaild,
And maugre all the power of Diomede,
So mightily against the Greeks prevaild,
That they did rescue Troyelus in his need:
And him by force of arms from him did take.
And then began great slaughter for his sake
On either side, where many men were slain,
On the one side for to keep him prisoner still,
On the other side to set him free again,
But yet in the end the Troyans had their will:
And while the fight in this sort twixt them held,
King Menelaus did enter in the field.
Who all that day against Troyans bravely fought,
And busy was on them revenged to be,
For malice that to them of old he ought,
The which when Paris not far off did see:
With all his knights upon him he did set,
And he with Greeks on him, and when they met
Between them both, on either side began
A cruel, fierce, and bloody fight, which was
The death of many a brave and gallant man.
Hector mean time through thick and thin did pass, spill.
And never ceast in surious wise to kill
The Greeks, and in great streams their bioud to
For with his sword so many of them were slain,
And beaten down with extreme cruelty,
That they could not his puissant blows sustain,
But were constraind before his face to fly:
And when a lusty, young, and gallant knight
Called Boetes, saw with how great force and might
The Greeks were slain by Hectors cruelty
On every side, to win himself great fame,
And that record of him perpetually,
Might still be kept for th'onor of his name:
With courage bold and heart not once affeard,
He thought he would adventure him to beard.
The which when Hector saw, he did conceive
Such wrath within his heart and great disdain,
That with his sword he did his body cleave,
Clean down from head to foot in pieces twain,
And took his horse and sent it to the town.
And then again road fiercely up and down
Amongst the Greeks, and ever merciless,
With extreme force and heart courageous,
He killed all those that on him sought to press,
Which when the valiant King Archilagus,
Perceau'd and saw his Cousin Boetes lie
By Hector slain in that sort cruelly.
To be revenged on him for that despite,
With fury great unto him he did go,
And as at him he did begin to smight,
Hector upon his shield received the blow:
And with his sword stroke him upon the head
So mightily, that he therewith fell dead
Upon the ground, his body cleft in twain:
And though his arms were passing strong and good,
Yet could they not the mighty force sustain
Of Hectors stroke that came with furious mood:
The which when King Protbenor did behold,
With great despite and courage fierce and bold,
(And yet in truth it was but in foolish pride,)
He road to him in have, and unaware
Smote him a mighty blow upon the side,
And him therewith out of his sadle bare,
And made him fall down flat upon the ground:
But Hector who in valor did abound,
In have leapt up upon his horses back,
And Prothenor pursued furiously*
And when at last he did him overtake,
He smote him with his sword so cruelly
Upon the Helm, that with the blow he gave,
His head and body to the breast he claue:
And down he fell before the Greeks, who sore
Abashed were at that most cruel blow,
But specially Achilles grieved therefore,
And for the same his heart was full of woe:
To see his Cousin Prothenor lie slain
Before his face, for which he felt such pain
And grief in mind, that full of heaviness
He road among the Grecian troops, to see
If he could ease himself of his distress,
And find the means with them revenged to be
On Hector, for the death of Prothenor,
The which both he and they together swore,
And for the death of King Archilagus,
And to that end conspired among them all,
With many Grecian Knights chivalorous,
At once on Hector furiously to fall:
And him with speed on every side t'assaile,
But at that time it did them not avail.
For all that day such havoc he did make,
And killed and hewd the Greeks so furiously,
That they on him could no advantage take,
But were constraind for their own safety:
And for to shun the extreme force and might
Of him, and of the Troyans that did fight
At that time with so great agility,
And such a fierce assault unto them gave,
To leave the field, and to recoyle and fly
Unto their tents, and there themselves to save:
And in their flight so beaten were and slain,
That all the way along, and all the plain
Lay full of dead and wounded Greeks that bled,
And gaspt, and groand, and howld, and cried sore,
And still the Troyan Knights continued
The chase, and drove the Grecians more and more
Before them down, till that it grew to night,
And waxed dark, and then for want of light,
The Troyans to their honor and renown,
With Hector did retire, and entered
Victoriously again into the town,
And there themselves refreshed, cured, and fed:
Where till the day next morning began to break,
I Will let them rest, and of the Grecians speak:
When Hesperus the bright and glistring star,
At evening in the West began t'appeare,
And spread his beams abroad both nere and far,
And twilight with a pale and deadly cheer,
Did seem to mo^ned he absence of the Sun,
And night approached with his mantle dun.
When Tytan did begin his leave to take,
And to the Western coast in have descond
At twilight, when the day an end does make,
(For twy-light nothing else is but the end
Of day, and the beginning of the night,
And yet in truth is neither day nor night.
But just a mean between them both does bear,
Yet neither the one nor the other perfectly,
And comes before the glistring stars appear,
To show themselves within the azure sky.)
Their General King Agamemnon sent
For all the Grecian Princes to his tent.
And when that they therein assembled were,
And every one of them in order set,
With looks demure and sad, and heavy cheer,
And many sighs which from their hearts they fet:
They did begin of Hector to complain,
Affirming that they never should obtain
That honor and renown the which they fought,
Nor victory against their foes should have,
While he did live and daily against them fought,
And to that end they might their honors save:
They did consult with one consent and will,
How that they might that valiant Cha^pion kill.
Concluding that while he in Troy remaind,
They never should attain the town to win,
And said that he the same alone maintaind,
And that he was of all that dwelt therein,
The only stay and chief protection,
Of them and Troy, without exception.
And castle, wall, and bulwark of their land,
And unto them a stern and deadly foe,
Whose mighty force the Greeks could not withstand,
Nor never should the Troyans overthrow:
Nor while that he did live and them defend,
Bring that their doubtful war unto an end.
And therefore all together did agree
With full and whole consent, that by some slight
When he should in the field most eager be,
(To kill and slay the Grecians in the fight)
Achilles with his Knights should him beset,
And unawares advantage of him get,
And with a mighty troop of Gre^kes a^^a^^e
Him round about and e^then ^lay or take
Him quick or dead, wherein they could no^ ^aile
If they would do it, and to that end did make
A motion to Achilles, to require
And pray him to accept of their desire.
To take in hand and bravely undergo,
That great and valiant enterprise to kill,
By force and slight their chief and deadly for,
Who presently did grant unto their will:
And from that time in wayt for him did lie*
T^^ntrap him and to kill him suddenly.
(But from thenceforth I counsel him beware
That he do not that action undertake,
And if therein he needs will have a share,
It Were best for him not too much have to make:
To try his force against Hectors puissant mig^^,
Least fortune turn her face, and in despite
Look on him with an angry frowning cheer,
And make him put his life in ieopardy,
And into Hectors hands light unaware,
And in himself the Proverb verify:
He that does for another set a trap,
Into the same himself may chance ^o hap.
Which hardly he shall escape if that he try.
For Hector had the like desire and will,
T'encounter with Achilles valiantly,
And him by all the means he could to kill:
As having vowed his death without all doubt,
If he on him could light to fight it out.
So that naught else but death he was to attend,
If he and Hector chanst to meet in field)
And thus the Greeks their counsel then did end,
Which they for that intent had only held:
And to their lodgings went their rest to take,
Till next day in the morn that they did wake.
CHAP. III.
I How the Troyans took King Thoas prisoner in the battle, and led him
captive into the To^^^.

WHen fair A^r^r^ with her drops that thine,
Complaining made great dolor, grief, and
And seemed for her childre^s death to whine, (sorrow
As she does use to do each Summer morrow:
That is, when a^ the dew that it so sweet,
Each pleasant flower, herb, and root does weet,
With liquor clear in April and in May.
And when of day the Lark that is messenger,
Salutes A^r^r^ fair in morning gray,
With sundry notes her woeful heart to cheer,
And ere the Sun does rise with ioyfulnesse,
Does make her leave her grief and heaviness:
At that same time the Grecians did arise,
And lustily with joyful hearts and cheer,
Put on such arms in brave and warlike wise,
As a^ that time it was their use to wear:
Intending early that same day to go
Into the field, to meet their deadly foe.
And Hector also fully purposed,
That day likewise against the Greeks to fight,
And early in the morning issued,
Accompanied with many a warlike knight:
All borne within the town of Troy and bred,
Which foremost of them all himself did lead.
Next after him Aeueas followed,
The second band to guide against their foe.
The third it was by worthy Paris led.
Before the fourth Deiphobus forth did go.
The fifth and last the lusty gallant knight
Young Troyelus conducted to the fight.
In which five bands that issued out as then,
The History declares that there were
An hundred and just fiftiethousand men
On horse and foot, all able arms to bear:
And fully bent with will and courage great,
Upon the Grecian foes that day to set.
And when they met together on each side,
With cruel and with deadly hatered,
And each against the other fiercely ride.
Paris that all the Persian Archers led,
And crossebow shot with arrows long and round,
And shafts that were square headed sharply ground.
Great store of Greeks in furious wise did kill,
And while that they their valors against them tried,
And that the field began with Knights to fill,
King Agamemnon on the Grecians side
Did enter in, with whom when Hector met,
In furious wise he did upon him set.
And in the midst of all his troops did cast
Him clean out of his sadle to the ground,
And then did beat the Grecians down so fast,
That many dead upon the plain were found*
Till at the last Achilles that did watch,
And follow Hector, if he could to catch
Him in a trap, came s^denly and struck
So puissant a blow on Hectors head,
That with the same he did his Helmet crack,
But naught therewith Hector astonished:
To set upon Achilles did not fail,
Intending him in furious wise t'assaile,
Had not Aeneas come them two between,
And Troyelus with him, who both together
To set upon Achilles did begin,
And with such mighty blows struck one the other,
That harnas, male, and plates of steel they b^^ke,
And made each others shields and helmet crake.
And then on each side slaughter great began
So cruelly, that all the field was red
And dyed with blood of many a valiant man.
At which time fierce and cruel Diomede,
By fortune in the prease Aeneas found,
To whom he gave a great and deadly wound.
And therewith all said to him spightfully,
That Is thy reward because thou do malign
At me, and did give counsel foolishly,
In open Court to Priamus the King,
To slay me there when as I was before
Him in the hall, as Greeks Ambassador.
Which was against all law of arms and right,
And trust me it shall nere out of my mind,
Till that I be revenged for that despite,
And for that cause if ere I chance to find
Thee in the field, if fortune do consent,
I Will make thee for thy counsel to repent.
And with my sword which now in hand I bear,
Thy blood i will shed, to make thee feel and know
How it can cut, and therewith all did rear
His sword on high, and gave him such a blow
Again upon the head with so great force,
That therewith all he feld him off his horse.
And while they fought, Hector Achilles met,
And him assaild so cruelly again,
That with a blow that on his head he smet,
His helmet cleft almost in pieces twain:
And had him brought to such extremity,
That at that time without all remedy,
He would him there perforce have prisoner ^ane,
I Diomede had not by chance come thither,
The quarrel of Achilles to sustain:
And with his sword while they two fought together,
To Hector gave a blow that hurt him sore,
But he nothing at all dismayed therefore.
Straight turned his horse about to Diomede,
And smote him with his sword so furiously,
That with the blow he feld him off his steed.
The which as soon as Troyelus did epsy,
Without delay off from his horse he light
Upon his feet, with Diomede to fight.
Who then together fought so valiantly,
That no man that beheld them well, could tell
Which of them both should have the victory,
For each of them in Knighthood did excel.
And while they two together so did fight,
Hector again upon Achilles light,
And on him set with fierce* and furious mood,
Where twixt them both a gallant fight was seen,
And each his foe so fiercely then with stood,
A^^^ two cruel Lions they had been.
Mean time the Greeks with many a gallant wing
Of Knights, came on with Menelaus the King,
With great desire upon their foes to set.
And next to him did march Neoptolemus.
Then wise Ulisses, and stout Pollimet.
Palamides, and valiant Selemus.
Duke Menestes, Duke Nestor, and King Thoas.
Currinulus, and then Philoctheas.
And lastly with the rereward followed
Duke Theseus with a band of gallant men.
And on the Troyans side there entered,
All those that to the town were come, as then
Against the Greeks to help them in their need,
And all the Kings by whom they then were led.
And none did stay behind but Hectors band,
Wherewith that day himself had issued,
And at that time did valiantly withstand
Their Grecian foes, and then much blood was shed
On either side; for that most cruel fight
Procured the death of many a valiant Knight.
And while the fight twixt them continued thus,
It was King Agamemnons chance to meet
Among the prease with stout Pantisilaus,
And on him there in furious wise did set,
And he on him likewise, and in their course
Each struck the other down off from his horse.
And Menelaus again on Paris set,
And each to other furiously did ride,
And when they both together fiercely met,
King Menelaus hit Paris on the side
A blow, which though it hurt him not at all,
Yet he was forced down from his horse to fall.
Wherewith in heart he was exceeding wrath,
And at that time did seem to blush for shame,
Least Helena should know it, as being loath
That it against his honor, name, and same,
Should unto her be told, that by maine force,
King Menelaus had thrown him from his horse.
And then the valiant King Adrastus met
Ulisses in the prease, and there together
A while they fought with force and courage great,
Without advantage one against the other:
But at the last Ulysses stroke a blow
At him so hard, that it did overthrow
Him to the ground, and then he took his horse,
And sent it by his Squire to his tent.
Then valiant King Palamides by force
King Hupon did assail, and they two spent
Long time in fight, till with great cruelty,
Palamides a blow at him let fly
With so great force, that it did wound him sore,
And therewith all dead to the ground he fell.
Not far from them two pikes length and no more,
Neoptolemus, who did in force excel,
Assailed King Archilagus, whereas
Between them both a valiant fight there was,
Till in the end each the other did unhorse.
Then to the field came stout Pollidamas
Upon a gallant steed of mighty force,
And when he did perceive and saw, whereas
The valiant King Palamides did ride,
He set his spurs unto his horses side,
And ran at him with such exceeding force,
That maugre all his valor and his might,
He gave him such a blow that from his horse,
He threw him on the ground with great despite:
For to revenge King Hupous death, whom he
Had slain before with extreme cruelty.
Not far from thence King Selemus did set
Upon a King called Carras, and by force,
When they in furious wise together me^
Selemus threw King Carras off his horse*
On the other side King Phil^m^ns assaild
The worthy Duke of Athens, and preuaild
So much against him that ^^ally by force,
(Although he was both valiant, stout, and strong)
And fought right well, he took from him his horse,
And led it in his hand with him along.
And worthy King Phil^ct^^ did fight
With R^mus, and each of them both did smight
The other from his horse. And Theseus,
As he amongst his Troyan foes did fight,
By chance did meet with King Coriolus,
A Prince of passing valor, force and might:
Where twixt the both the fight continued long,
(For Theseus likewise was exceeding strong.)
Till each the other wounded sore did smight
Off from his horse, and rising up again
Upon their feet, still valiantly did fight
A fierce and bloody combat, to otaine
The victory against his mortal foe,
For each of them great prowess then did shoe.
And all this while the sons of Priamus
Behau'd themselves so valiantly in fight,
And against the Greeks like Knights courageous,
Such valor showed that by their force and might,
Great store of Kings, Dukes, Lords, and knights were slain,
And many Greeks laid dead upon the plain.
And at that time renowned Thelamon,
With spear in hand set spurs unto his horse,
And furiously ran at King Sarpedon,
Who likewise at him ran with mighty force:
And each the other mortally did wound,
And in that sort they both fell to the ground.
And after they a furious fight had held,
And cut and mangled each the other sore,
When neither of them both their arms could weld,
They were constraind to breath and fight no more:
And among the horses feet in danger stood,
And all the ground about the^ did with blood.
While Thoas and Achilles that had spide
Where Hector fought in midst of all his foes,
Unto him in most furious wise did ride,
And unawares they did him round enclose:
And with great spite which they unto him bore,
They did assail and set on him so sore,
That they did smight his helmet from his head,
And in the same gave him a mighty wound,
But he therewith no whit astonished,
(For in him never cowardice was found,)
Most valiantly against them both did fight,
And many furious blows at them did smite.
So that advantage none on him they got,
Till Thoas did a blow at him let fly,
Wherewith his nose off from his face he sm^^,
The which when as his brethren did espy
The Grecians, they so furiously assaild,
And at that time so much against them preuaild,
That Thoas valiaritly by them was taken,
And Thelamon assaild so cruelly,
That they supposing him to have been slain,
Upon the ground for dead did let him lie:
Till that his men did bear him to his tent,
And Thoas prisoner unto Troy was sent,
Despite of all the Grecian knights that sought
To give him aid in that extremity.
And Menelaus as he in field then tought,
And road from place to place, at last did spy
Where Paris did the Grecians fiercely slay,
(For whom he had in wait lain all that day.)
And presently his horse he spurd in have,
And ran at him, intending if he might,
Ere that he further among the Grecians past,
To kill him suddenly with great despite:
But his intent and purpose to prevent,
Paris that had his puissant bow then bent,
At him did let a poisoned arrow fly,
And gave him therewith all a deadly wound,
Wherewith he was in such extremity,
That he fell down half dead upon the ground:
Which when his knights did see that then were nere
Forthwith unto his tent they did him bear.
Where with all speed for Surgions straight he sent,
Who being come, in have they searched the wound
And ere that they into it put a tent,
When as they had it viewd unto the ground,
They first of all drew out, and took away
The arrow head that in the bottom lay.
And then did wipe and cleanse it thoroughly
Of all the matter and corruption
That they could find therein, and presently
Put in a tent, and bound it up, which done,
King Menelaus no longer would abide,
But furiously into the field did ride.
With full intent and purpose to require
Himself, (although he had so great a wound,)
On Paris that same day if that he might,
And never ceast until that he him found:
By fortune clean unarmed in the field,
Of sword or Lance, of Target or of shield,
Or Bow in hand, the which as I suppose,
He did for to refresh himself, when as
He had long fought against his Grecian foes,
And at that time exceeding weary was:
Which Menelaus espying, straight did take
His Lance in hand, and toward him did make:
And without doubt at that time had him slain,
Had not Aeneas been that him beheld,
And suddenly stepped in between them twain,
And did receive the blow upon his shield:
Else Paris had assuredly been killed,
At that same time disarmed in the field.
And presently Aeneas set a band
Of valiant Knights on Paris to attend,
And to defend his person, and withstand
The fury of King Menelaus: to the end
He should him not with disadvantage slay,
For he in wait at that time for him lay.
And had as then by Hector taken been,
If that the Greeks had not come suddenly,
To rescue him with multitudes of men,
And at that time relieved him speedily:
But Hector by his valor great and might,
Dispersed, killed, and put them unto flight.
So furiously that he did them constrain,
By force of arms unto their tents to run,
And by that means the Troyans did obtain
The battle against the Greeks, and th'onor wun
That day, and fore them bravely did pursue
And beat them, till the day to evening drew.
And Phoebus did descend into the West.
For he as then was ready to go down,
At which time they went home to take their rest:
And entering again into the town,
Shut fast their gates, and so that day did end.
And when that Phoebus light again did send,
Next morning when the sky was covered
With crimson colored clouds which he then sent,
And ere the azure element did spread,
Before the Sun did rise in th'orient,
King Priamus intending not to go
That day into the field against his foe;
His Privy Counsel summond to appear
Before him that same morning speedily,
Whose names (as I in Guido find) then were
Hector the flower and root of Chivalry,
His second brother Paris, Deiphobus,
And lusty, young, and worthy Troyelus.
Anthenor, and his son Pollidamas,
Aeneas, and some other Princes more.
And when that he with them assembled was,
And that they had shut fast the counsel door,
Each one in order set and silence made,
King Priamus unto them spoke, and said:
My Lords, in whom my trust I do repose,
And only on your valors do rely,
You know that among our stern and deadly foes,
King Thoas (now our prisoner) specially,
Did always unto us great hatred bear,
(Although of him we never stood in fear,)
And to his power has sought us to offend,
And now to seek our full subversion,
With all the aid that he the Greeks can lend,
Is come with them here to besiege our town,
And to procure our ruin and decay,
By all the means that possibly he may.
Wherefore in reason and in equity,
(If unto you it be acceptable,
And that it likes you as it does me)
I think it not a thing unreasonable:
That since he seeks to do us injury,
With like for like he should required be.
And as our deaths he seeks to procure,
So let him die; for reason does require,
That he the self same censure should endure,
Which he in heart to others does desire:
This is my doom, now let me hear I pray,
What every one of you thereto will say.
To this Aeneas answer made and said,
If to your Grace it will be no offense,
That to the proposition you have made
I may reply, with leave and audience
Of you and of your counsel learnd and wise,
I will to you herein give mine advise.
It does behooue your Royal Majesty,
In all things which your Grace in hand shall take,
Not to proceed therewith too hastily,
But ere that you begin your reckning make,
What may ensue thereof, and look not on
The first beginning of a thing alone:
But as all wise men do, forecast the end,
And then proceed that you may bring to pass,
With issue good, the same which you pretend.
For that thing sure is well begun, when as
The end and the beginning both agree,
And either of them falls out happily.
Least otherwise for want of good forecast,
You might constrained be another day,
Against your will t'repent your self at last.
The reason why I this to your Grace say,
Is, that I think it good you should remember,
That Thoas who is now your prisoner,
Is among the Greeks one of the principal
And greatest Lords of blood and high degree:
And that if at this time it should befall,
He should be put to death by your decree,
It may be that all those that give consent
Thereto, at last full sore would it repent.
For if by chance (which no man can withstand)
Some of your Sons or chief Nobility
Now in this town, should fall into the hand
Of them, and by that means should prisoners be:
Assure your self, they will show like gentleness
To them, as you do him in this distress.
For if King Thoas now condemned should be
And put to death, you must your reckning make,
The Grecians will show us like cruelty,
If any of us they should prisoner take:
Yea, though it were one of your Royal blood,
The which I know for all your worldly good,
You would by no means wish, nor gladly see.
Wherefore by mine advise I think it best,
That Thoas should well kept and guarded be
Within this town, and quietly let rest:
Least as I said to you before, it may
Fall out, that one of us another day
Might hap into their hands, and prisoner be:
And so for him we might have ours again;
Which otherwise if with extreamitie
We do proceed, we never should obtain:
This is my counsel in this case, said he,
And such as I do think the best to be.
Whereto most worthy Hector did consent,
And with him was of like opinion:
And said, that he no will had nor intent,
That any wrong to Thoas should be done,
While he in Troy then prisoner was, though he
Nere had deserved of them well used to be.
Paris King Priams second son likewise,
(When as his brother Hector had declared
His mind,) said unto them, that his advise
Was, that he wished King Thoas should be spared,
And not put unto death, although he said,
To do the same they need not be afraid.
But Deiphobus of clean contrary mind,
Unto his brethren twain did say, he saw
No cause why Thoas should such favor find
At Troyans hands; who by their marshall law,
Might justly for his merits make him die,
Being as he was their utter enemy.
Whereto with courage bold and youthful heart,
Prince Troyelus, did seem somewhat t'agree
With Deiphobus, and said, that for his part,
He did no cause nor any reason see,
Why they should spare their enemy, that sought
Their overthrow, and to that end had brought
His forces fore their town, as fully bent
To work their utter ruin and decay:
But yet (said he) it is not my intent,
To counsel you to deal with him that way:
Least (as my Lord Aeneas says) we might
Perchance thereby procure our own despite.
Whose counsel Lord Anthenor did commend,
And said, that to show such extreamitie
Of marshall Law, and rigor, to extend
To him, could not be done advisedlie:
For that (said he) there is none of us all,
But may into our foes hands chance to fall:
And with the self same rigor used be,
That unto him we showed. Wherefore I say,
If that by my advise you will ruled be,
It Is best to let him safe in prison stay,
And use him well, that we like cur^esie
May have (when need requires) of the enemy.
Pollidamas his son, with all the rest
Of those that in their Counsel chamber were,
With one consent did say they thought it best,
That he should still be kept a prisoner:
And as Aeneas said, be used well,
Till they saw how fortune with the^ would deal.
But Priamus to wrath and fury bent,
Did not agree to their opinion,
And would by no means thereunto consent,
But still maintained his first conclusion:
And said, that if the Greeks should once perceive,
That we of life do Thoas not bereave,
But spare him, though unto that end it were:
They would report to our no little shame,
That we dare not attempt to do it for fear
We have of them, and so will us defame:
But nere the less (said he) since you're content,
I will (though loath) unto the same consent.
And therewithal their counsel up they brake:
And then Aeneas and Anthenor went
With Troyelus into the hall, and spoke
With Helena, (whereas some time they spent
With her, and with Queen Hecuba that bare
Her company, with many Ladies fair,
That with her and the Queen then present were.
Where Troyelus and Aeneas did persuade
Queen Helena to set aside all fear,
Which by the means of war that great she had:
And she, although much discontent she were
In outward show, did seem with joyful cheer,
And countenance demure, and being glad
To welcome them as to their state was fit,
But Hecuba that nere her equal had,
For virtue, bounty, eloquence, and wit:
While they unto Queen Helena so spoke,
Desired them for that fair Ladies sake.
And for the weal and safety of them all,
And of the town, that they would not adventer
Themselves in field what ever might befall,
Too far among the enemies to enter:
Nor put themselves in danger carelessly,
And yet besought them to fight valiantly,
To save and keep the town from that distress,
Which the enemy did seek to bring't into,
The which she said she feared (she must confess)
Although she hope't they should it never do:
And so of her and of the Ladies all,
The knights took leave and went out of the hall.
Mean time the Greeks that morning as I said,
While Priam in the town a counsel held,
Did murmr and great sorrow among them made,
As in their tents they lay in the open field:
To think upon the loss which they sustaind,
And all of them together much complaind.
And grieved for the death of many a man
Of great account, slain by the cruelties,
(Since that most cruel deadly war began)
And valor of their Troyan enemies:
And for the hunger, cold, and thirst also,
With sorrow, thought, unquietness and woe,
Which they had had and felt, and all for naught,
Or at the least for causes very small,
If that the ground thereof were truly sought.
This was the speech and words in general,
That through the Grecians camp at that time ran,
And currantly did pass from man to man.
But specially amongst the poorer sort
Of soldiers, who in war most commonly
Constrained are to endure, and to support
The brunt of all, and have no remedy:
For though they do find fault and grieve therefore,
Yet are they not relieved nere the more.
And so they did complain and make great moan,
To think upon the mischief they endured,
And which to them the Troyan knights had done,
Thogh't were themselves that had the same procured:
Unto their own decay, and might it shun,
If they had not that bloody war begun.
Which to increase the next ensuing night,
So cloudy, dark, and thick as pitch became,
That neither Moon nor star appeared in sight,
And such a storm did happen on the same,
Of thunder, lightning, wind, and rain that fell
Upon them, as if all the fiends of hell,
Conspired had their utter overthrow,
And therewithal the waters did so rise,
That all the field and plain did overflow:
And with the wind that blew in furious wise,
Their tents were overthrown, and they compeld
To leave the place which all that while they held.
By reason that the water grew so hie.
And in that sort the Greeks in great distress,
Compelled were all that same night to lie,
With hearts repleate, with grief and heaviness:
In that great storm of thunder, wind, and rain,
Until the water did go back again.
The wind appeased, and day began t'appeare,
Next morning when the Sun began to rise,
Which made the air show beautiful and clear,
And drove away the clouds out of the skies:
And with the force and feavor of his heat,
Dried up the ground which was exceeding weet.
And made the moisture void out of the plain,
At which time somewhat eased of their sorrow,
They did with speed their tents raise up again,
And joyfully with courage bold that morrow,
Did arm themselves in brave and warlike wise.
With full intent t'assaile their enemies.
And when the field was through dried again,
With Phoebus beams, the Troyans left the town,
And valiantly came forth into the field,
And were no sooner to the Greeks come down,
But stout Achilles met them in the way,
And was the first that th'onset gave that day.
Who entering in the field without abode,
In furious wise set spurs unto his horse,
And valiantly to strong King Hupon road,
At whom he stroke with such a mighty force:
That with his Lance he gave him such a wound,
That dead he fell therewith upon the ground.
Then Hector with King Octamene did meet,
And each the other valiantly assaild,
But Hector with such fury on him s^t,
That neither force nor armor strong preuaild:
But with his Lance he pierst his heart in twain,
That he therewith fell dead upon the plain.
At which time furious Diomede did wound
The worthy valiant Prince King Zantippus,
So sore that he fell dead upon the ground.
And then in furious wise King Cedius,
And valiant King Epistrophus his brother,
Assaild and set on Hector both together.
And first of all Epistrophus began
To spur his horse with mighty spear in hand,
And with the same at Hector fiercely ran,
And spightfully at him did curse and band,
And many raging words to him did give,
Which Hector at the heart so much did grieve,
That he at King Epistrophus let f^ye
So great a blow, and with such mighty force,
That with the same he killed him furiously,
And as he fell down dead off from his horse,
He bad him go unto the fiends of hell,
And there such bragging words unto them tell,
For here (said he) there is no man does them fear,
Nor any whit at all for them does care.
Which words when as King Cedius chanst to hear,
He did in heart like to a mad man fare:
And for his death so grieved was in thought,
That with the knights that he with him had brought,
He did on Hector set with great despite,
And him on every side enclosed round,
(While he against his enemies did fight)
And forcibly stroke him unto the ground:
And while with them on foot he fighting stands,
King Cedius with his sword in both his hands
At Hector smote a blow most furiously,
Intending to have slain him without fail,
But Hector watched him so narrowly,
That all the force he had could not prevail:
For ere his puissant blow descended down,
Hector sore moved with indignation,
Lift up his sword* and unto him did give
A blow, the which his arm clean off did smight,
And with a second blow did him bereave
Of life and all: and while he thus did fight.
Aeneas like a Lion furious,
Courageously slew King Amiphimacus.
Then to the field came in King Menelaus.
And after followed stout king Thelamon.
And then the valiant Duke Menesteus.
And worthy valorous king Machaon.
And last of all king Agam^mnon went
With them, t'assaile the Troyans fully bent.
Wdo valiantly themselves did long defend
Against the Greeks, and held them at a bay
With equal fight, until that in the end
As it did grow to noone-time of the day:
When they had each the other long assaild,
The Greeks against the^ of Troy so much preuaild,
That forcibly they made them to retire,
And back to go of mere necssity.
And while Achilles fought with furious ire,
He slew King Philon with great cruelty:
And Hector to requite the Greeks therefore,
Despite of them did slaie king Alphenor.
And then another King called Dorius.
And did the Greeks so valiantly withstand,
That like a Lion fierce and furious,
By virtue of his strong and mighty hand,
The Troyans many Grecian knights did slay,
And valiantly forced them to fly away.
And then out of the town of Troy there came
The worthy King Epistrophus that brought
A gallant band of men, and with the same
So furiously against the Grecians fought:
That by maine force he made them leave the plain,
And give unto the Troyans place again.
For with him in his company he had
An Archer of such strange proportion,
And monstrously and woonderfully made,
That men had him in admiration:
For from the middle upward to the crown
He was a man, and from the middle down
Like to a horse he was proportioned,
In each respect for form and feature.
His skin it was all hairy, rough, and red,
And yet although this monstrous creature
Had man-like face, yet did his color show
Like burning coals that in the fire glow.
His eyes they did two furnases resemble,
As bright as fire, whereby all that him met,
The very sight of him did make them tremble,
And from their hearts deep sighs for fear to fet,
His face it it was so foul and horrible,
And look so ugly, fierce, and terrible.
His manner was to go into the field
Unarmed of all weapons whatfoere,
And never used, sword, spear, axe, nor shield,
But in his hand a mighty bow did bear.
And by his side a sheafe of arrows hung,
Bound fast together with a lether thong.
Wherewith he did his enemies withstand,
And shot so strong, so mightily, and sure,
That wheresoere he fought on sea or land
No armor could against his shot endure.
Nor any horse how fierce soere he were,
Durst look on him, so much they did him fear.
For of him they no sooner had a fight,
(He was in all men's eyes so odio^s,)
But they would run from him with all their might,
As from a Devil foul, and monstrous.
Nor any man though near so strong a Knight,
Could rain or hold his horse by force or might,
If that he once this monster chaust to see,
But furiously it would start back, and fling
And neighing loud, and snorting, way did flee.
This hideous beast did many Grecians bring
With arrows sharp and strong unto their end,
For armor could them not from him defend,
So that not any one durst him abide,
When they him saw, (so much they did him doubt)
But spedely away from him did ride.
Till in the end that it by chance fell out,
While that the Trojans by his aid did chase
And slay, and drive the Greeks before their face*
Unto their tents, with extreme fear and dread,
He did by fortune meet full in the face
Hard by a tent, with valiant Diomede,
Who for because it was in such a place,
Where he could not this hideous moster shun,
Unless he should in greater danger run.
(For at his back so many Trojans were,
That fly from him he could not any way
But must of them be slain, or taken there.)
When as he saw he must of force needs stay,
With courage bold he did unto him go,
B^t ere that he could strike at him a blow,
The monster let an arrow fiercely fly
At Diomede, and gave him such a blow
That with the same he bled exceedingly,
Wherewith he was in heart offended so
That furiously unto him straight he went,
And ere that he his bow again had bent,
Stepped into him and with exceeding force
Gave such a dangerous deep and fatal wou^d
Unto that monster Demi man and horse,
That dead he fell down groueling on the ground.
Whose death when as the Grecians did behold
Abandoning all fear, with courage bold
They did upon the Trojans set ag^^^^,
And furiously constrained them to ^^i^
And to retire in have into the plain,
Where Duke Policinare most valiantly
Great store of them did of their lives bereave
Whose cruelty when Hector did perceive.
In furious wise he did upon him set,
And slew him with his sword wi^h great despite.
And then as he by chance Achilles met,
Courageously and like a hardy Knight
With lance in rest he ran at him amain,
And he at him, with purpose to have slain
Each the other if they might, and in their wroth,
So fiercely struck each other on the shield.
That with their blows they were unhorsed both,
And laid along flat down upon the field.
But fierce Achilles with dispightfull heart,
First up again into his sadle start.
And sought by all the means he could to take
Gallathe Hectors horse if that he might,
With full intent a prey thereof to make.
And having tane't to Hectors great despite,
He gau't his men to lead out of the field,
And Hoctor by that means was then compeld
To fight on foot, amongst his deadly foes,
Who in most furious wise on them did fall*
And killed, and beat them down with mighty blows,
And then unto his Trojan Knights did call,
And willed them upon the Greeks to set,
And forcibly his horse from them to get.
And they in have to rescue it again,
Achilles did assail, and against his will
Took it by force from him upon the plain,
And brought it unto Hector, who the while
The Grecians fiercely slew with great despite,
And then by force most like a valiant Knight,
Despite of all that round about him keapt,
And like Smiths on an anvell at him stroke,
Upon his gallant horses back he leapt.
And by maine ^orce through thickest of them broke
And then again so fiercely with them fought,
That they his wrath and anger dearly bought.
And among them riding bramely here and there
Like Lion strong the Greeks did wound and slay,
So furiously, that clean po^^est with fear,
As death, his sword they shunned, and fled away.
And by that means the Trojans did begin
Upon the Greeks the field again to win.
But it befell in (...) so furious fight,
That unawares Anthenor went so far
Amongst the Greeks, that by maine force and might,
They did him for their prisoner take, and bare
Him straight from thence unto their tents with speed.
And yet his son to help him at his need,
Spard neither pain nor valor to relieve
And rescue him, but all was labor lost,
For which at heart he did so free and grieve,
That many a Grecians life that time it cost,
By valor great which he as then did show,
But for because the son then waxed low
And it began in have to draw to night,
They made an end and fought no more as then,
Because at that same time they wanted light,
And either side retired with their men.
The Greeks unto their tents upon the plain.
The Trojans went into the town again,
And rested there, till morning did appear,
When Phoebus began his glistring beams to show,
And Dame Aurora with most joyful cheer,
The herbs and flowers did moisten with her deaw,
And hungd her silver drops like pearls fine,
On every bush which against the Sun did shine.
And show themselves so orient and so clear
On every valley, hill, and pleasant green,
In morning when the Crimson clouds appear,
And in the skies most beautiful are seen.
Until the heat of Phoebus glistring beams
Dries up their moisture with his fiery streams.
And makes the vaper mount into the air,
When as the sky did not exceed with heat,
And that the weather showed both clear and fair,
Which time the Trojans purposed to meet
Then foes, and with most brave and warlike show,
In order plast, into the field did go.
Against whom likewise the Grecians valiantly
Did go into the field, and when they met
And each the others armies did epsy,
They did upon each other fiercely set,
And presently great store of lances broke,
And many a mighty, strong, and cruel stroke
On either side was given, and many a shield
With axes, bills, and trenchant ^ades were cl^^
And many a Knight sore wounded in the field:
In little space was of his life bereft:
And such a cruel laughter there was then
On either side, that many thousand men
That day were brought unto confusion.
But greatest loss on Trojans side did fall,
Yet Guido of no Prince makes mention
That then was slain, but speaks in general.
And says that cruel fierce and bloody fight,
Between them held from morning unto night.
Which Trojans for their parts full dearly bought,
For Fortune then unto them was no friend,
But rather with the Grecians against them fought.
And so when day did draw unto an end,
The Trojans went again into the town,
The while the Greeks unto their tents went down
And there did rest till they again could see,
At which time all the Grecian Princes met,
And among them did with one consent agree
To send unto the town of Troy, to get
A truce for 3 months space, to which intent
Ulisses and fierce Diomede were sent,
That message unto Priamus to bear.
And when unto the gates of Troy they came,
A Trojan Knight called Dolon met them there,
And courteously convaid them through the same,
And brought them to King Priams royal hall,
Where he then sat amongst his Princes all.
Where they to him their message briefly told,
Which was a truce for 3 months space to have,
If he would be content the same to hold.
To whom the King a friendly countenance gave,
And said he would advise of counsel take,
And then to them he would an answer make.
And they did all agree and were content
To yield unto the Greeks in that respect,
Save Hector, who thereto would not consent,
But at the first their motion did reject.
And did affirm that it was but mere deceit
By them then used, of Priam time to get.
And that two things them thereunto procured,
First, that they might have time and liberty
To bury all their dead, while truce endured,
And under color thereof, secretly
More victuals to provide, which they did want,
And which as now with them was very scant,
And by that means the famine to prevent
Which then was in their camp, with policy,
He said he knew was only to the intent
That they the longer there in siege might lie,
And being well provided of each thing
That needful is said he they might us bring.
While they increase, and we decrease our store,
Into great want and famine at the last,
For by their means we can provide no more,
And this (said he) is it which they forecast:
For that which does for their advantage make,
For certain, does from us advantage take.
Yet nerethelesse (said he) what did befall,
Since to the truce you willingly agree,
I will not be repugnant to you all,
No^ against so many strive and disagree.
And so they did consent on either side
That for 3 months the truce should firmly bide.
And be observed, that while it did endure,
Such as sore wounds and sickness do oppress,
Might time and leisure have their wounds to cure,
And for their pain and sickness seek redress:
And while the truce for that time did abide,
It was twixt them agreed on either side,
That to procure Anthenors liberty,
Who at that time the Grecians prisoner had,
King Thoas then held in captivity
Within the town, should for him free be made,
And neither ransom pay: but while they sat
In counsel thereupon, it chanced that
The Trojan Bishop Calchas called to mind,
And thought upon his daughter Cresida,
Whom he left in the town of Troy behind,
When he the same forsook, and went away
At Delos to the Greeks, for whom in heart
He daily felt great sorrow, woe, and smart.
Supposing that she being there alone,
Should for his sake (because of his offense
And treason, which without occasion
Against Trojans he had done,) in his absence
Be hardly vsd, and little favor find,
For which he was full sore perplexed in mind:
And made account, that he should never be
Releast nor freed from extreme grief, and pain,
Till he his daughter Cresida did see,
And that she were restored to him again:
And therefore still within his mind forecast
While that the time of 3 months truce did last,
How he mihgt her relieve and get away
Out of the town of Troy, where he her left:
And to that end upon a certain day,
As one that were of comfort clean bereft,
Sore weeping in great woe and heaviness,
He did himself unto the Greeks address.
And humbly on his knees before them fell,
And with great floods of tears submissiuely,
His hard and woeful state to them did tell,
Beseeching them with great humility,
On him and his to have compassion,
And to procure him restitution.
Of Cresida his child and only joy,
Whom he because he had the Trojans left,
Durst not go fetch out of the town of Troy,
Least he by them should of his life be reft:
Desiring them that they a means would be,
That she might be exchanged, and set free
With Thoas, for Anthenor, which he thought
If they to his request would give consent,
By their good mediation might be wrought,
And they for Calchas sake were all content.
And presently a messenger did send
To Priam King of Troy unto that end.
To whom they gave express commission,
To bring their sure for Cresida to pas,
But when the Trojans hard their motion,
And found that it for Calchas daughter was;
Whose Father was become so odious
To all the town, and to King Priamus,
That all men said he was a traitor false,
And for his treason great and treachery
Well worthy to be hanged by the hal^e,
And that he well deserved had to die
A far more cruel death, for by the law,
They said, they should his traitrous body draw
Unto the place of execution,
And hang it there till that half dead it were,
And in that sort with speed to cut it down,
And it in quarters four to cut, or tear.
And said since that he was so badly bent
To Troy, that death was not sufficient.
For his offense, and answer therefore gave,
That since he had such treason against them wrought
They flatly said he should no favor have
Of them therein, nor yet would grant to ought
That might his mind in any wise content,
Nor should his daughter Cresida be sent
To him as he requird, but flatly said
If they could ever hands upon him lay
He should have that which he deserved had,
And unto his request said flatly nay.
But at the last allthough with much ado
They were content, and granted thereunto.
For Prians King of Troy his sentence gave,
That she with Thoas should exchanged be,
And both of them should for Anthenor have
Their free discharge out of captivity.
Which his decree with Princely promise sealed,
The Trojans could by no means get repeald.
But must the same against their wills fulfill,
And by that means she did from Troy depart,
Although it were full sore against her will,
For that much grieu d and vexed at the heart,
Great sorrow and complaint therefore she made,
Which when time serves unto you shall be said.
CHAP. IIII.
How during the time of the three months truce, Hector went into the Greeks
camp, and there spoke with Achilles, and what speeches past between them at
that time,

THe truce confirmd as I before did say,
And for three months agreed on either side,
It chanced that upon a certain day
Hector out of the town of Troy did ride,
And with him many Lords of high degree,
Determining the Grecians camp to see.
And entering thereinto directly went
With courarge stout and bold, (saluting none
That with him met) unto Achilles tent,
For he was moved with great affection,
To speak with him although he did intend
If that he could, to bring him to his end.
And truth to say Achilles had as much
And great desire of Hector to have a sight,
(Though as his foe he bare him mighty grutch,
Intending his destruction if he might.)
Because he nere had means nor liberty
Hector unarmed at any time to see.
And when that they together both were met,
And each be held the other for a while,
As in that sort they were together set.
Achilles upon Hector gone to smile,
And said, great pleasure Hector it is to me,
That here disarmd at this time I thee see
For nere before could I of thee have sight
But in the field, when thou thine arms did were,
And valiantly with trenchant blade did fight,
And therewith put the Grecian Knights in fear.
But truth to say it is much more grief to me,
Which am so deadly enemy to thee.
That now of thee I cannot have my will,
For here of be assured if that the peace
Restraind me not, forthwith I would thee Kill,
So much my wrath against thee does increase,
For the only thing which I in heart desire
Is cruel death to thee to appease mine ire.
For oftentimes when it was my chance to fight
With thee in field, full sore against my mind
I have both tried and felt thy puissant might,
As by the wounds which I about me find,
Which yet does ache and are both fresh and green,
And for just proof are extant to be seen,
For with thy sword thou often have shead my blood,
And sought to bring my life unto an end.
And like a Lion furious, sierce, and wood,
Thou have not spard my arms to tear and rend,
And cruelly, as I the signs can show,
Most furiously the same did hac and hew.
Whereby mine arms that forged are of steel,
When thou with puissant force on the^ did smight,
Could never yet assure my corpse so well,
But that thy trencha^t blade through the^ would (...)
Into my flesh, full deeply and profound,
As well appears by many a mortal wound,
Which in the same are now both long and wide,
And at this time full sorely ache and smart,
And put me to such pain on every side,
For which as now it seems that my heart
Does rise, swell, beat, and pant when I thee see,
With great despite reuengd on thee to be.
And is so full repleat with furious rage
And rancor old, with such extreamitie,
That by no means it never will assuage,
Till with my hands thy death I give to thee.
But one thing does torment me most of all:
Which is when I unto remembrance call,
And with my self in mind expostulate,
How to content thy fierce and bloody will,
With trenchant blade thou did separate
Patroclus corpse in twain, and did him kill,
Whom I did love with heart and mind entire,
And unto him so great good will did bear:
That as my self, I must the truth confess,
I loved him, and such affection
Unto him had, as no tongue can express,
And thou thereby did make division
Twixt him and me, that lived and loved together
Like brethren twain, and so had done for ever
While life endured, for that betwixt us twain
Our faithful hearts were knit to fast together,
As if they had been linked in a chain.
No grief nor no adversity could sever
Our hearts and thoughts, how great soere it was,
Till by his death thou broughtst the same to pas,
And by that means our faith full love did part.
Whose death so deep in printed in my thought,
So sore does griue and vex me at the heart,
That I protest it shall be dearly bought.
And't may be if I reckon not amiss,
Before this present year expired is.
For be assurd, that only for his sake,
When Fortune shall afor'd the time to do it*
Revenge by cruel death on thee i will take,
And thereof make account and look well to it:
For if I live it shall be surely don,
When thou shall have no means the same to shun*
For right requires, that since by death thou were
The cause and mean* to part two lover true,
Death should to thee be rendered for desert,
Which I my self will give thee as thy due.
That all the world through out may thereof know
And hear how that Achilles killed his foe,
To be revenged for Patroclus death.
And though that I do hate thee for the same,
And will as long as I on earth do breath,
Thou have no cause nor reason me to blame:
For well I wot thou have my death conspird,
And many a day the same in heart desird.
So that to end this strife, I tell thee plain,
Naught else but cruel death shall v^^p^^r be,
For till thou, I, or both of us be sla^^^,
It shall not cease. The which I hope to see
Ere it be long, for sure it shall be d^^
By me or thee, the which thou shall not shun.
When Hector had Achilles speech well hard,
And given him leave to tell so long a ^ale,
As he that for the same full little card,
With countenance glad, and yet with anger pale*
He did thereto reply and answer made
Unto the same, and thus to him he said:
Achilles, thou no marvel oughst to have,
That as thou say, I do thy death conspire,
And howrely the same of fortune crave,
As the only thing which I in heart desire:
And that to kill thee still I he in wait,
Because to thee I bear so deadly hate.
For if in mind thou did consider well
The sentence grave, which verity does prove,
And unto us for certain truth does tell,
That neither I, nor any man can love,
Nor any kind of favor show to one,
That daily seeks my confusion.
And me and mine to vanquish and destroy
With deadly hate, and great presumption,
Besieged has the noble town of Troy,
To bring us wholly to destruction:
Not can I any cause nor reason find,
That in my heart I should to him be kind,
Nor love, nor favor him in any thing
That seeks my death. For love does never breed
Of bloody war and strife, nor yet does spring
From foul and deadly hate, but does proceed
And takes her first and true original
From faithfulness, which is the principal
And only cause that makes men's hearts t'agree,
And never from true faith and love to start,
But does them still preserve in unity,
Of words, and will, desire, mind, and heart,
And neither life nor death can love disseuer,
For faithful love continues true for ever.
But hatred and dissension is contrary,
From whence proceeds and follows as we see,
When as men's hearts and minds dissent and varry,
Naught else but rancor, strife, and en^^itie.
When which once bred, makes men proceed so far,
That at the last they fall to mortal war.
The which all love clean vanishes away.
But nerethelesse I will that thou shall know,
That whatsoever thou to me do say
In proud and vaunting words, and make show
As if that thou would do that unto me,
Which while thou liust shall near be don by thee.
I care not whatsoere thou do, or say,
For without bost hereof I thee assure,
When as thou have don all that ere thou ^^yst,
If that this war long twixt us does endure*
I hope if that it be my chance to live*
The Grecians so to terrify and grieve,
That thou and they full* well shall find and feel,
How with my trenchant blade when we shall meet,
I Will hac and hew their armors made of steel,
And beat them down and tread them vnderfeet,
And thine and all their pride so much will daunt,
That if you stay and still these wars do haunt,
I Will make you all repent your coming here.
For this I know, and well assured am,
That the only thing (as plainly does appear,)
For which unto this town you hither came,
Proceeds of pride and indiscretion,
Else would you not with such presumption,
A thing of such importance take in hand,
As is the siedge of this our town so great.
Which able is your forces to withstand,
And you and yours from thence by force to beat,
For th'enterprise I tell you true and plain,
Is over hard and heavy to sustain.
And will because to make you all in fine,
(As hauty and as stout as now you seem,)
To leave your pride and lowly to decline,
And stoop unto the burden, (which you deem
To be but very easy, small, and light.)
With your no little shame and great despite.
And this I say Achilles unto thee,
That whenever thou do me assail,
Death shall unto thy self be given by me,
Before that thou against me shall prevail
To do the thing wgich thou so easy deem'st,
Though of thy self thou nere so much esteem'st
Yet if in thee there be such worthiness,
And courage stout, that like a valiant Knight,
Thy mind's repleat with so much hardiness
To move thee hand to hand with me to fight.
And that this quarrel may betwixt us twain,
(By combat bravely fought upon the plain)
Be ended, for the which we all contend.
I Will grant unto the same withal my heart,
And whatsoever fortv ne does me send,
I Will never yield till death us two does part:
So that the Lords on either side will be
Content, and with good will thereto agree,
That we two shall this combat undertake
And fight it out betwixt us two alone,
And thereof for us all an end to make.
Which shall be done on this condition;
That if thou by thy valor and thy might,
Caust overcome and vanquish me in fight,
I will to thee and them assurance make,
That Priamus my Father shall agree
To all which I for him shall undertake,
And that as soon as I shall vanquished be,
He shall his Crown and Regal scepter yield
(Which he so long and many years has held.)
Unto the Greeks, and him and his submit
In all respects most humbly to their will,
To do with him and his as they think fit.
Which that he may withal his Lords fulfill,
To Avoid each doubt and all ambiguitie,
Both he and they for more security,
Shall swear each one, and all in general,
To do as I have said, and there to stand,
And further to confirm the same he shall
Deliver presently into their hand
Such suerties, as they will chufe out of the best,
And noblest men in Troy, the which shall rest
And stay among the Greeks while we two fight,
That they may have no cause at all to doubt
That we will not perform our words, as right
And reason does require, if it fall out
That I should be overcome and slain by thee,
The which I hope thou near shall do to me.
Now then Achilles speak and freely do
(As I have said,) thine honor to increase,
And let us arm our selves and fall thereto,
That by our means this bloody war may cease,
Which other wise is likely and most sure,
Long twixt the Greeks and Trojans to endure.
And thou thereby not only shall win fame,
And honor both, but by thy valor great
Throughout the world eternize shall thy name,
And of the Greeks much thanks and favor get.
Who by thy means from hence may escape alive
And safe and sound in Greece again arrive.
Which otherwise may to themselves procure
Their deaths by fond and foolish hardiness,
If they stay here and that this war endure,
Whereof there is no other likelinesse.
Be brief therefore and make no long delay,
But let us for this Combat point the day,
As I have said, upon condition
On Grecians side, that if in this same fight
(Which I for all the Trojans and the town
Shall take in hand;) do vanquish thee by might,
That presently they shall from war surcease,
And break up siedge, and let us live in peace,
And into Greece return again with speed.
Whereto Achilles burning hot with ire
With haughty, fierce, and furious look agreed,
As being that which he did most desire.
And unto Hector said, he would that task
Upon him take, which he of him did ask:
And against the same made no exception.
And for a sign of his desire and heart
T'accomplith it, for confirmation
He threw his Gantlet down, and for his part
Said, whatsoere unto him happen might,
He would that Combat for the Grecians fight.
The which when Hector saw, with countenance glad
As ever any valiant Knight could have,
He s^oopt and took it up, and therewith said,
It was the only thing that he did crave:
And no man can in heart and thought surmise,
How glad he was of that high enterpize.
The news thereof soon among the Greeks was spread,
And to the ears of Agamemnon came,
Who with great troops of Lords accompanied,
Went to Achilles tent to know the same.
And when they had the matter fully scand,
They would unto no such condition stand,
But did it with one will and voice deny,
And said, they would not hassard their estate,
And welfare of so great a company
Of valiant Knights, to false and wavering Fate.
Nor show themselves to be so fond and vain,
To stand unto the combat of those twain.
And on the Trojans side within the town,
They also said, and flatly did deny,
They would not stand to that condition,
To venture all their good and liberty,
Upon the single valor of a Knight,
Although he were of passing strength and might.
But Priamus himself was fully bent,
To stand unto the combat of those two,
And willingly did yield and was content
In all respects as Hector said, to do.
Naught doubting, but believing certainly*
That Hector surely should have victory,
If that he took the enterprise iu hand.
But loath to make too much contention,
And strife with those that did against him stand,
He yielded unto their opinion.
And was content to let the matter pass,
And against his will to leave it as it was.
And Hector therewith left Achilles tent,
And went to Troy again. Where for a while
I Will let him rest. For now it is mine intent,
For some respect to change and turn my style,
To tell you of the sorrow, grief, and woe,
That Troiclus made to part his Lady fro.
WHy should thou still oh Fortune variable,
(When men most trust in thy most flattring (face,)
Become so false, untrue, and so unstable,
And make as though thou would them embrace.
When as with fained false dissembling show,
Thou only seekst their utter overthrow?
As well it may by Troiclus be seen,
Whom suddenly with envy thou did throw
Down from the mount of joy that he was in*
Into the vale of sorrow, grief, and woe*
When he did think himself to be secure,
And of his Love and Lady dear most sure.
And twixt them made a separation.
For whom I must a little while complain,
Because he made such lamentation,
And in his heart endured such extreme pain,
Such inward grief, and such great heaviness,
That all my wit cannot the same express.
For when he knew his Father had decreed,
And for a final sentence set it down,
That Cresid^ should presently with speed,
Unto the Greeks be sent out of the town.
Into such mighty grief and rage he fell,
That no man's tongue can well declare, or tell
The inward pain which in his breast he bare:
For day and night he did such sorrow make,
That like unto a madman he did fare,
And never left complaining for her sake.
Desiring rather death with all his heart,
Then that she should away from him depart:
For inwardly an other mind she had,
Which she with fair dissembling face did hide,
And to her true and fathfull lover made,
As though for love of him she would have died:
As women can false tears at pleasure borrow,
When in their hearts there is but little sorrow.
And unto men for truth will sometimes say
That which they will deny again as fast,
And serpentlike among flowers fresh and gay,
Most commonly their poison use to cast.
With sweet and sugared word, when as they mind
Naught but deceit and guile, for it is their kind
And property to flatter, feign, and lie,
When in them men do greatest trust repose,
For all they do is done in policy:
For when you think the^ friends, they are your foes
And hide their malice with such subtlety,
That though they seem with one disse^bling eye
And outward show in piteous wise to weep,
They can with the other laugh full covertly,
And in their hearts their double meaning keep,
Their sorrows they are outward commonly:
And never to their hearts and thoughts draw nere,
And all the party colors which they were,
Are mixed with change and great variety,
For therein does consist their chiefest blis,
The'are sure and fixed in lies and flattery,
And double in their truest promises.
Make show of faith, when least thereof they think
Likeliest to love, when most from it they shrink,
Most overthwart when as they should agree,
And truest seem, when truth in them is none.
For certain it is that few of them there be,
That in their hearts contented are with one,
But will in show receive and entertain
Two, three, or four, and in their speeches feign,
And make them all with flattering words believe
That she does love and like them every one,
And secretly her faith to all will give.
Yet makes them to think she loves but one,
And that she will live with him in weal and woe,
When as in very truth it is not so.
And by that means to each of them does seem,
As if she loved and liked him alone,
And makes him her for his true love esteem,
When as in truth perchance she loves none.
And thus with fained hope she does the^ scoff,
The tru'st to her is soon'st by her cast off.
He that best serves least favor shall deserve,
And yet she does them all with fancy feed,
But promise will with none of them observe,
She Will soon'st deceive, when you think sur'st to speed
Let no man trust therefore unto delay,
But take time and advantage when he may.
A man may change at pleasure all the year,
And yet thereby may get but little gain.
Great folly it is to buy that thing to dear,
Which man cannot in his bounds retain;
But flies away when most he does it want,
And if such ware at any time wax scant,
Men may them out at windoes often behold,
And find them in a chamber or a hall,
That with most shameless countenance and bold,
Will not refuse unto a man to call.
And many times abroad in every street
You may them see, and also with them meet
At Pilgrimages, and oblations,
At daunces, ^ights, and every common play,
That used are in Cities, and in towns,
Where they resort for pleasure night and day
To see and to be seen of every man,
And by their wiles t'intrap them if they can.
For their's no fraud nor any subtlety,
Like unto that of willy women kind,
Nor worse deceit, nor craftier policy,
Then in their false dissembling hearts men find.
For he that loves women steadfastly,
And thinks in them to find fidelity.
Shall see and prove them like unto the moon,
That ready is to change. For if their love
Be young, and them displease they will him soon
Out of the doors by head and shoulders shoue,
If he be old, th'yle say age makes him dote,
And let some younger man ride in his bote.
My counsel therefore is unto them both,
To cast them off in time and let them fly.
This Guido says, (not I, I tell you troth)
That has delight to speak unhappily
Of women, in most part of all his Book,
As you may see if you therein will look.
Whereby it seems that he was not their friend,
And unto them did bear no little spite,)
Else would he not so much with them contend,
Nor in his Book such slanders of them wright:
Which inwardly did make my heart to bleed
For grief, when I such things therein did read.
Which only of mere malice favored.
And maile of purpose women to contemn,
Wherein I see he was too much misled,
For generally he does them all condemn.
And for to show more indiscretion;
Twixt good and bad makes no exception.
He was too blame for one ^'accuse them all,
For I dare say and swear it by the rood,
And you shall find it to in general,
That for one bad, there are an hundred good,
And though some do themselves unconstant show
It hurts not them that faithful are and crew.
And though by some examples he may show,
(As likely it is, for many such there are,)
That* some one boue the rest did prove a shrow,
Those that are meek and gentle need not care.
We must not blame nor tax all women kind,
For some that prove untrue. For this we find,
That in the town of Collen once there were
Eleven thousand Virgins pure and true,
Which did the name of Holy Martyrs bear.
And many other stories tell to you,
That diverse maids did Virgins long remain,
And to preserve virginity were slain.
And some with flowers of true virginity,
Did live on earth in honor great, and fame,
That died at last in perfect ehastity,
And sanctified in heaven for the same.
With God remain in his eternal rest,
And among the Saints for evermore are blessed.
And though some against bad women so much say,
We must not all for some few women blame,
Therefore let no good women be dismayed,
For that of men may well be said the same.
Is it a shame to him that lives true,
Because an other man does live untrue.
And for his theft is hanged, (as many be.)
No more is it to women virtuous,
If among a hundred, one of them we see
That is of living bad and vicious.
When for one bad a thousand we may find
That virtuous are. Though Guido faith by kind
And nature they are false, yet men should think,
They are not so, and them not too much blame,
But rather at their frailty seem to wink,
For though ones bad, they are not all the fame.
Nature in operatiou has great power,
And who is he that lives at this hour,
That can by anymeanes his course restrain,
For she will not be shortened of her right,
Nor yet be stayed with bridle norwith rain*
And therefore man withal his power and might
Should give God thanks for them* ^^ (...) not blame
Poor women that by nature are the ^a^^e.
And though so much my Author against them says,
Where he does write of Cresida alone,
And for her fault such blame on women lays,
My counsellis to all and every one,
In reading it on her t'impose the shame,
And task not other women for the same.
Or read it not at all, but rather stay
Till that you come where Diomede had charge
To go to Troy, to fetch fair Cresida
Whereas my ma^ster Chaw^^r shows at large,
First how she was to him delivered,
With Thoas for Anthenor, and was led
By them out of the town, accompanied
By Troiclus, and many more that road
With him and her, and how King Diomed
Did lead her horse, and her great kindness showed,
Till that she came unto her Fathers sent,
Where she did light, and straight into it went.
And then declares how she therein did stay,
What speches she to him and others used,
While she with them sat talking all that day,
And how that soon her self she did abuse.
For G^ldo says, that day before t*was night,
She clean forlooke her dear and loving knight.
And gave her heart and love to Diomede,
To show what trust there is in women kind*
For she of her new love no sooner sped,
But Troiclus was clean out of her mind.
As if she had him never known nor seen.
Wherein I cannot guess what she did mean,
Unless it were because she did delight
In novelty, as women do by kind
And nature, which unstable is and light,
As by experience commonly we find.
But now no more of love I will declare,
But turn my style again unto the war.
CHAP. V.
Of the E^^^ailes fought between the Greeks and the Trojans, after the truce
of three months was expired. The description of the Palace of Ilion in Troy,
of a great p^st^^^^ce that happened in the Grecians host: Whereby they were
constrained to seek for a truce, which they obtained of the Trojans for 30.
days.

THe three months truce aforesaid being don:
The next ensuing day when Titan had
His Indian course from West to East out run,
And after he great sport and cheer had made
In sweet and fair Auroraes company,
And rose from her and would no longer lie,
But with his Radiant beams that shone most clear
(When as the ^arke did sing with great delight.)
Did on the walls and town of Troy appear:
Hector the strong and most victorious Knight,
His battles in good order did ordain,
And ready was to go into the plain,
To fight against the Grecian enemy:
The first whereof himself well armed led;
And with him had to bear him company,
Full fifteen thousand Knights well furnished.
Next unto him brave Troielus did go,
With just ten thousand Knights in warlike shoe.
And after him the Percian archers went,
That had his brother Paris for their guide*
Each with his Bow in hand all ready bent,
And shea^es of peircing arrows by his side:
In number full three thousand archers brave.
The leading of the fourth ward Hector gave*
Unto his brother Deiphobus, that had
Three thousand men well armed in corslets clear,
And of the rest Aeneas leader made,
And as the story ^aith, as then there were
An hundred thousand valiant Knights and stout,
By Hector to the field that day sent out.
And as I find by Dares Frigius,
And Guido too, against them forth were led
Seven thousand Grecian Knights by M^^^^^,
And just as many more by D^^^ed.
And next to them A^billes with his ^and
Of Myrmidons, in order plast did stand.
Then Zantipus a King of great renown,
Conductor of three thousand Knights was ^^d^
And last of all into the field came down,
The General of the host, that with him had
So huge a band of Grecian Knights, that all
The plain with them was filled* and straight d^^ ^^^^
And set upon the Trojan Knights so fast,
That many men at that encounter died,
And furiously unto the ground were cast,
And as by chance King Phillis Hector spied,
That cruelly the Greeks beat down and chaste,
He spurd his horse and ran at him in have,
And with his lance upon him fiercely set.
Which when as Hector saw, he coucht his spear,
And him with so great sorce and fury met,
That he did him out of his sadle bear:
And gave him such a deep and cruel wound,
That he therewith fell dead upon the ground*
Whose death when as the Grecians did epsy,
With grief for him they waxed pale and wan;
And many to revenge it, valiantly,
On Hector set, and first upon him ran
King Zantipus, who with most great disdain,
And grief to see King Phillis there lie slain,
His lance upon him brake, which to requite
Hector at him most furiously did fly,
And with his spear so fiercely did him smite,
That with the blow he did most cruelly
Give him a wound so deep into the side,
That he therewith fell off his horse and died.
For whom the Greeks complained and grieved sor^*
And hated Hector for his cruelty,
And each to other promised and swore,
With Trojan blood his death reuendg'd should ^e:
And at that time did them so sore pursue,
That many of them in little space they slew,
And among the rest Achilles cruelly,
Lichaon and Euforbius both did slay,
(Two Knights that came out of their Country,
Which distant was from Troy a mighty way,
To aid and help their friend King Priamus*)
And while the Greeks set on the Trojans thus*
Hector by chance was wounded in the face,
Wherewith the blood out of his Bever ran,
Whom when the Troyans saw in such a case,
They were so much abasht, that they began*
To fly, and in great have to leave the plain,
And in the chase great store of them were slain,
Before that they could get out of the prea^e.
The Grecians them so ho^^^e followed,
And to pursue and kill them did not cease
In furious wise* as they before them fled,
And chased them almost unto the town:
Till Hector that most worthy Champion,
Perceiving them to fly so fast away,
Unto them went t'encourage them again,
And made them turn and spite their hearts to stay,
And valiantly to fight, and to maintain
The battle against the Grecian enemies.
For when as he by chance cast up his eyes
Unto the walls of Troy, and did behold
Queen Hecuba, and Policene, that stood
Thereon to see the fight his heart waxt cold,
As being moved with fierce and furious mood,
For very shame to see the Troyans fly,
And made them turn with great dexterity,
And staid their ^light, and with them back did ride
Unto the plain, and in his way he met
A Grecian King called Merion, near allide
TO Achilles, and on him most fiercelieset:
And with his sword gave him so great a blow,
That therewithal his body claue in two.
Whom when Achilles found in that sort dead,
Much grieved to see it, but't could him noght avail,
He took a spear and Hector followed,
With full intent t'revenge him without fail:
And to that end ran at him valiantly,
And on the shield smote him most cruelly.
But could not once remove him with the stroke,
Nor make him in his sadle rise* nor bow,
For he sat sure and steadfast as an Oak.
But moved sore when as he fel^ the blow,
With sword in hand he did Achilles smite,
So great a stroke with all his force and might,
That with the same he did his helmet break,
And tare his Bever off, and made him reele,
And on his horse to bend, and then did speak,
And said to him, Achilles now I feel,
And well perceive the envy that to me
Thou bearst in heart, but I do counsel thee,
That thou unto thy self do not procure
Thy death, for if (as I desire) I may
Meet with thee ^n the field, I thee a^sure*
No ransom, aid, nor succor shall ^e stay,
With this my sword to take revenge on th^^
For with thy life thou shall not escape from ^^.
Be well advised therefore I tell thee plain,
For by my hand thou shall most surely die,
For I intend to pay thee for thy pain.
Whereto Achilles ^hinking to reply,
As he began to answer him again,
Prince Troy^^^^ step^ in between them ^^^^ne,
And parted them, and with the company
Of worthy knights, which he as then did guide,
Behau'd himself so brave and valiantly,
That where he fought* the Greeks on everieside
Were beaten down and killed, for that same day,
He did six hundred knights most fiercely slay.
And made the Greeks for fear the end of (...)
Unto their tents, till Menelaus came in,
With seven thousand Greeks in company,
T'assaile the Troyans fiercely did begin*
And made the Greeks march forward once again,
And to reco^er ground upon the plain.
But as he busied was to set upon
The Troyan knights, ^^ bea^ them down by ^^^^^,
He was encountered by King Ode^^^,
Who valiantly did cast him off ^^^ ^^^^^,
And wounded him so deeply in the face,
That he had thought to have died in that place.
And had been prisoner taken and led away,
(By aid and help of Troy^lus) to the town,
But that in his extreamitie and need,
So many thousand Grecian knights came dow^^
To aid and rescue him: that Ode^^^
Was forced to let King Menelaus alone.
And at that time as it by chance fell out,
King Diomede with Troyelus did (...),
And ^re that he could turn himself about,
With spear in hand so fiercely on him set*
That Troyelus by maine and mighty force
At unawares, he cast down from his horse,
And gave it to his Squire for to bear
To Cresida, and praid her for his sake,
That Present to accept (though small it were)
And with good will, and in good part y ^o take
That simple gift from her most loving knight*
That valiantly had woone it in the ^^^^^,
And taken it from him, whom sometimes ^he
Had loved well* and like't, and in her heart
Esteemd and (...) only knight to be.
The Squire as he had, did straight depart,
^^^ when he came therewith to Cresids tent,
He did ^^ in his Masters name present.
And as he had in charge, in humble rise
Delivered ^^ to ^^^, and earnestly
Besought her that ^he would it not despise,
But take it in good part, and c^^^eously
Vouchsafeto think on Diomede her knight*
That in her ^^d his sole and whole delight.
Whereto with countnance glad and joyful cheer,
She answer made, and bad ^im go with speed
Unto his Lord, and say ^o him from her,
That for his part to fear he should not need,
That she would prove discourteous or unkind
To him, in whom ^he did such kindness find.
And would no^ his good will and love reject,
That unto her ^ ^^ranger in that place,
So much himself did humble and subject,
As to desire ^e^ ^^ o^* love, and grace,
That never had ^^ him (...) so well,
And therefore had him to his master tell,
That while she lived it was her sol^ intent,
His love to her ^^^^in her he^^t to set.
The Squire with this answer gladly went
Unto his Lord ^^d when with h^^ he met,
Unto him told* what she to him had said*
For which he was so well at heart appaid,
That from thenceforth he did esteem it naught,
What gri^^^ so e^^^ after to him fell.
Mean time the Troyans then so bravely fought,
And against the Gr^^ks behau'd themselves so well,
That they of force constrained were to fly
Unto their tents, and there so cruelly
Were slain and ^^^^^n down^, that certainly
They had been (...) and clean driven out the field
At that same time, and spoiled utterly.
If (...) when he them beh^ld,
Had not come down with many a gallant man,
At which time such a furious fight began,
That many men were beaten down and feld,
But specially upon the Troyans side,
For then the Greeks them ^oo'^ so hardly held,
That they could not their fury great abide:
And by that me^^^ the Grecia^ ground the^ won,
And Troyans to recoyle as fast begun,
And lost* their ground ^^^^ that (...),
(W^o with a troop of gallant knights and strong,
The Greeks on the other (...) was)
In furious ^^se did (...) into the ^^^^ng,
And such a slaugh^^^ of the Greeks the^ ma^^,
That in short time^^^ them compelled had
To make retract, and way to fly at last*
Down toward these ^ unto the strond, where ^e
Along the way did ^^^^ them down so fast,
And put them to so great extremity:
That they were in no l^^tle fear and dread*
Until such time as fierce King Diomede
Beheld and saw how that Pollidam^s,
So cruelly the Grecians did pursue,
That if the fight continued as it was,
He doubted some great danger would ensue
Unto the Greeks, a spear in hand did take,
And spurd his horse, and after him did make.
And he likewise to show himself a knight
Of valor great, his spear set in his rest,
And valiantly with all his force and might,
Smote Diomede therewith into the breast,
Clean through his arms a deep and deadly wound,
Wherewith he fell down headlong on the ground.
Which having done despite of all the force,
That then the Grecians used t'ayd Diomede,
He bravely took and seaz'd upon his horse,
And by the bridle in his hand it l^d,
And gave it unto Troyelus that stood
On foot, as then all bathed in Grecians blood.
(Whereas he fought with them so valiantly,
That they could not his mighty blows sustain,
For with his trenchant blade most cruelly,
He killed and beat them down upon the plain)
Who did his foot straight in the stirrup set,
And with a trice upon his back did get*
And then again himself he did advance,
And furiously upon the Grecians ^et,
Till at the last with swords in hand by chance,
He and Achilles both together met,
And each the other valiantly assaild,
But Troyelus against him so prevaild,
That he did wound Achilles, and by force,
(Despite of his great valor and his might)
Most puissantly did smight him off his horse.
But nere the less Achilles like a knight,
That nothing feared, rose up upon his feet,
And used all means he could his horse to get.
But ere that he could do it, a new supply
Of Troyan Knights enclosed him round about,
And on him set with such dexterity,
That he by no means from them could get out:
And Hector at that time in furious rage,
His choler on Achilles to assuage,
A thousand Grecian knights did fiercely ^^ay,
And many more by his victorious hand,
Were beaten down that then stood in his way,
And him (to aid Achilles) did withstand:
Who at that time in extreme danger stood,
And could not escape by any likelihood,
But either had been taken, or else slain.
For Hector on him set so furiously,
That he had not been able to sustain
The fight against him, and those that busily
Upon him set; till that King Thelamon
Much grieved thereat, when as he heard thereon,
With many thousand Grecians thither road,
(And in despite of all the Troyans force,
Who notwithstanding bravely him withstood)
Did rescue him, and help him to his horse,
But not without the loss of many a knight.
But for because as then it drew to night,
They left the battle for that time, and went
Out of the field, the Troyans to the town:
The Grecians every one unto his tent,
And for that night to rest themselves lay down.
And after that as Dares Frigius says,
Continually for space of thirty days,
They never ceased valiantly to fight,
And furiously each other to destroy
On either side, but yet for all their might,
The Grecians lost much more then they of Troy.
And Priam lost in those most furious fights,
Six Bastard sons all brave and valiant knights.
For whom he made much dole and heaviness,
And never ceast to weep and to complain,
And in that time (as Guido does express)
Hector a wound got in his face again:
And in that sort each the other did procure,
Great loss, while all those battles did endure.
Till Priamus unto the Greeks sent down
For truce for six months space, if that they would
Grant thereunto, which King Agamemnon
With all his Lords contented was to hold:
And so it was confirmed on either side,
For so long time betwixt them to abide.
And while it held, the worthy Champion
Hector, the chief defense of Troy, did lie
To heal and cure his wo^nds in Ilion,
King Priams Princely house. Whereof if I
Should take on me (as Dares sets it down)
To make to you a full description*
I fear I shall want learning to express,
And show the same to you, for it is too much
For my bare wit, to do it I must confess.
For truth it is, there nere was any such,
In all the world before that ere was seen
For riches, nor the like nere since has been.
For (as he says) it was made for great delight,
And stood upon twelve mighty stones four square,
The which were all of Alablaster white.
The true and right proportion that it bare,
Was twenty paces in the latitude,
And just as many in the longitude.
The pauement under foot was Christ all clear.
And all the walls composed and made of stones,
The which most costly, rich, and sumptuous were:
As Rubies, Saphires, Aga^s, Diamones,
Topas, Emrands, Turques, Crosolites,
Purfier, Jasper, Iet, and Margarites:
And many other kinds the which are found,
And with great labor sought and dug out,
Within the rich and fertile Indian ground,
And all the Countries of the world about.
The which did glister, shine, and show as bright,
Within that fair and sumptuous house by night,
As when the Sun by day therein did shine.
And round about the hall most curiously
Huge pillars therein stood, exceeding fine
And bravely made of pure white Ivorie,
Which on the tops of each of them did hold,
Most great and massy Images of gold,
Inchast with Pearls and precious stones most bright.
So that the stately workmanship and fashion,
Of that most sumptuous Palace to the sight,
Was likelier by estimation,
To be composed by incantation,
Then wrought and made by man's invention.
And rather seemed a thing celestial,
And framed by the heavenly Deity,
Then any house of Prince terrestrial.
But for because I never did it see,
I will conclude and briefly to you tell,
Th^^ i^ all other buildings did excel*
And turned again unto King Priamus,
Who while the truce aforesaid did endure,
Most earnest was by workmen curious,
To make most costly tombs for Sepulture
Of his six Bastard sons aforesaid dead,
That in the war their lives had finished.
And all this while King Diomede lay sick,
And inwardly did feel great woe and smart
By Cupids shaft, that cruelly did prick
And sting him through the breast into the heart,
For love of his fair Lady Cresida.
For whom he never ceast both night and day,
To fret and grieve, and with deep sighs complain,
And for that cause most wilfully begun
To leave all food, and foolishlie abstain
From earthly joy, and looked so pale and wan,
That he did seem to be a man forlorn,
And one that all terrestrial bliss did scorn.
And ever unto her did still complain,
And prayed her of love and charity,
To show some grace to ease him of his pain,
And nor to put him to extreamitie:
Which surely was for her sweet sake to die,
If unto him her love she would deny.
But cunningly she held him at a bay,
And for to have and keep him in good hope,
She still did use to feed him with delay,
Yet would not seem to give him too much scope:
But as it were twixt hope and deep despair,
Showed unto him a countnance glad and fair,
To ease him partly of his heaviness,
And then with some new trick as in disdain,
Would put him to some other new distress,
And rather more then less increase his pain:
As wily women well can play such parts,
With men that pierced are with Cupids darts,
And make them oftentimes to give assaies,
Yet wau'ringly to stand twixt hope and dread,
By putting them to Nonplus by delays,
As Cresida dealt with King Diomede,
Of purpose for to set him more on fire,
For naturally all women do desie,
When they have made men after them to dance,
Twixt hope and dread both linked in a chain,
Unequally to hang them in balance,
Of most uncertain end of either twain:
To make them long and many years to serve,
Naught caring whether they doliue, or starve.
Lo here what by too fervent love is got,
For she to keep him still in servitude,
Held him at such a bay, that he could not
Perceive what she did mean, but to conclude
Left him in doubt; wherein i will let him lie,
And unto you will further certify,
How well themselves the Troyans did defend
Against the Greeks their enemies in field,
When as the six months truce were at an end,
Who after that, twelve days together held
Continual fight and never would refrain,
Wherein great store of valiant knights were slain
On either side, all in their own defense,
Which in the field long did unburied lie,
Whereof ensued so great a pestilence
Among the Greeks, by much extreamitie
Of heat, and by contagiousnes of air,
That they therewith did fall in great despair.
For day by day so many of them dyed,
That in short space their number did decrease
Most mightily, the which when they espied,
And saw the plague still more and more encreast,
Their General a messenger sent down,
With all their whole consents unto the town.
To crave a truce if Priam would consent
And yield thereto, for thirty days to endure.
Which when the Troyans heard, they were content,
And willingly the same did them assure:
In hope the plague whereof they dyed so fast,
Would be a means to kill them all at last.
CHAP. VI.
How Andromecha in a dream was fore^ar^ed of her Husband Hectors death, if he
the next day following entered into the field; and how he refusing her counsel,
was the next day slain in the battle by Achilles.

WHen as the plague among the Greeks did cease,
And time of truce likewise was at an end,
The Grecians that in courage did increase,
Determined and fully did intend,
T'assaile and set upon the Troyan foes
Betimes next day, as soon as Phoebus rose.
But as the story says, the night before,
Andromecha Prince Hectors loving wife,
*That unto him two Princely children bore,
(Whom he did love as dearly as his life)
The eldest called Laomedon, the other
Astionax, much lesser then the other.
For he as then was small and very young,
And only with his mothers pap was fed,
And neither had the use of foot nor tongue)
As she lay fast a sleep within her bed,
Was troubled with a sudden vision,
Or as men say a revolution
By dream (as happened to King Scipio)
Whether it were by divine Oracle,
Or that the Gods did then unto her shoe,
And give her warning as a miracle)
Wherein she thought that one to her did say,
That if that Hector issued forth next day
Out of the town his Grecian foes t'assaile,
That he should not escape, but certainly,
Fell fate would then so much against him prevail,
That she would him in trap, and finally
Fierce Atropos that foul and divellish fend,
The third of her dear husbands life would end.
Thereby to show her cruel force and might:
If he that day into the field did go.
Wherewith she fell into so great a fright,
And thought that she did feel such extreme woe:
That waking of a sudden up she start,
And for her dream was grieved at the heart.
And lay and sighted sore, and could not sleep,
By reason of the extreme grief and sorrow
She had conceau'd, and pittiously did weep,
But specially the next ensuing morrow,
When she beheld the worthy famous knight,
Hector put on his complete armor bright,
And ready was to go out of the town.
To whom with floods of tears within her eyes,
She ran in have and on her knees fell down,
And unto him declared with woeful cries,
The fearful dream she had the night before,
But he esteemed it not, but was therefore
Offended, and with indignation
Affirmed, and said that folly great it were
For men that are of good discretion,
Such peevish, fond, and idle dreams to fear,
Or trust unto so foolish fantasies
Of visions, that most commonly are lies,
And full of jests and false elusions,
Whereof the end is only to delude
Such as do trust to their conclusions,
Although the common people gross and rude,
Are moved with most fond affection,
To judge by them in their opinion
What may ensue, and what they signify,
Which many times falls out as they suppose,
But oftener times do hap clean co^^^arie.
Whereat with wringing hands straight up she ^^se*
But down again she fell, and there did lie
A while as in a trance, and then did cry,
And said alas, my love and Lord most dear,
Why will you not believe nor think upon
Your loving wife, but her refuse to hear,
That with good will and true affection,
Desires and wishes you all good she can*
And up she rose like one that is mad and ran
To Priamus and Hecuba that sat*
Together at that time, and down she fell
Upon her knees, but long it was ere that
For sobs and sigthes she could unto them* tell
Her woeful case, till at the last she took
Some courage, and with sad and heavy look,
Unto them showed the fearful dream she had
The night before* when as she wa^^ (...)*
And to them there a full discourse then made
Thereof in every point, with sighs most deep:
Affirming that for certaine't would fall aur*
So as she said if Hector did go out
That day into the field, sor't was ordaind
By fortunes false and mischievous decree.
And therewith in most pittious wise complaind;
And weeping prayed King Priam on her knee,
Of her and hers to have compassion*
And with all speed to give direction,
That Hector her dear Lord might not go out
That day into the field, and therewithal
With weeping tears she turned her self about,
And in a deadly sound began to fall:
And with exceeding pale and woeful cheer,
Cried out and said, help, help, sweet mother dear.
And of your great benignity and grace,
Find means that my Lord Hector may not go,
This day into the field to fight, no^ pass
Out of the gates, and to persuade him so:
That he this day use neither spear nor shield,
But unto your desire get him to yield.
Whereto they both did willingly agree,
And readily did grant to her request,
And to that end with speed went down to see,
When all the battles ready were, and pressed
To issue forth, where Troyelus first of all
Appointed was upon the Greeks to fall.
And next to him his brother Paris went.
And after him Aeneas forth did pass.
And then in order bravely plast were sent
King Sarpedon, and brave Pollidamas.
King Erio^^, and King Epistr^phus.
And after them a King called Forcius.
All richly armed in harness bright and clear.
And last of all went out King Philomene,
With all the Kings and Lords that then were there,
To aid King Priamus. Who having seen
Them all before him pass out of the town,
Himself in person with them did go down
A little way, and them in order plast.
Which having done he bad them forward go,
And willed them courageously to have
And set upon the Greeks, and there to shoe
Their valors great against them with all their might,
That ready were, and pressed with them to fight.
And proudly stood all armed in the plain,
With ensigns spread in brave and warlike shoe;
But Priamus with speed went back again,
And unto Hector purposely did go,
To will him not to ^^ue forth that day
Into the field, but in the town to stay.
For which he was sore grieved in his mind,
And when he saw the battles all go forth
Into the field, and he was staid behind,
He did begin to be exceeding wroth,
And laid the fault thereof upon his wife,
That seemd to be so tender of his life,
Imposing upon her the occasion,
That he unto his great disgrace and shame,
Constrained was to stay within the town.
But that it might not derogate his fame,
Nor give men cause by false report to say,
That he for fear did stay within that day;
He did protest, and with an oath it bound,
That happen life or death he would go out
Into the field, and therein would be found,
Yea though he were assured without doubt,
That he should die a thousand deaths and more,
So stout a heart within his breast he bore.
And for that cause he made no more delay,
But armed himself again with full intent,
Against his fathers will, that bad him stay,
To go into the field; and forward went.
For fear whereof his wife did cry and shout,
And with her child in both her arms ran out.
And did to him most pittiously complain,
Beseeching him her sorrow to behold,
And of his Princely love to ease her pain
By granting her request, and that he would
Not only pity her, but have a care
Of his young Son which in her arms she bare.
Who all the while would not from crying keep
By any means, what so ever that she made:
When as he saw his woeful mother weep,
And kneeling on her knees unto him said,
Alas my Lord have pity now on me,
And on this tender babe whom here you see
So woefully before you weep and cry,
And be not so hard hearted and unkind,
T'abandon us, and suffer us to die.
Let Troy some mercy at thy hand now find,
(Mine own dear Lord) least it and we each one,
Be put to cruel death when thou art gone,
For want of aid. Thus did Andromecha
Her Husband Hector mournfully desire
To stay at home. The like Queen Hecuba
His mother also of him did require,
Together with his Sisters Cassandra,
And Policene, with fair Queen Helena.
Who all at once down at his feet did fall,
And pittiously their hair did rent and tear,
And lowdly cried, and dolefully did call
On him, that he would for that day forbear
To go into the field, and of the town,
With them and her to have compassion,
And to behold their sad and pittious moan,
For that he was the bulwark and the wall,
And chief defender of the town alone,
And the only true supporter of them all:
In whom their only safety and good,
With all their weal especially then stood.
But all this could not move his heart to stay,
Nor grant to their request, yet still they kneeled,
And him with many brinish tears did pray,
Unto their cries and woeful suit to yield,
And that they might some sparks of grace the^ feel
To come out of his heart as hard as steel,
By pitying them and on their woe to rue,
Which likely was to their destruction
And overthrow, still daily to renew:
For that of their most famous Troyan town,
His death would be the ruin and decay.
Yet all this could by no means make him stay,
But forth he would with heart courageous,
Which was inflamed with extreme wrath and rage,
And like a Lion fierce and furious,
Would by no means his cruelty assuage:
For neither cry nor lamentation,
Could him withdraw from his opinion.
For casting every danger clean aside,
And all persuasions what so ere were made,
He spurd his horse, and forward began to ride,
Wherewith his wife such extreme dolor had
Within her heart, that with face pale and wan,
In furious wise unto the King she ran
So sore amazed, and in such woeful case,
That she could hardly tell where she did go,
And with salt tears be-dewing all her face,
So strangely looked that no man could her know:
And in that sort with great perplexity,
She fell before King Priam on her knee,
And unto him her woeful case did shoe.
Desiring him to put his helping hand,
To stay her husband Hector that would go
Out of the town, whom no man could withstand,
Vnlesse't were he; who presently did bid
One bring his horse, and forth in have he rid,
And pitying her estate, did for her sake,
Set spurs unto his horse with so great have,
That he did Hector speedily oretake,
Before that he out of the gate was past:
And straight laid hold upon his horses reine,
And made him against his will turn back again.
(Wherein he would his father not gain say,
Although he was full loath the same to do)
And by that means entreated was to stay,
And partly was by force constraind thereto:
And so he did down from his horse alight,
With heart so full of ranckor and despite,
Melancholy and hot and burning ire,
That his courageous heart did boil in blood,
And with disdain was set on such a fire,
That like a Tygar fierce, or Lion wood
And furious, deprived of his pray,
He did behave himself all that same day.
Or like a Bore that as he goes does whet
And grind his tuskes, still walking up and down,
While that the Greeks and they of Troy did meet,
Where at the first young Troyel^^ fore the town,
In furious wise upon his gallant steed,
By chance did meet with fierce King Diomede.
And both of them so furiously assaild,
And set upon each other with such might,
That neither arms nor weapons had preuaild,
But one or both of them in that hard fight
Had died, if that King Menelaus had not been,
That suddenly came riding them between,
And made them part, and after valiantly
Did spur his horse, and ran at Mereon
The Phrigian King, and him most cruelly
With sword in hand assaild and set upon:
And at him stroke a blow with so great force,
That with the same he feld him off his horse.
And at that time he surely had bin taken,
Or lost his life, the Greeks so mightily
Assaild and set on him, and on the plain
Enclosed him round about, and furiously
Plucked off his helm, and band upon him laid,
And had him led away. If to his aid
Pollidamas had not come suddenly,
With many valiant knights with him, and when
He saw King Mereon in extreamitie,
And among a troop of Grecians prisoner, then
In furious wise he did upon them set,
And him out of their hands by force did get.
But ere he could relieve him clean from thence,
On either side there was such mortal strife,
For that the Greeks against him made great defense,
That many a valiant knight then lost his life:
For rather then he should from them be taken,
They swore and vowed that he should first be slain.
And by that means he was in danger great.
But suddenly to free him from the same,
Young Troyelus upon the Grecians set:
And at the first as he amongst them ^a^^e,
He did behave himself against them so well,
And in such furious wise upon them ^ell,
That in despite of them and all their train,
Most valiantly he help king Mereon,
And him restored to liberty again.
And then into the field came Thelamon,
That of three thousand knights the leader was,
And sodenlie unhorsed Pollidamas.
And him in midst of all his knights cast down
Unto the ground. But worthy Troyelus
T'encrease his hautie fame and great renown,
Despite of them with courage furious,
Help him perforce unto his horse again,
But at that time the Troyans were so slain,
And beaten down by Greeks on every side,
(For fierce Achilles then so cruelly
Pursued them) that they could not abide
Before his face, but of necessity
Constrained were perforce to fly away,
And by no means within the field would stay.
But fiercely chaste by him unto the town,
Close by the walls did loose great store of men.
Which when the valiant Knight Margariton,
One of King Priams bastard Childeren
Perceau'd and saw, such havoc of them made,
Such grief and sorrow in his heart he had,
And was so moved thereat with great disdain,
To see them fly and chaste so furiously,
And fore the walls so many of them slain,
He purposed with heart courageously,
T'revenge them on Achilles if he might:
And therefore like a strong and valiant knight,
He spurd his horse and through the prease he brake,
And in the midst of all the Myrmidons,
Enforst himself to kill, or else to take
Achilles, and to that end on him runs,
And him with fierce and furious mood assaild,
But notwithstanding all his might, he faild
Of that which he intended to have done.
(For as fell fortune did for him ordain,
Which by no means he could at that time shone)
He was himself by fierce Achilles slain:
Wherewith the Troyans presently did fly,
Unto the town with fearful noise and cry,
To see the valiant Knight Margariton,
Dead on the ground so pittiously to lie,
And also for because King Thelamon,
Pursued them with so great cruelty,
And with his sword so fiercely shed their blood,
Though Paris him courageously withstood,
With all his valiant bastard Brethren,
But nere the less the Troyans more and more
Fled back, and with the loss of many men,
Constrained were to give the field clean ore:
And entering into Troy with mighty fear,
Margaritons dead corpse with them did bear.
And after them shut fast the gates with speed,
Whose body when as Hector did behold,
His heart within his breast for grief did bleed,
And for that cause he swore and vowed he would,
(Without abode or any more delay)
Revenge his death upon the Greeks that day.
And presently his complete arms put on,
And mounting on his horse with speed did go
Out of the town, before that any one
Of those that would have staid him did it know:
And like a Lion in his cruelty
Assaild the Grecians host so furiously,
That like to swarms of Bees, they ran away
Before his sword, and thought it best to get
Out of his sight, and he that time did slay
Two worthy Dukes that then upon him set,
Whereof the one was called Euripalus,
The other had to name Halcidius.
And by that means the Troyans having woone
Their ground again, they did the Grecians slay
So furiously, that they in have begun
To leave the field, and give the Troyans way:
Yet though they were pursued so, then it was
Their chance by force to take Pollidamas,
A Troyan knight, but Hector spurd his horse,
And road into the thickest of the press,
And took him from them all again by force,
And after put the Greeks to such distress,
That through his valor great where s'ere he rood,
He bathed his trenchant blade within their blood.
And was so cruel and so merciless,
That none escapt his hands that with him met,
And then a Grecian called Leothides,
Presumptuously would needs upon him set,
While he was in his greatest rage and ire:
But Hector, who as then had great desire
To make the Grecians feel his cruelty,
Slew him forthwith, and on the ground him cast.
The which when as Achilles did epsy,
And saw how he the Grecians slew so fast,
And hackt and hewed them down, and spared none,
He did conceive in his opinion,
That while that Hector lived it was most sure,
The Greeks should nere overcome their enemies,
Nor long against them in battle could endure.
And for that cause did study and devise,
Which way to find the means by force or slight,
To rid him of his life, if that he might.
And with him also did therein consent
Pollicenes an Indian Duke, that had
His love unto Achilles sister bent,
And she of him her only choice had made:
Who, that he might more in her favor stand,
Presumed to take that enterprise in hand.
And him began t'assaile with courage bold,
But he was slain by Hector presently.
The which when as Achilles did behold,
And saw him there dead on the ground to lie,
His heart with so great fury was possessed,
That presently he set his spear in rest,
And ran therewith at Hector furiously,
But Hector with a dart most sharply ground,
Which he with mighty force at him let fly,
Stroke him clean through the thigh a mighty wou^d:
Which grieved him so that he could not abide
Within the field, but was constraind to ride,
With all the speed he could unto his tent,
And there bound up his wound, and presently
Did mount upon his horse again, and went
Into the field, in fear least he should die
Of that same wound so dangerous and sore,
And not to take revenge on him before.
For he desired no better remedy,
To case him of the grief he did sustain,
Then for to have the means and liberty,
That Hector by his hands might first be slain:
For of his death he did small reckning make,
So he might like revenge on Hector take.
And so he made a full conclusion,
Death for death to give him if he might,
And with that steadfast resolution,
And heart repleat with choler and despite,
He road in mighty rage to find him out:
While Hector ranged the field and plain about.
And like a Lion fierce and Tygar fell,
The Grecians slew and beat from place to place,
And by his valor great which did excel,
With sword in hand did them so hotly chase,
That as the sheep before the Wolf do fly,
They ran as soon as they did him epsy,
For none so hardy was on him to set.
And while that he such havoc of them made,
Amongst the Greeks a Grecian King he met,
That on his back a goodly armor had,
Ingrau'd and set with many a precious stone,
And Pearls fine that bright and clearly shone.
For on the circle of his helm throughout,
And all the borders of his Crest were set,
In every place (on Velvet edged about)
Most rich and precious stones of value great:
Whose Armor when as Hector did behold,
To be so rich of precious stones and gold,
As Soon as he unto the king drew near,
He ran at him, and with exceeding force
Clean through the heart did pierce him with his spear,
Wherewith ^e died, and fell off from his horse,
And Hector then did presently alight,
And being of exceending strength and might,
Took up the body armed as it was,
Before him on his sadle-bow, and ride
Therewith out of the battle, that when as
He had it got out of the way aside,
He might of his rich armor make a pray,
And spite of all the Grecians beare't away,
Being glad that he had gotten such a prise.
But out alas, that ere he should it see,
Or set his mind so much on a varice,
The heat whereof cannot extinguished be
Out of man's heart, if once therein it get:
For it is the cause that makes man to set
His mind on nothing else but greediness,
Which clean disgraceth true Nobility,
And does extinguish all the worthiness
Of Conquerors, and such as by degree
Of honor seek to climb to lofty fame,
And oftentimes clean blemisheth the same.
A covetous desire of getting wealth,
Belongs not unto Nobility,
Nor riches gotten so by spoil or stealth,
Pertains not to worthy Chivalrie:
For avarice and Knighthood disagree,
And cannot well together lincked be.
For certain it is, that greediness of gain
Has often been the only overthrow
Of many famous men that have been slain,
As Guido in this History does show
By worthy Hectors fall, who coveting
To have the sumptuous armor of that king,
So greedy was thereof, that when he had
The body up, and on his horse it bare,
To have the spoil thereof such have he made,
That he did hang his shield without all care
Behind him at his back, the easier
To pull the armor off at his desire.
And by that means his breast clean open lay,
And nothing to defend nor save the fame,
But his thin plates. Wherein I needs must say,
He was too vnadvis'd and much to blame:
And't grieves me that so brave a Champion,
And of all knighthood the only pateron,
Should have of his own good so little care,
As not to think upon his enemy,
That him so great and deadly hatred bare,
And watching time and opportunity,
On him attended had all that same day,
To take him at advantage, and then lay
Close hovering not far off from him, to spy
A time to effect his purpose and desire,
For at that time Achilles so ^^^^ die,
With heart repleat with wrath and furious ire,
(While Hector so the dead Kings body bear
Upon his horse) tookevp a mighty spear
And therewith did at Hector fiercely ride,
And smote him unawares with great despite
Into the heart, that he fell down and did:
And so that most renowned Troyan knight
Was slain by careless bearing of his shield.
Whose death when as King Odemon beheld,
He was so grieved there at, that presently
He road unto Achilles, and despite
Of all his Myrmidons, most furiously
Smote him so great a blow with all his might,
That down for dead he fell upon the plain,
As if at that same time he had been slain.
Wherewith his knights straight laid him on a shield,
And bare him fair and softly thence away
Into his tent, where staying to be heald,
I Will leave him for a while sick as he lay:
And show how when that night began t'appeare,
The Grecians that with fighting wearied were,
Unto their tents retired, and lest the plain.
And at that time the Troyans also went,
With heavy hearts into the town again,
And all the way did mournefully lament
For Hectors death, whose body solemnly
They bare with them, and weeping bitterly,
Unto the Temple therewith all did go.
And in that sort that doleful day did end,
And all the night ensuing with great woe
And heaviness, did after likewise spend:
Wherein I will them lea^e, and for a while
To mourn for Hectors death, i will turn my style.
CHAP. VII.
The complaint of Lidgate for the death of Hector; and the description of the
sumptuous Toombe that King Priam made for him.

THe fearful style which I till now have held,
Of dangerous, cruel, fierce, and bloody war,
So numbs my hand, that I can hardly weld
My pen that is so clogged with fear and care,
Of valiant Hectors death the truth to write,
Unless some one vouchsafe me help t'indite.
But unto whom shall I cry out or call
For help? it must not be to any one
Of those fair Nymphs amongst the Muses all,
That on Pernassus hill by Helicon,
So Angell-like with heavenly melody,
Do sing together with such harmony,
That no man can express nor well declare,
The sweet accord of their most pleasant song,
For they do never disagree nor jar,
And have their instruments most sweetly strong,
That they on them no doleful tunes can sound,
Nor dittie sweet with woeful songs compound.
Of them therefore it boots me not to crave,
Their aid to help in this extreamitie,
And sure I am I shall as little have
Of Clio, or of fair Caliope:
I therefore must make suit with woeful moan,
And many a grievous sigth and ghastly groan.
Unto Megaera, Alecto, and Thesiphone,
That ever are in sorrow, and complain
With brinish tears in bad condition:
For they still live in extreme woe and pain
Eternally, and do in torments dwell
With triple headed Cerberns in hell.
Whom I must pray to be to me bening,
In this my case which is so lamentable,
For to a man whom sorrow still does sting,
A show of fear is always commendable,
And in a matter full of heaviness,
A heavy look the same does best express.
Help me herein o^ Niobe to moan,
And in my pen some of thy tears distill.
Do thou the like oh cruel Exion.
And Be^ides that do the bucket fill.
Help with thy roling stone good Sesiphus.
And furtherme also poor Tantalus,
That hungrest still in water without rest.
Help me I pray you all my plaints to end,
And let me crave of you to do your best,
To aid me so that I my wits may bend,
With phrases fit the woeful chance to tell,
Of him that did in worthiness excel.
And while he lived the root of Knighthood was,
The only mirror of all Chivalrie,
The man that did all other men surpass,
For valor and for great actiuitie:
And th'onlie pattern of all courtesy,
As Guido shows in this History.
Why should thou die oh Hector valorous?
What was the cause thou tookst no better heed,
Oh Parchas fell and too too mischievous,
So carelessly to twist his vital thread?
And what did move thee Atropos thereto,
So hastily to cut the same in two?
Oh Troy alas, well may thou mourn and cry,
And bitterly lament thy woeful state,
That art this day bereaved so suddenly
(By most accursed, false, and wavering fate)
Of him that was thy special proppe and stay,
And chief defense and bulwark night and day,
And he that only made thee fortunate.
Now, now, alas, the brightness of thy sun
Ecclipsed is, and thou art desolate
Of comfort, and in manner clean undone:
Thy light is out, and thou do plunged lie
In darkness, for this day most certainly
Is slain the brauest, and the worthiest,
The most renowned and chivalorous,
And of all valiant knights the hardiest
la battle, and the most victorious
That ever was or shall be borne most sure
Within the world, while that it does endure*
No marvel then it is thou weepst so sore
For him, since he both in thy woe and weal,
Was thy defense and comfort evermore,
And he whom thou did love and like so well:
That sure thou can not prove so much unkind,
As not to think still of him in thy mind.
For as the story makes mention,
There was not any one (of what degree
Or state so ere he was) within the town,
But rather would (in that extreamitie)
Have lost his child, to save his life, if so
The Gods would have been pleased to grant thereto.
The women for their parts of every age,
Throughout the town did stand along the street,
And for his death most pittiously did rage,
And with great floods of tears their faces wet*
And tearing of their hair for grief and woe,
In furious wise ran crying too and fro.
Such extreme dolor at that time they made,
That pity great it was the same to see,
The maids likewise no lesser sorrow had,
And wringing of their hands most pittiously,
Did sob and since, and lowdly cry and call,
And said alas, now shortly it will be fall,
That we shall see our fathers daily slain
Before our eyes with great extreamitie,
For no man will our quarrel now sustain,
Since Hectors dead, for he was wont to be
Our only trust, and in his valor stood
Our chiefest stay, our safety, and our good.
Whose body when King Priam did behold,
His heart it was so filled with extreme grief,
That both his hands together he did fold,
And like a man clean void of all relief,
His face with bitter tears did bath and drowned,
And could not speak, but fell into a sownd.
And so as cold as any stone did lie,
And neither stird nor moved foot nor hand,
Desiring rather presently to die,
Then in so great extreamitie to stand:
And in that sort on Hectors body lay,
Till that his sons by force pulled him away.
Who also sad and sorrowful to see
Their brother there lie dead before their eyes,
Did fall into so great perplexity,
That casting out most bitter sigths and cry,
They fared as if their hearts would burst in sunder,
Which made all those that saw the^ much to wonder,
For every one of them such dolor made,
And were so filled with grief and great remorse,
That they did seem as if no care they had,
But only to have dyed upon the corse:
And did such lamentation make, that sure
A heart of flint could not so much endure.
What shall I say of Hecuba the Queen,
Or Cassandra that was esteemed so wise,
Or of his sister Lady Policene,
Or how should I the sorrow great devise,
To show to you of his most woeful wife,
That loved him as dearly as her life?
Who all in great extremity and woe,
As if they would have killed themselves did weep,
And rent and tare their golden hair, and so
Torment themselves, and such a noise did keep
`About his corse; that if particularly,
I should upon me take to certify
Their sorrows, griefs, and lamentations,
Their pittious sighs, and salt and brinish tears,
Their woe^ull cries and exclamations,
Their sad complaints, extreamities, and fears,
And all their mournful jestures specify,
It would too great a volume occupy.
If I should every thing in order name,
And over long and tedious to be heard,
Of any man to listen to the same:
For many days ensuing afterward,
They wept before the corse most woefully,
And rent and tare themselves so pittiously,
That wonder't was they could so much endure,
But that they are used to weep and to complain,
For it is a point of women's nature sure,
Tears at command out of their eyes to strain,
For every thing wherewith they are displeased,
Till that their hearts thereby are somewhat eased.
And so ^e let them sigh and sorrow still,
And woefully with extreme grief complain
In mourning weeds till they have cryde their fill:
And I to them do turn my style again,
And show how Priam by invention
Did find a way without corruption,
To keep the body still unburied
Above the earth, (the which will putrify,
And clean consume to dust when it is dead,
If in the air above the ground it lie:
For if that Art do not surmount nature,
It cannot there long vncorrupt endure.)
Which to prevent King Priam did devise,
To have the same preserved from filthy smell,
And lothsomnesse and horror to the eyes,
To make it show as lively, fresh, and well,
As if that it still quick and living were.
The charge whereof he was content to bear,
Whatere it cost, and sent men up and down,
To search and seek with diligence and care,
For all the skilfulst workmen in the town,
That could by Artsuch costly things prepare,
As might effect the work that he would have.
And to that end, to them commission gave
Without delay to take the same in hand,
Which they performed and quickly brought to pass,
Within an ancient Temple that did stand,
Hard by the gate called Timbria, and was
By Priam built, which he did dedicate,
And to his God Apollo consecrate.
Wherein hard by the Altar they did frame,
A Chapel made of rich and costly stone,
And at the upper end within the same,
Upon a stage did frame a Princely throane:
(So high as that within it they might set
An Image of proportion huge and great.)
Supported by four Pillars all of gold,
With Angels standing on them all enchast
And graven, that most stately work t'vphold,
The roof whereof with arches overcast,
Was plated all with gold most sumptuously,
Embossed, knob'd, and knotted curiously.
And in each knob and knot a precious stone,
Of value great and price inestimable,
Which both by day and night so brightly shone,
That they did make it show as delectable
And lightsome in the dark and shady night,
As at noonday when Phoebus shone most bright.
To mount up to this Princely throane there was
Twelve goodly fair and stately steps, that were
Most curiously composed of Christ all glass,
Which showd so smooth, tra^sparant, bright, and clear,
That men did them admire; and on each one
A pinnacle there stood of Jasper stone,
At either end with Rubies rich enchast,
Upon the points most stately to behold,
And on the top of all this work was plast
A huge and mighty Image made of gold
Like Hector, which with countnance fierce did stand,
And looked upon the Greeks with sword in hand.
And in this throane king Priamus did place
The body of dead Hector, which by art
Was made to show as lively in the face,
Eyes, color, look, and skin, and every part,
As when it lived, apparelled also,
As commonly on earth he used to go.
For that through pipes of gold which bowed down
By skillful Art, and cunning policy,
A precious liquor ran into his Crown,
And from that place with great subtlety
Into his veins, and sine^^^ did deseend,
And by the virtue thereof did defend
And keep his body from corruption,
And made his skin and color show as pure
And lively without alteration*
As when he was a living creature:
And at his head there stood a voyoll full
Of precious balm, which ran into his soull,
And from the same by pipes composd by skill
Into his neck, and every other place
Did penetrate, and with the same did fill
The veins, and all the poores of his face,
And made it show as lively and as fresh,
As if it had been a quick and living flesh.
(The balm therein wrought so effectually,
Much like unto a spirit vegitable,
The which without all sense in things does lie,
And yet has power and is availeable*
By lively force, and kind humiditie,
Life to infuse in flower, herb, and tree.)
And likewise did the power thereof extend
Into each vain, and sinew in his breast,
Back, arms, and hands, and downward did descend
Through all his bones, and joints, and never did rest
Till it did run into his thighs, and feet,
At which a voyoll full of gum most sweet,
And balm was set, which never would decay,
Nor yet impair by no distemperature,
But still increast and waxed every day
Of greater force, and sweeter did endure.
Where of the vapor upward did assend,
And such a pleasant savor forth did send,
And made all round about the air to rise,
(For that it it was most exquisitely good)
That it did seem an earth by Paradize.
And fore the corpse four lamps of gold there stood
Within that place continually gave light,
And never ceased burning day nor night.
All ^^ld with oil, (if it be credible)
The which is said to be of such a kind,
That it was sound ^^be impossible
To (...) the (...) tempest, (...) or wind.
Not never (...) in many years,
Which lamps did hang high (...) by wiers.
And such (...),
That (...) the same to s^ell.
And when this work was brought unto an end,
And every thing was done exceeding well,
And pleased the eyes of all that did it see,
They made a grate of wood of Heban tree:
(Which wood a^^rmed is will ere endure,
And being cut does smell exceeding sweet,
^^d can by no means wast, for this is sure,
T*will never burn by any extreme heat
Of fire, as it has been tried often.
^^ wa^er ^^ n^re swimmeth up alo^t,
But down into the bottom straight does go.
And as some men thereof make mention,
This tree has been long since esteemed so
And heldon in such reputation,
That in the fertile soil of India
And in the land of Ethiopia,
They vsd to pay a tribute as it is sound,
Of Ivory, fine gold, and Heban tree,
To The Emperor as they thereto were bound)
And when King Priam saw the work to be
Performed in so brave and sumptuous wise,
That he in heart no better could devise,
He did ordain a quier of Priests to pray
Continually with great devotion,
Before that Princely throne both night and day
For Hectors ^oule, and gave them pentions
To live upon, and rooms wherein to lie,
And bound them to do it perpetually.
But while that they are in their orations,
With Hectors death my third Book I will end.
And for a while will leave the Trojans
In sorrow great, and woe the time to spend.
And show you what the Grecians mean while do,
If that you please to hearken thereunto.
FINJS.
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF HECTOR.
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
CHAP. 1.
How the Grecians deprived Agamemnon of his place of Genorall of their Army,
and made Pallamides General in his place.

THe worthy Champion Hector, being slain,
And fierce Achilles borne unto his tent.
Whereas he lay in danger great, and pain.
King Agamemnon for the Grecians sent,
Next day betimes assooue as son did rise,
To ask of them their counsel and advise,
What would be best for them as then to do,
Since they by vallant Hectors death were free
From danger great which he had put them two,
And out of fear of his great cruelty.
And when that they were altogether met
Within his tent, and there in order set,
And silence made, he spoke unto them all,
And said my Lords and Princes every one
That now are here: If you to mind will call
What good the Gods of late for you have done.
You ought to give them thanks with humble voice,
And inwardly in heart and mind rejoice,
To think on Hectors death, for he alone
Was the only prop and chief support of Troy,
Their whole defense, and their protection,
Their chiefest trust, their honor, and their joy.
And unto us confusion and death,
For that while he enjoyed vital breath.
We never could his valor great withstand,
Nor victory against our foes obtain.
For when that we did first set foot on lend,
Prothesalus by him was fiercely slain.
And next day when in field again we met,
He did upon Patroclus fiercely set,
And with his sword did cleave his breast in twain,
And after killed King Menon furiously
And next by him Archilagus was slain,
And in his wrath and extreme cruelty,
He slew the most renowned Prothenor,
And then the valiant King called Alphenor.
King Phillis also and Epistrophus,
And Merian a Prince of great renown.
And after him a King called Zantipus,
And in the field as he road up and down,
He flew two Kings, the one called Dorius,
The other had to name King Cedius.
And after that he killed strong Polibet,
L^^aboni^, Policenes, and more,
For in his wrath he slew King Phi^b^^,
And to the ground in surious wife he bore,
And killed the valiant King Isidius,
And then the noble King called Humorus,
For eighteen great and worthy Kings, and many
Brave Earls, Dukes, and Princes he has slain,
With thousands more. So that not ever any
Likevalor to him showd, nor could obtain
Such victory against us, for that his hand
Was the only terror to us in this Land.
But'now he is dead, to our no little joy,
(The Gods be thankt therefore) and to the woe
And great distress of all that are in Troy,
As by experience time to them will show.
Laud also and much honor given be
To Fortune, for her great benignity
Unto us shown in helping us so well,
To bring that furious Champion to his end,
By turning of her ^alse and fickle wheel,
And unto us such favor did extend.
That by his death while this war does endure,
All we that now are here, may live secure.
With comfort great and ease of extreme care
And fear we had of him while that he lived.
Where contrary the Tr^ians all now are
(By death of him that only them relieud)
Texpect naught else but their destruction,
And finally their towns subversion.
For now he is gone, they cannot long endure,
For be assured we will them so much grieve,
(That from hence forth we may our selves assure
To have our wills on them ere we them leave.)
And make this siedge to them importable,
If we do hold together firm and stable.
Their ship in the end is like to prove a wrack,
And ready with huge billows t'orewhelme,
For all their hope and comfort goes back*
And deep despair is guider of the^^ helm.
And makes them continually depend
On death, while we our state do still amend;
By aid of God both on the sea and land,
For now without all ambiguitie,
We may expect the victory at hand;
And boldly light with great security
Against our foes, without all fear or dread*
But yet my counsel is ere we proceed
T'assaile our foes, as we intend to do,
To stay a while and not to pass our bonds,
Till that Achilles to the fieild may go
With us, when he is healed of his wounds.
And then we will assail them valiantly,
And put them to most great extreamitie.
And till we have destroid them never cease,
Mean time well send unto King Priamus
A messenger for to entreat with him for peace
For two months space, if he will grant it us:
Whereto I do not doubt but he will agree,
Since for his good as well as ours twill be.
For he thereby may liberty obtain,
To celebeate the funeralles of those
Dead Trojans that within the field lie slain,
And serve for food to beast and carrion Crows:
And such a shincke into the air do cast,
That t'cannot choose but breed the plague at last.
And we the while may do the same likewise,
And heal our wounds, and give our bodies rest.
And so when they had all agreed by good advise,
Considered of his speech, and found it best
For them to do it. They did thereto consent,
And presently a messenger was sent
To Troy for truce, which granted was full soon
By Priamus, and he returned again
With speed, and made to them relation*
What he had done while he did there remain,
And for that truce, their counsel brake up so,
And every one unto his tent did go.
And while the truce endured, and they lay still,
And leisure had to think on their estate:
Pallamides whose heart began to fill
And swell with pride, disclaine, and deadly hate*
Grutch in his mind that King Agamemnon,
Because he had the sole dominion,
And ore the Grecian house was General,
And for that cause did envy him so much,
(And into such a great conceit did fall
Of his own worth,) that he began to grutch,
And murmured with indignation
At him, and in his furious passion*
Did seem to use such terms to his disgrace,
That all that heard the same might easily know
What he did mean, and yet he let it pas,
As thought he made no account thereof in show.
Till in the end that King Agamemnon,
Who was a Prince of great discretion,
Did hear thereof, and knowing his intent,
Determind with him self to move the same
Unto the Grecian Princes in his ^en^,
And when they all together thither came,
And orderly were set. That worthy King
Agamemnon, a Prince in every thing
So cercumspect, so wise, and provident,
So temperate, demure, and virtuous,
So prudent, well advisd, and patient,
And never given to be malicious:
Although he knew Pallamides intent,
And saw how much his heart to pride was bent.
With decent terms and great discretion,
(As he that could well frame and tell his mind,
And so restrain the same from passion
And hastines, or any other kind
Of bad behavior, or unseemliness,
That nothing past but with advisednesse
Out of his mouth, as first considered
Within his heart with great sincerity,
And neither for affection nor for dread,
Would seem to break the bonds of modesty.
Nor in his speeches superfluously let pas
One word, or sentence that unseemly was.)
He first saluted all his company:
And when he had causd silence to be made,
In seemly wise and in great courtesy,
He spoke unto Pallamides and said,
You need not King Pallamides said he,
As I suppose, if you advised be,
To muse o^ grutch that I am General
Of our great host, if you considered
How I attaind thereto by choice of all
The Princes here, and that it was offered
To me by full and free Election,
And not hy any composition
By me, or any for me, to procure
The same in my behalf once given or made,
For there of in my heart I am most sure,
No such ambitious thought I ever had:
Nor never dreamt of any such pretense,
But am most clear thereof in conscience.
Which never moved was with such vain glory,
As to aspire, or any ways contest
For this estate, which is but transitory,
Though I must say that I have done my best,
To see and look that all things might be well,
And for the good of this our common well.
And also that I had a special care,
As it is my charge while I the same do hold,
Of every man's estate particular.
And ever an indifferent eye did hold
To all degrees of persons high or low,
To help them in their need, when I did know
That they had need of aid, and day and night,
Was always moved with great carefulnes,
And special heed as much as ere I might;
To see that none did fall into distress.
And such a jealous eye thereto I had,
That in my heart I was exceeding glad
To do the best I could to please each one,
And that no man should at me take offense,
Nor have in me the least suspicion,
Of envy, sloth, or any negligence
In my estate, but ever more desired
To do my best, as time and place required,
For every man without exception.
And therefore I assure my self full well,
That in the host there is not any one
Of high or low estate that I can tell,
That can or may accuse me certainly
Of falsehood, or of partiality,
In his behalf, for I have always had
So great a care to nourish unity
And friendship mong you all, that I was glad
To see you live in love and amity.
So that till now I am full well assured,
That while I in this office have endured,
No such occasion has been ministered,
And all the Gods well know I never feared,
Nor cared, though you had determined
An other in my place to have preferred:
And given him the soueraintie,
And let me live at ease and liberty
In quietness of mind, as many more
Great Lords, and Princes here amongst you may,
That I might with my whole desire and power,
Fight for our common weal both night and day.
And ere in this our quarrel (if so be
It please the Gods) it should so hap to me.
Which for my part I speak and do not feign,
For it were no boot for me herein to lie.
And where you say, and thereof do complain
That I was chosen without your priuitie:
It Is true indeed, as every man can tell
You were not here, if you remember well.
Nor came not hither unto Troy, well nere
After that we our voyage had begun,
And planted this our siedge, in two whole year,
And for to let so long time ouer-run,
To stay till you had come, it might perchance
Have been to us a mighty hinderance,
And extreme hurt, for if that we had staid,
And lain so long at Athens still for you,
(As by your self it cannot be denaid,)
It Is like we had remained there till now.
And where you did esteem't incredible,
And held it for a thing impossible
For Grecians to presume in any wise,
(Without the aid and help of yours and you;)
To take on them so great an enterprise,
It Is nothing so, as you see plainly now.
For they without offense (to you be it said)
By force and power without you or your aid,
Performed have with most victorious hand,
And by their valor great, and worthiness,
Great matters both by water and by land:
And where you think, and say of me no less,
That I am proud of this my great estate,
To see my self so highly eleuate:
And that I seem because of my degree
Of General, t'extoll and magnify
My self too much: It is so far from me,
That for to prove and show the contrary,
And put you clean out of suspicion,
I will thereof make resignation
Unto you now, my self thereby t'excuse,
And for that cause I do advise you all,
Against to morrow in the morn to choose,
Whom you will have to be your General:
For I therein will make no more delay,
And so their counsel ended for that day.
And they went to their tents to rest all night.
And next day in the morning ere the sun
Began with radiant beams to shine most bright,
They met again for the Election:
And when they were assembled all together,
And knew the cause why they did then come thither:
Agamemnon with sober smiling cheer,
Rose up upon his feet, and to them spoke,
And said, my Lords that are assembled here,
I need no long discourse unto you make,
To show how I with heart and good intent
Have labored in this my government.
To see that all things might be done so well,
That they unto your good would wholly tend,
And for th'aduancement of your common weal,
By aid of Gods, and Fortune that did lend
Their grace and helping hand therein to me,
Whereby your state as yet does seem to be
Maintaind in honor great, and nobleness,
So that while you do flourish, and uphold
The same entire, and in great happiness,
I think it best for me that now I should
My government unto you all resign,
While Fortune to the same is so benign.
For of so many that here present are,
I know my self most insufficient,
Alone to take so great a charge and care
On me, and for that cause it is my intent,
To leave the same, for he may ouerwhelme
A ship, that knows not how to guide the helm.
My whole desire therefore is, that you would
Give leave to me t'resigne my government,
And charge which I of all this host do hold,
So that no man therewith be discontent.
And let us now with one intention,
Without all strife, and all dissension,
Amongst us find and choose out such a one
As we do like, and is most fit and meet
To govern us by good discretion,
And in the place of General to set.
Whereto they all agreed with one consent,
And as he said* to choose one were content.
Here you may see, that it is a usual thing
With men to take delight in novelties,
And that there thoughts are always wavering;
And led away with foolish fantasies.
In them most sure there is no security,
For all their minds are on variety.
And their delights in alteration;
And change of state, and never are content
Nor seldom hold in one opinion.
To day to love some one man they are bent,
Next day they will hate that man as much again,
And never do in constant mind remain.
For in a vain of mere new ^anglenes,
Which at that t^me moved their affection
With great oresight, and much unthankfulness,
In steed of valiant King Agamemnon,
They all agreed with one consent and voice,
Of King Pallamides to make their choice
To bear the rule and government of all
The Grecian host, and with most great applause,
Gave him the state and name of General,
To rule and govern them by Martial laws.
Like as the worthy King Agamemnon,
Had done before with great discretion.
Which done, they brake up counsel for that day,
And every man unto his tent did go.
But when Achilles, who then wounded, lay
Sore sick within his tent, thereof did know,
And heard how they all with one will and voice,
Of King Pallamides had made there choice:
He was much grieved thereat, and flatly said,
Agamemnon in his opinion,
Much fitter was the place still to have had
Then the other, and that their Election
In that case was not good, nor commendable,
Nor by their Martial law available,
Because it was done without consent of all
The Princes in the host, he being one
Whom they did neither summon, nor yet call
To be with them at their Election.
And did esteem't to him a great offense,
That they did make that choice in his absence.
And for that cause he was exceeding wroth,
And cha^ed sore, but it was to little end,
For whether he therewith was leefe or loath,
They would no ear unto his speeches lend.
For no Election more the Grecians would
For that time make, But said, it should so hold.
CHAP. II.
How King Priamus in person issued out of Troy with a puissant ^^ast to revenge
Hectors death, and fought most valiantly against the Grecians.

THe time of truce aforesaid being out,
The next ensuing morrow Priamus,
Though old in years, yet valorous and stout
Of heart, was in his mind desirous,
Against the Grecians valiantly to fight,
T'reuenge the death of Hector if he might.
Which when the Trojans knew, and did behold
Their aged Kings great courage, and his might,
They were exceeding glad, and said they would
Adventure life and lim with him to fight
Against the Greeks, and therefore every one
Did arm himself with resolution:
That day to issue forth with Priamus,
And those of Troy that armor bare as then,
Were as my Author Dares ^elleth us,
An hundred and just fifty thousand men,
Besides all those of other countries
That aided him against his enemies.
And first into the field went Deiphobus,
And after him his brother Paris led
The second ward, the third King Priamus,
Then Menon, and Aeneas followed.
And last of all Pollidamas did go
The rere-ward to conduct in warlike shoe.
And that same day upon the Grecians side,
With mighty troops all in good order set,
Pallamides with heart replcat with pride,
The Trojans in the field most bravely met.
And when the Battles joined on either side,
King Priam to Pallamides did ^ide,
And like a worthy Prince of great renown,
Most valiantly unhorsed him with his lance,
And clean out of his sadle bare him down
Unto the ground, and forward did advance
Himself, and road among the Grecians,
And with his trenchant blade in both his hands,
So heawd, beat down, and mightily ore-run
The Grecians in the field where he did ride,
That they for fear his puissant blows did shun,
And durst not in his furious sight abide.
And them so fast and cruelly did slay,
That wheresoere he road they made him way.
And shund his sword he was so furious.
For all that day he fought so valiantly,
And showed himself so strong and valorous;
That wonder it was he could so puissantly,
And long in field against his foes endure,
Being of so great an age, for it is most sure
That by his valor great and puissant might,
Which he that time courageously did shoe,
He put the proud and haughty Greeks to flight.
His Son Deiphobus valiantly also,
That followed him, so fiercely on them set,
That he did kill and beat down all he met.
King Sarpedon likewise that time did fall
Upon the valiant King Neptolemus,
The prowdest Greek at that time among them all
And he likewise with heart courageous
At Sarpedon did run, and with great might,
Out of his sadle fiercely did him smight.
But Sarpedon with fell and wrathful heart,
The which with rage and anger burned hot,
Did suddenly upon his feet up start,
And with his sword Neptolemus he smot
Into the thigh a great and cruel wound,
Wherewith he made him fall upon the ground.
But when the King of Percia did perceive
King Sarpedon stand fighting on his feet
In danger great, he did him straight relieve,
And on the greeks so furiously did set,
That in despite of them by mighty force
He help him soon again unto his horse.
But at that time King Menelaus came thither,
And Menestes Th'athenian Duke, who both
With many troops of Grecian Knights together,
In furious wise and with exceeding wroth,
Upon the King of Percia did fall,
And did enclose him round amongst them all.
Who fighting with them valiantly and long,
At last when he their force could not sustain,
They did so thick and fast upon him throng,
He was by them with disadvantage slain.
Whose death so much the Trojans did dismay,
That they retird and gave the Grecians way.
Till Sarpedon with bloody sword in hand,
Courageously did many Grecians slay,
And did their force and fury so withstand,
That he not only forced the Greeks to stay,
But drove them all before him on the plain,
And made the Trojans win their ground again.
While Priamus upon the other side,
With all his sons that bare him company,
Amongst the Grecians valiantly did ride,
And killed, and beat them down: but specially
King Priamus with many a bloody wound,
Did kill and slay all he before him found.
So that not any Trojan young or old,
What soere he was though nere so high and strong
Of body and of lim, nor nere so bold,
That time did fight so furiously and long,
As Priamus himself, for he alone
That day was many a Greeks destruction,
And utter overthrow. For that their
Wherewith he was at that time wholly led,
And made his heart to burn as hot as fire,
For causes two was then redoubled.
One for th'inveterate hatred which he bare
Unto the Greeks, the other cause he swear,
And vou'd to be revenged if he might,
For Hectors death, which put him in such rage,
That while he had the Grecians in his sight,
He could his choler by no means assuage.
But doubling his strength so fiercely fought,
That many a Greek that day to his death he brought,
And so continued in such furious wise
To take revenge on them, that in despite
Of all his fierce and cruel enemies,
By valor great he put them all to flight.
But they by slight the Trojans to beguile,
When they had fled before them for a while,
Did wheel about and suddenly went down
Into a very great and spacious plain,
That lay between the Trojans and the town,
Intending some advantage so to gain
Upon their foes, and to that end did set
Great Ambuscadoes every way to let.
And keep them from going into Troy again,
And certainly had don't by likelihood:
If Priamus had not with mighty pain,
And valor great most bravely them withstood
Who at that time like Lion fierce and strong,
With sword in hand did ride into the throng
And thickest of the Greeks, and valiantly
Brake all their rancks, and with deep wounds and wide,
Hact, hewd, and beat them down so puissantly,
That no man durst his trenchant sword abide.
For whosoere he stroke was surely slain,
Wheresoever he did ride throughout the plain.
At which time also Paris did so fast
Pursue them with his bows and crosbowes shot,
And piercing darts, which through their armors past
And by that means such vantage on them got,
That they began to give the Trojans place,
And Priamus did them so hotly chase,
That being put to great extremity,
By means of his exceeding force and might,
And to avoid his extreme cruelty,
They did with mighty fear and great despite
Fly to their ^ents, glad they escaped so,
And they of Troy into the town did go.
Because as then it drew fast toward night,
For Phoebus with his chariot west did hie
Unto the Indian coast to give them light.
And so the honor of the victory
Was wholly given to Priamus alone,
Who by his valor great the same had wone.
To ease his heart of that exceeding sorrow
Which he therein conceiud for Hectors sake,
But yet upon the next ensuing morrow
He sent unto the Greeks a truce to make
With them, whereto they gladly did agree,
But how long time the same should holden be,
It Is not expressed. In which time they of Troy
Great preparation made with diligence,
The Percian Kings dead body to conuoy,
According to his state with reverence,
And honor great into his country,
That he in decent wise entombe might be:
And buried among his progenitors
The Percian Kings, and so most solemnly
His Captains and his other officers,
Did take the corpse embalmed sumptuously,
And laid it in a Chariot covered ore
With black, and so in mournful weeds it bore
To Percia, conuaied with a rout
Of his own worthy Knights, and many more,
That in most doleful wise did ride about
The body, and behind, and eke before
The same did go unto the burial.
And at that time the sumptuous funeral
Of Hector was in Troy solemnized,
According to the manner in those days,
The which with honor great was hallowed,
(As Guido and his Author Dares says.)
For space of fourteen days continually,
And all that while within the sanctuary.
Great store of lights did burn and near went out,
Which custom they continually did keep
From year to year as it did run abo^t,
Wherein they never ceast to mourn and weep,
And watched and prayed there both night and day,
In mourning weeds, and never went away
From thence, but on there knees continued there,
Before the tombs of their dead friends: and so
The Trojans who great grief in mind did bear
For Hectors death, in woeful wise did go,
All clad in black to mourn and to lament
His death, till that full fourteen days were spent,
The which they did, with great solemnity,
While that th'aforesaid truce continued was
When as the Greeks might with free liberty
Go into Troy, and without danger pas
The gates thereof, and they of Troy also
As freely might unto the Grecians go.
At which time when Achilles wounds were curd,
And that he could well travel up and down,
He had a great desire while truce endured
To enter into Troy to see the town,
And to behold the sumptuous funeral
For Hector made, by all in general
Within the same, and so unarmed (without
Assurance, other then the truce then made,
Whereof in those days men stood not in doubt*)
He went to Troy, and entering in nere staid,
But to Apolloes Temple straight did go,
Wherein as then with brave and warlike sho,
According to the Pagans ancient rights,
The funeral was there accomplished
In presence of great multitudes of Knights,
And Lords and Ladies fair, who then did shead
Great store of tears with much affection,
And on their knees fell down before the throne
Whereas the corpse of that most worthy Knight
Unburied stood upright upon his feet,
And seemd as fresh and fair unto the sight,
(By virtue of the precious gums most sweet,
And balm) the which his flesh did so revive,
That he did show as he had been alive.
And at this feast and great solemnity,
Queen Hecuba with Policene and other
Fair Dames, and Princes of great dignity
Sat weeping, and in company together
Apparelled in sad and mournful black,
Such lamentation at that time did make
For Hectors death as nere the like was seen.
And yet for all the sorrow that they made,
The fair and goodly Lady Pollicene,
No part of her great beauty changed had,
But still a crimson red and white most clear
Within her face and countnance did appear
For all the tears that she as then did shead,
Which trickled down her cheeks like poa^les fine:
Her hair that then hung round about her head
In careless wi^e, like golden wier did shine,
And showed like Phoebus glistring beams most bright
When he does cast on us his radiant light.
Which with her fingers small ^^e rent and tare,
Whose beauty when Achilles did behold,
He did esteem the same to be so rare,
That he did muse how God and Nature could
Devise and make so fair ^^ creature,
For comlines of face, and feature:
So Angell-like she did to him appear,
That he to look on her could not endure,
For with her crystal eyes most fair and clear,
She stroke him then into the heart so sure,
That for her love which was his whole desire,
He burnt within as hot as any fire.
And suddenly again with grief he shook
Like one that is in fear, yet evermore
Upon her he did cast a glancing look,
For Cupids dart had pierced him so sore
Into the breast, and given him such a wound,
That it was likely never to be sound.
And as he durst he looked her in the face,
And still approacht unto her with his eye,
For whom (if that in her he found no grace,)
He made account assuredly to die.
For he was fallen and caught in such a snare,
That of his health he was in great despair,
And in his heart he was perplexed so,
That care of all things else he did reject,
For knowing not what he were best to do,
He did himself and all his state neglect,
To set his thought on her, and in this wise
He fed himself with sight of her fair eyes.
Till Phoebus with his char^^^ did decline,
And to the Western coasts began to draw,
And on their hemisphere no more did shine.
When as he cast his eyes about and saw
Queen Hecuba with Pollicene, and mo,
Out of the Temple to the Palace go.
On whom he never ceast to have a sight,
As she did pas along, till that she went
Out of the gate, and he no longer might
With her fair eyes give to his heart content.
And then no longer in the town be staid,
But going to his tent himself he laid
Upon his bed with sad and heavy cheer,
Whereas he lay still thinking on his love,
Whose beauty in his sight did so appear,
And as he thought still more and more did move
His heart the same with great desire to crave,
That he no rest no^ any ease could have.
For love of whom such burning heat he felt,
And extreme pain, which did torment him so,
That with the same he thought his heart would melt,
And in that sort he tumbled too and fro.
And like a man half dead and fore dismayed,
Unto himself he spoke, and thus he said,
Alas quoth he, that fortune so unkind
Should be to me, to make me feel and know
Such grief that I no end thereof can find,
For that it does my heart so ouerflow,
As I suppose that since the world began,
There nere was found a more distressed man.
(For I that whilome was of so great might,
Renowned throughout the world of high and low,
And honored and feared of every wight,
For no man ever heard no^ yet did know,
Of any Knight that was more valorous
Then I, nor ever more victorious.
For neither Hector that most valiant Knight,
That was my Lady Pollicenes dear brother,
Although he was of most exceeding might,
And hardy therewithal, nor any other,
The power had when he on me did set,
The least advantage upon me to get.
Nor in the field my courage once could daunt,
Or make me yield, of fearfully to fly,
Whereof I may unto my self now vaunt.)
Because I am assurd i^ is no lie.
Now, now alas, a maid of tender age,
Has suddenly set me in such a rage:
And with the streams of her fair Crystal eyes,
Has pierst my woeful heart and every vain,
That I cannot by any means devise
How to relieve my self, or ease my pain.
On whom shall I for counsel now re^^e?
Or who can give me any remedy,
To ease and cure my grief and heaviness?
For this is sure, that hope for me there is none,
If death end not my woe and great distress,
But her good will, and that from me is gone:
For neither prayer, wealth, nor comlines,
Strength, power, courage, nor yet Noblenes,
Birth, honor, blood, nor great affinity,
Can ought avail to help me now in need,
To move her stony heart (to pity me)
For whom my heart with inward grief does bleed.
What fury has possessed my restles brain,
That it should so against nature me constaine,
And make me prove so much unfortunate*
As for to seek mine own confusion,
To love and like of her that does me hate?
But truth to say, when as I think thereon,
No marvel it is that she does me despise,
Since I am come to Troy in warlike wise*
To kill, and to destroy her kindred,
And all her friends by fierce and cruel war,
Wherein the blood I have already shead
Of Hector her dear brother, who both far
And near was known to be the valiantst knight
That ever lived, for valor, and for might.
Alas for woe, now may I quake for fear,
And of my life despair both day and night,
For with what face can I fore her appear,
Or be so bold to come into her sight?
That have offended her in such a fashion,
As that in truth I merit no remission
Nor pardon at her hands, but certainly
Must yield my self the sentence to abide
Of cruel death, to end my misery,
Which does enclose me round on every side.
And so with many sobs and sighs most deep,
He did begin so bitterly to weep,
And made such woeful lamentation,
That pity it was for any man to hear,
Or see the grief and cruel passion,
Which he with great extremity did bear
Within his mind, and outwardly expressed,
And so he lay, and by no means could rest
But tumbled on his bed till night came on,
Wherein as little comfort he received
As in the day, for rest he could get none,
So that of all relief, and joy bereaved,
He did continue still in grief, and sorrow,
Till that the star called Lucifer next morrow
Began in the east (ere Phoebus did arise,)
To show itself, and brightly to appear.
When drencht in tears, with wet and heavy eyes
For want of rest, and quaking with the fear*
And grief he had conceived in his heart:
He held his peace, and presently up start,
And calling one to him he trusted well,
And whom he knew desird and wished his good*
He did from point to point unto him tell
What he had done, and how with him it stood,
And sent him to the town of Troy to speak
With Hecuba, and unto her to break
The matter, and by his discretion
To find a means if possible it were,
To give to him some satisfaction,
In that which he s^mpatiently did bear.
Who presently unto the Queen did go,
And handled the matter with her so,
And did so wisely play his part therein,
Before that he did utter their pretense,
That he had license granted of the Queen
To tell his mind to her without offense:
With promise whatsoever that it were,
She would vouchsafe the same of him to hear.
To whom he did his message so explain,
That no man ever heard a better p^^d,
For from his mouth there past no word in vain,
No^ sentence, but was spoken to some end:
And at the last he brought it finely out,
With many circumstances fetched about,
And told her, that the full conclusion,
And purpose of his message verily,
Was with a steadfast resolution,
To set a perfect peace and unity
Between the Greeks and Trojans that same day,
Whereto he said, he knew no better way,
(If he might be believed) for both their ease,
(And t'end the mortal strife and bitter rage
Of war, and all dissension to appease)
Then speedily to make a marriage
Between Achilles and fair Polixene
Her daughter, if that so t'wold please the Queen
Whereby he said, all enmity would cease*
If she could by her good discretion,
Find means King Priams anger to appease,
And by her wit and mediation,
Get him to be well pleased, and content
With willing mind to give his free consent
That Polixene his daughter should be made
Achilles wife, upon condition,
As he at first unto her then had said,
That all the Greeks should presently be gone
And leave that bloody war, as soon as ever
They two by marriage should be linckt together.
Whose message when the Queen did understand,
And know the effect of that he did require.
She did a while as one amazed stand,
And ere she answer made to his desire:
She sighed sore, and then with heavy cheer,
She spoke and said unto the messenger:
My friend, concerning that thou do request,
I cannot of my self thereto consent,
Yet for my part I will be always pressed,
And with my heart am willing and content
Thy masters will therein to satisfy,
^ And so I would thou should him certify.
But first I must King Priams pleasure know,
If he will grant to that which thou do move,
And I must likewise unto Paris show
The Effect and meaning of thy master love.
To see if he will give consent thereto,
The which as soon as ere I can, i will do.
Whereof I will an answer make to thee
Within three days, and then i will satisfy
Thy Lord, if he will send again to me.
Mean time thou mai'st return with safety,
And satisfy thy master in some part,
Of his desire to ease his troubled heart.
And therewithal the messenger went back
Unto Achilles tent, with countnance glad,
To whom he did in such wise answer make
Concerning that which he declared had
Unto Queen Hecuba, that he thereby
Was somewhat easd, and looked cheerfully.
In hope that by that means he should in the end
Attain to that which he so much desird,
And so well pleased in mind, he did attend
The three days time by Hecuba requird:
To answer unto that he did propound.
Who presently when she King Priam found
At leisure all alone, to him did move
The matter touching that Achilles had
Made known to her, and that he was in love
With Pollicene, and for her sake had made
A profer to procure a final peace
Between the Greeks and Trojans, and to cea^^
All war and mortal strife, so that he would
Give her to him. The which when he perceiud,
He did the Queen with countnance ^ad behold
And as it were a man of speech bereaved,
Sat mute, and woundred to himself wherefore
Achilles should love Pollicene so sore,
That he would make that offer for her sake.
And at the last he sighed and said, alas
What grief is this, that I no peace can make?
For can Achilles wrong so lightly pas
Out of my head, when as I think how he
Slew my son Hector by his cruelty?
Who while he lived, as't cannot be denied,
Of me and mine was the only safety,
And special stay, supporter, and the guide
Of all that under my command now be.
And to speak truth, he was as it were the light
Of both mine eyes, for by his puiffant might
He did protect and save me from the rage
And cruel fury of my Grecian foes,
And was the staff of all my age.
But now alas (which filles me full of woes.)
Achilles has him slain, which from my mind
Shall never pas, for who in heart can find
To be alied unto his mortal foe?
And hard it were to bend my heart, to love
Him that is cause of all my grief, and woe,
And by that means the Grecians proud does move
T'insult on me, now fortune does m^ cross
And frowns on me, and only for the loss
Of Hector my dear son that was my stay.
Yet against my heart (which does for anger riue)
Since that as now there is no other way,
I will, (though loath) against my nature strive*
For truth to say, it grieueth me full sore,
Yet to eschew great dangers many more,
Which likely are to happen unto me,
And to preserve my sons that yet do live,
I am content and thereunto agree,
My youngest daughter Pollicene to give
Unto Achilles, on condition he
Shall hold his promise he has made, to be
The means to make a truce and final peace
Between the Greeks and Trojans, and that we
Our mortal war from henceforth shall surcease*
But least that he should mean some treachery,
I will that he shall first perform the offer,
Which he so freely of himself does proffer:
Without all fraud or false collusion.
Which Paris also did consent unto:
(The rather for that no exception
What they with fair Queen Helena would do,
Was made therein, whereby he did suppose
That Menelans should her for ever lose.
And never have her into Greece again,
And therefore he did freely without strife
Agree thereto, that he might so obtain
His will to have Queen Helen for his wife,
Without all doubt or contrariety,
For in her was his whole felicity.
And when the three days foresaid ended were,
Achilles unto Hecuba straight sent
His messenger again, of her t'inquire
What Priam said, concerning his intent.
To whom she told at large what had been don,
And how that she the King thereto had won.
And Paris likewise to consent thereto,
As also that her self well willing was
With them t'agree, and grant it should be so,
If he could find the means to bring't to pas,
That peace between them, (as he said he would)
Perpetually for evermore should hold.
The which she said he must first bring about,
And sure and perfect make in each condition:
And then he should not need to stand in dout
Of speeding in his love, with expedition.
Wherewith Achilles messenger content,
Out of the town unto his master went.
To whom he told the answer that was made
By Hecuba to him, wherewith well pleased,
And seeing that no other way he had
But peace whereby he might of grief be eased:
He purposed to bring the same to effect,
And did no time, nor any means neglect,
To find a way t'impart the same unto
The Greeks, the which while he did go about,
Supposing certainly that they would do
The same for him, and yet thereof did doubt.
At last into a desperate mind he fell,
And did persuade himself in heart full well,
That he the power had to work his will,
And that without all cause of doubt or fear,
The Grecians would most redily fulfill
His mind, and grant to that he should require,
And in that sort he did himself persuade
All should fall out, (as he devised had,)
According to his will and fantasy,
As lovers use to do. Who whatsoere
They take in hand think, it must certainly
Fall out, though nere s'impossible it were.
So much their minds with folly are possessed.
And so Achilles did set down his rest,
And was in hope his mind to satisfy,
Supposing that for his great worthiness,
His mighty strength, and his actiuitie,
His high renown, and passing valiantnes.
(Whereof with no small pride great boast ^^e made,
And in himself therefore much glory had.)
The Grecians would be in despair and fear
For ever winning Troy, if he withheld
His helping hand, and that by him they were
Forsaken, when they went into the field:
And would at last, and only for his sake
The siedge of Troy and all their war forsake.
Unless that he among them still did stay
To help them till that they had made an end.
And for that cause he made no more delay,
But did procure Pallamides to send
For all the Lords unto his tent to know,
What unto them he did intend to show.
And when that they assembled were together,
Achilles spoke, and said as you shall hear:
My Lords, since it has pleased you to come hither,
And that at my request you summond were;
Let me desire you without offense
To tell my mind before this audience:
I know said he, that for the providence,
The wisdom, and the great discretion,
The valor, mighty force, and sapience,
The honor, wealth, and excellent renown.
Wherewith you are endowed, your worthy name
From East to West is spread by trompe of Fame:
But nerethelesse that these things do belong
Of right to you, yet this I must you tell,
That though that you be nere so huge and strong,
(As truth to say you do in force excel
All Nations, yet if you do consider
The very cause wherefore you are come hither,
You must confess and so it will be found,
That you in this your quarrel had no right,
Nor reason whereupon you might it ground;
For sure, it is most evident to sight
Of every man that bears an upright heart,
That you herein did play a foolish part,
Without forecasting with advisednes
What cause you had to make this mortal war:
For when as we by foolish hastines
Did come out of our countries so far,
Into the Trojan land our lives to venture
Against our foes; The quarrel we did enter,
At that same time into, as every one
Of us well knows, was for the injury,
And to revenge the private cause alone
Of Menelaus; for who can it deny,
That th'ravishing of Helena his wife,
Was the only cause of all the war and strife
Between us and the Troyans which as now
We do maintain with great hostilie,
And for the which we all have made a vow
To sack the town of Troy, with ieopardie
Of life and goods, and for that cause have left
Our Countries and our Cities, and bereft
Our children and our wives of all delight
And joy, and make them mourn in great distress,
While we remain here in the field to fight
Against our foes, in grief and heaviness,
Assailed and enclosed on every side
With enemies, and naught but death abide.
For since the time that this our war began,
(Which only of mere pride we do maintain)
It has us cost the life of many a man
Of great and mean account, that now are slain,
Who might have lived at home in wealth and joy,
If they had not come hither unto Troy,
To loose their lives by their own wilfulness,
Here in this place with great extreamitie.
And for my part I must in truth confess,
That by the Troyans force and cruelty,
So much blood I have lost since we began
This war, that it has made me pale and wan.
And not long since I had a wound again,
Which Hector with a Dart did give to me
Upon the thigh, that day that he was slain,
Which put me to so great extremity,
That it has made me long in bed to lie
To heal't, and yet I doubt thereof to die,
Ift be not quickly cured; for it is yet green,
And very sore, and puts me to great pain,
With many other wounds that yet are seen
Upon me still, which make me often complain:
And truth to say, (if it considered were)
We should not buy Queen Helena so dear.
As for her t'hazard life and lim, and all
Our honors, and our worldly goods and fame,
The which unto us quickly may befall,
If we have not regard unto the same,
And in our minds consider not how much,
This doubtful war for Helen does us tuch.
For if that we our reckning rightly make,
And call to mind what alteration
Has fallen since we the same did undertake,
And what destruction of our warlike Nation
Has for her sake been made, and yet much more
Dishonor we are like to have therefore,
And to incur; for as it does appear,
Although we do still hold this siege so long,
In fine, if that we do continue hear,
It will to us because of greater wrong:
And more and more redownd unto our shame,
If order be not taken for the same.
Which may be, if that we on either side,
Together would agree with one consent,
That Helena, in Troy shall still abide,
And that King Menelaus would be content
To take another wife, and let her go,
That to him does her self unfaithful shoe.
Which he by law and without blame mya take,
And be diuorst from Helena, since she
So shamelesly in Greece did him forsake
For Paris, and commit adultery
Thereby, with foul disgrace unto her name,
And truth to say, to her perpetual shame.
For many great examples extant be,
And through the world are to be heard and seen,
How that for filthy foul adultery,
Great Princes from their wives divorst have been.
And therefore it can be no prejudice,
If for that most accursed sinful vice:
King Menelaus does justly her forsake,
And of another wife does make his choice,
The which of him much more account will make.
Whereto if that you all will give your voice,
It Will for our good, be cause this war to end,
Wherein our lives and blood we vainly spend.
And likely is, if it continue long,
To cost much more both of our lives and blood,
For Troy is so invincible and strong,
And furnished with worthy Knights and good,
And in so great a number, that though we
Should stay here still the uttermost to see,
We never should be able to attain
To that we do pretend and so desire.
And therefore since it is so, it were in vain
For us to stay, and proudly to aspire
With wilfulnes to that we cannot get:
But rather let us our minds on reason set,
And think more of our profit then our glory,
And wisely in good time withdraw our power,
While honor graceth us with victory,
Since we cannot make fortune (if she lower)
To stay her wheel which is so variable,
And therefore ere she waxes mutable,
And does begin on us to change her cheer:
Let us leave off the war and live in peace,
And go our way, and stay no longer here.
For better it is from bloody war to cease,
While we may do it, and so our honor save,
For of the war the advantage yet we have.
For all men know that by our valor great,
Our principallest foe Prince Hector's slain,
My counsel therefore is we should not let
The Advantage go, while we do still retain
Our honor, and ere fortune gins to lower,
And seeks to cross us by her mighty power,
With one consent and sole opinion
Of heart and mind, we should no more soiourne
Hold at this siege, but let us every one,
With speed into our native Land return:
For if that we our quarrel still maintain,
Which now so long has held, I tell you plain,
I am in doubt great detriment will be
Our shares at last. Wherefore I think it best
Our folly to reject, and ere we see
Worse happen unto us, set up our rest
To leave the war, while as it is known to all,
We are in fame and honor peregall
With them of Troy, and them surpass if we
Our state he hold in his assention,
And while that it is in the highst degree.
But least some men should make objection,
And say, that we cannot our honor save,
If we return to Greece, and cannot have
Our wills to bear fair Helen back again
Into our native land, for whom so many
Of us have in this cruel war been slain:
I say, if that amongst us there be any,
That thinks and is persuaded in his mind
If we go hence, and leave her here behind,
It will to our most great dishonor be:
I say, that it to us can be no shame,
(If that into the depth there of we see)
Since we have one for honor and for fame
As great as she, and by her birth as good,
For she descends of high and royal blood.
As all you know the Princess Exion
King Priams sister, who against their will,
In Greece is holden by King Thelamon,
As Helen is by Paris against our will:
And therefore since it now can be no other,
My counsel is to set the one against the other.
And all the wrath and envy that does rest,
Between us and the Troyans to appease,
The which I think and know would be the best
For us and them, and for our good and ease:
Which otherwise (said he) will never end,
If you unto my counsel will not bend.
To whom with extreme wrath King Menelaus,
Who with Achilles words did seem most tucht,
And Thoas also, and Duke Menestes,
Who likewise at his insolency grucht:
All with one voice unto Achilles spoke,
And into mighty choler against him brake.
And with them all the rest impatiently,
The Court perturb'd, and did begin to fall
Into great words much vnadvisedlie
Against Achilles, and at last said all,
They would not to his counsel then consent,
Nor to make peace in any wise were bent.
Wherewith Achilles full of wrath and ire,
The which did seem to burn within his heart,
To see they would not grant to his desire,
Did sodenlie upon his feet up start:
And in a fury great did go away,
And said he would no longer among them stay:
Nor aid nor succor them in any wise,
(What need so ever they of him should have)
To fight against their Troyan enemies,
And to his men a special charge he gave,
To see they did not aid the Grecians
In any wise against the Troyans,
When so ever they to battle forth should go.
In which his resolution firmly standing,
He did a while himself so constant show,
That while against them in that sort he was banding,
The Grecians many overthrows received,
And thousands of them were of life bereaved.
And while this controversy thus remaind,
The Grecian host great want of victuals had,
Whereby as then much hunger they sustaind,
For which among them great muttring there was
For at that time they were so much distressed (made:
For want of food, that they were sore oppressed.
Till that their General Palamedes,
To remedy the same a Court did call
Of all the Princes in the host, to appease
Their murmuring, and by consent of all
That then assembled were, did order take,
A fleet of ships in readiness to make.
Whereof the King Agamemnon should be
Commander, and with speed with them should sail
To Messa for some victuals, if that he
In that same Isle of so much could prevail,
As need requird for their necessity,
To put them out of that extremity.
Who being there arrived, such favor had
Of Thelaphus the King that therein reigned,
That he not only ready was and glad
To aid the Greeks therein, but straight obtaind
Commission presently, and with all speed
Of him to take as much as they should need
Of every kind of victuals in that jsle,
Commanding all his subjects to fulfill
The same with speed, and so in little while,
According to his pleasure and his will,
They made so great provision of each thing
That served for food, that presently the King
Did fraught and fill their ships with mighty store
Of victuals, that so much as then they had,
That in them they could put nor lade no more.
Whereof King Agamemnon being glad,
He took his leave of Thelaphus, and so
With all his ships full laden forth did go,
And put to sea, and so with wind and weather,
Soon did arrive before the Troyan coast,
Where safely landing all his ships together,
He presently relieved the Grecian host
With victuals, who thereof had then great need,
And thankt him that he brought it with such speed.
The Grecian host relieved as you have heard,
Palamedes went to their ships to see,
If they had any need to be repaired,
And what so ever requisite to be
Bestowd on them was found, he did with care
Cause to be done. And likewise did not spare,
Of every thing what so ever it did cost,
To see provision made, and to supply
All things that needful were within the host,
The which he did perform most carefully,
While time of truce endured and was outrun,
And that their bloody war again begun,
Which many on each side most dearly bought.
Whereof to write at large is my pretense,
And show how they together fiercely sought,
Each the other to destroy in their defense,
And still continued in their deadly hate,
The which they held between the without date.
Unto the great destruction and decay
Of many valiant knights while it did last,
For as they were accustomed next day
Ensuing, after that the truce was past:
In warlike wise well armed with spear and shield,
They entered again into the field.
Where with their banners wavering in great pride,
And drums and trumpets sounding fearfully,
They met together bravely on each side,
And at the first encounter valiantly,
Deiphobus like a Lion furious,
Met with a Grecian King called Creseus.
And with his strong and puissant spear in rest,
Ran at him with so great and mighty force,
That he did pierce him deep into the breast,
Wherewith stark dead he fell off from his horse:
Whose death so much the Greeks did terrify,
That sore amazed they did begin to fly
Unto their tents, as fast as ere they could
To save themselves, with mighty fear and dread,
The which when as the Troyans did behold,
They chased them till that King Diomede,
And with him also King Palamodes,
With most despightfull hearts, and merciles,
With twenty thousand knights accompanied,
Upon the Troyans suddenly did set,
And where the Grecians then before them fled,
They did so fiercely kill, cast down, and beat
The Troyans, that their furious (...) us to shun,
Then made them fore the Greeks as fast to run.
And at that time came Thelamon Ajax in,
Conducting of another Grecian band,
At whose approach such slaughter did begin,
On Troyans side by his victorious hand:
That many of them then were fiercely killed,
And all the plain with Troyans blood was filled.
And as he thus in furious wise did set
On them, and like a Lion fierce for pray
Did range about the field, by chance he met
The worthy knight Sicilian in his way,
(A bastard Son of (...)) whom he
Assailed with such extreme cruelty,
That with his sword he cut his arm in twain,
And he therewith fell dead within the field.
Whom when Deiphobus saw so fiercely slain
By Thelamon, and his dead corpse beheld:
With spear in hand he smote so great a stroke
At Thelmon, that his Lance on him he broke.
And yet did hit him with so great a might,
That with the trunchion which did whole remain,
He did him clean out of his sadle smight,
And laid him all along upon the plain:
Which stroke when King Pallamides beheld,
And saw how he unto the ground was feld,
He was therewith so vexed at the heart,
That to revenge King Thelamon he swear
On Deiphobus, and ere he thence did part,
With mighty spear which in his hand he bare,
He ran and smote Deiphobus such a stroke,
That therewithal he pierst his breast, and broke
The spear within the same, and therein left
The trunchion and the head still sticking fast,
Wherewith he was of vital breath bereft,
But ere the same out of his body past,
Which long within his breast could not abide,
It was his brother Paris chance to ride
That way, where he lay in a manner dead,
Whom when he did behold in such a case,
He was therewith so much astonished,
That he did look with pale and deadly face:
And for him grieved and wept most bitterly,
And bad his knights convey him speedily
Out of the field and prease wherein he lay,
Aside into a place to take the air,
Who presently did bear him thence away
Upon a shield, with easy pace and fair:
And with great grief and sorrow laid him down
Hard by the wall, close underneath the town.
Where when he had a little while still lain,
With heavy cheer he lifted up his eyes,
And being in extremity of pain,
Unto his brother Paris softly cries:
And said, good brother let me one thing crave
Of thee, that thou will pity on me have,
And kindly, and for lone and brother hood,
Remember what to thee I now shall say,
Since that thou can do mono other good,
Because I must depart from thee away:
Thou see what woeful case I here lie in,
For Atropos will now no longer spin
My thread of life, nor favor to me shoe.
Good brother let me crave so much of thee,
Before that I out of the world hence go,
That by thy means I may revenged be,
Of him that has bereaved me of my breath,
And in this sort has given me my death.
That I may be assured before I die
That he is slain, and first gone down to hell,
And in that soul in^ernall lake does lie
With P^^^to, there eternally to dwell,
Amongst the damned souls in grief and woe,
The which when my poor dying heart shall kno^,
I shall depart contentedlie and glad
Out of this world, and will esteem't a bliss
To me, that he his death before me had,
And that with me thereof he did not miss:
Wherein I pray thee do me not deny,
And then pull out this spear and let me die.
Which his desire t'accomplish Paris went,
With speed into the field (in mighty grief
Sore weeping) to revenge with full intent
His brother, who mean time without relief
Lay languishing and drawing on to death,
Expecting every hour to yield his breath.
And seeking up and down, he came whereas
Pallamides was fighting hand to hand
With Sarpedon, (a valiant King, that was
Come unto Troy to Priam with a band
Of valiant Knights to aid him against his foes)
And while that they together fiercely close,
And each the other furiously did smight,
(For Sarpedon was valorous and strong,
And showed himself to be a puissant knight)
Pallamides (when they had ^ought so long,
That both of them were weary) puissantly
Stroke Sarpedon a blow upon the thigh,
And cut it clean a sunder, wherewithal,
King Sarpedon not able to endure*
Upon his horse, dead on the ground did fall,
Whose death unto the Troyans did procure
Such fear, that they were forced to retire,
For that with heart repleat with wrath and me,
Pallamides slew them so furiously,
That they durst not abide before his face.
Whose cruelty when Paris did epsy,
And thought upon his brothers woeful case:
He bent his bow that was exceeding strong,
And therein put an arrow sharp and long,
Which had the head so strongly poisoned,
(That who so ere he chanst therewith to smight,
Was sure to die) and then he followed
Pallamides, and with exceeding might
Shot at him, and did give him such awound
Into the throat, that he fell to the ground,
And died forthwith. Whose death moved such a cry
And fear amongst the Greeks, that (with great grief
Complaining for his death most pittiously
Because he was their General and chief
Of all the host, and their espicall stay)
Like unto sheep that without sheapheard stray
Amassed sore for want of one to guide
And govern them, they resolutely bent
Themselves to fly, and speedily did ride
Each man to save himself within his tent.
Which when the Troyans saw, with mighty pace
They followed, and so hotely did them chase,
And slay and beat them down so cruelly
(Receiving none to mercy nor to grace)
That all the plain with dead Greeks full did lie,
And still continued fiercely in the chase:
Until the Grecks to shun their cruelty,
Constrained were of mere necessity,
To turn again to fight, and to defend
Themselves a while, but it would them not avail,
Because the Troyans did so fast descend,
And did them in such furious wise assail:
That what resistance s'ever they then made,
They were so beaten down and so dismayed,
That they could not against them make defense,
But were constraind to fly away in have,
The Troyans did with so great violence,
Beat down, pursue, and follow them so fast
Along the plain, and not contented so,
In furious wise unto their tents did go.
And therein fiercely killed and beat them down,
And all their gold and treasure that they found,
They took and carried it into the town,
And overthrew their tents unto the ground*
And after that fierce Troyelus did ride
With Paris down unto the water side:
Who as they went slew all that with them met,
Or scattering here and there they could epsy,
And there the Grecians ships on fire set,
The flame whereof ascended up so hie
Into the air, that they that were in Troy
Might see it, for which they made no little joy.
And at that time had burnt them all, if then
King Thelamon Ajax had not speedily
Run to the ships with many thousand men,
To stay their furious course, and valiantly
Withstood them like a brave and worthy knight.
And then began a new and cruel fight,
Between the Greeks and Troyans in such wise,
That many valiant knights as then were slain,
And yielded up their ghosts with woeful cries,
And all the field about, and all the plain
Was filled with dead and maimed men that lay,
All ^ack^ and hewd on every side the way.
The which so sore and cruelly did bleed,
That all the grass and ground was dyed red (shead,
With blood which they out of their wounds did
And still the cruel fight continued
Amongst them, to decide their deadly hate,
Which they with blows betwixt the^ did debate.
And like to Bores and Tygars fell did fare,
Each tearing and sore mangling others flesh,
And to beat down their enmies did not spare,
As thick as men do corn when they do thresh.
At which time worthy Thelamon did fight
So valiantly, and showed such passing might,
The Grecians by his prowess to deliver
From Troyans hands, that no man could do more,
And by maine force so furiously did sever
Their troops, that all before him down he bore:
And showed himself so valorous and stout,
That had't not been for him without all doubt,
Their ships had all been spoiled utterly
By Paris and young Troyelus, who there
So fiercely fought, and did so furiously
Aslaile them and assault them, that there were
Full fifty ships clean burned and destroyed,
Before the Greeks could any way avoid
Their furious force, or Thelmon Ajax came,
To rescue all the rest that did remain.
And yet although by force he did the same,
There were so many Greeks at that time slain:
That Troyans had the honor of that fight,
And only by the valor and the might
Of Troyelus, who for his part did slay
So many Greeks, that they compelled were
To make retreat, and fast to run away
Out of the field in mighty dread and fear:
For It was no boot for them to stay, when as
They saw they were brought unto such a pass.
Amongst the which Prince Heber Son unto
The King of mighty Thracian land, was one
Who moved with indignation thereunto,
(And wounded so that hope of life was none
In him as then, for in his breast their stacke
The trunchion of a mighty spear that brake
Within the same) went to Achilles tent,
Where he had lain, and came not out that day,
(For love of Pollicene) for his intent
Was not to aid the Grecians any way,
Because they would not grant to his desire,
And him reproacht (with extreme wrath and ire)
Of faintness, and of very cowardice,
That he that day to his no little shame,
Had not come forth, nor would in any wise
Give aid unto the Greeks, whereby his fame
(He said) would before ever blemished,
Especially when he was certified,
Into what mischief and confusion
They were redust, and at the very brinke
And mouth of extreme desolation,
And he thereat did seem as't were to wink:
And nere made show for them at all to grieve,
Nor would of knighthood them therein relieve.
And while he thus unto Achilles spoke,
And him so sharply did reprove therefore,
They did out of his breast the trunchion take,
Which (as I say) broken in the same he bore:
And therewithal he turned up the white
Of both his eyes, and in Achilles sight
Fell down and died. At which time sodenlie,
One of his Knights into his tent did come,
Of whom he did enquire earnestly
What that day of the Grecians was become,
And how the case at that time with them stood.
Who answered him with sad and angry mood,
And said, in sooth my Lord unhappily,
For Greeks, alas, have had the worst in fight,
And by the Troyans have most cruelly,
And to their shame been put unto the flight:
And such a number slain and spoild this day,
That few or none of them could escape away,
Vnmaymed, or without some deadly wound,
The Troyans us so cruelly pursued,
Who as I think (if truth thereof were found)
Were in the field so great a multitude
This day, that I am of opinion,
That they left not a man within the town
That able was to fight with spear or shield,
Or any other weapon what so ere,
But he came forth with them into the field,
Against us, so great a multitude they were:
So that't was hard for us to take in hand,
Against so huge a company to stand.
But now my Lord (said he) it waxes night,
And they will shortly to the town go back,
For they are faint and wearied with the fight*
Wherefore if that your armor you will take,
And valiantly go out and them assail,
While they are in that case, you could not fail:
To your perpetual honor and your fame,
But win a great and noble victory
On them, and make the Grecians by the same,
For evermore ore them triumphantly
To reign, and while the world does still endure,
To Troyans everlasting shame procure.
But to his words Achilles took no heed,
Nor yet of Hebers body seemd to have
The least respect, though it lay before him dead,
Nor in a manner leave unto them gave
To speak their minds, for it was to him allone,
Whats'ere they said, for counsel he would none.
But like a man that is deaf and dumb he stood,
And made as though he did not hear at all,
And never seemd in countenance nor mood,
In any passion for the same to fall:
For in one ear no sooner entred't was,
But out again at the other it did pass.
Herein a man may see a lovers state,
That wholly thereunto addicts his mind,
Who rather then he will prove unfortunate,
And in his love desires joy to find:
All honor, worship, manhood, valiantnes,
Strength, reputation, might, and hardines:
Increase of virtue, fame, and victory,
Knighthood, renown, and every other bliss,
Glory in arms, and all activitie
He will forsake, and count them none of his:
And as vain toys will lay them all aside,
When he in Cupids bands himself has ti'd.
Such power Cupid has on him to seize,
When once his heart within his snares is cought,
That he is loath to anger or displease
In word or deed, in countenance or thought,
Her whom he does esteem his Lady dear,
For with a look of her fair eyes and clear,
She only it is can daunt his pride of heart,
For Venus with her flattring tongue can bind
His senses, thoughts, and every other part
So strictly, that naught else in his mind
But his sweet love, and so does make him lie
In Cupids bands, restraind from liberty.
Which was the only cause without all doubt,
Why all that day Achilles was not seen
Abroad, nor t'aide the Grecians would go out
Into the field, for he feared Pollicene;
Least she should be offended* if he went
Into the field, and against the Troyans bent
His force, and so should seem her enemy,
Whom he esteemd his dear and special friend.
And while he lay in this extreamitie,
And with conceits of her the time did spend;
The Grecians fought against them of the town,
Till Phoebus with his Chariot went down:
At which time all the Troyans did begin,
(Because they wanted light) to go their way
With speed to Troy, but ere they entered in,
Young Troyelus and Paris made them stay:
While they took up Deiphobus (whom they found
Complaining sore of his most deadly wound.)
And when they saw him in that pittious case,
They could not choose but weep and sore lament,
And with salt tears bedewed their eyes and face,
And were so filled with grief and discontent
Within their hearts, and did such sorrow make,
As if they would have died for his sake.
And while that they in this sort by him stood,
He waxt so weak that he began to die,
For he had lost such quantity of blood,
That t'saue his life there was no remedy:
Yet while his valiant brethren did lament,
Because they saw his vital breath was spent,
He lifted up his eyes, and when he heard
That Paris King Pallamides had slain,
He seemed therewith to be a little cheard,
And to release the sore and deadly pain,
He bad them draw his spear out of his wound,
Which done, he fell down dead upon the ground*
Whose body straight they bare in mournful wise
Into the town with great solemnity:
I need not show what sorrow and what cries
For him was made, with much extremity,
By all the men and women in the town,
(As also for the death of Sarpedowne,)
And specially by old King Priamus,
Queen Hecuba, his sisters Pollicene,
Cassandra, and his brother Helenus,
With other of his worthy brethren:
This shall suffice that unto you I tell,
That't was most great as you may judge full well.
And to be brief, for him and Sarpedon,
King Priamus in have two toombs did make
In sumptuous wise, of pollisht Marble stone,
And when that they were finished, for their sake
He made a great and costly funeral,
Whereat the people all in general
Were present, and did mourn and make great moan,
According to their old and ancient right.
And while that this within the town was done,
The Grecians with all speed and have they (...),
Did make a tomb for their most worthy (...)
Pallamides, and at his burying
Did use such ancient customs as they had
Amongst them, and their sorrow to express,
Great grief and extreme dolor for him made,
And in that sort brought him with heaviness,
In royal wise unto his sepulture,
And then because they might not long endure
Without a Prince to be their governor,
By full and free election of them all,
They made King Agamemnon (who before
Had held that place and ruled them) General*
And chief Commander of their host again,
In stead of King Pallamides then slain.
Which done, on either side without delay
The Troyans strongly armed did issue out
Of Troy, and went into the field next day
T'assaile the Greeks, who without fear or doubt,
In warlike wise, and face to face them met.
But Troyelus on them so fiercely set,
That by his valor great and mighty force,
The Greeks durst not abide before his face,
For he so many of them did unhorse,
And did begin so ho^ely them to chase:
That where so ere he road the field about,
They fled from him, in mighty fear and doubt.
And with him were the Knights that he then led,
Young, lusty, and well armed with spear and shield,
Who so much Grecian blood that day did shed*
That all the ground showd red within the field,
And streams of blood ran down along the plain.
At which time there did fall so great a rain,
And huge a mist that men could hardly see,
But most of all upon the Grecians side,
By means whereof, and with th'extremitie
And smart of wounds which they did then abide:
And through the valiant prowe^^e and the might
Of Troyelus, the strong and hardy Knight,
They were constraind to shun his cruelty,
And to avoid the storm which then did rise,
To save their lives, in mighty fear to fly,
And to give place unto their enemies,
Ran to their tents, some succor there to find,
The Troyans them pursuing fast behind
In cruel wise, and with exceeding pace.
But for because the storm did still increase,
At that time they no longer held the chase,
But both from it and fighting did surcease,
And entered into Troy; and there did stay
Till morning, when the Lark did sing next day.
That Troyelus betimes did issue out,
Determining the Greeks again t'assaile,
Where in the field as he did ride about
Among his foes, he did so much prevail
Against them, that who so ever he did smight
With his strong sword, was maimed or killed ou^ right.
And in that furious manner still did hold*
His enemies in chase and beat them down,
All that day with courageous heart and bold,
And brought them unto great confusion:
So long till that the Sun withdrew his light,
And evening when it waxed toward night,
That he returned to Troy victoriously,
And seven days ensuing without rest,
He did assail the Greeks so cruelly,
And in such furious manner them oppressed:
That they could not his puissant force sustain,
But forced were to fly out of the plain,
T'avoyd the strong and mighty blows which he
Amongst them dealt, for where so ere he past,
He put them to so great extreamitie,
That they shrunk back and were in heart abasht,
To see the field all died and colored red
With blood of Greeks that on the plain lay dead.
And were that day oppressed in such wise,
That next day after they did all agree,
Betimes as soon as ere the Sun did rise,
To fend a messenger to Troy, to see
If Priamus unto a truce would yield
For two months space, wherewith king Priam held
A counsel of his Lords to that intent.
And by consent of them he did agree
Unto the Greeks desire, and was content
That peace for two months time should holden be
Which done, the Greeks out of the town straight (went,
And coming unto (...) tent,
Declared unto him what was decreed
By Priamus concerning his desire.
And after that their General with speed,
Sent messengers to pray and to require
Achilles, (who was obstinately bent,
And resolutely held in his intent:
Not to relieve nor aid the Grecians
In any wise what need so ere they had,
Against their mortal foes the Troyans,
According to the vow he then had made)
To mollify his anger, and t'agree,
With them t'assaile their Troyan enemy
As he had done before, the which to do
Ulisses, Diomede, and Nestor were
Appointed to persuade him thereunto,
That they might not such loss and damage bear
As daily they endured, and specially
Because he did to them his aid deny,
And would not with them in the field appear.
Whom when Achilles saw he did receive
And welcome them with joy full heart and cheer.
And when they had of him desired leave
To speak their minds according to their charge:
Ulisses their Commission to discharge,
An eloquent discourse unto him made,
And following his first instruction,
In this sort did begin him to persuade:
And said, my Lord Achilles whose renown,
Exceeding might, and glory passing great,
For memory perpetually is set
Within the Book and register of fame:
And who (the truth to say) does certainly
At this time well deserve to bear the name
Of all that underneath the christ all sky
Do live and breath, for knighthood to excel.
Be not displeased (I pray you) that I tell
My mind to you, nor be it none offense
At all unto your honor, that I say,
For this is sure, it is my full pretense,
To tell the truth as near as ere I may:
As well your Lordship shall perceive and see,
If you but mark what shall be said by me.
You know full well if you to mind will call,
The chiefest cause and reason, why that we
With all the Grecian Princes (which excel
For puissant strength and power) that now be
Assembled here, whereof your self was one
Of those that first did make the motion,)
Was by a full consent and will t'invade,
Besige, and to destroy the puissant town
Of Troy, and when that we performed had
Our wills therein, to raise and cast it down
Unto the ground, to our e'relasting fame.
But now (my Lord) you varrie from the same,
And so denlie have altered your mind,
And to that end do utterly deny
To aid us in our war, the which we find
To be exceeding strange, especially
When you should think upon the mighty wrong
Done unto us in Greece, and that not long
Nor many years ago by Troyans,
That sent a mighty force out of their town,
And therewith slew and killed the Grecians,
And entering into Cithera, beat down
Our Castles and our houses, and did bear
Our treasure thence, and not contented were
With all that spoil, but to our great despite,
Did ravish fair Queen Helena, and made
Her go with them, and hold her still by might,
And would not once confess the wrong they had
Then done, and now still unto us procure,
But in the same do obstinate endure.
And since our being here in siege, have wrought
So much and so great hurt and injury
To us, by burning of our ships, and brought
So many Greeks unto their ends, that we
Cannot but muse at your great carelesnes,
That will not now (when they as we confess,
By your exceeding might and valor great,
Are brought unto most hard extreamitie,
S^th you have Hector slain, in whom they set
Their special trust and chief security:
And he who only did their town sustain.
And since Deiphobus likewise now is slain,
And they by likelihood continually,
And day by day to fall into despair,
Now fortune on them casts a lowering eye,
And unto us does show a countnance fair:
Even now I say, when you are so renownd,
And that your praise by trump of fame does sound
Through every Land and Nation far and near.)
Take time while it does serve t'extoll your praise,
And by dame Fortunes aid which does you bear
So great good will to work by all assaies,
To bring your long desired wish to effect.
For It were great wrong in you so to neglect
Dame Fortune, when to you she is so kind,
And obstinately to refuse her aid,
When you do her so friendly to you find,
And so extols your fame (as I have said)
That she puts victory into your hand,
And unexpectedly your foes withstand,
So that you need no help of her to crave.
Why then should you so wilfully let fall
The noble fame which at this time you have,
And suffer that men should't in question call,
When as it is now in the highst degree?
Me thinks you should much better thereto see,
And have a greater care the same to keep.
For every knight that is of valiant mind
Would grieve thereat, and with great sighs and deep,
Lament to see you prove so much unkind
Unto your self, as to abase your state,
When fame does it so highly eleuate.
Wherefore we you desire heartily,
To have remorse of conscience in your mind,
And that you would unto us not deny
Your aid, but let us so much favor find
At your hands, to help us in our need,
To Effect the thing which we have all decreed,
To bring to pass ere we leave off the same.
That your renown may still be magnified
Throughout the world, to your perpetual fame,
And still increase and be reedified:
And that the trivmph of our victory,
May evermore be had in memory,
And so recorded that forgetfulness,
May not your fame and valor greatt deface,
Nor power have by malice to suppress
The same, which now does shine in every place,
Without eclipse, as we must needs confess,
Which to preserve you seem with carelessness.
Not to respect, and to obscure the light
Of your renown, which ever was so clear,
And through the world did shine exceeding bright,
In field to fight with us you do forbear.
Remember how the Grecians have been slain
Before your tent, and also in the plain
In cruel wise, and every place throughout
The field, and you no pity on them take.
Why should you then refuse, and be so stout
Without a cause them wholly to forsake?
Who until now have been their Champion,
Their chiefest help, and their protection.
And for their sakes have osten shedyour blood
Against their foes, when they with the^ have fought,
And by your aid not only them withstood,
But their confusion valiantly ^aue wrought,
And mightily their enemies did assail.
Without whose aid they may not long prevail
Against their foes, no more may any one
Of us, how stout and strong so ere we be,
For it is you only that can do it alone,
If that you will vouchsafe with us t'agree
To fight against the Troyans, and thereto
Lend us your aid as you were wont to do:
And as we doubt not but you will grant the same,
To succor us in our necessity,
N^^ (...) for your own perpetual fame,
But to redeem us from extreamitie:
And to that end we come to you as now,
To crave of you your mind herein to show.
Whereto Achilles presently began
(As Soon as ere Ulisses ended had
His tale) to speak, with visage pale and wan
For ang^^, and in this sort answer made:
Ulisses, if so be our meaning were
As you to me at this time do declare,
Of purpose, and with one entire consent,
The famous town of Troy to overthrow,
And utterly to spoile't, and that we bent
Our minds thereto, and thereby meant to show
Our power and might, I must you plainly tell,
That we of truth therein have not done well,
To put cur selves by indiscretion,
So carelessly without advisednes,
Into so dangerous an action,
To hazard the estate and happiness,
With lives and goods of all the Chivalry
Of Greece, that put the same in ieopardy,
For little cause or none, the truth to tell.
For has ^ot many a worthy King and Knight,
(Who both in fame and honor did excel)
Consumed his wealth and lost his life in fight
Here in this siege, that might have lived in peace
And honor still, if he had staid in Grease?
For has not King Pallamides been slain
But now of late, whose life was of more worth,
Then all the cause for which we here remain
And hold this dangerous siege, to tell the troth?
And many other Knights and Princes great,
That on both sides are here together met,
To show their puissant valor and their might,
And to attain to honor and to fame,
Have lost their lives unhappily in fight,
And many more are like to do the same,
If that long time this cruel war does last*
For every day the number lesneth fast,
Both on the Greeks and Troyans side likewise.
So that, if this most cruel rage and mood,
Continue long, and in such furious wise,
If that it be not otherwise withstood:
It Is likely that it will such havoc make
Of Princely blood, that clownes will undertake
To rule and govern here upon the earth,
And of the same have sole dominion,
And such as are of no degree nor birth,
Will Lords become when Princes there are none:
For is not Hector that most valiant Knight,
That was the only mirror and the light
Of Chivalrie, unfortunately slain
In this same war, and so may I likewise
Perchance be killed, that never shall attain
To Hectors worth, while light is in mine e^es:
For there is no way deaths furious dart to shun,
If we upon the point thereof will run,
And seek it of our selves while we are here.
And therefore such a motion now to make,
Concerning this our war, as you require,
Is but in vain, for I do mean to take
Another course, and in this bloody strife,
No more to stand in hazard of my life.
For I had rather to impair my name,
Then wilfully to die or to be slain,
Thereby to be eternized by fame,
For honor after death is but a vain
And needless thing, and soon is set aside:
For though that fame be spread both far and wide,
Oblivion and forgetfulness may soon
Impaire't by tract of times, and length of days,
And make thereof a wrong conclusion:
For that the fame of Knighthood, and the praise
Of honor, wisdom, and of worthiness,
Of freedom, bounty, and of gentleness,
Of virtue, and of every other grace
Wherewith a man is in this world endowd,
Forgetfulness can darken and deface,
And in oblivions mantle does them shroud:
And with a false report maliciously,
Does crop the Palm^ of worthy Chivalrie.
And therefore for my part I do intend
Such folly now to leave, and henceforth live
In peace, and all mine actions thereto bend:
And for that cause this counsel to you give,
To make a peace with Troyans if you may,
And therein do no longer time delay,
Before that further mischief does arise,
And cruel death should chance to be your share.
And therefore good my Lords if you be wise,
Of this my counsel see you take some care:
This is (said he) my purpose and intent,
Which you may show to him that has you sent.
With which his resolute conclusion,
Ulisses, Diomede, and Nestor went
Unto their General Agamemnon,
And unto him declared the intent
And answer of Achilles which he made
To them, as I before unto you said.
And there upon he presently did call
The Princes of the Greeks unto his tent,
And when they were assembled, to them all
Did show whereto Achilles mind was bent:
And that he was desirous of a peace
With them of Troy, that all their war might cease.
Refusing flatly t'enter in the field
With them against the Troyans any more,
And for that cause a counsel with them held,
To know of them what will thereto they bore:
And what therein they did intend to do,
Since that the case with them as then stood so.
Whereto the first of them that did reply,
Was Menelaus, who with an angry mood
Began to chafe, and flatly did deny
To make a peace, and therein boldly stood,
And said, that it was never his intent,
By any means thereto to give consent,
Since that the town of Troy was in such need,
And at the brinke of their destruction,
Now Hector and Deiphobus both were dead,
That whilome were their sole protection:
So that they might all comfort clean reject,
And nothing else but cruel death expect.
And therefore flatly said without all fear,
Though that Achilles will us help no more.
The burden of our enterprise to bear,
We need not any whit to doubt therefore,
But that without him we shall overthrow
Our enmies by our force, as well I know.
Whereto Ulisses speedily replied,
And Nestor, both of one opinion,
And against his false assertion iustifi'd,
That touching peace whereof the motion
As then was made, it was no marvel why,
King Menelaus did it so much deny.
And to the same by no means would give ear.
Since that he was the ground of all their war,
And that he and Queen Helena both were
The cause that made the Greeks to come so far
Out of their native Country, there to lose
Their lives and goods amongst their deadly foes.
And therefore said, he cared not what pain
Nor loss the Greeks endured, so that he might
Recover his Queen Helena again.
And where he says the strong and valiant knight
Hector is dead, his heir as yet does live
For knighthood, who in manner does reviue
And raise him up, which is his younger brother
Prince Troyelus, whom we may rightly call
Young Hector, for there is not such another
In all the world, for he is as't were the wall
And sole defense of Troy now Hector's gone,
Which is well seen unto us every one.
(If we the truth thereof acknowledged.)
Whose trechant blade in his most furious heat,
Does often and every hour make us bleed
Within the field, when he with us does meet.
And in the stead of worthy Deiphobus,
That was a puissant knight and valorous,
His valiant brother Paris yet does live,
That Is unto him for knighthood peregall,
Who also does Troy mightily relieve,
Whereby of them advantage none at all
We have as yet, so that since we begun
This war, in truth there is but little woone
By us, but we are likelier to loose
Yet more and more, if we it still ^^ hold,
And therefore since that we have power to choose,
My counsel is, twere good if that we would
T'agree with them of Troy, and seek for peace,
And let us from this bloody war surcease.
Ulisses having spoken in this wise,
The Troyan traitor Calohas vexed sore
To hear the same, upon his feet did rise,
And forth hatred which to Troy he bore,
Said, worthy Kings and Princes every one,
Why should you change and vary like the Moon,
From that your first and resolute intent,
Which was by you so fully greed unto,
Against the will and the commandment
O^ all the Gods, that power have to do
What ere they list, and rule and govern all
The actions of mankind, both great and small?
Why should you not unto them credit give,
Whose hests and doings are infallible?
For this you must all constantly believe,
That it is most true and not impossible,
That Troy by their preordinance and will,
Shall be destroyed within a little while,
If you do not neglect and slack the same,
Whereby great honor, praise, and victory
Reserved is for you by Lady Fame,
And will be ever had in memory:
If you with courage bold pursue your foes,
And do not your good fortune fondly lose.
The which I dare affirm and boldly say,
And further must you tell, that wilfully
To dally with the Gods, is th'onlie way
To make them change their purpose speedily:
Wherefore my counsel is, that unity
Should be maintaind, and all amb'guitie,
Despair and dread, or any kind of doubt,
Forecasting peril, sloth, or cowardice
Clean laid aside, you should with hearts most stout
And valiant courage, utterly despise
All fear of death, and once again resume,
Your force with resolution to consume
And spoil your foes: for fear makes men to faint,
And leave the enterprise they take in hand,
And does men's minds with cowardice attaint,
And make them that they dare not thereto stand:
That as the Gods ordaind have by decree
And providence divine, that you should be
Victorious ore your enemies in the end,
(If you with valiant hearts thereto aspire)
You may attain to that you do pretend,
And so you shall fulfill the Gods desire:
Which speech when Calchas with smooth words and (fair
Had spoken, and thereby put all despair
Out of the Grecians hearts, they did protest
And vow, that fear and danger laid aside,
They would fulfill his counsel, and nere rest
(Though that Achilles flatly them denide
His aid therein) till that they had orethrowne
The Troyans, as hereafter shall be shown.
The two months truce aforesaid finished,
The Grecians did prepare themselves to fight
Against their foes, and bravely entered
Into the field, against whom in great despite
The Troyan Knights with hearts courageous
Did issue forth. At which time Troyelus
Such valor showed, that with his trenchant blade,
He killed and wounded them so furiously,
That in short space to fly he had them made.
For that day, in his extreme cruelty,
He vowed for his brother Hectors sake,
Upon the Grecians full revenge to take.
And (as it is said) that worthy Champion,
By his exceeding valor and his might,
Did slay a thousand Knights himself alone,
And put the Grecians valiantly to flight
All that day long, till Phoebus did descend,
At which time he of fighting made an end,
And entered into Troy, whereas he rested
Till next day that the Grecians (who t'revenge
Their loss upon the Troyans, had protested)
Did orderly their wings and squadrons renge
(As Soon as Phoebus rose) within the plain,
With whom the Troyans fiercely met again,
Where each the other valiantly assaild.
At which time fierce King Diomede did fight
So cruelly, and then so much preuaild
Against his foes, that by his passing might,
Great store of Troyans lost their lives and died,
Till Troyelus his cruelty espied.
At whom with speed he ran a mighty pace,
And with his strong and puissant spear in rest,
Encountered with him bravely face to face,
And gave to him a blow upon the breast,
So mightily, and with such passing force,
That with the same he smote him off his horse*
And bruised him sore. To whom in spightfull wise,
As he upon the ground did lie, he spoke,
And told him of his love and treacheries,
Which he against him had wrought for Cresids sake:
At which time when the Grecians did epsy
King Diomede upon the ground to lie,
Amongst the horses feet in great distress,
They did with all the have and speed they might,
To save him from stout Troielus furiousnes,
Take him up from the ground, and in despite
Of all his foes, sore bruised and dismayed,
Bare him from thence and in his tent him laid.
Whom to revenge, King Menelaus did set
His spear in rest, and furiously did ride
To Troielus, but ere with him he met,
Fierce Troielus that his coming would not bide,
Prevented him, with such a furious blow,
That to the ground he did him overthrow,
And gave him therewith all a cruel wound
Within his breast, that he was like to die:
But when his Knights saw him upon the ground,
They* laid him on a shield, and speedily
Bare him out of the press into his tent,
At which time while away with him they went.
The Greeks were sore oppressed, slain, and chaste
Throughout the field by Troilus passing might,
Who then most fiercely them pursued fast,
That they were forced to take themselves to flight.
Until such time as King Agamemnon
With many Grecian Knights came riding down
Into the field, (whose ensigns glistring
Against the Sun, made such a gallant sight
As they within the air hung wavering,
That to behold them it was a great delight.)
Who in most furious wise the Trojans chaste,
Killed, wounded, and did beat them down so fast.
And at that time most like a valiant Knight,
Behau'd himself so bravely and so well,
That by his valor great and puissant might,
To fly from him he did them then compel:
But while that he in that most furious mood,
Amongst the thick est of the Trojans road;
Prince Troielus ran at him with a spear,
And in the face of all his enemies,
Out of his sadle to the ground him bare*
Wherewith the Greeks with huge and mighty ^^ies,
(To see their puisant Lord and General,
In midst of them receive so great a fall,)
Ran to him, and by maine and mighty force
Relieved him, and made him mount again,
(Despite of all the Trojans,) on his horse.
At which time many a gallant Knight was slain,
And furiously on either side unhorsed,
But yet the Grecian Knights at last were forced,
(For all the great (...) that they made,)
By Troielus, (whose sword they durst ^or bide,)
To leave the plain and bloody fight* and glad
To make retrait, withdrew themselves aside.
For when as King Agamemnon perceived
How that his men were or there lives bereaved
So furiously, that they could notwithstand
The Trojans blows, he did suppose it best
For him to make retrait, and out of hand
To leave the field, and for that time to rest,
And to that end did give commandment,
To every man t'retire unto h^^te^^.
And after that ere Ph^bus did appear,
Next day, he sent to Priam to require
A truce for six months space, i^ that he were
Content therewith, who granted his desire.
Although that some therein with him did stritie
And grueth thereat, and would not grant to give
Such respit to the Greeks, but it was no boot
For them to strive, when Priamus had past
His word and faith unto the Greeks to do it.
In which time while the truce twixt them did last,
Fair Gr^sula loath so long time to tarry,
(Although her Father was therein contrary.)
From vili^ing her friend, and to have a sight
Of Diomede, (who ^a^ received a wound
Not long before,) that was her loving Knight,
Went to his tent whereas when The him found
She sat down on the bed side where he lay,
And while that she therein his tent did slay,
She did consider with her self, and thought
That it was in vain for her so long to endure
Without a love, and that t'availd her naught
For Troielus to stay, and to be sure
Of store, for that men say it is no sore,
She thought she would delay the time no more.
But presently with gentle heart and kind,
She promised love unto King Diomede,
To show what piety is in women kind,
And how that they b'extremitres are led,
T'expulse old love, and new to entertain,
Before that men should sue to them in vain,
Or suffer grief and sorrow for their sake.
The exchange is not so ready in Lombard street,
Where Merchants do contracts and bargains make
For Duckects and for Crowns when as they meet.
Each kind of gold and coins to them's all one,
So that it have a face or stamp thereon.
Their letters of exchange pa^se currantly,
And commonly are paid upon the sight,
The passage boat is ready, and does lie
To Attend all comers both by day and night:
No man's refusde that will desire grace,
Danger there is none but in dissembling face.
The Sea is caline, and clear from Rocks and sands,
It Was never heard that man was ere said nay,
That craved or asked mercy at their hands,
As you may plainly see by Cresida,
Who at that time gave Diomede her heart,
To ease, and to release him of his smart.
Desiring him to be of joyful cheer;
And promised t'obay him faithfully
In every thing, as to her Knight most dear,
Before that he for love of her should die,
Esteeming't better to want constantnes,
Then to be held and counted pittiles.
As women are by nature very loath,
T'adict their minds t*reuenge, or cruelty,
Against any man for breach of faith or oath,
But rather seem to show humility,
And mercy unto those that want relief,
And have their minds possessed with woe and grief.
Thus much for her, and now I will proceed
According to the History to show:
That while the two months truce before decreed,
Was holden, King Agamenon did go
Unto Achilles tent, of him to crave
That of the Greeks he would compassion have,
And not to endure not suffer them to die,
And to be slain and maimed every hour
By them of Troy, who with great cruelty
Assayl'd the Greeks, and by their mighty power
Did put them to most great and hard distress,
The which he said was likely to increase,
Unless he would vouchsafe his aid to lend
With speed, and it no more from them withold,
And by his mighty power and force defend
Them as before he did, with courage bold.
But it was in vain, for whatsoere he said,
Achilles would not yield to him, to aid
No^ succor them, but with obdurate mind,
Still wished them to think upon a peace,
And with all speed some way and means to find
That bloody and most tedious war to cease.
But yet because he bare affection,
And much good will to King Agamemnon.
He would not altogether say them nay,
But partly to their wills did condescend,
And said, though he within his tent would stay,
He was content his Myrmidons to send
In steed of him, into the field to aid
Them against their foes. Wherewith full well apaid,
Agamemnon and Nestor took their leave,
And left him in a malancholly mood
Upon his bed, where he did sigh and grieve
For Pollicene, in whom then wholly stood
His sole delight and comfort, yet in doubt
Nere to attain to that he went about.
And so continued still. But as he had
Made promise when the truce was at an end,
He did appoint his Mirmidons to aid
The Greeks to fight, and when he did them send
Into the field, he gave a riban red
To each of them to were upon his head,
That they might from the rest be known thereby,
And when they took their leaves and did depart
From him, he was in great perplexity,
And mightily tormented at the heart:
Because he sent them t'ayd the Grecians
Against his will, t'assayle the Trojans.
But nerethelesse with hearts repleat with pride,
They went with King Agamemnon to fight
Against their foes, who for them did abide
Upon the plain, and when they were in sight,
Each side began the other to defy
In warlike wise with many a shout and cry.
And fearful noise of drums and trumpets brave,
Wherewith the Trojans furiously began
T'assayle the Greeks, and such an onset gave
To them at that same time, that many a man
On Grecians side were slain, and they compeld
To make retrait again out of the field.
Till that the Duke of Athens entered
With mighty force, the fury great to stay
Of Trojans, and did make the Greeks that fled
Advance themselves again, but in the way
Stout Troielus smot him so great a blow,
That from his horse he did him overthrow.
And then with fury great he entered in
The thickest of the press, and beat down all
That with him met, and therewith did begin
So hotly on the Myrmidons to fall,
That many of them lost their lives, and so
Far amongst the thickest of the Greeks did go,
That at the last he put them all to flight
And by his valor great had them in chase,
So long till that the day was past, and night
Began t'appeare, when as he left the place,
And went into the town, and there did stay
And rest himself, till that betimes next day,
They did begin a cruel fight again
Within the field, so fiercely on each side,
That at that time great store of Knights were slain
And beaten down, and as they stoutly ride
To try their valors one against the other,
Pollidamas and Philomene together
Did take King Thoas prisoner, whom they meant
To Have carried unto Troy with speed, had not
The Myrmidons (before with him they went
Out of the field,) from them by valor got,
And rescued him, for they were very strong.
At which time Troilus road amonst the throng.
And thickst of them, and like a valiant Knight,
K^ld and orethrew great store of them by force,
So long till that by their great strength and might,
They did enclose him round and killed his horse,
And thought to have taken him prisoner, but he foght
So valiantly, that they full dearly bought
His horses life, with many of their own.
Till at the last his brother Paris spied
Him fighting there on foot with them alone,
And with his other brethren straight did ride
To rescue him, and forcibly made way
Through all the press, and many of the^ did slay,
And by their valors soon recovered had
A horse for him, whereon he lightly sprung,
And then again such havoc of them made,
That though he was enclosed among the throng,
He killed, and beat them down so furiously,
That many of them dead at his feet did lie*
But as most like a valiant Champion
He fought in midst of them enclosed round,
One of his brethren called Margariton,
By Myrmidons received his deadly wound.
Whose death set Troilus heart on such a fire
With cruelty, that in most furious ire,
He purposed to be revenged therefore.
And with his sword by force he made a way
Through thickest of the press, and down he bore
All that before him stood or once durst stay
To make resistance, or withstand him then,
The like did Paris with his brethren,
Who altogether furiously did ride
Amongst Achilles Myrmidons, and there
Such havoc of them made, that to abide
Before them they durst not, but in great fear
They were compeld of mere necessiry
To set spurs to their horses, and to fly
In have to save their lives. For Troielus
Did kill and beat them down so cruelly;
And was on them so fierce and furious,
And wounded them so sore and terribly,
That many of them died in the plain,
And yet they did the fight long time maintain.
For they were noble Knights and of great worth,
And knew full well how they their arms should weild
But yet they were by Troielus driven forth,
With many wounds sore bleeding from the field:
Not able to withstand his extreme might,
Although they held together, and did fight
Most valiantly, and would not separate
Themselves long time asunder, till at length
They were by Troielus fierce and desperate,
So hotly chaste, that by maine force and strength,
He made them break their rancks, and in despite
Their hearts to fly till that with many a Knight,
King Menelaus, and King Agamemnon,
Ulisses, and most cruel Diomede,
And with them also fierce King Thelamon,
Came to the field; and when they entered,
So valiantly assayld the Trojans,
And with such multitudes of Grecians
Upon them set, that at that time the fight
Betwixt them did so hot and sore renew,
That it did cost the life of many a Knight
On either side; and thereof did ensue,
So terrible a noise and cry throughout
The field of men that maimed lay, and might
Not help themselves, that all the air did sound*
And ring therewith, and many shields were spleet,
And harnes hackt, and hawd, and all the ground
Lay covered ore with hands, arms, heads, and feet
Of men, that cut and mangled dying lay,
And streams of blood ran down along the way,
And in the plain, most fearful to behold.
At which time they of Troy, for all the might
And multitudes of Greeks, with courage bold,
Not once dismayed, so valiantly did fight,
That many Grecian Knights by them were killed,
And wounded sore: and where within the field
The fight most strongest, horst and furious
Was held, and where greatst troops of Greeks withstood
The Trojans and assayld them, Troiclus
Courageously amongst the thickest road,
And with his Knights such slaughter of them made,
That in short space he them compelled had
To fly, and to avoid his furious sword,
As th'instrument of their destruction,
And which as death they shuned, and abhord.
And this continued till that Thelamon
The fearful flying of the Greeks beheld,
Did turn them back, and made the^ keep the field
And valiantly the Trojan Knights assayld.
And then again the fight was hot and strong,
And Greeks against the Trojans sore prevaild,
But that advantage held not very long:
For Troielus relieved them again,
And by him then so many Greeks were slain,
That he compeld them mauger all their might,
And great resistance which they the^ did make,
Before his sword again to take their flight
Unto their tents, and at that time did take
An hundred Percian Knights, whom he did send
To Troy, and so that day the fight did end.
Which being done the Myrmidons with speed
Unto their Lord Achilles tent did go,
With many wounds full deep that sore did bleed,
And in that sort themselves to him did show
W^o of their number then were lessened,
An hundred Knights within the field lay dead.
With ghastly wounds, slain by the puissant might,
And valor great of Troielus alone,
Whereof when as Achilles had a sight,
The night ensuing he did naught but groan,
And sigh, and grieve, and was so much oppressed
With heaviness, that he could take no rest:
For in his mind he had a double woe,
First, for his Knights that had been newly slain,
And then for Pollicene whom he loved so;
For he knew well that he should nere obtain
His will of her, if to revenge his men
He should once seek the means, and therefore the^
His heart burnt in his breast with double fire
Of wrath, and love, which p^t him to great pain,
For wrath provoked him with great desire
To be revenged, and love did him restrain
From doing it, and got the upper hand.
For he in mighty fear and doubt did stand,
That if he should within the field be seen
Against them of the town, King Priam would
Think much thereof, and Hecuba the Queen,
And Pollicene would him for ever hold
To be disloyal and unkind, whereby
He was in such twofold perplexity:
That he knew not which way himself to wind,
He was so pressed with fear and fantasy,
As lovers in their brains do often find,
When they for love are sick and like to die.
And thus it fared with him for many a day,
(In which time as the History does say,
For seven days ensuing one the other,
The Trojans with the Greeks did fiercely fight,
And in such cruel wise then met together,
That it did cost the life of many a Knight
On either side, that pitiously were slain,
And wounded sore, lay dead upon the plain.)
Mean time he musd upon no other thing
But to obtain his pleasure, and to win
His Ladies love, and how't to pa^^e to bring,
Nere caring what estate the Greeks were in:
Nor how they sped when against their foes they foght
Esteeming it no parcel of his thought.
So much his mind on other things was set,
Which made him oftentimes to watch and wake,
And many sore and cruel sighs to fet:
And so great care and inward thought to take,
That from his heart all comfort clean was gone,
Till on a day that King Agamemnon,
Perceiving what destruction still was made
By them of Troy upon the Grecians, sent
To Priamus for two months truce, but had
No grant thereof, for he would not consent
To longer time then for few days to endure,
While they provided for the sepulture,
Of those that on each side lay slain and dead
Within the field, which they accordingly
Within the days set down accomplished,
And after never ceast continually
Each other to assail, while that they were
Besiedging of the town as you shall hear.
CHAP. III.
How Achilles when Troylus was enclosed round about by his Myrmidons, came
behind him and smot off his head, and after drew his body through the field at
his horses tail.

THe cruel and continual slaughter made
From day to day, still more and more increast
Th'inveterate malice, that continued had
Long twixt the Greeks and Trojans, and nere ceast,
Nor nere was like to cease, till that deaths dart
Had killed many Knights on either part:
T'accomplish by most stern and cruel Fate,
Gods steadfast, and infalible decree,
And t'execute the great and deadly hate
On either side, which might not shunned be:
For Atropos that in deaths ship does go
For Misteris, had said it should be so.
Nor never cease till all did go to wrack,
And flattering Fortune with dissembling cheer,
Disdainefully on Troy did turn her back,
As in this Book hereafter you shall hear:
For when the last day of the truce was past,
On either side they armd themselves in have:
And in the morning early fore Sun rose,
Into the field they went and fiercely met
Together, like most stern and deadly foes,
Where Paris first on Menelaus did set:
And they each other bravely did unhorse,
For they were both of passing might and force.
And then Ulisses furiously did run
With mighty spear against Pollidamas,
Where twixt them both a cruel fight begun,
For neither of them vnex perienst was,
How to defend himself against his foe,
And while they were together fighting so,
Not far from them Menestes fiercely smot
Anthenor with his spear, so great a blow,
That it in pieces brake, yet failed not
Him to the ground therewith to overthrow,
And Philomene a King on Trojans side,
To valiant King Agamemnon did ride,
Who at the first together fiercely sought,
But in a little while Agamemnon
Was by him into so great danger brought,
That he had sure been slain, if Thelamon
Had not come thither t'ayd him in his need,
Who setting spurs unto his gallant steed,
Stroke Philomene with such a mighty ferce,
That with the blow which was exceeding strong,
He smot him to the ground off from his horse.
And then amongst the thick est of the throng,
The young and valiant Knight Archilagus,
Ran at a Trojan Knight called Br^^i^s
King Priams Bastard son, to whom he gave
So mighty and so puissanta blow,
That neither shield nor armor could him save,
But dead unto the ground he did him throw*
Whose death when as the Trojans did epsy,
They did cast forth a huge and piteous cry,
And grievously complaining for the same,
Were sore abasht, and stricken in great fear,
But when the news thereof to Troielus came,
T'reuenge his death he did protest and swear:
And presently did make no more abode,
But to the place where he was slain, straight rode
And with his sword so furiously did slay
And wound the Greeks, that he did make their blood
Run down in mighty streams along the way,
And in the plain, and all that him withstood
Were fiercely by him beaten down, and killed:
So that the hardiest Knight then in the field,
Durst not abide in his most furious sight,
He slew and wounded them so c^uelly,
And had that time sure put them all to flight,
But that the Myrmidons most valiantly
Withstood him for a while, (who all that day
With one consent in wait for Troielus lay.
For which he was in such a mighty rage,
That like a Knight that did in arms excel,
His furious wrath and anger to assuage,
With courage bold upon them all he fell,
And did amongst the thickest of them ride,
Where some of them he wounded in the side,
Some in the breast, and some he did bereave
Of heads, hands, legs, and feet, and some he smot
So puissantly, that he did fiercely cleave
Their bodies in two parts, and spared not
To hac, and hew them down so mightily,
That at the last they were compeld to fly
Unto their tents, pusued by Troielus
With many Knights, till he did them oretake,
Wherewith most cruel heart and furious,
He did so great a slaughter of them make,
And put them to so great extremity,
That they cast forth a fearful noise and cry.
And such a great and lamentable moan,
Was heard of them that lay upon the ground,
And gasping, cast out many grievous groan,
That all the field and plain therewith did sound:
And through the camp the tumult was so great,
Because their foes so fiercely on them set,
That at the last it came to Achilles ear,
Who calling to his men, demanded why
The Grecians at that time were in such fear,
That they did make so great a noise and cry?
Who told him that for want of aid, as then
The Trojans in their tents did slay their men.
And put them to so great extremity,
That they were forced to cry for grief and pain,
Which they endured by the cruelty
Of Troielus, and that his men were slain
Likewise within his tent, and there did lie
In great distress without all remedy.
And while they thus unto Achilles spoke,
A Grecian Knight came running from the plain,
Whose heart within his breast for fear did shake,
And said to him, how can you now sustain
And bear this great and cruel injury,
To so your men before your face thus lie
Dead on the ground, and slain in cruel wise
Within your tent, and take thereof no heed?
But stay still here, when as your enemies
Have sworn, and with full intent decreed,
To kill you thus disarmed as you stand,
If by your mighty force and puissant hand
You do them not resist, and valiantly
Show forth your courage, and ere hence they pass,
Requite them for the extreme cruelty
Which they have showd to us herein this place.
Which when Achilles heard with furious ire
Which in his breast did burn as hot as fire*
He armd himself and soming like a Bore,
(Forgetting that whereof so much he drempt
And thought upon,) unto himself he swore
To be reuengd, (for love was clean exempt*
Out of his mind, and Pollicene also,
For whom he had endured so great woe,
And for her beauty felt such grief in heart*)
Upon the Trojans for their cruelty.
That suddenly upon his feet he start,
And calling for his horse, road speedily
Into the field, where in short space he had
So great a slaughter of the Trojans made,
And did so furiously upon them set:
(For like a greedy woolfe that seeks for pray,
He killed, and spared none that with him met,
Or that durst him witstand along the way
Whereas he road.) That in a little space
He made the Trojans fly before his face,
And shun his sword, all died with their blood,
(Wherewith he had so many of them slain.)
For there was none that him as then withstood,
But he was soon laid dead upon the plain:
Till Troielus that by fortune did behold,
How he the Trojans slew with courage bold,
Ran at him with most great and puissant force,
Whose coming when Achilles did epsy,
He likewise spurd his strong and gallant horse,
And ran at him with like dexterity,
And met together with such puissant might,
That each the other to the ground did smight,
Both pierced in their breasts, but differently,
Achilles with a wound most dangerous,
Whereof he was constrained long to lie
Within his tent to heal't, but Troielus
A little pricked: and so that day till night,
And six days more ensuing they did fight,
And never ceast in furious wise to kill,
And to destroy each other valiantly,
And in that time great store of blood did spill,
Unto no little damage certainly
On either side, for many a worthy Knight
Was brought unto his end with great despite,
In that same time. But cause I do not know
Their names, nor of what dignities they were,
For Guydo in his Book does it not show,
To write them I must likewise now forbear,
And let their names and titles with them die,
And in oblivion rest perpetually.
But when King Priamus was certified
How fierce Achilles in the field had been
That day to fight, and thereby falsified
His promise made for love of Pollicene:
Sore grieud he was, and did himself persuade
Achilles with his words had him betrayed.
But truth to say, it was neither fraud nor guile,
Nor any treason secretly decreed,
But heat of love which lasts but a while,
Which for that time did vex Achilles head:
And made him swear to do more then he could,
(And like the wind that none by force can hold.)
Let words from his dissembling mouth be heard
Contrary unto that he meant to do.
The which a man that is wise should not regard,
And make as though he gave no ear thereto.
For though Achilles had tofore been gotten
In Cupids snare, he had it then forgotten,
And card not in his fury to displease
His Lady, whom so much he seemd to flatter;
He had not any will the war to cease
As he had said, but clean contrary matter
Was in his head, then he made show to mean,
And promised to the Queen and Pollicene.
And for that cause King Priam did vpbraid
And cast her in the teeth with light conceit
Of false Achilles love, wherein she laid
Her trust, whereas he meant naught but deceit,
For which she was sore grieud, because that she
Did to the Queen her mothers will agree
To marry with Achilles, to the intent
That by her means and marriage there might be
A peace for ever made. But it was not meant
By treacherous Achilles, for when he
Was healed of his wounds, he did devise,
And in his traitrous heart a way surmise
To be reuengd on Troielus, who still
Stake deeply in his cruel heart and mind,
If that he might have means t'obtaine his will,
And him at some advantage take or find.
Such hatred in his heart to him he bare,
That day and night he took no other care,
Nor set his mind upon no other thing,
But only how to quench the burning fire
Of envy against him borne, and how to bring
The same t'eflect according to his desire:
For he had sworn and bound it with a vow,
That Troielus should die, (he card not how,
Nor by what means,) by his hand and none other.
And to that end with purpose fully bent:
T*effect his will he called his Knights together,
And when they were assembled in his tent
(One morning when the Grecians forth did go
Into the field with brave and warlike sho,
To fight against their Tr^^^ enemy,
Who in like sort out of the town were come
With all their force the Grecian to defy,
And ready stood with sound of fearful drume,
And trumpets shrill* to call and to invite
The Grecians to a fierce and cruel fight.)
He did to them of Troielus complain
For th'iniuries that he to him had done,
And prayed them that they would take the pain
That day to let all other things alone,
And only watch on Troielus to hold
And to enclose him round if that they could
In midst of them, and when they had don so,
In furious wise t'assayle him altogether,
And not by any means to let him go,
But yet to save his life till he came thither.
That with his sword alone he might him kill
To satisfy his fierce and cruel will.
Lo here the valor of this worthy Knight,
Who enviously with rancor and in pride,
By treason and with rage and great despite,
All honor and true Knighthood laid aside;
Does seek to kill a worthier Knight then he,
Alas that ere such treachery should be
Within the heart of any man alive,
That does profess to be a valiant Knight,
And honor seeks to win and to achiue
Most valiant acts, and who is bound by right
And law of arms, while life in him does rest,
All falsehood and foul treason to detest.
And to maintain all truth and equity,
For now he does in secret wise conspire
The death of him by great disloyalty,
That only unto honor did aspire.
And he that was the braust and worthiest knight
That ever ware or put on armor bright.
(But that which by Gods will ordained is,
Though nere so much men seek it to withstand,
Must fall out in the end and cannot mis.)
The which his Myrmidons did take in hand:
And promised to do as he had said,
And so no longer time therein delaid.
But went into the field, where Troielus
With all the Trojan troops did ready stand,
Who valiantly with heart courageous,
And with his strong and trenchant blade in hand
Upon the Grecians set, and of them made
Such havoc, that in little time he had
So many of them slain, and overthrown,
And furiously sore wounded every where
As he amongst them road and past, that none
Of them durst stand against him, and appear
Before his face, and did so hotly chase,
And kill, and beat them down in every place,
That they began for fear of him to fly,
So that despite of all the Greeks he won
The field of them, and with such cruelty
Pursued them, that ere it was full noone
That day, he had constraind them to retire
To save their lives, and shun his furious ire.
Till that Achilles Myrmidons began
T'inclose him round about on every side,
And with most great despite upon him ran,
And he to them in furious wise did ride,
And though alone he was amongst them all,
Like Lion fierce upon them he did fall,
And in such furious wise did them assail,
And valiantly to kill them did not cease,
That in short space he did so much prevail
Against them, that he their number did decrease:
For some he slew out right, and some he bore
Down to the ground, and some he wounded sore,
And some he maimed, and some he cleft in twain,
And hackt and hewed them most cruelly,
And did the fight so valiantly maintain
Against them all, with such dexterity,
That they could not his hautie heart subdue,
But still he seemed his courage to renew.
And them with force and valor great t'assayle.
And by no means to give them any rest.
But what could all his power and strength prevail,
When as he was so mightily oppressed;
And that three thousand knights did never cease
In furious wise upon him still to press.
And more and more on every side him held
At such a bay, that cowardly, in the end
They killed his horse, whereby he was compeld
To fight on foot, and yet he did defend
Himself so valiantly that they well felt
The puissant blows which he amongst them dealt
But nerethelesse he was so sore beset
That all he did could him no whit prevail,
By any means from midst of them to get,
For they did him so furiously assail:
That mauger his most puissant force and might,
Off from his head they did his helmet smight.
And hackt and heawd his armor in such wise,
That naked both with head and neck he stood
In midst of all his furious enemies
Without relief. Yet like a Lion wood
He showed himself a valiant Champion,
And never ceast to smight and beat them down.
And to withstand them mightily and long,
Disarmed as he was, till in the end
Achilles entering in amongst the throng
Of Myrmidons, where Troielus did defend
Himself, and against them fought with courage bold:
Whom when he did in such a case behold
Sore wearied with fighting, and in need
Of aid, (as then,) with extreme cruelty
Ere Troilus of him took any heed,
Behind him fiercely road; and cowardly
Smot off his head, and not contented so;
Vnknightly his great cruelty to sho,
He causd his mangled body to be bound
Unto his horses tail, and in a rage
Drewt after him along upon the ground
Throughout the field, his choler to assuage,
And to content his fierce and cruel will,
Which took delight his enemies blood to spill
By treason, as too well it does appear
By that disloyal act which he then wrought.
But he that such a traitorous heart does bear,
All honor and renown does set at naught:
So that he may effect his cruelty,
And bad intent against his enemy.
But now I must a little change my style,
And leave the Greeks and Trojans in the fight;
And unto learned Homer speak a while,
Who as it seems did take a great delight
To praise Achilles for his chivalry,
And all the Greeks t'extoll and magnify.
But Homer thou had need to blush for shame,
And to condemn thine own partiality,
For magnifying of Achilles name,
That in thy book extolst him to the sky:
Who while he lived was full of fraud and guile,
And never did deserve so lofty a style.
I must confess that with great Eloquence,
And Rethoricke, thou have set forth his praise,
And like a Poet of great excellence,
Do say he was the best Knight in his days.
Yet in one point thou greatly art to blame,
Without just cause to magnify his name,
And t'eleuate, commend, and glorify
Him with a title of such happiness,
As that for everlasting memory
Thou do declare, that through his worthiness
And Knighthood, he the honor did obtain,
By his own hand two Hectors to have slain.
(One, who in truth for Knighthood did surpas
All men that ever lived, for such an other
Was never found, and Troielus that was
A most renowned Knight, his youngest brother:
Who likewise well deserved for his fame
And valor great, a second Hectors name.)
If thou wast moved by affection
And love which thou do seem in heart to bear
Unto the valiant Greekish Nation,
To praise him, thou should not for love nor fear,
Refuse to write the truth of every thing,
And set aside all lies and flattering.
For when that he slew Hector in the field,
It was when he without all fear or care,
To ease himself a while had cast his shield
Behind him at his back, and fore him bare
A Kings dead corpse before his sadle bow;
And of his coming did full little know:
For if he had perceiud his treachery,
Thou had not had the cause of him to boast
As now thou have, for by his chiualry,
He would have made Achilles, to his cost
To feel his puissant force and valor great,
And him besides his purpose would have set.
And so he did to Troielus likewise,
Who being all alone enclosed round
Amongst the Greeks, his deadly enemies,
And fighting there on foot upon the ground,
Disarmed head and neck, in great distress,
And ready for to faint with weariness:
He road behind him and most cowardly
Smot off his head, when he suspected least
He would have used him so traitorously;
Now judge you all I pray at my request,
Ift were an act of any valiant Knight,
To kill a man sore wearied in fight.
Which he had held against thousands all that day,
And much of his most Princely blood had spent,
In midst of them as he stood at a bay,
Bare headed, with his armor all most rent
Clean off his back, not able to sustain
Himself, but in great danger to be slain.
And in that case to come so cowardly
Behind his back, and kill him unawares,
To cover his devised treachery,
As one that of his honor had no care.
Praise him not therefore Homer for the same,
But rather unto his eternal shame,
Out of thy worthy learned Book deface
His name, and of him make no memory
Therein at all, for surely in this case,
When as I hear his name, me thinks the sky
Infected is therewith, and that throughout
The world all men against him do cry out.
For if he had esteemed Nobility,
Knighthood, renown, or worthiness, or fame,
Praise, honor, glory or gentilitie;
Or in Fames Book to have registered his name,
He would have been aduisd and taken heed,
For honors sake to have done so foul a deed,
To draw so great a Prince when he was dead
At his horse tail, who was so brave a Knight
That while he liud, and in Troy flourished;
To speak the truth and yield to him his right,
Surpast Achilles far in each degree,
Of Knighthood, valor, and actiuitie.
But to return where I did leave, when as
His brother Paris did behold and see
Him dead, and drawn by Achilles as he was,
With such despite and so great cruelty:
Such grief and sorrow at that time he had,
Within his heart, that like a man that is mad
He fard, and with all speed that he could make,
Pollidamas and he together ran,
And many more to see if he could take
His body from Achilles, but as than
The Grecians fought so hotly, that in vain
They labored, for they could not obtain
To their desires, what means so ere they made,
Till Menon who entire affection bare
To Troielus, and great compassion had
To see him dead, without all fear or care
Of fierce Achilles valor, did protest,
That he would never leave, nor take his rest
Till he reuengd his death upon the man
That had him slain, and presently did take
His spear in hand, and at Achilles ran,
To whom in fierce and furious wise he spoke,
And said, thou traitor false and mischiuous,
Thou Scorpion most vile and envious,
That in dishonor of all chivalry,
This day have slain the worthiest Knight that lived
Upon the earth, by thy false treachery,
Who cannot but be vexed, moved and griu'd,
To see a worthy Knight of his degree,
Drawn in such wise as he is now by thee
At thy horse tail in scorn and great despite?
Have thou forgotten and abandoned
All knighthood, that thou sholdst now take delight
To do so great disgrace to him that is dead.
Who while he lived was better knight then thou,
The which I mean to prove upon thee now,
And for this vile and most vnknightly act,
Revenge his death, whom thou this day have killed
By treason, with thy Myrmidons compact,
And by this means thy treachery fulfild.
Whereby thou think great honor to have gotten,
But thy foul fact will never be forgotten
While that the world endures, and presently
He set spear in rest, and spurring's horse
Ran at Achilles, and most valiantly
Hit him upon the breast with so great force,
That with the blow he ready was to fall
Unto the ground, and bravely therewithal
Drew out his sword, and that he might well know,
That he of him did stand in little dread,
Struck him therewith a strong and mighty blow,
And gave him such a wound upon his head,
That notwithstanding all his puissant force,
He made him fall down headlong from his horse.
Upon the ground, whereon in extreme pain
He lay long time as if he had been dead,
Till that his Knights did take him up again,
And notwithstanding that full sore he blead,
Got him at last to mount upon his horse,
And when he had recovered his force,
And felt himself well eased of his pain.
With purpose to revenge the injury
He thought he had receiud, in great disdain
He spurd his puissant horse, and furiously
At Menon ran, whose coming when he spide,
He likewise set spurs to his horses side,
And like a valiant Knight that feared him naught,
With courage bold met with him on the plain,
Wherewith their swords they both together fought,
And twixt them did a combat long maintain
With fierce and mighty blows, till in the end
King Menon did himself so well defend,
That he the advantage of Achilles had,
And in despite of all his fury great,
(For he as then fought as he had been mad.)
So valiantly upon him then did set,
That he had surely slain him, but that then
There came twixt them so great a troop of men
On either side, that they were forced to stay
Their combat, and by that means parted were,
And each from other borne clean away:
At which time such a cruel slaughter there
Was made of many a valiant knight and stout,
That all the field and all the plain throughout
Was filled with men that slain and wounded sore,
Lay mangled on the ground in cruel wise,
For neither Greeks nor Trojans would give ore
Till Phoebus did begin to leave the skies,
And to descend, at which time they withdrew
Themselves out of the field, and did renew
The fight again next day, and met together
As Soon as sun did rise, and every day,
For seven days ensuing one the other,
Continually from fighting did not stay.
While that Achilles in his tent did lie
To cure his wounds, and there new trethery
Within his mind did practice and devise,
To be reuengd on Menon, who as then
He hated sore, because that in such wise
He wounded him, and to him called his men,
And bad them when they fit occasion found
Within the field, t'inclose King Menon round
On every side, and when they had him so
Amongst them, to assail him altogether,
And by no means from them to let him go,
(But not to kill him till that he came thither.)
That he himself on him revenged might be,
And so they did: for as he did decree
With them in secret wise to do the same,
The next day in the morning when they met,
And either side against other fiercely came
Into the field, with rage and choler great,
Achilles and King Menon met together,
And valiantly assailed each the other.
On horseback as they sat where they did fight
So long, and in such furious wise, that both
O^ them compelled were by force t'alight,
And so on foot in mighty rage and wroth,
Fought valiantly. But while that on the ground
King Menon stood, he was enclosed round
By Myrmidens, and as Achilles bad,
When he was in the midst of them all,
And not one Trojan Knight to aid him had,
In furious wise they did upon him fall:
And though long time he did the fight maintain
Against them all; at last he was there slain
In traitorous wise by false Achilles hand,
(Who by that means did his desire obtain.
But yet he did so valiantly withstand
Him, and them all, ere he by him was slain,
That fore that he fell dead upon the ground,
He gave Achilles such a cruel wound,
That all men thought he would thereof have died.
Now Homer judge in truth, and with good reason,
(A^by no upright mind't can be denied,)
If this were not most vile and filthy treason
The which Achilles wrought: and say with right,
If ever he slew any worthy Knight
Unless it were by treason as it is true
And proved by King Menons death, whom he
Slew in that sort. And then give him his dew;
And thou shall find his knighthood staind to be
With foul disgrace, and all his praise naught worth
And contrary to that which thou setst forth.
So that thou can not rightly (and speak true)
(Though nere so eloquently thou do write,)
Commend him, unless that thou say untrue,
And showst thy self one that does take delight
To hide his treason with thy sugared phrase,
And him that nere deserved, the same to praise.
But now I must leave Homer, and again
Return to show unto you how that day
When that Achilles Troielus had slain,
(Who of the Trojans then was the only stay,)
The Greeks (encouragd by King Menclaus
And others;) were so fierce and furious
Upon the Trojans, and did them pursue
So hotly; that they forced them to fly
In mighty fear, and many of them slew
As they before them ran, and cruelly
Did wound, orethrow, and chase, and beat the^ down
Even to the walls and trenches of the Town.
And made them in despite their hea^t^, forsake
The field, and t'enter Troy most woefully
With Troiclus, whose body they did take,
And bare it in with great solemnity.
Where all along the town as it did pas
Such sorrow for his death then made there was,
That no man living can discribe, or tell
The half thereof. No not most learned Boys,
Who has the praise in phrases fit t'excell,
And of most doleful words to have great choice:
When as he makes show to weep and cry
In his complaint made to Philosophy,
Wherein he seems Fortune to accuse
For her unconstant dealing, and does charge
Her by that means, all mortal men to abuse.
Nor Stacie who of Thebes writes at large,
The woeful and the most unhappy fall,
And does describe the death and funeral
Of those that were the causers of the same.
Leave of thy mournful weeping Niobe,
And thou that art reported to have the fame,
Each year so far ore land and sea to flee:
And great complaints and woeful cries to make
For thy dear brother Aliagers sake.
Let Oedipus the Theban King, that so
Did weep and wail that he lost both his eyes,
Content himself, and many other mo.
As Mirha and Calixtone, whose cries
And doleful mones so well were heard and seen.
And Dido fair that sometime reigned Queen
Of Carthage town, and for her love did die.
Let Phillis mourn no more for Demophon^
Nor echo still renew her woeful cry.
Let fair Corrinne cease to make such moan
As she long did, and nere left night nor day,
Because that she had lost her Popingay,
As Onid in his Book does tell. And let
All their complaints, their forrowes, and their moan*
Forgotten and clean out of mind be set,
For they are nothing in comparison
To that of Troy, which every one did make
Within the town, for worthy Troylus sake.
For high, and low, wives, children, and men,
So piteously complaind: and for him there,
So many salt and brinish tears were then
Let fall, that men naught else in Troy did hear
But mournful cries, and lamentations sad
By them cast forth. That nere the like was made
In any place, nor no man well can tell
Nor yet express the same, for it is sure
That Pluto whom men call the Prince of Hell,
(For all the torments great he does endure.)
Proserpin^, nor furious Ticius,
Nor Irian, nor hungry Tantalus.
Though they tormented are with extreme pain,
With him together in the infernal lake,
Nere could nor did more bitterly complain,
Then all the Trojans did for Troielus sake.
For who-could grieve more then King Priamus,
Or shead more doleful tears and piteous,
Out of their eyes, then Hecuba the Queen,
Eassandra, Hellen, Paris, Hellenus,
And beautiful young Lady Pollicene?
Or then the Trojans with most dolorous,
And woeful cries, did all in general
Shed forth, and did against Fortune cry and call:
Accusing her of great inconstancy?
For they were clean discomforted and out
Of hope to be relieud, since enviously
She had bereaved them of Hector stout,
And of his valiant brother Deiphobus,
And in their greatest need, of Troielus.
So that in sore distress and desperate mood,
They utterly dispaird of their estate,
The which they knew in danger great then stood,
And made account as men unfortunate,
T'expect naught else but their confusion,
And finally the whole destruction
Of them, and of their town that was so strong,
And therefore it avails not to mourn,
Nor of their grief to make discourse so long.
Since they by Fate to that hard hap were borne.
And for that cause i will leau't, and to you shoe,
How Prianous in that distress and woe,
A messenger unto the Grecians sent,
For truce for certain months, which presently
(With all the Grecian Princes full consent.)
Agamemnon did grant and ratefie,
Which either side observed, while it did last,
And freshly fought again when it was past.
CHAP. III.
How Paris slew Achilles, and Archilagus Duke Nestors Son in the Temple of A
pollo in Troy.

THe truce aforesaid lasting, Priamus
A Sepulcher did make most sumptuously,
Of metal and of stone, for Troielus:
And buried him with great solemnity.
And hard by him King Menons body lay
Intombed, and both buried on a day.
And as the Pagans were accustomed
By the ancient laws, in ceremonial wise,
Most dolefully for them solemnised,
And dewly held their funeral obsequies:
With great devotion and obseruances,
The which to you is needles to express.
And therefore at this time i will let it pas,
As tedious both to hear and tell likewise.
And show you how Queen Hecuba that was
Sore grieved for death of Troilus, did devise
And practice in her mind how to require
Achilles, for the trech'ry and despite
Which he both unto her and Troy had don.
And to that end she sent in secret wise
For Paris, (who was then her eldest Son,)
To whom with tears that trickled down her eyes,
And mournfully with sad and heavy cheer,
She spoke and said to him, as you shall hear.
Paris thou know as well as I can tell,
How false Achilles by his treachery
Has slain my sons, (who living did excel
Him far,) and by his extreme cruelty
Has me bereaud of them, and left me none
But only thee, to comfort me alone.
For cowardly thou know how he did slay
Thy eldest brother Hector unaware,
And Troielus likewise, that were a stay
And comfort unto me in grief and care:
And therefore now I have determined
Within my mind, his traitorous blood to shead.
And him to pay as reason is and right,
With treason for his treason done to me,
And treachery with treach'ry to requite.
And thus it is; thou know well that he
Loves Policene thy sister, and does crave
Most earnestly her for his wife to have.
Now my intent is presently to send
For him, without delay to come to me
Into Apollos Temple, to the end
We may with speed upon the same agree:
Where thou well armed in secret wise shall stand
With certain knights, and ready be at hand
To kill him there, while he for me does stay,
Where let him of his death be surely sped,
And see that by no means he escape away,
Out of thy hands, until that he be dead:
Which I thee heartly pray as't is my will,
Effectual for my sake to fulfill,
And see thou failest not to do the same.
Whereto he did agree, and presently
Against Achilles to the Temple came,
With twenty valiant knights there secretly
Did stay. Mean time Queen Hecuba did send
A messenger to Achilles to that end,
As she with Paris had determined:
By whom she made him certainly believe,
That she did mean and fully purposed,
Her daughter Policene to him to give:
And at his coming would (as she did say)
Agree twixt them upon the marriage day.
Where to he did most willingly consent,
As he that no suspicion had in mind
Of treason, for his heart it was so bent,
And set on fire with love, that he was blind
And could not see, nor yet perceive at all,
By reason and advise what might be fall
To him by going into Troy so soon
At her request, he had offended so
By killing of her Sons as he had done,
But hap what would, needs thither would he go:
As lovers all are fond, and despratly
No peril shun (although that they should die)
T'enioy the thing wherewith in love they are,
(Their malady it is so furious)
Until they are intrapped in a snare.
And so Achilles, and Archilogus
Duke Nestors Son, that bare him company,
Did go to Troy, and entering presently
Into the Temple of Apollo went,
Where Paris with his Knights for him did stay
In secret wise, with purpose fully bent
Him there (as he deserved had) to slay:
And suddenly as soon as he was in,
T'assaile him altogether did begin.
(By night (as some do say) but when so ere
The same was done) when as Achilles saw
Himself assaild, abandoning all fear,
He did his sword out of his scabberd draw,
And in short space despite of all their mights,
In furious wise he slew seven Troyan knights.
And did defend himself so valiantly
Against them then, although they were so many,
And with them fought with such dexterity,
That long it was ere vantage they bad any
On him at all, till Paris who as then,
Stood watching opportunity, and when
He saw Achilles such resistance make,
Took up a Dart and aimed at him so well,
And so directly, that therewith he struck
Him through the heart: and therewith all he fell
With pale and deadly face upon the ground,
And body mangled sore with many a wound.
And so was slain his treason to requite.
As reason is that such as traitors are,
And while they live in treachery delight,
Should at the last fall in the self same snare
Which they for others had prepared. And thus
Achilles, and with him Archilogus,
Were slain by Paris in the Temple, at
Queen Hecubaes desire and request,
Who presently did give commandment that
Their bodies in the Temple should not rest:
And made them to be drawn out of the bounds
Thereof, and to be thrown unto the hounds.
Lo here the just reward of treachery
And of deceit, which while he lived he
Delighted in, and how with equity
God punishes all such as traitors be:
For reason is, that he that seeks t'obtaine
His will by treason, should likewise again
With treason be requited for his pain.
As false Achilles was, that took delight
In treason while he lived, and so was stain
Within Apollos Temple in the night:
But yet their body: were not as it is said,
(Although that they in the open streets were laid,
That with great joy the Troyans might them see)
Devoured by hounds as by commandment
Of Hecuba they were ordaind to be.
For Helena unto King Priam went,
And on her knees of him did humbly crave,
Their bodies from that cruelty to save.
Who willingly did thereunto consent,
And caused them to be kept as she desired,
Till that King Agamemnon to him sent
A messenger, and leave of him required,
To fetch them, and to give them burial,
The which he did; for whom in general
The Grecians did such extreme sorrow make,
And were so much discomforted therefore,
That in great fear each unto other spoke,
And said alas, now farewell evermore,
Our trust, our hope, our joy, our confidence,
Our welfare, and our sovereign defense,
Since valorous Achilles now is dead.
For he in knighthood did so much excel,
That while he lived, we never stood in dread
To overcome this town, but now full well
We may both fear, and plainly say, that we
Nere in our lives shall masters thereof be.
And while that they such sorrow great did make,
And plunged were in extreme doubts and fears,
For their great Champion fierce Achilles sake,
Agamemnon two costly Sepulchers,
For workmanship most rare and curious
Caused to made, one for Archilogus,
The other for Achilles, wherein they
Intombed were with great solemnity
In Paynim wise, and both upon a day.
To show the whole particularity,
And manner of their ancient burial,
Were overlong to trouble you withal.
It shall suffice to tell that they did make
Much sorrow, and endured great heaviness
For death of them, and how in mournful black
They brought them to their graves, and to express
Their woefulnes with heavy heart and mood,
Some threw sweet gums, and some cast milk and blood
Into the funeral fires, and how they made
Plays, which by them were called palestrall
And wrastrings at the wakes, and how they had
Great store of customs ceremonial
At burials of the dead, the which much more
Then needful were to tell as now, therefore
I Will leave herewith. And unto you declare,
How thereupon King Agamemnon sent
For all the Grecian Princes that then were
Within the host, to come unto his tent:
And when they all assembled were therein
And orderly set down, he did begin
To speak to them and said, my Lords it is now
No time to move nor need t'encourage your
Against your Troyan foes, since that you know
And too well find by good experience, how
Unconstant fortune has now changed her face,
And suddenly clean altered our case*
And filled your hearts with rage and just despite,
To think upon the murder horrible
Of late done to Achilles, (which in sight
Of God and man is foul and odible,
Despightfully by Hecuba the Queen)
For which I think it shortly shall be seen,
If that within your valiant hearts there be,
Or rests any manhood, force, or wit,
To make a virtue of necessity:
And to refrain till that occasion fit
To take revenge therefore, and t'recompence
The injury, despite, and great offense
Unto you done and given thereby, fall out,
As reason it is it should requited be,
(For very beasts insensible no doubt,
Would do the same in like extremity,)
But yet as you are wise and provident,
I would feign know your meaning and intent,
What you think best by us now to be done.
And whether that you will the war maintain,
And hold the siege still here before the town,
Till that it be destroyed, or go again
Home into Greece, since our chief Champion,
Our sole defense, and our protection,
Achilles now is slain. Whose death alone
Unto us will a mighty hindrance be.
And therefore I entreat you every one,
To give me your advise herein what we
Shall do: since that the case now stands thus,
For that delay often proves dangerous.
Which having said, the Princes all began
To fall in great dissension, and to varrie
Amongst themselves, and many of them than
Were half in fear no longer there to tarry:
And doubtful were what they were best to do.
But some replied and answer made thereto;
That happen life or death they would still stay,
And never leave the siege till they had woone
And clean destroyed the town: and some did say
They would not stay, but presently be gone,
And into Greece return again with speed:
And in that sort a while they disagreed,
And every man was of opinion
Contrary each to other. But in the end
They did all with full resolution
Agree to stay, and ceasing to contend,
Said flatly, they would never leave the town,
Till they had it destroyed and beaten down.
Although their chief and only Champion,
Achilles then was slain, of whom they made
So great account, for their opinion
Was, since that all the Gods decreed had
They should destroy the same, they did not doubt
But in short time to bring the same about.
And to confirm their resolution,
And that they might still firmly therein hold,
The worthy Grecian Knight called Thelamon,
Surnamed Ajax, did with courage bold
Stand up, and when he had obeisance made,
Unto them all in this wise spoke and said.
My Lords and Princes all assembled now,
If you will take my counsel and advise,
I am persuaded it is best for you,
Since that Achilles in such traitorous wise
Is slain, that we a messenger should send,
To fetch his Son young Pyrrhus, to the end
He may revenge his fathers death, and aid
Vsto atchieue our enterprise in hand^
Who at this time as I have hard it said,
Remains with King Licomedes, and
As men of him repor, it is said to be
A valiant Knight and likely, if that he
While he is young take on him arms to bear,
To prove a knight of great renown and fame:
And also ift be true as I do hear
By prophecy, which does foreshow the same,
Troy nere shall be destroyed, unless that he
With us to do the same here present be.
And further that till Pyrrhus do come hither,
We never shall obtain the victory
Against our foes, and therefore let us together
Agree to send one thither presently
To fetch him. Whereunto they did consent*
And Menelaus of that Embassage went.
Who entering ship, saild forth the self same day,
And soon arrived where Licomedes dwelt;
Where with him for a while i will let him stay,
And show you how the Greeks and Troyans dealt
Together, when (truce past) in fight they were,
As in the Chapter following you shall hear.
CHAP. V.
How Paris and Thelamon Ajax slew each other; and how Queen Helena Lamented
for the death of Paris; the Grecians remove their tents necrer unto Troy, and
the truce is ended between them.

When Phoebus by due course (as time does pass)
Into the sign of Cancer entry made,
And in the height of his assention was,
Which usually men Summer call, and had
Drawn from the root of every flower and tree,
The virtue, sweetness, and humiditie,
And made them mount into the herbs and leaues^
And when each flower does fresh and gay appear,
Till Cancer place by course to Leo gives,
Which is the time and season of the year:
When as the Sun being in the highest degree
Descends, and is said retrograde to be;
And with his mighty heat and feruor clean
Dries up the sap of roots, trees, herbs, and flowers,
(And that which spring time made show fresh and
Co^verts to white (for want of April showers) (green)
To mollify his strong decoction.
For that by natural digestion,
The moisture which in fruits and flowers abounds
By reason of the great humiditie
Which is in them, he dries up and confounds:
And with his heat and extreme fervencie,
(Which hotest is when it is Summer weather,)
Does ripen them, and make them sit to gather?
And pull off from the branches as they spread
And hang thereon, in their due time and season.
When Cheries gin to ripen and wax red,
And other kinds of friuts are young and geason.
In June, and at the latter end of May,
When as the hot and pleasant Summers day,
By course of time is sixteen hours long,
The Greeks with hearts repleat with wrath and ire,
Presuming of their force that was so strong,
And hoping to attain to their desire,
Into the field courageously did go
Well armed to fight against their Troyan foe.
Conducted by the Kings Agamemnon,
Ulisses, valiant Diomede and mo,
As Menestes, and furious Thelamon,
(Who that same day into the field did go,
Without an armor, helmer, spear, or shield,
Only his sword which in his hand he held,
And naked in that sort most bravely fought.)
Against whom the Trayans (though in fear and doubt)
Did issue forth, for that King Priam thought
His force too weak, so often to go out
As he was wont, since his Sons valorous,
Hector, Deiphobus, and young Troyelus,
Unfortunately were all dead and slain:
Yet not to give the Grecians cause to say
He feared them, he sent them out again,
And gave the chief command of them that day
To Paris, that his eldest Son then was,
Who with King Philomene, Pollidamas,
King Esdras, and Aeueas valiantly
Against the Grecians went, and on them set
With courage stout, resolved that day to die
In their defense, o^ honor great to get,
Upon their deadly and inveterate foes,
As't pleased God the victory to dispose,
And furiously the onset on them gave.
Where Paris with his Persian Archers shot,
Upon the Greeks so swiftly and so brave,
That soon he had advantage on them got:
And they compelled were in extreme need
To fly to save themselves. Till Diomede
Perceauing them so fast to run away,
T'^eleiue them like a stout and valiant Knight,
Did turn them back again, and made them stay
Still in the field, and valiantly to fight:
And at his entering in amongst them met
King Philomene, on whom he fiercely set.
Who bravely unto him did likewise ride,
Where each of them the other did assail,
And valiantly their strengths and valors tride^*
But neither against the other could prevail,
And yet they fought most furiously and long,
For both of them were passing stout and strong,
And would not yield one ^o^ unto his foe,
So much they did in courage great excel.
But while they were together fighting so,
The Troyans fought so furiously and fell
Against the Greeks, that they could not sustain
Their mighty blows, but forced were again
To run out of the field discomforted,
(Though Diomede did what he could to stay
And succor them) so many of them dead,
And wounded sorevpon the plain then lay,
And cast out many a great and woeful cry.
The which when Duke Menestes did epsy,
And saw what great disorder they were in,
And how the Troyans them so sore oppressed,
Into the battle fiercely did begin
To enter, and with mighty Lance in rest,
Brake through the Troyans ranks, till that he was
So far, that he met with Pollidamas.
Against whom at unawares he ran so fast,
That with a blow which he at him let fly,
Upon the ground he did him fiercely cast:
And while that he amazed thereon did lie,
Had slain him, if with speed he had not been
Relieved and rescued by King Philomen.
Who bravely in despite of all the force
And might Menestes had, did set him free,
And made him mount again upon his horse,
Sore bleeding and in great extreamitie:
Mean time fierce Thelmon Ajax carelessly,
Unarmed, with great pride (yet foolishly)
Amongst the thickst of all his armed foes,
Nere ceast to kill and mightily to wound
The Troyans, and such valor great then shoes,
That they in heaps lay dead upon the ground
About him, and none durst against him stand,
So fierce he was with bloody fword in hand,
To kill and beat them down still as he road:
And yet though in the midst of them he was,
And that so many thousands him with stood
On every side, as he through them did pass;
No^ any part of him was perished,
Nor drop of blood out of his body shed.
Which wonder was, considering how that he
Disarmed fought. But when dame Fortune will
Preserve and keep man from extreamitie,
Nothing can hurt, nor him by no means kill:
And yet when as she list she will him beguile,
And play and sport with him a little while:
And suddenly when he thinks least thereon,
Ore-turne her wheel, and cast him on the ground.
As she that day did unto Thelamon,
Who to his cost her most unconstant found:
For as he among the Troyans with great pride,
Disarmed through their ranks did fiercely ride,
And many of the Persian Archers slew,
With heart clean void of any fear or dread,
And more and more with fury did renew
His force, and to his safety took no heed:
Paris perceauing his great hardiness,
And how he did the Persian knights oppress,
In great despite an arrow at him shot,
And with the same (as he did fiercely ride,
Still killing all he met, and spared them not)
Pierst him at unawares into the side,
So deep a wound, that without remedy,
There was no other means but he must die.
Which when he did perceive, and saw no way
To Avoid his death, with heart surpised with ire,
In furious wise he made no more delay,
But running through the prease with great desire
To be revenged on Paris ere he died,
Sought him so long, till at the last he spied
Him among the thickst of all the Greeks in fight,
And unto him (with pale and deadly cheer,
But yet with extreme rage and great despite,
To think upon his death that drew so near:)
Said, Paris, the wound which thou have given me,
I know and certain am my death will be.
For I do feel such extreme grief and pain
Within my heart, that I am well assured,
I never shall return to Greece again.
And since that thou my death have thus procured,
I mean to give thee such reward therefore,
That thou alive to Troy shall nere go more:
For as the great despite well meriteth,
Which thou shewst me, i will make thee first to feel
(Ere that I die) the bitter pangs of death,
And send thee down before me into hell:
And therefore make account thy glass is run,
And that thou can thy death as now not shun.
For here my troth I plight and firmly vow,
That with my sword i will make divorce between
Queen Helena and thee, and that as now
The chain of fained wedlock that has been
So surely made and knit twixt her and thee,
Shall now at last be cut in twain by me.
And that false knot of thy adultery,
(Which has been cause such slaughter great to make,
And made so many valiant knights to die
In this our war, and only for thy sake)
Shall be vnknit^ for without remedy,
Paris (said he) of my hand thou shall die.
And with his sword (scarce able to sustain
Himself upright) gave Paris such a wound,
That with the same he cleft his head in twain,
And therewith he fell dead upon the ground:
Which having done, he likewise presently
Fell down and died to bear him company.
Which when the Troyans saw, with doleful cheer
They took up Paris body, to convay
The same to Troy, and in a mighty fear
Began to fly, where all along the way
The Greeks did kill, pursue, and beat them down,
Even to the walls and trenches of the town.
And more had done, but that it did begin
To draw to night, for then the Sun was down.
And when the woeful Troyans were gone in,
And had secured themselves within the town:
The Greeks likewise retired back, and went
Unto their Camp, each man into his tent
To ease themselves, but ere (as't them behou'd)
They took their rest, that night Agamemnon
Commanded that their tents should be removed,
And set and placed nearer to the town,
Not far off from the walls: and so they were,
Which put the Troyans in no little fear.
So that they durst not issue out to let
And hinder them from doing it, but glad
To save themselves; shut fast their gates, and set
Watch all that night upon the walls, and made
Such sorrow, and so pitifully fared
For Paris death, that nere the like was heard.
For by that means all Priams sons being slain,
They did despair and out of hope clean were
Of any comfort, or release t'obtaine
In their distress: and so possessed with fear,
And plunged in most great extreamitie,
They made account there was no remedy,
Nor any means to aid themselves withal,
(But still expecting their destruction)
To keep themselves enclosed within the wall
And rampires of their strong and mighty town:
And for that cause most pittiouslie complaind,
And so great woe and sorrow then sustaind,
That nere the like was heard nor seen before.
But specially King Priam did so grieve,
For Paris death, and did lament therefore
So mightily, that nothing could relieve
Nor comfort him, and from his heart which filled
With woe and care then was, such tears distild,
And let fall down his checkes and aged face,
That he did seem as if he would have died.
To tell you how in this most woeful case,
Queen Hecuba his mother wept and cried:
And what exceeding sorrow for their parts
His sisters made, and felt within their hearts:
And how they rent and tare their clothes and hair,
And beat and smote their breasts in great distress,
And all bedewd and wet their faces fair
With floods of tears, to express their heaviness:
Were unto me a thing impossible.
And yet in truth it was not comparable,
To that which fair Queen Helena did make,
Who with a deadly cheer and woeful face,
Cast forth most doleful cries for Paris sake,
And running furiously unto the place
Whereas his body lay, fell flat thereon,
And though that it was cold as any stone,
Embrast it in her arms, and woefully
Lamenting on the same fell in a sound,
And likely was in that extreamitie
To die, and to have been laid into the ground
With him, if those that were with her, by force
And strength had not pulled her off from the corse,
Wherewith she rent and tare her golden hair,
Like one that is mad, and waxt so pale and wan,
That her most comely face which was so fair,
Changed in such sort, that it therewith began
To look and show like unto ashes cold.
And with her hands which she did ring and fold
Together, smote her white and deadly face,
And sounding fell again upon the ground,
And in her arms did Paris corse embrace,
And with her brinish tears did fill his wound:
And was so much perplexed in her mind,
That she could neither ease nor comfort find.
But rather seemed to wish with great desire
To die with him, in whom her sole delight
Was placed, and in that most furious ire,
To end her days with her most loving Knight,
And live no more; since that she was bereft
Of him, and in such great discomfort left.
So that I may well say, that never any
Poor woman felt the like nor more distress,
Although I could rehearse and tell of many,
That have been plunged in great heaviness,
As Cleopatre going to her grave.
And Thesbie, that did come out of the cave,
And smote her self for grief into the heart.
And Oristilla, who no sooner spied
Her Lord take shipping and from her depart,
Sore grieved for love of him fell down and died:
And Iulia that loved her Lord so well,
That suddenly dead on the ground she fell,
When she beheld his clothes all dashed with blood.
And Portia that was so true a wife
To Brutus, that when as she understood
That he was slain, because she had no knife
In readiness to kill herself withal,
To show her love into the fire did fall
And burnt herself. And that most noble Queen
Called Arthemisia, who when she had found
Her Knight Mausalus grave, and there had seen
His bones, did take them up out of the ground:
And with an heart repleat with grief and care,
Unto her Palace solemnly them bare.
And beating them to powder, every day
Did drink thereof, till it was clean consumed.
Who with the rest aforesaid I must say,
(And as in truth it is to be presumed.)
No doubt great grief endured, but not so much
As fair Queen Helen did, nor nothing such.
Who would have killed her self for Paris sake,
Desiring to her grave with speed to go,
And rather of her life an end to make,
Then to live after him she loved so:
And languishing in woe long time remaind,
And never could from weeping be restaind.
(He that does say that women cannot cry,
Deceaues himself, for it is a thing most sure
They can by nature do it, and certainly,
Though they no grief nor sorrow do endure;
Yet they can false and fained tears distraine
Out of their eyes, and without cause complain.)
I say not this Queen Helena t'accuse
Of fained tears, whose heart with woe was filled,
For then I should you with untruth abuse,
For she for grief her self would feign have killed:
And yet it seems she was not in such have
As she made show; for when the storm was past,
She soon forgot the great extreamitie
That she was in, for all things have an end,
And every woe how great so ere it be,
Must pass away, for follie't were to spend
Long time in that which may be remedied.
For though that fair Queen Helen would have died
For Paris sake as then, yet afterward
She did repent, for nature did her move,
And told her that it was a thing too hard
For her so soon to kill her self for love:
She was a woman, what would you have more,
She thought it folly great to die therefore.
But I will speak no more hereof as now,
For it would be too long and teadious
For me to show and to declare to you,
Her grievous woe and passions furious,
And all her doleful lamentation:
The which would move unto compassion
The hardest heart alive to hear it told.
For Priam and Queen Hecuba likewise,
Such pity had to see, and to behold
Her shead such floods of tears out of her eyes,
And in such fort to grieve and to complain,
That they almost endured as much pain
Within their hearts for her, as she had had
For Paris, but there was no remedy.
But to conclude, when they an end had made
Of all their woe, King Priam speedily
Did cause a rich and costly sepulcher,
To be set up in Iunoes Temple, where
Most sumptuously, and in their Paynim wise
His body was entombed, but to declare
The manner of the great solemnities
Then used at their funerals, (which are
So many and so diverse) it would be
Too long to be declared now by me.
CHAP. VI.
How Panthasilia Queen of the Amazons, coming to aid the Troyans against the
Grecians, sh^^ obtained great honor, and was slain by Pyrrhus the So^^e of
Achilles.

KIng Priamus in doubt of his estate,
(And brought into most great extremity
By fortune, and his hard and cruel fate,)
When he perceived no other remedy,
Shut fast the gates of Troy, and day and night
Kept watch and ward as strongly as he might.
For all the Troyans generally were
So much abasht, and did such sorrow make
For Paris death, that they could not forbear
To weep and wail, and durst not undertake,
Against the Greeks to fight nor issue out,
But kept within the town in fear and doubt,
Expecting naught, but finally to end
Their days in woe. Which when the Greeks did see.
Agamemnon to Priamus did send
A messenger t'intreat with him (as he
Before had done) to issue with his might
Out of the town, against the Greeks to fight.
But Priamus the motion did detest,
And flatly said it was not his intent,
To issue out of Troy at his request:
And that he was most resolutely bent,
Not once to set one foot out of the town,
But when he list without compulsion.
And yet the cause why he so long time staid
From issuing out against the Grecians,
Was, for because he did expect some aid
From Panthasilia Queen of Amazons:
Who at that time was coming with great speed
And mighty force, to help him in his need.
Whose Country (as some Authors say) did stand
Far distant in the oriental part,
Twixt Asia and Europe. In which Land
None else but women-kind did dwell, whose art
And chief delight, and only exercise,
Was managing of arms in warlike wise,
And valiantly into the field to ride,
Armed at all points against their enemy,
Among whom no man might by no means abide,
Nor they with them at any time did lie
But three months in the year, which as they say,
Was in the months of April, June, and May.
At which time setting arms and wars aside,
They went into an Isle not far from thence,
Wherein their men did all alone abide,
Of purpose, and with full and sole pretense
To lie with them, and till they did conceive
And were with child, did not that I sland leave.
And after time of their conception,
They did in have and with all speed return
Into the Couotry where they dwelt, which done,
When as the child into the world was borne,
They nourisht it three months, and at the end
Thereof, ift were a son, they did it send
Unto the Isle whereas the men remaind:
And if it were a female child, they hold
And keep it still by them, and it sustaind
And nourished, till that it waxed old,
And was of years and strength to use and wear
An armor, and to manage sword and spear,
According to their ancient Country fashion.
And at that time Queen Panthasilia was
The Sovereign Commander of that Nation,
Who did so much in valor great surpass:
That for her puissant force the trump of fame,
Throughout the world eternized her name,
And yet although she did addict her mind
To practice arms, and manage sword and spear,
(Which is a thing not used by women-kind)
For wisdom, and for virtue she did bear
The praise and commendation, for none ever
Surpassed her for modesty what s'ever.
The reason that did move her then to aid
The Troyans was, for that in heart she bare
Affection great to Hector, and it is said,
Loved him so well that all her thought and care,
Her only joy, her pleasure and delight
Was in him, cause he was so brave a Knight.
And therefore when as by report she heard,
The Town of Troy besieged was, and how
The Greeks and Troyans against each other ward:
She did protest and made a solemn vow
To go to Troy, and with her force and might,
For love of Hector against the Greeks to fight.
And with her took a thousand maids that were
Well armed, and on horses brave did ride,
Who gallantly could mannagesword and spear,
And well durst against their foes in field abide*
And to that end set forward with all speed,
To help her dear friend Hector in his need.
But when she came to Troy, and understood
That valiant knight in that great war was dead,
And that as then she could do him no good,
A flood of tears out of her eyes she shead:
And did such extreme sorrow for him make,
As if she would have dyed for his sake.
And took a solemn oath revenged to be
Upon the Greeks therefore, and to that end
She did desire King Priamus that he.
His Troyan force into the field would send:
With whom (she said) the Amazons should go,
To show the Greeks what they in arms could do.
And how with spear and shield the could the^ greet,
And make them feel their force and worthiness
In arms, when they with the^ in field should meet:
To whose request made with great hardines,
King Priamus did grant with good advise.
And next day when the Sun began to rise,
And on the walls and towers of Troy did shene,
Sent all his Troyan Knights out of the town
Against the Greeks, led by King Philomene,
Commander of the knights of Phaflagowne:
And next to him Aeneas bravely led
The second band, well stuffed and furnished
With warlike knights. And then Pollidamas
Conductor of another band did ride,
And after them in order forth did pass
Queen Panthasilia guarded on each side
By Amazons, with courage stout and bold:
Whom when the Grecian army did behold,
To issue forth in battle bravely plast,
They likewise against them marched into the field,
And first of all Menestes in great have,
With mighty spear the which in rest he held,
Against the Queen of Amazons did ride:
Whose coming she most stoutly did abide,
And did encounter him with such a force,
That with her Lance to ground she did him cast,
And forcibly did seize upon his horse:
And as she further among the Grecians past,
King Diomede upon her fiercely set,
And she as fiercely with him also met,
And puissan^lie struck him so great a blow,
That notwithstanding all his force and might,
She did him clean out of his sadle throw,
And therewithal unto his great despite,
Laid hand upon his shield, and took't away
Perforce from him, and all that durst say nay.
And then like Tygar fell with greedines,
Throughout the field road ranging up and down,
And as a fierce and hungry Lioness,
Slew many of the Greeks, till Thelamon
Beholding what a slaughter then she made
Of them, such indignation thereat had,
And into such exceeding rage did fall,
That he did set upon her furiously:
But she no whit abashed therewithal,
Let fly at him again as valiantly:
And spite of all the Greeks that bout him were,
By force did him out of his sadle bear.
And by the aid of stout King Philomene,
Laid hold on him, and caused him to be led
To Troy-ward, and without all doubt had clean
Ore-throwne the Greeks as then, if Diomed
With many Grecian knights had not assaild
The Troyans, and so much against them preuaild,
That ere that they led Thelamon away,
He rescued him out of their hands with speed:
Yet after that the Queen all that same day,
So furiously the Grecians blood did shed,
That many of them cruelly were slain,
And by her and her maidens all the plain
Was cov'red ore with Greeks, that wounded sore
Lay crying out, and they at last compeld
Thereto by force (because they could no more
Sustain her mighty blows) to leave the field,
And run into the strond in mighty fear:
Whereas by her so many of them were
In furious wise beat down and slain out right,
That finally they had been all ore-throwne,
If Diomede most like a valiant knight,
Had not his prowess great at that time shown,
And forciblie resistance made against all
The Troyans power, for he stood like a wall
And bulwark strong in their defense and aid,
And freed them from all extreamitie
And fear wherein as then they were, and staid
The force and fury of the Queen. Yet she
So valiantly behau'd her self that day,
That with great honor she went thence away.
And did return again with victory,
Triumphing with her maids unto the Town,
And so left fighting with the enemy,
About the time of Ph^bus going down,
And entered with King Philomene that road
Close by her. Where King Priamus abode
To welcome her, and with great reverence,
In Princely wise received her, and gave
Her hearty thanks for th'aid and great defense
She had vouchsafed him that day, to save
His honor, and to show her worthiness:
Wherein (he said) he could not but confess
That she excelled all others what so ere.
And offering her his gold and treasure great,
And all things else that necessary were,
For to refresh her and her maids, he let
Her take her rest, in hope through her to be
Revenged of his Grecian enemy,
And all the wrongs and malice to require,
Which he long had endured at their hand.
For after that she ceased not to fight
Against the Greeks, and daily to withstand
Their power so well, that they were still co^peld
With loss and great disgrace to leave the field.
Till Menelaus returned back again
From Lyco^edes Land, and with him brought
Young Pyrrhus son to Achilles (that was slain
In Troy by Paris hand, and treason wrought
By Hecuba) whose coming did rejoice
The Grecians much, for they all with one voice
Did welcome him, and were exceeding glad
To see him, and because he was the son
And heir unto Achilles, he was made
Commander of the Myrmidons. Which done,
And homage made to him by full accord
Of all his knights, as to their Sovereign Lord:
King Agamemnon did create him Knight,
And t'honor him the more, King Thelamon
Did gird his sword about him (as the right
And custom was) and when he put it on,
Said unto him, good Cousin Pyrrhus see,
Thou prou'st in time as good a knight to be
As ere thy father was. For truth to tell,
While among us he enjoyed vital breath,
He did all men for valor great exceed^
And see likewise that thou revenge his death.
And after that, two Grecian Dukes did kneel
Upon the ground, and put on either heel
A spur of beaten gold, and when that all
The ceremonies usual ended were,
King Agamemnon openly did call
For th'arinor which Achilles used to bear
Upon hi^ back, when he in field did fight,
And gave it unto Pyrrhus as his right,
With all his treasure and his tent, that was
Left in the Grecian camp when he was dead.
And after that they had for eight days space,
Throughout the Grecian host solemnized
A royal feast, to show the joy they had
Conceived for Pyrrhus, that then knight was made.
The next day after when as Phoebus bright,
(Which spreads forth his radia^t beams so far,)
Had driven away the brown and obscure night,
And clean defast the beauty of the star
Called Lucifer, which commonly men say
And term to be the messenger of day.
They did prepare themselves again to fight,
And with the Troyans in the field to meet,
Determining with all their force and might
That day to show their valors, and to set
On them, and to assail them on each side:
And to that end out of their tents did ride
In order bravely plast, where Pyrrhus bare
His fathers warlike arms upon his shield,
And his Coat-Armor also which he ware:
And in that sort road foremost to the field,
Well horst. Where he no sooner entered was,
But he encountered with Pollidamas.
Whom with his sword in hand he fircely smot,
And he the like did unto him again.
But Pyrrhus on him such advantage got,
That he was in great danger to be slain
By him as then, if that King Phylomen
Had not come thither t'aid him with his men.
But Pyrrhus smote king Phylomen a blow
Upon the helmet with such extreme force,
That sore amazed, he was constraind to bow,
And bend his body backward on his horse,
And without doubt had taken him prisoner then,
If he had not been helped by his men.
Who to relieve and save him, fiercely fought,
And strove against the Greeks, but nerethelesse,
The valor great they showed, availd them naught:
For Pyrrhus on them did so strongly press
With Myrmidons, that they could not sustain
His fierce assault, but many of them were slain.
And beaten down, whereby King Phylomene,
Still was and stood in danger great to die,
Or to be taken, if that he had not been
Somewhat relieved in that extreamitie
By stout Pollidamas, that fiercely fought
To succor him, but it availd him naught,
For at that time the Myrmidons did fight
So furiously, and with such valor great,
That he could not (to his no little spite)
Relieve him, nor out of that danger set:
Till Panthasilia coming furiously
Upon the Greeks assaild them valiantly.
And with hermaidens (who for their delight
That day did issue forth into the field,
With Cassocksore their armors all of white)
So hot a skirmish with the Grecians held,
And did so many of them fiercely slay,
That they constrained were to give her way.
For who so ere he was that with her met
Was sure to die, till Thelmon unaware,
With fury great upon her fiercely set,
And with his Lance out of her sadle bare
Her to the ground, and laid her on the plain:
But she no whit abasht ro^e up again,
And with her sword gave Thelamon a blow
That feld him to the ground, and then by force
Her Amazons their valors great to show,
Despite of all the Greeks, brought her an horse,
And made her mount thereon. But nerethelesse
The Myrmidons on Phylomene did press
So hotely and so sore, that all the might
And force his men in his behalf could sho,
Did naught avail, for to their great despite,
They took him prisoner, and began to go
With him through midst of them out of the field.
Which when the Queen of Amazons beheld,
Assembling all her maids, she did begin
To follow them, and did so fiercely set
Upon them, that with furi^en^ring in
Amongst the thickest of the press, she beat
Them down so fast, that she did them constrain,
Despite their hearts, to let him go again
Out of their hands, and fought so cruelly
Against them at that time, that she compeld
Them in great have before her face to fly,
And backward to retire out of the field:
Whose valor great, when Pyrrhus did epsy,
He did begin unto his knights to cry.
And said it was a shame for them to lose
Their lives by women's hands, and so to yield
Them ground, and give occasion to their foes
To scorn them, and by them to be held
As cowards, that could not the force withstand
Of women, if they did not take in hand
With speed to daunt their pride, and kill them all,
And by that means requite them for the shame
They had endured by them, and therewithal
T'encourage them forthwith to do the same,
With sword in hand, and with a knightly cheer
Before the^ marched. Who^ when the Queen did here
In that sort to his knights to cry, she staid
Her horse, (and scorning once to turn her back,
Or of his threatening words to be afraid,)
With courage stout and bold unto him speak,
And said, Pyrrhus, I know thy father well
Slew Hector, that all others did excel
Throughout the world for peerless chivalrie,
Not fighting with him like a valiant knight,
But unawares, and by false treachery,
Before that he of him had any sight:
Which traitorous act my heart does so much grieve,
That I shall think upon it while I live.
And for the same my heart persuades me,
That just revenge without exception,
Should therefore first be taken upon thee,
And also in like sort on every one
That unto thee allied are by blood:
For love of that most valiant knight and good*
Whose death the world cannot enough complain,
And for that cause men do not only take
Revenge therefore, but women do maintain
His quarrel, and have vowed for his sake,
As right requires without exception,
To put the same in execution.
Unto which end here now before thy face
I stand, and ready am to try thy might,
For to revenge his death here in this place:
And since thou have at women such a spite,
Thou shall soon find by good experience
What we can do, and how in our defense
We can both weld a sword and warlike spear,
Which thou shall try by shedding of thy blood
Here in the field without all dread or fear.
Which words when Pyrrhus heard, he waxt as wood
As any Lion fierce when men him chase,
And then with color pale and angry face,
He took a spear and ran at her amain,
And she likewise (of him no whit in fear)
Encountered with him bravely in the plain,
Where Pyrrhus first upon her brake his spear,
But moved her not, she did so firmly sit,
But she did him so sure and strongly hit,
That with her Lance she did him overthrow,
And made him fall down flat upon the plain,
At which his heart with rage did overflow,
And rising on his feet an great disdain,
With sword in hand struck at her many a blow,
But she still firmly sat, and did not bow:
And in exchange gave him the like again,
And often made him kneel upon the ground,
And in that sort the fight between them twain
Continued long, and no advantage found
On either side, till Pyrrhus knights came on
And brought his horse, and made him mount thereon*
And then the General Agamemnon
With banners rich and pennons brave displaid,
Marched forward, and into the field came on,
With many Earls, Dukes, and Kings to aid
And second him, and to assail their foes,
Whose entry made the Troyan knights to lose
Their grouud, they were so fiercely followed,
And hotely charged by the Grecians,
Till Philomen them bravely rescued,
And by that means relieved the Troyans,
And joining with the Queen the Greeks assaild,
And at that time so much against them preuaild,
That by main force they made the^ lose their ground,
And then great store of knights on either side
Were stain out right, and many more were found
That wounded sore with ghastly voices cride,
And yielded up their breath, and many a she^d
And helmet broke and cleft, lay in the field.
And many a horse ran ma^^erlesse about,
And such a noise of Drums and Trumpets shrill,
And cries of men was heard the field throughout,
And with the sound thereof the air did fill*
That fearefull't was to hear and to behold,
How on each side with courage stout and bold
And most confused noise, they slew each other.
Where the Amazons conducted by their Queen,
Assaild the Greeks so furiously together,
That all the field the which before was green,
Was turned into a fair and crimson red,
With blood of Greeks which by them then was shed.
Who seconded by stout Pollidamas,
King Esdras, and Aeneas, and the rest
Of Pr^^^s force, which then all entered was
Into the field, upon the Grecians pressed
So valiantly, that they were forced to lose
Their ground, and to give place unto their foes.
And would have fled if Pyrrhus had not been,
Who only by his valor made them stay,
And killed so many of the Troyans men,
That they were glad to get out of his way.
But Panthasilia bravely did with stand
Both him and all the Greeks, and by her hand
And extreme force the Troyans did relieve,
And killed so many Greeks on every side,
And unto them such mighty wounds did give,
That they durst not her puissant blows abide:
And in that fore those Champions fierce and bold,
The fight in equal balance long did hold.
Till Pyrrhus with the Troyan Glaucon met,
That brother was unto Pollidamas,
Anthenors son, and on him fiercely set,
To whom at unawares as he did pass
By him, he gave a wound into the side
So deeply, that he there fell down and died.
Wherewith Queen Panthasilia fiercely ran
To Pyrrhus, and did bravely on him set,
At which time such a cruel fight began
Between them both, when they together met:
That with their swords in furious wise by force,
They beat each other down off from his horse.
And so on foot fought valiantly and long,
Without advantage gotten on either side,
Till that the Greeks and Troyans with a throng
Of knights by force between them both did ride
And parted them: and then Pollidamas
(Whose heart with grief and wrath possessed was
For Glaucons death) upon the Grecians ran,
And without mercy or compassion had
Of any one, beat down both horse and man,
And with the Queen so great a slaughter made
Of them at that same time, that they compeld
Them spite their hearts to fly, out of the field
Unto their tents: until that Diomed,
And Thelamon, with Pyrrhus, turned them back,
And once again into the field them led:
Where for a while they did resistance make,
And fought again till that it drew to night,
At which time when they could no longer fight
For weariness: When Phoebus began to hide
Her glistering beams, and Westward to descend,
(With greatest* loss upon the Grecians side)
They did from fighting cease, and made an end
Of that days bloody battle, with desire
To rest themselves, as time then did require.
And so they did (...) next day began t'appeare,
When as with courage great each side began
To enter in the field, and without fear,
In furious wise slew many a valiant man:
And for a month ensuing every day,
From fighting in the field did never stay.
But who did best, or had the victory
In all that time, there is no mention made,
Nor yet what men of note therein did die,
But only that Queen Panthasilia had
One hundred of her women therein lost,
For which she said, it should her dearly cost,
But she would be revenged for the same
Upon the Greeks, if Fortune favorable
Would be to her, but she (that bears the name
To be so fickle, false, and variable,
That no man can his trust in her repose,)
By turning of her wheel did make her lose
Her life, when as she was in highst degree
Of honors throne, presuming that her soes
Nere should bereave her of it. But you* see
That when it is Gods pleasure to dispose*
Of man, and of his actions none cannot shun,
For what he has decreed must be done.
For that when many battles had been fought,
And Greeks and Troyans long and furiously,
Had slain and spoild each others power, and sought
On either side to win the victory*
And that Queen Panthasilia bravely had
Behau'd her self in many fights, and made
Such slaughter of the Greeks, that for the same
They feared her, and shunned her in the fight,
And by that means had much encreast her fame:
With heart that was possessed with great despite
That she had lost so many maidens so.
In furious wise into the field did go,
One day betimes upon the Greeks to set,
With full intent to be revenged therefore,
And in the battle first with Pyrrhus met*
Who cause he her, and she him hated so,
With courage stout she spurd her gallant steed
So hard, that she did make his sides to bleed.
And ran at him, and he at her likewise,
And with their puissant spears set in their rests,
And countenances stern, and wrathful eyes,
Directly aimed at each others breast,
And gave each unto other such a stroke,
That both their spears in many pieces broke.
But neither of them fell unto the ground,
Not once within their sadles bowd or bent
And yet the Queen gave Pirrhus such a wound
With her spear head into the breast, that went
Clean through his arms that he therewith bled sore,
Which when the Grecians saw, they were therefore
So grieved, that with hideous noise they crid,
And like to swarms of Bees upon her fell,
And did enclose her round on every side.
But she did fight against them all so well,
And valiantly, that they did her admire,
And spite their hearts she made the^ back retire.
Whereby long time it was ere they could get
Or have advantage on her, till at last
Being sore oppressed and round about beset,
So thick by them, that they smot her as fast
As Smiths upon an Anuile head, they broke
Her helmet, and with many a cruel stroke
Of axes, swords, and other weapons, tare
And rent her arms, and cleft her shield in twain,
Whereby her shoulders naked were and bare,
Yet nerethelesse she did the fight maintain
Against them all, so long and valiantly,
That many Greeks dead at her feet did lie.
Till Pirrhus wounded as before is said,
And feeling so great anguish smart and pain
Within his heart, that he was sore afraid
To die thereof, in have ran to the plain,
Intending whatsoere of him became,
To be revenged on her for the same.
Whom when she saw come running in such have,
And doubting she by him should be assayld,
She turned about, and to him made as fast,
And with her sword first struck at him, but faild
To hit him, for the Greeks on her did come
So thick and fast that she could have no room
To lift and weld her sword above her head,
But he smot her a blow with mighty force,
And cut her arm clean off wherewith she bled
So sore, that she fell dead off from her horse.
And not contented therewithal to show
His cruelty, he did her body hew
And mangle with his sword in pieces small,
And yet the blood did run out of his wound
So fast* that he constrained was to fall,
As if he had been dead upon the ground:
Where groueling in a trance awhile he lay,
Till that his Knights did bear him thence away
Upon a shield, with sad and heavy cheer;
Sore bleeching, and deep wounded to his tent.
But when the Amasoman Maids did hear
Their Queen was slain, in furious wise they went
(Like unto women desperate and mad,
And as if of their lives no care they had.
Among the thickest of the Greeks, and then
So cruesly assayld them that they slew
Two thousand of their best and brauest men*
And did the fight more terrible renew
Then it had been all that day long before,
And fought that time so desperarely and sore,
That wonder it was that women could endure
To do so much, but all to little end
When they had lost her that could them secure,
And by her valor great did them defend*
As being she who only and alone
For worthiness inferior was to none.
For both they and the Trojans then were in
Such danger great for want of one to guide
Them in the field, that they did all begin
Like sheep dispersed to run on every side:
And scatteringly for their defense to stand,
To keep themselves out of the Grecians hand.
Who then so furiously upon them ran,
With full pretense their losses to require;
That they dismayed to save themselves began
To make retrait, wherein with great despite
The Grecians did ten thousand of them slay,
And they to Troy-ward from them fled away.
For all the Grecians then at once came on
Upon them, and whosoever them withstood
Were by them slain without exception;
But specially the Amazons, whose blood
They chiefest sought to spill, because they had
Together with their Queen such slaughter ^ad
Of them while she did live, for she alone
A terror was to them, and therefore they
Without all mercy or compassion*
In great despite did them so fiercely slay:
And drove the Trojans fore them to the town,
And never ceast to kill, and beat them down.
Till they in mighty fear and great distress
Got in, and after them their gates did close,
Being out of hope (as men clean comfortles,)
Of ever fighting more against their foes
In open field, since their best knights were slain,
And therefore thinking it to be in vain
For them to issue ^orth, they purposed
To keep themselves close in their town, as then
Impregnable, (if it were furnished
As they supposd of victuals and of men.)
And able to resist and hold out all
The forces of the world, though they should fall
Upon it all at once. But for all that
The Greeks no whit despayring at the last
To win it, set strong watch at every gate,
And sentinels to see that no man past
Out of the town, no^ victuals were conuaid
Into It, while they in siedge before it staid.
And they within the town great sorrow made
For Panthesillias sake, who valiantly
In their defense against the Grecians, had
By Pyrrhus hand been slain, but specially
Because that they could find no means to have
Her mangled corpse, to bury it in a grave
With honor which thereto did appertain.
And to that end sent to the Greeks to pray,
And to entreat them for it, but all in vain,
For moved sore they flatly said them nay,
And swore and vou'd with protestations great,
That they nere should her body from them get.
But to despite and grieve them said, it should
Be thrown to dogs, and fowls of the air to be
Deuourd and torn by them, before they would
Showd so great savor to their enemy,
To whom they did so deadly hatred bear.
But though that they to her so cruel were,
Yet Pyrrhus somewhat milder then the rest,
Would not consent unto such cruelty:
And said to them, that he did think it best
To give her body to the enemy.
But Diomede said plainly to them all,
That she had not deserved burial,
That in her life had slain so many men*
And in that sort they strove and did contend
With many words about the same, but when
They had long argued among themselves, in the end
They all agreed, and did the body take
Despightfully, and cast it in a lake
Or pond of water, nere unto the town.
Wherein let it consume and rot away
While unto you at large I do setdowne
What they did in the town of Troy, that lay
Enclosd therein. But first I must complain
Of thee oh Mars, that made them to sustain
Such extreme loss, and by thy furious ire
Did clean consume the worthy Trojan blood*
Why did thou with insatiable desire,
Slay all their Knights, and against them was so wood*
And furiously bent, as to let fall
Thy vengance upon them in general?
To make them as a Myrror and a show
To all the world, of thy great cruelty?
But it is most true as every man does know,
Thy nature given to all hostility,
Is the only cause of strife and of debate,
Because thou art a star unfortunate:
Hot, hateful, dry, fiery, combustious,
Wrathful, and given unto dissension,
The only ground of malice, envious,
And choleric of thy complexion:
That do in death and murder take delight,
And upon vengance setst thine appetite:
First motioner of anger and of hate,
The causer of contention and of war,
The root of all dissension in each state,
That moouest men to wrangle, fight, and jar:
Fearful of look and ghastly to man's sight,
Whose radiant beams shine as the lightning bright*
And twinkle like to sparkles burning red,
Which from great fires mount up into the sky,
And round about the air themselves do spread,
Consuming such as by melancholy
Within their hearts, foul envy do embrace,
Giving to them in whom thy wrath takes place,
Of shape to be tall, slender, lean, and small,
Brown haired, pasle, and sallow colored,
Unmerciful, addicted unto all
Bad qualities, to evil easly led:
Crafty, deceitful, and ingenious,
Backbiting, slanderous, and malicious;
Sad, sullen, and still full of heaviness,
Inclined unto theft, and robbery,
Consenting unto all accursednes,
To murder, death, and to foul treachery:
Wholly without remorse of conscience;
And art so mischievous of influence,
That thou of treason author art mong men,
In scorpion thy chiefest mansion is,
And raignest King in Capricorn, but when
In Taur^s thou art plast, then thou do miss
Of power, strength, and all Dominion
Thou also have in thy subjection.
War, exile, ^etters, and imprisonment,
Bondage, proscription, banishment, and all
The miseries, and mischiefs that are bent
On earth, and chance upon mankind to fall.
Which for to gnaw poor Troy unto the bones,
Thou did on it power them out all at ones.
I cannot choose but for the great despite
Which thou to Troy did bear, condemn thee much,
For if that men consider it aright,
It may be said there nere was any such:
Nor so great vengance taken for any thing
Against land or town as thou on Troy did bring:
As first to kill and spoil them by their foes,
And to consume their Knights by fire and sword,
Then in their town as prisoners up to close
And shut them fast, and no means them aford,
To be relieved with victuals, or go out,
Besieged by the Grecians round about.
I think they have small cause in my advise,
With bores, or bulls, bears, Lions, Tygars fell,
Or any such wild beasts to sacrifice
To thee, (wherewith thou pleased art so well,
As being Patron of them) nor with smoke,
Of brimstone, on thine Altars to invoke
Thy name, that to them showest such cruelty,
And did such extreme vengance on them bring,
And yet, as if thou could not satisfy
Thy self therewith, (with torments more to sting
And plague the^,) thou made treason mo^gst them work,
And secretly within their hearts to lurk.
And so did set them at division
Among themselves* whereby we plainly see,
How th'vgly serpent Discord creeps on
And slyly slides into man's heart, till he
By tract of time has therein gotten place,
And banished from thence all peace and grace.
With venom of his foul dissension;
When once it spreads it self in any town,
Land, commonwealth, house, country, or nation
Or i^^ens hearts of small or high renown.
For when as men live not in love and peace,
All happiness and joy with them does cease.
For where as Discord has his residence,
And does begin amongst men to appear,
It Is worse then any sword or pestilence:
For who are worse then foes familiar?
Or who can hurt men more if that they lust
Then enemies in whom they put their trust?
And briefly to conclude without a pause,
All trouble, mischief, and confusion
In any land, proceeds from the cause
And root of hatred, and dissension.
And much more danger in the same does lie
If it be wrought and stirred up secretly:
Record whereof is to be found by Troy,
Where while that in the town they did agree
They held the same, and did it long enjoy,
Despite their foes. But when they began to be
At strife and hatred among themselves, and crossed
Each other, not long after it was lost.
(For without doubt, as often proved is,
When men* begin together to contend,
Or that a land in it self divided is,
It Is not the means them, nor their state to mend.
But rather is a certain sign and way,
Of that same land and peoples sure decay.)
For Mars the sovereign Lord of enmity,
(That unto men he might his power show,
And bring Troy into all extremity,)
The seeds of Discord did among them sow.
Against which a man no remedy can find*
For I am sure persuaded in my mind
That treason wrought with fained show of peace,
(To be procured thereby) is worse then war,
And more then it, all mischief does increase:
Whereof the principalst actors weere
Aeneas Duke Anchises (his old Father,)
Pollidmas, and Anthenor, who together
Among themselves did secretly agree,
And traitorously conspire with bad intent,
If that the town of Troy should chance to be
Taken by the Greeks (whereof they feared th'vent)
How they might save their own lives, goods and lands,
By some devise out of the Grecians hands.
Which if it might not be (as they did doubt
It could not be,) they meant in secret wise
(Before the utmost danger should fall out)
To parle with the Grecian enemies.
And traitors against their town of Troy to be,
Before they would their own subversion see.
Or loyalty unto their country yield.
Intending rather to forget their oath
And promise made, and vowed to be held
By them while life did last, and faith and troth,
With due alleagance wholly set aside,
For them and their own safety to provide.
Esteeming it more wisdom to forecast,
How they for there own good should do the same,
And bring't about before the time were past,
And rather save their lives, though twere with shame.
Then foolishly to fall into a trap,
Which otherwise they might full well escape.
They though: it no disgrace nor worthy blame
For to betray the town, so they went free
Away with goods and lives out of the same:
Nor had no care for others to agree,
But how they might unto that thing attain,
Which they did seek by treason to obtain.
And to that end they went unto the King,
To give him (as they said) some good advise
And counsel how to bring about the thing,
Which they among themselves had by devise,
Forecast for their own good: whereof the effect
Was, that they wished that he would not neglect
His own estate, the town, and commonweal,
By obstinately standing against his foes;
But rather to advise himself, and deal
With them about a peace, (and not to loose
Time when it served,) if they would grant thereto
And that to move them better thereunto,
He would be pleased to offer to restore
Queen Helena to Menalaus again,
And all that he had taken from them more
In Cithera, and so he might obtain
That at their hands, which other wise could not
By force, nor any other means be got.
But words and thoughts with them did not agree,
They had an other meaning and intent:
For they knew well no peace would granted be,
And that the Greeks nere would thereto consent
With them of Troy, whom they as then had brought
Unto that point, that in a manner cought
Like Birds within a cage, they held them pent,
And therefore tw'as in vain to think thereon:
For if the Greeks had thereto given consent,
And made peace on that condition,
King Priamus successors might have raignd
Till now in Troy, and never had sustaind
Such loss and extreme desolation,
As after on them fell. But it was too late
To motion that, for when Agamenon
Did by advise of all the Grecian state,
Send messengers to Troy, from Tenadon
To offer Priam peace, upon condition
That he should send again* Queen Helena
To Menalus, and restitution make
Of all the treasure which in Cithera
Parit by force with her from thence did take.
King Priam would by no means hearken to it,
But obstinately said, he would not do it.
So that by their own folly and their pride,
For want of good foresight and providence,
Peace justly might unto them be denied;
For think you when the Greeks with such expense
Of treasure, loss of lims, and of their Knights,
Endured had so many cruel fights.
And after many a bloody broyle orepast,
By them to bring that war unto an end,
They would in fine even at the very last
Oreslip so good occasion given, to spend
The time in making peace when they had brought
Their foes to that which they so long had sought.
And without any recompense would leave
The Advantage by them gotten, and again
Return to Greece with loss, and clean bereave
Themselves of that which they with so much pain
Obtained had? it were without all sense:
For they knew well (though to their great expense,)
They had brought Troy to that extremity,
That it could not long against their force endure,
And that in fine without all remedy
They could not fail to win't, whereof being sure,
They made account to have the victory
Against their foes without ambiguity.
So that Anthenors counsel (and all those
That with him were of that conspiracy,)
To Priam given, to seek unto his foes
To make a peace, was but mere treachery,
As it unto King Priam well appeard,
When he from the^ first motion thereof heard.
For when he with his son Amphimachus,
And many of his Lords in counsel were.
Anthenor and his friends moved Priamus
To seek for peace, the which when he did hear:
In policy before he would consent
Or grant thereto, he asked them what they meant,
To motion it, and said before that he
Did enter into parle with his foes,
He would with more advise instructed be
How't should be done. Wherewith Anthenor rose
Up suddenly, and without reverence,
And countnance stern in open audience
Spoke to the King, and said, if thou will take
Our counsel at this present time, and do it
Thou may, but if that light thereof thou make,
Though it should turn to thy destruction, yet
Thou nere shall be advised more by me,
But follow them that of thy counsel be.
To whom the King in great sobriety
Made answer, and unto him said again;
Anthenor, thou oughtst not so hastily
To speak to me, nor take me up so plain
For my intent is no way able to reprove
The counsel which thou give me in love,
So it be good, and for the commonweal
Of all men in the town in general:
But know this for a truth, and mark it well,
If it prove bad and clean contrary fall,
And in the end be their destruction,
I will by no means take it, nor hear thereon,
As reason is we should prevent the worst,
Whereof me thinks thou should not think amiss,
Nor suddenly into such choler burst,
For every man as it most certain is,
Should chose the best, and leave the worst, and take
The wise man's counsel, and the fools forsake,
And seek a salve to cure his wound withal.
Wherewith Anthenor rose upon his feet,
And into such a mighty rage did fall,
That leaving honor and obedience meet
And dew unto his Sovereign Lord the King,
Said, sure me thinks it is a wondrous thing
How you being wise and well aduisd should be
So blinded in conceit, that wilfully,
You either cannot, or you will not see
The mischief, and the great adversity;
Wherewith we are environd on each side,
For we cannot although we would it hide,
Deny in what extremity we stand,
For are we not besiedged round about,
And fearing to fall in our enemies hand,
Dare not adventure once to issue out.
Nor be so bold to go forth of our gate
To fight with them, that us so deadly hate?
Because our force is weak and theirs too strong
For us to deal withal, for certainly
There are yet fifty valiant Kings among
Them in their Camp, who all most furiously
Have vowed and protested with great pride,
Even to the last and utmost hour to abide,
And never to depart nor leave this town,
Till that they have their wills on us to shed
Our blood; and see our walls turn vpside down;
Your most renowned Princely sons are dead,
And all your strong and valiant knights are slain
That wonted were to help you, and maintain
Your right against your foes: but now berest
Of them, there is no way for us to escape
Out of their hands, nor comfort for us left.
It is in vain for us to think to shape
A remedy by force to be relieved,
Wherefore I say, that ere we bereaved
Of hope, and both our lives and goods do lose,
And see the overthrow of this our town,
Of two extremes the least of them to choose,
And for a resolution to set down,
That better twere for us in time to make
Peace with them, and an order thereby take
For our relief: which that it may be done,
Let us restore Queen Helena again
To Menalus her Lord, for whom alone
There has so many worthy men been slain:
And many since this bloody war began,
Since Paris now is dead that was the man
Who only hindered that while he did live.
And also to make promise by a day
To make them satisfaction, and to give
Them all which we by force in Cithera
Took from them, which I think to be the way
To Appease them, and their furious course to stay.
Which having said, Amphimachus arose
Upon his feet, who grieved much to hear
Anthenor speak of treaty with their foes,
In manner as you heard, could not forbear
In presence of King Priamus t'vpbraid
Him openly with treason, and thus said,
Anthenor, by thy speech I well perceive,
That we have little cause to trust in thee
For aid in need, that so much do deceive
Our expectations, for we plainly see
That Faith and troth from thee are banished,
And thou in it falsehood art by error led,
When as thou do so variable show.
Where is become thy faith unto thy Lord?
And due alleigance thou to him do ow?
Where are thy oaths, thy promises, and word,
Which thou did make, protest, and give to be
True unto him, and his posterity,
All fled and gone. In steed whereof thou have
Retained mutability, and change
Of mind, opinion, and of will, and past
The bounds of thy fidelity to change.
At liberty from all affection,
Which thou sholdst bear to him, and to this town.
To live and die for it, if need should be,
For neither faith, nor troth, nor sparks of love
In thee remains, as now we plainly see;
When thou dare be so bold t'excite and move
The King by thy persuasions to give ear
To that which to his great dishonor were.
Which is to seek a peace as if that he
Did fear his foes. Thou rather should have been
The first that should have proferred him to be
A chief protector of the City, (when
So ere the Greeks should seek t'assaile the same,)
With loss of life and lim to keep the same,
But know thou well and so I thee assure,
That whatsoere thy meaning is to do,
Before we will this injury endure,
And ere they shall so far proceed thereto
It shall the lives of twenty thousand cost,
And many more, before this town be lost.
I hold thy words to be no prophecy,
But rather do esteem them by good reason,
To be the signs and marks of treachery,
Of fained faith, of falsehood, and of treason,
To bring us in subjection to our foes,
But though thou setst on them so fair a gloss,
And outward show, they are but mere deceit
And Syrenes songs t'entrap and to beguile
Us and this town, till that our foes it get.
In this sort did Amphimachus revile
Anthenor for his counsel, knowing well
That it was naught else but treason. Till full well
To pacefie his choler, and to stay
Them from proceeding further to a brawll,
Aeneas with fair words to make the way
More open for their purpose, and withal
To smooth the matter so, as if they meant
Naught else but troth, but it was with false intent.
For he spoke clean contrary to his thought,
Intending only to appease them twain,
Till that he had by policy so wrought,
That they from futher speeches did refrain:
And when he saw them somewhat pacified,
To cloak Anthenors speeches, and to hide
His own dissimulation in like ease,
When he had pausd a little while, he said
Unto the King with smooth and flattering face,
That touching help, relief, or any aid,
To be expected for the town, he thought
There was none to be found, and that it naught
Availed them to hope thereon, since they
Besiedged were soclosely and so hard,
That they could have no victuals any way
To comfort them, and wholly were debard
From issuing forth, as having not the might
Against the Greeks for want of force to fight.
For as you know (said he) while that this war
Endured has, we have consumd such store
Of famous and most worthy knights that were
A terror to our foes, that now no more
We can, nor dare not issue out to fight,
And which is more unto our great despite.
The people are so full of fear and dread,
That they are all persuaded there is noway
For them, but every one to lay his head
Upon the block to die? therefore I say,
(Since that the Fates for us have so decreed,
And that we now are driven to such need.
If that you will be ruld by my advise,)
I think the safest way for us will be
To parle with our foes, and not be nise
To make a peace with them, though that it be
Unto our loss, to avoid th'extremety
We may fall in, since there is no remedy.
But Priamus with face for anger pale,
And countnance stern, (he was so moud in mi^d;)
Cut of Aeneas long and flattering tale,
And fretting at the treason he did find
Lie hiden under it. Could not refrain
In furious wise to speak unto them twain,
And said, Anthenor and Aeneas both,
I muse why you two should so hardy be
And bold, as that with breach of faith and troth;
You dare invent such* treason, to bring me,
And all my subjects into extreme thrall
And danger of our foes, and therewithal
Into despair by false suggestion,
How can or may you in your conscience find,
(If that you well considered thereon)
Against your facts and oaths to be unkind
To me, that of my secret counsel were,
And so well thought on by me, that whatsoere
Did pass therein, it was not don without
You were in presence to agree thereto:
But now I cannot muse how it falls out,
That you decline in this sort as you do
From me, that am of all my soones bereft,
And desolate of friends in manner left:
It makes me grieve to think upon the same,
And much to muse that any of you can
Be so untrue, and have so little shame
To do it, how should I trust any man?
When you two are so faithless unto me,
That ought my chiefest counselors to be.
You should remember how with your consent,
And chiefly by your counsel and advise,
Paris by me was into Grecia sent
With many ships and men in warlike wise.
And thou Anthenor know full well also
That fore he went thou did Ambaster go
Unto the Greeks, to fetch home Exion,
If by fair means we could bring them thereto,
And after that thou madst the motion
And was the cause that Paris then did go
With warlike force to Greece, and this is true.
For think you that without advise from you,
I would with such a power have sent him thither,
Or have assayld the Grecians in their land,
Unless that you had moved me to it together,
No surely, it had nere been taken in hand:
And you your selves if you be well aduisd,
Cannot deny but that it was deuisd
And put in execution through you twain,
Especially, for when as Paris went
To Cithera for Helena its plain
Aeneas, thou wast cause that he was sent,
And the only man that readiest was, and sought
To welcome her when she to Troy was brought.
For it is most sure, she never had come here
If thou had been unwilling thereunto:
Although as now thou makst as though thou nere
Had known thereof, nor given consent thereto.
And now my sons are dead, and I bereft
Of my best Knights, and without comfort left.
You tell me that the best way for me were
To make a means unto the Greeks to get
A peace, as if of them I stood in fear;
And that I were so simple to forget
The many and most extreme outrages,
The slaughters, mortal wars, and domages,
The cruelties, and great destruction,
By them so long and often don to me,
This town, and to my subjects every one,
Which when I call to mind I cannot be
Persuaded thereunto, though I should die
And loose all that I have. For I epsy
Such danger in that which by you is meant,
And so great falsehood covertly to be
Therein, that if you compass your intent
In such sort as you move it unto me,
It will in fine be my confusion,
And this towns utter desolation.
For impossible it were for me to shun
The mischief that thereon depends, which I
Were sure to find (if that the same be don,
Which you do seek,) without all remedy.
For this most sure and certain is no doubt,
The issve of the peace you go about.
Wherewith Aeneas grieved at the heart,
Rose up upon his feet and moved sore
Against the King, before he did depart
Out of the counsel chamber, voud, and swore
With many bitter words, and taunts, which he
Unto him gave, that he reuengd would be
On him, if he in time no order took
For better satisfaction in that case,
Whereto he bad him with all speed to look;
And so in mighty rage he left the place,
And with the Lord Anthenor went his way,
And would no longer in the counsel stay.
At whose departure Priam grieud to see
Himsefe by them so hardly vsd, he was
Therewith so vexed at the heart, that he
Could not refrain to shead forth eeares when as
He thought thereon, and then considering more
And deepelier then he had don before.
What treachery and treason they had wrought,
And secretly conspired and devisd,
Against the town of Troy, and him, and sought
Their utter ruin he thereby surmisd,
And feared they two would him by some way
In secret wise unto the Greeks betray.
If he did not the same with speed prevent,
And shape some way their malice to withstand;
And thereby turn the treason (which they meant
To work against him, and had then taken in hand
To practice with the Greeks,) before it wrought
The Effect upon themselves that had it sought.
That so the guerdon of their treachery
Might light on them that first invented it,
For treason and all false conspiracy,
Should be requited as it is most fit
With treason, for he that works villainy,
For just reward a shameful death should die.
And to effect the same King Priamus
With many tears did grievously complain
Unto his bastard son Amphimachus,
And when they had together twixt them twain,
Showed their dislikings of the treachery
Anthenor and Aeneas secretly
Devised had, with others, to betray
Him and the town into the Grecians hand:
With many sighs he did unto him say,
Good Son I pray thee mark and understand
My meaning well, and thereto give good ear,
Thou know that I am thy Father dear,
And how that now there are no more alive
Of all my Sons, but thou alone to be
Mine only heir and after me t'suruiue,
I pray thee therefore if thou love me,
And of thine own estate have any care,
Think on this treason, by the which we are
As now in so great danger to be brought,
If we do not prevent it by some way,
And practice quickly by us to be wrought,
Whereby we may their furious courses stay,
And first entrap and take them in the snare,
Which they for us do craftily prepare:
Which to effect, my meaning is to call
Them this night unto counsel purposely,
Where being come thou shall upon them fall
With many Knights, and kill them suddenly:
The which mean time see thou do not disclose
To any man, but only unto those
Whom thou with thee wilt take to do the deed.
And so we shall prevent them unaware:
The which to do Amphimacus agreed,
And bad King Priam lay on him the care
Thereof, t'accomplish it with as much speed,
As was to be required in such need.
But as by Proverb old it is often said,
There is nothing so closely gone about,
Nor counsel that is so secretly conuaid,
But by some means or other twill come out;
And that a murder often done privily,
And many years unknown to men does lie,
The beasts and birds of the air will it discrie.
And that the dumb and senceles earth likewise,
Often times casts forth that within it does lie,
And makes itknowne. Therefore let men be wise,
And not disclose their secrets, since they say,
Two can keep counsel when one is away,
But specially great Princes should have care
Above all men to keep their secrets well,
Because that they like unto Mirrors are
Whereon men look. For if they chance to tell
Or speak a thing out of their mouths that should
Not uttered be, men presently lay hold
Thereon, and spread't abroad both far and wide,
When they do least suspect that it is known,
And would it from the common people hide,
That it may not about the world be known:
And so by indiscreetnes often disclose,
Their secrets great unto their chiefest foes.
And some perhaps in whom they most do trust,
And do familiarly to them resort,
Will soonest show themselves to them unjust,
And to the world give them a bad report.
And therefore it is best for them to spare
To speak, and of their words to have a care.
That which a Prince does secretly intend,
Should not unto the vulgar sort be told,
For they their wits and wills do chiefly bend
(And do it as a common custom hold,)
Untruly to report that which they hear,
And make it clean contrary to appear.
For they do conster things as they desire
To have them, and to reason are not tide,
And are compard unto a wispe of fire
Which makes a blast, but does not long abide
Within the same, but strait-way does consume*
It is not good on such men to presume,
That fire and water both in one hand hold,
And unto either side do bow and bend,
And as men say, are neither hot nor cold,
And t'euery new found tale their ears do lend,
To day they love, to morrow they do hate.
And never do continue in one state.
To trust to them there is no certain stay,
For much like to a broken staff they be,
Which when a man leanes on it it shrinks away:
And therefore Lords and Princes ought to see,
That they commit not too much secrecy
To them, for in them there is no constancy.
For Priams counsel though it were deuisd
Between him and his son alone, it was told
Unto Aeneas, who thereby advisd
Of that which he thought Priam never would
Have done, did make Anthenor understand
In how great danger both their lives did stand.
And therefore they together did consent
Asecret counsel with their friends to hold,
And others that unto their party bent,
Wherein they did agree, and said they would
Prevent King Priam by some means, before
He should proceed to that against them, and swore
They would revenged be on him, and make
Him and his son both rue they had done so,
And did among themselves an order take,
That if the King sent for them, they would go
So strongly unto him, they should not need
Of him nor of his friends to stand in dread.
(Of such great power and might Aeneas was,
And in the town so well alyed, and had
Such store of wealth, that he did far surpas
All men therein, whereby the people made
So much account of him, that they did fear
And honor him as much, and to him wear
As dutiful almost in every thing,
Which he desird or asked of them, as
They in a manner were unto the King.
For he in wealth and power equal was
Unto him. And Anthenor also had
Almost as much, for every man was glad
To follow them, and durst not well deny
Whatsoever they would have, or did command.)
And did conspire between them secretly,
To yield the town into the Grecians hand,
Upon condition of security
That when it was done, they would have liberty
With goods, and lives of them, their children,
And kindred borne within the town, to go
Or stay securely where they list, and when
They had agreed among them so to do,
And scarce had made an end of parlieng,
They were sent for to come unto the King.
Who fully was determined and bent
That night to kill them as he purposed,
And straight Aeneas and Anthenor went
And with them such a troop of Trojans led
To guard them, that when as King Priamus
Saw them, he sent unto Amphimachus,
And willed him no further to proceed
In that which he had bidden him do that night,
For that the thing between them two decreed,
He said revealed was, to their despite
And as he feared, to his destruction:
For when with more advise he thought thereon,
And did perceive Aeneas with so great
A power to come, and saw the people so
To favor him, he knew he could not let
His purpose, for he made no more a do,
But proudly to the King did flatly say,
That spite of all that thereto would say nay,
There was no other remedy to be had
Whereby they might escape destruction
Then peace. The which he said should straight be made.
Wherewith the common people every one
With shouts and cries commended his advise,
And praised and extold it to the skies.
And yet the King was thereunto contrary,
And would not grant to yield unto his foes:
But then Aeneas would no longer tarry
To argue with the King, but fiercely rose,
And told him whether he were liefe or loath,
Well pleased therewith, or angry and wroth,
He must content himself, for it should be
No otherwise, and that to his despite,
And against his will and mind they would agree,
To enter into treaty ere it were night,
Of peace to be concluded, and set down
Forthwith between the Grecians and the town.
Which when the King did hear, and saw how hot
Aeneas and the people were therein,
He thought to strive with them it was no boot,
And therefore for the time he did begin
With wisdom to dissemble, when he saw,
And knew well that necesty has no law.
And for because he could himself not mend,
He told Aeneas fainedly, that he
Would with them at that time no more contend,
And also that he was content to be
Ruld by them, and t'allow, and to maintain
Whatsoever they in his name should ordain.
And so dissembling with them against his mind,
(For as the case then stood he could not choose)
When as he saw that he no means could find
To shun the snare laid for him, nor refuse
To yield unto their wills, he did consent
(Though faintly) that Anthenor should be sent
In all their names to parle for the town,
And to conclude a Peace as they desird,
(The which before in manner was set down,
And with the Greeks agreed and conspird
By him, and them that of his party were
Contrary to the message he should bear.)
Who, going to the Greeks that knew his mind
And purpose in that case, before he came,
Was by them entertaind with countnance kind.
And while he staid with them about the same,
The Trojans in the town with joyful cheer
Went on the walls, and in their hands did bear
Green Olive branches, signs of perfect peace:
Which when the Greeks did see that stood below
Upon the plain, their hope therein to increase,
(With false pretense) the like to them did show:
And to confirm them in opinion
Thereof, their General Agamemnon
(That no suspicion might among them breed,)
Appointed three Commiss^^ners to treat
Of peace with him, which were King Diomed,
Ulisses, and Taltabius King of Creet,
Esteeming them sufficient to agree
Thereon for them, and whatsoere should be
Done therein, by them all to be allowed
For good, and giving them commission large,
When they had sworn on either side, and vou'd
Uprightly to do that they had incharge:
Anthenor and they three together went,
To parle by themselves, into a tent;
And when they were together closely set
Within the same alone, and privately,
Where no man was to hinder them, nor let
Their business. Anthenor traitorously
With envious heart which he to Priam bare,
In few words did his mind to them declare,
And said, he would give Troy into their hands,
That they thereof might at their wills dispose,
Conditionally, that they should put in bonds
To him, that he, Aeneas, and all those
That were of their affinity and bloods,
Should freely with their bodies, lives, goods,
Go where they list, or if they would stay still
Within the town, (as they should think it best
To take their choice) it should be at their will
Without all let. And therewith did protest,
That that which he had promised he would do,
If they would in such sort agree thereto.
Wherewith the Greeks in solemn wise did swear
T'obserue the same, in all things as he made
Condition, (so that no varying wear
On either side, from that they promised had.)
Upon the peril of their lives. And when
They had in that sort sworn to do it; Then
He charged them to keep it secretly
Unto themselves, and not to make it known
To any man, till with security
It Were brought unto effect, least it were blown
To some abroad, by those that could not keep
Their tongues from vttring of such secrets deep;
And so they might be crossed therein before
They were aware. And therefore did agree,
That he and they three only and no more,
Of what estate soere they were, should be
Made privy to the same on neither side.
And then Anthenor said, my Lords, to hide
Our purpose, and t'auoid suspicion,
I think it good that King Taltabius
Should go with me into alone the town,
To countnance me unto King Priamus,
Who being civil, old, demure, and sad,
And very wise, there will no doubt be made
Of him by them, for they will think that he
Does only come to speak about the peace:
And to be well assured, that it shall be
Obserud and kept in all things, more or less,
By them as I unto you have declared,
And by that means (said he) they wilbeoard
From any manner of suspicion,
Or doubt of ill proceeding, till that we
Have brought it to the full conclusion,
Whereto the Grecians gladly did agree:
And liking very well of every thing,
Took order that Taltabius the King
Should go as he desird, but ere he went,
Anthenor (to make show that he had brought
Some thing to effect, and that the Greeks were bent
To give consent unto the peace, and sought
It earnestly,) desird of them to have
Queen Panthasillias body, which they gave
To him forthwith, and so he took his leave
Of all the Greeks, and with the King alone
Went to the town with fained show to give
Them hope of peace, and make relation
What he had done unto King Priamus,
Who faining to be much desirous
To hear the effect thereof without delay,
Called all the commons of the town together
In Ilion his Palace, where next day
When they and all his counsel were together,
And he had caused silence in the place,
Anthenor with a smooth dissembling face,
(And sugared words refind with eloquence
In terms so well, and circumspectly vsd,
That no man at the same could take offense,
Nor judge that they by him should be abusd
By any outward show of countnance, cheer,
Or restures, they so finely couched wear.)
Declared unto them the effect of that
Which he unto the Greeks propounded had
Concerning peace unto them made, and what
The answer was that they unto him made,
With his reply returned to them again,
Although therein his meaning was not plain.
For it was with foul deceit and falsehood fraught,
For he was very close, and warily
Did watch his time till he advantage caught,
(Like Serpent sly that in the field does lie,
And hides his venom under grass that is long,
And as the Be that stingeth with his tongue,
When he has first cast forth his honey sweet,
For with his Sirens voice he told his tale
In terms that for the time were apt and meet:
And covered it with such a subtle vale,
That outwardly it seemed smooth and plain,
Like to the sun that shining in the rain,
Shows fair and bright, although the weather be
Sore troubled, windy, and tempestuous,
As by experience many times we see.
And so did he, (that was so treacherous,
And like a Tiger full of doublenes,)
Dissemblingly his mind to them express,
As if that he meant truly to the town.
Affirming that the Greeks were very strong,
And by some reasons which he then set down,
Proved that they likely were and very long
To hold their siege, as being victualled
For many months, and therewith furnished
Of all things else that necessary were
To serve their turns, concluding certainly
(To strike their hearts into the greater fear,)
That without doubt there was no remedy
For them of Troy against the Greeks to strive,
For they (said he) mong them have yet alive
Great store of puissant Kings, and many more
Most worthy Knights, who all with valiant heart
Have vowed and protested, that before
They break up siege, or from this town depart,
They Will have their wills on it what ere befall
To them thereby, and that there is neither wall,
Tower, Bulwark, nor yet gate that shall them let
On every side t'assayle it, and at last
Despite of all our force the same to get,
And therefore ere it comes to the utmost cast,
(Since that we may not long against them stand,)
It Were best for us forthwith and out of hand
To find a means to remedy all this,
The which (said he) so that you be content,
I know well how to do: and thus it is,
When I unto the Grecians camp was sent
T'intreat for peace, this answer they me gave,
That willingly we should our asking have,
But it must be upon condition,
That we shall make them restitution
Of all the wrongs and mischies that were don
By Paris in the Isle of C^^^^r^n,
As it does stand in right and equity,
And we are driven of necessity
And against our wills and minds to them to bend,
For, since it is in their Election
To bring this bloody war unto an end,
It Is not for us to make condition
As pleases us, for now it is thus far brought,
To strive against them it would avail us naught.
For that might sooner hurt, then mend our case:
Therefore I say since need does us constrain,
Through two most great extremities to pass,
Let us chose out the lesser of the twain,
And wisely seek the greater to eschew:
And let our gold by us kept close in new,
Redeem our lives. For better it is to loose
Our worldly wealth, then to be fiercely flaine
(Through wilfulnes) by our most deadly ^e^^.
Are not our lives more worth then riches vaine^
He Is but a fool that for his own welfare,
Does niggardly his gold and treasure spare
When life depends thereon, let money go,
We may good store of tresure get again,
But life once lost with us, it is nothing so,
Then to esteem gold more then life, is vain.
And therefore (as I have unto you told,)
If we may have a final peace by gold,
And with our treasure stint this mortal war^e:
Great folly it were against the Greeks to stand,
And obstinately with them always jar,
For if (said he) I let them understand,
That you do yield to that which they require,
You may obtain a peace at your desire,
It is of them so easy to be had:
For that as soon as they are certified
By true report, what answer you have made,
They are content with covenants to be tied,
And bound t'obserue that which of the^ you crave;
And they will look the like of you to have.
Which being done twixt us on either side,
There must be thereupon Indentures made,
That shall record to what each part is tied;
That no doubt nor suspicion may be had
Of their true meaning and integrity:
And for because they do expect from me
An answer, I will go to certify
Them of the truth of all that has been said,
Naught doubting but that it will satisfy
Them, that therewith they shall be well apaid.
Which said, the commons shouted out and cried
And with one voice much praisd and magnified,
Anthenors pleasing speech unto them made,
And therewith gave him special charge to bear
Their answer to the Greeks, who with him had
Aeneas joined, to the end that nothing were
Omitted that might further their intent.
And they (with King Taltabius that was sent
Commissioner upon the Grecian part
With Anthenor to Troy,) did undertake
The charge to effect the peace, although in heart,
Whatsoever protestation they did make,
They were but traitors, and meant nothing less
Then that which outwardly they did profess.
For Priamus had great suspicion
Of both of them, and certainly believed
They would procure the towns destruction,
For which he was within his mind so grieved:
That to himself sore pressed with care and woe,
He wept and said, alas what shall I do
To escape the snare wherein I fear to fall?
For by my hard and cruel desteny
(Which is the worst and greatest grief of all.)
I am compelled of necessity,
Despite my heart, to ransom and to buy
My life with money, of mine enemy,
Which does torment me sore. But I perceiu^
Whatsoere I do there is no remedy,
For by constraint I must my treasure give
Unto my foes, and dare it not deny:
And yet I am not thereby freed of fear
To loose my life, which hangs as it were
In balance of deceit and tyranny,
For I am forced for all my royal state,
T'obay their wills that seeks by treachery
To have my life, because they do me hate.
But Parchas has for me such Fortune shapt,
That without doubt it cannot be escapt.
And while that he did in this sort lament
His woeful state with many a brinish tear,
Queen Helena unto Anthenor went,
To pray him and Aeneas when they were
In parle with the Greeks, for her to make
A motion, and if they could for her sake,
By their good mediation get that she
Might be restord again (if peace did hold,)
Unto her Lord King Menalus, so he
Contented were, and that of grace he would
(Forgetting that had passed) pleased be,
T'restore her to her former dignity.
To whose request Anthenor answer made,
That he would do as much as in him lay
To pleasure her, and so when as he had
Taken leave of her, he went the self same day
Unto the Grecians Camp, to effect the thing,
Which he meant traitorously to pass to bring.
Mean time within the town they buried
A valiant Knight called Glaucus, bastard Son
To Priamus, whose funeral finished,
And all things thereunto belonging don,
King Priam for Queen Panthasillias sake,
Causd cunning workmen curiously to make
A vessel of pure gold, which he did fill
With balm and spice, her body to enclose
And to preserve from putrefaction, till
The war did end between him and his foes,
By treaty of the peace as then in hand,
That it might be conuaid into the land
Of Amazons, wherein she reigned Queen,
To bury it there, according t'her degree
In princely wise. The which King Philomene
Did carry away with him from thence, when he
Left Troy to go into his native Land.
But now I will thereon no longer stand,
To tell you what about the peace was done
Within the Grecians Camp. Who all agreed,
With full consent did make election
Of those three Kings, Ulisses, Diomede,
And Taltabius of Creta, and no more
To deal for them, as they had done before
Concerning peace, and to that end to meet
Anthenor and Aeneas, and to go
With them to Troy, in counsel there to sit
Upon the same. The which forthwith to do,
With such instructions from Agamemnon
As needful were, they went into the town
With both the Troyan Lords, where when they came,
There was such joy among the people (who
In novelties delight, and at the same
Rejoice, though afterward again they do
Repent therefore, and their own follies rue.)
For they supposed that the^eby would ensue
A perfect peace to them for evermore,
And final end of all the grief and sorrow
Which they endured had so long before.
And Priamus the next ensuing morrow,
Assembled all his Lords and Peers together
In Ilion, and when they were come thither,
And every man set down in his degree.
Ulisses standing up with words refind
With eloquence, and smoothed subtilty,
In presence of them all declared his mind,
(So well, that those that then were there to hear
His pleasing speech, and not acquainted were,
Nor privy to his meaning fraudulent,
Took pleasure in it, but did not understand
The depth and secret drift of his intent)
Wherein he did two things of them demand;
The one, that Troy unto the Greeks should pay
A certain sum of gold without delay,
In recompense of all the injury
And wrongs unto them done in Cithera,
When Paris without right or equity,
From thence did take away Queen Helena.
The second thing was, that Amphimacus
(A bastard son unto King Priamus)
Should be exiled from Troy perpetually,
Without all pardon or remission.
The which Anthenor had by policy
And envy great procured to be done:
Because that he did spite Amphimacus*
For crossing him before King Priamus
In presence of his counsel, (when he made
A motion touching peace, and said he would
Not give consent thereto, but rather had
Loose life and lim then any such thing should
Be offered to the Grecians.) And therefore,
Such hatred secretly unto him bore,
That finding opportunity to quite
Him privily, like serpent envious,
He thought he would occasion take to bite,
When time did serve with heart malicious,
For speaking truth. And therefore my advise
And counsel is, to wish men to be wise,
And not in words to be superfluous.
For men must not say all things that they know,
And wisdom oftentimes advises us,
When we are by extreamities brought low:
To spare to speak, and to dissemble when
We are constraind to yield to other men.
A man were beter not to speak at all,
And silent be although against his will,
Then by his speech in danger great to fall.
We must beware, and may not always tell
The truth of things, but rather hold our peace,
The false reports of envious men to cease.
That man is wise that can his choler hide*
For better it is with modesty t'abstaine
From anger, then with fury and in pride
To speak, for when with silence men refrain
From words, and can endure wrongs patiently,
It is the way debates to pacify.
For happy is he that can endure a wrong,
And not in speech be too presumptuous,
(Which oftentimes makes men excel in tongue)
As it did happen to Amphimacus:
(Although to tell the truth was his intent)
For by that means he suffered banishment,
But God the judge of all men, afterward
To show how he with equity and right
Can punish men, and give them their reward
In short time after made like judgment light
Upon Anthenor, which he falsely sought
To lay upon Amphimacus for naught.
For not long after he himself was sent
By Aeneas means out of the Town of Troy,
And judged to perpetual banishment,
(And never did his freedom there enjoy)
Whereby you see how God by providence,
In his due time does justly recompense
And punish all dissimulation,
And treason, for who s'euer traitor is,
And seeks another man's confusion,
To have the like reward shall never miss:
For falsehood evermore does back rebound,
Like to a ball that rises from the ground,
And falls down again where first it lay.
For what so ever treason men forecast,
Most commonly (as we are wont to say)
Will surely be discovered at the last:
And he that strikes with sword shall stricken be.
(As by Anthenor you may plainly see.)
And while that they so earnest were t'agree,
And bring the peace to that effect they sought,
And chiefly that Amphimacus should be
Exiled, as Anthenor closely wrought:
A sudden noise among them did arise,
As it had been the lamentable cries,
And doleful plaints of men in extreme woe.
Whereat Ulisses and King Diomede,
As they did out the Counsel chamber go,
Were stricken in no little fear and dread:
And thought the people that great favor bore
TO Amphimacus, would be revenged fore
His exile causlesse done to their despite.
And therefore feared that they should murdered be,
With fury great within the town that night,
By some devise and foul conspiracy
Of false Anthenor and Aeneas both,
In whom they did repose but little troth.
And yet in truth there was not any man,
That heard the noise and rumor in the hall,
That could c^^ceiue or know how it began,
Which made the Greeks in greater fear to fall,
And to sufpect the Commons would arise
And kill them, as their deadly enemies.
But to assure and put them out of dout,
And danger of all tumults what so ere,
Anthenor did convay them safely out
Of Ilion: and when they gotten were
Out of the way to an assured place:
Ulisses with a pale and deadly face
Scarce freed from fear, and with dissembling smile
Began to charge Anthenor, and to say
They feared that he meant them to beguile,
Because he put them off from day to day:
And naught performed of that he promised had,
When they at first the cov'na^ts with him made.
So that (said he) we think and certainly
Believe for truth (as reason does us move)
That you mean nothing else but treachery.
But false Anthenor from them to remove,
All causes of suspicion what so ere,
Spoke unto them with sad and sober cheer,
And said, I do the Gods to witness call,
Who only know the secret of man's heart,
That without any fraud or guile, in all
That I have taken in hand (as't is my part)
I have been faithful, true, and diligent,
To bring't to pass with all my whole intent.
One thing there is (whereat you must not grieve)
Which is the cause I cannot (as I would)
Performe't so soon, which if you give me leave
Shall briefly unto you by me be told.
This town (as old records declare to us,)
Long since was Builded by King Ilius.
Who in perpetual honor of his name,
And to preserve it from oblivion,
When he had fully finished the same,
Gave unto it the name of Ilion:
Wherein with most exceeding cost and charge,
He did erect a Temple fair and large.
(In Pallas name the which long time was had,
And holden by all men in reverence great,)
Which Temple being raised up and made
As high as to the roof, ere he had set
And laid the beams and lead upon the same,
Pallas (because of her it had the name,)
To show how much the honor they her bore,
She did accept as pleasing in her eyes,
And also to encourage them the more,
Upon her Altars t'offer sacrifice,
A miracle so strange did show as then,
That nere the like was seen before of men.
For from the sky did suddenly descend,
A fair and goodly Image so well made
And curiously composed, that none could mend
The workmanship thereof, nor ever had
Seen any thing so exquisitely formed,
Nor in all points so cunningly adorned.
For it was made within the heavenly bower
Of Angels, by divine Mineruaes hand,
And by her sent, to show her mighty power,
Down from the skies into the church to stand
Therein, for us perpetually to be
A preservation in extreamitie,
And to maintain and keep the town from all
Distresses, harms, and dangers what so ere
At any time should hap thereon to fall.
For that as long as it remains here
Within her Church, Troy well may be annoyd
By enemies, but nere shall be destroyed.
For Pallas of her grace to us does show
Such favor, that while it is in the Town,
There Is no terrestrial power can overthrow,
Nor have the means by force to break it down:
Unless the Image could be stolen away
From hence, and yet there is no man that may
Remove it from the place where it does stand,
Unless it be the Priest, whose office is
Alone to attend thereon, and with his hand
Is licensed to do it, because it is
Impossible for any other man,
To stir or lift the same, do what he can.
And who so ever sees and does behold
The Image, cannot tell whether it be made
Of wood or stone, of metal or of mold,
For certain it is, no earthly man ere laid
Hand thereunto, it is so heavenly
A piece of work, and wrought so curiously
By power divine and wise Mineruaes hand.
Who of her grace has given it unto Troy,
Within her Temple evermore to stand,
And granted them this privilege t'enioy:
That while it there remains, they shall not need
The force and power of enemies to dread,
If they do yield due honor thereunto.
And by succession so shall still remain
From King to King, who by true title do
And shall the Troyan Diadem obtain:
If they preserve the same with reverence,
And loose it not by their own negligence.
The name whereof is called Palladiowne,
Because it was sent down out of the sky,
And by Minerua given to the Town,
Within her Church to stand perpetually
For their defense: and this is the only thing
Which hinders me my word to pass to bring.
Whereto Ulisses said, if it be so,
That Troy cannot be given into our hands,
(As thou to us protested have to do)
While The Image in Mineruaes Temple stands;
And that it is impossible t'attaine
To our desires therein; It is in vain
For us t'expect that at thy hands, which thou
Can not effect: and folly in thee to take
On thee to do that which thou know not how
By any means t'accomplish, nor to make
Thy promise good to us; therefore I say,
It Is best for us to seek some other way.
To whom Anthenor made reply, and said,
As yet there is nothing promised by me
But shall be well performed though it be delaid,
As by the sequel plainly you may see:
The manner how to you I will declare,
If so much time to hear it you will spare.
My meaning is (said he) forthwith to go,
Unto the Priest that has the custody
Of Palladowne, and to persuade him so
(By promising to give him presently
A sum of gold in hand) that he shall be
Content at my request, to grant to me,
To bring the Image to the place whereas
You shall appoint: If that mean time you will
Content your selves, and letting care ore-passe,
Stay patiently a little while, until
That I this thing have fully brought about,
Wherein (said he) I pray you not to doubt,
For I will take the charge of it in hand,
And do assure you of Palladiowne.
Whose purpose when the Greeks did understand,
They took their leaves to go out of the Town:
But to avoid suspicion ere they went,
Anthenor said, that it was his intent,
To go unto King Priamus to know,
In what sort the Indentures should be made
On either side concerning peace, and how
Much money should provided be and had,
That they were to receive of him in hand:
And so (said he) I shall soon understand
His meaning, which I will to you impart,
Wherewith Ulisses and the rest content,
For that time took their leaves, and did depart
Well satisfied, and to their army went,
To certify unto Agamemnon,
What they in Troy concerning peace had done.
And Anthenor unto King Priam went,
And told him that the best and readiest way
For him was, (since the Greeks were fully bent
To make a peace) the next ensuing day
To call his Lords and Commons all together,
In Ilion: And when they were come thither,
Anthenor spoke before them all, and told
(Though falsely) what the Grecians meant to do,
And what the sum of money was they should
Prepare for them (if they would grant thereto)
The which was twenty thousand pound in gold,
And as much more in silver, if they would
Have peace, according to their own desire,
Which all in ready money must be paid.
And further that the Grecians did require
Some corn, flower, and meal, the which he said,
Should be to put into their ships, when they
Were ready to set sail to go away,
To serve their turns while they at sea should be:
And bad them that they should without delay,
Collect the silver and the gold, and see
That it were ready by a certain day.
Whereto the King (though loath to do it) agreed,
(For he durst not gain say it) and so decreed,
That presently an order should be made
To gather it of rich and poor, (for none
Was spard) and when Anthenor had thus laid
His traitorous plot, and so far therein gone:
He went by night unto the Priest to see,
If by persuasions he content would be,
To hearken unto him, and give consent
To do that thing, the which he had decreed
To bring to pass, and to that end he bent
His wit, and all the skill he had to feed
Him with fair words, and promises of gold,
That should be given to him in hand, and told
Him while he lived he nere should want, if so
He would consent to grant to his request,
And speaking to him said, if thou will do
The thing that I desire, I here protest
And unto thee a solemn vow do make
Upon mine honor, that I Will undertake
To give thee such a sum of gold in hand,
That ever after thou shall surely be
The richest of thy kindred in this land.
The thing that I therefore require of thee,
Is, that thou would deliver presently
Palladion, which thou have in custody,
Into my hands, and I will thee assure,
Therein to be so secret, that no blame
Shall fall to thee thereby, and will secure
Thee from all harms may happen by the same
So that upon my word thou shall not need,
For doing it, to stand in any dread.
For I will so devise, how ere it goes,
That thou no hurt shall have if that thou do
This thing, for I (as well as thou) am loath
It should be known I gave consent thereto:
Or that the least in Troy should me suspect
Thereof, therefore all fear and care reject*
For I had rather die then't should fall out,
That we should be accused for the same.
Which to effect, I will it so bring about,
That thou and I thereby will reap no sham^^
Nor once suspected be thereof, for all
The fault upon Ulisses head shall fall,
And he therefore shall only bear the blame,
For by my means it shall reported be,
That he was th'onlie doer of the same,
And that by his great craft and subtlety,
He has devised to steal Palladiowne,
And borne it secretly out of the town,
Whereby he shall be blamed, and we go free,
Of being once accused for this deed.
Wherefore (I say) if that thou will agree
To my request, I pray thee then proceed
And do it out of hand, and here is the gold
That thou shall have, as first to thee I told,
Which I will now deliver into thy hand.
But Tonant (so the Priest was called) delaid
To do the same, and flatly did withstand
Him therein at the first, and to him said,
That neither gold nor any other thing,
Nor fair nor flattering words, nor menacing,
Should make him yield unto such treacheries
And though at first he straightly said him nay,
(And that some honest men hate villainy,
Yet bribes in these days bear so great a sway,
That men the truth for money will suppress,
The poor for want, the rich for covetousness.
And both of them for gold will falsify
Their words, and be seduced to decline
From truth, and all the bounds of honesty.
For men with golden spades may dig and mine
Through Marble stones) the gold did tempt him so*
That letting truth and honesty clean go,
He yielded to Anthenor in that case,
And was content (so he the gold might have)
To take the jmage down out of the place
Whereas it stood within the Church, and gave
It unto him, which he the self same night,
Sent secretly with all the speed he might
Unto Ulisses by a messenger,
Whom he did trust: and so between them both
The Town and all the Troyans spoiled were.
For traitorously without all faith and troth,
They gave the same into the Grecians hand,
As by the sequel you shall understand.
CHAP. VII.
How the Greeks made an Horse of brass, wherein they put a thousand armed
Knights; and under color of peace, brought it into Troy, by the which it was
utterly destroyed for ever.

NOw may thou mourn and pitifully weep,
O famous town of Troy that so art tossed
In waves of woe, and with so re sighs and deep
Complain, that thou Palladiowne have lost
By treason of the Priest, by whome't was sold
Unto thy foes for greedines of gold.
Why did not thou (oh mighty Jove that art
The Governor of all the world, and know
The inward thoughts and secrets of the heart,
Before they are conceau'd, and daily showst
Thy power divine by judgments strange and rare,
Upon such men as disobedient are
Unto thy will) take vengance on the Priest,
That traitorously for greediness of gold,
At false Anthenors motion and request,
Mineruaes jmage to the Grecians sold?
And thereby was the means they did destroy,
And utterly deface the Town of Troy.
What Land or Town is able long to endure
In any certain state? or what is he
That lives here on earth can be secure?
When as such men as are of that degree,
Will be corrupt in heart and mind, and take
Rewards, and of their conscience shipwreck make?
Is It not a great and grieuons thing to see
Men (that should unto us examples give
Of holiness, and lights unto us be,
To show us by good doctrine how to live,)
Do things which are most wicked and contrary
To that they teach, and from their function vary.
For if that Priests be bad of conversation,
And that the brightness of the perfect light
Which they should show, be void of good devotio^,
And turned by iniquity to night?
To whom shall any man repair or go
To learn, or take example what to do?
The chiefest cause thereof is Avarice,
And greediness of getting gain and gold:
Which most accursed and pestiferous vice,
So great a sway within Priests hearts does hold,
That with the force thereof it makes them blind,
And unto wicked motions stirs their mind.
For certainly there is no man that lives
Upon the earth that is more ravenous,
Nor unto us so bad examples gives
Of greediness, nor is more covetous
Then Priests, to scrape and catch all that they may.
For true it is, that long since many a day,
It has been so fast rooted in the heart
Of Priests, that are so much therewith in love,
That nothing what so ere can make it part
Out of the same, nor it from thence remove:
For it is so firmly grafted in their sect,
That it makes them all holiness neglect.
For gold is now so glistring and so bright,
That naturally it draws men to the same
Like th'Adamant, and dasleth so the sight
Of Priests, that they do only bear the name,
To be the men that earnestly embrace
That wicked vice of covetousnes, and place
It in their greedy ravening minds so well,
That virtue does not once so soon begin
To move their hearts, but vice does it expel,
And will not suffer it to enter in:
Such force it has all goodness to supplant.
As by this wicked Troyan Priest Tonant
You may too well perceive, that traitrously
The holy jmage to Anthenor sold;
While Priam and the Troyans busily,
Collected silver, corn, and store of gold,
Of rich and poor, in readiness to pay
Unto the Grecks: which treasure they did lay
And shut within Mineruaes* Temple, there
To be reserved till all the covenants made*
On either of their sides performed were,
As they instructions from Anthenor had:
Which done, the King and all the Troyans went
Unto Apollos Temple, with intent
To call upon his name, and to adore
His Altars, and thereon in Paynim wise,
(In hope of grace) his aid and help t'implore.
And when they had begun to sacrifice,
And lay the beasts, the incense, and the blood
Upon the Altars, as the priests then stood
Before the same, and went about to make
The wood to burn: two strange things did appear,
The one was, that it would no fire take,
Nor mount up to the air with flames most clear,
As it at other times was wont to do,
Although they still did add more fire thereto.
And ten times kindled it but't would nor be,
For still it quenched again, and did no other
But cast out filthy smoke, as often we see
Lyme when it is with water sleckt does smother.
So that with all the means they devise,
For want of fire they could not sacrifice,
To Appease their Idol God Apollos ire.
The other thing was this, that when they laid
The offering on the Altar, while the fire
Was kindling, and burnt not (as it is said)
An Eagle did descend down from the sky,
And with a great and mighty noise did fly
Unto the Altar where the offering lay,
And seazing on it with his tallents, took
It lightly up and bare it clean away,
While all the people sore amazed did look
And gase on him with extreme dread and fear,
But The Eagle soring ore the Town, did bear
It swiftly thence in all the Troyans sight,
And flying with it toward the Greeks, at last
Descended, and upon their ships did light,
And into them the offering did cast:
Which when the Troyans saw they had great fear,
And judged thereby the Gods offended were
Against the Town, because the fire went out.
And therefore to enquire what those things meant,
And t'ease their minds, and put them out of dout,
Unto Cassandra presently they sent,
To pray her that she would them certify,
What those two strange events might signify.
Who told them that the quenching of the fire,
Was unto them a demonstration*
And certain sign of great Apollos ire,
And of the wrathful indignation,
Which he most justly did unto them bear,
Because that in despite, without all fear
Of him they killed Achilles traitorously
Within his holy Temple, and did stain
The same with blood, and after cruelly
When they had him therein so falsely slain,
Without respect of place or person drew
His body thence, and unto dogs it threw.
For which, she said, (to appease his wrath and ire)
They must go to Achilles tomb by night,
And there devoutly at the sacred fire
Which burned at the walk, their Tapers light:
And with that fire (the which without all doubt,
She said, would not by any means go out.)
New offerings make with great devotion,
Which would before Achilles burn most clear,
That so they might give satisfaction
To him for murdering of Achilles, where
His name adored should be, the which they made
In manner as she them commanded had.
For The Eagle that with th'offring way did fly
Unto the Greeks, she bad them take good heed,
And said, that it did plainly signify,
That all the Gods together had decreed;
That Troy should by some treason be destroyed,
And that by no means they could it avoid.
For as they saw the Eagle when she fled*
With th'offring to the Greeks, so should they see
The Town that had so long time flourished
In honor great, and wealth, delivered be
Into the Grecians hands, and utterly
Defast by them with most great cruelty.
Mineruaes Image could not help them then,
Which they had lost by their own negligence.
For it most sure and certain is, that when
Gods sentence is pronounst, there is no defense
Against it to be made, for every man
Must stand to his decree do what they can.
The Grecians likewise woondring much (when as
They saw the Eagle with the offering
Come flying so) said, surely that it was
A sign of some most strange and secret thing
That should be brought to pass, and for it had
Great fear, till Calchas exposition made
Thereof to them, and bad them not to doubt,
Nor stand in fear at all of any thing,
For that the issue thereof would fall out
Unto their good, and they to effect should bring
That for the which they long had quarrelled,
And so much of their Grecian blood had shed:
And willed them therefore no cost to spare,
To make an end of their great enterprise,
And to that end did wish them to prepare
Some thing to offer for a sacrifice
To Pallas: and to show his traitorous mind
To Troy, he did a strange invention find:
The effect whereof was thus. When he perceived
King Priam was persuaded to a Peace
By false Anthenors means, as clean bereaved
Of all relief and hope of war to cease:
And that Anthenor, and Aeneas both
As traitorous as himself, were very loath
To be discovered in their treachery,
Before that they had brought the same to pass,
To further them in their great villainy,
He told the Grecians that their best way was,
To make a show to offer sacrifice
Unto Minerua, in their Paynim wise.
Whereby (he said) he would a means devise,
That they the Town should take without all doubt,
And get the spoil of all their enemies.
Which that they might the better bring about,
He counseled them to make a horse of brass,
The which of such a mighty greatness was,
That it within the body of it held
A thousand valiant knights that close did lie
Hid in the same, well armed with spear and shield,
Which framed was by craft and subtlety
Of Synon, and of Appius the wise,
That with him joined were in that devise.
Which horse the Grecians purposely should bring
Before the Town, pretending (as they said)
That they would give it for an offering
To Pallas, and by Calchas counsel praid
King Priam, that he would vouchsafe them leave
To set it in her Temple, and to give
Them liberty to enter in the Town,
To offer unto her a sacrifice,
Before they sailed down to Tenadowne.
And by this false and politic devise,
They found the means to take the town of Troy,
And did the same in cruel wise destroy.
But ere that they did bring the same to pass,
When as the fai^^d articles were made,
The Kings by whom king Priam aided was,
While he against the Grecians warred had;
Perceauing that the Troyans would have peace,
And that thereby their bloody war should cease:
As many of them as then living were,
Did take their leaves of Priamus, and went
Again into their Lands and Countries where
They reigned kings, when they had lost and spent
Both money and men: mong whom king Philomene
Did take with him the body of the Queen
Of Amazons, that was by Pyrrhus slain.
And of two thousand knights that with him came
To Troy, there went but fifty back again:
The rest (unto their everlasting fame)
Were slain in fight against the Grecians.
And of a thousand Amazonians
That came to Troy in Priamus defense,
There was but just four hundred of them left,
To bear their Queens dead body way fro thence,
The rest were by the Greeks of life bereft:
Who being gone, the next day following,
The Troyan Lords and Priamus their king.
Met with the Greeks in open field, and there
Conferred of the Peace on either side,
Where for the Grecians Diomede did swear,
That they would firmly stand to, and abide
By all that which they had agreed upon
In treaty with Anthenor, and that none
Of all the Greeks the contrary would do.
Wherein the Troyans and King Priamus
Were much deceau'd, and took no heed unto
His double oath, as not suspicious
Of treason meant thereby: for he did take
His oath in general terms, and did not make
Rehearsal of the points particular
That were agreed upon. For his intent
Was only with a false pretense to swear,
T'obserue and keep the treaty fraudulent,
The which Anthenor with the Grecians made,
Contrary unto that which Priam had
Been made believe by him to have been done.
For by the oath they took, they did include
And meant that treason only greed upon
And swore thereto, intending to delude
The Troyans, and to catch them in a trap,
From whence they neither could nor should escape.
Clean contrary to that the Troyans meant.
They made a show as if they peace would make,
But bloody war was only their intent,
And outwardly a fained oath did take
T'obserue the peace; but treason was the end
And drift which they did secretly pretend.
But though they valid and covered it with show
Of peace, therewith to blind the outward eye,
Yet he that all men's secret thoughts does know,
Perceived that their oath was but a lie.
He that professes truth and does pretend
No such thing, but thereby deceaues his friend,
Is not to be belieud what ere he be,
Because the vow he makes is but a lie:
And though into men's hearts we cannot see,
That swear and take their oaths so craftily,
Yet he that craftily does lie and swear,
Does wilfully by craft himself forswear,
Whereto he can make no exception.
For God that knows man's heart and secrets all,
Condemns him that with intention
Swears falsely to betray his friend withal.
As Diomede did traiterouslie deceive
The Troyans, that did verily believe
His oath had been without all fraud and guile,
As having no suspicion in their hearts,
That they should be betrayed by a wile,
Which at the last they all too dearly bought:
When as they found the Grecians did contrary
Unto their oath, and from their promise vary.
But longer to entreat hereof were vain,
Let it suffice't was all but treachery,
The which the more to hide they took again*
Queen Helena: and therewith presently
The money which the Troyans were to pay,
Was brought unto the plain the self same day,
And with the flower and meal delivered
Unto the Greeks, as they agreed had,
The which they caused to be carried
Unto their ships. And then as Calchas made
And laid the plot, with feigned devotion,
And great and foul dissimulation,
And holiness vaild with hypocrisy,
The Grecians praid king Priamus that they
Might by his license have free liberty
In Pallas Temple (ere they went away)
Devoutlie t'offer for oblation,
The horse of Brass in satisfaction
To her, for th'jmage which they stole from thence.
(If Priamus would grant them so to do)
That she thereby forgetting their offense,
Might be bening to them when they should go
By sea to Greece, and help them in their need.
To which King Priam presently agreed,
As having no suspicion that he should
Have been betrayed thereby, and gave consent
That they should do it when s'ever that they would:
And was the willinger therewith content,
Because Anthenor and Aencas both
(Whom he then thought did mean good faith and troth*
Persuaded him thereto: although they knew
The Greeks intent was thereby to obtain
Their wills of Troy, which after did ensue.
And to that end the Greeks straight on the plain,
Began with speed and mighty diligence
T'remoue the horse, and with much reverence,
And great and extreme force to draw the same,
As near unto the town as well they could.
But when unto the gate therewith they came,
It was so great that by no means it would
Go in thereat, who when the Grecians saw,
They staid, and did themselves from thence withdraw,
And left it there before the gate, and went
Down in their ships to Tenadon, to stay
There till they had effected that they meant
To bring to pass. Who being gone away,
King Priam and the Troyans that were glad
Of their retract, supposing that they had
Been gone indeed, set open the gates of Troy.
Whereat the common people issuing out
Into the plain, with signs of extreme joy
Ran to behold the horse, and went about
The field whereas the Greeks encamped lay,
While they before the town of Troy did stay.
And as they viewd the place, and looked upon
The Grecians huge and monstrous horse of brass,
And every man his judgment gave thereon,
The Troyan knight Timeres counsel was
To draw't into the Town, but some that there
About it stood, and somewhat wiser were,
As Capas, and some others, flatly bad
Them throw the treasons of the Greeks away,
Or that forthwith a fire should be made
To melt it, or else that without delay
They should it break in pieces small, to see
What secret thing might therein hidden be.
Wherewith the people that amazed did stand,
In sundry minds divided were, till that
Lycaon came with mighty spear in hand,
And many following him demanded what
They meant to do, and entering among the throng,
Said Troyan knights, you do your selus great wrong.
Believe you that the Greeks are gone away?
Or that there is any goodness in their gifts?
Think you that for our benefit we may
Give credit to Ulisses subtle drifts?
I Will pawn my life that in this horse lies hid
A multitude of Greeks, or that they did
Devise it for an engine wherewithal
By night to scale our Town, and so to win
The same by force; take heed, you know not all,
What mystery so ever is therein:
I fear the Greeks (said he) and will not trust
Their gifts, and therewith gave so great a thrust
Against it with his spear, that it did shake,
And with the same was heard so great a sound
Within the hollow horse, that it did make
The noise thereof throughout the air rebound:
Whereby, had not the Troyans hearts been blind,
Enough was done the Grecians craft to find,
And Troy until this day had flourished.
Mean time by chance the Troyan sheepherds caught
A man, who with his hands fast pinioned,
In have unto King Priamus they brought:
One, that into their hands fell purposelie,
And in his heart was fully bent to try
How he could work the Troyans to beguile,
Or if he faild, was resolute to die.
Who, when he had stood still a little while,
Before the King, and each man cast his eye
On him, and some of them at him did flout,
He seemed to sigh, (but mark how it fell out,
And you shall here the Grecians treasons see,
And by this one, conjecture all the rest.)
For as he stood in show perplexed to be*
And with his hand did smight upon his breast:
Alas (said he) what ground may me receive?
What hope can I poor caytife now conceive*
That neither with the Grecians dare abide,
And now among the Troyans captive here,
Stand at their mercy ready to be tried,
And to receive the doom of death I fear:
For that (as reason is) they thirst my blood,
The which to shed I know would do them good.
This mournful tale by him so uttered,
The Troyans hearts of rigor did bereave;
And being by them somewhat pitied,
They asked him what he was, and gave him leave
To tell his tale, and plainly to express
His mind: to whom (he said) I will confess
The truth (O King) of all that I do know.
And first I must needs say a Greek I am,
For though that fortune false has now brought low
Poor Synon; (for so called was his name)
Yet shall she never make nor prove him lier,
Nor cause him to become a flatterer.
If ere you heard of King Pallamides,
And of his valor great and Chivalrie,
Who traiterouslie because he did displease
The Greeks, by them condemned was to die:
Upon suggestion that he favored
Their enemies, but after he was dead,
They wished he had been alive again.
His Squire I was and also kinsman near,
To whom my father (I must needs tell plain)
For poverty put me his shield to bear,
And Arms to practice while he flourished:
Who living, I was loved and honored.
But after that by false Ulysses drifts,
He was betrayed and brought unto his end,
With grief and woe I was put to my shifts,
Pitying the fall of my vnguiltie friend:
But (like a fool) I could not hold my peace,
Nor yet from hard and thratning words would cease.
But still I vowed, if ere return I might
To Greece again, (as they deserved had)
I would his death upon his foes require,
Which was the cause of all my woe, and made
Ulysses to invent new crimes against me,
Whereby I was suspect and held to be
A traitor against the Greeks, and favorite
To the enemy: and not content with that,
He rested not, till Calchas by his wit
Had found a means to end my life. But what
Should I rehearse such things as needless be
To you, and would no good procure to me?
But if you still to hate the Greeks persist,
Let it suffice, you have me here alone,
On whom you may take vengance if you list:
The which that it were brought to pass and done*
Ulisses and Artidos much would spend.
And with that word he paused, and made an end
Of speaking, which did make them more desire
To know the circumstances of his tale,
Suspecting not his craft, and did require
Him into his discourse again to fall:
Who trembling (though therein he did but feign)
With show of fear spoke unto them again,
And said, full often the Greeks would have been gone,
And left their siege, and over seas have past
To Greece again, for that not any one
Of them but weary was, the war did last
So long, and they their blood and lives did spend
Therein, and could not bring it to an end.
And gone they had, but that the seas did rise
And often rage, and southern winds did blow,
And caused them swell and mount unto the skies,
And foming over brinks and banks to flow,
And made them stay: but specially when as
They had devised and framed this horse of brass;
So great a noise of thunder then was heard,
And round about the skies the lightning flasht,
That it did make them generally affeard,
And for that cause they were so much abasht,
That they did send Euripalus to know
Of Phoebus, what those tempests did fore-show.
At whose return, this answer he did make,
And said, with blood (oh Greeks) of maiden slain,
A wind you had unto you given, to take
Your voyage unto Troy; and must again
With blood return, for one of you must die,
The fury of the Gods to satisfy,
Ere you a wind can have. Which news once blown
Into the Grecian ears, each man with fear
Did tremble, and would willingly have known
On whom the lot should fall, as then to bear
That punishment* and for the rest should die.
At which time when Ulisses did epsy
Advantage, he praid Calchas to declare
The name of him that therefore should be slain,
That all the rest might freed be of care.
And many closely spoke, and some said plain
It Was I, for that they all acquainted were
What secret malice he to me did bear,
And some thereof unto me warning sent.
But ten days it was ere Calchas would it show,
For he did seem to be much discontent,
And loath that any man from him should know
Who't was that suffer should for all the rest.
Till that Ulisses with his promise pressed
And urged him so much, that with one voice
The lot was cast on me, and me they name,
And glad they were of me to make their choice,
For each man of himself did fear the same:
And to be sure with speed laid hands on me.
But when the time drew near that I should be
Upon the Altar offered, and that they
The garlands full of dainty fruits did set
Upon my head, I slily stole away,
(I must confess) and speedily did get
Into a place all full of mud and ose,
And there lay hid, and durst not once disclose
My self, till they were undersail, and gone.
And by this means my native Land have lost,
And of the Grecians here am left alone,
And nere shall see my children, and which most
Torments me, fear, because I escaped away,
They will both them and my poor father slay,
And they shall guiltles die, and suffer wrong
For my offense. Wherefore I humbly pray
(If any pity does remain among
Men here on earth) that I some favor may
(O King) receive unfeignedly of thee,
And that thou would content and pleased be
To ease my woe, and pity my estate,
Which is so bad that I no friends can find,
Because that all the Grecians do me hate.
This woeful tale so moved Priams mind,
And made him his distressed case to moan,
That he did will there should no harm be done
To him, and bad unbind his hands, and said,
What ere thou art, forget the Grecians now,
For of them here thou needst not be afraid,
Thou shall be free, so that thou will us show
Who did this huge and monstrons horse invent,
Why was it made? was it because they meant
To offer it unto Pallas? or was it not
An engine made by them to use in war?
Whereto (when he had so much favor got,
And saw himself to be set free from care
And fear of death) he said, (with joyful cry,
And lifting both his hands up to the sky;)
O everlasting fires of God, that are
So terrible that no man can endure
The force thereof! I here by you do swear:
And oh you swords, and sacred Altars pure,
I do you unto witness call, and say,
(Protesting by the goodly garlands gay,
That like a beast to slaughter brought, I ware,
Upon my head in that most doleful day)
That by my will I do not now declare
The secrets that should not be known, nor say
That willingly I do my Country hate.
But since their cruel deeds and cursed fate,
Compel me thereunto, it lawful is
For me to tell that which they would conceal,
And hope that if therein I do amiss,
The Gods will pardon me, as now I deal
Uprightly in this case. Wherefore (oh Troy)
Which by this means to thy no little joy,
I do preserve, in like case save thou me,
Perform thy word, for I to thee hereby
Procure great wealth, and much prosperity.
The hope of all the Grecians specially,
Since that this long and bloody war began
In Pallas was, till that Titides ran
Like mad man with (the Father and the head
Of mischiefs all) Ulisses, and by night
Into Mineruaes Temple entered,
And slew the watch, and then by force and might
Their hands embru'd with blood, (where no defense
Against him was made) her jmage took from thence.
For from that day good fortune from them fled,
And nothing did unto their minds fall out,
No hope they had, nor comfort followed,
What ere they took in hand, or went about:
For Pallas did them utterly forsake.
And with some doubtful signs of war to make,
And put them in great fear, when they did bring
Her jmage to the Camp, and down it set,
Her eyes like flames of fire glistering
Did show, and all her body ore did swet:
And thrice she rose (whereat they woondered)
And shook her spear and shield thrice ore her head.
For which they were by Calohas bid to go
Unto their ships, and put to sea in have,
For that (said he) believe me it is so,
All hope for us at this time clean is past:
And though that they are gone from thence a while,
And unto Greece returned, it is but a wile.
For their intent is but to pacific
Their Gods in Greece, and then to come again
When wind does serve, and with a new supply,
A hotter war against you to maintain:
And this by Calchas counsel they have done.
And for amends to Pallas, and to shun
Her wrath for that most foul and great offense,
By them committed against her Deity,
They were by visions warned ere they went hence,
This Horse that is so huge of quantity,
In this same place where now it stands, to set.
Which Calchas has caused to be made so great;
(For it was Calchas work and only drift)
Because they feared you would enterprise,
When they were gone, the same by force to lift
Into the Town, which they would in no wise
Have you to do, because you should not call
On Pallas name, nor worship him at all.
For if you should this gift of hers deface,
Destruction great without all doubt would fall
On Priams princely blood, and would it race
Out of the world for a memorial
In time to come, to make all men to fear
To do the like. But if you could it bear
Into the Town, and on your walls it set,
The Greeks of you would stand in mighty fear,
And Conquests great against them you should get,
And they, despite their hearts, great loss should bear.
By this deceit of Synon false perjured,
They credit gave to him, and were allured
To work their own decay by that same horse,
Whom neither stout Achilles, nor the war
That ten years held, nor all the Grecians force
Could make to yield, nor for their foes to care:
And while they stood this crafty tale to hear,
The which he told with many a fained tear,
Another thing at that same time fell out,
Which put them in a mighty maze, and filled
Their valiant hearts with extreme fear and doubt.
Which was, as Neptunes Priest Lycaon killed
A Bull upon his Altar, and the same
Did offer unto him, behold there came
Two mighty Serpents swimming to the shore,
Whose ugly heads they might far off behold,
And see their backs and huge long tails that bore
The sea aloft, and in the waves did fold
And turn, and whirle the water round about,
Who with their fiery eyes came fiercely out
Upon the land, and at them hissing ran
With gaping mouths, wherewith in mighty fear
They all began to fly away, and when
The Serpents hard by Neptunes Altar were,
They set upon Lycaons children twain,
And with their claws their tender lims did strain,
And tearing them in pieces, fed so fast
On them, that they with speed devoured were.
Which when Lycaon saw, he ran in have
With sword in hand to save their lives, but there
Was no defense against them to be made.
For when as they children eaten had,
They ran and claspt Lycaon round about
The body and the neck in cruel wise,
Who mightily strove with them to get out
Their furious claws, with great and fearful cries:
(Like to a Bull that is tide unto a stake
For to be killed, does mighty roaring make,)
But all in vain, for nothing could him aid*
And when that he was killed, they took their way
Unto Mineruaes Temple, where they laid
Themselves down at her feet, and there did stay:
Wherewith a mighty trembling feate did fall,
With wonder new and strange upon them all.
For they supposed and thought it to be true,
That for because Lycaon with his spear
Had run against the horse, that as a due
Deserved plague that punishment he bare:
And therefore all of them did cry and say,
Why bring you not this horse without delay
Into the Town, the Goddess wrath to appease.
And presently the people did begin
To batter down their wall, and did not cease
Till they had made a mighty brech therein:
Which done, they set the horses feet upon
Huge planks with wheels, that it might slide there on,
And with great ropes about his neck did draw
The fatal horse, with men and armor full.
Which when the women with their children saw,
They leapt, and daunst, and singing help to pull
And hale it in, and glad was he that could
By any means upon the ropes lay hold.
And in that sort it entered in the Town,
(Unhappy men to breed their own decay)
For as they drew and should it up and down
Along the streets of Troy, upon the way
Four times it swai'd and iog'd against the ground,
And every time they heard the armor sound.
Within the same; yet on with it they went,
And blind with fond desire they had to get,
That monstrous horse brought in, were not content,
Till they had it by Pallas Temple set:
Wherewith Cassandra plainly did them show
By spirit divine, what would thereof ensew.
But they that for her words did little care,
Belieu'd her not, but like to senseless men,
The Temples strewn with herbs, and did prepare
As solemn feasts (as if that they had been
Secured and freed from dangers, whatso ere
Might happen when poor wretched men they were
At point of death, and as we use to say,
With one foot stepping in the grave, and had
No longer time to live, but one short day)
And so great triumph for the time then made,
That nere the like before was seen in Troy.
(But true it is) that after extreme joy,
As often we find, ensues adversity,
And after peace (when men do live secure
Without all fear in great felicity,
And think that it for ever will endure)
Comes cruel war, for there is no certainty
In worldly bliss, full of variety
Deceit and guile, unhappiness and trouble,
And never in one state does long remain,
Not much unlike unto a water-bubble,
Which rises up and straight falls down again:
For though that men have wealth and riches great,
And on the top of fortunes wheel are set,
Yet unawares she soon does cast them down.
As you may well behold and plainly see
Here in this Book, by Troy the ancient Town,
Which thought it self for ever safe to be:
By bring in that mighty horse of brass,
Which the only cause of their destruction was.
And when that they in extreme joy had spent
The day without all care, till it was past,
And that the crystal firmament had sent
Dark night with clouds the skies to ouercast:
While that the wearied Troyans on the wall
Lay carelessly, and some on sleep did fall
As fearing naught. The Grecians army soon
From Tenadon with all their Navy came,
And guided by the clear bright shining Moon,
With silence great did land, and made a flame
Of fire out of their admiral, to show
That they were there, and to let Simon know
They were prepared to join with him, when he
Had done his feat within the Town, who when
He started up, and looking out did see
The light from thence, he stole out and began
To turn the gins that in the horse were made
And when that he his belly opened had,
He called out Ulisses, Athamas,
Thesander, Machon, and King Menalus,
Pyrrhus, Achilles son, (that also was
Surnamed by the Greeks Neoptolimus,)
King Thoas, and a number more beside,
Who soon out of the Horses panch did slide:
And presently upon the walls did go
And there fast sleping found the watch, whom they
Did fiercely kill, and when they had done so,
Unto the gates in have they went there way,
And brake them up, and then out of the town
Did hang a light, which they at Tenadowne
Perceiving armd themselves, and fiercely ride
To Troy-ward, where their fellows watch did keep
And ready stood their coming to abide
At midnight, when sound sleep on men does crepe
And furiously throughout the City ran,
And sparing neither woman, child, nor man.
Killed all they found with extreme cruelty,
For they as then fast sleeping lay in bed,
And little did suspect such treachery,
Till that they felt with ghastly wounds that bled,
Their enemies blows and saw no remedy
But by their hands in cruel wise to die.
For neither sex nor age by them was spard,
Whereby a mighty cry and noise did rise
Within the town, the which when Priam hard,
(Who little did suspect his enemies:
So falsely had betrayed him, and that
The town by them was taken) but al to late
He found, and by experience too well knew
Anthenor and Aeneas had betrayed
The town and him into their hands, and drew
That traitorous plot, the which they falsely said,
Was for his and their good in general,
But it was don to blind his eyes withal.
Till they fit oppertunitie might have,
To bring't pass, in such sort as they had
Agreed with the Greeks, which was to save
Themselue on such conditions as they made
In secret wise, and clean contrary told
To Priamus, which then he might behold
To well, for at that time the treachery
Which with such traitrous hearts they had co^ceild,
Was seen and by the Grecians cruelty,
Unto the towns, and his decay reueald,
And The Authors known, when as no remedy
Was to be found, t'auoyd th'extremity
That on him fell, for then the town was taken,
And all the lofty towers thereof began
With fierto burn, and every street and lane
Was filled with Greeks, and nothing hard therein
But lamentable cries and woeful groans,
Of men, that dying lay upon the stones
Within the streets, and howses, and that fled
Before the Greeks, in mighty dread and fear*
Amazed sore he rose out of his bed,
And sheading many a salt and brinsh tear
Ran to Apolloes Temple comfortles,
T'escape if that he might in that distress.
Mean time the town was of a flaming fire,
Which merciles consumd and spoiled all,
And Greeks on every side with great desire
To be revenged upon the Trojans fall,
And murdered and beat them down so fast,
That while that most accursed night did last
Ere Phoebus shoane the next ensueing day
They slew of them boue twenty thousand men,
And forcibly did take and bare away
Their ^iluar, gold, and all their goods, and then
With mighty rage and extreme violence,
They sacked and spoyld without all reverence
The Temples of the Gods throughout the town,
And in despite of them with courage bold,
Did fiercely rent, and furiously pull down
Their ornaments of silver and of gold,
In presence of the Gods that then were there,
While Priamus with sad and heavy cheer
Before Apollo kneeld, and to him praid
Devoutly to relieve him, but in vain,
For at that time there was no hope of aid,
That he by any means could then obtain:
But only there with patience to attend,
By cruel death his woeful life to end.
Whereof without all doubt he was most sure,
Ere long time past by Grecians hand to have,
And Cassandra that holy creature,
Her self likewise in that distress to save,
Unto Mineruaes Temple did repair,
Accompanied with many a Lady fair,
And other Gentle-women of the town;
Who there with sobs most bitterly did cry,
And made their woeful lamentation,
Attending every hour when they should die.
Wherein i will let them with the goddess dwell,
For if that I their sorrows all should tell,
And show how they in every lane and street
Lay groueling on their Lords and husbands dear,
And sucked their wounds, and all their cloths did wet,
And staind, and di'd them with the blood that there
Out of their bodies ran, that woefully
Beheld them with a pale and deadly eye.
It would be over long for me to write,
And tedious likewise for you to hear.
But to proceed, when they had all that night,
Nere ceast to kill and ransacke every where,
The people, and the town, and spard not one;
Next day in heaps they went to Ilion,
King Priamus most fair and Princely hall,
Wherein they found not one to make defense
Against them, nor to keep the same, for all
The people in great fear were fled from thence
To save their lives, and left it desolate,
Where all the gold and riches of the state,
Enclosed lay within the treasory,
The locks whereof they brake, and bare away
The treasure therein found, and cruelly
Did fire the house, for no man durst say nay,
Nor let them to pursue their enterprise.
Then Pyrrhus in most fierce and furious wise
Went to Divine Apolloes Temple, where
Before the Altar with great cruelty,
While Priamus devoutly prayed there,
In humble wise to Apollo on his knee,
With fury great not speaking any word:
Into the body ran him with his sword,
And gave him such a deep and deadly wound
That presently he fell upon his face,
And pitifully died on the ground,
And with his blood defild the holy place.
Aeneas and Anthenor standing by,
As witnesses of his great cruelty.
Whose death when as Queen Hecuba perceiud,
And on the ground there lying did behold
His bleeding corse, she seemed clean bereaud
Of senses, and in woeful wise did fold
And wring her hands, and pitiously did cry,
And in great fear out of the Church did fly
With Pollicene her daughter, (who together
Were present when King Priamus was slain,)
To save their lives, and yet they knew not whether
To go no^ run, for no man durst maintain
Their quarrel, nor no comfort then was left
For them, that of the same were clean bereft.
For all the town in every place was filled
With Greeks, that through, twith glistring swords did run,
And every where the Trojans fiercely killed,
That had no means their cruelty to shun.
And as she ran in that sort through the street,
It was her chance Aeneas there to meet,
Whom when she saw, her flesh began to shake
And tremble with the grief she had in mind,
And therewithal in fury great she spoke,
And said to him, oh Traitor most unkind!
Oh serpent false! oh Adder envious!
Oh villain vile, and most malicious!
Thou that art causer by thy wickedness
Of all our woes, and through thy treachery
Have brought us now into so great distress;
That plunged in the vale of misery,
We run from place to place distressed in mind,
And can no ease at all nor comfort find.
How could thou in heart be so unkind
Unto thy Lord and King, as traitorously
To stand by with a fierce and cruel mind,
And see him slain by Pirrhus cruelly
Within the Temple, where he shead his blood,
Who while he lived was unto thee so good,
And gracious Lord, that never any man
Felt more of his great liberality,
Nor was more loved, (as all men witness can)
Then thou by him, (which thou may not deny.)
Who now lies dead within that holy place:
Thou wast not only traitor in that case*
But did conspire his death, for thou did bring
Fierce Pirrhus to Apolloes Temple, where
Thou knew well that he should find the King,
Of purpose set, that he might kill him there,
Where as thou should (as duty does thee bind)
Have saud his life, if thou had been so kind.
But thou not only have that mischief don,
But did betray this town where thou wast bred,
And fostred with more reputation
Then any man, save he that was the head
And King thereof, which now forgotten is
By thee, wherein though thou have done amiss,
Yet if within thy stony heart there be
One drop of pity or compassion,
Let me request this favor now of thee,
That in this time of desolation,
Thou will my daughter Pollicene relieve,
And unto her some aid and succor give,
If thou do any one respect at all
Of Priams race, (as sure thou can not choose,)
That she by thy protection may not fall
Into the Grecians hands, her life to loose:
That when men shall this woeful story read,
And find therein this foul and treacherous deed
By thee so falsely done, and brought to pas
Against this town, it may the rigor stay
Of those that will judge and condemn thee as
A Traitor vile, and give them cause to say,
That though thou did this great and wicked thing,
Yet at the last thou shewdst thy self bening,
And gracious unto Pollicene, whereby
Some little satisfaction thou shall make,
In recompense of thy great treachery
To us, and give her cause thy part to take:
When men of thee (to her) shall justly say,
And call thee Traitor false another day.
If thou will now vouchsafe her life to save*
But as for me do what thou will, all is one,
I neither do, nor will thy favor crave.
For since my Lord King Priams dead and gone,
I care not though that thou some Grecians bidst
Do unto me, as unto him thou did.
This motion made by Hecuba the Queen,
Though sharp it were, did move Aeneus so,
That pitying fair Lady Pollicene,
He caused her forthwith with him to go,
And shut her in a chamber secretly,
From sight and knowledge of the enemy:
Least they thereby should find occasion
To pick some quarrel with him for her sake.
And at that time likewise King Thelamon
Of pity did in his protection take
The wife of Hector, called Andromacha,
And Priams daughter Lady Cassandra.
And unto them his Princely promise gave,
To keep them from the Grecians cruelty.
And Menalus Queen Helena did save,
As she for whom with such hostility
He had been cause to move that bloody war,
And for whom long in heart he had such care.
The Greeks the while with hot and ragingire,
Near ceast to break and furiously pull down
The walls, and to consume and burn with fire
The howses and rich buildings in the town:
So that therein they left nothing upright,
Nor vndefac'd, but with most great despite
Destroyed all without exception
Of any place or person whatsoere,
(Unless twere those which by condition,
They had before protested to forbear,
And did belong and appertain unto
Aeneas, and all those that did unto
The treason by them practiced consent.)
And from their fury great would not forbear
That day, till King Agamemnon had sent
For all the Grecian Princes that were there,
To meet in Pallas Temple. Unto whom,
When they therein were altogether come,
He asked them, if they would constantly
Observe their faith and promise made to those,
By whom they had obtaind that victory,
Which they so long had sought against their foes*
And what they would with all the treasure do
Which they within the town had won? Whereto
They answered, that for their promise made,
And truly sworn unto by them, they would
In each respect observe it well, and said,
That all the gould and treasure gotten, should
By just division be distributed
To every man as he had merited:
Of what degree, estate, or dignity
Soere he was, and that it should be done
By him without all partiality,
So that mong them there might not any one
Have cause to be offended, nor to blame
Him for the true division of the same.
Which done, while they within the Temple staid,
Some speech about Queen Helena did rise,
Whereto when some had answer made, and said
Their minds therein as they could best advise:
King Thelaphus with great severity
Said, that she well deserved had to die*
For whom so many men their lives had lost,
And urged, that she might have judgment given,
That as they dyed for her, it should her cost
Her life likewise, that day ere it was even.
Which many more of them agreed unto.
And cause for her there was so much ad^;
Agamemnon and Menalus sat still,
And durst not speak one word to save her life,
Least that the Greeks in ^ury should her kill,
(There was mong them as then so great a strife.)
Till that Ulisses with much Eloquence,
And good persuasions made in her defense,
Did satisfy them all so well in the end,
That they contented were that she should live,
And ceasing more about her to contend,
To M^nalus they did her freely give.
And when their General Agamemnon
Perceived that they were agreed thereon,
He made request to them, that they would give
Cassandra unto him for recompense
Of all his pains, and said while she did live
He would her keep; and when they went from thence
Take her with him: and they contented were
It should be so. And then before them there
Aeneas and A^^henor to them told,
And justified it upon their oath,
That Helenus King Priams Son nere would
Agree unto the war, but still was loath
That Priamus his Father, and the rest
Should take the same in hand, and did his best
To let it by his counsel and advise,
And how that by the mediation
Of him, and of Cassandera the wise,
(Whose hearts were moved with compassion,)
Achilles murdered body was not made
A prey for hounds, as Hecuba had said
That it should be, and further that they were
Much grieved for the murder, and likewise
For many other matters that were there
Don in the town, contrary to th^aduise
Which they from time to time had given to those,
That of the war had order to dispose.
To whom because that they were innocent
Of all the wrongs that to the Greeks were don,
They granted with one voice and full consent,
That they should have a full remission
And pardon of their lives. Then Helen^^
With humble voice and visage piteous,
Fell on his knees with great submission,
And thanking them for pardon to him given,
Submissiuely besought Agamemnon,
With many salt and brinish tears, that even
As he had freely pardoned his offense,
(For which he could make him no recompense)
He would be pleased to have compassion
Upon the silly blood of children,
And with a gracious eye to look upon
The sons of valiant Hector, who as then
Nere had don wrong to him* nor any other,
And that he would vouchsafe the^ with their mother
(His widow left, all comfortles alone,)
A pardon of their lives and liberty.
To whom the King moved with compassion
At his request, did grant security
Of life, and lim, and license free to go
Whereas they list, the like he did unto
The rest of all the women then in Troy,
That in the Grecian fury were not slain,
And gave to them free liberty t'enioy
Their dwellings there, or elsewhere to remain
Within the land: for which most humbly
They gave him thanks with many aioyfull cry*
Which done, the King with all the Grecians went,
Out of the Church, and presently agreed
To leave the town, and to that end they sent
Their treasure and their men aboard with speed:
Intending to return to Greece again,
But such a sudden storm of wind and rain,
With great and hideous tempests did arise
Upon the surging seas, and such foul weather
Of thunder and of lightning in the skies,
Continued for one whole months space together,
That none of them durst with their ships aduc^ture
That dangerous time into the seas to enter.
But were constraind upon the land to tarry
Till be^^er wind and weather did ensue,
And finding it still more and more contrary,
They asked Calchas counsel if he knew
What those great storms and tempests signified,
That them so long of passage had denied.
Who told them, that those storms and tempests fell
By providence Divine, that had provokt
The ugly, foul, and furious fiends of Hell,
To move the same, and could not be reuok't,
Nor yet would cease till they were punished
By death, that had Achilles murdered.
And that their God Apollo angry was,
Because thereby his Temple they did stain
With blood, and that therefore they should not pa^,
Till they had pleased him with blood again:
Which must be done by offering Pollicene,
(Who by her extreme beauty cause had been,
And th'obiect of that cruel murther*don
Upon Achilles body,) to apease
And give Apollo satisfaction:
The which he said, if they would have the seas
Propice, they must needs do ere they went thencee
To take away all causes of offense.
This answer made, fierce Pyrrhus sought about
In every place for Pollicene, but could
By no means hear of her, nor find her out,
Till some man at the last unto him told,
That she was closely kept, and hidden by
Aeneas and Anthenor privily.
Whereby so great a rumor suddenly
Arose against them, that by that means they were
In danger of their lives, till traitorously
Anthneor to avoid all cause of fear,
And better to make known his villainy,
Had sought and searched so long and busily,
That at the last he found her out, and brought
Her forcibly unto the Greeks, and there
Delivered her to them, (when she least thought
That she unto her death had been so near.)
Who presently without compassion,
Was judged to die by King Agamemnon,
And taking care that execution
Upon her should be done without delay,
He did give order and commission
To Pyrrhus for the same, who made no stay,
But took her by the hand, and furiously
Drew her unto the place where she should die.
Great was the press that ran unto that place,
To see and to behold young Pollicene
Who for her beauty, comlines, and grace,
Within the world her like had nere been seen:
So that they all were grieud that she should die,
And for because there was no remedy,
Let many a salt and bitter tear distill
Out of their eyes, for pity to behold
Her woeful stare, and gladly by their will
Wished that she might escape, and feign they would
Have ventred to have taken her forcibly
From Pyrrhus hands, but that they verily
Beleeud that without she died, they nere
Should have fair wind, nor go to Greece again
To see their Native Land, whereto they were
Most certainly persuaded by the vain
Suggestions which their Prophet Calchas had,
Concerning her unto them falsely made.
And when unto Achilles grave she came,
Whereas the Grecians would her sacrifice,
She kneeled down devoutly fore the same,
And lifting up her fair and tender eyes,
With wringing hands unto the Gods she praid
In most submissiue wise, and thus she said.
OH mighty Gods that in the heavens abide,
And see and gourne all things whatsoere,
At whose command the world that is so wide,
And eke the seas and skies created were,
And by your word all formd and framd of naught,
To whom the depth and secrets of man's thought
Is known, for nothing from your Deities
By any means conceald or hid can ^e;
I humbly pray your heavenly majesty's,
That you will now be merciful to me,
And my poor soul into your hands receive,
When bitter death shall me thereof bereave
I do confess with all humility,
That with a holy care of chastity,
I have preserved my virginity
Until this day, wherein I now shall die
A maiden vndefild for thought or deed,
Although the Greeks have judged and decreed
To put me to this hard and cruel death,
The which I nere deserud (as you can tell,)
For as my conscience to me witnesses,
And I in truth may sai*t, and swear it well,
I am most clear of that which they accuse
Me for, and yet they will me not excuse,
But die I must to satisfy their will,
As they allege because I gave consent
My brother Paris should Achilles kill,
Whereas God knows I am an innocent,
And never did in will, deed, word, nor thought,
Give my consent such treason should be wrought
Against him, whom I do know did love me dear,
But was therefore right ^ory in my heart,
Though presently as now it does appear,
I must for him endure great pain and smart,
Because they have decreed (for his ^ake)
That they on me alone will vengance take,
Without all mercy or compassion,
And offer me up for a sacrifice,
To Appease the Gods great indignation.
Oh Grecians blind! me thinks you are not wi^e
So cruelly to seek my death for naught,
And merciles to bend your hearts and thought,
To kill a poor and desolate young maid
That never did offense to any one:
For which it may full well of you be said,
That you have hearts as hard as any stone,
And that you far in cruelty excel
The Tiger fierce, and hungry Lion fell,
T^assent unto so villainous a deed,
And to destroy a silly fearful maid,
Unto her death so hastily proceed,
As that it may by no means be delaid,
To give her time and oppertunity
To mourn and weep for her virginity,
For which your great and monstrous cruelty,
My giltles blood will sure for vengance call
Unto the Gods, that shall with Equity
Judge every man on earth both great and small,
And make the truth of all things openly
Appear, which now lie hidden secretly.
I say not this, nor yet do I complain
To have redress, or to released be
From death, as if that I did fear the pain
Thereof, for it is now welcomer to me
Then life, since all my brethren now are dead,
And in this woeful town lie buried.
My father slain in this unwieldy age,
And I my self left desolate alone,
To see this town by Grecians furious rage,
Brought into utter desolation:
The which does make my heavy heart so sore,
That I am able now to weep no more,
And therefore wish for death to end my woe.
For now to live were unto me a death,
And better it were out of this world to go,
And presently to end my vital breath,
Then to be led into captivity,
And there with strangers live in poverty.
And now good death no longer time delay
With thy most piercing dart my heart to riue,
Strike sure and firm, I will not start away,
Nor with thee in no wise contend nor strive,
Now is the time to show thy power on me,
That ready stand here to attend for thee.
A maiden true, and Virgin pure I am,
That never was nor would be known of man,
As pure in mind and thought as ere I came
Out of my mothers womb, and boast I can
That when that I am dead it may be said,
That Pollicene did live and die a maid.
And now unto the Gods I do commend
My soul, of whom I crave submissiuely
In mercy to behold ^e, and to send
Me patience in this great extremity.
And unto every maiden better grace,
Then t'end their lives in such a doleful case.
And longer time to live in wealth and joy
Then I have done, and to defend and save
Them from all foul misfortune, and annoy,
Beseeching all good maids of me to have
Remembrance, and example by me take,
How they of worldly ^oy account shall make,
And that they would vouchsafe to shed some tears
For me when I am dead and out of date,
To think how I in my most tender years,
Did end my days by death unfortunate.
And thus unto the Gods I do commend
My soul, said she, and so her speech did end.
And with that word she bowed down her head,
And shut her eyes, attending stroke of death,
Which Pyrrhus with a furious spirit led,
Gave her, and soon bereaud her of her baeath:
And being dead his cruelty to show,
In pieces small he did her body hew,
As it upon his Fathers grave did lie.
I muse how he could have a heart so hard,
To mangle it so in pieces cruelly,
And not contented therewith afterward,
To satisfy his rage in furious mood
Like Tygar fierce did take her giltles blood,
And cast it with his hand all ore the grave.
Well may thou cruel Pirrhus rightly be,
Achilles son, for Nature to thee gave
A gift to be as pi^^les as he,
And worse, for that I never of him read
That in his life he did so foul a deed,
As in such sort to kill a silly maid:
But for a woman fell great pain and smart,
And that he felt in love as it is said
With Pollicene, for Cupid with his dart
Did wound him so by casting of his eye
On her, that he thought verily to die,
For love of her, and how that it was his chance
To loose his life* for her whom thou did kill
With fierce and furious mood, not by mischance,
But puposely thy pleasure to fulfill.
For which although thou thoghst it was no shame
Assure thy self the trumpe of flying Fame
Will through the world thy great dishonor spread
For doing of an act so horrible,
And when that men shall chance thereof to read,
Thy name will unto them be odible.
Whose cruel death when Hecuba the Queen
(That standing by when it was don) had seen.
With extreme grief she fell out of her wit,
And tare her ha^re, and furiously did set
Upon the Greeks with tooth and nail, and bit
And scratcht, and beat all those that with her met,
And palted them with stones, till at the last
The Greeks laid hold on her and bound her fast.
And finally did take and bear her to
An Island to the Troyans subject, where
They stoned her to death, and having so
Bereft her life, they made a sepulcher,
Most sumptuously composed of stone and brass,
Wherein with great solemnity she was
Entombed, as belonged to her estate,
Which Tomb stood there long after to be seen,
And called was the place unfortunate.
And in this sort that great and worthy Queen,
Did end her days distressed ^ore, and mad:
When as the Greeks through Calchas counsel had,
By Pyrrhus hand her Daughter sacrifiz'd
Unto their God Apollo, to appease
His furious wrath, who foolishly ^urmiz'd
That they should never have fair wind nor seas,
Unless Achilles death revenged were
By death of Policene: for they did fear
The Gods would nere be pleased, nor content
To let them pass to Greece till it were done.
But God that sits in the firmament,
And is the true and only God alone,
Confound such false and fained Gods, and all
Their jmages, with those that on them call.
For they are naught but stocks that are without
All sense, wherein the devil does remain,
And subtly by them has brought about
His purpose, man to move (whose heart is vain)
To pray to them, and truly to believe
That they are Gods, and can us succor give
In our distress, and so induced has
Mankind to leave the eternal God of heaven,
To pray to stocks and stones against the faith
Of Jesus Christ, that has his body given
To death for him, and by such false illusion,
Has brought him in such error and confusion,
As he belieueth by jdolatry,
And offering beasts and blood to jdols vain,
That he does serve the heavenly Majesty
Of God, and shall remission free obtain
Thereby for those offenses he has done:
But God confound them all and every one,
What title, name, or quality so ere
Idolaters unto them give. Whose number
So many are that name of Gods did bear,
That when I think thereon it makes me wonder:
The which that you as well as I may know,
I will their names to you in order show.
First Jupiter, Saturn, Mercury,
Apollo, Daphne, Mars the God of war,
Diana called the Queen of Chastity,
The guide of men by night Lucina fair,
And Iun^ that most commonly does dwell
In waters deep, and Pluto God of hell.
Fair Venus Queen of lust and venery,
With Cupid blind her son, the God of love,
Minerua Goddess of activity,
The God of wine called Bacchus, that does move
Men to desire the same, Dame Cithera,
And Plutoes lovely Queen Proserpina.
Neptunus, Flora, Vulcan, Eo^us,
And Bell^des that thirsts, and still does draw
Up water in a Bucket, Sisyphus
Conde^nd to roll a stone by fatal law,
And nere to cease, and hungry Ta^talus,
Th'jnfirnall fates, and Sisters furious,
That ^ained are to spin the thread of life,
The Muses nine that sweetly sing and play,
Bellon^ Queen of discord and of strife,
And double faced Ianus (whom they say
The Romans did adore) and Priapus,
The angry fretting Priest called Genius,
(That Is said to curse all those that froward be,
To such as friendly are to them, and kind)
Imeneus (who has authority,
The hearts of married couples fast to bind
In love, till they are moved to disagree
By discord that twixt them sets enmity.)
The Fayries that are used by night and day,
In houses and in fields to sing and dance.
The water- Nimphs, and Siluan Gods that stay
In woods and groves, and many times by chance
Are seen of men, as Satyrs, Nay^des,
Bycornes, Fawnes, Incubs, and Dr^^des,
With many more. And finally to close
And make the number complete, Orph^^s
The God of sleep* but certainly all those
That to such Gods so vain and ^rivolus,
Do sacrifice or on them use to call,
Will sure at last into some danger fall,
For recompense, of serving them so well.
For all such false and faind Idolatry
Proceeds from the crafty fiend of Hell,
Who is so full of fraud and subtilty,
That he deuisd those Idol Gods to frame,
And purposely did creep into the same,
And spoke in them, and answer made to those
That praid to them, and caused men thereby
To leave the true and living God, to lose
Eternal blis in heaven, for certainly
All those that on such Idols false do call,
Serve Beelzebub, and clean from God do fall.
As David in his Psalter does declare,
That mong the Pagan Gods there is not one
That can relieve or aid us, for they are
All made and framd of silver, gold, or stone:
Or else of Copper, Brass, Tin, Lead, or wood,
And that they neither can nor do man good.
For eyes they have and cannot see at all,
And ears likewise and yet they do not hear,
And legs and feet and cannot stand, but fall,
Unless they lean, or somewhat does them bear
And hold upright: and therefore as he says,
He that in them reposeth trust or faith,
Or to bow down to them which take delight,
Let him be well assurd, that at the last
They will him with such recompense requite,
That headlong down to hell he shall be cast,
With damned souls to dwell perpetually,
And that is his reward when he shall die.
And in this life misfortune dread and fear,
With many troubles that on men do light.
As famous stately Troy does witness bear:
Which once was of such puissant force and might,
That it did think it self to be secure,
And that it should in that state long endure.
And against her foes to have prevailed by
Apollo, Pallas, Juno, Uenus, and
Diana fair, the Queen of Chastity,
Whom they were wont to honor in that land
With sacrifice, and worship great to show
To them, by whom they now are brought full low,
And utterly destroid for evermore.
Whereby you see what is the end of all
That do such false and fained Gods adore,
And unto them for help and succor call:
What did Mineruaes Image them prevail,
By whom they hoped nere of aid to fail?
Or any of their supersticious vain,
The which they did so dearly buy at last,
Not only with a short and earthly pain,
But with eternal woe that ere shall last.
Oh Troy therefore I must lament thy fall,
And when I think upon thee, ever shall
With pity thee bewail, that were so brought
Unto thine end, and sometime was so great
And populous, that no town ever might
Compare with thee, when thou wast proudly set
In honors throane, as those that thee then knew
Can witness bear, but now all men may rue,
And pittle thy decayed walls that stood
(About thy stately building,) loftily.
And Priamus thy Prince of Royal blood,
That made and builded thee so sumptuously.
I think no man that in the world lives now,
By pen or tongue can tell which way, or how
To frame or to devise a doleful cry
Convenient to describe thy misery.
No though it were the Prophet Jeremy,
That mourned for the great Captivity
Of that most famous town Jerusalem,
And of the woeful Jews, bewailing them
With bitter tears. Nor yet Ezekiell
That to King Zedechias earnestly,
Fore-shewed the Captivity that fell
In Babylon, and for his Prophecy
Was stoned to death, nor he that cruelly
Was sawed in twain, though all of them did cry,
And bitterly lament the Jews orethrow.
Nor Daniell that within his heart did grieve
With extreme pain, (when God his power to show)
Unto King Nabuchadneser did give
The shape of beast his hautie pride t'imbase,
And seven years did make him feed on grass.
For I suppose if all of them had been
Here living in that doleful time again,
And with their sore and warry eyes had seen
The great distress which Troy did long endure,
And all the bloody slaughters had beheld
Between the Greeks and Trojans in the field,
There fought on either side in cruel wise,
I verily persuaded am that all
Their bitter tears would by no means suffice,
To grieve for those great sorrows that did fall
Upon the town of Troy by Grecians brought,
And also by false treason against them wrought.
But this shall now suffice thereof to speak,
For like as he that against the wind does sail,
And sees his masts and yard^ begin to break,
Knows well to (...) avail:
So were it in vain for me to tell you all
The miseries that did to (...) befall,
Or to prefume to show how eursed Fate,
Was bent in fierce and cruel wi^e to make
An end of them, and of their happy state,
The which on me I dare not undertake*
And therefore of the siedge i will make an end
In rude and simple wise, as it is pend.
And so the fourth Book finish with the leave
And favor of your Princely Majesty,
The which if that your grace to me will give,
The fifth Book i will begin, and specify
Therein what dangers and adventures fell
Unto the Greeks upon the sea, and tell
How they therein were ^rownd and cast away,
And th^^e that did escape and got to land:
(To show that man has here no certain stay,
And cannot fatal De^^iny withstand,)
Unfortunately died, and so together
Such measure had, as they did meet to other.
FINIS.
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF HECTOR.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
CHAP. 1.
Wherein is showed how the Greeks in their return to Greece, after the
destruction of Troy, by tempests on the seas were most of them drowned; and how
the rest that escaped and got to land, dyed miserably by malice and treason
wrought in Greece, one against the other.

WHen Eolus (whom Poets feign to be
The ruler of the winds) appeased was,
And he and Iun^ did together gree,
To make the seas so calm that men might pass^*
Securely through the same, and sky t'appeare
With fair and crystal hew: The Greeks that were
Desirous to return to Greece with speed,
To see their native Land (when they had woone
And utterly destroyed Troy) decreed
To ship themselves, and forthwith to be gone
From thence where they had ten years space maintaind
A painful siege, and little thereby gaind,
Considering all the losses they had had.
Yet triumphing for victory obtaind,
Reioyst that they so good an end had made.
But fortune that their pride and joy disdaind,
Soon changed their mirth into adversity.
For when they thought themselves secured to be,
And that they should in peace and quiet rest,
She stirred up foul discord and disdain,
Their happy state to trouble and molest,
And did in stead of joy procure them pain:
And made their hearts with pride and rank or swell,
Whereby at strife among themselves they fell,
(In midst of their high and greatest glory,
When as they most reioyst and triumphed,
That they by force had woone the victory
Against their Troyan foes, and flourished
In honor, and by trumpe of flying fame,
Eternized had the glory of their name,
From East to West, and make it swiftly fly
Throughout the world, to show their worthiness
As far as Phoebus compasses the sky.
For suddenly by great unhappiness,
Their glory that did shine so clear and bright,
Ecclipsed was, (unto their great despite.)
And all their welfare and prosperity,
Subverted clean by envy and debate,
(Which Satan through his craft and subtilty,
Made suddenly to creep into their state.)
For Thelaphus with rancor and discord,
Before the Grecian Princes went abord,
Complaind against Ulisses in this wise,
And said, my Lords, if that it please you stay
To hear me speak, (and think as you are wise
That reason moves me thereto;) I say
That at the winning of the town of Troy,
The treasure that thereby we do enjoy,
And forcibly did get into our hand,
Together with the riches which by might
And valor great we wan within the land,
Me thinks is not (if it be judged right)
Distributed by just devision,
Nor with indifferent proportion,
According to the law of equity,
Which in such case, to those that merit best,
And are of high degree and dignity*
Affords better part then to the rest,
And gives to every one as he deserud,
The which mong us has not been well obserud,
In every part without exception,
For Pallas Image called Palladion,
Whereof Ulisses has possession,
I say that right unto it he has none.
Although he has a false appearance found
To justify his title, and does ground
The same hereon, that it is his own by right
Because he woon't, as he does brag and vaunt,
(Though subtly, and not by force and might.)
And says it was given to him by special grant
Of every one, and yet it is not true,
For I deni't, and flatly say to you
That he does not deserve the same, nor shall
Enjoy it long, for that as just reward
For my deserts, it to my ^^^^^ does fall,
If that indifferently I may be ^eard,
And that you with reason judge, and be
Impartial in this case twixt him and me.
And first consider well, and way withal,
That while you here so long in siedge did tarry,
I only out of Messa brought you all
Provision that for you was necessary,
That you no want of victuals might sustain,
By any means while you did here remain.
And further as concerning feats of arms
Performed in the field in Knightly wise,
I ever ready was at all alarmes,
And daily fought against our enemies:
And as I am assurd full well, killed more
Of them, then those that greater countnance bore.
You also know that I slew Philomen,
To whom King Priam sent his youngest Son
To keep with store of treasure great, and when
I had him slain and all that riches won,
I brought it unto you, and therewith did
Relieve you much, and did supply your need.
And sor your sakes I slew the Frizian King,
And store of gold and treasure from him won,
And all those spoils unto the Camp did bring.
You likewise further know what I have don
T'augment and to advance your sovereignty,
By conquering two kingdoms valianly
While you in siedge here lay, and did them ad
Unto your puissant Empire, and likewise
The provinces to Troy annexed, made
All Subject unto you. What otherwise
I with Achilles did to increase your fame,
I know that you cannot forget the same.
And therefore needles twere for me to say
Or show you all I could produce to prove,
My merits more then his, do every way
Deserve a greater recompense and love
Of you. And therefore whatsoere he says;
No right unto Palladion he has.
The judgment in this case I do refer
Unto you all, the which that you may know
The better how to give, you first shall hear
His qualities, which I will to you show.
In him there is no manner worthiness,
Knighthood, valor, nor yet hardines.
For when time serves that he should in a need
Show forth his might, he dates not enterprise
That which he boasts, but proves as he is indeed
A coward right, as plainly with your ci^s
You see there is i^ him naught but cra^tines,
Words many, falsehood, and dec^^^fulnes.
For he is still in heart imagining,
How to effect by craft and subtilty
His purpose, and the same to pass to bring,
T'intrap and to deceive his enemy:
For never any thing as yet there was
By him archieu'd, nor fully brought to pass,
For which he well deserved praise or laud,
But it was done (it is known unto you all)
By some devise of treachery or fraud.
For like unto a goodly painted wall,
He makes a fair and pleasing outward show,
But no man can his inward meaning know.
And by such sleights, deceit, and policy,
He got the Image called Palladion,
And thereby (to our shame and villainy)
It may be said the conquest we have woone
Upon the town, by treason gotten was,
And not by our great knighthood brought to pass.
The only cause whereof (as I have said)
Ulisses is, for he (unto our shame)
This stumbling block has in our honor laid,
And thereby much ecclipsed all our fame:
The truth thereof since all of you do know,
I Will leave for this time, more of him to show.
And of you all my Lords together crave
You judgments, which of us deserves best
For his deserts, the jmage fair to have,
That for the same we may no more contest:
Which words thus used by King Thelaphus,
Ulisses having heard with mind suspicious,
And seeing how with envy great he was
Incenst and moved against him, with good advise
He bare with him a while, and let ore-passe
His choler, and, as he was passing wise,
Determing no jest thereof to make
To answer him, on this wise to him spoke,
And said with countance bold before his face,
My Lords, if that I may have leave to speak,
I hope before we part out of this place,
(And yet intend no peace thereby to break)
To prove directly that with equity,
The jmage only does belong to me,
Which I will keep and hold while I do live,
Despite of all that thereto dare say nay.
And first, for proof this instance I do give,
That at the siege wherein so long we lay,
In double wise I did my self acquit,
As well by valor great, as by my wit.
For by advise I was the only man
T'intrap them in a snare, and for your good,
Devised the means and way whereby we wan
The town of Troy, which otherwise had stood
And flourisht to this day, and truth to tell,
As it is not unknown to all full well,
If you will speak uprightly and with reason,
I dare avouch (though Thelaphus says no)
I was chief cause of their confusion.
How often of Embassage did I go,
To make the treaty with them in such wise,
As I for our advantage could devise?
And when I saw that all that we had done,
Was but in vain the town of Troy to win,
And that for us advantage there was none,
While that the holy Image was therein:
By my advise so subtillie I wrought,
That I to you Mineruaes Image brought.
Which Thelaphus maliciously does say,
That to your great dishonor and your shame,
By treachery I brought it thence away,
And thereby much imblemished your fame:
But since you are so wise I pray you take
The quarrel now in hand, and thereof make
An end between us twain, and so provide,
That th'jmage at this time may judged be
(All favor whatsoever laid aside)
To him that it deserves; and as for me
I Will stand to your award. Which having said,
He paused, and from speaking further staid.
Whereat with courage great King Thelaphus,
In heart and mind exceeding lie much moved,
(Respecting no man there in furious
And raging wise) despightfullie reprou'd,
And chafed at Ulysses with disdain,
And he at him replide with like again.
Whereby they two great enemies became,
And into hard and bitter terms did fall,
And threatening each the other for the same:
King Thelaphus in presence of them all,
Said, that before they two did end that strife,
It should unto Ulysses cost his life
By his hands, if he did not well defend
Himself. Which when the Grecian Princes heard,
The quarrel grown between them two, to end
The matter was by all of them deferd,
And wholly put to th'arbitration
Of Menalus, and King Agamemnon,
Which afterward did breed a mortal jar.
For when they two considered had thereon,
They judged, cause Ulisses (t'whom they bare
Affection great) the jmage fair had won,
He should possess the same as his reward,
And Thelaphus from claim thereof debard.
The reason that made them therein prefer,
Ulisses (and King Thelaphus to thwart)
Was, for because they both beholding were
To him, for that he friendly took their part,
When as the Greeks bout Helen were at strife,
To have her killed; and he to save her life,
Persuaded them so well, that they content
To let her live, to Menalus her gave.
When Thelaphus with fury against her bent,
Before them all said flatly she should have
Her head cut off, and suffer deadly pain,
Because for her so many had been slain.
And by that means King Thelaphus was crossed,
And put besides Palladion against his will,
For which he swore (though dear it should him cost)
Ere long time past he would Ulysses kill:
And one day likewise be revenged upon
King Menalus, and king Agamemnon.
And therewith in a mighty rage he went
With all his knights, (and left the company)
Who with him in their hearts were fully bent,
When they a fit occasion might epsy,
In cruel wise ere long revenged to be
Upon their foes, but chiefly on those three.
And for that cause such hatred to them bare,
That nothing but their deaths could the content:
But they that of his purpose were aware,
With policy his fury to prevent,
Did cause their knights about them to attend,
If that occasion served, to defend
And keep them from the fury of their foes.
And likewise soon to rid them of that doubt,
For early in the morn ere Phoebus rose
(The matter was so quickly brought about)
King Thelaphus that brave and worthy knight,
Most cruelly was murdered in the night.
And in the morning bleeding sore was found
Within his bed, whereas his body lay
Sore mangled, hewd, and cut, with many a wound:
Which thing when as the Grecians heard next day,
They did abhor that act so horrible,
And cause to God and man it was odible.
They could not choose but for his murder weep,
And grieve to think how foul and traitorously
He had been killed, when he was fast asleep,
And mong them then there rose so great a cry,
Throughout the host for that most wicked deed,
That all his friends within their hearts decreed,
His death should be revenged upon those
That had that cruel murder brought to pass:
The which, although no man would it disclose,
Yet every one that in the host then was,
For it had most and great'st suspicion
On Menalus, and King Agamemnon,
But chiefly on Ulysses, unto whom
By common voice of them in general
His sudden death imputed was, and some
Did vow and swear what ever did befall,
(Mong whom young Pyrrhus specially was one)
They would revenge the death of him full soon
Upon Ulysses, who by treachery
Had falsely wrought the same; but to prevent
And escape from Pyrrhus fury, suddenly
Aboard his ships next morning straight he went:
And hoising sail in have from thence he fled,
And left the jmage with King Diomed.
And of the fact in heart had great remorse.
Who in that sort thus fled away and gone,
Young Pyrrhus took his bloody mangled corse,
And made a fire and laid the same thereon,
In presence of the Greeks that it beheld,
And burnt it unto ashes in the field.
And afterward the ashes being cold,
He took them up, and did them safely put
With reverence great, into a box of gold,
The which with his own seal of arms he shut:
And sent them to be buried there whereas,
While he did live, the sovereign Prince he was.
And having all the ceremonies used
For him in every point most orderly,
He still upon the cruel murder musd,
Which unto him was done so traitrously:
And swear and vowed it should be dearly bought,
By them that it so wickedly had wrought.
And for that cause great hatred bare unto
King Menalus, and King Agamemnon,
Who well advised, and taking heed thereto,
For fear thereof nere went abroad alone*
But strongly guarded daily did attend,
What issue would ensue thereof in the end.
Which Pyrrhus likewise did, and would not cease
By all the means he could to seek some way
T'intrap them, and his wrath would not appease.
And in that sort they three from that same day
Were stern and deadly foes each unto other:
And while that they in such wise iar'd together,
And enviously each other did pursue,
Still more and more their malice did increase,
And hatred great on each side did renew.
Till Anthenor their furies to appease,
By policy did cut of all disdain
On either side, and made them friends again.
And to that end prepared a royal feast,
And did invite the Grecians to the same,
And to entreat and pray them never ceast,
Till they three with the rest unto it came,
That all the Princes of the host might see
They had their anger left, and did agree
Together like good friends as ere they were.
To write the great and sumptuous fare they had,
With all the several dishes that were there;
As also what rich Presents then were made,
And by Anthenor given liberally
Unto the Greeks, it is no necessity.
Let it suffice they wanted nothing that
Might please and give contentinent unto man.
And while at table they together sat,
Some one among them enviously began
To speak against Aeneas, and t'accuse
And charge him with most great and vile abuse,
Especially because he did conceal,
And hide away the Princes Pollicene,
And would by no means tell them, no^ reveal
What was become of her that cause had been
Of fierce Achilles death: and for the same
They did impose upon him so much blame,
That they did all with one consent agree,
He should therefore be banished out of Troy,
Contrary to their former grant that he
The freedom of the Town should still enjoy:
But nere the less they did with one consent,
Comdemne him to perpetual banishment.
(The causer of the same I cannot tell,
But sure it is Anthenor, and none other
Within the Town of Troy did know it well,
And secretly betrayed his traitorous brother:
That with him help to bring that thing to pass,
Which in the end the Towns destruction was.)
Which when Aeneas knew, and saw no way,
For him by any means to mollify
The Grecians hearts, to give him leave to stay,
He humbly prayed them of courtesy,
That of their princely favor and their grace,
They would vouch^afe to grant him 4 months space
To stay in Troy, while he provided had
All things that should for him be necessaire;
And further unto them petition made,
That he from thence might also with him carry
The ships that into Cithera did go
With Paris, just number twenty two.
Which being by the Grecians full consent
Unto him given, with license for the space
Of time he asked to stay, to Troy he went
With heavy heart, to see it in such a case:
And specially when he to mind did call,
That all the woes which on the same did fall,
Came only by the treason he had wrought
Against the Town; and also to remember,
That he could not enjoy the thing he sought,
But must of force depart and stay no longer,
Where he had lived sometime in great estate.
And cursed his most hard and cruel fate,
To see him self so plunged in that distress,
And banished by the Greeks, and knew not why
Nor who had sought his fall, till he did guess
And saw by signs Anthenor subtly
To get him out of Troy procured it,
For which he swear and vowed he would him quit.
And to that end sent presently for all
The Troyans that then in the town were left,
Who willingly assembled at his call,
(For being of their sovereign Prince bereft,
They made account he only did remain
Alive, to be their Lord and Sovereign.)
To whom he spoke and said, my friends you see,
How fortune at this time begins to frown,
And with dissembling face to ieare at me,
As she has done at this most worthy town,
Her cruelty against it and me to show:
You know likewise that we are but a few,
Here resting in this ruined place to abide,
And I perforce must leave your company.
Wherefore I think it best that you provide
Some means for your own good and safety,
By looking out among you for a man,
To govern you with all the speed you can.
For otherwise I see not how you should
Be able long this open Town to keep,
Nor yet your selves from strange invasion^ hold:
That here now like unto a flock of sheep,
Dispersed without a shepherd do remain,
And no man left your quarrel to maintain.
Wherefore if you my counsel now will take,
I think, sithtis so dangerous a thing
For you to live without an head, to make
And choose some one among you for your king.
And he whom I think fittest man to reign
Ore you, and be your Lord and sovereign
Is Anthenor, whose knighthood and renown
Is known unto you all, if you consent
And will agree to my opinion.
And to that end let one for him be sent,
And when that he comes here within the town,
You shall set on his head a regal Crown.
That he may govern you with equity,
And valiantly defend, preserve, and save
You from distress and all extremity.
And they agreed, and were content to have
Him sent for presently to be their king.
For they not once suspected any thing
Concerning that the which Aeneas meant,
Whose words and mind contrary were to other,
For it was his full purpose and intent
To slay him presently when he came thither,
And with his friends prepared to that end
All armed stood, his coming to attend.
Who naught suspecting that which did fall out,
Unarmed came into the town, where he
Was presently enclosed round about
By Aeneas, and in danger slain to be:
If that the common people had not been,
Who in great have came running the^ between.
And down upon their knees before him fell,
Desiring him to have compassion
On them and theirs, whom he then knew full well,
Were left within a bare and naked town
Without a guide, and praid him to withhold
His hand and fury great, from that which would
Be cause of their destruction general,
And on them and their woeful case to rue.
To whom Aeneas said before them all,
Will you that I forbear him that is untrue,
And shows himself so traitorously bent
To you and me, with false and bad intent,
That for it he deserved has to die.
For was it not he that specially alone.
Conspired by treason with your enemy*
To bring you all unto destruction,
And me unto the Greeks has sold and bought,
And undeserved my banishment has wrought*
The which they have decreed without repeal,
But ere I go from hence I Will make him sure,
The just reward of his deserts to feel,
And without all compassion to endure
The pain that to a traitor does belong,
That at this time has done me so much wrong*
To be exild from hence, where with you all
I purposed to lead my life, and take
Such part as should unto our shares befall,
But by his means I must the Town forsake:
Which wrong I cannot brook nor never may,
And therefore for the same I will him slay*
Besides all this, he was as you haueseene,
The only man that to the Grecians gave,
The young and goodly Princess ^^llice^e;
Whom they did slay, and would you I should save
One that so traitrous is? Thus much I say,
(Whos'ever that against the ^ame says nay.)
Since you entreat for him he shall go free
With life, but cause his treason is so great,
He shall out of this Town exiled be,
And therewith they a time unto him set,
When he should go from thence, without all grace
Or favor showed, and that he must not pass.
And thus as traitors both they wrought together,
To bring the Town to ruin and decay,
So treacherously they did exile each other
Out of the same, and might not therein stay
To lead their lives where they were borne and bred,
In peace and rest as they determined.
And presently Anthenor thereupon,
Without delay did preparation make,
Of all things necessary to be gone
From thence, and with his friends did shipping take,
And saild by diverse Lands and sundry Isle^.
It Is needless to rehearse how many miles
He traveled on the seas, nor how he escaped
The dangers that therein are often seen.
But to be brief his course so well he shapt,
That at the last when he a while had been
Tossed too and fro, with stormy wind and weather*
He spied an Isle, and with his ships made thither.
Which Island had to name G^r^^diay,
Where he no sooner foot on land did get,
But there upon a ^^^ke without delay,
His men with present speed to work he set,
And made a town that was both broad and long,
With towred walls which were exceeding strong.
And many pleasant woods and waters sweet,
That on each side the same environed,
With all things else that for the same was meet.
Which Isle as then was ruld and governed
By Thetides a king of worthy same,
Who long and many years had held the same
In peace, and never had molested been
By any adverse fortune whatsoe^e:
Who unto Lord Anthenor and his men
Great courtesy did show, and by him were
In friendly wise received and welcomed,
And peaceably by him were suffered
To plant themselves therein, and to enjoy
Their town as freely with all privilege,
As they before lived in the town of Troy:
Whose being there once known and published,
A number of the Troyan knights went thither,
And there encreast and multiplied together.
And soon did make it rich and populous,
And called it the Town of Menelau.
To tell you more of him were frivolous,
For memory of him there should be none:
Since he was by his treason cause of all
The miseries that did on Troy befall.
And therefore I will turn my style again,
To tell you what unto the Greeks befell,
And how by Prophecy Cassandra plain,
And truly did unto the Grecians tell,
What happen to them should, and mong them all
Declared to their puissant General,
That he within his house should murdered be
By treason, that against him should be wrought,
And that there was no way for him to fly,
Nor escape the same what means so ere he sought:
And bad him have a care of his estate,
For he should die by death unfortunate.
The story says, when Thelaphus was slain,
(As in another place I said before)
He had two sons (that living did remain)
The which two several wives unto him bore:
Who with a King called Tenter did remain,
And nourisht were till that they did attain
To men's estate, and in the end he came
Two brave and worthy knights as ever were,
And in their time attaind to hauty fame,
As by their lives and acts it does appear:
The elder of them called Authe^ic^s,
The younger had to name A^^issar^s.
And then does show that when the Greeks had done
All that they would to Troy, and ^eadi^ lay
Attending wind and tide at T^^^d^^,
To sail to Greece, Agamemnon did pray
And earnestly entreated them t'agree,
And give consent that Menalus and he
Might take their leaves and stay no longer there.
Whereto at first they would not give consent,
But flatly them denyd and against it were,
But after much entreaty were content
They should depart: and so they two together
Set sail, when it was fair and pleasing weather,
In Autumn when the air was dry and cold,
And melaucholie humors did abound,
When Phoebus had clea^e passed Le^ bold,
And in sixteenth degree of Virgo found:
And trees that in the Summer time were green,
Waxt dry, and corn and fruits were gathered in.
And flowers and herbs (which in the month of May,
With fresh and lively hew showed gallantly,)
Began to hang their heads and to decay.
And all the fields that flourisht verdantly,
Were dried, and looked with sad and heavy cheer.
At th'jssuing of the days caniculeare.
And men by humors great which then abound,
Molested were with shivering fevers cold,
And when the wind with blustering blasts was found
To shake the trees so sore, they could not hold
Their leaves, but did constrain them off to fall
At time of year, when men on God do call,
And humbly him beseech to keep and save
Their vines from rain, and storms, and nipping frost,
That they in time the fruits of them may have,
Which otherwise would utterly be lost,
If too much moisture fall upon the ground,
As commonly that time of year is found,
At unawares to happen with some blasts
Of wind and blustering weather, which so sore
Does move theseas, and therewithal orecasts*
The skies, and makes them lowering, which before
Showed pleasantly, and seemed for a while
To put men in good hope with fained smile.
But yet there is no trust twill so abide.
As well the Greeks that put to sea did find,
And sailed forth of Tenadon with tide,
And wind as good as they could wish in mind:
And with the gold and treasure that they won
In Troy, three days their course directly ^un
To Greece ward, by consent of Eolus,
Who with the winds did seem as't were t'obay
To them, and promised voyage prosperous,
And did conduct t hem onward of their way,
With pleasing gale along the Grecian coast.
But when that they in fortune trusted most,
And thought themselves to be in her good grace,
Mistrusting naught, she suddenly did lower,
And unawares with false dissembling face,
(To show and to declare her mighty power,)
Turned all their hope into most deep despair,
And ouercast the weather that was fair,
And made the Egean seas that calm did show,
To rise aloft with billows huge and hie,
And Boreas with his boystrous blasts to blow,
And roar and whistle lowdly in the sky:
And day that was most clear, to seem as night,
It was so dark, so that they had no light,
But only by the lightning that did fall
With flashes great, and made them sore aghast,
And much more when the thunder therewithal,
With mighty claps did break both Yard and mast:
And rent and tare their sails, and made them fly
Ore board into the sea that rose so hie,
And bare their ships up with so mighty force,
As if that they on mountain tops had been,
And then again with clean contrary course
Cast them as low, so that they often were seen
As if that they directly headlong fell
Into the deep infernal pit of hell.
And therewithal the lightning suddenly
Fell in their ships, and set them on a fire,
And two and twenty of them speedily
Consumd and burnt, the rest (with furious ire
The which Minerua to them bare) were cast
Upon the shore, and there in pieces brast.
For she offended was with them so sore,
Because to her they did no reverence
When they from Troy departed, and the more,
Because of that most great and foul offense,
The which Cileus Ajax against her wrought
Within her Church, which he full dearly bought.
For when his ships were most part of them drowned,
She bare so great a spite and hate to him,
That he to save himself from death was found
In danger great, within the seas to swim
Stark naked, and at last got to the land,
And there lay almost dead upon the sand,
And that he had for his desert and share.
The which Minerua justly to him sent,
Because that he no honor to her bare,
When he into her Temple boldly went:
And forcible with mighty violence,
Cassandra Priams Daughter drew from thence.
Whereby you see what danger does ensue
To men, that dare profane a holy place,
As Cileus Ajax did, but did it rue,
And plagued was therefore without all grace:
As God with grievous punishment will strike
All those that do presume to do the like.
Which many of the Greeks most true did find,
By giving of the same occasion.
For he that with a proud and hawtie mind,
Will venture by too great presumption,
To strive against the God of peace and might,
Shall at the last unto his foul despite
Repent the same much sooner then he weenth,
And oftentimes not punished alone,
For many a man that innocently meanth,
Is plagued for that which other men have done:
For all the Greeks in general together,
Returning home received some hurt no other,
Both hie and low of state, all felt the smart
And punishment of rigor to them used
Upon their foes, with stern and cruel heart,
Because that they their victory abused:
As by the sequel of the History,
It does appear most clearly to the eye.
Which says, that in times past a King there reigned
Among the Greeks, which Naulus had to name,
Who long in honor great his Land maintaind,
And through the world did spread his hawty fame:
Two Sons he had, Pallamides the elder,
And Oetes was the second, and the younger.
Who both one mother had, and valiant were,
Especially Pallamides, for he
For knighthood was esteemd and held to bear
The name and fame both far and near, to be
The worthiest Prince then living in his days,
For force and power of men at all assaies.
And for his wisdom sometime governed
The Grecians host, when they fore Troy did lie,
And was of them most highly honored,
But at the last was slain unhappily
In battle: when as he most flourished
In honor, and his fame abroad was spread.
But some that bare great envy in their hearts,
Unto the Grecians most maliciously
Against them treason wrought, and played their parts
So well therein, that Naulus hastily
Fell at debate with them: for they devised
A tale the which they told him, and surmis'd
That which was never practiced nor wrought
By any one of all the Greeks, not yet
In any wise imagined nor thought
By them, though he for truth believed it:
For they told him that while the Grecians were
Before the town of Troy, that falsely there
Pallamides his son was murdered
By night, as he within his bed did lie,
The which they said was done by Diomede,
And false Ulisses with great cruelty:
Which (truth to say) and give to them their due,
They never did, for it was most untrue.
They also did most confidentlie tell
The King, that all the Princes did consent
Unto that deed, and knew thereof full well,
(Although there was nere any such intent)
And specially that King Agamemnon,
And Menalus were by when it was done.
But all (they said) was false and nothing so,
Yet nere the less they did the king persuade
So well, that he gave credit thereunto,
And verily belieu'd the Grecians had
Conspired the death, and the destruction
Of valiant King Pallamides his son.
And better to aver their false report,
They feigned and said that letters twain were sent
Out of the town, which treason did import,
And said that King Pallamides was bent
To favor them of Troy, and that he had
Received a sum of gold of them, and made
Condition more to have, so that he would
Delay the time, and cause their enemy
To leave the siege, and for them only hold:
And more to make their matter good did lie,
And said, they found the letters in the field,
Enclosed fast within a Troyans shield
That in the fight was flaine, and that thereby
The who^e contents of all the treason wrought,
And practiced by the Troyans secretly*
With King Pallamides, to light was brought:
And though that he was guiltles of the same,
(The Grecians more to slander and to blame,)
They said Ulisses falsely practiced,
With one that on Pallamides did wayt,
And him with gold and words most fair so fed,
That at the last he caught him with a bait,
And got him to agree and be content
To grant to his request, and give consent
To take a bag of gold, and secretly
By night convay the same into the bed
Whereas his Lord Pallamides did lie,
Which he accordingly accomplished:
And to make all seem true, the gold then laid
Within the bed, was so much as was said,
Pallamides received had in hand.
That when the matter once in question came,
He should not well against his accusers stand,
It being found and proved to be the same
Just sum of gold, the which was specified
In those two letters in the Targat hid,
Which being found, and to the Grecians told,
They were to vproare moved in such wise,
Concerning those two letters and the gold,
That they did in a muttering arise:
And all together ran with one consent,
In furious wise unto the royal tent,
Wherein the king (that innocent and clean
Of that supposed offense then was) remaind,
And little knew what they thereby did mean:
And would by no entreaty be restraind
To stay, but when before him there they stood
Like unto men that had been mad or wood;
They did begin against loud to cry,
And bitterly to rail and chafe withal,
And by no means their rage would pacify,
But ready were on him therefore to fall:
And specially the kings Agamemnon,
And Menalus with indignation
Against him in their hearts conceived, than
Without advise or any care at all
Of his estate or high degree, began
For justice there before the Greeks to call:
The which when king Pallamides perceau'd,
And saw what malice they against him conceau'd,
At first he was somewhat therewith abast,
But presently again without all fear
He stood up on his feet, and at the last
When as he saw how hot at him they were,
And that they still persisted that he should
Condemned be: To show his courage bold
And valor great, he flatly did deny
That which by them on him was falsely laid,
And swore before them all it was a lie,
For proof whereof he offer made and said:
That he his life would venture like a Knight,
With any whatsoere he were, to fight
In single combat hand to hand, to try
And prove by force that he no treason wrought,
(Respecting not his Sovereign dignity
Nor royal blood) and them therefore besought,
To grant and give consent that presently
That day the combat might be fought, thereby
To find and know the truth, if any one
Against him durst within the field appear.
Which proffer made they all stood mute, and none
Of all his foes that his accusers were,
The combat would accept: for Diomede
And King Ulisses authors of that deed,
Withdrew themselves, and never did make proffer
To take his gauntlet up, which he had laid
Before them on the ground, nor yet would offer
To prove that which of him they falsely said
Behind his back, but with a fained show,
Made as if they thereof did nothing know.
And for his part Ulisses craftily,
(As't was his common practice to dissemble
With all men, and to flatter, feign, and lie,
Wherein he did the serpent sly resemble,
That closely lies hidden in the grass,
To sting and bite such as thereon do pass.)
When as he heard Pallamides deny
The treason to him laid, and offer made
To prove them false that would it justify,
He seemd as if therefore he had been glad:
And like a friend that meant naught else but well,
He did begin in double wise to deal.
And openly seemd him thereof t'excuse,
And gave advise unto the Greeks to cease,
From charging him with treason, and to use
No more opprobrious speeches in that case,
And by that means appeaz'd their muteny:
And did persuade them that most certainly,
That accusation false and slanderous,
Upon him was imposed wrongfully,
By some that had with hearts malicious,
Conspired to do him that great villainy:
And to procure his everlasting shame,
Yet he himself was author of the same.
But when he saw he could not bring to pass,
That which he had devised to betray
And charge him with, that he a traitor was,
He subtly found out another way:
Which by consent of Diomede he brought
Unto effect, and in this wise he wrought.
He went unto him late upon a night,
And as a secret friend unto him told,
(First swearing him by th'onor of a knight,
Not to disclose that which reveal he should)
That he could bring him to a place whereas
Great store of gold and treasure hidden was.
That had to him been privately disclosed,
And none else but himself thereof did know,
And that is lay within a well enclosed:
Which as a friend he offered him to show,
So that he promise would that night to go,
Accompanied with them two, and no mo,
To fetch it secretly into his tent.
Which he (believing all that they did say)
Agreed unto, and forth with them he went
Unto the well, whereas he said it lay:
And coming thither, told them that he would
Go down into the well to fetch the gold.
Supposing to have found it there indeed.
But being down into the bottom gone,
(As they before between them had agreed,
When aid and succor for him there was none,
For up again himself he could not rise:)
They stoned him to death in cruel wise,
And went their ways unto their tents with speed,
Where down they laid themselves to take their ease,
As if that they had never done the deed.
And so they said that King Pallomides
Was murdered by Ulisses treachery,
And Diomede: and it was but a lie
Devised to slander them that guiltless were,
And also all the Grecians else beside,
For he was with an arrow slain in war
By Paris, while they did in siege abide:
But they that are to falsehood wholly bent,
Can tales devise that nere were done nor meant.
And as for those two letters that were brought
Out of the town, as by them was surmis'd,
No such thing by Pallamides was wrought,
It only was maliciously devised:
And nothing else but falsehood and untroth,
Of purpose told to make king Naulus wroth,
And angry with the Greeks in general,
Thereby to work their ruin and decay,
And moved him for that cause on them to fall,
As they returned homeward on their way:
For presently king Naulus and his son,
Believing that such treason had been done,
And wrought by Greeks, as was unto them told,
Did swear and vow revenged to be therefore
Upon them by all ways and means they could:
And unto them in heart such hatred bore,
That without any favor merciles,
When as the Greeks were on the surging seas,
And saild along the shore by Naulus land,
He caused fires to burn, and set up lights
Upon the coast, the which on hills did stand,
And might be seen far off in winter nights,
To make the Greeks to err and go aside
Out of the way: for when they had espied
The lights on shore, and did not understand
The reason, but supposing harbor near,
They did direct their course unto the land,
And thinking them for sea-marks placed there,
To show them how to fall on land by night,
Without all fear they made unto the light.
Whereby upon the rocks and sand they stroke,
And by that means two hundred ships they lost,
Which suddenly were all in pieces broke,
And cast away upon king Naulus coast,
Which cost the life of many a worthy man.
And so to take revenge he first began
Upon the Grecians, with destruction
Of them, and of their Navy huge and great,
But yet by fortune King Agamemnon
Escaped death, and safely home did get,
With Menalus, King Diomed, and more
That followed them: and yet there was great store
Of Earls, Kings, and Princes cast away
At that same time. But when as Oetes knew
That they were gone, and that he could not stay
Them as he would, he vowed some should it rue:
And presently imagined a wile,
Wherewith he did Agamemnon beguile,
By writing of a letter to his wife,
Which set so great contention tweene the^ twain,
That it did cost Agamemnon his life.
The letter did in it thus much contain,
That her dear Lord and king Agamemnon,
A great and mighty wrong to her had don.
The which could not but breed most extreme blame,
And detriment unto her in the end,
(Although she nere had merited the same)
The which he said was that he did intend
A daughter of king Priamus to take
To wife, and would her utterly forsake,
(Though she surpast her much for excellence
Of beauty, and of comely feature)
That never had unto him done offense.
Whereof he did her certainly assure,
And that it was his purpose and intent,
That she should into banishment be sent,
A thousand miles from thence when he came home,
Advising her that she should warily
Look to her own estate. This was the sum
And general contents of that which he,
Within his letter sent unto the Queen:
Although the king was innocent and clean,
Of that which he to her did falsely write,
And loud her while he lived with all his heart,
And in none else but she did take delight,
Nor had no such intent from her to part:
But't may be that the letter which he sent,
Made her to do more then she ever meant,
And to give credit thereunto too soon.
Who thanked Oetes for his carfulness
In her behalf, and his compassion
Showed therein to preserve her from distress:
And yet (as in the story you shall find)
She was a most false Lady, and unkind
To him while he was absent in the war.
But nerethelesse she was so diligent
To look unto her self, and to prepare
A bait for him, and thereby to prevent
All mischief whatsoever might ensue
To her, by that which she thought to be true,
That finally she brought him to his end.
What trust can man repose in worldly glory,
(Though all men to obtaine't their wits do bend,)
Which proves to be so vain and transitory:
Or in the wavering joys of proud ambition,
Which suddenly are turned vpside down.
Or flying fame that mounteth up so hie,
And is orethrown in twinkling of an eye,
Or as vain boasting of great victory,
That vanishes away so suddenly,
Or in dissembling fortune most unjust,
In whom no man could ere so surely trust,
As that he might assure himself that she
Would unto him a constant friend remain,
Against whom no man whats'euer that he be,
Can once resist or victory obtain:
For on her wheel though he clime nere so fast,
Let him be sure she will throw him down at last.
Her favor's not to be relide upon,
For she is so full of mutability,
That he which does repose his trust thereon,
Does build upon a mere uncertainty:
To day she will be a friend and seem to smile,
To morrow she will falsely men beguile.
Her pride is such she spares no degree,
Great Emperors, Kings, Dukes, Princes, all are one
With her, for in their greatst felicity,
When they are plast in high and Princely throne,
And live and reign in honor and renown,
For all their mighty power she casts the^ down.
As you may see by King Agamemnon,
Who while he lived so puissant was of state,
That mong the Greeks there was not any one
Esteemd nor found to be more fortunate,
Nor greater; yet for all his excellence,
He could not make resistance nor defense,
With all the power that on him did attend,
Against conspired murder, nor prevent
The treason wrought to bring him to his end,
Which his Queen Clytemnestra did invent
And purposely devise. But he that knows
All things on earth, his judgment often shows
On such as take delight in murdering
Of men, which God does utterly forbid,
And specially the murdering of a king.
Which is so foul and horrible a deed,
That all the pain that Exion fe^les in hell,
With other foul infernal spirits that dwell
With Beelzebub, are not sufficient
To take revenge, nor punish such ^one
As has a heart so mischieuously bent,
For that excedeth in comparison
All other kinds of treason whatsoere,
And no man can uprightly with it bear.
But God will them assuredly confound,
And bring unto an end unfortunate;
For they are worse then Cerberns the hound,
Who though that he of malice does us hate,
He barks before he bites; but such as lie
In wait to kill a man, will suddenly
Assail and set on him ere he is aware.
But blood so shead undoubtedly does cry
To God for just revenge on those that are
The actors, and will fall assuredly
On them, which though sometimes he does prolong,
Yet he is just, and punishes all wrong
Done unto every man, but specially
To mighty Kings; as this Agamemnon,
In his time was of such authority,
That comparable to him there was none
In all the Grecian camp, but fate so wrought,
That when unto his house he came, and thought
To live in peace, he should there end his life
By unexpected murder, which was done
By policy and mischief of his wife:
For that when to the shore he came, as soon
As ever foot upon the land he set,
In seemly wise Clytemnestra with him met.
Who outwardly with countenance bening,
And friendly show did welcome him, with much
Great courtesy and honor, whom the King
In loving wise embrast, and thought no such
False treason had unto him then been meant,
And straight with her unto his Palace went.
Where she no whit respecting faithful vow,
Nor promise made in wedlock, set aside
All duty and respect she ought to show
Unto the king, and shamelesly untied
The knot of love, and proved so unkind,
That she did set her heart and all her mind
Upon a knight that in her favor stood,
Whose name Egistus was, though truth to tell,
He neither came of noble birth nor blood,
Nor yet in arms nor knighthood did excel:
But cause he did his business well by night,
She took in him such pleasure and delight,
That he her love from all men else had wone,
Which moved her her husbands blood to shed,
And for because she could not he alone,
She made him her copartner in her bed:
And by him at the last a Daughter had
Called Exion, and promise to him made,
Upon the pain of loosing of her head,
That should be her Lord and King, when as
Her husband King Agamemnon was dead.
The which accordingly to bring to pass,
Agamemnon next night by him was slain,
Whereof the Queen exceeding glad and feign,
No longer time delayed, but presently
Did marry with Egistus, and did bring
His purpose so to pass by treachery,
That he was of Messena crowned King:
And gave him thereof full possession,
And thereby disinherited her Son.
And lust with her abounded in such wise,
That reason bore no sway within her mind,
(For they are always deadly enemies)
And wrong and falsehood now more favor find,
Then equity, true dealing, righteousness,
Honor, estate, desert, or worthiness.
For by her beastly foul adultery,
(A sin which never reigns in man alone)
She practiced with false conspiracy,
To murder her dear Lord, and wrong her Son:
And thereby heapt one sin upon another,
Which down to hell with her did sink together.
And to her did erelasting woe procure,
Which she full well deserved for her pain.
Who can himself here in this life assure,
When Kings in traitorous wise are falsely slain*
To make and stir up alteration
In kingdoms great, by wrong succession.
Which they that are the authors may pretend,
To do with color of some equity:
But God the Judge of Judges in the end,
Will right all false intrusions speedily,
On those that seek by force and violence,
To wrong such as nere did to them offense.
For though thereby she thought her self secure,
As having all the Country at command,
And dreamt long in that happy state to endure;
Yet she cold not the punishment withstand
Which God for her prepared, for when it was known,
That she her self s'vnnaturall had shown
Unto her Lord and King Agamemnon,
As so to murder him, and afterward
So falsely disinherited her Son,
And had him from his lawful right debard:
Her Son that was of young and tender age,
( Horestus called) to shun his mothers rage,
Was secretly convaid and sent away
Out of the Land by King Taltabius,
Into the Isle of Creet^e, where he did stay
And nourisht was by King Idumeus,
And Carkasis his Queen, whose only heir
A daughter was, of beauty passing fair,
( Climenea called) and by them used as well
As their own child, where he continued
Till he waxt great, and did in arms excel,
And with him thence a puissant army led:
To conquer his inheritance by might,
Which false Egistus held without all right
And equity from him. But for a while
I Will let him stay where he was nourished
In tender years, for I must change my style,
And tell you somewhat of king Diomed:
Who for his part likewise great woe endured,
The which to him was enviously procured,
And falsely brought to pass by Oetes train,
Which he for him and many others more
Prepared had, of malice and disdain,
Which he unto the Grecian Princes bore:
To take revenge on them for murdering
Pallamides, the which to pass to bring,
(Though It were untrue) yet he and Naulus both
Persuaded otherwise, would't not believe,
But in their minds conceived so much wrath
And hatred against the Greeks, that to bereave
Them of their lives was all their care and thought:
Thus against the said king Diomed they wrought.
Within the great and spacious Grecian land,
There was a mighty kingdom long and large,
Which toward the Eastern parts thereof did stand,
Composed of Calido^ie and Arge,
Both joined in one, abounding in great store
Of wealth, whereof he that the scepter bore
And raignd therein, Polentus had to name,
To whom his wife a son and daughter bare,
The son Assandrus called was; whose fame
Both far and near was spread for knighthood rare.
His daughter fair the name of Egra bore.
Who cause he had two children and no more,
He did upon his death bed so provide,
That when he should depart the, world,
All strife) they two his kingdom should divide to cease
Between them, and together live in peace.
Whose daughter afterward he being dead,
Was married unto king Diomed.
(Who while he did at Troy in siege remain,
Loved Cressida that Calchas daughter was,
And for her sake endured much grief and pain.
But I will let his love to her orepasse,
As nothing to the matter pertinent)
Who not long after they were married, went
Unto the siege of Troy, accompanied
With Assandrus her brother, who together
Upon the seas out of the way were led,
And driven too and fro with stormy weather:
And clean contrary wind they had, which bore
Them forcibly upon Boetia shore.
Whereas they did (as glad a while to stay
And rest themselves) take land and there remain,
Till Thelaphus the King thereof heard say
That they were there, and thereat much disdaind,
Because that they to land thereon would venture,
Before that he did give them leave to enter.
Though they (as he supposed) did not pretend
To do him wrong thereby while they did stay,
Nor yet by any way or means to offend
His subjects, but for all they took did pay:
But Thelaphus well armed with many a knight,
Went down unto the shore with them to fight.
And with exceeding fury on them set,
Where Assandrus so bravely did assail
His enemies, that those that with him met,
Could not against his valor great prevail:
So that by knightly force the field he wan
Upon his foes, and killed many a man
That him withstood, which when the King espied,
And saw how he so bravely played his part,
Disdaining sore thereat (to daunt his pride)
With all his force he stroke him with a dart,
So far into the breast that he fell dead
Upon the ground: the which when Diomed
Perceived, to revenge him like a knight
Of valor great, that time such slaughter made
Upon his foes, that by his puissant might,
He made them run out of the field as glad
To save their lives: which done, he began to make
Great sorrow for his loving brothers sake.
And studying what were best for him to do;
At last his corpse from savage beasts to save,
Before that he one foot from thence did go,
He put the same into a Princely grave,
And buried it with many weeping eyes,
Upon Boctia shore in Paynim wise.
But Oetes to his sister wrote and said,
That he was slain by craft of Diomede,
Who to that end in wayt for him had laid
A band of men, that he once being dead,
The kingdom wholly might without all strife,
Descend by right to him and to his wife.
And that he would possession thereof take,
As Soon as he again returned home.
And further said, that he would her forsake,
And that with him there did a Lady come,
Whom he did love and meant to make his wife.
And by that means did set such mortal strife
Between them, (as he in like sort had done
Not long before, and in the self same kind,
Twixt Clytemnestra and Agamemnon,)
That he possessed her sad and heavy mind
With such conceit of treason: that much grieved
To hear thereof, she verily belieu'd
All to be true that unto her was told.
So that with heart to wrath and fury bent,
And face that looked deadly, wan, and cold,
She did for her dear brothers death lament:
Whom she did with so great affection love,
That from revenging him (no man could move
Her heart that was as hard as any stone)
Upon her husband Diomede. For when
The tedious weary siege of Troy was done,
And he returned home to her again,
She did him on the shore by force withstand,
And beat him back not suffering him to land.
But banished him presently from thence,
And would not once with him be reconciled:
Who seeing that he could not make defense
Against her power, to see himself exiled
So wrongfully, much grieved at the heart,
Clean comfortless he did from thence depart.
And went unto Salerne land, whereas
A puissant King called Tentar then did reign,
That Brother unto Thelamon Ajax was,
Who at the siege of Troy was falsely slain:
But Diomede clean destitute of aid,
Unhappy man not long time therein stayed;
For when King T^^^^r knew that he was there,
Suspecting him for death of The^^mon,
He did pursue him, so that wheresoere
He staid, he saw that succor there was none
For him to have: so that upon a night,
In secret wise he took himself to flight,
And left Salerne land, in hope to find
More comfort and relief in other place,
To ease and to redress his troubled mind,
If fortune would vouchsafe him so much grace:
Mean time with heavy heart and thought confused,
Like one forsaken wholly, and refused
Of every man, he wandered to and fro
From place to place, and could no rest procure
Unto himself, not knowing where to go,
And all that while great mis'rie did endure.
Till at the last Aeneas that still staid
In Troy, the scattred Troyans there to aid,
Which after the destruction there were left,
And every day and hour were in doubt
To be destroyed, and of their lives bereft,
By enemies that dwelt there round about:
And had no man to govern them, nor stand
In their defense, or that would take in hand
To be their guide against their enemies.
Till that Aeneas t'aid them in their need,
Unto them gave his counsel and advise,
To send a messenger for Diomed,
(Of whom he did the fortune understand,
To be expulst and banished from his land,)
To pray him to come unto them with speed,
With all the force and power he could make,
To save and to defend them in their need,
From those that them oppressed, and t'vndertake
To be the guide of them, that ready were
To be destroyed for want of government.
Which Diomed did grant unto, and came
In have to Troy, and thither with him brought
A gallant troop of men, and with the same
Relieved them, and bravely for them fought:
With whom upon the way Aeneas met,
And to the town with honor great him fet.
And entertaining him as his degree
Requird, a banquet for him did prepare,
Of every thing that might desired be,
Where each of them to the other did declare
The miseries and troubles first and last,
By sea and land which they had overpast,
Which no man can by any means eschew.
But as dame Fortune for him has decreed,
He must take that she sends him as his dew.
But now unto the matter to proceed,
The Troyans that were almost driven out
Of Troy, by those that dwelt there round about,
That daily did invade and spoil their land,
By Diomed relieved were, and set
At liberty again, who did withstand
Their foes so puissantly, that he did get
The victory of them four times at least,
And them so sore pursued and oppressed,
That finally they took and slew them all.
And such as were found traitors, and had done
That mischief which upon them then did fall,
Condemned were and hanged every one,
Whereby no man durst do them any wrong:
And by that means king Diomed waxt strong,
And did in time by his protection,
And government which he did take in hand,
As being Lord and Ruler of the town,
So valiantly their enemies withstand:
And such a sway there for a time did bear,
That of him all the Country stood in fear.
And by that means in fine it so fell out,
His fame did spread abroad both far and large,
And his great valor was so blown about,
That it was known in Calidon and Arge:
Which when the Queen his wife did understand,
She feared he would invade her in her land,
And it by force at last from her would take.
And to her self much mused how Diomed,
Such succor and such grace had found, to make
Himself so great, that he so far should spread
His fame: for which, as politic and wise
She did forecast, and with her self devise,
By counsel of her Lords in general,
To reconcile her self, and to that end
(Determining him home again to call)
A messenger with speed to him did send,
And to him by her letters signified,
That whereas she had wrongtully denied
Him entrance into his Land, when he
Returned from the siege of Troy, she said,
That she with all her whole Nobility,
Submissiuely for pardon craved, and praid
Him to come home again into his land.
Which news when he from her did understand,
Remitting all offenses whatsoere
Unto him done, he was content to do
As she desired, and with her fault to bear,
(As being more of mercy moved thereto
Then justice, which does wrongs with force requite,)
And as he was a wise and courteous knight.
When he did by her letters understand
Her meaning and intent, he thought it best
To stint all strife, and therefore out of hand
Did willingly grant unto their request,
And speedily returned home agene,
And reconcild was unto his Queen,
And for his part all wrongs forgotten were,
And pardoned to his Nobility,
And after that he lived long time there
In high estate and great felicity,
And with his Queen a happy life did lead.
But cause no more of him I further read,
I will leave off to speak of him as now.
And unto Duke Aeneas turn my style,
And of him briefly tell unto you how,
When he in Troy remained had a while
To aid them with Diomed, and spent
Some time therein, with many men he went
Aboard his Trojan ships well furnished
Of all things that for him were necessary,
And hoysing sails put unto sea with speed,
And prosperous wind, till it began to varry:
And made the seas to storm, and waves to rise,
And mount aloft almost unto the skies.
And having many dangers ouerpast,
And sailed many miles along the coast,
He did ariue at Carthage at the last,
When he his wife by Fortune strange had lost.
But to declare all that to him befell,
And severally unto you here to tell:
How that Queen Dido loved him, and gave
Him treasure, gold, and costly jewels store,
With all things else that he desired to have,
And how for all the love she to him bore,
He showed himself to her so much unkind*
(That as you shall at large in Virgill find,)
He secretly from her did steal away,
And got into his ships ere she it knew,
By night, when she in bed fast sleeping lay,
(For which in desperate wise her self she slew.)
And sailed into Italy, whereas
He did through many hard adventures pas
And diverse battles fought, and at the last
Did conquer it; and therein reigned King
With all his long and tedious travails past,)
It needles were for me since every thing
Declared is by Virgill long before
I wrote this Book* which of him speaks no more
But shows how Horestus to requight
His Fathers death on them that had him killed,
Did find the means as equity and right
Requires, that blood by murder falsely spild,
Should by the King of kings most just decree,
Without all doubt at last revenged be.
For blood by murder shead or violence,
Does never cease for vengance loud to call,
On him that has committed such offense,
Which on him at the last will surely fall
And give him that reward he has deserud,
(For none can escape the doom that is reserved
For murders) by God that sits on hie,
And does behold down from his heavenly throne
All actions good or bad with equal eye.
Who though a while he lets them alone,
And makes a show to winck at faults forepast,
When he sees cause hele punish them at last,
At such time as they little think thereon,
The which he does full often for our good,
As for the murder of Agamemnon,
He made one that was next to him of blood,
( Horestus his own Son) his substitute,
His judgment in that case to execute.
And unto him procured means and might,
By aid of friends to bring the same to pas,
Who when he had been made and dubbed knight,
By Idumeus King of Creet, when as
He had attaind to twenty four years old,
And was of body strong and courage bold:
And therewithal both wise and provident,
And calling unto mind the injury
He had sustaind, was resolutely bent
(If Fortune unto him did not deny
Her aid,) to prove if that he could obtain
His kingdom and his heritance again.
The which by force Egistus from him held,
And wrongfully possessed by false pretense
Of wedlock, and thereby had him compeld
For safeguard of his life to fly from thence,
For which he did protest while he had breath
To be revengd, and also for the death
And murder foul of King Agamemnon
His father, on all those that had conspird
And traitrously procurd it to be don,
And to that end most earnestly desird
Idumeus King of Creet to stand his friend,
Some aid and some relief to him to lend.
To help him to assail his enemy,
By whom he did such injury sustain,
Which his request the King would not deny,
But willing his just quarrel to maintain,
Ordained that a thousand Knights should go
With him to fight against his cruel foe.
Egistus that by force and violence
So long time unto him had done such wrong,
Which done, Herestus by his diligence
In little time did make himself so strong,
That he another thousand knights did win
To go with him, and therewith did begin
With all his power to march, and in the way
As he along did through the country pas,
The first place where he did incampe and stay
To victual and to rest his army, was
Within a town ( Troyesa called,) where he
Was welcomed with great solemnity,
By Forence King thereof, who hated sore
Egistus for his barbrous cruelty,
In murdering King Agamemnon, but more
Because of great deceit and treachery
He had unto him done, when as the king
That loud him well, him so much honoring
Unto him gave his daughter young of age
To be his wife, but he respecting not
The Kings good will, nor breach of marriage
When he had her virginity once got,
Cared not for her, but quickly changd his mind,
And showed himself unto her so unkind,
That he without a cause her clean forsook,
And against the laws of equity and right
Committed foul adultery, and took
Clytemnestra to his wife, when he by night
With her consent had slain Agamemnon,
And of Methena Crown bereft her Son,
And for that hateful false conspiracle,
By her and him so mischieuously wrought,
Committing murder and adultery:
King Forence that by all occasions sought
To be revenged on him for the ^ame,
As Soon as Prince Horestus to him came,
He did not only offer him some aid,
To help him in his need against his foe:
But in most friendly wise unto him said,
That he himself would also with him go,
And with four hundred Knights well furnished,
Unto Methena land accompanied
Him all the way, but ere they entered
Into the same, Horestus first did go
Into the Temple, where he offered
A sacrifice unto the Gods, to know
How he should speed, and also to implore
Their aid therein: and when he kneeld before
The Altar, he by Oracle was told
And bidden that without compassion
Shown to his mother Clytemnestra, he should
Revenge the death of King Agamemnon
His father, upon her that was the cause
That he was slain against all humane laws:
And that he should no mercy to her show.
But to fulfill the Gods degree and hest,
He willed was her body all to hew
In pieces small, which done, he should not rest
Till he had slain Egistus in likewise,
For just reward of their great cruelties.
Enioyning him not to be negligent
In any wise, but carefully to effect
And execute the Gods commandment,
On pain (if that he did the same reject,)
Of that which might unto himself ensue,
Which Oracle which as Horestes knew.
He entered straight into his native soil,
Where when he came, all that did him withstand,
He did in hostile wise destroy and spoil,
And being in the midst of the land,
Laid siege unto Methena town, whereas
False Clytemnestra the Queen at that time was.
But ere Horestus fully thither came
To plant the fiege, Egistus in great post
The day before was gone out of the same,
Intending to prepare a mighty host
To set upon Horestus, and constrain
Him to break up his siege, but all in vain.
For while Horestus still before it lay,
He ceased not his spies abroad to send,
To see and to enquire every day
Which way he went, and what he did intend
Or meant to do, and purposely did set,
Some bands of Knights his passages to let.
Appointing others speedily to ride,
And follow him about in every place,
Commanding them t'assaile him on each side,
And ever more to keep him still in chase:
While he the town so hotly did assail,
That it could not against his force prevail.
So that at last he took it by assault,
And entering thereinto at evening late,
He found the Queen Clemnestra in a vaut,
Whom (when he had set watch at every gate)
He caused to be bound in chains, and laid
Therein again, where till next day she staid,
While traitrous King Egistus have did make,
Withal the power of men that he could get,
T'invade with speed and unawares to take
Horestus, and him of his purpose let:
And him thereby an overthrow to give,
And by that means Methena to relieve.
But all that he could do did naught avail,
For unawares Horestus with him met,
And with such mighty force did him assail,
That in short space he did the victory get.
And having slain and put his men to flight,
Himself was taken, and to his great despite,
In prison cast, with hands and feet fast bound.
Which done, Horestus caused every one
Wichin the town that were consenting found
Unto the death of King Agamemnon,
As also those that arms against him bare
To be committed prisoners, and did spare
None whatsoere he was, but all received
Due punishment for their reward, and were
Condemnd to die, and of their lives bereaud,
Next day when as the Son shined bright and clreare.
And first Clemnestra principal and head
Of all the rest, in mighty fear and dread
Was fore Horestus brought, who presently
Severely drew his sword, and therewithal
(When as he had condemned her to die,)
Did hew and cut her into pieces small:
And caused her in that sort to be borne
Out of the town, to be deuourd and torn
By Beasts and Birds, and have no burial,
And by that means gave her a just reward:
Which done, he did for false Egistus call,
Who when he had likewise his sentence hard,
(Which was that he stark naked drawn should be
Along the town, and hanged upon a tree,
And not to be cut down but there to rot.)
To execution went, and so you see
What guerdon by Gods judgment murder got,
And they are so repaid that traitors be.
And then the rest that with them did consent
To kill the King and to rebel, were sent
Out of the town, and hanged on gibbets hie,
That all men might example by them take.
And so Horestus with severitie
Revenged was for Agamemnons sake
On them that him so traitrously had slain,
And got his lost inheritance again.
But when he had thus finished and don
That which the Gods commanded had, and taken
Revenge for death of King Agamemnon,
So traitrously by Queen Clytemnestra slain.
King Menalus ariuing with his fleet
Of ships (that with him came from Troy) in Creet.
(And with him brought Queen Helena the fair,
That had been cause of all the Trojan war:
The people did in mighty flocks repair
To see and to behold her beauty rare,
For which so many Princes great were slain,
But things once done, cannot b'vndon again.)
Who hearing of his brothers death, and that
In traitrous wise he had been murdered
By Clemnestra his wife, was grieud thereat:
But yet with partiality much led,
Considering on the fact as it behou'd
Him to have done, he was in heart ^ore moved
Against Horestus that so merciles,
With rigor great and extreme cruelty
Had slain his mother, like one pitiles,
And clean bereft of all civility;
For which he swore and vou'd if he did live,
He would him of his regal Crown deprive.
Affirming for his cruelty so great
By law of God that he unworthily
Upon his Fathers Royal throne did sit,
And therefore straight again to ship did hie:
And leaving Creet, to Athens sailed so fast,
That he ariud in Nestors land at last.
And therein was receaud and welcomed
As his estate requird, but he possessed
With fury great, and by much choler led,
Would not content himself, nor be at rest
Till he had told to Nestor why he came,
And of him asked his counsel in the same.
Desiring him that he a means would be
By counsel, and by power if that he might,
To put Horestus from his dignity
And Regal throne, (which though it were his right)
He said, that he had lost the same because
He had his mother slain against natures laws.
And thereupon to Athens both they went,
And did require the Princes of the land,
To meet together there in Parliament,
Where Menalus gave them to understand
What Horestus to Clytemnestra had don,
And craved all their judgments thereupon,
Who being there himself, and hearing what
King Menalus had said, and did es^ie
His meaning and intent was flatly that
He would have him deprived. Did reply
With courage bold, and said, he had don naught
But that which all the Gods decreed and thought
Convenient to be done, and then did show
How he commanded was by them to go
Into Messena land, and there to hew
His mother all in pieces, and to do
The same without all ruth or compassion,
Because she had killed King Agamemnon;
And that the murder chiefly had been wrought
By her alone against all humane laws,
And therefore all the Princes there besought
With equity to think upon the cause,
And not with any malice nor in rage,
To seek to take from him his heritage,
He being Son to King Agamemnon,
And true and lawful heir thereto by right,
Though Clytemnestra sought his destruction,
And disposed him thereof hy might.
Which having said Duke Nestor hastily
Stood on his feet, and for him did reply,
And said, that he would for Horestus sake,
That had don naught but that which should be don
And lawful was, his quarrel undertake
Against all those that held opinion
Contrary thereunto, but none replied
To him again, for every man espied
That Horestus had reason so to do;
And therefore all agreed and gave consent
To Crown him King, and did proceed thereto:
Which don, they did dissolve their Parliament,
And so Horestus by his subjects true,
Was crowned King again with honor due
To his estate, and after that was made
Good friends with old King Menalus again,
Whereof King Idi^^us being glad,
That friendship long between them to maintain,
By mediation twixt them brought to pas,
That Hermion that Helens daughters was
By Menalus, was married unto
King Horestus, and by that alliance,
So made and surely knit between them two,
They ceased all their strife and variance,
And afterward did live and reign in peace,
And more and m^re in honors did increase.
Mean time Egistus daughter Exion
Whom he on Queen Clytemnestra had begot,
Did fall into such desperation,
That she all worldly pleasures clean forgot,
And did endure so great extremity,
That she did hang her self upon a tree.
But here I must digress and turn my style
From Horestus to King Ulisses, and
Of his most strange adventures speak a while,
Which endurd both on the sea and land.
Who when he did to Greece again repair,
A while he found the weather clear and fair,
And then again when as the skies did frown,
And did begin to thunder and to rain,
He was upon the seas cast up and down,
And had no more ships with him then but twain,
The which like merchant ships were furnished,
That he might sail the safelier without dread.
Yet nerethelesse for all his policy,
The wind so much contrary against him was,
That he was forced by extremity
To fall upon the shore and land, whereas
King Thelamon (that was so falsely slain
By night within his bed,) some time did reign.
Where he no sooner got unto the land,
But he was taken and into Prison throne,
And bound with Iron chains both foot and hand,
Because he murdered King Thelamon,
(As they suspicion had) but he del^so
With them, that at the last they let him go,
But yet with loss of all that ere he had
Within his ships, and after that again
He put to sea, and was exceeding glad
To have escaped so, but all in vain:
For Fortune so contrary to him was,
That as he on the seas along did pas,
Unhappily he fell into the hand
Of Naulus, who watch long his coast had laid
To spoil the Greeks, that thereon chanst to land,
And by him there against his will was staid,
And into cruel prison cast again,*
Because he did suspect that he had slain
Pallamindes his Son: but being bold
Of spirit, and of wit and wisdom great,
So smothly for himself his tale he told,
That he again at liberty was set:
And out of Naulus danger safely got,
But by what me anes the story tells not.
And having well escaped from the same,
He travailed in simple poor array
A foot throughout the land, till that he came
To King Idumeus court, and there did stay,
Who seeing him in such a mean estate
And barely clad, did wonder much thereat.
Yet nerethelesse disdaind him not therefore,
But welcomed him with glad and joyful cheer,
And honored him although he came so poor:
And when they two alone together were,
Ulisses his complaint unto him made,
And told him what unto him chanced had.
And in this wise with sad and heavy cheer
Unto him said, my Lord the gentleness
You show to me that thus distessed here
Unto you came, imboldneth me to express
The manner of my fortunes, and to tell
You how and in what sort they on me fell.
First, when I did the Trojan land forsake,
With wind at will which at that time did blow,
And entered ship my course for Greece to take,
I sailed to an Isle I did not know
Called Mirma, which with all things did abound
That are to be desird, wished, or found.
And which for gold or silver may be bought,
Wherein for certain time abode I made,
And all the while I stayed, wanted naught
That needful was for man, and with me had
The treasure which I won in Troy, and men
Good store to serve my turn withal, and when
I did perceive that Isle to be so sound
And wholesome air, I purposely did stay
Therein, and all that while no creature ^ound
That once molested me. Till on a day
When we did find the weather fair and still,
And wind to blow according to our will*
We went abord, and straight did put to seas,
And in a little space made so good way,
That we arrived at Clanstafages,
Where with our ships we for a while did stay,
And had the wind and weather clear and fair,
But who may put his trust in wind or air?
For in good hope to have a pleasant sky,
And room at will as I had found before;
And entered ship and fast again did hie
To sea, where when for three days and no more
I ^ayled had with wind still at my back,
At last it turned about and the air waxt black.
And such a hideous tempest did arise
Upon the sea, that I was in despair
To loose my life, it thundered in such wise,
And lightning flasht so fast out of the air:
And in that sort being driven to and fro,
In danger great and knew what to do,
It was our chance at last to spy out land,
Whereto we made and found the same to be
An Island called Cicile, and out of hand
Cast anchor forth with great extreamitie,
And got to shore with labor sore and pain,
Wherein at that same time two kings did reign.
Whereof the one was called Sorigones,
Who unto us proved cruel and unkind.
The other had to name King Coclopes,
Who likewise had a fierce and bloody mind;
Both brethren, and both like, for difference none
Between them was for bad condition.
For both of them at once upon us set,
And cruelly a prey of us did make,
And all the goods out of my ships did fet,
And forcibly the same from me did take,
And left me naught wherewith my self t'relieue.
But that which most of all my mind did grieve,
Was that when they perceiud I had no more
Left in my ships for them, away they went,
And unto us such cruel minds they bore,
That they their Sons two mighty Giants sent
Down to our ships, the one (...),
The other huge and strong Poliphe^^^s.
Who being both of body mighty great,
And therewith all exceeding tall and strong,
In fierce and cruel wise upon us set,
And did assail us so that ere it was long
A hundred of my men they slew, that were
Not able there most cruel blows to bear,
Nor against them long to stand in their defense,
Which don, they took me and King Alphenore,
And in their arms by force and violence,
Despightfully away with them they b^re,
And carried us (that were in mighty fear)
Into a dark and filthy prison, where
Our hands and feet with Iron chains were bound,
And we were fed with bread and water clear,
And had no bed, but bare and naked ground
To lyevpon while we remains there.
This mighty Giant called Poliphemus,
Who as I said had so imprisoned us,
A sister had that passed every one
That lived in her time, for beauty rare,
Who as it seemed had some compassion
Of our distress, (as maidens often are
More kind then men,) and came to visit us
In prison, by which means it fell out thus:
That Alphenore (though captive then he lay)
So much admird her beauty, that he fell
In love with her, and did naught night and day,
But musd thereon, and liked her so well,
That though he did himself in fetters find,
Yet he on her did holy set his mind:
And faster with loves chains had tied his heart,
Then with theyron bands wherein we lay
Six months in great distress, ere we could part
Or get from thence, for so long we did stay
Imprisoned, till that Polliphemus,
At last had some compassion upon us.
And after we had been tormented so,
Did ease us of our great captivity,
And of his grace and favor let us go,
Whereas we would at our own liberty.
But Alphenore still burning hot in love,
Could not the same out of his mind remove,
But daily felt a sore and grievous fit
Thereof within his heart, till at the last
He found the means by policy and wit,
(When he had many storms of love orepast,)
That on a night he did the maid convay
Out of her fathers house, and went away
With her so secretly, that no man knew't,
Till morning early ere that it was day:
Polliphemus did swear that we should rue't,
And following us oretooke in the way,
And such a fierce assault on us did make,
That ^e the maid from Alphenor did take,
And then our men so furiously did slay,
With th'aid of those that him accompanied,
That they compelled were to give him way,
And at the last in extreme fear they fled,
And left me in great danger all alone,
To fight with that most mighty Champion,
And when I saw there was no remedy
To escape from death, I did with courage stout
Defend my self, and smot him suddenly
Upon the face, and thrust his eye clean out,
Which done, I went unto my company,
And with them to our ships in have did fly:
And no man did perceive which way we took,
And finding wind and weather fit to go,
We went aboard and speedily forsook
That country, as best for us so to do,
For there was no abiding then for us.
(Of Poliphemus Ovid writes thus,
That he a huge and mighty Giant was,
Whose face was covered ore with beard and hair,
So thick and so defusedly, that as
Men looked on him, they were in mighty fear,
The rather for that he deformedly
In midst of his forehead had an eye,
And none elsewhere, as men are vsd to have,
Which eye when as Ulisses had smit out,
He did therefore s^extreamely rage and rave,
That he ran blindfold groping round about
Ore hills and dales, and wheresoere he past,
Huge rocks and mighty stones about him cast
In every place, supposing so to be
Revenged on Ulisses for the ^ame,
As you at large in Ovids book may see,
Which he his Metamorphosis does name,)
And having so escaped from his hand,
And safely with our ships got from the land,
We sailed all that day until it was night,
When as it was our chance unhappily
Upon a round and little Isle to light,
Which in the middle of the sea does lie:
( Eludium called) wherein as then did dwell
Dame Circes, who in magic did excel,
And would that which she took in hand perform
So cunningly, that by her Art she could
A man or woman when she list transform
Into what kind of shape so ere she would,
And make them in that sort to live as long
As pleased her, (her potions were so strong.)
And likewise made her self by Art so fair,
That none like unto her was to be found,
For that whosoere did to her Isle repair,
Could not get out of that accursed ground
Without her leave, for by that Sorceres,
My mind was so possessed with carelesnes,
That I had no desire at all to go
From thence, but there with a year did stay,
And truth to tell, I was enchanted so,
That I could not get thence by night nor day,
So pleasant was the life that there I led.
And while that I with her continued,
She did conceive with child by me, and had
A son that Thelagenius had to name,
For which cause much account of me she made,
And loved me more then others for the same:
But yet at last by secret providence,
I in her Art had such experience,
That maugre all enchantments she could use,
I stole away from her; and to conclude,
Though she so many others did abuse
By Art, I did her divelish Art delude:
And by that means escaped from her hand,
And with my men got free out of her land.
But nerethelesse it did me naught avail,
For that when I had been a little while
Upon the seas, and forward thought to sail,
A wind contrary blew me to an Isle,
That far remote within the sea did stand,
And was exceeding rich, and fertile land.
Wherein Calipha, Circes sister raignd,
Whose Art and foul enchantments were so strong,
That she again my liberty restraind,
And spite my heart there also held me long:
But (truth to say) she did so much abound
In courtesy, the which in her I found,
And was a Lady of such excellence,
For rareness of her qualities and wit,
That tarrying there to me was no offense:
But though that I well pleased were with it,
Yet loath to stay, I did her Art prevent,
And secretly escapt from her, and went
Directly to an Isle wherein did stand
A Temple, where there was an Oracle,
And whosoere therein did chance to land,
Might answer have (as't were by miracle)
Of any thing whereof he would enquire.
Whereas I did most earnestly desire
To know what fortune should unto me fall,
And also how I might prevent the same,
Where I was told my future fortunes all,
What soere I ask^, save only what became
Of souls of mortal men when they are dead,
For nothing thereunto it answered.
As being that which is not in the might
Nor power of any creature to tell,
For that belongs wholly and of right
To God that does in highest heavens dwell,
For it is clean beyong the reach of man.
And from that Isle I once again began
To hoyse up sails in surging seas, and scourd
The same, but with contrary
In Caribdis, where Mermaids use to lie,
That from the middle down-wards fishes are,
And from the middle upwards, women are.
Whose custom is upon the seas to ^leet,
And sing with such a pleasing harmony,
Their sugared Sirens songs with voices sweet,
That they are able with their melody,
To ravish any mortal man alive,
And for a time his spirits all deprive,
And bring him therewithal in a such a trance,
That for a while he thinks upon naught,
But is bereaved of his remembrance,
Till unawares he is in danger brought,
And with their pleasing songs cast in a sleep,
Till he is by them drawn vnderwater deep.
And so both men and ships often drowned are,
And by inticements of their lives bereaud,
If sailing by they have of them no care.
But at that time they were by me de^eaud,
For both mine cares with wax fast stopped were,
Which made me that I cold by no means hear
The sweetness of their warbling notes, whereby
(Man's reason blinded is, and senses lost)
And so escaped by my policy
With all my men, and in the seas sore tossed:
Did sail so long till toyld with weariness,
It was our chance t'arriue in great distress
Before Phenician haven, where we cast
Our Anckors out, and straight on land we went*
But when we thought we had all danger past,
The people with great malice against us bent,
In fierce and cruel wise my men assaild,
And in short space against them so prevaild,
That most of them were slain, and I be^^^t
Of that small store of treasure which I had
Within my ships, and naught for me was left:
And all my men that were not slain they made
To go with them, and there in prison cast,
I left them. And thus in great care I past
A world of woes, as Fortune has me led
A dance, with little joy and store of pain,
Whereby unto my cost experienced,
In her unconstant courses that are vain
I fallen am, in need and poverty,
And having with most great extremity
By sea and land, through many dangers past,
With heart possessed with sorrow, woe, and grief,
I am unto your presence come at last,
In hope to find some succor and riliefe
At your hands, to whom with grief and care,
I am thus bold my Fortunes to declare.
Presuming with my self as you are wise,
That you will take my coming in good part,
And therefore at this time let this suffice
That I have said. And so with heavy heart
And woeful cheer, when he had sighed sore,
He held his peace a while, and spoke no more.
Which long discourse Idumeus having hard
Ulisses tell, he did all that he might
With words to comfort him; and nothing spard
That might in any wise breed his delight;
Thereby to put all grief out of his mind:
And was to him so loving and so kind,
That willing him his heavines to leave,
Assured him as long as he remaind
With him in Creet, he would unto him give
Whatsoever he did want, and entertaind
Him in such wise, that in short space he was
Well eased of his sorrow. And when as
He had a while reposd himself and staid
In Creet, and that his griefs ore passed were;
He took his leave and to Idumeus said
He would go home: which when the king did hear,
He gave him clothes as his estate requird,
And all things else whatsoever he desird,
And needful was to serve his turn, and when
He should depart and ships prepared were
In readiness for him, he gave him men
And victuals store to serve him, and to bear
His charge till he got home. And so he went
To sea again with speed, and homeward bent
His course, and as he sayld along the way
He ankored with his ships and went on shore
To see King Alphenon, whose country lay
Not far from his, (who likewise longed sore
To see him and to hear his Eloquence,
The which in him did flow by influence
Of nature, and did pleasure therein take.)
By whom he was received and welcomed
Most heartily, and of him then did make,
So much that with great honor he was led
Unto his Royal Palace, where as he
T'encrease his joy heard of Penelope
His true and loving wife, whose constancy
Was such that while she lived on earth, the same
Was much extold, and shall continually
Be spread throughout the world by flying Fame:
As she whom no temptation ere could move;
In thought or deed to be untrue in love
Unto her Lord, while he was in the war*
So that through all the Grecian land she was
The Myrrour, and the commendation bare,
To be the only woman that did pas
All others for her modesty. Yet she
Was known and held most beautiful to be,
And therewithal of noble house and blood,
And yet nere any more temptations had
To try her, which she constantly withstood,
And against them all so great resistance made:
That never any breach of love was found
In her, that could to her dishonor sound.
For when her Lord from her was gone so far,
She never left to mourn for still his sake,
When as she thought upon the deadly war
Wherein he was, and fearfully would shake
For th'absence of her Lord, both eve and morrow,
Was unto her continual grief and sorrow.
And ever when she heard of Hectors name,
She presently in floods of salt tears drowned
Her comely face, and cheeks, and with the same
Often fainted, and did fall into a swound:
With mighty fear which in her heart she had
To think upon his strong and trenchant blade
Wherewith so great a slaughter he did make,
Among the Greeks continually in fight,
Least that her Lord of pride should undertake
To try his force against that worthy knight,
And loose his life, and many times she past
The weary night with fearful dreams that cast
Her into many doubtful thoughts, and made
Her loath, and shun the company and sight
Of other men, as she that chiefly had,
Her sole and only comfort, and delight
In her dear Lord, and other joy had none
In all the world, but only him alone.
And did for him all others love refuse.
And therefore he that with a peevish mood
In word or deed does offer to abuse,
And speak of women otherwise than good:
I wish him to remember and to see
The life and praise of Queen Penolope.
Least that for doing so he might be damned,
And therefore to thee Guido I must tell
That thou within thy heart should be ashamed
For writing of them otherwise then well:
For though some women do offend, and be
Unconstant, and unfaithful too, yet she
That lives well and does deserve no blame,
Is not to be reproved for their sins.
And whereas Guido writes, and does name
Some that liud bad, and in his Book begins
To show th'vnconstant life of Cresida,
Th'adultrous marriage of Queen Helena.
And cruel mind of false Medea, who
Her children and her self so fiercely slew,
Let him not speak too partially, but do
As right requires, and give to them their due.
And tell you of Penelope the Queen
That faithful was. And of fair Policene
That lived and di'd a Virgin without spot.
And with them also join Queen Hecuba,
Whose like for virtue while she lived was not
In all the world, and also Cassandra,
That did deserve great praise for steadfastness,
And Panthasilia for her gentleness.
With many more that well might be set down:
And he shall find if hethe truth confess,
The virtuous and such as deserve renown
The greater number be* and the other less
Against whom he does so enviously invay,
And all men that do favor them will say
That he did err in his opinion,
To tax them so without exception.
And while Ulysses staid with Alphenon,
Ere he from thence determind to he gone:
A messenger unto him certified,
That if from home he did long time abide
Without all doubt his Queen Penelope,
By some great Lords whose country bordred
Next unto his, by force should ravished be,
And in despite of all his men be led
Out of his land full sore against her will,
For she to him remained constant still,
Yet nerethelesse they had all flatly sworn,
That if by force she were not rescued,
She should without delay away be borne:
And to that end with her continued,
And would not part from thence but with her staid,
Who in her heart therefore was much dismayed:
But yet so wisely with them dalied,
That they could get no vantage at her hand
But with delays to their demands were fed.
Which heavy news when he did understand,
And knew the truth by letters which she sent
To him, he was in heart so fiercely bent,
That he would stay no longer but begone
In have from thence, and then most humbly praid
His sure and trusty friend King Alphenon,
To bring him home, which he not once denaid:
But with him put to sea when wind was good,
And finding naught that them thereon withstood
They soon ariud within Ulisses land,
And in the night were secretly conuaid,
Unto the place where those that did withstand
And make resistance against his wife, then stay,
Where suddenly before they could awake,
He did them unawares surprise and take.
And without more delay or mercy shown,
As he them found fast sleeping in their beds,
He causd them all in pieces to be hewn,
And on the castle walls did set their heads:
The which before the Cock next day did crow,
Were seen thereon to stand upon a row.
Which done, that night they there continued close,
Till morning that the Lark with pleasant song,
Began to mount aloft when Phoebus rose,
At which time with a mighty force and strong
They entered in the town, and by the Queen
Were welcomed, as she that ^^^g had been
In sorrow great, and had endured such pain
For th'absence of her Lord she loved so well,
That wonder it was she could so long maintain
Her health, but if I should unto you tell,
And orderly set down the pleasures great,
And joy they did conceive when as they met,
And what they to each other friendly said
Wi^^ ^^ry ^^es, and many ^ sweet embrace,
When as they were in bed together laid,
And lovingly beheld each others face:
As also what great joy their subjects made,
When they beheld their sovereign Lord that had
So long been absent from them in the war,
And what rich presents they to him did make,
To show the love which they unto him bare,
And that he did a new alleigeance take
Of them again, and how that every one
Great honor showed unto king Alphenone.
And thank't him for the succor he had lent
Unto their Lord to help him in his need,
And how ere he out of that country went
A marriage was by those two Kings agreed,
Between the daughter of king Alphenon,
(Called Naufica) and young Prince Thelamon
Ulisses Son, whereby an aliance great
Between those Kings perpetually was made.
It would be overlong for me to set
It down to you, and be a means t'orelaid
My Book with that, wherein I would be brief
As Guido is, who touches but the chief
And speciallest matter, and goes on
To show how, when that marriage was agreed
And consumated twixt them. Alphenon
Took shipping and went home again with speed
Into his Land, and left Ulisses still,
In joy with Queen Penelope, until
That fierce and cruel Atropos did bend
Herself against them both, and did bereave
Him of his life, and unto him did send
A sudden death: until which time I Will leave
To speak of them, and for a little while
Change matter, and to Pyrrhus turn my style.
CHAP. II.
Here the Author shows the stock of Pyrrhus by lyneall descent, and tells
how his Grandfathers name was Peleus, and his Grandmother Thetides.

AS Guido does, so must I likewise tell
And show at large what of Achilles Son
Young Pyrrhus did become, and what befell
To him when as the Trojan war was don.
Whose grand-fire as the story tells us,
While he did live, was called King Peleus.
His grandmother named Thetides, whose Son
Achilles was, (that falsely lost his life
Within the town of Troy, when he had won
Great honor at that siege,) that took to wife
Dardanica the fair, (who as I read
Was daughter to a King called Lycomead.)
And on her his Son Pyrrhus did beget,
Whom some men use to call Neptolemus)
Her grand-sire King Atastus was so great
An enemy unto King Peleus,
Achilles, and to Pyrrhus, with the rest
Of that same stock, that he did sore detest
And hate them all, and furiously when as
King Peleus staid in Thessaly alone,
And then without his Son Achilles was,
Who to the mighty siege of Troy was gone:
He entered by force into his land,
And finding none that could him there withstand,
He took the same from him, and made him fly
Into a Cave with Thetides his wife:
And there he was compelled secretly
To hide himself, whereas to save his life,
Long after in great misery he lay,
While cruel King Atastus every day
Sought all the means he could devise or find,
To bring his Nephew Pyrrhus to his end,
And thereupon determind in his mind
In secret wise his knights abroad to send,
To take and to entrap him on the way
As he returned home, and him to stay.
But Pyrrhus out of all the snares escapt,
Which he for him did lay by sea and land,
And at the last as Fortune for him shapt,
(As no man can his Desteny withstand.)
With loss of many men and treasure great,
Before the town of Malasus did get
Unto the shore: where he did understand,
Of Thetides and Peleus bannishment
By violence out of their native land,
And how false King Atastus was so bent
Against him, that he each hour and minit sought
His death, and nere would cease till he had brought
The same to pass. Which when as Pyrrhus knew,
He purposed his malice to prevent
By some sinister means, and to eschew
The fury of Atastus against him bent.
(Who as the story says, had two Sons more,
The One the name of Menalippus bore,
The other of them was Polistenes,
Two Knights of great renown, and valorous,
And one fair daughter named Thetides.)
While his old aged grandsire Peleus
With Thetides his wife lay in a cave,
In great distress their woeful lives to save.
And yet clean out of hope relieud to be,
Or comforted in that extremety,
Unless it were by Pyrrhus means, when he
Returned, for which he praid continually,
And cursed the time of his so long abode.
Which heavy news when Pyrrhus understood
At Malasus, he straight to sea did hie,
With full intent if he did safely get
Unto his native land of Thessalie,
He would false King Atastus purpose let,
And be reuengd on him ere it was long
For all the mischief, cruelty, and wrong,
That he had done unto King Peleus.
But first before that to the Sea he went,
He called to him two knights, one Crilippus,
The other named Adrastus, whom he sent
To Thessalie to hear and understand
Where King Atastus kept within that land,
And what against him he did intend to do.
And that they might the better bring't to pas,
He gave them letters, which he sent unto
One Assandrus a Lord, that sometime was
A counselor unto King Peleus,
And* Chamberlin: and when he had done thus,
He entered ship and would no longer tarry,
But through the seas did scowre and stayed not,
Although the wind and weather were contrary,
And storms arose till at the last he got
To Thessalie, where it was his chance to land
(Hard by the place wherein the cave did stand.
Where Peleus and his wife themselves did hide
Mong bushes, briers, and thorns,) and all alone
Did walk upon the sand without a guide,
And when he had with heavy heart thus gone,
A little while, King Peleus coming out
His Cau^ to take the air, was in a doubt
To loose his life, when as he saw a knight
There all alone, and sore abashed staid
Till he of him had taken better sight,
And when he had beheld him well, dismayed
In mind, he thought that he Achilles saw,
And therewithal did nearer to him draw.
(For he so like unto Achilles was,
For visage shape and personage, that none
Could know the one from the other well,) so as
King Peleus to himself did musethereon:
And straight with tears distilling down his face
He ran his nephew Pyrrhus to embrace,
And being somewhat better comforted,
With joyful heart (though grieud) to him did tell,
How cruelly he had been banished,
And forced in a cave long time to dwell
In misery and woe, and nothing left
To succor him, but all from him bereft,
With crown and Kingdom, by the cruelty
And hatred of Atastus that had don
It causeles unto him, whose tyranny
For want of aid he could by no means shon,
Which Pyrrhus having heard and marking well,
Into so great an agony then fell,
That he stood still and would not speak a word,
And therewith in his heart exceeding wroth
To hear the cause, (so much the same abhord,)
That speechles to his ships from thence he goes,
(And would not make an answer thereunto,
Still studying with himself what he should do.)
Till he was told how that the self same day
Atastus with his Sons was ridden out
Into a wood not far of from that way
To hunt for dear, and that they were in doubt
To be assayld by him, which when he knew
He stayed not, but straight himself withdrew,
And putting of his clothes, apparelled
Himself like one of poor and mean degree,
And girding on his sword without all dread,
Went all alone into the wood to see
What Fortune or advantage he could find
Therein, to ease his sad and troubled mind.
And as he went along from place to place,
Much like a man that seemed to make great moan;
At last it was his chance to hear the chase,
And therewithal he slept aside that none
Of them should see nor find him where he stood:
And when he had a while been in the wood,
It was Prince Menalippus chance to ride
That way with Prince Polistines his brother*
Where Pyrrhus, the^ did stand* whom when they spid,
They staid their horse, and both of them together*
With countna^ce stern before they thence would pas,
Went unto him, and asked him what he was,
And whence he came, and why so poorly clad
He wandered in that manner all alone,
Like one that neither joy nor comfort had?
And he that seemd in heart to sigh and groan,
With heavy cheer, and countenance full sad,
Replied to them again, and answer made,
That he by chance was cast upon that shore
By tempest, and how all his company
Were drowned at sea, and that he and no more
Escapt with life, but yet vnhappelie
Had lost all that he had, and without joy
A Grecian borne that lately came from Troy,
There wandered solitarilie, and praid
Them that they would upon him then bestow
Some money and apparel for to aid
Him in his need, that had been brought so low.
Who pitying his estate, did not denay
To do him good, but bad him there to stay,
That they might see what he could do: and when
They had said so, and turned their heads aside,
Behold a mighty Heart before them ran,
Wherewith Prince Menalippus straight did ride
In have to follow it, with sphere in hand,
And left his brother there who still did stand
By Pyrrhus, talking with him all alone,
And seeming to be weary, lighted there
Off from his horses back, which having done,
He laid him down to rest, and giving ear
Unto the woeful moan that Pyrrhus made,
No fear of any hurt or treason had.
Where suddenly ere he perceived the blow,
He was by Pyrrhus thrust into the heart,
From whence the blood in stream began to flow,
And there he died, while Pyrrhus side-waies start:
And left him lying groueling on the plain,
Till Menalippus came to him again,
Where while with weeping eyes and color wan
To look upon his brothers corpse he stood,
Fierce Pyrrhus in great fury to him ran
And with a mind that thursteth after blood:
Straight with his sword his life from him bereft,
And by his brother dying there him left.
And so they were unfortunately slaiue
By Pyrrhus, who when he had done the same,
Withdrew himself out of that place again,
And as he went he saw a Knight that came
Unto him wards, of whom he did enquire
His name, and what the reason was that there
He road alone so far out of the way,
Who answered his name was Cineras,
Great King Atastus knight, who that same day
Did hunt within the wood, and that he was
Not far from thence, whom Pyrrhus without ^^ord
Repli^d to him again, smot with his sword*
And killed him in that place, and then forsook
The Forest, and directly went his way
Unto his ships (with fierce and furious look)
Where he put of his clothes, and did array
Himself in purple velvet like a king,
And to the Forest back again did fling.
Where suddenly while he walked too and fro,
He met with king Atastus all alone,
Who wondering much to see him clothed so,
Asked what he was, and why there making moan
He wandered so solitarilie?
T'whom Pyrrhus answer made, and for reply
Said full of grief and woe I do confess
My self to be, and therefore wandering
Alone I go to think on the distress
That happened has to Priamus the King,
Whose Son I was, and by the fall of Troy
Bereft of all my honor, wealth, and joy.
I now am made a prisoner against my will
To Pyrrhus, unto whom I promise made
To be his prisoner true, and to fulfill
His hest in every thing, and therefore sad
And heavilie I walk, and so said he,
I have you told how it now stands with me.
Which when he had so said unto the King,
Atastus friendly spoke to him again,
And questioned with him of many a thing,
And among the rest where Pyrrhus did remain
In Thessalie, and what he went about?
And Pyrrhus said, to put you out of doubt,
He does as now continue in a cave
Not far from hence, and there does closely stay
In mighty fear and dread, his life to save,
And pointed to the cave where Peleus lay:
The which he did to make him look about,
While he in furious wise his sword drew out,
Intending there Atastus to have slain,
But as he thought to give the fatal blow
Queen Thetides came running to the plain,
And weeping at his feet her self did throw,
And holding fast his sword, did make him stay
His hand, and thus unto him she did say,
Let it suffice good nephew thou have don,
And from so sore revenge thy self refrain,
(Since against things past remedy there is none,)
Have thou not killed (said she) my brethren twain,
And will thou without mercy take away
My aged fathers life? I pray thee stay
Thy cruel sword, and now no more blood shed,
(Remembering that the blood thou spilst is thine,)
And pity take upon thy kindered,
From whom thou comst by right paternall lin^
For all men cruel Parasites contemn,
And for unnatural murderers* condemn.
The which when Pyrrhus heard like Tiger wroth,
He said, whosoere against the same will stand,
Despite of him whether he be leefe or loath,
He shall be slain at this time by my hand:
For has he not (said he) by force and might
Bereft my grand-sire Peleus of his right.
Whose Queen you are, and he your Lord and king,
Whose part you ought to take, and not to stay
My hand from doing of so just a thing,
And therefore without fail I will him slay:
For naught there is that now his life shall save
Unless my grand-sire Peleus does it crave.
And therewith aged Peleus did begin
To creep out of the cave, and when he saw
What danger King Atastus then was in,
He praid his Nephew Pyrrhus to withdraw
His hand, and not to kill him in that place,
But rather to respect his woeful case.
And think said he upon the extreme smart
Of him, that weeping sore with cruel pain
Before thee stands, with cold and dying heart,
To see his Sons here lie before him slain
By thee, the which (said he) if thou be wise,
I pray thee at this time let it suffice;
And think thy self enough revengd to be
On him, if thou considerest well thereon,
And since he does submit himself to thee,
I pray thee for my sake let him alone
And spare his life, that ready is to die
For grief, which thou shall not to me deny*
The which when Pyrrhus heard he did refr^^n^
From killing him* as P^le^^s ^ade ^^quest,
And when he had put up his sw^^^ ^gain^,
Perceaving that he had done for the have:
While these two aged kings together were,
He made accord between them both, ^^ there
They did agree on either side to make
Division of the land of Thessalie,
And each of them the halse thereof to take,
And of the same to have the sovereignty:
And never more to strive nor to contend
For it again, till they their liue^ should end.
And while they two and Pyrrhus there alone
Within the wood did stand and no man by,
Atastus in this wise to speak begone*
And said, my Lords I can it not deny.
(As both of you, as well as I, do know)
That crooked age has brought me down so low,
That nature in me now begins to dry,
And all my wits and senses so decay,
Whereby I feel such insufficiency
Within my self, that I must truly say,
That I am far unfit to take the pain,
Within the land of Thessalie to reign.
For seeing that both of my sons are dead,
And I am left alone without an heir,
And have no children living to succeed
Me in my throane, I wholly do despair
Of worldly joy and all felicity,
For wavring fortunes mutability*
Has taught me (as I must of force confess)
That no man does in certain state abide,
And that there is no trust nor stablenesse
In worldly joys: and thereforeile provide
While time does serve, that strife there shall be none
For Thassalie, when I am dead and gone.
Forgainst the will of God i will not repine)
And to that end the Scepter of thi^ land,
And regal throane for my part I resign,
And give into my Nephew Pyrrhus hand:
And with that work his faith and troth he g^^e*
That he possession straight thereof should ^^^^*
In presence of his daughter Thetides.
And Pyrrhus that no other likewise meant,
Said, since that is does king Atast^^ please
Here to resign hi^ part, I am concour
To do the like, affirming that long since,
It ever was his purpose and pretense,
And the only worldly joy he had, to leave
His Crown unto his Nephew, whensoere
Death with his dart should him of life bereave,
As lawful heir unto the same: and there
In presence of Atastus, and his wife,
To Pyrrhus said, to end all war and strife
Between us twain, I will likewise resign
My Scepter, Sword, and Crown into thy hand,
As fully and as whole as ere 'twas mine,
And makethee Lord of my part in this land,
Which freely unto thee I now do give,
To be thine own as long as thou shall live.
Which having says and this agreement made
Between the kings, as you have understood,
Atastus knights, who in the mean time had
Dispersed themselves abroad within the wood,
Came thither, and were willed by their Lord,
To swear and vow to hold and keep th'accord
Between them made, whereto they gave consent.
And so together in a company,
Each for his part well pleased and content,
They road unto the town of Thessalie:
Where king Atastus called a Parliament,
And therein by express Commandment,
Caused all his subjects whatsoere they were,
(Especially his whole Nobility)
In open Court to take their oaths, and swear
To yield unto the soveraignety
Of Pyrrhus: and with full and free accord,
T'acknowledge him to be their King and Lord
Of Thessalie, and none but he alone;
At which time Pel^^^ likewise did the same.
Which being thus on either side so done,
By sound of trump the Heralds did proclaim
King Pyrrhus in each street of Thessalie:
And afterward with great solemnity,
They crowned him king of all that land, and made
Such triumph at his Coronation,
And also such a royal banquet had,
That if I should thereof make mention,
It were too much, and I must it forbear,
Because mine Author writes not thereof here.
But briefly tells, that Pyrrhus by his might
Increased much the Land of Thessalie,
And reigned long there with equity and right*
And no more thereof speaks presently,
But unto other matter turns his style,
And shows how king Idumeus di^d the while
In Creet, where he long time had reigned king,
And after him his son Prince Merryone
Succeeded, who untimely death did bring
Unto his end: and children having none,
His brother Prince Leorica obtaind
The Crown of Creet, and therein long time raignd.
And while in Creet this change of Princes fell,
Atastus by consent of Pyrrhus, made
A rich and sumptuous tomb which did excel
For workmanship, wherein (when as he had
According to his mind full finished
All that thereto belonged) he buried
His sons which by king Pyrrhus had been slain
Within the wood. And leaving him does show,
How while that Pyrrhus prosperously did reign
In Thessalie, and did in wealth oreflow:
He was provoked want only to lust,
For that which by Gods law is held unjust,
And fell in love with fair Queen Hermion,
Horestus wife, and had so great desire
To her, that he did wholly think thereon:
Whereby his heart was set on such a fire
Of lust, that he by no means could content
His mind, till he unto Methena went.
And there his purpose brought so well about,
That watching time and opportunity,
When Horestus her husband was gone out,
He ravished her, and after secretly
Took her away and held her as his wife,
And long with her lived an adulterous life.
(For which Horestus hated him so sore
That he sought all the means he could devise
Or find, to be revenged on him therefore,
But held his peace (as being very wise)
And for a little while sustaind that wrong,
As knowing well that Pyrrhus was too strong
For him to deal withal, t'revenge the same
At home within his land. Who also made
Andromecha (Prince Hectors wife, that came
With him from Troy) his Concubine, and had
A child by her, who by his Grandsiers name
Achillides was called, and with the same
She nourished Prince Hectors eldest son
Laomedon,) who Pyrrhus being slain,
And left no child to be his heir, (but one
A bastard borne) his kingdom did obtain:
By gift of young Achillides his brother,
Whom Pyrrhus did beget upon his mother.)
Which women being both of high estate,
And living in great pleasure and delight,
Could not content themselves, but so did hate
Each other, that Queen Hermion in despite
And jealousy, that Pyrrhus loved better
Her Feer then he did her, did send a letter
To Menalus her father, t'whome she wrote,
That notwithstanding her so great degree,
She well perceau'd that Pyrrhus loved her not,
But favored more Andromecha then she:
Desiring him with speed to come to kill
Her and her son, who granted to her will.
And in great have went unto Thessalie,
To be revenged on them that never had
Offended him, but yet his cruelty
Could not so far extend, but he was made
To leave the same, by those that did withstand
Him in the town, and took her out his hand,
And did abhor such inhumanity,
(Especially in him that was a king)
Unto a woman done, which certainly
In my conceit is such a heinous thing:
That it does make me blush for very shame,
That I should be compeld to tell the same.
But you must understand that this was done,
When Pyrrhus was from home and gone away,
For he that time on pilgrimage was gone
To Delos, there to sacrifice and pray
Devoutly for his fathers soul unto
Apollo, and such other things to do,
As he had vowed and promised to fulfill,
For joy of that revenge that had been made
At Troy, on those that did his father kill,
And for that great good fortune that they had,
To triumph ore his Troyan enemy.
Which vantage when Horestus did espy,
Who still laid watch for him both day and night,
He did no time nor no occasion let,
But straight to Delos went with many a knight,
And on him there so furiously did set,
That Pyrrhus was not able to withstand
Horestus, but was slain there by his hand,
And all that were with him in company*
(And so king Pyrrhus died and lost his life,
For just reward of his adultery,
And foul abuse done to Horestus wife.
And let all those that use to do the like
Remember this, and know that God will strike
Them likewise when they little think thereon.)
Whose body was in Delos Temple laid,
Within a costly Marble tomb, which done,
Horestus there no longer time delayed,
But straight when as his enemy was slain,
He went and got his wife by force again
Out of the town of Thessalie, whereas
He found not one that durst against him stand,
Such fear and grief amongst them then there was,
When they of Pyrrhus death did understand:
And that to rule and govern them was none
Then left, but young Achillides his son,
A child as then not fully three months old,
Whose young and tender age was not to take
So great a charge in hand, and yet they would
Not put him from't, but for his fathers sake
They were content that he ore them should reign.
But when he did to lawful years attain,
He did resign his crown and all his right
In Thessalie unto Laomedon,
His brother by the mothers side (a knight
Of worthy Troyan blood, Prince Hectors son,
Begotten on his wife Andromecha)
(Protector while he lived of Phrigia.)
And made him king and Sovereign of that land,
Despite of all that durst the same deny.
Who when he had the Crown and chief command
Of all the puissant Realm of Thessalie:
He let the Troyan captives all go free,
Where as they list at their own liberty,
And no exception made of any one,
But freed them of all ransom whatsoere
They were to pay: and when he had so done,
And set all things in peace and quiet there,
And much encreast the bounds of Thessalie,
He reigned long there in great prosperity.
But of the acts of king Laomedon,
Or of king Pyrrhus and his kindered,
I Will cease to speak as now, because thereon
Mine Author writes no more that I can read:
Who briefly by the way somewhat does show,
(But to what purpose well I do not know)
Of Menons wife (whom fierce Achilles slew,
Because when he Prince Troyelus had killed,
And at his horses tail his body drew,
He valiantly withstood him in the field,
And made him leave his body, and by force
Sore wounded, beat him down off from his horse.)
Whose body was entombed by Priamus
In Troy, within a little Temple, where
It lay close by the Tomb of Troyelus,
And after did stand therein many a year.
Who says, that long time after she was dead,
And in her native Country buried,
Did suddenly at Menons Tomb appear,
(In shape and form like to an Angel bright,
Environed with stars that shone most clear,
And round about the place cast such a light,
That no man could behold her steadfastly,
Her countenance did shine so heavenly.)
Descending from the skies celestial,
In sight of many men, apparelled
Divinely, and in presence of them all,
Did make her husbands tomb be opened:
And out of it did take his bones, and bear
Them (in a chest of gold which she had there
Of purpose brought down with her) clean from thence,
And on a sudden vanished away,
And never was seen there before nor since.
Which did the standers by so much dismay,
That at the sight thereof they were afraid,
And every one his judgment thereof said,
Some thinking't was a Goddess, others, some
Celestial power descended from the sky,
Or else the soul of Menon that did come,
To bear his bones up to the Deity:
But what it was I know not, neither will
Presume to judge of that is past my skill,
As being loath to climb above my reach.
And therefore of the same i will speak no more,
But turn again whereas I made a breach,
When of Ulysses life I spoke before:
And tell you of his hard and fatal end,
When Atropas loath longer time to spend
In spinning of his thread of life, agreed
With Parchas fell her office l'execute,
Who having preordaind the same, with speed
Took out her sheares and it in sunder cut.
Defend thy self therefore Ulisses now,
Without all fear to shun the fatal blow,
Which by thy sons sharp sword thou shall receive.
For I am now prepared, and do intend
To sharp my pen once more (before I leave
My work long since begun) to write thy end:
And with the same my Books full period make,
For that my hand with weariness does shake.
But yet ere that I thereof make an end,
I must of force to make my Book complete,
A little longer time about thee spend,
And of thy fatal fate and death entreat:
Which unto thee did happen by the dart
Of him whom thou did love with all thy heart.
But first I must desire the sleepy God,
(By Poets Morpheus called, who by the might
And power supreme of his enchanting rod,
Does rule men's minds and fancies in the night:
And makes men dream and diverse visions see,
Which many times prognostications be,
And warnings unto men of future good
Or ill, that unto them shall after hap,
The which cannot be any way withstood,
For no man may Gods just decree escape.)
To rule and guide my wit and pen as now,
That I to you Ulisses dream may show.
The which he had not long before he dyed,
Wherewith by signs that true and certain were,
He was forewarnd and fully certified,
His end by unexpected death drew nere:
Who as he in his bed fast sleeping lay,
About the time when Cocks crow fore it is day;
He thought there did before him then appear
A woman of so heavenly feature,
That she did show as she an Angel were,
And not to be an earthly creature:
Who was so fair and beautiful of face,
That she did seem t'jlluminate the place
Wherein she was, and therewithal her eyes
Did shine as clear and bright as any star,
And able were t'intrap, and to surprise
Their hearts that looked upon her near or far:
And no defense against them could be made,
So exquisite a look and face she had.
Whom when Ulisses did perceive, he was
So much amazed to see her, that the more
He looked on her he liked her, so as
He did fast sleeping lie, he sighed fore:
And (as he thought) put forth his hands to take
Her in his arms, but she from him shruncke back:
And still the more his eyes on her he cast,
The farther she from him did seem to fly,
As if she would have shund him, till at last
(When she perceived his importunity)
She spoke to him, and asked him what he would
With her, and why he did her so behold.
In truth (said he) fair Lady I confess,
That I am so much blinded in my sight,
That I cannot perceive nor truly guess
By outward signs, if I should speak aright,
Whether that your shape divine or earthly be,
So excellent it seems unto me.
But this I dare affrme and boldly say,
That at this time my life and death does stand,
And are at your devotion, if I may
Crave so much grace and favor at your hand,
(Presuming not thereon by any right)
To pity me that am your faithful knight,
And so devoted unto you, that sure
If I do not my mind as now fulfill,
And so much favor at your hands procure,
As this night for to grant me your good will
To lie with me, there is no remedy,
But for your sake of force I needs must die.
And thus twixt hope and fear I have you told
My mind, (said he) wherewith she staid awhile,
And did him with a countnance sad behold;
Yet at the last upon him began to smile,
And said, the love which you to me do bear,
Will be both our destructions I do fear,
It is so doubtful and so dangerous,
That without doubt (believe it certamly)
If we together take our pleasure thus,
One or else both of us shall surely die,
For that the end thereof can be no other,
If we as you desire, should lie together.
Which said, Ulisses looking on her still,
And therewithal approaching somewhat near
Unto her, to behold her at his will,
(Who in his mind did show so bright and clear)
He saw that in her hand a spear she held,
Which on it had a flag, whereof the field
Was blew, and in the midst a Crown of gold,
With fishes white environd round about,
Which while he did most earnestly behold,
She did begin to leave him and go out
Whereas she was, but ere she left the place,
She staid a little while, and turned her face
To him, and said, I tell you true and plain,
That after this we never more shall see
One the other, but for parting of us twain,
This greeting said, our last farewell shall be:
And there withal her leave of him she took,
And after that he suddenly awooke.
And did begin t'imagine curiously,
And muse unto himself within his mind,
What that strange dream he had might signify.
But when he could the same by no means find,
(As being that he did not understand)
He sent for all th'Inchanters in the Land,
And such as could the depth and meaning show,
Of dreams that use to happen unto men
When they do sleep, that he of them might know
The exposition of his dream. And when
They understood the same, they did agree
All in one point, and told him plain that he
Should shortly be bereft of life by one
That nearest of his kindred was, and that
To Avoid it way nor means for him was none:
Which when he heard he woondred much thereat,
And did begin to look with visage pale.
But when he saw it could him not prevail,
To grieve, his head was filled with fantasies
And deep conceits, t'imagine and to see
If he could find, or shape a remedy,
By any means to shun that would not be:
But yet for all his policy and wit,
He could not reach unto the depth of it.
For thinking that he would the same prevent,
De did suppose that no man but his son
Was he that should it do, and therefore sent
With all the speed he could for Thelamon,
And cast him into prison, so to shun
That which the Fates decreed should be dun.
Remembering not the spear with steeled head,
Nor yet the flag thereon with azure filled,
With fishes on it which in the seas do feed,
Nor Circes fair who in her hand it held:
(Which signified naught but hostility,)
Nor yet the Crown and regal dignity
Of one that reigned within an Isle, that stands
In midst of the sea, that should be he,
Who against his will should slay him with his hands,
And execute thereby the just decree
Of God, the which Ulisses thought not on;
But only did suspect Prince Thelaemon,
Whom he then held close prisner in a tower.
And to prevent all other means what s'ere,
He never ceast to muse thereon each hour:
And at the last grew thereof in such fear,
That he did cause a Castle to be made,
And built of Marble stone, the which he had
Devised in such sort, that there was none
Like unto it in all the world throughout
For strength, and had no gates in it but one
To enter in the same, and round about,
A ditch most deep and broad on every side,
Did compass it. Wherein he did abide,
And closely kept himself from sight of all
The world, but those which on him did attend,
And ever held a watch upon the wall,
Both day and night most strictly, to the end
That no man should so hardy be to venture,
Without his leave into the same to enter,
Unless it were those that therein did lie.
Now as the story unto us does tell,
Ulisses had a Son begotten by
Queen Circes, who in valor did excel
So much, that he was comp'rable to none
In all that land, whose name was Thelagon.
Borne in an jsle among the furious rage
Of foming seas that compast it about,
Who at that time attained had to the age
Of twenty five years old: who stood in doubt
What man did him beget, or who should be
His father, whom he longed much to see.
And having great desire the same to know,
He fell before his mother on his knee,
And did entreat her earnestly to show
The truth to him, who might his father be,
And what he was, and where he then did dwell:
But she long time by no means would it tell,
But put him off, and fed him with delay,
Till when she saw she could not be at rest
For him, that did torment her every day,
And would not cease till he had his request:
She showed him that Ulysses was his sire,
And where he dwelt, who with most great desire
To see him, took his leave of her with speed,
And told her that he straight from thence would go:
But when the Queen perceau'd, he had decreed
To go to seek Ulysses, and that no
Persuasion in the world could him withhold
From doing it, her heart it waxed cold,
And in her breast she felt exceeding pain.
And when she saw he would by no means stay,
She prayed him to come with speed again
Home unto her. And so the self same day
He put to sea, and saild so long, till he
He arrived where he did desire to be.
And when he was within Achaia land,
He never ceast to ride from place to place,
And rested not till he did understand
Where king Ulysses royal Palace was:
Which when he knew he made no more abode,
But speedily unto the Court he road.
Whereas the king within his Castle stayed,
And early on a Monday morning came
Unto the gate and drawbridge, where he prayed
The Porter, who at that time kept the fame,
To give him leave a word or two to speak
Unto the king, who to him gave a cheake,
And churlishly did thrust him from the gate*
And proudly said he should not enter in,
And with some other speeches told him that
He must be gone: whereat he did begin
To be in such a rage, that there with all
He did upon the Porter fiercely fall,
And furiously did take him by the beard,
And gave him such a blow, that there with all
He fell dead on the bridge, which when they heard
That were within, they issued and did fall
On him, but he so hotely them withstood,
And fought with such a fierce and surious mood,
That many of them clean ore the bridge he cast,
And when as more upon him issued forth,
And on all sides began t'assaile him fast,
He did begin to be exceeding wroth,
And with his sword about him made such way,
That he therewith did fifteen of them slay.
And fought so long that he was out of breath,
And scarce could hold himself upright, so that
Sore wounded he expected naught but death,
Wherewith Ulysses came unto the gate:
And when upon the bridge he did epsy
His men on heaps dead on the same to lie;
Sore moved thereat, he took a dart in hand,
And there with all in furious wise did throw
At Thelagon, who then did leaning stand
Upon his sword, but it did light too low,
And hurt him not at all: but Thelagon
Straight stooped down, and laying hands thereon,
Did throw it at Ulysses in great have,
And there with all did strike him such a blow
Into the breast, that through his ribs it past,
And gave him his deaths wound: but did not know
That't was the king, nor that he so had slain
His father dear, who then could not sustain
Himself upright, but to the ground did slide,
With pale and deadly face, and so he lay
Amongst his men that stood on either side,
And busy were to bear him thence away,
Supposing that he verily was dead:
But suddenly he lifted up his head,
And having still a perfect memory,
He called to mind the vision he did see,
And how that he was told assuredly,
That one of his ner'st kinsmen should be he
That with a dart, of life should him bereave,
And for because ^^ could not well conceive
Who it should be; He bad his men to bring
The young man that before the gate then stood
With speed to him, without once offering
To wrong him for so sheading of their blood.
And when that he was brought into the place
Whereas he lay, he looked him in the face:
And marking well his countenance, began
To ask him for what cause he did come thither,
And what occasion moved him as than
T'assaile his guard, that he and they together
Had fought, and he had slain them so, whereby
Himself sore wounded was, and like to die.
To whom with courage bold he spoke, and said,
The only cause why I came hither was
To see the King, but by the Porter staid,
(Whom I entreated courteously to pas)
And churlishly put back, with words most vile:
I seeing that he did me so revile,
Much grieved that he vsd me in that sort,
Did kill him with a blow on the ear: which when
The guard did see (that watch held in the fort,)
They issued, and together on me ran:
And I compeld to fight (though against my will)
In my defense, fifteen of them did kill.
Whereby I am thus wounded as you see,
And like to loose my life, as well as they
That sought (if that they could) to have killed me.
And this (if these here present truth will say)
The reason was we fought, and they were killed
By me, which when Ulisses heard, he wild
Him to declare where he was borne, and what
His Father was, and where he then did dwell?
Who answered the King, and told him that
He would the truth thereof unto him tell:
And said, he was borne in an Isle that stood
Within the sea, of high and Princely blood,
And that he to his mother had a Queen
Called Circes, who both f^r and n^^^ was known,
And how he had his Father never ^^erio,
But said, that by his mother he was shown
That he was gotten by a king, who as
He did return from Troy did chance to pas
Along that way, and as she told to me
(Said he) his name Ulysses was. Whom I
Did long, and such desire had to see.
That taking ship I set sail presently,
And in short space I came into this land,
Where I was told and given to understand,
That I should find my Father in this place;
But now I see my labor is in vain,
And fear that I shall never see his face:
And therefore since I have taken so much pain,
And cannot unto my desire attain,
I will if that I live return again
Into my native soylo, and seek no more
With danger of my life, for that which I
So long to find: and yet it grieves me fore
To Have taken such pains and cannot satisfy
My mind. This is all that I can you show
(Said he) of that which you desire to know.
Whereby Ulysses (sighing sore when as
He had heard him that answer to him make)
Perceiving he his Son by Circes was,
With grief began to tremble and to quake.
And sheading store of blood out of his wound,
He fainted, and did full into a swound.
And with a countnance heavy, dead, and pale,
Said, now I see my woeful Destiny
Fulfilled is, for by this young man's ^ale,
I know and find there is no remedy
For me, and that the time is now too l^^e
To strine against my hard and cu^s^^ Fa^e.
For now my Son which here by me does stand
Has given me^^y death, and made an end
Of his old Fathers life, and with his hand
Has finishe that, whereto my dream did tend.
Which words pronounst, young Thelagon began
With countnance sad, and face ^oth pale and wan,
To sigh, when as he knew and understood
That against the laws of nature he had flame
His Father, and so fiercely shed his blood,
That him begot, and felt such grievous pain
In heart, that he did presently sincke down,
And fore them all did fall into a swone.
And coming to himself, when he had torn
His clothes, and pulled his hair off from his head:
He said, alas, that ever I was borne,
That by my hands my Father should be dead.
Cursed be my hard and woeful Destiny,
And fortune fell the which I could not fly.
Cursed be the hand that has been so impure,
Whereby this wicked deed by me is don.
Accursed be I of every creature,
Accursed be my constellation.
And cursed be and most unfortunate
The hour wherein my father me begat.
Oh would to God for this unhappy deed
T'excuse his death, I might for my reward
In presence of you all die in his steed,
And wholly of all comfort be debard:
And that men would me utterly forsake.
But when the King such sorrow hard him make,
And knew he was his Son that Circes bore
By him in th'isle Aulides as be found
By many signs which he rehearst before,
He made him to be taken up from the ground
Whereon he lay, and pardned him his death,
Being ready then to yield his vital breath,
And lying in so great extreamitie,
With speed did call for his Son Thelamon.
Who at that time in prison straight did lie;
Who presently when as he heard thereon*
Unto his Father went, and when he saw
That he began unto his end to draw,
And by inquiry knew the truth, and found
That Thelagon who fore him there did stand
Was he that had given him his deadly wound,
With mighty rage he took his sword in hand:
And thought his brother Thelagon to kill,
But ere th^^ he of him could have his will
Ulisses made his men to run and hold
His hand, and then for all the pain he had,
He called his Sons and told them that he would
Have them t'agree, and to be friends* and made
Them gra^^ and promise to be so, which ^on
He did expressly charge Prince Thelamon,
That he without dissimulation
Should love, and in most friendly manner live
(While vital breath did last) with Thelagon
His brother, and to him the half should give
Of all his goods, as heir by true descent
To him, whereto he freely did consent,
And never from his Fathers will did varry.
Which said, his men a Chariot did provide,
And did him to his chiefest City carry,
Where afterward within three days he did.
Whose body was interred by hie Son,
Within a costly Tomb of Marble stone.
And after that they Crowned Thelamon
And made him King with great solemnity,
With whom a whole year after Thelagon
His brother staid, to whom most lovingly,
And kindly, he nere any thing denide.
And when he would n^ (...) there abide,
He dubd him Knight, and after did prepare
A ship, and gold for him, (whereof he had
Great store,) wherewith he did again repair
Home to Aulides Isle, and thereby made
His mother Circes heart exceeding glad,
That had for his long absence been full sad.
For she by Negromancian Art could tell
That he through many dangers great had past,
And escaped them all. And after that, she fell
Into an extreme sickness, and at last
Well stricken in years she died, (as all men must
When as their time is come.) For God most just
Has death ordaind for every living thing.
Who having unto nature paid her debt:
Prince Thelagon her Son was Crowned King
Of Aulides, whereas with honor great
He did his Crown and Kingdom long maintain,
And threescore years full co^pleat there did reign.
While Thelamon lived in Achaia land,
And thereof held the Scepter and the Crown
For seaventy years together in his hand,
Till from his throne death proudly pulled him down
Unto the ground, and with his piercing dart*
In cruel wise did strike him to the heart.
This shall suffiice to let you see and know,
Th'adventures of the Greeks by sea and land
When they returned from Troy, and for to show
That whatsoever man does take in hand,
The issue does upon Gods will depend,
For he it is gives an ill or happy end.
Which is well proved by this History,
Wherein you see, that though the Greeks did win*
And had a most triumphant victory
Against the Trojans and their Town; wherein
They did obtain that which they did desire,
Which was their will and t'honor to aspire:
Yet cause the war which they with Troy began
Was done of pride, and in an envious vain
Without just cause, they rather lost then wan.
For that upon their side more men were slain
Then on the Trojans part, (for all they lost
Their town) so that they had no cause to boast.
Considering that besides their loss fore Troy,
When they were into Greece returned, most part
Of them that lived, did not long time enjoy
Their victory, for that with envious heart
Each the other did destroy, and sought to kill
By treachery, the Proverb to fulfill,
(That blood with blood always revenged will be)
Troyes fall does teach all Princes to take heed,
When as they live in great prosperity,
Not to be too secure, least that they speed
As Priam did, who would not be content
When he did live in peace, (but t'envie bent)
Old quarrels with his Grecian foes renewed,
Supposing that is his wealth and power great
He could do what he list. But what ensued
Thereof, the story plainly down does set:
Which says, that he thereby wrought's own decay,
To show that man has here no certain stay.
THus have you heard as much as I can tell,
Of all the Trojan war as it is set down,
By Dares Frigius who therein did dwell,
And wrote the story thereof in the Town,
And every day a view thereof did take,
Who of this same an end herewith does make.
With whom the Grecian Ditus does agree,
And in like sort his History does end,
Twixt whom in truth no difference I can see,
For both their works unto one purpose tend:
Which is the true proceedings to express
Of that whereof they were eye witnesses.
Though not in verbal form, yet in effect
And meaning both alike, and true they are.
Which is the thing men chiefly should respect.
But that the Grecian Ditus does declare,
And says, that while the siege did there remain,
The number of the Greeks that there was slain
Amounted to eight hundred thousand men.
And of the Troiaus side as Dares shoe*
Six hundred thousand seaventy and sixteen
Then lost their lives, mo^g whom are reckned those
That to the Town from other countries came,
And there were killed by ayding of the same.
For that of hundred thousands that did aid
King Priam, and of diverse countries were
It is not found, (as it before is said,
Though they behaud themselves most bravely there,
So many of them in that war was slain,)
That there did go five hundred home again.
And both of them in this point do agree,
That full ten years, six months, and 12. days more
The siege did last, with great hostility
And loss of men on either side, before
The Greeks for all that ever they could do,
Could win the town o^ enter thereinto.
Till Synon by his craft did it betray,
As it at large declared is before,
And further of the same I cannot say,
Because mine Authors thereof say no more.
And for to add more then they write thereto,
Were in me great presump'ion so to do.
The time when I this work had fully don
By computation just, was in the year
One thousand and four hundred twenty one
Of Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior dear.
And in the Eight year complete of the reign
Of our most noble Lord and Sovereign
King Henry the fifth, who in despite
Of all his foes, Brutes Albion does maintain
In honor great, for by his puissant might
He conquered all Normandy again.
And valiantly for all the power of France,
Has won from them his own inheritance.
And forced them his title to renew
To all the Realm of France, (which does belong
To him and to his lawful heirs, by true
Descent, the which they held from him by wrong
And false pretense,) and to confirm the same*
Have given him the honor and the name
Of Regent of the Land for Charles his life,
And after his decease they have agreed
(Thereby to end all bloody war and strife)
That he as heir shall lawfully succeed*
Therein, and reign as King of France by right,
As by records which extant are to light,
It does appear. And then I hope we shall
Enjoy again the time so prosperous
And fortunate, the which men use to call
The good and golden world, and that to us
God will afford his blessing and his grace,
That Mars no more our country shall me^^^ce.
Nor with his countnance furious and wood,
Move war and strife between these countries twain
Nor be the cause of sheading of their blood,
Whereof till now they both may well complain:
And that our noble King will so provide
By wisdom and by power, that either side
Shall live in peace and henchforth so agree,
That both the realms of England, and of France,
By one Prince ruld, shall seem all one to be,
And ever more live without variance:
And from their hearts all hate and malice chase,
By th'influence of Gods most mighty grace;
And heavenly power which rules every thing,
And who by his great providence divine,
Has such an alliance made between our King
And France, by marying Lady Katherine
The French Kings daughter, that we hope it shall
Procure us peace and joy perpetual.
And that the Royal issue of them twain,
(Will be a mean and way without all fear)
That England shall for evermore obtain
The sole command of those two Realms, and wear
Their Diadems imperial both together,
And that the fair Queen Katherines coming hither
Will nourish so great love and unity
On both sides, that we never shall have need
Nor cause to fear nor feel adversity;
And that it will be the only means to breed
Our honor, joy, and great prosperity,
Wealth, pleasure, peace, and all felicity,
And drive away all mischief whatsoere
Out of this Land. So that with heart and thought
We shall have cause with voices loud and clear
To pray for her that has it to us brought:
And him that by his valor great and might,
Has showed himself so puissant a Knight,
That he has won, and clearly does possess
All that to him belongs, and now it is set
Accompanied with his fair Emperesse,
Victoriously with praise and honor great,
In his most Royal throne: to whom God give
As long as he upon the earth shall live,
(And does enjoy the full fruition
Of all that unto him belongs of right,
And holds the same in his subjection,)
Increase of comfort, pleasure, and delight:
And t'send him home with triumph and with honor
As great as ere had any Conqueror.
And long time after grant him to possess
His kingdoms, and his Regal Dignity,
(With his fair Queen) in joy and quietness,
If possible it were perpetually:
And I will never cease both night and day,
Withal my heart unto the Lord to pray
For him, by whose commandment I took
On me (though far unfit to do the same)
To translate into English verse, this Book,
Which Guido wrote in Latin, and does name
The siege of Troy, and for his sake alone
I must confess that I the same begone,
When Henry whom men fourth by name did call,
(My Princes Father) lived and possessed
The Crown. And though I be but rusticall,
I have therein not spard to do my best
To please my Princes humor. Though
A thing that I should not have taken on me,
(Which am a Monk by my profession
In Berry, called John Lidgate by my name,
And wear a habit of perfection:
Although my life agrees not with the same)
That meddle should with things spiritual,
As I must needs confess unto you all.
But seeing that I did therein proceed,
At his command whom I could not refuse,
I humbly do beseech all those that read,
Or leysor have this story to pervse,
If any fault therein they find to be,
Or error that committed is by me*
That they will of their gentleness take pain*
The rather to correct and mend the same,
Then rashly to condemn it with disdain.
For well ^^vot it is not without blame,
Because I know the verse therein is wrong,
As being some too short and some too long*
For if with faults men should not sometime bear,
But all for some seem wholly to refuse,
Then must I say in vain my labor were.
Let ignorance and rudenes me excuse:
For though my verse for harshnes you reject,
Yet if you to the some have good respect,
I doubt not but that you therein shall find,
That all the substance of the matter is
Set down that Guydo wrote, to please your mind.
And if that any word be plast amiss,
I pray you mend the same in courtesy:
For to condemn an error utterly,
Which is not made nor done with bad intent,
No commendation to him that is wise:
For no man unto scoffing more is bent
Behind men's backs, nor sooner will surmise
A lie, then he that has no wit at all,
He treads sure that never has a fall.
I often have read in Authors new and old,
Which write of men's behaviors good and ill,
That no man is more foolish and more bold,
Then he that is an Idiot without skill.
For that blind Bayard fears nothing at all
Till in a ditch he suddenly does fall.
And none so ready is to prate and prattle,
Nor sooner will condemn a man then he.
But for all those that use such tittle tattle,
I care not what they say or speak of me:
For I do not to them direct my Book,
But unto such as with a sincere look
Pervse the same, and with men's falts do bear,
And can amend an error without blame
To him that writes, and tell not what they hear
To hinder or impeach a man's good name:
But used are to speak well of their friend,
Whereto all honest men their wits should bend.
For Chawcer that my master was, and knew
What did belong to writing verse or prose,
Nere stumbled at small faults, nor yet did view
With scornful eye the works and Books of those
That in his time did write, nor yet would taunt
At any man, to fear him or to daunt
His courage in that kind of exercise:
But rather use their weakness to support,
And as he was well learned and very wise,
And able to instruct and to exhort
Such as did use to write, would wink and smile
At faults, and yet say nothing all the while*
So that if to describe him I should strive,
I must needs say (unless from truth I varry)
That never any man as yet did live
Until this day, that worthy was to carry
His inckhorne in respect of Poetry.
But if within this Land or Realm there be
Such men as able be his steps to trace;
To them it is that I direct my Book,
And wholly to their skills refer my case,
With their judicial eyes thereon to look:
Beseeching them to mend what is amiss,
And t'adde, or to diminish all that is
Super^^uous, or else wanting. And although
They find therein no phrases that are new,
Nor Eloquence (as they suppose) enough,
Yet I do hope that they shall find all true
In substance as mine Author wrote the same,
Wherein I know I shall incur no blame.
ANd he that list and does desire to see
The wavering state and infelicity
Of ages past, may here instructed be,
And find how Fortunes mutability
Has always been so great, that no man could
Put trust in her. And therewithal behold*
How Princes clean bereft of Royalty,
Were suddenly brought into great distress.
And Kings redu'st to such extremity,
That poverty and want did them oppress.
Great slaughters made in kingdoms enviously.
Murders committed by conspiracy.
False treason, secret ambushes, despite,
Subversion of whole kingdoms suddenly,
The ravishing of women for delight,
The root of war and great hostility.
Maintaining of most foul adultery,
Which caused many Princes great to die.
To show thereby that since the cause of all
Such wickedness receives reward most just,
Which suddenly upon mankind does fall,
For that in worldly joys there is no trust.
And in this Book examples you shall find,
If you consider well thereof in mind,
How every man must unto nature yield,
When time does serve, both young and old of age,
And wither like the grass within the field,
For here our life is but a Pilgrimage
Repleat with sorrow, misery, and woe,
Which if men marked and took good heed thereto
And wisely would consider of their end,
They would esteem all pleasure but a toy,
And no more time therein so vainly spend,
Nor take so much delight in worldly joy.
For by Troyes fall it plainly does appear,
That neither King nor Emperor has here*
A permanent estate to trust unto.
Therefore to him that died upon the rood,
(And was content and willing so to do,
And for mankind did shead his precious blood,)
Lift up your minds and pray with humble (...)
That he his aid unto you will impart.
For though you be of extreme force and might,
Without his help it will you naught avail,
For he does give man victory in fight:
And with a few is able to prevail,
And overcome an army huge and strong,
And by his grace makes kings and Princes long
To reign here on the earth in happiness,
And Tyrants that to men do offer wrong
And violence, does suddenly suppress,
Although their power be nere so great and strong*
And in his hand his blessings all reserveth,
For to reward each one as he deserves.
To whom I pray with humble mind and heart,
(And so I hope all you will do no less)
That of his grace he would vouchsafe t'impart,
And send all joy, well fare, and happiness,
Health, victory, tranquillity, and honor,
Unto the high and mighty coqueror
King Henry the Fifth, (that his great name
May here on earth ^'extold and magnified
While life does last, and when he yields the same
Into his hands, he may be glorified
In heaven among the Saints and Angels bright,
Therein to serve the God of power and might.)
At whose request this work I undertook
As I have said. And now that I have don,
And with great labor finished my Book,
I do entreat all those that look thereon
T'accept thereof, and take it in as good part,
As I it send to them withal my heart.
FINIS.

