The comparison between the Antipus and the Antigraphe or answer thereunto,
with. Anapologie or defense of the same Antipus. And reprehence of the
Antigraphe.

Antipus,
To hear of such things ye be not wont
Nam horum contraria verissima sunt
AS verily as Adam created first his God,
So verily he tasted not, the fruit that was forbod
As verily as Abell, did kill his brother Kayn
So verily the ship made Noe, this is plain
As verily as Isaac, his father did begette
So verily the Sodomites remain unburned yet
As verily as the Isralites, the Egiptians did oppress
So verily did Moses give God the law doubtless
As verily as Sampson was, slain, of the lion rampinge
So verily did Goliath distroye David the King
As verily as in Babylon the meats were eat of Bell
So verily the dragone of brass devoured Daniell
As verily as Christ did crucifye the Jews
So verily the Apostles the Gospel did refuse
As verily as Simon Magus the Apostles did confute
So verily the Apostles did princes persecute
As verily as the deuel has perfect love and hope
So verily gods word does constitute the pope
As verily as Isicles within be hot and holowe
So verily proud prelates our master Christ do follow
As verily as bread does make and bake the baker
So verily these thefes the priests can make their maker
If Leighton will neades his maker make
That these are true he can not forsake
A Papiste he is and the popes own knight
That preaches falshed in stead of right
He knows not how to pay his dettes
But with catchinge his creditors in the Popes nets
A thief, a robber, by preachinge sedicion
Is better regarded then the Kings commission
Among Papists.
Antigraphium
Hear of such true things,
As ye have been wont
Nam ea audite verissima sunt
AS verily as Adam was create by God
So verily he tasted the fruit was forbode
As vere^y as Abel was killed of Cayn
So verily made Noy the ship, this is plain
As verily as Isaac was of his father got
So verily was the Sodomites consumed by fire hot
As verily as the Egiptians God did opresse
So verily gave God Moses the law doubteles.
As verily as Sampson killed the lion rampinge,
So verily was Golias killed of david the King
As verily as in Babylon the meats were not eaten of Bell
So verily the dragon of brass deuowred not Daniel
As verily as Christ was crucified of the Jews
So verily y^ Apostles taught us gods word and true news
As verily as the deuel has not perfect love and hope
So verily consent not I to the falsenes of the pope
As verily as the Isickelles with in be not hot and hollow
So verily meke prelattes our master Christ do follow
As verily as bread is made of the baker
So verily by gods word we consecrate our maker
As verily as gods word did turn Moses rod
So verily gods word consecrates the body of God
As verily saint Paulle with me does well accord
Who makes no difference is guilty of ye body of our Lord.
Leiton can never of his own pore his maker make
But only gods word no christian can this forsake
No papiste he is nor yet the popes knight
That preaches the truth and abhors the unright
He wills to pay his creditors his dettes
Desiringe God to keep him from the popes nets
No thief nor robber but void of sedicion
A man well regarding our sovereigns commission
The writer.
And you that call you Gospellers that in Ire do swell
You are as fare from the Gospel as heaven is from hell
Amend your lives and follow charity
Leave your presumptuouse and folishe vanitye
The mysteries of God ye know this is plain
Ye cannot conceive in your fantas^icall brain
Commite your selfs to God, and the King
And follow holy church to your ending
For unto these three I will stick
And never regard no flalse heretic
But pray unto God that I may se him burn
If he from heresy will not turn
Of the Sacrament.
The bread* which I will give, so clean* so pure
Christ says is very flesh steadfast and suer
I think him a beast and a most vile noddy
That will not believe Christ that says it is his body
I believe it with steadfast heart and mind
As gods own words does me command and bind
So as I believe he made althinges of naught
So I believe it is the body yt on the cross me boughte
And the very blood as scripture makes mention
Was shed on the cross for mankind redemption.
FINIS.
Apologia Antipi,
To speak false latin, I perceive ye be wont
By your writing, ea audite verissima sunt.
RIght rougheli and rashli, and well over seen
With ruggid reason, vnclerkly conveyed
Ye cowcher of stones, reproved I wene
The proper antipus, that truly had said
Without line or leuel, foundation ye laid
Wherefore it apereth, your work must decay
For things evil grounded, will moulder away.
To build your baggage, on an other man's ground
As it has been the costome, so will ye still use
But the trade of your treachery, shall sone be confound
Where with ye were wont, the truth to abuse
Your doctrine and order, are both but confuse
To maynteyn your errors, the scripturs ye frame
So that ye must be overthrow with the same.
To comende your diligence more then your wit
It is my part, I can it not denaye
Your learning and connyng, I will not omyt
For though it be not much, it is not very gaye
Paraduenture ye will think, this is but homly play
So hastily your wit and learning to reprove
But there be such occasions, as me thereto move
How chanced you to stomach at Antipus the littel
Sythen he taxed none, but such as papists were
But it most needs be so, a fools brain is shittil
And always does show, which way the heart does bear
And even so did you now, without wisdom or fear
That ye have been and be? Right earnestly express
A papist most pestilent, no man will Judge less.
And in your antigraphe, you show your self full wise
Which ye wrote to antipus, whose contraries be just
And yet, I think ye took some other dawes devise
As of some smoky Smyth, and other that ye trust
To the which antigraphe, an answer make I must
Wherein I trust the lord, will be my help and aid
To prove you an heritique, I am nothing afraid
In all your hole Antigraphe, ye vary nothing fro
The antipus: but the contrayes do declare
A boy of twelve year old, as well could have done so
Wherefore ye show your wit, to be but weak and bare
To inter in correction, of things that perfect are
But in the latter lines, great grieffe, ye seem to take
Because he said such thieves, could not their maker make
Ye bring a piece of scripture, your heresy to maintain
That as gods word in Egypt, made a serpent of the Rod
So gods word makes God, ye have a peuish brain
Know ye not ye Romayne, that the very word is god?
Then how can he make him self, thou heretical clodd^?
Art thou not ashamed, such poison to spewe yet?
Christ is not made, nor create, but only was beget.
I know full well they shifte, and what thou wylt object
I know well thou will say, it is by concecration
For that is all the hold, of thy most cursed sect
And by that word consecrate, came all the abhominacion
For as ye have abused it ye made it execration
A word I say it is invented but by man
Search all the euangely and find it if ye can
As verily saint Paul with your sayings does accord
As light does with darcknes which easily may be spied
For where he speaks of difference of the body of the Lord
He means not as you flesh flies do, and that shall be tried
The christians the body, ^o Christ the head, he applied
Prouinge the pore his menbers as well as the rich to be
The which when ye regard not no difference make ye
As when the congregation to the lords supper shall come
To eat the bread worthily the Lords death to betoken
They must accept al like and not some more then some
For all they be partakers of Christ's body broken
This is the very meaning of that saint Paul has spoken
Because this bread does signify ye lords dath in our p^^e^ce
Between ye bread and other neades must we make a difference
To eat christ's flesh and eke to drink his blood
Is so to dwell in Christ as he may dwell in us
Lo here ye may se plain it is a spiritual food
Believe and thou have eaten saint Augustine said thus
Christ when he gave the bread, with hands so glorious
Said when ye shall, do this do it remembringe me
He said not when ye do it, my body shall it be
This is my body said he, which for you shall be given
What think ye, did he mean a body made of bread?
No, but it that was present and was betrayed that even,
He said for them and many, sone after should be dead
He created not an other, no such things shall ye read
The death of that one body, for all men is sufficient
So with his holy memory, let al men be content
He took the cup and said, this is the testament new
In my blood. How think ye, made he his blood of wine?
He gave it for a witness, of his blood shedynge true
Why should you any otherwise, his holy words define
Or as men nothing spiritual to fleshelynes incline
And take his words grossly after their Iwishe ways
As saint John the euangeliste in the sixth Chapter says
But O thou gross pharisey, for go thy fleshely mind
Let scripture the Illuminate, thy Judgment is but crasse
A man God made the, reasonable by nature in thy kind
And y^ by thyn unthankfulness wilt make thy self an ass
Treadinge within the trade, of the most wicked Mass
Wherein thou kepest compass, as a blind horse in the myl
God grant the to se better, when it shall be his will
FINIS.
Now where as ye stand in Leytons defense,
Papisticall acts, ye seem to commence
For standing by him stowtly as a cha^pio^ chief
It is folly to axe you, and your fellow be a thief
Ye have under take he shall his dettes pay
But that shall be the morrow after domes day
Ye say the kings commission, full well he does regard
Regard ye it better boeth, or ye shall have reward
With papists.
Your other words also entitled the writer
A man may sone perceive sprange from some shepebiter
Ye call men Gospellers, and say they swel in Ire
But you be full of charity, ye wish them in the fire
Ye will teach men their duitie, to God and to the King
Which know their duitie, better then you in that thing
Ye will follow holy church, ye say to your ending
The holy church of Rome, no dought is your meaning
Ye say in your Antigraphe that you forsake the Pope
But no thank to you, grauiercy gentle Rope.
In your writing of ye sacrament, ye play sir hoddy doddy,
In understanding the scriptures as crafty as a calfe
He that believes not as you, ye call him a vile noddy
But you prove more a dawe, the^ I would take ye by half,
I leave ye as ye be, and make no more a do.
Nothing have you written, but ye be answered there to.
FINIS.
A Mason, a Smyth, and a Paynter fine
With a Mugge, and a Gray, and a Perkens gross
Be fooes to Antipus, at whom they repine,
And him with great anger, they turn and they toss.
As cruel as Jews, that did Christ on the cross,
To put him to rebuke, ^hei do what they may,
But they mysse of their purpose, and go the wrong way.
The Mason first at Babylon began,
Byldyng of the tower, that men call Babel,
Though he be a Babilonite, Nemprothes own man.
That now raineth in Rome, it is no great marvel
Thubalkaim the first smyth, and grauer of metell,
For antiquity and frendshyp, must needs stand him by
To forge him his toles, to build Idolatry.
An other there is, that hight master Mugge
An ayder and adbettour, with all his hole power
As nymble in cariyng, as is my spaniell rugge,
He will catch a lie by the end, and within half an hour
Bear it a mile of, for fear it should be sower,
The Paynter shall go with him, to painte ye matter fair
Whosoever lacks papists, here he may have a pair.
Then is there one Perkens, with a belly somewhat large
Of kin to Perken Warbeck, as by his name appears
Which for his good conditions, may row in the barge,
At good he stops his ears, but evil he sone hears,
And al such as are papists, full earnestly he chereth,
And Gray that badgerd, may not be left behind
Nor their sword bearer of s. Mildredes who knows all their mind
In knavery.
In heresy
In baudry.
In popery.
(...) cetera.

