Be Thankful LONDON AND HER SISTERS; OR, A SERMON of Thankfulness: Setting
down the kindness of God to us, the duty of Thankfulness, the way to it,
and the practice of it. Applied in particular to these times:

By ROBERT ABBOTT Preacher of Gods Word at Cranebrooke in KENT.

PSALM. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me.

LONDON, Printed for Philemon Stephens and Christopher Meredith, and are to be
sold at their shop at the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard, 1626.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, worshipful, and dearly beloved, his friends,
kindred, and acquaintance within the City of LONDON, ROBERT ABBOTT wishes due
Thankfulness to God for his unspeakable MERCIES.
THough I live a far off from you, yet God knows that I have not been
unmindful of you in my daily prayers to God, which was the best good which I
could do unto you. And when I heard that God did begin to shine in love upon
the City again, God knows that I was not unmindful to be thankful to him
that is the sole Author of it. I thought not that enough: therefore as before I
had spent many days in fasting, and prayer, for our selves in body; so did I
resolve (having that blessed liberty) to spend one day in fasting, prayer, and
thanksgiving for you: what good it wrought upon my own people and those of
your body who heard me, I am not worthy to know: but what good I aimed at my
conscience is privy to, and what my desire is to do more. I consider how
lovingly I have been entertained of many of you when I was assistant to a
Reverend Divine amongst you, who is now with God. I consider Master Haiward of
Wool-Church.
that I have many brethren, sisters, and kins-folke, who have fellowship with
you, and whose souls I tenderly affect. In which respects though (as it is
wittily said) some more Learned, and godly men are Fathers, Nurses and
murderers to their own Children, in begetting, kissing, and burying the
fruits of their own brains, yet am I still aduenturous to show others what
God has given me (unworthy wretch) to bring forth, and to say unto you; Behold
I and my child. I have not trimmed it with ornaments and laces of Egypt, nor
sweetened it with the Frankincense and myrrh of the Christian Synagouge: but as
God has sent it with the law of God written in the forehead, hands, feet
and heart of it, so send I it unto you, desiring God to make this service
acceptable and profitable unto you: And so I rest,

Yours to be used in the Lord, ROBERT ABBOTT.
From my Study this fifteenth of November 1625.
Be thankful London: OR, A SERMON, Setting down the duty of thankfulness,
the way to it, and the practice of it, preached upon
PSALM. 31. 21. Blessed be the Lord, for he has showed his marvelous
kindness toward me in a strong City.
WHEN God purposes to plague a people, who have not been wise to observe the
day of their visitation, and by faith and conversion Ier 15. 2.
to hide themselves: such as are appointed unto death, must unto death: such as
for the sword, to the sword: such as for the famine to the famine: and such as
for the captivity to the captivity. In which respect, when we, who now live, do
perceive that, though we have been chasiened sore, yet we have not Psalm.
118. 18.
been delivered unto death: and that neither Plague nor Sword, nor Famine, nor
Captivity, nor any other noisome evil has so far prevailed over us, but
that we may still praise God after the manner of the living: then how can we
resolve less with our selves then this, I shall not dye but live, and declare
the works of the Lord? Or, Psalm. 118. 17.
what can we say less then this to others? Praise ye Psalm. 34. 3.
the Lord with me, and let us magnify his Name together.

True it is, that ordinarily the injuries that are done unto us are written in
Marble, and the benefits that are showed unto us are written in Sand: and as
the Air in the Mat. 26. 69, 70.
High Priests Hall did (after a sort) infect Peter, and was an occasion to his
soon and sudden denying of his Master: so every blast of new favors does
(through our corruption) infect us with unthankfulness, and blow away the
memory of the former mercies which have been showed unto us.

Hence it is, that God expostulateth with his people, Hear, O Heavens, and
hearken, O earth, for I have nourished Esa. 1. 2.
and brought up children, but they have rebelled against me: And that Christ
cries out against the unthankful Luke 17. 17.
Leapers, Where are the nine? Hence it is that God is (as it were) driven to
put his people in mind of the favors which he has done unto them, saying,
Surely I brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the
house of servants, and I have sent before thee Moses, Aron Mic. 6. 4, 5.
and Myriam. O my people, remember now what Balack King of Moab had devised,
and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him from Shittim to Gilgal. Yea,
hence is it, that good Moses did take such pains with Gods Deuteronomy. 6. 12.
people, to press them not to forget the Lord which Deuteronomy. 8. 10. 11.
brought them out of the Land of Egypt, but to bless him for the good Land
which he had given them. And at that time when he saw them tardy in their duty
of thankfulness to God, by corrupting themselves toward him by their vice,
how roundly does he take them up, saying, Do ye so reward the Lord, O foolish
people and unwise? Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
is not he thy Father that has bought thee? yea, he has made thee and
proportioned thee.

All which courses do manifest unto us our pronenesse to unthankfulness, yea,
and our practice of it also (for, what are we better then other people?) Yea,
and that we stand in need of continual provoking to the good duty of
thankfulness, that we may practice it, to the assuring of our hearts that
greater Plagues then that which we have had, do not awaite us. Therefore is it
that I have chosen this good example of David, to quicken you to this duty at
this time, who in the inioyment of some great deliverance from some great
trouble, in some great City, cried out with a thankful heart, Blessed be
Psalm. 31. 21.
the Lord, for he has showed marvelous great kindness toward me in a strong
City.

The Psalm where you read these words, is spent in the practice of a
threesold duty: namely, Prayer, Praise, and Exhortation.

In his Prayer, first he sueth for himself; and secondly, against his enemies.
For himself, he prays to God that he would deliver him out of his troubles
(as from the hands of his enemies, and from them that persecute him) Verse. 1,
15, 16, 17
and that he would make his Face to shine upon him, that he be not confounded.
And that he may with the more confidence depend upon God for audience, he does
take a suruay of those arguments which may give encouragement to him to wait
upon God in Prayer. First, he does look to that confidence and trust which it
has pleased God to work in his heart, and says, In thee have I put my Verse.
1.
trust. As if he should say, Thou have promised, that they who put their trust
in thee, shall not be confounded: Behold Lord, through thy good grace I have
done it: or thus, Shall I be ashamed at the last to confess in whom I have
trusted? or shall it be said, That I have leaned upon the Reed of Egypt? God
forbid: Therefore, O Lord, deliver me. Secondly, he does look to the
employment which Almighty God, in his special providence has taken upon him
for the benefit of the Church in his preservation and redemption of it, and
says, Thou art my strong rock, my house of defense, my fortress, by thy
Verse. 1, 2, 3.
names sake thy righteousness* which is my shield and buckler; Psalm. 91. 4.
yea, thou have redeemed me: therefore deliver me, Verse. 5.
guide me, and draw me out of the Net which they have privily laid for me,
Thirdly, he looks upon Gods former dealing with him, and from thence gathers
hope of mercy to come. Thou have given me a soul in love with thee, for I have
hated them that give themselves to deceitful Verse. 6, 7, 8.
vanities; yea, thou have seen my trouble, thou have known my soul in
adversity, thou have not shut me up, but have set my feet at large: therefore
why should I not triumph and rejoice in thy mercy for after times. Fourthly, he
looks upon the extremities of his miseries, saying, Mine eye, Verse. 9, 10, 11,
etc.
my soul, and my belly are consumed with grief, my life is wasted with
heaviness, and my years with mourning; and so he goes on. As if he should
say, Thou art the God that helpest in extremity, and bring us down to the
grave. First, because we should not trust in our selves, 2 Cor. 1. 9.
but in thee who raisest the dead: Behold, my case is such, therefore have
mercy upon me; especially considering, Thou art my God, and my times are in thy
hands. Thus he Verse. 14. 15.
has sued for himself. Secondly, he prays and prophesies against his
enemies. Prays (I say) in respect of himself, who was infallibly led by the
Spirit of God, and therefore could not err in the persons against whom he
prays: Prophesies (I say) in respect of us, because his shoe serves not our
foot in such suits, if we conceive them with their particular applications:
for we being led by an ordinary spirit not discerning final estates, have
this rule given to us Bless (I say) and curse not. In this Mat. 5 44.
Prayer then, or Prophecy of David, he desires that through Romans 12. 14.
shame, fear, horror, God would so silence and stop their mouths, that they
may not be able to plead for themselves, or against him.

Thus has David prayed; but he knows that he who sues for more, must be
thankful for what he has received. Therefore now he falls to the second
part of the Psalm, which is Praise. Wherein you may see, that first, he does
with an holy admiration, set out the favors Verse. 19, 20.
which God shows to the sons of God above the sons Gen 6. 2.
of men that is, the wicked of the world. How great is thy goodness which thou
show to them! Thou hidest them privily Mal. 3. 17.
in thy presence, as thy Jewels in thy Cabinet. Secondly, he does come to a
particular favor which God showed unto himself, and blesses God for it. And
whereas God might Verse 21.
say, Why ( David) can sweet water and bitter come from James 3. 11.
the same Fountain? Did not thou erst while distrust me? It is true Lord,
but it was my haste, and thou were pleased Verse. 22.
to pass it by, and to hear the voice of my prayer when I cried unto thee,
therefore will I praise thee.

Thus has David praised also: but he knows that it is not enough for him to
be good alone, but he must strive to draw others to be good also: therefore
in the Verse. 23* 24.
two last verses he does press all Gods people to love God, and to put their
trust and confidence in God, assuring them, because he had tried it and found
it true by experience, that the Lord preserves the faithful, and plentifully
rewards the proud doer.

Now ye have seen in part how David spent himself through this Psalm. Though
we have ouerlooked it all, yet we are to deal only with that which does
concern his praise: and not with all that, but only with that Verse
propounded, in which he breaks out into the praise of God for some
extaordinary favor which God showed unto him in a strong City.

For our better understanding whereof, resolve the Text into some questions and
answers. What did David? He blessed Iehourah, who gives being to his sweet
promises of protection which he has made unto his people. But alas, David,
can thou bless God, who alone is the blesser of men and Angels? No truly,
he cannot do it by adding any thing to his happiness immediately, as be
blesses us; or by being instruments under another to further his good
mediatly, as man blesses man; but by confessing to God, and declaring to man
with humility and reverence, what happiness we do receive from God. And this
it pleases God to account a blessing of him, to encourage and draw us on to
make our selves the more happy by cleaving unto him by thanksgiving. Yea, but
for what does David bless God? For showing him kindness or mercy. It was some
special deliverance from some great danger, as from the cruelty of Saul,
trechety of his Courtiers, or the like. Yea, but of what worth was this favor
that he showed David? It was his marvelous kindness. Thus did he prize his
favor he did receive. As Peter did weigh his sins, that his godly Mar. 14.
72.
sorrow might sink the deeper: so did David weigh his kindness, and found it
to be Gods, and found it to be marvelous, that his thankfulness might rise
the higher. Yea, but where did David receive his marvelous kindness of God?
In a strong City. Whether in a City or no City it is doubted. Therefore some
do understand it by way of similitude, that the kindness was such, as if he
had been kept in a City of strong defense. But I know no inconvenience, in
thinking that David felt the comfort of some walled Town, as when he fled to
the holds of the Philistims, or the like, because the words are so pregnant.
Howsoever this we are sure of, that if we reflect upon our selves, and in this
Glass of Gods kindness to David, see the love of God unto us, who, amongst
many other favors, has heard the groans and sighs of his people for the poor
City of London, where so many thousands have been swept away as the Dongue of
the streets, we may justly say, Blessed be the Lord, for he has showed
marvelous kindness toward us in this our City. As if we should say, It is
true, Lord, thou have* showed thy Psalm. 60. 3, 4.
people heavy things, thou have made us drink the wine of giddiness: but now
thou have given a Banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed
because of thy truth: thou have delivered us from the noysom Pestilence, Psalm.
91. 3, 4.
even from the Snare of thy hunting Angel: thou have covered us under thy
wings, and we shall be safe under thy feathers; therefore blessed be thou
Jehovah, and let all thy people say, Amen.

This blessing of God is the nail which I would have driven home at this time.
Therefore I shall pass by other things which might afford us matter of
meditation from these words, and only insist upon this point; That

By how much greater the favor is which God bestows upon us, by so much more
must we labor to praise God.

There are two things propounded here: the first is this, That the greater our
favor is, the greater ought to be our thanks. Therefore David, having received
a great favor from God (namely, the forgiveness of his sins, though as yet
he could not feel the comfort of it) and fearing that he was not able to
praise God answerable unto it, prays to God that he would open his lips that
his Psalm. 51. 15.
mouth might show forth his praise. And again, upon the consideration of the
like favors, he does stir up his soul greatly to the same duty, My soul
praise thou the Lord, Psalm. 103. 1, 2, 3, 4.
and all that is within me praise his holy name: my soul praise thou the Lord,
and forget not all his benefits; which afterward he does reckon up: yea, and
when he does find his heart enlarged by God to practice the duty, then does he
employ all his powers, saying, Seven times a day do I praise Psalm. 119. 164.
thee because of thy righteous judgments: yea, so long as he Psalm. 146. 1^2.
lives, so long as he has any being, he will sing praises unto his God: yea,
and he seems to have bound himself unto it by an humble vow, and therefore
he says, Thy Vows are upon me, O Lord, I will render praises unto Psalm. 56.
12.
thee. Why does he call them Gods Vows? Surely, because they, being made, were
out of his power, who might not devour the sanctified thing, but give God
praise with all his heart, as he had promised.

The second thing propounded is this, that every favor from God does call for
thanks from us. Therefore is it a duty which is often pressed and patterned in
the Scriptures. Paul says, let your requests be showed unto God in prayer with
giving of thanks: and again, Phil. 4 6.
continue in Prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving: Col. 4. 2.
and again, In all things give thanks: yea, even 1 These. 5. 18.
in those things which are matters of humiliation, we must give thanks in
respect of their fruit and use for our good. And as for patterns, how might I
tell you of Melchizedech, the Priest of the most high God; of Moses Genesis 14. 20.
and Aaron, who led the people of Israel like sheep; Exodus 15 1.
of Deborah and Barack, after their victory ever Sisera Jude 5. 2.
and Iabin; of Iehoshaphat, when his people were delivered 2 Chronicles. 20.
from Moab, Ammon, and mount Seir; of that one Leper, who turned back to
Christ with praise; of the Luke 17. 15.
healed Cripple, who went into the Temple, walking and Acts 3. 8.
leaping and praising God. I might (I say) speak of these and many other rare
Patterns, but the time would be too short for me to tell of them. Heb. 11. 32.


It may be now you will ask me, why we must thus labor Why we must praise God.
to praise God? I answer, we must do it both in respect of our selves, in
respect of others, and in respect of the duty of thankfulness it self.

David consulting with himself what he shall render unto the Lord for all his
benefits toward him; resolves, that he has nothing but the Cup of
salvation, so alluding to the Psalm. 116. 12, 13.
Peace-offrings, which were offerings of thankgiuing to God. When therefore we
do consider, that God is not bound unto us (for who has given him first?) and
that Romans 11. 35.
whatsoever we do receive from God is of his free favor, can we do less
for shame then give him thanks?

Exodus 12.
commanded that every year they should keep the feast of the Passover; the
old Persons as it was a Sacrament, and the young Persons as it was a
remembrance of their deliverance out of Egypt. And when God fed them with Exodus
16.
Mannah, he appointed that a certain measure of it should be laid up for
posterity, that they might be thankful; which was also the reason of the
laying up of Aaron his Rod in the Arc. When also God gave the Israelites Heb.
9. 4.
a famous victory over the Amalekites, he said to Moses, Write this for a
remembrance in a Book. Seeing Exodus 17.
therefore that God requires a thankful remembrance of his favors, as the
end of them, we must as cheerfully give it as God does justly require it.
Secondly, God makes special account of this duty, and therefore he uses
many means to work it from his people. In Exodus Exodus 23. 16.
ye read of that general offering of first fruits in the feast of unleavened
bread, when none must appear before God Exodus 25. 1, 2, etc.
empty: and likewise of the voluntary gifts for the making of the Tabernacle.
In Leuiticus ye read sometimes of offering the first fruits of the ears of
Corn dried by Leuit. 2. 24.
the fire: sometimes of offering a sheafe of the first fruits of Leuit. 23. 10,
17.
the Harvest to be brought unto the Priest: sometimes of the shake offering of
two Loaves, baked with Leven for first fruits unto the Lord. In Numbers we
read of an heavy offering of a Cake of the first of their dough. In Deuteronomy
Numb. 25. 20.
we read of the first of all the fruit of the earth, that Deuteronomy. 26. 2.
must put it in a Basket, and carried to the place which the Lord did choose.
Now, why does the Lord require all this of his people? Surely this is one
reason, that he might show what reckoning he makes of thankfulness for all
the mercies which we receive from his hand. And therefore must we be thankful.

Again, we must praise God in respect of men, both bad and good. If we look
to bad men, they do encourage themselves to be thankful to the gods of silver
and Dan. 5. 4.
gold, to whom no thanks is due, as we may see in Belshazzar: and should not
we much more do it to him to whom all is due? If we look to good men, they
have been plentiful in this kind of duty. When the Floods ceased, thankful
Noah built an Altar, and offered unto the Genesis 8. 20.
Lord. When God renewed his promise to Abraham, he thankefully built an Altar
to the Lord in the plain of Genesis 13. 18.
Mamre. Agar had learned so much in religious Abraham's house, therefore when
God had comforted her in her banishment, she called his Name, Thou God look
on me: Genesis 16. 13.
much more would the Jews, and therefore they thankfully kept a feast of
remembrance for Hamans destruction, Hest. 9.
and their deliverance. Thus all sorts of men have encouraged us to this duty.

David says, Give unto the Lord glory Psalm. 29. 2.
due unto his name, that is, praise him. Alas, what are we that we should give
to God? We must say with David, Who are we, that we should be able to offer
willingly to thee 1 Chronicles. 29. 14.
our God? For all things come of thee, and of thine own hand we have given
thee. Yet it pleases God to account them gifts: and we know that it is a more
blessed thing to Acts 20 35.
give then to receive. Secondly, God does not only account our praise a gift,
but a sacrifice (the best gift:) as the Psalmist says, Let them offer
sacrifices of praise. Yet remember Psalm. 107. 22.
that it is not a sacrifice of redemption (for so is Jesus Christ alone) but of
thanksgiving. Therefore, offer to God praise, and pay thy Vows unto the most
high. Thirdly, Psalm. 50. 14.
God does not only account our praise a gift and a sacrifice, but does
prefer it before all sacrifice. Will I (says God) eat the flesh of Bulls,
and drink the blood of Psalm. 50. 8. to 15.
Goats? offer to me praise. As if he should say, This is that which I prefer to
all outward service, as being a part of my inward worship. And in another place
he says, That is better then a Bullock that has horns and hoofes: i. a
perfect Psalm. 69. 30, 31.
Bull. Take a Bullock at the best, and Praise is better then it, and as with
horns (through the mighty power of Mal. 1.
God) will push down our enemies, and as with hoofes will enable us to wade
through any difficulties. Fourthly. God does not only account our praise a
gift, a Sacrifice, better then a sacrifice, but by it gives us communion with
the service of the life to come in Heaven. Men full of wants do pray, but
Angels and Saints full of grace and glory do practice. The Angels cried (says
the Prophet) Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts. The Angels said Esaias 6. 3.
(says John) Praise, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and
Apoc. 7. 11, 12.
power, and might, be unto our God for evermore, Amen. These four things do
manifest unto us the excellency of this duty, to press us to lift it up from
the feet of swine, and to set it like a Jewel in our hearts, that it may give
luster unto our lives and conuersations, and may evidence that we live to God
and not to our selves.

Thus have I showed you (in some measure) why we must praise God for his
marvelous great kindness which he has showed unto us.

David, Blessed be our good God, who has showed us marvelous great kindness
in City, Town and Country. He might justly have given us over as a prey to all
his Plagues. He might have sent the Sword Es. 1. 20.
to devour us, and brought in the battle of the Warrior, Es. 9. 5.
which is with noise, and with tumbling of garments in blood. He might have
sent us a Famine, and made the life of our Lamen. 2. 19, 20.
young children faint for hunger in the corners of all our streets; King. 6.
28, 29.
and our cockering women to eat their fruit, and their children Lam. 4 2, 7, 8.
of a span long; and our Nobles, who are comparable to fine gold, to be
esteemed earthen Pitchers; and our Nazarites, who were whiter then Milk and
purer then Snow, to be blacker then a cole, to have their skin cleave to
their bones, and wither like a stock. Thus (I say) the Lord might have done by
making an Asses head at fourscore pieces of 2 Kings 6. 25.
silver, and the fourth part of a cab of Doves dongue at five pieces of silver,
through a fearful Famine amongst us. He might have made the Plague of
Pestilence more wonderful, and not only seized upon some few Cities and Towns
amongst us, but coasted from Dan to Beershebah 2 Samuel 24.
by his devouring Angel, from one part of the Kingdom Psalm. 91. 3.
to the other, to find out men, and women, and children that might justly have
been appointed to dye. What might not God in Justice have done unto us who are
a rebellious and gaine-saying people? We must needs say (though God have
looked upon us for good and not for evil) that we are full of sores, from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot, as Daniel says, We have Esaias 1. 6.
sinned, and have committed iniquity, and done wickedly yea, Dan. 9. 5, 6.
we have rebelled and departed from thy precepts and from thy judgments: for
we would not obey thy servants the Prophets, which spoke in thy Name to our
Kings, to our Princes, and to our Fathers, and to all the people of the Land.
Who sees not that we have been heavy at the whole heart, notwithstanding Esaias
1. 5.
all the Lords chastisements? yea, even as wicked King Ahaz in the time of our
tribulation, We did trespass more against the Lord, when we would be 2 Chronicles. 28. 22.
wanton in our Feastings, yea, in our Fastings: as being loath that outward
Discipline should speak angrily to our bellies (which are our God) though God
have spoken Phil. 3.
angrily both to our bodies and souls. And how could we do otherwise? Can the
blacke-More change his Ier. 13. 23.
skin, and the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good that are
accustomed to do evil, says Jeremy. As the Drunkards of Ephraim had a Crown
of pride in it: so in all Esa. 28. 1.
parts amongst us, we have had those that are mighty to drink Wine, and strong
to power in strong drink. Oh, Esa. 5. 22.
how many have harped upon that Epicurean string, Come, I will bring Wine, and
we will fill our selves with strong Esa. 56. 12.
drink, and tomorrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant? How many
have sacrificed their own distempers to others healths? Have not we had also
too too many of them, who (like fed horses) have neyed after their Ier. 5. 8.
Neighbors wives, and waited for the twilight, that they might fill
themselves with dalliances on those cursed pleasures of sin for a season?
Have not we been full of pride for want of that emptying grace of humility,
that God may be all in all? What shall I speak of vain glory, whereby we live
upon the stinking or vain breath of impostumated mouths? Or of our
Hypocrisy, whereby we have been painted Tombs full of stinking sauors? Or of
our Security, whereby we have cried, Peace, Peace, when we have been ready to
be swallowed up of the Plague, Sword, Famine, yea, Hell? Or of the disorders of
the poor, who are unruly and negligent, because they are dis-heartned with the
oppressions of the rich? Or of the disorders of the rich, who provide for
themselves, and are careless of the common good, because they are dis-heartned
with the clamours of the poor? Or of the neglect of Justice, because some
Rulers love to say with shame, Bring ye? What shall I speak of our Hos. 4. 18.
moderate thoughts concerning Popish superstition, as if it were as good a way
to Heaven as the best Religion in the world, notwithstanding the abominable
idolatry which does depend upon the works and whole worship of it? Or of that
ignorance which is amongst us, that makes us a prey to the Priests and
Jesuits, that make us (I say) need to be taught the first principles of the
Word of God, even Milk and not strong meat; notwithstanding, Heb. 5. 12.
that concerning the time we ought to be teachers? I might speak (to the
grief and vexation of our souls and spirits) of a world of other our sins,
which are as a cloud of witnesses against us, as if we were set to school to a
thousand Vices: In regard whereof, God may justly say to us as to his people of
old, Who shall have Ier. 15. 5, 6.
pity upon thee (O Jerusalem?) Or who shall be sorry for thee? Or who shall go
to pray for thy peace? Thou have forsaken me (says the Lord) and gone
backward: therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee, and destroy thee:
for I am weary of repenting. God might (I say) justly say thus unto us, and
deal with us accordingly: yet he has not dealt with us after our sins, nor
rewarded us according to our iniquities.

As a girdle cleaves to the loins of a man, so has God Ier. 23. 11.
tied us unto him, that we might be his people, and showed his marvelous great
kindness to the generations to come. Oh therefore let us labor (as we are
bound) to take notice of the favors of God, and to make a Catalogue of them,
to provoke our slothful hearts to obedience and thankfulness! How came it to
pass that the Israelites were so unthankful? Surely, they forgot God Psalm.
106. 21.
that made them, and the strong God of their salvation. Therefore Moses says,
Remember the Lord thy God, for it Deuteronomy. 8. 18, 19.
is he who gives thee power to get riches. And afterward Ioshuah puts them in
mind of Gods benefits, both before the Law and after the Law, as ye may see
in that excellent Josh. 24. 2, 3, 4, etc.
Parliament speech which he made before his death. So let us lay the mercies
of God before us, that we may be moved to be thankful.

To this end (that I may give a little light) let us behold God, either giving
of us favors, or removing miseries from us. If we would a little see his
favors, let us consider our selves living a fourefold life. The first is, a
life of vegetation, whereby we grow: and this puts us in mind of a double
benefit. First, that God has not made thee a Dwarf, or imperfect man of
parts, but he has given thee the full feature and proportion of a man, that
thou may be able to do all the business of a man. If thou had not this,
thou would see the worth of it. Carendo magis quam fruendo.
If thou were as little David to combat with Goliath; or if thou did dwell
among the sons of Anak; or if Og, the Deuteronomy. 3 11.
King of Bashan should set upon thee, who was of the remnant of the Giants, and
had his bed nine cubits long, and four cubits broad, according to the cubit of
a man, it would trouble thee much: but God has provided better for thee, for
thine, and for thy Countries good. Yea, secondly, God has not made thee fire,
and hail, and snow, and vapor, Psalm. 148. 8.
and wind. If he had but made us a Hailstone, yet we must have praised him
according to our creation; how much more now, God having given us life.

The second, is a life of sense, whereby we hear, see, smell, and the like,
as beasts do: and this puts us in mind of a threefold benefit. First, that
God has given us the comfort of our senses. If by Sight thou could not
discern colors; by Hearing, sounds; by Feeling, substances, qualities and
quantities; by Smelling, savors; and by Tasting, meats; though we had never
so much wisdom, we would think our selves half dead, and no better then
objects of scorn and pity. Yet God has not only given us this but more: for
secondly, he has given us a full measure of natural delights for all our
senses. There are variety of Flowers to fill thy smelling, chaunting of Birds
to delight thy hearing, unmatchable Colors for thy eye, infinite variety of
Meats for thy taste, and soft and hard, hot and cold substances for thy
touching. Yea, and more then this: Thirdly, he has made us the noblest
composition of all sensitive creatures. God might have made us a Dragon in the
deep, a Toade in the earth, an Owl in the air, and a Boar in the Forest,
but he has made us men and women, after his own Image, though we have
defiled it. Genesis 1. 27.
Yea, and though he has made Plants to excel us in Col. 2.
grouth, and Beasts in particular senses; as a Dog in smelling, a Hawke in
seeing, a Spider in touching, and an Hare in hearing; yet in all these Senses,
no creature is like unto man.

But thirdly, if to these we add the life of reason, then Gods kindnesses are
greater: for by it we are put in mind of a double benefit. For first, he has
given us reason to be a Ruler (at the least sometimes) to all the inferior
powers of the soul. If the will should be always an absolute Monarch of it
self, it would turn Tyrant, and make us utter that imperious voice, So I
will, so I Dictasapientum.
command, my will shall be my Councellor and wisdom. If the affections should
govern, the Laws would not be the Iuraplebeia.
sayings of the wise, but the decrees of the heady multitude. And what could
follow but confusion, when every man would do what he list. For the redress
of which disorders Almighty God has given us Reason. Yea, and secondly, he
has given us a sound mind, or our wits, as we call it. If we were fools, as
David did counterfeit himself to be before Achtsh in its slaueting mood; or
as Nabuchadnezzar, whom God deprived of his wits for a season, we were worse
then beasts* and every man (I think) would rather wish always to mourn,
having his wits about him, then always to laugh and to be merry without them.
Behold then, God has given them unto us, blessed be God.

Yet here God has not left to be kind unto us. For, if (lastly) we consider
the life of Religion, we know not where to begin with Gods favors, nor
where to make an end. We might speak of being borne of religious Parents, to
bring us up in the instruction and information Ephesians. 6.
of the Lord: of being brought up in a most Christian Church, where we are
entered into the public fellowship of the Saints by Baptism, and nourished by
the Word of God and the Eucharist: of living under a most worthy and religious
King, under whom we have peace, and the Gospel, and a greater measure of
plenty then we deserve. These and many other I might speak of, and I pray God
that the commonnesse of these benefits do not make us to slight them: but I
must not be infinite. Therefore briefly call to mind, that (first) from God
the Father we have the blessing of all his Attributes, by his divine influence,
doing of us good: as of his truth in keeping promise; of his mercy* in
accepting the righteousness of, Christ for ours; of his Justice, in bringing
tribulation to them that trouble us; and of his Wisdom, in finding a means in
Christ to make his Mercy and Justice meet together for our salvation, and so of
the rest. Secondly, from God the Son we have rasted such love, greater then
which, knows no man, that one should dye for his John 15. 13.
enemy. Yea, and this his love he has manifested by his Romans 5. 10.
obedience Active and Passive to the Father for us: as it is Psalm. 40 6, 7, 8.
written, Behold, I come. In the volume of thy Book it is Heb. 10.
written of me, that I should do thy Will, O God. Yea further, he does
maintain all this good, which he has done for us, by the power which the
Father has committed to him, whereby he rules in us, and ouer-ruleth our
enemies. Thirdly, from God the holy Ghost, we have the Wisdom of Christ
applied unto us by teaching: Ioh. 16. 13.
We have the Righteousness of Christ applied unto us by 1 Ioh. 3. 24.
union: We have the Holiness of Christ applied unto us by Ioh. 3. 5.
regeneration: We have the learned tongue of Christ applied Esaias.
unto us by comfort: And the full Redemption of Christ Ioh. 14. 16.
applied unto us, by assuring our hearts that we shall rejoice, Ioh. 16. 22.
and that no man shall take our joy from us. Lastly, from the whole Trinity we
have this benefit, that though all the earth be Gods, yet we are his
inheritance, his precious Deuteronomy. 32. 9.
people, his Jewels, his chief Treasure. This swalloweth Deuteronomy. 26. 18.
us up, and it may thus be valued, that the Saints Mal. 3. 16, 17.
of God, who were wiser then we, have rather chosen to Psalm. 135. 4.
be servants of God with sorrow, then otherwise to be in great places without
it, as Moses.

Thus have I stirred you up, to look upon God, giving of us favors. Now do
but cast your eyes about, unto more kindnesses, and see him removing miseries
from us. And this I shall show in two particulars: First, in delivering us from
our enemies both at home and abroad: and secondly, in a comfortable abating and
removing by degrees the fearful infection of the Plague. Concerning Gods
delivering us from our enemies (I think) no man can doubt that it is a
marvelous kindness. Therefore Joseph, when he was ready to dye prophesied of
Genesis 50. 24.
it for the Isrelites, and God in a special manner came down from Heaven to
send Moses about it: and the Israelites Exodus 3. 8, 16.
were assigned to keep the memory of it upon a Exodus 12.
set day: and Moses, as a thing worthy the speaking of, Exodus 18. 8.
told Iethro of it, and often rubbed it upon the Israelites, that they might
not forget it. But there are two things above the rest, which do make it to
be a great kindness.

First, that God did not deliver his people of old (ordinarily) but at their
great and earnest suite. Sometimes he left them twenty, sometimes forty, and
sometimes seventy and more years under their enemies hands, that they might
cry aloud, stretch out their throats till they were hoarse, and wait upon God.
Now things dearest bought and hardest come by, are usually (as we see) most
precious.

Secondly, consider that the oppressions of an enemy do extend both to body
and soul. When Sampson fell into his enemies hands, they put out his eyes,
bound him in Iud. 16. 21.
fetters, and made him grind in the prison house. Abel in Genesis 4, 8.
Cains hands came to an untimely death. The Israelites in the power of the
Egyptians were caused to serve and made weary of their lives. Naash the
Ammonite, having Exodus 1. 13, 14.
advantage over the men of Iabesh-Gilead, would 2 Samuel 11. 2.
have all their right eyes, that he might bring shame upon Israel. Haman being
provoked by Mordecay, thought it Est. 3. 6.
too little to hang him except he rooted out all the Jews. The King of Babel
having Zedechiah in his hands, slew his Ier. 52. 10, 11.
sons before his eyes, put out the eyes of Zedechiah, bound him in chains,
and carried him to Babylon. But what, does the oppression of an enemy go* no
further then the body? Yes, these things cannot, but by way of sympathy, sad
the Spirit: Yea, and it makes Joseph swear by the life of Pharaoh, and draws
fearfully to sin; as God knows how many the popish yoke has made to shake
hands with Conscience for the present, until this tyranny be ouerpast, and to
bow the knee to that cursed Romish Baall.

In these respects is the hand of an enemy a grievous burden: yet has our
good God (in whom alone we must trust) delivered us from it both past and
approaching. As for times past, how powerful and loving has God showed
himself, in smiting our enemies upon the cheek Psalm. 3. 7.
bone, and disappointing them of their hopes. Some through maleuolence would
have brought disgraces to our persons, troubles to our lives, unquietness to
our minds by unchristian advantages and politic wresting of simple,
tolerable, and good actions to badnesse, as the Jesuits declamations may
witness: yet blessed be God, we stand in the same condition as before. And do
we not call to mind the proud Armado of Spain in eighty eight, which was (to
no purpose) called Invincible? We were like the Israelites, two little flocks
of Kids, and they like the Aramites, who covered the Sea. They laughed at our
handfulls, and confidently expected our ruin: but he that sits in Heaven
laughed them to scorn, Psalm. 2.
the Lord had them in derision; he brake the snare, and we were delivered. And
can we ever forget that Gunpowder plot of Gods and our enemies, which should
have been the ruin of Prince and people? Who could deliver us from this but
God? He that must do it, must have praescience to foreknow the mischief,
wisdom to supplant it, and power to withstand it: And where are these but in
God, and in them to whom God leudeth them?

Thus has God defeated our enemies in times past, and has he not done so for
the present? It is not long since Jesuitical brags were evidences of their
hopes, and their facings of an assurance of a triumphant day: but God has once
more driven those stout Confessors heads into an hole. And it is but as
yesterday that our hollow friends beyond the Seas looked toward us, either to
affright us, or else, as from the top of Pisgah, to look toward our Land of
Canaan, with a desire to plant themselves, and root out us and our posterity:
but as Saul had tidings which drew him from the Wilderness of Maon: so there
was a Flea in their ear, which (blessed be God) has for the present sent
them another way. So, even so, Iud. 5.
Lord, let thine enemies perish, be consounded or disappointed still.

Secondly, as God has been kind in removing the misery of our enemies
abroad, so of a wonderful abating the Plague of Pestilence at home. The
grieuousnesse of the evil will make the more for the greatness of the
deliverance. And that the Plague is a grievous evil, besides, our woeful
experience (I think) these considerations will make good: First, it is a
pouring out of Gods Ezekiel. 14. 19.
wrath upon a Land in blood; and a pleading against a people Ezekiel. 38 22.
with pestilence and blood, as the Prophet calls it. And it may be called so,
either because it poysoneth the blood, so as no disease does the like, or else
because in the general (though not in every particular upon whom it seazeth)
it is an argument of an angry God, who will not be pacified with the light
skirmishes of Fevers, Aches, Gouts, Rheumes, and the like, but will have blood,
and that in abundance, and stremes answerable to the iniquities which have gone
before; as when he says, He will make his Arrows drunk with blood, and his
Sword shall eat Deuteronomy. 32. 42.
flesh. Secondly, it is the Plague of woeful evils, or the noisome Pestilence,
as the Psalmist calls it. For it poysoneth Psalm. 91. 3.
the spirits, both Animal and Vital, choking the one in the brain, and
stifling and ouercomming the other in the heart: yea, it Infecteth Houses,
Clothes, Breath, and the Air it self. It is true, that I do not think it
naturally to have such a malignant quality as other poisons have; for then (as
they do in some degrees or other) it would seize upon all persons where it
comes, which it does not, but according to the Commission, which (as a servant)
it has from God to do his pleasure: yet that it noysomly infecteth (I think)
we have no just cause to doubt, if we consider that God sets his
extraordinary providence on work, to keep them that trust in him (if they
have not done all that business Psalm. 91. 4.
which he has for them in this world) from the infection of it. Thirdly, that
it is the terror of the night Psalm. 91. 5, 6.
which is so much the more terrible because (like a thief) it walks in the
dark, and surpriseth a man before he is aware. Hence is it that it breeds a
strangeness betwixt Father and Son, Mother and Daughter, Brother and Brother,
one friend and another. Hence is it that some in places of danger grew cruel,
and others not in so great danger grew unkind. Hence is it that there is flight
on all sides in times of infectio^. The wicked do fly out of rashness, and
contempt of Gods stroke, like rebellious sons, who, when they see that their
father has provided a Rod for them, do run out of the house from him, and will
neither submit to his correction nor amend their faults for which he does
correct them. Oh too many such fly from the Plague out of the City, and are
plagues unto the Country by disorderlinesse. But these must know, that if they
be now appointed unto death, Gods hunter shall bring the^ into the snare: if
not, except they shall with bleeding souls amend their ways, God has
reserved the^ for greater miseries. The good do fly out of humble submission,
to the use of those means, which daly experience warrants to be the way to
safety, at some times, and to some persons. Therefore like fearful children
(yea, and good ones too) when they see their father reach down a Rod, they run
away, not out of contempt, but with deep cries and lamentations, out of
tenderness of nature, sorrow for offense, and hope of pardon: so sometimes
Gods good children do fly also, but with humblings in the sight of God, for
the weakness of their faith, want of preparedness to meet God, and the like;
and do in their absence, not think themselves so safe, but that God may smite
them; and therefore they spend much time in deprecating the wrath, in mourning
with them that mourn, and (to their power) in relieuing the necessities of
their forsaken brethren that are in adversity. These three things (if we speak
of no other) do either make or show the Plague to be a grievous evil: yet
some of us may say with the Psalmist, which some change, A thousand has fallen
besides me, and ten thousand at my Psalm. 91. 7.
right hand, but it has not come near me. And where it has come, may say, I
have been as Aaron, standing betwixt Numb. 16. 48.
the living and the dead, but the Name of the Lord has Prou. 18. 10.
been a strong Tower: And many that had the Pestilence, and are yet escaped
may say, We have been sore afflicted, but it is thou (Lord) which have not
delivered us to death: For man is not Lord over the spirit, to retain the
Eccles. 8. 8.
spirit, neither has he power in the day of death: And all of us, who have
felt, heard, seen or understood of the abatements of this noisome evil, may
say, Blessed be the Lord for this marvelous kindness; and let all Gods
people say, Amen.

It may be you will ask why we should account this such Ob.
a kindness, seeing he gives it to many that are wicked people, and denies it
to many whom he dearly loves?

I answer, that it is never the less favor for that. If Solu.
he give it unto wicked men, it is because God may show the riches of his
bountifulness and patience, and long sufferance toward them: and if they
after their hardness, and hearts that cannot repent, heap up to themselves
Romans 2. 4, 5.
wrath against the day of wrath, and the declaration of the just judgment of
God: What good have they by it, what good can they have by it? If he deny it
unto good men, it is as a father denies a knife to a Child, who knows not how
to use it. To dye of the Plague is better then to escape to such. To such, to
dye, is gain: for all Phil. 1.
things work together for their good; and so whether they Romans 8.
live or dye they are the Lords. Romans 14. 8.


You have now (so far as I intended) as in a little Map, a glimpse of the
world of those kindnesses which God has showed to us. Let us take heed that
we do not diminish the worth of them. Ye know what is said of the
Israelites, That they despised the good and pleasant land: Psalm. 106. 24.
and ye know what they said of Mannah, Our souls are Numb. 11. 6.
dried up, and we can see nothing but this Man: and again, Numb. 21. 15.
Our soul loatheth this light bread. But though Israel play the harlot, yet
let not Judah sin; and though Israel, according to the flesh, has been
unthankful, yet let not Israel according to the spirit. No, let us rather
hear our good God speaking unto us, and saying, Have I been a wilderness
unto thee, or an unpleasant land? Ier. 2. 31.


If you shall ask me, What good it will do unto us thus to behold God in his
merciful kindnesses unto us? Truly* they will be excellent means to subdue
the pride of our hearts, and to make us serviceable to Gods will. The power of
God alone does it not, for though Christ manifested his power, yet it did no
good to them that apprehended him; they went backward and fell to the ground at
John 18. 6.
his very word, yet they persisted in their course. The justice of God does it
not, for though God brought one Plague after another upon Pharaoh, which made
him stoop for the present (as many have done, I fear, in this Plague) yet
presently he hardened his heart: but if the mercy of God comes, it is like the
Sun which thawes hard Ice, and the Fire, which makes old Wax soft, pliable,
and fit to be wrought upon. Though Justice follow us to Hell, yet there is
blasphemy and gnashing of teeth, both which are arguments of pride: But Paul
knew how forceable an argument this was, I beseech you by the mercies of God.
Romans 12. 1.
Is not my word (says God) like an hammer and like fire? Ier. 23. 29.
The Law which brings tidings of Justice, may like a Hammer break our stony
hearts in pieces (break, I say, before bend) but the Gospel (bringing the
glad tidings of salvation by Christ) like fire will melt us and mould us anew.
This will breed the spirit of judgment (as David's kindness* made Saul judge
him more righteous then himself) and the spirit of burning to cleanse out Esa
4. 4.
and purge away the filth of sin, that the graces of God may be shed into us,
or (at the least) shine from us, and amongst the rest this just thankfulness.

Well (say you) I see that God (blessed for ever) has been marvelous kind
unto me, I have heard and felt many particulars of it, and I see that the
thought of it is of excellent use to break my proud heart, and make me
thankful to God: I pray now tell me wherein must I show my thankfulness to
God? I answer, to give you a little help herein, I must first lay down the
root and ground of thankfulness; and secondly, the practice of it. As for the
root of thankfulness, It is the love of God. No man will freely and joyfully
acknowledge, that all goodness, in what estate soever comes from God alone,
except we love God. We see ordinarily, if men happen to receive kindnesses from
them they love, or desire not to be beholding unto, how they pinch courtesy
(as we say) and slight them: whereas, if we do receive them from such as we
prize in our affections, then every Molehill is a Mountain, and a point from a
friend is better then a pound from an enemy. Therefore Paul loving Aquila and
Priscilla, did freely acknowledge their kindness: Romans 16. 4.
saying, They have for life, yea for my life, laid down a neck, yea, their
own neck, unto whom not only I give thanks, but all the Churches of the
Gentiles. So likewise David, when he had professed, saying, I love the Lord,
Psalm. 116. 1, 12.
he presently shows it, and says farther, What shall I render unto the Lord
for all his benefits? Oh therefore let us labor to wind up our hearts from
the love of the world, 1 John 2. 15.
and the things which are in the world, that the love of the Father may be in
us. And (if we desire to be thankful) let us not give either God, or our
souls rest, till we have found this love in us in these five particulars.

Jacob did think seven years trouble Genesis 29. 20.
nothing for Rachel, because he loved her; and Gods people of old have endured
the loss of Father, Mother, Houses, Lands, Wife and Children for Christ's sake,
because they loved him: so must we (every day, and upon the Lords day, in
living the life of Jesus, and dying for the Lord when he calls) suffer any
thing for the Lord, if we love him.

where our Treasure is, there will our hearet be also. Mat. 6. 21.
Of the wicked man the Psalmist says, That God is not in all his thoughts: but
he that loves him, can think of him almost to an ecstasy. As when David
says, Oh how I Psalm. 119. 97.
love thy Law! he presently adds, It is my meditation continually: so when
we can say, That we love God, our thoughts of him will let in comparison of
other things, deep and long: yea we will think upon him sometimes in the
night season, and our soul shall receive comfort.

two pence which the Samaritan left to Luke 10. 35.
provide for him, it had been an argument that he neither regarded him nor his
kindness; and it was a sign that Esau loved not God, because he esteemed not
his birthright: So certainly is the Law of God far from us, if we love not
the word, wherein we hear our lover speak, and the Sacraments, wherein we
see him speak peaceably unto us.

Fourthly, in being humbly familiar with God, and acquainting Job 12. 21.
our selves with him. Where there is love free from Job 12. 21.
jealousy betwixt man and man, they think themselves never better the^ when
they are in one another company, talking, and communing one with another,
laying open each other griefs, and making one another partaker of each others
comforts. So we must have such interest in Gods acquaintance, if we love him,
that we must often sup with him, and open our hearts unto him, both concerning
Apoc. 3. 20.
our miseries and our sins. As if we should say; thou see (Lord) what
sorrows I endure within and without: I beseech thee give me grace so to carry
my self, as thou may have the glory of this thine own work. And thou
know (o my God) that I have this infirmity, or that weakness, and that
were it not for thee, I should fall into fearful breaches of thy Law: but
Lord help me against this or that (as against pride, vaineglorie, deceit,
hypocrisy and the like) that I may in a more settled and constant course honor
thee my good God, to whom I am so infinitely bound. Oh, how would such
acquaintance make the day of death welcome, and our daily prayers comfortable,
without which we have little hope to have access to God in either.

Lastly, we must love God by fearing to lose him, grieuing after him, when in
sense and feeling he is lost, and caring to recover him again. It is strange
that a man Discat timere qui vult amare. Amor eijcit timorem inimici, non
timorem domini.
should love by fearing: but it is very true. Perfect love casts out fear of
having, to wit, the wrath of God for sin, (because, after repenting and
believing the Gospel, it quiets the heart from such troubles) but it casts
not out fear of loosing, to wit, our God in those sweet comforts, whereby he
speaks peace unto our consciences, and says unto our souls that he is our
salvation. Blessed John 19.
is he that so fears always, says Solomon. As Pilate loves John 19.
his place by fearing to loose it, which made him do against Quod cupis habere
times perdere.
his conscience when once he heard that speech. If thou deliver Christ, thou
art not Caesar's friend: So must we love God so, as we must fear to loose him
above all things. Yea and as the young man in the Gospel, which Luke 18. 22,
23.
was a rich man, when he did but think of parting with all and following
Christ, was very heavy, because he loved his riches too well: so when we do
but think of parting with our God (who is our Portion) it cannot but Psalm. 119.
grieve us, if we love him and prize him as we should. Yea and again, if the
Spouse in the Canticles, when through her security she had ouerslipped the
golden season of entertaining Christ, who therefore withdrew himself, Did
seek him (whom her soul loved) but could not find Can. 5. 6, 7, 8, etc
him, did call him though he answered not, did go to the watchmen, and took a
great deal of pains to recover him: then so must we, if our hearts be in
love with God, care to recover God by hearing, praying, meditating, conferring,
receiving of the Sacrament, and such other good duties, in which it pleases
him to give us the influence of his favor, and the testimony to our spirits
of his most dear presence.

Thus have I learned you how to love God, that we may lay a good ground for
the duty of thankfulness, which is to be practiced by every one of us. Now
that we may be the better able to practice it, you must know that it must be
performed in word and deed. To thank God for his blessings with our tongues,
and not to live answerable to them, is no better then to say, All hayle King of
the Jews* and to spit upon him; it is to have Jacobs smooth tongue and Esau's
rough hands; it is as bad as to give a man sweet words for a benefit, and to
beat him about the ears: in conclusion, it is after a deal of formal
hypocrisy, hanged out at the sign of the lips, to requite God with evil for
good, which is the worst degree of ingratitude. First we must thank God in
word; because we must take the first opportunity to do it: for delays argue
no will unto it. Secondly, we must thank God in work, for as Physicians do
pass their judgments of men's hearts by their arms (when they feel upon Per
brachium fit iudicium de cord.
their pulses) and not by their tongues: so wise men will look more to doing,
then to saying (though both are good, and both must be done) remembering that
Jesus Acts 1. 1.
did and said.

As concerning that thanks which we must give to God in word, it stands in
the practice of a double duty: David says, Come and hearken all ye that
Psalm. 66. 16, 17, etc.
fear God, and I will tell you what be has done to my soul. I called upon
the Lord with my voice, and he was exalted with my tongue: and God heard me,
and considered the voice of my prayer, and so forth. Now, for our more
conscionable practice of this duty, we must observe four rules.

which are renewed every morning, will Lam. 3. 23.
either out of custom, or example, or conviction speak of them in general:
but we must do it in particular. As Jacob names them, saying: With my staff
came I over this Genes. 32. 10.
Jordan, and now have I gotten two Bands: so must we. As if we should say, as
Hannah in her song, The bows of the 1. Sam. 2. 4. 5.
mighty are broken, and the weak have girded themselves with strength; They
that are full are hired forth for bread, and the hungry are no more hired, so
the barren has borne seven and she that had many children is feeble: So we,
the Spanish Armado was broken, the Gunpowder traitors were discovered, the
Plague is ceased, and our enemies are yet disappointed, Oh blessed be God.

David says, (as I mentioned before,) Come ye children, Psalm. 66. 16.
hearken unto me, I will tell you what he has done for my soul. And to this
we are exhorted by the Psalmist, saying: Sing unto the Lord and praise his
Name, declare his Psalm. 96 2. 3.
salvation from day to day: Declare his glory among all Nations, and his
wonders among all people.

Isaacks giving a blessing to Jacob and Esau. The worldly man says, Blessed
Genes. 27. 28. 39.
be God for the fatness of the eartth, and for the dew of Heaven from above,
as if a fat earth were his best benefit: but the godly man says, Blessed be
God for the dew of Heaven, and fatness of the earth, and plenty of Wheat and
Wine. Thus is he wise in speaking of spiritual blessings with the highest
strain; if not always in order, yet in affection. See it in David, My soul
praise the Psalm. 103. 1. 2. 3. 4 5.
Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy Name: my soul praise the
Lord, and forget not all his benefits, which forgiueth all thine iniquity and
heals all thine infirmities. Here are the chief favors which he speaks
of, and then he descends lower: Which redeemeth thy life from the grave, and
which satisfies thy mouth with good things. This also must be our course. We
must thank God for outward peace and prosperity, but especially for the
Gospel: We must thank God for our deliverance from the Plague: but
especial, that he has given us to know the Plague in our own hearts, and to
confess it, and turn 1. King. 8. 38.
from it unto the living God.

Job, who said, The Lord gives and the Lord takes away, blessed be the Job
1. 21.
Name of the Lord: yea, they are renewed every morning; Lam. 3. 23.
and therefore must we say with the Psalmist, In the morning, in the evening,
and at noonetide, will I praise thee because Psalm. 119.
of thy righteous judgments. Thus have I taught you how to be thankful unto
God by Celebration, that is, speaking of Gods praises to others.

I give thee thanks, O Father, Lord Math. 11. 25.
of Heaven and earth. Now for the better performance of this duty, we must
properly do three things:

upon whom God casts his beams, and gather our worthiness, not by the worth
of Gods blessings (seeing a precious stone may be in a Toades head) but by the
glorious worthiness which is in God, who accounts it little enough for him to
give, though it be too much for us (as we are our selves) to receive. Hence is
it that David cries out, What is man that thou should be mindful of Psalm.
8. 4.
him; and the son of man, that thou should so regard him. And good Jacob,
when he did swim in Gods favors, freely confessed, that he was less then
the least of Gods Genesis 32. 10.
mercies. Thus ought it to be with us. As if we should say, O my God, how
unworthy am I that I should live, when so many have dyed? that I should abound,
when so many have wanted? that I should have ease, when so many have cried for
woe and pain? What am I better then my brethren? No, Lord, I am worse then
many thousands, who have made their beds in the dark in this common calamity.
Thou know mine unrighteousness, and mine iniquity can I not hide, and yet
thou have been gracious, and so forth.

Hannah, when she had borne her Samuel, sings, The barren has borne 1 Samuel 2.
5.
seven: and David, when he sat before the Lord, said, Who am I, O Lord God,
and what is mine house that thou 1 Chro. 17. 16, 17
have brought me hitherto? yet thou esteeming this a small thing, O God, have
also spoken concerning the house of thy servant a great while, and have
regarded me according to the state of a man of high degree. Even thus must we
do: as if we should say, O blessed God, my Father was an Amorite, and my
Mother an Hittite, and thou might have cast me into Hell from the womb, yet
thou keptst me when I hanged upon my Mothers breast: yea thou have brought me
up in a Christian Church, under Christian Kings, who have desired to serve God
according to thy Word: yea, and thou have continued the Gospel to me even
unto this day: and though I have been unworthy of them, and therefore thou
have plagued me and mine; yet, as if I had been like King David, worth ten
thousand of others, thou have kept me from the common misery, and so forth.

Moses sings, Who is like unto thee, O Exodus 15. 11.
Lord among the gods! Who is like unto thee so glorious in holiness, fearful
in praises and doing wonders! Fearful in praises (says he) because he cannot
duly be praised but with astonishment: according to that of the Psalmist, God
is very terrible in the assembly of the Saints. And thus Psalm. 89. 7.
should he be to us in praising him. As if we should say, O our God, let not
thy favors seem ordinary unto us, which thou bestowest upon us. It may seem
a small thing to us, to have water to our hands, air to breath in, earth to
tread upon, and the like: but when we do consider who it is that gives, and
to whom; that thou art he who art a God of glory, whose glory is able to
swallow up Heu miser quid sum? vas sterquilinij* concilia putredinis plenus
foetore, August.
our understanding, and that it is to us, who are a sink of sin and stinking
noysomnesse before thee, we are confounded in our selves, and cannot tell which
way to return thee thanks, which in the least measure may answer thy love,
and so forth.

Thus have we considered that thanks which we must give to God in word; yet
that is not enough, for it remains that we be thankful unto God in deeds
also. And wherein this stands we cannot better learn then by looking into
those that have been thankful unto God in the Scriptures. Now these have
performed a real thankfulness unto God two ways. First, by studying and
caring in what particulars they may show themselves thankful unto God. As one
that has received a great kindness, does bethink himself how he may in
some measure requite it: so will he that is thankful do. As 2. Cor. 7. 11.
the penitent man cares for the remission of his sins and eternal
happiness by Christ, and therefore cares also to use means answerable
thereunto; so does also the truly thankful person. See it in David, who having
received a great kindness from God says, What shall I Psalm. 116. 12.
give unto the Lord? as if he did consult and take care with himself how to be
thankful to God. Even thus must it be with us, we must, when we are by our
selves alone, take thought and care what to do, wherein we may show our
selves thankful to God. As a man roles every stone, and takes thought how to
live and bear about the world (as we say:) so must all of us whom God has
pleased to deliver from these dangerous times, either by healing our sores, or
by keeping us from infection, or by comforting our hearts against the fear of
our enemies, either at home or abroad, say and think with himself: O Lord,
what shall I do? How shall I carry my self in my thoughts, words and actions;
yea, and sufferings so as may pleasethee, and I may testify how highly I prize
those favors which I have received from thy hands.



First, we must register the noble acts of God; according to that of the
Psalm, This shall be written for the generations to come. Hence was it that
the Patriarchs erected Psalm. 102. 18.
Mountains, builded Altars, and imposed fit names upon their children, that
they might in these things register the kindness of God unto them. Therefore
as Ahashuerosh did cause his deliverance from Bigthan and Teresh to be written
in the book of the Chronicles before Hest. 2. 22.
the King: so must we have a record of favors, that we telling our souls that
such a year God did such a kindness for thee, and such a year, month,
week, or day did he another, to day thou have received one evidence of his
love, and yesterday thou did receive another; we may not only practice a
duty of thankfulness in it, but provoke our selves thereby to be thankful in
after times: As Ahashuerosh his registring of his deliverance Hest. 6.
made him afterward to be thankful to Mordecai who (under God) was the
author of it. And think we not thus of our selves, that there are few who have
done thus before us. I make no doubt but that thousands of Gods people, of whom
the world is not worthy, have taken this Heb. 11.
course in secret, yea and do take it. And of a good man I have often read, who
is said to delight in one book which he daily carried about him, and was
portable enough; for it had but two leaves, one black, and the other white: in
the black he made a register of his sins, that he might daily be humble, in
the white he made a register of Gods mercies that he might be thankful.

Secondly, we must heartily labor the good of others. For can we requite God
himself? we cannot do it, Our Psalm. 16.
goodness reaches not to him: only he pleases to interpret some services
which he requires as thankful requitals to himself; amongst which this is
one, to do good to others. Now, this we must do (by way of thankfulness unto
God) both unto their souls and bodies. As for their souls we must labor
their conversion and turning from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan to God, Acts 26. 18.
that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance amongst them
that are sanctified by faith in Christ. Thus David promises unto God when he
says: Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free
Spirit, Psalm. 51. 12, 13.
then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted
unto thee. Yea and Peter was commanded thus much when Christ says unto him:
When thou art Luke 22. 32.
converted, show thy thankfulness, by strengthening thy brethren. As for the
bodies of others we must relieve (so far as our selves be not grieved) the
poor members of 2. Cor. 8. 13.
Jesus Christ. For do but mark how it was with the Jews, when they freely
heard the word of God again, they did eat and drink, and did send away part
(as they were Neb. 8. 10. 11. 12
commanded) to those for whom nothing was prepared, for joy that they
understood the words which they had taught them. And we may read of an
Apostolical ordinance of thankfulness in the Primitive Church to be observed
every Lords day, or first day of the week, that every one should put aside by
himself, and lay up as God had prospered 1. Cor. 16. 1. 2.
him, for the necessities of the Saints. Thus also must it be with us who have
tasted how good God is, in these times of troubles: we must throw about these
our alms both spiritual and temporal. We must labor to do others souls
good, who are within our gate and jurisdiction, saying as David, Come ye
children, hearken unto me, Psalm.
I will teach you the fear of the Lord: or as Philip who had found Christ said
to Nathanael. Come and see: we must labor Ioh. 1. 46.
to do others bodies good, by thinking who have endured more hardship then we,
and who have endured the more for our flight, and then parting with something
to feed the hungry, cloathe the naked, relieve the oppressed, maintain the
fatherless, and set at liberty the honest prisoner and captive, and the like.
Thus shall we show the true use and issue of all our fasting this Summer,
which as the Prophet says, is to loose the bands of wickedness, Esaias 58. 6. 7.
to take off the heavy burdens, and let the oppressed go free, and that ye
break every yoke. It is to deal thy bread to the hungry, to bring the poor
that wander into thine house, to cover the naked and not to hide thy self from
thine own flesh.

Thirdly, we must renew our covenants and promises to God of a more sincere and
hearty obedience. When God had delivered David from Saul in the Wilderdesse of
Maon, he renewed his promises twice together, That he would take the Cup of
salvation, That he will offer the sacrifice Psalm. 116. 13. 17.
of praise, and call upon the Name of the Lord. Thus Asa, when God gave him
victory over his enemies and settled peace, and the Prophet Azariah came and put
him in mind of his duty, he and his people made a covenant 2. Chro. 15. 12. 14
to seek the Lord God of their fathers with all their hearts, and with all
their souls, and they swear unto the Lord with a loud voice, and with
Trumpets, and shouting, and Cornets. Thus Ezra also, and the people who
returned from the captivity of Babylon, when they were sensible of Gods mercy
and their own sinning, and while there was Ezra 10 2. 3.
hope in Israel (though as yet they trembled for their sins in the street of
the house of God, and for the ruin (as we may do for the Plague) did make a
covenant with God to put away their heathenish wives, and live more holily.
Thus must it be with us also; we must bethink our selves wherein we have
offended God, either privately or publicly, either as Magistrates, or
Ministers, or Husbands, or Wives, or Masters, or Servants, or Fathers, or
Children, or Buyers, or Sellers, or Borrowers, or Lenders, or Letters, or
Hirers; and we must prepare our selves for the Lords Supper (with the first
opportunity) wherein we must renew our Covenant with God, humbling our selves
for the sins we have committed, and promising to God upon his assuring of us
his love unto us in Christ Jesus, that we will be careful to use our best
endeavors, according to the measure of grace which we have received, to live
more holily to God, more righteously and justly in all Tit. 2. 12.
our dealings with men, and more soberly in our selves: and when we cannot do
so much good as we would, that we will lament it to God, and cry out unto him,
saying, Oh that my ways were so direct that I might keep thy Statutes. Psalm.
119. 5.


Lastly, as we must renew our Covenant, so when we have done, we must with all
our strength (and with an humble dependence upon the use of Gods means for
more) resolve and settle our bodies and souls to continue in it, and never so
to offend so good a God as we have done in former times. This is true
thankfulness indeed, when out of a feeling of Gods love, and out of a
conscience of our duty to God, we can say as David, I Psalm. 119.
have sworn to keep thy righteous judgments, and I have determined to keep
thy Statutes. Without this resolution our hearts will start aside like a broken
Bow, and our Psalm.
righteousness will be like a morning dew, and like a cloud Hos. 6.
passing away. Therefore (I say once more) strive we to the utmost of that to
which God has enabled us, and for the rest pray with David, Lord, Stablish me
by thy free Psalm. 51.
Spirit, which is a Spirit of liberty, and will make us run the way of thy
Commandments.

Thus have I taught you in some measure to practice this duty of Thankfulness.
I pray God give us understanding in all things, and honest hearts that we may
practice this duty now when Gods marvelous kindness calls for it with so
loud a voice. And thus I commend you to him, who is of power to establish you
according to the Gospel, Romans 16. 25.
even to the God of peace, whom I humbly beseech to make you perfect in all
good works, to do his will working Heb. 13, 20, 21.
in you, that which is pleasant in his sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be
praise for ever and ever; Amen.

FINIS.

