An answer to the examination that is said to have been made of one named
John de Poltrot, calling himself the Lord of Merey, upon the death of the late
Duke of Guyse By the Lord of Chastillon admyrall of France, and others named
in the said examination.

At Caen. 1562.

PRINTED AT LONdon by Rouland Hall, for Edward Sutton, dwelling in Lumbard
street at the sign of the Cradell. 1563.

An Epistle.
A Few days after the late Duke of Guyse was hurt suddenly before the town
of Orleans, the.xiiij. day of Februarye last past there rose a bruyte and
rumor, that one called Merey had done the deed at the suggestion of the Lord
Admiral which was then and is yet at Caen in Normandy Lieutenant in the kings
army under the charge of the prince of Conde. Whereat the said Lord Admiral
was not much moved, for as much as he thought that this slander (as many
other) would vanishe away of it self. But since by the solicitation of a
certain man called La Vallette, master of the camp of the light horsemen
under the said Duke of Guyse, going about to disvnite the Almaines, and to
put the Amirals army into an uproar and trouble: a copy of the confession
being cast abroad in the said army, ascribed unto one called John de Poltrot,
naming himself Senior of Merey, and signed by the hand of one called Maluaut,
Scriuener or Notarie: by the which it appears that the said Poltrot being
examined by the queen mother in person, and in the presence of certain lords
of the counsel, and knights of the order of the kings majesty, did greatly
charge the said Lord admyrall, and certain other Lords, and also certain
Ministers of the word of God, to have induced and allured by words and money
the said Poltrot to that which is abouesayde. The said Lord admyrall having
respect and regard to the troth and to his honor, can not attribute such an
invented accusation but to ye ene^ies of the rest and quietness of this realm,
continuing in their wicked will and purpose, which is wholly to overthrow and
destroy the said Lord admyrall with all those that profess the gospel
bringing them into hatred to all the world by such crafts and practices:
whereunto he means spedely to seek a remedy. And for this cause not
regarding the subtelties and deceytes of the aforesaid enemies, but trusting in
God and in his own good conscience has not stickt to publishe the said
confession word for word, adjoining thereunto his answers upon every article
contained therein. Protesting before god, to answer it before all Judges in
christendom that be not suspected, but indifferent, and offering him self to
maintain his innocence in all sorts and manners reasonable and meet in the
place and degree that he has in this realm: to thentent that such calumny
and slander being discovered, and the troth having vanquished lies, the
faultye and culpable may be punished, as the deed shall require. (**)

The.xxi. day of February 1562. in the camp at saint Hyllaries beside S.
Mesmyn.
BEfore the Queen mother of the king, my lords the Cardinal of Bourbon Duke
of Etampes, prince of Mantua, ye Earl of Gruyeres the lords of Martigues, of
Sansac, of Cypierre, of Loss, and the bishop of Lymoge, respectively lords
of the privy counsel of the king, and knights of the order being than
present. Was brought one John de Poltrot, naming himself seniour of merey
borne in the country of Angoumois in the lordship of Aubeterre of the age of
xxvi. years or there about: who being commanded by the said Queen to declare
truly the cause of his enprisonement who provoked him to shoot ye dagge
wherewith the Duke of Guyse was hurt on thursday last: what his intent was, or
theirs which had caused him to do it, and what money he received for it or
trusted for to receive. Said and confessed kneelynge on his knees before the
Queen and asking pardon these words following.

Deposition or confession.
That is to say, yt about the month of June or July last. The Prince of Conde
being at Orleans, and the lord of Soubize in his company whose servant he is,
he went to the said town of Orleans.

Answer.
The Lord admiral answers truly and before God, that he knows not when the
said Poltrot arrived at Orleans, nor when he went from thence, and remembers
not that ever he saw him nor heard him speak in any manner or sort, until
January last by occasion which afterward shall be declared.

Deposition.
In the which place the Lord of Feuqueres the young governor of Roy and
Captain Brion, came unto him, and said: that heretofore they had known him
to be a man to execute a matter or enterprise, and that if he would take in
hand to do a good exployte, which should turn to the service of God, and the
honor of the king, and the comfort of his people, he should be greatly
commended and esteemed. And then the Deponent requiring them to declare more,
and to open unto him what enterprise they would speak of assuryng them that
for his part, he would be always ready to do service to the king: they than
knowing his good will, they remitted him to the Lord admyrall, and told him
that he should give him to understand more at large the matter that they had
moved unto him.

Answer.
As touching the Captain Brion, the said lord admyrall declares that he
never heard him speak of the said Poltrot, and it is not like to be true,
that if the said Brion had known of any such practice he would have held his
peace since that he was in the service of the Duke of Guyse where he is now
dead. And as concerning Feuqueres, the said Lord Admyrall remembers well
that about the latter end of Ianuarye last, and never before, he told him,
speaking of the said Poltrot newly comme from Lions, that sometime he had
known him a man of service, in the time of the war in Pycardye, which was
the cause that the Lord Admyrall shortly after the report of the said
Feuqueres, employed him as anon shall be declared. And as for the rest, the
said Lord Admyrall doubts not but the said Feuqueres can well answer for
his own deeds.

Deposition.
And again, two or three days after, the said men Feuqueres and Brion
presented him to the said Lord of Chastillon admyrall being lodged at Orleans
nigh unto the house of the prince of Conde. And the said Chastillon was then
in a low hall under the said lodging: and after the said Feuqueres and Brion
had presented him to the said lord of Chastillon, he commanded all that were
in the hall to depart, which thing they did. And also the said Feuqueres and
Brion departed, and he remained alone with the said Lord of Chastillon, who
asked him by these or such like words, if he would take upon him to go into the
camp of the king, (which the said lord of Chastillon called the Duke of Guyse
camp, being then beside Bogency) and that if he would enterprise to go to ye
said camp about the matter that he would declare unto him, he should do God,
the king and the common wealth great service: and the said deponent askyng him
what enterprise it was, he said unto him that if he would venture to go to the
said camp to kill the said Duke of Guise (which persecuted the faithful)
he should do a meritorius work toward God and man. The said Deponent hearing
these words, which seemed unto him more then he was able to do or perform, he
said unto the said lord of Chastillon, that he durst not take upon him so great
a matter. The which answer being made, the said Lord of Chastillon pressed
him no further: but prayed him to keep this talk secret, and not to utter it
to any man.

Answer.
The contents of this article are utterly false and imagined: whereupon the
said Lord admiral shows first that in all this confession he is called but
Lord of Chastillon, which is a name yt he tells not scorn of, or disdeineth
it: but yet that declares manifestly out of what shop this confession
comcommeth, seeing he is not so called in no place of all this Realm nor else
where, but by them that pretend by such craft to beriue and spoil him of
the state and degree that appertains unto him.

And secondly these words. The camp of the king which the said Lord of
Chastillon calls the camp of ye Duk of Guyse being then beside Bogency, show
sufficiently that whosoever wrote or endyted this deposition of the poor
Deponent was to much in a passion or affection for to do his occupatio^ well,
and went about no other thing but to seek how he might not leave out any
thing that might charge the said lord Admiral, were it to the purpose or not.
Finally when it is said that the Lord Admiral for to induce the said
Poltrot, alleged unto him yt he should do a meritorious work to god and man
who sees not plainly that all this talk was forged by some one all together
ignorant of the true religion, y^ which ye said lord admiral professes? He
should at the least have considered what the doctrine of the Gospel is, and how
much it condempneth the words to Merito and meritorious works, before he took
in hand to counterfeit the talk of a gospeler. But behold how it fares with
false witnesses by the Just judgment of God, that by their own mouth they be
convinced.

Deposition.
And since the said Lord of Soubize departing from the said town of Orleans
for to go to Lions, the said Deponent accompanied him and there contynuallye
remained with him, until about fiftene days after the battaylle fought
beside Dreux.

Answer.
The said Lord Admyrall knows nothing of all this.

Deposition.
That the said lord of Chastillon, wrote to ye said Soubize being at Lions ye
he should send him the said deponent.

Answer.
The said lord Admiral wrote then many times to lions to the lord of Soubize:
but upon his life and his honor it shall not be found that ever he wrote,
that the said Poltrot should be sent unto him whom he knows not whether ever
he saw or knew before, and thought nothing upon him.

Deposition.
And tha^ in deed the said lord of Soubize dispatched him with letters to go
to the said lord of Chastillo^, and gave him a packet to carye not telling him
what he wrote unto the said lord of Chastillo^. And being arrived nygh unto ye
town of Celles in Berry in a place named Villefranche, he found the lord of
Chastillon there to whom he delivered the said packet of letters.

Answer.
The lord Admiral remembers well that it is so: but so far of is it yt it was
to employ the said Poltrot about this matter now in question, that contrary
wise the said lord of Soubize sent word that he should send him again, because
he was a man of service, as the letters shall declare and specifye.

Deposition.
And when he had seen the letters he commanded him to go to tarrye him at
Orleans and so he did.

Answer.
The said lord Amirall sent him not to Orleans, but he gave him leave to go
thither, because he said he had busynes to do there.

Deposition.
And shortly after the return of the said lord of Chastillon unto Orleans,
this Deponent presenting himself to ye said lord of Chastillon to know and
understand his pleasure: he asked him if he remembered the talk that he had with
him the somer before: and this Deponent answering said yt he remembered it very
well but it was to venturous a thing. The said lord of Chastillon said unto
him, yt if he would execute the said enterprise he should do the most notable
and most honorable thing for the service of god and the common wealth yt ever was
done and gave him courage to put the same in execution from the which ons
again he would have excused himself. But than even at yt instant came in
Theodore de Beze, and another minister of a small stature somewhat big, with a
black berd, y^ which spoke unto him many things demanding him if it were not
a blessed thing to carry his cross in this world as Christ had carried it for
us: and after mani discourses and words, they said unto him yt he should be the
most happiest man in this world, if he would execute the enterprise which ye
lord Admiral had moved unto him because he should ryd a tirant out of this
world, for the which act he should win heaven and be among ye blessed ^aits if
he died in so just and good a quarrel. By the which persuations the said
deponent granted unto them, and said to the lord of Chastillon, yt he was
ready to consent to all the sayings of the said ministers, and that he would
than the will of God, and would go to the camp of the said Duke of Guyse, to
endeavor to put the said enterprise in execution. For the which he was greatly
commended and esteemed as well of the said Lord of Chastillon, as of the said
Ministers: and they told him that he was not alone that had done such exployts,
because there were many other yt had taken upon them the like charge: and
namely ye said lord of Chastillo^ said unto him, yt there were more then fifty
other gentilmen of good houses, that had promised him to put in effect other
like matters: and furthwith caused his steward to give him.xx. crowns, for to
go to the camp at Messas, where then the said Duke of Guyse was, to the end he
might think and devise ye mean and way how he might bring his purpose to pas.

Answer.
The said lord admiral answers truly before god and man, that the foresaid
words be falsely and wickedly invented. And furthermore, to thentent that all
the world may know how he behaved himself toward the said Duke of Guyse, he
declares frankly and freely, that before these last tumults, he knew some that
were determined to kill the said Duke of Guyse because they were displeased
with him. But so far of is it that he enticed them thereunto or allowed it,
that rather contrariwise he did disuade and turn them from their wicked
purposes, as madame de Guyse her self knows whom he sufficiently advertised
thereof in time and place where. True it is that after the murder at Vassy,
after taking of armur for to maintain ye authority of the kings decrees and
laws, and to defend the poor oppressed men against the violence of the said
Duke of Guyse and his adherentes, he has counted and pursued them as publyke
enemies of God, of the king, and of the rest and quietness of this realm. But
upon his life and his honor, it shall never be found that he allowed that
any man should attempt on this sort upon the person of the said Duke,
until he was certainelye advertised that the said Duke of Guyse and the
Marshall Saint Andre had hired and suborned certain persons to kill the prince
of Conde, him, and his brother Dandelot: as the said Lord Admyrall not long
ago declared amplye unto the Queen before Paris, and since unto the Constable
at Orleans. And seeing this, he confesses that since y^ time when he heard one
say that if he could he would kill the Duke of Guyse, yea even in his camp, he
did not dissuade or withholde him from it: But upon his life and honor, it
shall never be found that he sought or induced any man to do it, neither by
words, money or promises by himself, nor by any other directly nor
indirectly. And touching the twentye Crowns whereof mention is made in the
article before, he acknowledges it to be true, that at his last return to
Orleans about the end of January last, after that the said Feuqueres had told
him that he had known the said Poltrot for a man of service, he determined to
employ and use him for the understanding of news from the camp of his said
enemies: and for this cause he gave him.xx. Crowns, having no other words or
talk with him, nor ons making any mention of killing or not killing the said
Duke of Guyse. For namely if the said Lord admyrall had had any such
enterprise in hand, he would in no wise have trusted the said Poltrot: for when
he sent him to ye camp of ye said duke of Guyse about ye matter foresaid, it
was not without mistrusting him, for as much as it seemed unto him that he made
the mean and way to easy to enter into the said camp, as the said lord
admiral declared unto Monsieur de Grammont, who at that time was present, and
nevertheless he let not to send him for to understand news of the said
camp, saying these very words that he should be rather tried and proved than
nourysshed and maineteyned.

Upon this same article also, Thodore de Beze declares most truly as follows
for his dyscharge be fore all christendom. To wete that seeing many so
animated and moved against the said Duke of Guyse for the murder committed at
Vassy, yet he was never of the mind or advise at that time to proceed against
the said Duke, but by way of ordinarye justice: where of he calls them to
witness that have seen and heard him speak at that time, which also was ye
cause why he was at Monceaux in the company of other appointed by the reformed
church of Paris: for to require justice for ye said murder at the kings
majesty, and the queen his mother and of ye late king of Nauar, beseching the^
most humbly to provide with al diligence against the troubles which already
thretened this realm, and are happened since indede. And herevpo^, the answer y^
it pleased ye queen to make him, was such, that they of ye reformed church were
contented and satisfied with it, for the hope yt was given them y^ good and spedy
justice should be don upon the tra^sgressers. But sone after the said duke of
Guise and his co^plices having taken armor, and the matter brought to such a
state, y^ right and justice could take no more place: and which is more ye
persons of the king and queen being used and handled as every man knows, he
confesses to have at y^ time as well publikly in his sermons, as by letters and
words warned and advertised as well ye prince of Conde as thadmirall and al
other lords, and men of all co^ditio^s and qualities professing y^ gospel, of
their duty, for to bring the^ to maintein by all means possible, ye authority
of ye kings laws and ordinances, and thinnocen^ie of ye pore oppressed. And
since he has always continued, and yet now continues in the same mind:
exhorting not wtstanding every man to use his armor and weapons with the most
modesty yt is possible, and to seek (next to ye honor of god) peace and
concord above al things, so that they suffer not themselves to be deceived. Of
the which things he takes to witness all those which have hard him publikly or
particularly, and such as will say the troth. And furthermore as concerning ye
Duke of Guyse, because he has taken him for the chief author and main tainour
of these troubles, he confesses to have many times desired and prayed God,
either to turn the heart of the said Duke of Guyse (which thing not
withstanding he could never hope for) or else to deliver this realm from
him. Whereof he calls to witness all those yt have hard his sermons and
prayers, and namely madame de Ferrare knows what he told her both with mouth
and heart, and what he has often times written to her hereof.

But it shall not be found that ever he named the said Duke of Guise publikly,
not yt ever he spoke to the said Poltrot in person, nor by any other, nor that
ever he knew him, or had to do with him in any thing, and then much less that
he did counsel him to do it. The said Theodore de Beze says more, over y^ it
shall never be found that ever he hired or suborned any other man to do this
deed, wherein he acknowledges not withstanding a just judgment of god,
threatening the like or greater punishment unto all the sworn enemies of his
holy gospel, and those that are the causes of so much misery and calamity
in this realm. And for the verifiing of his answer, beside the forsayde
things, he takes his advantage upon ye very terms ascribed unto y^ said
Poltrot deponent. For thanks be to god, he is not so ignorant or evil
instructed in his charge and calling, as to apply ye scripture so evil in that
which is there said, to carry his cross, and much less to say, that men
win heaven. And therefore he sends all this confession into the forge from
whence it came, being ready also to submit himself generally and
particularly, concerning all that he has done and said in this present war,
to the knowledge and understanding of all vnsuspect Judges, as well in this
realm as else where: upon pain to be punished as the most wicked offe^dour
upon the earth, if he be found a liar, or culpable in this answer.

Deposition.
The which xx. crowns he received, and came to the said camp at Messas where
he presented himself unto the said Duke of guise, and said that he repented
him self that he had carried armoure against the King, and that he would from
hence forth render himself unto him. The which thing the said Duke of
Guyse took in good part, and said that he was welcome. And when the said
Duke departed from Messas to go to Blois this Deponent went thither and
returned with him.

Answer.
The said Lord Admiral believes it to be so, forasmuch as the said Poltrot
told him the same thing, not at Orleans where he never saw him since he sent
him to the said Camp to know and understand news: but in a place called
Neufuille, as afterward shall be declared. And the said Lord Admyrall
remembers well that the said Poltrot bringing report of that he had seen and
known in the said camp, said that he went to Neung, to one whom he called
senior de Lstang who presented him to the said Duke of Guise.

Deposition.
And certain days after, he returned to Orleans to the said lord of
Chastillon and there excused himself unto him from taking in hand so great a
charge because that the said Duke of Guyse used not to go out of his house,
but with a great company. But the said Lord of Chastillon encouraged him more
then he did before: and said he knew well enough what he had promised him and
that he might not make any excuse in the matter. And furthermore caused the
said Theodore de Beze and the other minister which before had spoken to him,
to give him diverse instructions, which so troubled his mind, that he accorded
and consented to do what they would. And for to confyrme him in this wicked
mind and purpose the said Lord of Chastillon gave him with his own hands a
C. crowns of the sun in a paper, for to bie him a horse, if his were not
good enough for to save himself after he had done the deed. The which. C.
crowns this Deponent received, and came to the said camp at Messas, to find
the means to put the said enterprise in effect.

Answer.
It is true that the said Poltrot coming again to Orleans to make his report
of things, found not the said lord Admyral there, who was already gone on his
journey toward Normandye which thing is sufficient to prove that the rest of
the former article, is no less false and invented. True it is that Monsieur
Dandelot having heard his report of news at Orleans sent him to the said lord
Admiral his brother then being arrived at y^ village of Neufuille six or seven
leagues from Orleans, in his said viage to Normandy, accompanied with Monsieur de
Traues, by whom he sent him word that he was determined to stay the said
Poltrot because he seemed to make a doubtful and an uncertain report of
news. Yet nevertheless the said Lord Admiral having heard him Judged that
would serve their turn for to understand certain news of the enemies camp:
and for this cause he delivered him ye hundred crowns, whereof there is
question, as well for to horse himself better, as for to use diligence requisite
in such aduertisementes, and commanded him to repair in his absence to the
said Monsieur Dandelot his brother: More, the said lord Admiral remembers
well now, that the said Poltrot went so far in making his report of news that
he said it was an easy thing to kyl the said Duke of Guyse. But the said lord
Admiral staid not upon that talk, because he thought it a thing to vain and
folyshe: and upon his life and his honor, he never opened his mouth to
provoke him to take it upon him. Upon the self same Article Theodore de Beze
answers that he cannot remember that he ever saw the said Poltrot and he
never knew him nor knows him yet and much less that he ever spoke to him
about such an enterprise.

Deposition.
And since, the said Duke of Guyse being come with the army in this place of S.
Hylary beside S. Mesmine, he followed him, having bought of Mo^sieur de la
Mauuoisiniere a spanishe Genet at the said place of Messas for y^ su^me of a
C. crowns that he gave him and the horse whereupon he rode before. And lodged
certain days in the Castle of Corneil.ii. or.iii. leagues from the ca^pe at
s. Hilaryes, differring to execute the said enterprise until he saw the town
of Orleans sore laid unto, and that they went about by all means to take it,
and fearing than y^ many honest men being in the town, should be slain and
spoiled, he fully determined with himself to keep his promise. And to do this
act, on thursday last ye xviii. of this present month, after he had dined in a
ferme half a league from the house where the said Duke of Guise was lodged,
it came into his mind to execute yt day ye said enterprise and in deed the said
Duke passing the river of Leret for to go to Pontereau, he accompanied him and
followed him to the said Pontereau: and than returned by the bridge and village
of Olyuet, where the Suyssers were lodged, and there tarried the coming of the
said Duke of Guyse at the passage of the said river of Leret intending whether
he were well or evil accompanied, to execute his enterprise, as he did. And
hearing a tro^pet blown at the return of the said Duke of Guyse, when he
would enter into the boot to pass the water, he approached near unto the
River and after that the said Duke of Guyse was landed being accompanied
only with one gentyllman that went before, and another that spoke unto him
riding upon a little Mulette, he followed him behind, and when he approached
nigh unto his lodginge, at the corner of a street where there were many ways
turning this way and yt way, he shote his dagge at him charged with three pellets,
about vi. or vii. pase of, thinking to strike him in the shulder, because he
thought he had been armed on the body: and by and by set spurs to his
spanishe genet whereupon he rode, and saved himself swiftly, passing over much
wood that was cut down, and rode that night about x. leagues in the country,
thinking to convey himself far from Orleans. But god would that the darkness
of the night turned him out of his way, and came again to the village of
Oliuet into the mids of ye guard of Suissers where one of the said Suyssers
spoke unto him these words, Houardot. Understanding those words he knew it
was the guard of the Suyssers, and drew back and rode on the spur until the
next day nine of the clock in the morning. And perceiving that his horse was
weary and sore travailed, he lodged in a ferme where he rested until the next
morrow, that he was taken and brought as prisoner.

Answer.
This article appertains particularly to the said Poltrot, and therefore he
refers it unto him, praising god in the mean while for all his just
judgments.

Deposition.
And upon that, which the said queen mother examined him whether any other were
consenting to the said enterprise, beside ye lord of Chastillon and the said
ministers. He said yt he was never spoken to of it, by any other persons the^
by the said lord of Chastillon, the said Theodore de Beze and his fellow: but
yet he thinks that he lord of Roche foucaul knew some thing of the matter,
forasmuch as when he arrived at the said Ville ^ranche, beside the town of
Celles: the said Roche foucault showed him a good countenance, and said he was
welcome.

Answer.
This confession is manifestly contrary to that which before he declared
against Feuqueres and Capitain Brion, and yet wrongfullye and without cause, as
the said lord Admyrall thinks. And as for that which concerns the earl of
Rochefoucault he answers truly, that if he had known any thing of such an
enterprise he would not deny it: but he never heard any talk of any such
thing before it was done, and refers it also to the judgment of all upright
men, whether the contecture of the said Deponent be well grounded or not: and
whether it appears not that the said Poltrot has been rather procured to
accuse the said earl of Rochefoucault by some manner of mean than to testifye
the truth.

Deposition
And as touching the Prince of Conde, being thereupon demanded says he never
knew that he was privy to the said enterprise neither that he knew any thing
of it, and thinks in his conscience that he never knew of it. But contrary
wise the first time that the said lord of Chastillon spoke of this enterprise,
the said Deponent asked him if the prince of Conde would have him to do it, the
said lord Admyrall answered, and said, that he needed not ask any thing as
concerning the prince of Conde.

Answer.
The said lord Admiral perceyneth by this article the craft and subtiltye
of his enemies, going about by all means to separate him and all this army from
the Prince of Conde lieue tenant general for the king in the said army. But
he is assured that such practices by the grace of God, shall return and fall
upon their own heads. Furthermore he douteth him not but will bear always
witness of the integritye, honestye, and innocencye of the said prince, not
only in this deed, but also in all that is taken in hand done, said, or
written by him in this war, and denies plainly and expressly the end of
the said article referring himself to that he has answered before.

Deposition.
Likewise he declares that Monsieur Dandelot never spoke to him of it, nor the
lord of Soubize, but contrary wise when the said Deponent declared unto him
the first talk that the lord of Chastillon had with him, of which he has
before spoken, the said Soubize said unto him, that it ought not to be done by
that means, for if God would punish the said Duke of Guyse he would do it
another way, not vsyng such manner of doyngs.

Answer.
The said lord Admiral thinks in his conscience, that the said Poltrot had
never such talk with the said Soubize, for he never understood any thing
thereof: and also douteth nothing of the innocence of Monsieur Dandelot his
brother nor of ye said Soubize.

Deposition.
And also the said Deponent has advertised and warned the queen to beware and
to take heed to her self, because yt since the battle beside Dre^^ the said
lord of Chastillon, with the capitains and soldiers being with him bear her
evil will, saying, that she betra^ed them, because she promised the^ before
Paris many things which she has not performed.

Answer.
The said lord Admiral says, that this advertisement and warning can not
proceed but out of a wicked mind, which desires nothing else but the
continuance of the present miseries and calamities of this realm: and for
proof of his fidelity and faithfulness he cannot have better witness tha^ the
queen her self, with ye services that he has done heretofore, protesting
before g^d that by his grace no evil entreating made him ever nor shall n^uer
make him forget the duty and obedience that he owes unto their majesty's and
to his country, and he douteth not but the intent and mind of the lords,
capitaines, and other of his army is so likewise.

Deposition.
Saying more over, that there were many persons, as well in the train of the
court as following this camp, which were sent by the said lord of Chastillon
to execute the like enterprises: yet he never heard them named, whom the Lord
of Chastillon would have to be killed: but only in general words, he heard
him say, that after the said duke of Guise should be killed, he would cause
the like to be done to all those that successively would rule and lead the
army, and also that there must be slain six or seven knights of the order,
not otherwise namyng them, but that he understood it commonly by the capitaynes
and soldiers being at Orleance, which hated greatly the lord Duke of
Montpensier, and monsieur de Sansa^: and that if the said duke of Guyse were
slain together with the said knights of the order, to whom they bare evil
will, they would than come to the court to submytte them selves to the grace
and pardon of the king, and would do what he would command them.

Answer.
The said lord admyrall answers to this article, as unto the next before
it, leaving it to al me^ to judge that know him whether it smell like a
truth, that in case he had taken in hand such enterprises he would have
discovered them unto such a man as the said Poltrot is. And as touching that
he says, that he heard it said of the capitaynes and soldiers, the said
lord admiral ought not to answer to it, and yet believes it not to be true,
specially seeing there is not so great occasion nor appare^ce of hatred
against them which are named in the said Article.

Deposition.
He says moreover, that being in y^ town of Bloys with the said duke of Guyse,
while the Camp was at Messas, he found in the gardens of ye said town nigh
unto ye king, who tha^ played at the mallet and the ball, a man of a mean
stature with a red berd, red hose and a ierkyn of lether cut, which had a dagge
ready charged and spande in his hand, whom sometime he had seen at Orleance,
in the said lord of Chastillons hall.

Answer.
The said lord Admyrall can not tell what the said Poltrot might see at Bloys,
and therefore ought not to answer to it: but he knows very well, that he
and all his army bear according to their duty, a singular affection,
obedience and reverence to his majesty, as his true and faithful subjects
and servants, and that they have nothing in this world so dear unto them, as
the prosperity and wealth of their prince and king.

Deposition.
And furthermore, that he saw in this camp four men well horsed, whose names
he knew not, but he knows them if he see them, which were in the hall at
Orleance when he spoke with the said lord of Chastillon the last time, and the
said lord of Chastillon asked him, if he would be known unto the said men,
who also had promised him to execute other enterprises. But this deponent
fearyng to be descried, prayed the said lord of Chastillon not to discover him
unto them: And said, that if they would give him liberty to walk about the
camp, he trusted to find them out, and to show them.

Answer.
The said lord Admiral says that calumny and false report was forged in the
same shop that the other were, and for to have certain and true knowledge
thereof, they should have suffered ye said Poltrot to walk about the camp with a
good and sure guard about him.

Deposition
Being demanded what the said lord of Chastillon departing from Orleance to go
into Normandy went to do and work: said, that he purposed to go to join
with the Englishemen, and to bring them to Orleance: and that at his departing
he promised his brother monsieur D'andriot, that if the said duke of Guise would
come to besiege the said town of Orleance, he would come with succor, and would
seek to give him battle.

Answer.
The said lord Admiral answers that his enemies sekyng so curiously all
means to destroy him, under the color and pretext of justice, should have
sought out things by some other of his counsel, than by the said Poltrot, or
other such as he is: And also the said Poltrot was not at Orleance when the
said lord Admiral departed from thence at the lest that he knew of, and
therefore could not testify any thing but by heresaye, what he had promised
unto the said monsieur Dandelot his brother. And furthermore, the said lord
admiral says, that it shall not be found that he ever did it, and that he
had rather dye, than to think ones to do any thing contrary to the duty of a
true and faithful subject and servant of his majesty: as he will show it at
all times when need shall require.

Deposition.
Furthermore, being demanded of the manner of the death of the late marshal
saint Andre, and after what sort he was killed, said that he heard say at
Orleance of many gentilmen that forasmuch as the said Marshall Saint Andre had
first given his faith to a young gentylman of a high stature with a little
abern bearde: and afterward the second time had given his said faith to the
prince of Portian, the said gentylman to whom he had first given his faith,
killed him with his dagge: and more the said deponent said not. The mynute he
has signed.

The.xxii. of the said months and year, this present confession or depositions
being made yesterday by the said John de Poltrot, before ye queen and the
lords of the counsel, and knights of the order were red and repeted again
to the said Poltrot, in the which his confession after an oath by him taken,
he persisted, saying that it contained the truth: and in witness thereof,
signed every leaf of the minute, thus signed. P. Maluaut.

Answer.
If the said Poltrot, either for fear of death, or by any other subornatio^ or
persuasion has persisted in his false and invented confessions: The said lord
admiral, and they that by them be charged with him, have more reason to
persist in their answers which contein the pure and plain truth. And for as
much as the verificatio^ of all this matter depends upon the bryngyng of the
said Poltrot face to face before the^ whom he has charged, the said lord
admiral with the other aforenamed, after having refused the courts of
parliament, and all other judges which have manifestly declared themselves
their enemies in these present tumultes: most humbly beseech the kings majesty,
to appoint and command y^ the said Poltrot may be well and safly kept, in
place where he may neither be put in fear nor suborned, until it shall plese
god to grant the long desired and necessary peace in this realm: and that by
this means the whole matter may be verified and ended before upright and
vnsuspect judges: and in case that any of the said judges of the parliament or
any other will forthewith proceed in judgment and execution of the said
Poltrot, and by that means take from the said lord admiral and from al the other
the true mean and way to justify themselves of the said falls accusations, they
protest of their integrity, innocence, and honest reputation, and stand
against the said judges and against all other to whom it shall appertain.

Given at Caen in Normandy the 12. day of March. 1562. Thus signed.
Chastillon. La Rochefoucault. (...) B^ze.

A copy of the letter sent to the queen by the said lord Admiral with the
foresaid answer.
MAdame two days since I saw an examination which was made to one John
Poltrot catling himself the lord of Merey, the 21. day of the last month: who
confesses to have hurt the duke of Guise, by the which also he charge yt I
should procure him or rather forced hi^ to do that he has done: and because it
is the thing that I most fear in this world least the said Poltrot should be
put to execution before the truth of this matter be known, I most humbly
beseech your majesty to command that he may be well kept. And in the mean
time I have set forth certain articles upon every one of his, which me
thinks deserve an answer, the which I send unto your majesty by this
trompet: whereby all men of good judgment may almost be certified of the
matter. And more over I say, that it shall not be found that ever I sought that
man nor any other to do such a deed. But rather contrarywyse I have always
stopte and not suffered as much as lay in me, that such enterprises should
be ^utte in execution. And thereof have I often times talked with the
Cardinal of Lorayne, and Madame de Guyse, and namely with your majesty: whom
it may please to be remembered how contrary I have been thereunto, saving
within this five or six months, that I have not much ben against those which
showed them selves to have such a mind. And that has been since there came
certain persons which I will name when time shall serve, which said, that
they were procured to come to kill me, as it shall please your majesty to
remember what I said unto you at Paris, going out of the Myll where we
commoned together: which thing also I have told unto the Constable, and
nevertheless I may say, and that truly, that for mine own part, I never
sought procured, nor practiced with any man about such a matter. And I will
report me unto all those which have seen such enterprises put in effect
before me, how much I mocked such doings. And because I will not trouble
your majesty with any longer letter, I most hu^blye beeseeche the same ones
again to command that the said Poltrot be well and diligently kept for to
verifye of this matter the truth. Also that being brought to Paris, as I
hear say, I fear lest they of the court of parliament will put him to
execution, and al for to leave this calumnye and false accusation in my neck:
or else lest they should proceed against me for this deed, which thing they
cannot do being my parties and refused as they be. And in ye mean time think
not that which I say, is because I am sorry for the duke of Guise: for I think
it is the greatest good turn that ever could happen to this realm, and to ye
church of god, and particularly to me and to al my house, and also if it please
your majesty it shall be the mean to set this realm at rest and peace, which
thing al we of this army desire, according to y^ which we have required of
you, as soon as we were advertised of the death of the said duke of Guyse.
Madame I pray god give you most parfit health with happy and long life.

From Caen the. 12. of March. 1562.

FINIS.

