Sic fuit* (ah, fuit*) Amesius. Quid funere tanto,
Cum grege Papali, Pelagianus ovat?
Quid rides Hierarcha? Viri nos arma tenemus,
Astra animam, tellus ossa, sed os tabula.


A FRESH SVIT Against HUMAN CEREMONIES IN GOD'S WORSHIP. OR A Triplication
unto. D. BVRGESSE HIS REJOINDER For D. MORTON.

The First Part.

Psalm. 119, 113. I hate vayn inventions: but thy saw do I love,

Printed Anno 1633.

An ADVERTYSEMENT to the Reader, Occasioned by the never enough lamented death
of my dear friend the Author of this Fresh suite.
Understand Christian Reader, that with the coming forth of this book into
the light, the learned and famous Author Dr. Ames left the light, or darkness
rather of this world. His name for diverse reasons (not needful here to be
recited) has been hitherto concealed, and that which generally was but
imagined before, (viz. that the Repl. and this fresh suit to D. B. Rejoinder)
to be his work, now it is certainly known to be his, that none need to doubt
thereof. It pleads truth succinctly, yet perspicuously, and with sinewy
Answers to B.M. and D. B. poor Sophisms, as indeed his veinc in all his
writings and discourses did most admirably lead him to do. Concerning this
matter, I may not keep back what I heard him speak as in the sight of God,
that he was in his conscience more persuaded of the evil of these relics of
Popery and monuments of that superstition then ever, and yet he never had seen
good in them, or come from them: and that moreover if D. B. or any other of
them would yet be daubing with suntempered mortar, and not give over to paint
rotten sepulchers, he was by the grace of God resolved still to maintain the
cause, and while he lived never let fall the uit commenced this way, not that
he sought victory to himself, no; That truth might return out of the field
with conquest was the highest pitch of his ambition. And though this worthy of
the Lord be with us no more, yetGod (I trust) who is rich in mercy, and has
more then one blessing, will (as need shall require) supply the advantage
truth had, and now has lost in the loss of this glorious instrument.
Together with his life God has put an end to all his travailes, wherein he
showed himself a pattern of holiness, a burning and a shining light, and lamp of
learning and Arts, a Champion for truth, specially while for the space of 12
years at least, he was in the Doctors Chair at Franequer, and having fough^
the good fight of faith, whereunto he was called, and professed a good
profession before nyamwitnesses, he has now indeed laid hold on eternal life.
His spirit gone to the spirits of just men, and his body committed to the
ground, we committ his labors to thy use, wherein he being dead, yet speaks,
and his memory we hope shall live for ever.

Fare well in Christ, the Fountain of all welfare.
To the renowned King, EDWARD THE SIXTH And so To our present Sovereign King
CHARLES his Successor. JOHANNES ALASCO (a Godly Learned Polonian Baron and
Superintendent of the Church of strangers at London) in the Epistle Dedicatory
of his tractate Concerning the Sacraments, printed at London, Ano. 1552.
WEll does that Father, and without doubt diserueth praise, who having a
daughter a Virgin drawn by the guile of panders into some lewd and dishonest
house, and there trimmed after the vvhorish guise does presently rescue her
thence and bring her home to his own house before she be utterly spoiled.
But the same Father (if he be wise) thinks it not enough for the safty of his
daughter, and the honor of his house, that he has brought her home again,
unless he take from her wholy whatsoever he knovves to be accounted in those
houses a vvhorish attire.

Neither does he inquire whence such attire came first: but judges it
dishonorable to himself, and so unvvorthy his daughter and whole family, that
any such thing at all as strompets have used for dressings in their houses,
should appear in his.

Neither does he give ear to their persuasions, who bear him in hand that
all things are to be Esteemed according to the Fathers mind in his own
house; and so think that the Fathers approbation can make that honest, in his
own house, for his daughter, and whole family, which in another house, is
most dishonest, for any daughters that regard their own credits: ascribing so
much to the Fathers prerogative, that what soever he approues, must be of
others well liked of, so far as it concerns his own house. For he knovves
full well, that although all those things which he has authorized in his
own house be there well thought of, yet that is not enough, since the honor
of his daughter, and his whole Family, must not only he cared for within his
own house, but also throughout the whole City, that he may remove all evil
suspicions from his family among all his neighbors; and is heedfull that the
panders have not the least occasion left them, of challenging or laying claim
to the said daughter, as having some of their vvhor-house-marks upon her.

Even so in the Church of God, as in a city, Magistrates and Ministers are in
place of parents, having the pure and right Administration of the Sacraments
committed unto them of God, for to be tended, and tendered as their own
daughter. It is therefore very commendable in these parents of the church (as
we may term them) if they rescue the lavvfull and pure Administration of the
Sacraments from the violence and tyrany of the Romish Panders, by taking it
into their own care and Custody.

But here they ought to remember (Especially they who are called by the holy
Spirit, Eminent Ministers of God, and Nursing Fathers of his church I.E.
Christian Kings and Monarchs, that it is not enough for them, thus to have
brought this daughter out of the Papists stevves, home into their own care
and keeping, unles they also put of from her, all that dressing, which they
know to be vvhorish in the said stevves, that no such thing may be seen with
them, which may be accounted vvhorish: Especially in that city where there
is great Variety of judgments, the ouerruling vvherof by man's Authority is not
to be expected, and where there are so mamy hucksters for the stevves
remaining.

Nor let them hear the delusions of those who suggest, that such kinds of
dressing from whence soever they be taken may be made good and honest by
Authority. For well they know, they are not set over the whole church of
God, but only one part of it, as a Family in a City, and that therefore though
they could bear out such things at home by their Authority; yet it is their
duty (as they regard public Chastity and honesty) to procure the honor of
their daughter and familye not only within their own vvalls but also
throughout the whole city; not suffering any thing to be seen within their
house, which they know to be held, urged, and maynteyned by the Romish
stevves and their instruments as their proper vvhorish stuff.

Last of all they must be wary, least any signs or tokens be left upon
their daughter, by which she may be questioned again by these panders as
one of theires.

Now (if it please your Excellent Majestye) you are one of these nursing
Fathers of the Church of God blessed be his name therefore: and in this high
calling (by Gods providence) you have this Ministry of the Sacraments rescued
out of the popish Brothells, and brought into your own care and keeping: Here
therefore be pleased to set before your eyes the foresaid example of a good
Father in those things which yet remain to be performed, I. E. in providing
for the credit of this your reduced daughter and so of your whole Family, not
only in this your Flourishing Kingdom, but also in the Catholic Church of
Christ vvherof you are a citezen, unto whom a principal part thereof as an
honorable familye is Committed in trust.

This is that which all the Godly throughout the Christian world do expect
from your hand, and that the more earnestly because they know that God has
enriched you with such excellent gifts, and placed you in so high a place
almost above all others; even to this very end, that you might remove from the
Ministry of the Sacraments all those popish trinkets, wherewith it has bin
fearfully profaned, and restore unto it again that virgin-like attire,
wherewith it was of old adorned by the high King of Kings, and lawgiver Christ
the Lord in his holy Institutions. So shall your faith and fidelitye be famous
throughout the Christian world: and the Church of England grow more honorable
under your Government.

The Latin words of Johannes Alasco himself.
Serenissimo Regi EDVVARDO SEXTO Deigratia, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae
Monarchae, Fideiverae, Catholicae, and Apostolicae, Defensori; Omnium (in suis
ditionibus) personarum etc. JOHANNES A LASCO, etc.
REcte facit Pater, laudemque meretur proculdubio, si Filiam Virginem, dolis
lenonum, ad ganeas forte abreptam, rituque jam meritricis ornatam, protinus
illinc eximat, incolumi adhuc pudicitia illius, inque suas rursum ipsius aedes
reducat: Sed idem satis non esse putat, ad tuendam suam, filiaeque illius, and
totius adeo familiae suae honestatern, exemisse e ganeis filiam, inque suas
aedes reduxisse; nisi illi id totum plane detrahat, quod in ganeis illis pro
ornatu meretricio haberi videt. Neque disquirit, undenam ornatus ille originem
suam habeat: sed indecorum sibi, adeoque and castitate filiae suae, and
familiae etiam totius indignum esse judicat, ut aliquid omnino ejusmodi
domisuae conspiciatur, undecunque tandem deductum esset, quod in ganeis ipsis
pro ornatu meretricio haberi non ignoret. Neque hic audit eorum persuasiones,
qui omnia ex Patris arbitrio domi suae, aestimanda esse dicunt; and proinde
ornatum quoque meretricium illum in ganeis, honestissimum jam fore putant domi
paternae, cum filiae illi, tum etiam reliquae toti familiae, si quidem paterna
authoritate comprobaretur; eo quod in Patris id potestate positum esse
videatur, ut quae illi probantur, ea jam honesta etiam domisuae omnia esse
censeantur. Intelligit enim, etiamsi domi suae, pro honestis haberentur omnia
quae ipse sua authoritate comprobasset; honestatem tamen filiae illius, and
familiae suae totius, non intra domesticos sibi duntaxat parietes suos, sed per
totam etiam civitatem reliquam, tuendam esse; ut omnem malam suspicionem, apud
omnes omnino cives, a domo sua depellat: and cavet ne ullis rursus lenonibus,
ullam deinceps etiam reposcendae denuo ad ganeas filiae suae occasionem quoquo
modo relinquat, pro jure ipsorum; si quae apud illam notae adhuc tales, ganeis
familiares, conspicerentur.

Ita vero, etiam Parentum loco sunt in Dei Ecclesia, veluti in civitate quadam,
and Verbi, and Gladij Ministri omnes; habentque sibi concreditum ab ipsomet
Domino Deo, veluti filiae loco, purum ac legitimu^ ministerium Sacramentorum.
Hic igitur istorum Ecclesiae Parentum (ut ita jam loquamur) fidem ac studium
nemo non merito laudaverit, si concreditum sibi ab ipsomet Deo (veluti filiam
quandam) purum ac legitimum Sacramentorum ministerium, ab Antichristi Romani,
and lenonum suorum ganeis, in quas vi ac tyrannide ipsorum abductum fuerat, in
suas ipsorum domos rursus, in curam (inquam) ac custodiam suam reduxerunt. Sed
hic cogitare debent utrique, potissimum autem ij, qui non frustra Praecellentes
Dei Ministri, Altoresque Ecclesiae Dei a Spiritu Sancto vocantur, Reges
(inquam) ac Monarchae Christiani, satis non esse, si filiam illam e ganeis
Papisticis, in aedes rursus suas ipsorum, hoc est, in curam custodiamque suam
recipiant, nisi eam etiam omni illo ornatu plane exuant, quem in ganeis ipsis,
meretricium ornatum and esse, and haberi sciunt; nequid ejusmodi domi ipsorum
conspiciatur, quod pro meretricio haberi posset: in ea potissimum civitate, in
qua varia sunt adhuc judicia hominum; neque ab uno homine gubernari possunt;
and in qua adhuc multam, infinitamque lenonum turba^ superesle constat. Neque
hic audient persuasiones illorum, qui ornatum ejusmodi (undecunque tande^
desumptus esset) honestum nihilominus domi paternae fore existimant, si Patris
ipsius authoritate comprobetur. Intelligunt enim, non toti se Civitati omnino,
non toti (inquam) Dei Ecclesiae, sed parti duntaxat illius alicui, veluti domui
ac familiae cuidam praeesse: et proinde, etiamsi domi suae, pro honestis jam
haberi videant, quae ipsi sua authoritate comprobassent; sui interim officij
esse agnoscunt (quatenus equidem castitatis am^ntes, publicaeque honestatis
studiosi haberi volunt) ut filiae illius, totiusque adeo familiae suae
honestatem, non inter domesticos tantum parietes suos, sed per totam illam
civitatem etiam, omni studio, ac cura tueantur, nihilque domi suae conspici
patiantur, quod in ejusdem civitatis ganeis, ac lupanaribus, maximo
lenonuomnium conatu, ac tyrannide, pro meretricio haberi interim, urgerique, ac
propugnari vident. Postremo, cavendum sibi modis omnibus esse putant, ne eisdem
lenonibus rursum, aut eorum similibus, ullam omnino occasionem (pro jure
ipsorum) relinquant, quoquomodo reposcendae fi^^ae illius suae; si quae notae
adhuc (ganeis illis familiares) apud illam conspicerentur.

Iam vero tu quoque unus es ex hisce Ecclesiae Dei Altoribus (Rex Serenissime)
quo quidem nomine, summas Deo Patri nostro coelesti gratias agimus. Et
concreditum tibi, in praecellenti vocatione hac tua, a Domino Deo,
Sacramentorum Ministerium, veluti filiam quandam, ganeis jam Papisticis, in
tuas rursum aedes (Divino beneficio) hoc est, in curam ac custodiam tuam
domesticam reductum habes. Hic tu igitur tibi quoque sequendum esse cogitabis,
in his quae adhuc restant, propositum jam boni Parentis exemplum, in tuenda
reductae filiae, totiusque adeo familiae tuae, publica honestate, non tantum in
Regno tuo florentissimo, sed in Chatholica etiam Christi Ecclesia, cujus
alioqui and ipse civis es, ejusque partem pulcherrimam, veluti insignem illius
familiam tibi concreditam habes. Hoc vero abs te pij omnes, toto orb
Christiano, exspectant. Etquidem tanto majore desiderio, quanto majoribus atque
excellentioribus donis te a Domino Deo nostro ornatum, ac sublimiore etiam,
supra alios fere omnes, loco, positum esse non ignorant: nempe ut Sacramentorum
Ministerium, illecebris meretricijs, in Papae ganeis, nefandissime profanatum,
omni illarum ornatu meretricio exuas; suoque illud ornatu virgineo rursus
induas; quo videlicet a summo illo Regum omnium Rege ac Nomothete, Christo
Domino, in suis institutionibus ornatum esse constat. Sic enim nota demum erit
toti Ecclesiae Christi, fides tua, in tuenda filiae tibi concreditae, non domi
modo tuae, sed toto etiam orb terrarum, publica honestate.

THE PRAEFACE.
THey who put to sea, according to their several scopes and purposes, so do
they steer their Compasses, and proceed in their travells ansvvearablely. Such
as set out merely to satisfy their pleasure, or some private end; when once
the heavens begin to be besett with clouds, the vvynds grovve high, and the
storm approaching threatens apparent danger, when their companyes are
scattered and severed from them, or when the foulenes of their stomachs and
the noisome humors there, cause, that they cannot brook the sea, but with much
taedious disquiet and sickness; They turn their courses and make to shore
with as much speed as they may.

Others who seriously intend to make a voyage of it, and are bound for some
remote place, and resolved to fetch some precious commodityes from a far
country; they reckon upon hazards, expect the common calamityes of the sea, and
determyne to undergo, what ever they do expect, or shall befall. The
conclusion is: vvilling they are to adventure the loss of their lives, but not
vvilling, to loose their voyage, therefore on they will: extreme necessityes
may overbeare them, but no fears can discourage them in there course.

As thus it fares in traveling, so fares it also, with men in professing the
truth; their aims are several, and their proceedings suitable thereunto: Some
take up the profession of the truth, as a voyage of pleasure: and such will be
sure, to sail no further, then that they may see the smoke of their own
chymneyes: they will serveChrist no longer, then they may serve there own
turns, and therefore such will have no more of the gospel, then they may have
their own private with it, not only within sight, but within reach: And
its admirable to see, what falsenes they discover in there course, and yet
what fair colores, they putt upon all their procedings, and would bear the
world in hand, they vvyshnothing but soundnes, when indeed there is nothing
but shows and appearances, to please a sensual eye:

Its not amiss therefore, to take the scantling of both these kinds, that the
Judicious Reader may be able to own them as they appear in his way, either
in their vvritings, or behaviors: for the lives of men are like living books,
which a wise man will search into, and observe: To this purposse therefore we
shall shortly consider: 1 what is the cause of this declyning? 2 what be the
pretenses, vvherby they labor to excuse it?

The cause of this declining, is the entertaynment of the truth upon false
grounds: The apple which is unsound at the coar, will discover rottennes in
the skin afterward: when the foundation is not sure the whole frame vvil
synke, Causses of declyning 1 Sext. 13 Luke 19
when its shaken by the least storm.

Some there be, like the stony-hearted hearers, who from the present
apprehension of the comforts and promises of the gospel, are tickled with the
sweetness the rof, though but in general conceaved, and have their hearts
sudainly cheared, with the confused and unapplyed grounds of good; 13 Math.
20. (...)
And therefore they are said to receive itsuddaynly with joy:

But as they flourish speedily, so do they fade as soon: 13 Math. 21. (...).
for these flashes of comfort, as they arise not from any deep root of an
humbled and self denyng heart: So they leave no deep stamp or impression upon
the Spirit: and therefore when sad and heavy pressures of sorrovv do sease
upon the soul, these slight impressions of flashy joy vanish away:

These comforts in Temporaries, are like the painting and complexion, which is
laid upon the face by deformed harlotts, which the least violence of cold, or
heat takes off immediately; whereas, a sound joy issuing from grounded
assurance, is like ruddy complexion, which arises from good blood, and a
vvholsom constitution, which the greatest heats or colds may increase, but
cannot remoove as long as life and strength lasts:

2 Sort of decliners.
Others again are brought to embrace the truth because of the company or
multitude, which they see give credit or countenance thereunto: 13 Luk 24. 8
Math. 20.
thus the Pharisee would not to heaven unless he might go in the crovvd. Or
because of the safty and commodity which the Lord sometimes voutsafes to
sincere Professors. Thus many turned Jews in Esters time, Ester. 8.17.
not because they were the better, but the stronger party; not for the truth
of their profession, but for the safty of the Professors. 6 Ihon. 26.
These attend upon Christ for the loaves and follovv the gospel no longer then
profit follows them. The name of a prison, the noise of a chain, makes the
truth so deformed in their eye, that they dare not, and therefore vvil not own
it. As the leaves of a tree, while they be fed with moisture, drawn up in^o
the branches by the Sun in the spring, theyflorish and cold frost drive back
the moisture, they wither and fall. Like these leaves, is the love of these
worldly gospellers. An instance of this temper is apparent in many of our
Elizabeth Professors (as they are termed) who were vvhot at the entrance of
the Gospel, when company, credit, and profit were attendants to it: but
when the frovvnes and displeasure of authority, like vvynter blasts, plucked
away their livings and dignities which were as the moisture, to feed their
desires, they dried away in their (discretion) and retained nothing but the
name of ancient Professors, like boxes in Apothecaryes shops, which carry
fair titles on the outsyde, and fill up room, but have not one healing or
useful drugge in them.

A third sort there be, 3 Sort.
who at the first appearing of the gospel in a place, are taken up with the
strangnes and novelty, either of the Doctrine, or the manner of delivery, and
ansvverablely with some affection make inquiry after it. This was their
practice, when John Baptist came preaching in the wilderness, 3. Math. 5.
Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Region about
Jordan. This also our Savior acknowledged as there endeavor. Ihon. 5.35.
Ihon was a burning and a shining light, and you would have recoyced in him
for a season.

It befalls the Gospel in this case, as it does with some strange commodity:
when it first comes to view, many see and cheapen, until the price proves too
heavy, and then they depart and will not buy: So here: when our Savior sets
open the sale of the gospel, in some obscure place, many vvil be comers,
hearers, Cheapners, until they find that the word grows somvvhat high
rated, and the conditions of the Gospel seem too hard, and then they for sake
it. Herod vvelcomes Ihon Baptist, and observes him, but at last murders him.

4. Fort of declyners.
Others lastly, after some sad conviction of the truth revealed, as also of the
necessity and excellency thereof, hold it a point of honor, to persevere in the
defense and maintenance of it: and hence for their own praise, may, and do
Suffer heavy persecutions, as, poverty, Exile in the profession of the truth,
the power vvher of they never approved in the exactnes of it.

Thus many in Queen Maryes days, were exiled for the Gospel, who afterward
returned into England, 13. Math. (...).
and opposed, yea persecuted the power and accuratnes practice of it.

For there is a nick of temptation, which stuttes the humor of these
temporizing hypocrites, and discovers them in their colors: and hence it is,
that these of Diotrephes his generation, could endure banishment, because that
hyndred not, but promoted their honor in that kind of suffering: yet when they
came into place of supremacy, fell to beating of their fellovv brethren, as
conceaving the strictnes of their course, carried a condemnation of their
careless and pompous sensuality.

We have seen the causes, consider we now the excuses they would pretend
for themselves. Statist his p^aetense.
And here as men's corruptions are diverse, and act more or less strongly,
their shifts carry more or less apperance vrith them. Here first your statist
is most gross, to whom his Religion is as his coin. All that, goes for
current gospel with him, that is stamped with the authority and allowance of
the State: He is hovering betwixt several Religions, that he may take any for
his turn, vvaits and eyes, to see which side is like to prosper, that so he
may be of the safest side: And he ^esseth him self with the name of a
Christian Church, and the substance of Religion. And what ever things are
like to prove trouble some, these he vvil make indifferent, that he may take
them, or leave them, as he likes best for his ease. Discretion is they sta^ists
God and Gospel.


He complaynes much of the restless strictness of men's Spirits, who cannot
see when they are well, put too great weight upon things, that are of no
vvorth, stand upon trifles. He cries out for Discretion as that which would
umpire and determyne all doubts. And therefore he can run with the hare, and
hold with the houud: Pranks pl^yd under color of discretion.
(by discretion) He will do any thing, rather then suffer any thing: (by
discretion.) He can soder with the times, and vvinke at the synmes of men, yea
swallow them down, though with reluctance of conscience, and that he
terms tolerating; and all (by discretion.) Authority is in stead of all
arguments to this man, he enquires after no other ground or vvarrant.

The Temporary Gospeller having had some touch of Religion, Temporary
Professors pretense.
and light of truth, in his mind, can find no rest unto his conscience,
unless he have some show of reason to allege: for he remembers the charge of
the Apostle: ye are redeemed with a price: be not the servants of men: he
recalls the limitation of Gods command: 1. Cor. 7.23 1. P^t 2.13 1. Cor. 11.
obey in the Lord: that we ought to be followers of the Apostles no farther
then they were followers of Christ. That the utmost extent of our Saviors
commission to teach, and for men to obey was: That men should be taught, 28.
Math.
to observe all that he commanded, not that men commanded.

Resolving therefore to decline, they seek to catch at any appearance, which
they may plead for their declining. A declining heart catch^th at any thing,
that it may plead for declining.
And because they are most led by example, and sense, these are the weapons
with which they use to ward them selves, and maintain their course.

Common example carries a persuading power with them, its a sufficient
reason for their doing because they see it is don. Here they take up their
stand. All men for the most part do so, and why may not they? Non quo eundum
sed quo itur.
Thus like sheep they follovv the drove though it be to the shambles. Especialy
if they hear of any noted and famous for piety, and godliness to go in such a
way, they conclude forthwith, it is the right way: reasoning thus: They are
wise and godly, and think you, they durst do it, they would do it, unless it
were good and pious? when the truth has told us, that all m^n are liars, 3.
Romans 4.
and either do, or may deceive, or be decey^^d; even the courses of the
strictest saints have there crackings: 2. Gall. 12.13.
Peter was a good man, and yet dissembled: and Barnabas was a good man, Acts.
11.24 2. Gall. 13.
and yet was snatched away by example into the same dissimulation. What
madness is it because a wise man happily falls into the mire, that we should
foul our selves and vvallovv with him? But the main bulvvark vvherby they
beat back all assaults, is if they can hold out some Ecclesiastical Canon: The
Church enjoynes it, The authority of the Church, and theCanons of it, like wind
and tide carry the Temporizer to any coast.
and are you vviser then The Church? This stricks it dead, no man must dare to
dispute any further; nay they count it unreasonale, once to demurr or doubt any
more: but expect, that al men should captivale their conceits presently, and
put off reason, and pluck out their eyes, to see by other men's spectacles:
which is intruth not only to cease to be Christians, but to be men.

Not that I detract any due respect and esteem, which each man should have
both in opinion and affection of the true Church of Christ: The extent of the
Churches authority.
I know she is the spouse of Christ; yet but the spouse. It is enough that she
is next to her head, the Lord Jesus, she must not usurp to be head, her power
is subordinat not supreme, ministerium not imperium, 28. Math. last.
she must deliver the laws which she has received, from her King, not dare
to make laws: And therefore we must bevvare, lest while (for our own es)
we would honor the Church too much, we dishonor Christ, vvrong and greive
both: The praetensetaken from the authority, dashed. 1. because its a poisoned
d^ug of popery.
To crush therefore the former Cavil, and objection: I answer several things.

It is the Romish tenet, to a hair, and one of the most fulsom points, and
loathsome dregs of the fylth of Popery. The Jesuits themselves having no other
bottom ^hey bear up, or to biuld up, their blind obedience: An opinion
constantly and unanimously opposed by all our Divines (Chamier de votis, 1.
Bec: it overthrovves the Soveranguty ofChrist and his prophetical and Kingly
office.
lib. 11. cap. 11.) abhorred by all Christian self denying, and
syncere-belleiving hearts: For what is it else, but to jusle Christ out of his
prophetical and Kingly office: to resolve our faith and obedience lastly, into
the determinations and commands of men?

2. Why are the Berreans commended for examining Paul's Doctrine? Acts. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
why are all men enjoined to try all things, and to hold that which is good;
If we be bound to take our Religion upon trust from the authority of the
Church?

3. If Paul an Apostle and Doctor of the gentiles, 3. The Apost: would not
challenge this power.
disclaymes all such souveraignty as tyrannical usurpation, what man or
Church dare challenge it? But disclayme it he does. 2. Cor. 1. last. Not that
we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy, for by faith
you stand.

4. Had men, or Curches, power to coin Ecclesiastical Canons, to forge new
articles of faith, to make these senses of the Scripture Authentic, which
suited their mynds, and to charge these upon the consciences of men, as
necessary to be believed, Beleivers should not stand by their faith, but they,
and their faith, should stand or fall, according to the feeble determination of
men.

5. If the faith of particular men depend upon the Church, That the authority
of the Church is not the rule: and the fa^^e rule which guides the Church, does
guide each member.
upon what does the faith of the Church depend? Either they be the rule,
(which is too loathsome to affirm) or else they are guided by the rule of the
word, in their determinations, which begets both saving light in their mynds,
and sound faith in their hearts: Ephesians. b. 20.10. Romans 17. And if the word be
able to give them light and faith, why not others as well as them?

6. The authority of the Church, unto which we must captivate our judgments,
Universal ne^ existit, nec agit n^si^in individuis.
musteyther be the authority of the Universal Church, which acts nothing
but in the particulars; and these have varied in opinion, and practice,
touching Ceremonies, and therefore cannot setle us in a certain determination;
Or it must be the authority of a particular Church: but particular Churches
have not only erred, but departed from the faith: Who Lorded it oter the
law? did not the Church: 14. Math. 10? who condemned and crucifyd the Lord?
(did not the Church?) who persecuted the Apostles and forbad them to preach
and publish the Gospel? (did not the Church?) And this which is said of
Churches, is true of Coun^els, of all kynds, as experience of all ages has
made it good.

Others of this rank, plead the love of their people, 3. Plea of the Temporizer
is the love of his people and preaching; when indeed it is the love of him self
and living.
the necessity of preaching, and hope of doing good: how precious men's pains
are, and what need of laborers in the vynyard. And therefore conclude, if all
men should sit do vvur in silence, as some do, the ruin of the Church must
needs follovv. They confess (its true indeed) these popish relics, which
are the bane of the Churches peace, being unprofitable and needless, nay
scandalous and offensive, should be removed. But when they weigh that heavy
charge: VVoe if I: preach not the Gospel, they are then vvilling to bear all,
rather then to deprive the Church of the benefit, and the souls of Gods
people, of the profit and comfort of their ministerye: Favor thy self: is the
serious arge: whatever is alleged ito color it with.
whereas alas all this pretense of mercy is a miserable mistake, and commonly
that vvorldly vvatch word (of favor thy self) lies closely covered under
these curious florishes of care and compassion for the common good. For the
quaestion is not, whether preaching be precious, or the pains of faithful
Ministers profitable? But the doubt here is, whether we may come to do
lavvful things, by unlawful means? To sin, that we may do service? As
though the Lord had need of my lie; or else that he could not bring his
servants to his owe haven, without the devils boat; or that Christ could not
upholde his own kingdom without the pains and preaching of some men; now
I conceyve, it is undeniably evident, that the suffering, in the time of Queen
Maryes days, did more setle and enlarge the bounds of the Gospel, then all the
preaching did in King Edward the sixth his reign.

A 4. plea of the temporizer.
Others speak out, and deal down right: profess, it is against the hair,
and their hearts, to do this drudgery, but they are not able to undergo the
extreme pressure which follows the refusal of them: Nay its certain, some
have openly protested, that, if it were but half an hovvres hanging, I. speak
but what I. know.
they would rather suffer it, then subscribe. But for them and theirs, to ly
in the ditch, and to be cast into a blind corner, like broken vessels; yea they
and their familyes to dye many hundred deaths, by extreme misery, before they
could come unto their graves; This they were not able to undergo. A
condition, I acknovvledge, which needs and deserves a great deal of pity and
commiseration, since it is true, that some kinds of oppression make a man mad:
But oh that the God of mercy would put it into the mynds and hearts of those
whom it does concern, that they would never suffer such refuse relics,
long, to hazard, not only the comforts, but even the con^ciences and happiness
of many distessed souls.

There is a third and last sort of men, more ingenuous then the former, who
when they see, The close hypocrite his excuses*
that such colors (of excuses, formerly propounded) are not laid in oil, and
therefore vvillnot continue, nor can give them any encoragement in there course;
such feeble pleas being like figg leaves, which cannot cover the nakedness of
their cause, being neither true in themselves, nor honorable to their
proceedings: They come to the main hold; and profess the things are lavvfull,
and commendable, and therefore they do no more but what they may, nay what
they ought. And whereas they have been of another mind, they diversely
discover the causes of their change; as they are diversely affected, or have a
greater stroke of conscience, and conviction of judgment. 1. Not willing to
search.


One man acknowledges, he has been long staggering, about the things in
quaestion: But now he has got greater light, sees more, and understands
better. And yet no man could ever see, his candell lighted, his arguments
alleged, nor yet were his oversvvaying reasons, ever offered to skanning.

Nay if he be put hard to, it vvil appear he has, none: yea he is not
acquaynted with the things he does, if he come to give an account, of what he
has done. Only you must believe, he has private arguments, which do
overpovver his judgment: Otherwise he must grant, he does practice without
ground and reason: The sum in short is, he has gotten a perspective about
him, and perceyves that ease, and liberty is good, and therefore, (Issachar
like) is resolved to sit under his burden: he sees the way by svvallovving o^
ceremonies, how to sleep in a vvholle skin, and that ^ourse he takes.

His falsehood in his search.
If some searching truth delivered in public, press him, or some sincere
hearted friend persuade him to a further inquiry, he seeks after the truth, as
a covvard does for his enemy, being a frayd to find it. Loath he is, to be in
the society of such, vvho^ he conceaves, to be either Judicious in their
dispute, or Zealous in their course, against this trash. Secretly desirous,
that other should not occasion conference, or that such should not enter into
serious communicatio^ of these things, and if they do, he is weary of it,
Consult wiht these only who are of his judgment.
and blames the Author of the discourse, as that more savory or seasonable talk
were shut out: When he goes for counsel, and direction, it is to some such
Authors, who write for the things he would practice, or consul^ only with
those men, that profess to maintain them, and so they make up the match at
mydnight.

But if yet, their own consciences, the arguments or persuasions of others,
Or advises with thos^ who are weak, if contrary they be in judgment.
provoke to a more serious examination of both sides: How vvearishly and
unvvillingly go they to the vorke? Commonly they make choice of the weakest,
whose opinion they know, to be cross, to their course: or if they advise
with other, of more able understanding, it is upon a start or suddayne, that
^her can be no sad dispute, and if yet such arguments fall, which they are not
able to gaynsay; They go their way, and can tell how to forget or neglect
them, and profess ^hey were with such, but could not be convinced, ^or see
any sufficient reason to set^e their judgments.

But when they consult with such, whose opi^ions they know vvil please
their palates, and persuade them to that, which, they are resolved before
hand to ^ractise; Though happily they propound no reason, but ^nly administer
some grave counsel, or savory advise to ^xpresse their own resolution, or
allege that place Romans ^3.1. Let every soul be suject to the higher powers;
Oh they go away with abundant content, admire and thank him for his advise*
profess they never heard so much, and that now he is fully settled, and has
his doubts ansvvered to his desire, gives it out, that such a man is able to
give satisfaction to any: when in the mean while, he never asked any
argument, but took his bare opinion, because it pleased him, and yet will
reject the reason somtymes of another, because it crosses him.

May be, it so falls out, that some new book of great note and expectation, is
publyshed, which might clear the cause to these men's contents: After they
have vievved it, and wiped their eyes, all things then are so clear, that
there is not a cloud in the sky, nay not a mote in the sun: There was never
said so much before: Oh this book of D. Burgess, has made all things evident
to them, even to admiration, and conclude, it will do as much to any that
reads it: so that, if men be not obstinate, they cannot, but be convinced.

But alas: these men, have they taken the arguments into serious consideration?
have they labored to search and examyne the strenght of them? have they
propounded them to such who are held most able, and judicious, of the other
opinion, who do not find themselves, yet persuaded? Alas here is deep
silence? where is that ancient rule: Audi alteram partem? where is that
charge of the Apost: try all things. Is it not likely the man should be
persuaded by his author, 1. Thest. 15 23.
who resolves beforehand never to quaestion any thing in him? He must needs
be of his authors faith, who purposes to believe all he says, or not to
doubt of what he says. And while I was penning this preface, there was one
curious prank of cleanly conveyance of a declining heart, brought to hand, and
it was this: pressures growing heavy upon such, that would not conform them
selves, The Court censures of the Commissary, proceeding to excommunication of
such as refused, and adding aggravations thereunto: to wit, This was done at
Lecester:
forbidding to buy or sell with such, that were so excommunicate, upon pain
of excommunication: one amongst the rest was not able to undergo the burden:
to profess he could not suffer, was too shameful, and therefore he professes
his jugdement was changed by D. Burgess his book: and therefore he need not,
nay he should not suffer. Some of his parteners or consorts, desiring
satisfaction with him, entreat that he would point at the place, express the
argument, or arguments, in this book, that prevayled with him. To which he
answers: no particular, or perticulars, in the book, persvvades, but the
vvholl: The English of which speech and practice is this: I am resolved to
conform: and I will be persuaded by Doctor Burgess his book to it; but
neither I, nor you shall know, what persvvades me; that so my grounds not
being know, they cannot be answered, nor I unsettled any more: oh the
desperate folly of a declining heart, to betray and deliver up it self unto the
delusions of Satan!

There is lastly another sort of profound disputers in the world, The shifts of
^ubtyll disputers.
who apprehending their reach to be beyond the reasons and vvritings of other
men, have out of the depth of their judgments, devised a way judiciously to
deceyve their own souls; and out of their pick-lock subtility, count it easy
to make way for themselbes, and maintain their way in any quaestion. And
this they do by making a maze of Divisions, and cut things in so many shreds,
by multitudes of distinctions, that at length they loose their cause, the
truth, and them selves also in theissue, and must of necessity be vvilder the
reader, unless he be of a searching judgment: This kind of distinguishing is
like snuffing of the candell too near, putting out the light wholy, while
they intend to make the light burn more clear: so do these men darken the
truth, professing to discover more of it. praegnable examples of this kind, the
Rej. has expressed unto us, when to avoid the dint of the argument concerning
significant Cerem: and worship, his destinctions are so many and intricate,
that one member destroys another, and the true nature of worship also, as may
appear in the 85. and 136. page: of the first part of this Dispute.

All this I speak, not that I would fall out with any, who is not of the
same opinion with my self: for I prosesse the contrary, in a word of truth:
every man abounds in his own sense: Only this seems somvvhat greiuous, and I
conceave also injurious to the truth, that after all hard dealing, she cannot
get an indifferent hearing, Seeing it is the fashion of the world, to have
men's persons in admiration, to gain some countenance thereby to their own
courses, And therefore to blovv up the fame of men's abilityes, (as they do
bladders) to the utmost greatness they can, that the greater vvarrant they may
seem to have, to follovv their opinions and vvayes. And contrariwise, the
person must be disparaged, when we would have his cause, or work come into
discredit: a fashionable, but a shame less piece of Rhetoric: Thus the
vvriting of the Repl: must be a pamphlet, his manner of vvriting ^currilous,
that when both are thus disfigured, by the dirt and soote, which the Rej.
has flung upon them, it may be conceyved, they were so misshapen in their
first frame: vhereas the answer of the Rei: must be lifted up and
proclaimed, worthy, learned, and judicions: which puts me in mind of
Demetrius his out-crye: 19. Acts: 28. Great is Diana of the Ephesians: 19.
Acts. 25
the ground whereof was not so much the love of the Goddess, as the greedy
desire of that great profit, they reaped thereby: So here, the answer must be
learned and judicious, that men may conform learnedly, and judiciously.

Not that I envy the Drs. Honor, or would diminish any thing of his due, but I
cannot endure davvbing, much less that the praise of men, should be advanced,
to the praejudice of the truth. Laying aside therfore-all praejudice, and
partiality, cast we the proceedings of the Repl: and Reioy. into the scales of
righteous consideration, and where the blame most appears, let the Reader lay
it on, and let-him bear it, to whom it is due by desert: And in this search,
let no man think, I intend or seek the Rej. his dishonor, for my witness is in
heaven, I do not; nay I dare not do it. I know the righteous judge would
require it: but it is for the manifestation of truth, and innocence, where
ever it is to be found.

That I may do the Doctor right then, I will set down the rules how far
the faylings of others may be laid open. 2. How far, and in what cases, some
kind of tartnes, and sting of indignation may be expressed, in pen or speech,
as allowable in holy writ.

That we may lay forth the limits of the farst, and see how far the compass
of our Christian Commission reaches in the discovery of others faults, How
far law full to lay open sins.
we must vvisely distinguish of Persons and Sins that so we may not be
deceaved.

Persons then undergo many conditions, and relations: some are members of the
same congregation, who have covenanted, to walk in the fellowship of the
faith of the Gospel: Others are subjects of the same commonwealth only,
professing the truth.

Both these again; are there repenting or pertinacious, and incorrigible
sinners.

Sins also are of sundry kynds some are private, some are public: both these
again, are lesser scandalls: or more heinous and Capital Crimes, which
threaten apparent hazard to the public good of a state, or the prosperous
success of the Gospel: Now out of these distinctions, such conclusions may
easily be collected, which may give answer to the first quaestion, so far as
concerns our purpose: and these be 3.

In private offenses, the rule of our Savior takes place: Rules of direction,
how we may discover the faults of others.
If thy Brother offend, tell him his fault betwixt him and thee alone, if he
hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother: if our admonition attain the end, in
removing the evil, we need not then crave further help, from any other, to
redress it. Beside, our Brother having regayned his honor by repenting, we
should not cast the blott again upon him, by any fresh report.

2. If under private admonition, a Brother prove obstinate, and incorrigible,
we may, and should publish, both person and fault to the congregation, as our
Savior in that case enjoynes it, as a duty to be discharged, and leaves it not
to our freedom to omit: for the words runn in force, and form a command:
tell the Church.

3. If the offense be public, either left upon record in vvriting, and made so
notorious to all that will attend, and read it: or acted in some sollemne
assembly, or in open view before many vvitnesses, laying aside malice, and
envy; which may stir us, or sinful and sinister ends, which may carry us
hereunto, and spoil this, and the best service. Its very lavvfull, nay (in
case) very necessary, to speak of such miscariages, or write of them, as
occasion may require, and that with out all breach of love: whether we look
at others, who are but standers by, That they may not be scandalized,
infected, or plucked away by the error of men: Or if we look at the
offenders them selves, by way of Caution, and wholsome prevention, we stopp
the poison of their practice, that so they do no more harm to others; nor
bring any more guilt upon their own souls: then which what greater love
and mercy can be shovvne, to our fellovv Brethren?

And out of this ground, and after this manner it is, that we shall bring some
of the Doctors miscariages to consideration, and present them to the view of
the Reader: but such only, which he himself has made open and notorious,
either by vvriting or practice: and that for this end alone, that the false
colors which he has putt upon his course, and proceedings, may not prejudice
the truth in in the hearts, or judgments of the ignorant, and unvvary Readers;
or any that are vvilling to declyne, who would very feign have the Doctors
words without control, that so they might follovv him without fear, and
this may suffice for answer to the first quaestion, and the vvarrant for our
way to walk in.

The second admitts satisfaction in short: to wit How far and in what
cases, some kind of tartnes may be expressed in pen or speech. How f^rr t^rt
speeches may be used.


Ans: there be two instances in Scripture, which are plain and pregnant to
this purpose, and left for our direction in this case.

The first is the behavior of Elias, toward Idolaters and their Idolatrous
practices whom he jeares to their faces, and out of a holy kind of
indignation, s^i^gs with a bitter and a deriding Irony. For so the (...): And
it came to pass at noone, that Eliah mocked them, 1. Kings 18.26.
and said cry aloud, for he is a God, either he is talking, or is pursuing, or
he is in a journey, and peradventure he sleeps, and must be avvakened: And
hence it is, the Lord casts such loathsome terms of detestation, upon the Idol,
that he besparckles the worshippers thereof with disdain.

The second instance is touching ambitious false teachers, 56. Isay 10.
or Idol sheapherds. So Isayah, his watchmen are blind, they are dumb dogs,
they cannot bark, they are greedy dogs, they can never have enough. So the
Apost. Paul gyrds the consciences, of those silken Doctors of Corynth, and
their followers; which slighted the simplicity of the Gospel 1. Cor: 4.10.
we are fools for Christ, and ye are wise in Christ; we are vveake, and ye
are Strong; ye are honorable, and we are despised; These tart Ironicall
speeches stable the heart, with a secret disdain, of their groundless, and
ambitious folly: And indeed when the Lord enjoins it as a duty, and makes it a
note, and argument of a happy man, 15. Psalm. 4.
that a vile person is contemned in his eyes; what expression of words, can
suit such a contempt in the heart, unless they carry some tartnes of di^dayne
with them.

We now see our limitts and allowance: let the judicious Reader according to
this rule, consider of some Keen passages of the Reply: and I suppose it will
be found, that the most of the^, if not all, are poynted against the
unvvarrantable standings, and places, the intolerable, and ambitious courses
of our Prelates, or else their seeming and self-deceaving arguments.

If in any he has exceeded the bounds of sobriety, I profess, neither to
defend, nor excuse it, I know the Replyer himself will not allow it: For he
has silenced, all such expressions in this second Reply: though he had never
so just cause, to provoke him thereunto, and never so great advantage given him
by the miserable mistakes of the Rej. in many places: which if the Rej. had
found in him, (He that can haulke after words with such eagernes) we should
have had exclamations, Proclamations, and outcryes enough to have filled up a
vvordy and vvyndy volume.

How ever, was the Reply: never so worthy, to have the reproach of
scurrility cast upon him, or his work; the Rey; was most unvvorthy and unfit
te do it, who has, (I dare say) much exceeded in this kind: Quis tulerit
G^aecos?
How unseemely is it, and how ill sounds it, to hear thieves complain of
Robbers, harlots of adulteresses. The proverb is homely, but true: its a hard
world, when heerring-men revile fishermen. For proof whereof, I appeal to
thine eyes to be vvitnesses Christian Reader. And that I may proceed, according
to Allegata probata, I will not look beyond my line: Only that picture which
the Rej. has made of himself, I judge it not only lavvfull, but in this case
necessary to present again to his veivv; that the world may know, and if God
will, Doctor Burgess also, may know himself, and what his spleen has
been, against the people of the most High God, blessed for ever.

A taste of the tartnes of Doctor Burgess his Spirit, in the several passages
of his answer.
This tartnes will appear in 3. kinds.

1. His heavy Censures, and that, of the very hearts, and consciences of men.
2. His open reviling of the persons of the no^ conformists: or secret
inducements to bring them into distaste: 3. His Keen and scornful jests,
which are his pastime, frequently expressed through the vvholl.
Heavy Censures.
1. They who tell us, that all the Church may do touching rites is: but the
application of circumstances, which are in nature, Civil: Adding that the
Church may not ordain any Cerem: merely Ecclesiastical; do Manifest a spirit
which lusts after contradiction p. 37 of manuduc.

In the answer.
2. If it seem so to him indeed: God has smitten his contentious spirit,
with Giddines: for who but a man forsaken of all vvisdome. etc. 62. p.

3. The Convocation house is not so likely to conclude etc. as this Libeller,
is to come to shame for his factious, and intolerable comparison, unless God
humble him. p. 62.

4. For whosoever thinksnot as (they) must either be condemned of gross
corruption, or excused, as having some good meaning: yet much weakness with
all, scil. in (comparison of them) And this pride makes them so scornful: p.
65.

5. It is so palpablely false, that I should hardly believe, any Friar durst
have set it down in print: p. 67.

6. And see how these men that talk and write in so haughty, and magistrall
a fashion, do but gull, and deceive them with the names of worthy men.

Which is so great and shameful a sin, and in this Replyer, so frequent,
that I vvonder he dares dispute about Cerem: before he have learned the
substance of common honesty: p. 83. in his alligations.

7. How can you believe any truth, cross to your opinion? when as you seek
glory one of another, and presume of your new traditions, as if the spirit of
truth came to you, or from you alone. p. 103.

8. As for terms of excrements, which he would be loath, one should apply
to the hair of his head, It savoureth of a spirit of rancor, as does the like
Foul speech, in the Scotch Dialogue. God will judge them for these reproaches,
by which they labor, to breed scorn, and abhorring of these, in the minds of
ignorant men. p. 131.

9. This flim-flam Master Jacob lent you, and both he, and you take it up,
merely for a shift, Not out of conscience, or judgment; but of hauty desire of
defending, what you have once spoke. 207.

10. This Replier (in a common course) giving the name of a good Christian, to
some unconformable. The Rej. breaks out into these words. This Addition
savores Strongly of that spirit of separation, which has been hunted after,
in the chase of unconformity.

For this shows, that with these men the adversaries of Ceremonies and Bish.
are the only good Christians. p. 216.

11. Does this Repl. and such as he, who without law, without calling,
without reason, without conscience, do smite with their toungs, and
condemn to the put of darkness, ^he Bish. and the conformed Ministers, and in
a manner, all that are not of their party. 216. pa:

12. Nor is it rightly taken up, that these men are counted factious, for
neglect of Ceremonious Canons, upon conscience, but for stiff opposition to
Ecclesiastical laws, which they despitefully speak, and write against,
and for contempt of these statute laws, by which the book of common prayer
is established. For that they dravv (as fast as they can) into a body of
themselves, engrossing a forehand, the name of brethren, The Godly, the Church,
the good Christians, as though we had lost our Christ, and they had found him
quite away: 222: page:

13. The tearming of our Cerem: Popish, is done out of faction, and to make the
imposers, and Observers of them, hateful with the people of God, which I
believe no Church would suffer, I am sure it should not: page: 238.

14. This man forces his wit, and I fear his conscience also, and does not
believe himself, when he says, that these Cerem. are imposed as parts ofGods
worship; but only for faction and opposition, would feign have it thought so,
that their opposition might be justified before men. 243. p.

15. For a wrangling spirit; yea an ill conscience, is so plainly to be
observed, while he studies to persuade, what himself believes not. 243.

16. But what should I press these men, with the authority of men, who have
themselves in estimation, for soundnes of judgment, before all men. p. 370.

17. But the Repl. seeing no interpretation will help against the clear
Testimonies of the Learned, by us alleged, confesses they were men, (as if
he, and his partners were more then men!) and that there is a little variety.
So vvilling are men rather to cast dirt in the faces of others, then to
confess any mistaking in themselves. Is this any thing, but the spirit of
pride, thus masterly to judge the Lords vvorthyes? 387. p.

18. This answer you think good to give: because you are resolved to sink the
reputation of all men, ancient or latter, how learned, and zealous soever
they were, ratherthen to confess your own mistaking.

Open Revilings of the Persons of Non-conformitants: or secret inducements to
bring them into distaste.
In 52. page: of the Praeface: some Nonco^formists are brought in, and said to
be of that temper: that when the remove all of Cerem. only was mentioned:
Their answer was.

They must not have a hoof-behinde them: And the note in the Margent tells us.

1. This Sr. Fran: Walsingham told Mr. Knevvstubs, of whom I had it. 2. It is
a ridiculous supposition; its a malicious surmise; all this scurrilous bundle
is of no use, unless it be to ingraft himself, into the affections, (which
he calls the consciences) and applause of his own party. p. 633. Preface.
3. These two notes, note you to be an egregious vvrangler. p. 6. 4. Did ever
sober-man reason thus? p. 61. 5. I should be sorry to find so much
vvayvvardnes, and falsehood, in any man of our Religion; but cannot but vvonder
at it, in a man pretending more then ordinary sincerity p. 15. 6. How ever
these men, who in effect say to all other men, stand back, I am more holy
then thou, etc. 7. What a shame is it for men to glory of sincerity, for
refusing Cerem. And use no sincerity in alleging authors, 284. 8. But that
use which the learned divines call Historical, these men call Religious, that
they might by a false eare-mark, bring us into suspicion abroad, and into
hatred vviht our Religious people at home, and yet they would be counted
sincere men. 303.
Certain Quaeres, by which these passages may be weighed, in the balance
ofserious consideration.
Of all, in general, the quaeres are these: 1. If the Replier did any where
give sentence of conformists consciences? 2. If he uttered any one bitter
speech against all Conformists? 3. The former being negatiuely true, if the
Rejoyner (in his over and under-lashings) was not overcome of his own evil,
rather then the Repliers?

Quaere. 1.
1. If a man upon probability affirm such a point, or out of ignorance and
mistake, conclude it certain, and so relate it, as by him conceaved, does he
hereby necessarily manifest a spirit of contradiction, or the weakness of his
own apprehension?

2. If charity hopes the best, that can be conceaved in reason, to judge men's
spirits by grounds weak, and feeble, out of which nothing can be concluded.

Quaere, whether it be not uncharitable censuring?

3. Do all those who contradict the like conceits of the Rej: as false,
manifest a sinful spirit in lusting after contradiction?

Quaere 2.
Whether may not a man mistake a thing plain, and be of no contentious spirit?

Whether in such a mistake, is it certain God smites with giddines?

Whether is not this to judge men's consciences, beyond warrant of any word of
God, or the nature of the work will bear?

But is not this, not only unreasonable, but intolerable, if the thing be true?

Quaere 3.
1. Whether these words come from a calm loving and merciful spirit?

2. Whether God may not abate a man, for his false in executing judgments here:
or may lay many punishments on him beside open shame?

3. Whether these definitive determinations of judgments upon men, for some
light differences, and those not so clear, be not to jussle God out of the
place of justice: and to cast thunderbolts where he does not?

But if the replier make his expression good by his defense, as he has; is not
this a strange censure, upon so small a thing, and so strange a mistake?

Quaere 4.
Whether this charge issues not out of a principle, desirous to make the
Persons of non conformists, odious to all, proclayming them as such, whose
intolerable pride, scorns and contemnes, all men in regard of themselves?

Whether the Rej. his passion did not transport him beyond himself in this
accusation, when it makes him contradict his own confession? preface: p. 5.

There be some moderate learned, Godly, loving. etc.

Whether his spleen is not great that would spare none, but even destroy the
Nation of Nonconformists, in the esteem of men: As Haman the Iues? For of all
he speaks: They: Them.

Quaere 5.
Whether he be not more charitable to Friars, then Nonconformists since he
knows, what they have printed?

Quaere 6.
Whether if this Repl. was faulty, was it reasonable to fly in the face of all
Nonconformists? These men.

Whether the Rej. his conscience in cold blood dare say, that their is not
amongst the NonConformists, the truth of worthiness, but only the names?

When in his preface he thus writes p. 3. some peacable and very Worthy
Ministers were cast out.

Quaere 7.
Whether they that cannot entertain truth cross to their opinion, and seek
honor one from another, can have any truth of grace? our savior seems to
gainsay it 5. John. And therefore Whether there be any color of argument, for
the Rej. to condemn al Nonconformists as such, whom this charge condemns?

Quaere 8.
Whether does the vilefying of a relic which one conceaves superstitions,
argues a spirit of rancor?

How came the Rej: to be sure, that God will judge them for these?

Whether may they not repent, and then God will pardon them, not judge them?

How if the relics be base and deserve to be scorned?

Quaere 9.
How knows the R^j: but they might do it out of ignorance, and an error of
ignorance may stand with a good conscience?

How knows the Rej: that it was a hauty desire, and no other passion?

But if all this be maynteined, is not the Rej: extremely harsh in his
censures, when no room will serve him, unless he situpon men's consciences, and
Pilat-like condemn the innocent?

Quaere 10.
If one call a non-conformitant a good Christian, does he express a strong
savor of separation?

He that names a Non-conformitant a good Christian, does he conclude, that the
adversaryes to the Bish. are the only Christians?

Quaere whether reason, or passion against all color of reason, make these
consequences? And whether the Rej. would suffer us to make the like out of his
words, when he calls Conformists: the faithful servants of Christ, as he
does page: 628.

Quaere 11.
Would not the Rej. make Nonconformitants monsters of men, who shall commit so
capital a sin, as condemnation of me^ to Hell: and being void of law,
calling, reason, conscience; in sodoing?

Where does this Repl: condemn all that are not his party, or all conformed
ministers?

^ay if neither he, nor any Non-conformitant ever writ, spoke, printed; nay
thought so unreasonablely: quaere: whence such an accusation comes, and what
ground it argues, which exceeds the bounds of truth, or reason; yea common
sense?

Quaere 12.13.
Whether these hundreds of ministers silenced at the beginning of K. I. were
despitefull speakers against the cerem: or conscionable forbearers of their use?

Whether these, who desire to subscribe according to law, be despisers of the
law, or those who deny them the benefit of it?

Where is that body, into which the Non-conformitants gather them selves?

How appears it, that they ever engrossed such Titles to them selves, so as to
deny them to all others: or more then the Rej. ingrosseth the title of the
faithful servants of Christ, unto conformists, page? 628.

Whether this imputation be not to bring them into hatred and distaste of the
state?

Whether ever profane drunkards, riotous adulterers, scoffing Atheists, or the
bitterest of the Jesuits, geered more tauntingly against many faithful? And is
it not loathsome to lick up their vomits? For the worst of men, have not worse
language, against the Nonconformists.

Quaere 14.15.
Whether the Rej. can judge of a man's heart any other way the^ by his
expressions outward?

Since the Repl: proffessions and expressions are plain one way, by what
warrant can the Rej. conclude his conscience is other. Neither word, nor
reason, nor love, nor Religion, learnes or allows such inferences: what is the
principle whence these proceed?

16. Quaere.
Whether any man, truly humble, and gracious, can prefer him self before all
men?

Whether the Rej. accountes all Nonconformists, void of all truth of grace,
when he lays this to their charge?

17. Quaere.
Whether he that says the Ancients were men, does thereby infer, that he
himself is more then a man?

Whether to affirm the Fathers to be men, is masterly to judge them, or
argues a Spirit of pride; when they them selves, so judge, and speak of
themselves?

Whether to affirm the Ancients to be men, argues a man resolved to sink
all men's reputation, how holy and zealous soever they be, rather then to
confess his own mistake?

Quaere 18.
Whether there can be a heavier charge laid against a man then rotten hearted
and unfit to live in the society of men? And yet what lighter ground, and more
insufficient can be pretended to bear it up?

Quaere. 19.
What if no man should have known, what Mr. Knewstubbs told Dr. B: in
private, conceaving him of the same judgment? ergo Quaere.

Whether it be safe for fellow brethren, to betrust their secrets to the Rej.
his keeping?

2. Whether the Rej. did not rake up all the blind corners of his memory, to
fetch out what might be, to bring Nonconformers into distaste?

Quaere. 20.
Whether this be not downeright railing?

Quaere 5.6.7.8.
Whether the Pharisees, in their Ceremonies, did not praetend more holiness,
then other men? And whether Conformists be not therein more like the Pharisees,
then Non-conformists?

Whether this be not to leave the Persons, and to gibe at sincerity it self?

Whether do the professed enemies against the power of godliness, use any
otherlanguage, when they would jeare at the sincerity of Gods servants?

Is not some historical use, Religious? what want of synceritie then is it, to
distinguish that historical use of images, which is to stir up devotion, from
other civil use, by the term Religious? Nay what synceritie is there, in
branding such a declaration with a false affected ear-mark?

His tart jests and taunts are not as grains of salt, but so frequent, that
they seem as Pickle, in which the passages of his book are laid to steep, and
therefore I will but point at some number of places, to ease the reader, and my
self.

Page 71. lyn: Praeface. pa. 14. ly. 29. pa. 19. pa. 33. ly. 22. pa. 15. ly.
1.2.11. pa. 37. ly. 24.25. And he not only takes, but seeks an occasion: yea is
content to go some miles about, to reach men a blovv, who were of Godliness
and vvorth, by some slighting taunt to disparage their persons, or works.

That judicious and paynfull laborer, and faithful servant of Christ he
slights, pa. 4. Prae^ace.
on this manner: M^. Parkars Gaudye and passionate treatise of the cross. A
work in truth, of that strength, and beauty, that it bleares and dazells the
eyes of envy it self. And therefore men out of hope, either to imitate it, or
answer it, would bear the world in hand, it was not vvorth the while to
spend labor in it.

But the Rej. wishes, some would reduce it to Logical arguments: and then
he doubts not, but it would soon be ansvvered. pa. 75. praeface.


Which is such a mere put-of, and so unbeseeming the skill of a Logical
disputer, much more the champion-like confidence of Doctor Burgess, that had
not his heart secretly misgiven him, in this seeming bravado, such an
expression would never have fallen from his penn.

For let any rational man be judge in this case. Are not Logical arguments
plainly expressed in a continued discourse, and by a Logician easily collected?
and what needs a reducing to a form then?

Beside Mr. Parkars discourse is either empty, and void of sinevves of sound
reason, and then the weakness of it, is soon discovered, and may be confuted;
yea disgraced with more ease; or else there be arguments, of that solidity, and
strength, which either the Rej. cannot reduce, or else is not able, or not
vvilling to answer. To say he cannot reduce the^ to form, is a thing too
mean to imagine, nor will the Rej. grant, nor will I, or do I think. To
say he is not vvilling to answer, is to gaynsay his own course, the
profession of his care, to traverse this cause, and his love to our Cerem: and
the peace of our Church, so much pretended in his answer.

The third therefore must be concluded, for I do not see what fourth thing can
be given.

Only, Did ever any ansvverer, serious and judicious, amongst Divines, of any
kind, Protestant Papist, Lutheran, propound such conditions, did ever any grant
such? nay is it not to common sense ridiculous? For any Lutheran to send to a
Calvinist, any Protestant to a Papist, having printed some serious treatise
against them, to send I say this message; well: you have printed a treatise
here, and you place some, yea great confidence in it: if you will (reduce it
into sillogismes,) you shall be soon ansvvered, and that there is nothing but
bumbast, and painted vermilion putt upon it? Spectatum admissi risum? Would
not the Papists laugh in there sleeves, at such an answer, I will say no more:
but only propound this form to the Rej. and save him a labor to reduce it.

He that propounds such terms of answer, which never were yet asked, or
granted, and indeed are unreasonable to yield: professes he cannot make an
answer, being vvilling thereunto.

But such terms the Rej. craves. The like jirkes he lends to Mr. Jacob, p. 16.
To Godly learned Fenner. p. 38.

And he has such a mind to chide, that upon the occasional mentioning of one
word excrement, he fetches a vagary into Scotland, as it were, and sitts in
judgment upon the Author of theScotch dialogue: pa. 131. l. 20. without any
confutation of any ground, which I supose had better suited his place, being
an ansvverer, and not a judge.

In like sort, he vilifies Mr. Bradshavv: A pamphlet of things indifferent of
Mr. Bradshavv. pa. 188. (your Mr. Bradshavv) Whom we are not ashamed to
own, and suppose the Doctor would have been afraid to have grappled with
him, in an arg: had he been alive.

Venerable Mr. Cartwright he takes up sometime, as if he had written upon
praejudice, without judgeme^t. Thus much I thought good, to add in short, to
wipe away that supercilious disdain, cast here by the Doctor upon diverse of
the Lords dear servants; many thousands of whom together, he accuses after
of stupiditie, or praejudice, even all that allow not of Organs, in Divine
service, or Psalmes-singing. We shall now summarily point at the rest of the
places, as an inventory or treasury of the Rej. taunts p. 47. l. 22. p. 50. l.
7.8. p. 52. l. 33.34.35. p. 55. l. 26. p. 113. l. 32. p. 120. l. 12. p. 130. l.
10. p. 141. l. last. p. 180. l. 32. p. 182. l. 16 17. p. 213. l. 18. p. 247. l.
21.22. p. 312. l. 6.7. p. 315. l. 11.12. p. 316. l. 10.

These are some of the many common places of scoffs, to be found in his book,
and are all contained within the compass of the three first chapters. as for
the last, I had neither leyseure, nor list, to trouble thee good reader, or my
self, with vvriting them out.

Only to give thee a guess, how prittily the Rej. can play with words, find
himself talk, and fill up pages: I shall take so much pains, as to transcribe
a place or two: Thus he writes. p. 66.

So this and those rules after added, are as the proverb is, like a rope and
butter, that if the one slip; the other may hold: So again.

p. 73. The truth is: Mr. Jacob could never get over the block, which Mr.
Cartwright, and the Admonitors had laid in his way (how ever Mr. Cartwright
himself a man of more activity, made a shift to leap over it) namely thus:
What soever is not commanded in the word, must not be in the Church:

And yet Mr. Jacob, that he might seem to hold fair quarter with Mr.
Cartwright, and other learned Divines, who acknovvledge, that certain
Ecclesiastical rites and Cerem: appropriated to holy actions, were left to
the determination of the Church, under some general rules of the word, will
seem to allow somevvhat, he cannot tell what, some circumstances only
civil, or occasional, as the time and place, which he rather calls
circumstances, then Cerem: that so, if any shall say, he allows nothing to
the Churches determination, to be squared, by some rules: He may answer for
himself and say: yes, certain circumstances are; namely such as are necessary
in civil, as well as sacred actions. If on the other side, one challenge him
to give some liberty to men, for the ordayning of rites, which are but
extrinsecall circumstances about the worship of God: He may answer for
himself, he has protested against all mere Ecclesiastical Rites, which are
ordained by men, and not left so much as one, to their determination.

Thus, as he, that by turning of his picture of an horse, made it running, or a
tumbling horse, which you would: So has Mr. Jacob provided for himself, there
to square some circumstances, by 4. rules, or to put of all by another, as the
market shall require.

This is the substance (Christian Reader) of a whole page almost: Touching
which I would propound these Quaeres to thy consideration.

Whether it was not easy to make up a massy volume with such talk as this?

2. If a man should set down such like passages word for word, and add an
answer suitable, filled with such vvynde, would it not rather be accounted,
and that justly, a blotting of paper, and abusing the reader, then rendering an
answer of any vvorth and satisfaction?

And by the survay of these perticulars, collected out of the three first
chapters, and comparing theReply therewith, I am confident, it will soon
appear, to any not forstalled with prejudice, whether the replye, or
answer, may most justly challenge and bear the name of scurrilous? And it
will be as evident thatthe Rej. had no cause to accuse the Repl. of
scurrility, unless he would condemn himself not only, of the same crime;
but ofsomvvhat beside far more sinful. For, though it be easily incident, I
confess, to our corrupt natures, out of a pange of pride and passion, to cast
unbrotherly contempt upon such, who seem to cross us in our opinions, and
practices, when it comes to point of opposition, bevvixt some particular men
and our selves; yet to vent such a mass of venom, in heavy censures, harsh
Revilings, slighting scorns, and that not against one particular, which may
appear in competition, and opposition against us, but even against the
generation of those, which refuse humane Ceremonies in Divine worship, many
vvherof, our penns, and consciences acknovvledge worthy and Godly; Nay not
only to vent these expressions, but to keep them sovvring, and leavening by
us, in our hearts, and vvritings, many years, vvherin we have been
persuaded by friends, and after persuasions resolved, rather to have the^
burned by others, or to burn them our selves; And yet after all this in cold
blood, in saddest consideration, upon revievv, so far to approve of the^, as to
print and publish them to the world; How such a man's spirit is principled?
and whether it was a root of bitte^nes, or Godliness, whence such things
issue: I leave it to the Almighty to judge, and to the wise hearted to
discern.

These be the vvitnesses, which I have to produce out of the Rej. his own
vvritings. All that I desire is, that their depositions may be impartially
weighed, and in this desire, and endeavor, there is no vvrong done to any rule
of piety or charity.

We have also the Rej. his open practice, as an apparent evidence, to
contradict what himself professes in his Praeface, touching the constancy of
his opinion, about the inconveniency only of these Cerem: hovveuer he bears
the world in hand to the contrary, and that with great confidence: To which
purpose, we entreat the follovving Allegations may be indifferently heard,
from those, who as vvitnesses can testify his vvalking by their experience.

That faithful servant of Christ, Mr. Arthur Hildersham, now at rest with
God, upon his sick bed, with great regrate and grief, thus expressed himself
to a fellovv Brother; Doctor Burgess his conscience knovves, that I know he
speaks untruly. And that it may appear, these words were neither spoken
passionately by him, nor forged by me; he has left the proof of them, under
his own hand upon record, which I now have by me, and shall be bold, for
fuller satisfaction, to set down his own mind in his own words.

In the 19. page of the Praeface: The Rej. expresses him self on this manner,
I do ingeniously confess two errors in that my Apology; one that I trusted
too much to the quotations of the Abridgement, which then I had in vvriting:

To which Mr. Hildersham thus replies in his notes: How false the quotations
are in the Abridgement, will be seen hereafter. But this is manifestly false
that he was (before the vvriting of his Apologye) deceaved thereby, or that he
had a Copy of it in vvriting before that time. For the Abrigdement was not
made till after he was deprived: and therefore no man could have any copy of
it, either in print or vvriting. Nay the large book (where of it is an
Abridgement,) was not delivered to his Majesty before that day he was
deprived; and the Abridgement was made sundry months after. He proceeds Ibid:
19. p. Its true that the Ministers were resolved to have chosen him for one of
those three, that should have disputed for them, (such profession he had made
unto them of his full consent with them in judgment,) and he had been one of
the disputants, if that (not the Deane of the Chapel; but) the King himself,
had not expressly (in his message) excepted against him: which also argues,
that his Majesty did hold him to be fully of the mind, that the rest (who had
sent him the foresaid book) were of.

In his notes of the 20. page: he has these words. That there is no color of
truth in this that he says here: i. e. (That when he was chosen to be one of
those, that should mayntaine their cause by disputation, he professed to his
Brethren, that he could not speak against the things as unlawful; but only
as inconvenient) may appear evidently to any reasonable man. For seeing they
had in their book delivered to his Majesty our Kings Father, stated the
quaestion not against the inconveniency, but the unlavvfulnes of these things.
Who will imagyne, they Would ever have chosen him to be one of the 3 to
dispute for them, if he had professed to them at that time, that he had nothing
to say against the unlavvfulnes of them? These be the dying words of that
dear servant of God, as I have them to show in black and white.

If yet the witness of the dead deserve no credit: The Rej. may with some
small consideration, recall to mind, how after the Revolt, or change of his
former opinion, in an occasional concurrence and meeting of many fellovv
Brethren; when they out of humane Civility desired him to take his place
according to his years and gifts; I say, he may (if he will bethink himself)
easily recall, what words he then openly uttered to this, or like effect: He
told the^ he was unvvorthy to sit with them; to have respect from the^,
since he had betrayed them, and their cause. Now the cause which they
mayntayned was not inconveniency: but unlavvfulnes in these things. If the
Rej. his memory serve him not about this particular, let him repair to Bambury
side to his ancient friends there, and they can testify so much to his face.
If then the construction that the King, and state, made of his course, the
apprehension his fellovv Brethren had of his practice: nay his own profession
may be trusted: Let all the world, and Dr. Burgess his own heart judge,
whether he has changed his opinion yea, or no?

In his praeface, there is not much that expects answer. For to omit his
biting language, and devouring words, where with we have cloyed the Reader
in the foregoing Catalogue, and unto which rank many Gibes here may be
referred: as That page 5. These do commonly call any small company of their
party: The Church and the Christians of such a town. As if Christ were (I
say not divided amongst us) but wholy taken away from us, to them, and what
wants this of Schism in the heart, And that: pa. 9. The glory of suffering
for (as they call it) the good cause: And that pa. 12. Others aim at Schism
and Anabaptisticall delusions: to let pass these pangs of spleen, and other
distempered cariages, which he himself cast upon some passionate people and
Strongly conceited. All which being justly blamed, it neither hurts the cause
against which he writes, nor helps that which he defends, since the most
glorious Gospel of Christ has such blotts cast upon it, by reason of the
sinful weaknesses of some, who take up the profession thereof; Leaving (I
say) all these, as not worthy the consideration, we shall entreat the Rej. at
his return to give some satisfaction to these quaeres.

1. Why Atheists, Papists, profane varletts, brutish drunkards hellish
blasphemers, together with the accursed crew of the most riotous vvretches;
yea the Generation of Nevvtralists, moral formalists, ignorant sotts of all
sorts, are so zealous for these Cerem. Are so violent to urge, so careful to
practice them, who never had care of piety in all their lives?

2. After the Lord, has cast in some saving illumination into the mind,
convicted the conscience, and converted the hearts of scandalous sinners; after
such have gained svveet peace of conscience, and assured evidence of Gods love,
sealed unto their souls; why do the hearts of such, rise in some strong
indignation against these Popish relics; when they have never been
persuaded thereunto by teachers, nor had time from their own inward
troubles, to consider of them? That this is the disposition of many, I can
speak by proof, I would have the Rej. speak to the reason of it.

3. When it is notorious to all the English world, that the most of the
people (who live in the bosom of the Church, and profess the faith) be
wholy taken up with conformity, both approving and practicing of it,
countenancing those that do it: Why is the Doctor so troubled, that a fevv
silly despicable people, void of vvisdome (nay if his former charges be true)
void of grace, should distaste the Ceremonies; when I know no Judicious
Non-conformer, is disquieted that the crovvde of the formal Gospellers should
embrace them? while the Rej. is searching the reason of these things, it may
chance, he may either search or see his own heart somvvhat more clearly.
Leaving then these to his consideration. Proceed we a little to survay the
praeface, and the substance of it may be referred to three heads. 1. He
charge Nonconformity to be cause of many mischeifes. 2. He debates the cure,
and administreth that, which he conceaved most meet for redress. 3. He makes
a defense for himself, and vvriting: Against all which we eycept thus.

1. That his charge is not just. 2. His dealing in the cure not plain and
through. 3. His defense in that where the stresse lies, either not equal, or
not sufficient.
Come we to skanne the particulars: The mischeifs, which he conceaues to
issue from Nonconformity are no less then Separation and profaneness. A heavy
charge, I confess, but the best is, his reasons have not the vvayt of a rush.

1. That of separation, p. 5. is supported upon so slender a ground, that he
bevvrayes only his desire to have surpassed his power: therefore Rhetoricates
in stead of reasoning. If these (says he) be Idolatrous will vvorshipps; how
can you? how dare you join with us, in those acts of Religion wherein these
are used?

Wherein he neither concludes the quaestion, because a man may refuse to
join in such acts, without sepera(...) or utter condemning and renouncing
allChurch-^ommunion: Neither does he prove that, which he con^ludeth about
joining in such acts, by any other argument ^ut only by how can you, how dare
you? To which ^ answer, we so can, and darejoyne in good acts, to which
^omthing perticipating of Idolatry is added, as Christ (our ^eacher) and his
Apost: did join in the Ievvesvvorship, unto which were added many
superstitions, as unlawful, as ^ve had our Cerem: Nay I will add one thing
further, that, if D.B. be resolute in this point, i.e. that he must ^eperate
from all Churches, and Church actions, in ^vhich any superstition is exercised;
then he must be one of the greatest Seperatists in the world. For ^e holding
error of judgment to be superstition, and those ^uperstitious Brethren, that
absteyne for conscience sake from things lavvfull, though only upon error in
judge^ent: must upon the former ground separate from all those Churches in
whose Religious acts, any thing in his jud^ement lavvfull, is so absteyned
from; and much more if any thing in his opinion unlawful, be put in practice:
from one of which faults, fevv or no Churches will be ^ound wholy free. Yet
I would have another opinion ^f D. B. and think, that though he houlde bowing
to ^he altar, to be superstitious or Idolatrous, yet would he not therefore
separate from the good prayers, that follovv that ridiculous Ape of Idolatry.

That Other charge of profaneness p. 6. pretended to come from praecisenes,
is so strange a consequence, that it can hardly with deliberation, be fathered
upon Nonconformity, without Non-conscience.

For strictness in matters of Cerem. has no more force, to bring forth
loosenes in matters of substance; then zeal in matters of faith, and charity
has to bring forth carelessnes of both, nay then pure Religion has, to breed
Atheism.

Go we to experience: view the places where Non-conformists live; the
people whom they teach* the vvayes of those with whom they walk; who they
be that have reference to, and dependence upon their persons, or ministeryes;
and I suppose the vvalls of the Churches, and the stones of the streets, will
give testimony against this accusation. Nay I suppose, I may speak it truly,
as I profess, I think it, that someone Non-conformable minister, has been a
means under God, to bring more souls to grace and heaven; then all the
Cloisters, or Cathedralls in all England in the same time, where all
Conformity has been the daily diet, and liuelehood, of the people.

Go we to reason: the best that either the Rej. or any beside, can make of
our Cerem: is, that they are things indifferent. Now that vveake ones may
doubt and stagger about such, That doubting, they ought not to practice them
14. Rom: last verse: is made a duty. That men's vvalking according to conscience,
should be the cause of others disobedience; That keeping the law, should be an
occasion in it self of profaning the law; that stopping the very appearance
of the least evil, should set open a gappe to the greatest; I appeal to any
reasonable man whether it be not a consequence void of common sense, unless
men have a miraculous skill to soder quicksilver, or tysande together, or make
heaven and earth meet!

Last of all, it is remarkable that Doctor Burgess himself pa. 8. does impute
these mischeifes unto civil war about Ceremonies: which if it be well
weighed, it will manifest too much prejudice, in his former discourse. For in
Civil wars, the mischeifs ensuing on them, are not wont to be charged upon
one part alone, and that poor, passive, overpovvred, obnoxious to the
suffering of vvhat-soever pressures their opposites please to lay upon them,
which is the Case of the Non-conformists in these Commotions: Tell us I pray
you, if in your conscience, the Praelats Canons, courses, Courts, and
proceedings, have had no hand in vvorking mischeife? nay diverse of these
mischeifes, which you have affectedly placed on the other side?

If non-residents, double treble beneficed men, unable, perverse, scandalous,
half-Popish Ministers, have not had a finger in them? If those trumpetours, and
drummers, who proclayme the innocence, and justness of our Prelates
proceedings, have not brought something to the furtherance of these mischeifes?
If you speak your conscience, it must needs say, yes; and, so confess, it
was your passion, not your judgment, that obtruded all upon Nonconformity.

The state of this war is this: we (as it becomes Christians) stand upon
the sufficiency of Christ's institutions, for all kind of worship: and that
exclusively, the word, (say we,) and nothing but the word, in matters of
Religious worship. The Praelats rise up on the other side, and will needs
have us allow, and use certain humane Ceremonies of Religion in our
Christian worship. We desire to be excused, as houlding them unlawful.
Christ we know: and all that comes from him, we are ready to embrace. But
these human Cerem: in divine worship we know not, nor can have any thing to
do with them; upon this they make feirce war upon us, and yet by the pen
of D. B. lay all the fault of this war, and the mischiefs of it, upon our
backs. Now all ye that pass by, consider, and judge, what aequity is used,
in such dealing? They will say, all things are to be done decently and in
order. To which we willingly consent, but allege again, that we cannot
apprehend these Cerem: to be necessary for order, and decency. They (as our
Lords) tell us, it is enough for our Consciences, that They esteem them so.
Our Consciences tell us, this is to usurp the place of God, what can we say
less, then that we will follow our Consciences, rather then their wills?

To conclude, the Rej. p. 285. makes Circumcision lavvfull to be imposed, upon
the same grounds, that our English Cerem: stand on. Now if it should please
our Prelates in a Convocation to apoynt, that all English men should consent to
the cutting of their fore-skins, and denounce war upon those that should
refuse this goodly Canon; was it not a grave Accusation, to lay all the
mischiefs of such a war, upon those which would not conform to such a
Ceremony? But the weakest must alvvayes go to the wall, and the Lamb must
dye for troubling the water, if it please the Lion so to determine it.

We have done with the disease, and mischeife together with the cause of it.
We are now come to consider the Remedy the Dr. administers: and we except
against his dealing herein as not plain; nay not profitable, even by his own
rules.

1. He deals not plainly. For making the Abolishing of the Cerem: by
authority, to be one, and the chief course for cure, as despayring to obtain
that, he refuses to persuade thereunto: Because forsooth: to judge what is
most convenient, and to determine thereof, belongs only to those, who
together with power of doing what they shall well like, have judgment to
make choice of the best way. Which is a vveake and a very unvvorthy conceit.
For. 1. D. B. cannot deny, that those, who impose, urge, and with capital
punishments enforce these Cerem: upon Christ's, Ministers and people, do therein
abuse that authority, which they received for the procuring of the quietness,
peace, and safety of those, that desire to serve God according to his word,
and not for the troubling, vexing, and scandalizing of them, by opposing their
mere wills, in Religious affairs, to men's Consciences: depending wholy and
only upon Gods Word; He cannot (I say) deny this to be a grievous sin of
those in place, and yet refuses seriously to admonish them of the same, being
called to give counsel, and ^dvise about this very cause:

2. It is to be supposed that worthy Ministers of the Gospel, are not
destitute of vvisdome, and judgment concerning Religious affairs. By this
reason therefore D. B. might as well have forborne to judge, what they should
choose, as to determine so peremptorily thereof. Lastly, I would gladly know
of D. B. whether the Scriptures be not able as well to make Magistrates, and
Governoures, perfect to every good work, as they can do Ministers? whether;
either Minister, or Magistrate should do, or ought to do any thing, which
God has not commanded them? Whether a faithful Minister, in his office,
ought not to understand, what that word reveals: ought not to teach all
Magistrates what out of the word, he so understands? If all which
particulars be plain and undeniable, it will appear that it belonged to D.
B. being called to give counsel, declaratively to judge and determine, what
was convenient to be done: which if he durst not declare, he durst not do
his duty. And that I may fasten this nail yet more fully, I thus force the
conclusion.

What ever duty of any calling, the word teaches; that the Minister by the
word ought to judge, determine, and deliver. Else how can he teach the vvholl
counsel of God? how can he give every one his portion?

But the duties, and doings (if good) of all Magistrates the word teaches.

Ergo the Minister ought to judge, and determyne of those, by the word, and so
deliver them. Ergo it does not belong to those only, who have power, and
are in place, to judge and determine; which was the Doctors assertion.

Again: what ever God commands, that, and all that, the Minister should
teach: and so judge, and determine, else the trumpet should give an uncertayne
sound.

But what ever men, or Magistrates ought to do, that Christ has commanded.
Both the parts of the argument are in 28. Math: last v. therefore the conclusion
follows: what ever men, or Magistrates ought to do, Ministers should teach,
and consequently judge, and determine.

And as thus the Rej. dealt not plainly in his cure, ^o whether has be dealt
profitablely, in that his ^eceit, is against his own rule; as it shall
appear in ^he scanning of his defense: Which we except against ^s
insufficient in those particulars, vvherin the stresse and weight of the plea
lies: And those appear in ^hree special objections he makes: the dynt of none
of which, he is able to declyne.

The objections are page 12.13. and the sum of them ^n short is, this
vvriting stirrs strife: ob. 2. exasperat^eh authority: Obj. 3. hinders the
remoueall of the Cerem: ob: 4.

Hear we now his defense to each of these, in order: To the first, he
answers in truth by denial, that this course of his is so far from stirring
the fire of contention, that its casting on water to quench ^t: and to this
also belongs that, p. 11. there is a neces^ity that some should speak for the
cause, unless we shall suffer ourselves, not only to be rooted ^ut of our
livings, but which is worse, out of the hearts of our people, whom we serve
in the Lord.

Ans: bare denial vvith-out reason, yields small releife to a cause, but when
it is contrary to the vvor^ and it self, it betrays a cause, does not defend
it: and such is this.

1. It is contrary to the word, and that staple (...) delivered by the
Apostle, which he setts down, as station, and shelter for the vveake in the
faith to be take them selves unto. 14. Romans 1. where the (...) toleration of
those, who are vveake in the practise^ things indifferent, is ever the ground
of contention and disturbance in the Church. And therefore this cour^^ of
forbearance, he inferrs, 19. v. as the way to follow peace: sense teaches it
also: when a company of passengers are confined to one way to pass, or one
door to enter, it causes them to crowd and jussle.

2. This Denial is contrary to the Doctors ovv^ doctrine delivered in 3. page
where its granted by him, and proved by the experience of thresco^ years:
that opposition begetts opposition, and th^^ which was given to stir the
humor, did only sharpen it. Putt we now the case to the Colledg^ of
Physicians; nay let D.B. himself be judge. Is it rational course? Or like to
work a cure? that vvh^^ the body has been distempered many months vvit^
physic, we should still continue the same receite^ And its mavelous to see,
how conviction vvrests truth from a man, even against his own passion, and
purpose. weigh these two passages, and see if they will accord?

The Doctor must write, that he may not be wrought out of the hearts of his
people. page 11. And yet he confesses by vvriting, he has wrought himself
out of the hearts of the godly.

His defense to the 2. obj: is yet more feeble, though more ingenious: For his
answer is nothing but yiedling the cause, in some compass and circumlocution
of words.

For (1) when he graunts: that he forbore some years this course of vvriting,
that he might not exasperate authority: he privily, yea plainly yields, the
objection had such rational face in it, that it did not only press him, but
prevayle with him also: where as 2.ly. he adds: that by this means he has
some hope to persuade some to conform, and so to avoid the lash of authority.
By this he does not only yield the objection, but confirm and establish it.
For if only those, who are persuaded by his answer, shall avoid the lash,
therefore they who will not be persuaded, must expect the blovv, and shall be
sure to feel it.

3. He adds for his own intention: Sure I am that I desire not the vexation
of any sober man: But his own bond will not be taken, because he has so
often broke his word; he must seek for other suretyes: (Quid verba audiam, cum
facta videam?) Little power have words to persuade any of common
understanding, when the practice goes the contrary way. Nor yet can I
discern, how to judge of any man's desire, but only by his endeavor. Those
heavy accusations, uncharitable censures, vvherby he charge and that with
much bitterness, the generation of Non-conformists, from what root they come,
and what desire they imply, let any rational man determine: For it cannot be
to ingratiate them, or procure favor for them, in the affections of the
Governors, when he makes them appear such as deserve none; nay such as ought
to receyve none, but the contrary at their hands.

Lastly when it is objected: That this course hinders the removeall of these
things, which authority otherwise might possibly remove; His defense is; That
he will never believe, that authority will remove them, with dishonor of it
self, as yiedling the things to be unlawful, which it has so long
mayntayned.

In which answer: these two particulars offer themselves to consideration.

1. To remove Cerem: as unlawful, being long mayntayned is a dishoner to
Authority. 2. D.B. beleives, authority will not thus dishonor it self.
Ansvv: The first of which is a most dangerous assertion; and is made a chief
bar to stay Papists, and others from reforming of any thing, that others have
opposed, and they defended: And its usual in the mouth of false flatterers,
and back friends to all reformation: and I would hope that D.B. did utter more
in this, by his pen, then he meant in his heart. Beside the consequences are
not so dangerous, but the ground is as vveake For the long continuance, or
mayntenance of a thing, if evil and unlawful, is so far from bringing
dishonor upon any, for the removeall of it, that retayning thereof, increases
both his sin, and shame: and it argues a greater measure of humility and
power of grace to abandon it.

Nay, were the thing lavvfull, if yet by circumstances it did appear, that
Gods Honor, the common good, the aedification of our brethren, might more be
promoted by the remoueall of it, though it were hoary headed with antiquity
and continuance, it argued greatest love to God and man to alter it, rather
then to keep it in use: and that would bring greatest honor to him that
should so do; since by the verdict of Gods Spirit, he is most honorable, that
most honoreth God.

2. From these grounds, how rotten and unsavory the second particular of the
Rej. his defense is, will easily be granted. For if in such a remoueall, the
duty of Authority does consist, the power of grace does appear, the glory of
God, and good of the Church and common wealth, will be advanced; To be of
that belief with D. B. that Magistrates will never be brought to do what
they ought, how uncharitable is it thus to lay their honor in the dust? And
not to press them hereunto, when we may, and by our calling, ought, how
unconscionable is it? And how contrary to that love we owe to the Almighty,
and our Governors?

The crovvd of objections, which he makes concerning himself, I conceyve, as
so many Strugglings of Spirit, which stood in the way, to vvithstand him in
his course. His conscience, as it should seem, gave the ^nsett, and let in
some such intimations as these to him.

Why is not Popery coming in fast enough; but you must make a preparation
thereunto: yea become a purveyer, and harbenger to make Room, and lay in
provision for it? Is it not sufficient, that the vvicket is set open, that the
Popish pack may be drawn in; but you must set open the great gate, that a
Sumpter horse may amble in with a load of relics and Cerem? For if the
patent of the Church be so enlarged, to appoint Cerem: at their pleasure, to
admonish and teach, and it is in their power to appoint what, and how many,
as seems good to them; why then let images be erected, let crosses and
Crucifixes be set up in every corner. These are lavvfull admonitors, and
instructers, and we cannot have too many good Companions, to putt us in mind
of our duties.

Consider beside, how many poor Ministers are under pressure, some fled, some
imprisoned, many suspended, themselves and families undone. Why will you not
suffer them to lie in the dust, but will you trample upon them, even unto
death? Is it not enough, they make brick, but must they be beaten also? Oh
consider, as before the Lord, to whom you must give an account. Do you well
to blovv the fire in the Chymny, while the flame is in the thach? Is not the
fury of the BB. yet feirce enough, their rage sharp enough, but you must set
them on, and strenghthen their hands, to strike harder? lastly, is not Cringing
at Altars, bowing at the name of Jesus, like to be brought in, and practiced
with great forvvardnes, and will you, dare you encorage, in such courses, yea
give an approbation and commendation to them? For they will say, they are but
significant Cerem: they place no merit, putt no efficacy in them, only they are
admonitors of our duties. Thus is the foundation of superstition laid, the
Gospel Stopped, and an open way made for Popery, and you are the persvvader,
the encorager, yea defender of all these: how vill you answer this at the
great day?

Yet do I not speak this, as though I were troubled, with the weight of any
thing he has writ. For I profess unfaynedly the way of his traverse fynds
vvelcome with me; vvherin the nakedness, and indefensiblenes of his cause I
hope will be discovered. Only one thing I would most earnestly entreat, that
he would shovv us but fair play in these proceedings: to wit, that he
would not break our heads, while others have bound our hands: Let him but
grant us indifferent terms, even the common curtesy of the court, an
impertiall pleading: we desire no more favor then the cause by its own
credit will procure: Let the larv be open, as the rigor of Justice allovves:
To which purpose shall he so far prevayle with his Lord BB. that we may
enjoy, the use of our books, the liberty of the press, and if not the benefit
of our charges, yet freedom of breathing in our native soil, and with our
poor desolate families; And I dare promise him he shall not want those, that
will join issue with him, in this traverse, either by vvriting, or printing,
and that without any gaudy expressions, (vvherof he accuses Mr. Parker) but
by play dynt of Syllogism: and we will take our oaths, as he in desires,
that each man of us shall write his conscience. which I vvonder why the Dr.
putt in, since its openly known to all that will not shutt their eyes, that
all conscience does not live and dye alone with conformable men. But if we
neither have, nor he will procure us leave, or liberty, either to preach, or
write, or print, yea scarce to live; then he must know, we are denied the
benefitt of the law, and the Curtesy of the Court and in vain he braggs of
his traverse.

To pursue all the particulars objected, and ansvvered in his own beshalf, is
not vvorth the while, since no weight of the cause lies there upon: Only one
^ravado here vented by the Rej. is not to be borne: which is observably set
down in the 14. ob: D. Burges. has parted with more profitt, by taking up
conformity, and a benefice, then any now in England has done by his
unconformity, and loss of a benefice. Surely he myndeth not so affectionately
as he should, the affliction of his brethren. What did D. B. part with?
Nothing but future, contingent, uncertayne profitt: which made him liable to
be envied, and opposed by the college of physicians; Profitt, which was not
necessary to his life and being, depending upon extraordinary pains: such as
in all probability, he could not have long endured, or at least with
contentement of mind. His Pshisick practice made that change, which Tully
commends in Merchandise: Satiata quaestu, vel contenta potius, ut saepe ex
alto, in portum, sic ex ipso portu, se in agros possessionesque contulit. After
sufficient gettings, it forsook both sea and sea-hauen, and betook it self to
quietness and plenty in the country.

On the other side, what have not? what do not men loose by unconformity?
Even all their means of living; all their liberty, not only of providing for
themselves, and their families; but even of breathing in any air, saving only
that, which may be drawn out of stinking prisons. Nay sometime all the
Commodity of their Country, or National habitation; being forced to fly even
unto the indians for safety, to say nothing of their loss of life it self, by
cruel imprisonments Now let our Savior judge betwixt us, and D.B. The poor
widow (says he) that parted but with two mites, parted with more then
they did, who out of their plenty, parted with many sheckells, because those
two mites were all that she had.

If this be true, then many and many a one has parted with more profitt for
Nonconformity, then D. B. did for Conformity, for so much as they have parted
with, all they had, and he only with part of that which he had, or might
have hoped to get, superfluous in comparison of that, which others have lost.
To conclude all, I suppose if we were vvilling to suffer, we should be more
vvilling, both to search, and see the truth, and I doubt not, but the Lord
would settle the hearts of such, and bless their indeauors in that behalf.
All that I would crave at thy hands (Christian reader) is this, that thou
would read without prejudice, and judge without partiality; judge not the
person, or cause of the distressed the worse, because of their pressure or
paucity.

VVelcome Christ with his cross, any truth though with trouble. Be vvilling
the truth should fall on any side as worthy to be prised and loved for it
self. That is all I desire for my money: and Religion, conscience, reason
will not deny this.

Rules for to direct the weak reader how to read the book with profitt.
Where these abbreviations occurr, D.B. signifies Dr. Burges. Rej. signifies
Dr. Burges. Repl. notes the Replier. Def. signifies D. Morton.

2. Because the Replyer is forced to follovv Dr. Burges in his far fetched,
and new coined definition, and the maze of the multitude of his distinctions,
the weaker understanding will be at a loss, as not able to comprehend, or
catch his meaning suddenly, and therefore, if I were worthy to advise, I
would entreat such, to crave the help of some judicious Minister, who is
faithful, not to betray him for having the book, but vvilling and able to
inform him how to conceive of it aright.

The Replyer his manner of vvriting being press and punctual, and therefore
setts down so much of the Rejoynders words, as he conceived needful, if
any difficulty arise therefrom, the Reader is to be entreated to consult with
the answer at large.

The faults escaped correct thus:
page: 17. in the margent line 3. for sext read sort. page: 20. lin: 22. for
accuratnes read accurate. page: 24. lin: 5. for captivale read captivate.
Ibidem lin: 18, for es read ends. page: 25. lin: 1. for they read to. page:
26. lin: 20. for oter read over. page: 27. lin: 7. for dowur read down.
Ibidem in the margent lin: 17. for ito read to. page: 37. lin: 14. for there
read either. page: 42. in marg: lin: 2. for Graecos, read Graccos. page: 50.
collum: 2. lin: 9. for these read those. page: 71. lin: 9. for had read hold.
page: 75. lin: 2. put out by,

An Alphabeticall TABLE Of the Principal Occurrents in this FRESH SVIT. Where
note that 1. p. and 2. p. at the end, sometimes of the number, directing to the
page, stands for 1. part, and 2. part.
A.
AVgustin what he thought, but durst not speak. p. 33.2. p. His judgment of
signs. p. 223. His Condemning the very nature of such Ceremonies, where some
choice things are noted. p. 228.
Adjuncts called Parts by Ramus, p. 156.2. p. Anabaptists occasioned
reformation of Cermon. p. 19.1. p. and 457.2. p.
B.
BEzas clear judgment of Episcopal authority. p. 91.1. p. Beza expresses
the Commune sentence of our Divines, of the ancient Bishops, viz* that they
were ever too busy about Ceremonies. p. 228 Bucers wish about Holidays, viz.
that there were not so much as one left, besides the Lord's Day. p. 360. Baines*
his Syllogism against our Ceremonies: confirmed p. 258. Brightmans answer to
Iuel. p. 503. Babingtons Comment. on Levit. 10.1. observable against our
Ceremonies. p. 24.2. p. Bradshaws opinion of indifferent things opened. p. 161.
Bellarmins answer to the Law of the O. Test. prescribing all things to the
Jews. p. 13.2. p. His Proof ^or the Churches liberty to institute Ceremonies
from Purim and the Feast of Dedicat. p. 246. He says as much for their, as we
for our Cer. p. 488.
Blumfeild a Persequutor threatened a good man for the Surplice. p. 18.1. p.
Bernards answer to the Virgin Mary's Image, bidding him Good morrow. p. 364.
C.
CAsuits admit nothing beside their order. p. 65.1. p. Chokim the Hebrew name
of Ceremon. finely laid open. p. 35.1. p. Conformers miserable Apology. p.
13.1. p. Ceremonies their dispute how ancient; opposed by Waldenses, Martyrs,
removed in Helveria. p. 8.15.1. p. Other things ridiculous yet as tolerable, if
they had but institution from the Convocation-howse as a May pole ith Church,
or a straw in a Child's hand at Bapt. p. 17.
Ceremonies such as ours, why naught. p. 18. Ceremonies how defined, examined.
p. 21. Ceremonies laid out in 4. things p. 23. Ceremonies holy. p. 129.2. p.
and 178.186. Their Worship. p. 132.2. p. and 298. Ceremonies must have a rule
for number. p. 144.2. p. Ceremonies Popish may yet be Jewish. p. 218. See also.
p. 273.
Ceremonies by Institution to what Commandment they belong. p. 301. Ceremonies
condemned for speaking out of place. p. 364. Ceremonies, Clowts that have layen
on the plague foares of Idolatry. p. 367. Ceremonies cannot be deduced from
the kinds named by the Rej. p. 482. Ceremonies used by us never objects of
Idol: answered. p. 401. Ceremonies consequently imposed as belonging to giving
honor to God, yet Superstitious. p. 103.1. p. Ceremonies single, double,
trebble. p. 91.2. p. Ceremonies the Garments of Religion whereof the Scots man's
jest. p. 94. Church repraesentative, to the life repraesented. p. 88.1. p.
Church English and primative compared. p. 403. Calvin's account of additions. p.
121.2. p. 376. What he says to Cassander, and to our Masters of Cerem. p.
122.2. p. His admirable speech to the Lord Protector of England. p. 389. His
moderation toward Popish Ceremonies, what See. p. 400.
His inference, that, if the 3. Children in Dan. had followed the Counsel, and
wit of our times; they needed never to have stood out against the Kings
Commandment. p. 127.2. p. His judgment of Ceremonies cleared. p. 240. His
opinion missinterpreted by the Rej. answered. p. 16.1. p.
Chamiers answer to that of no new Cerem. brought in these days. p. 295. His
famous Censure of Ceremonies Analogical and Sacramental, as idly doing that
over again, for which the Sacraments were by Christ appointed. p. 84. 1. p.
Covels Sentence slighted by the Rejoynd. p. 208. Christ the only authentic
teacher. p. 210.211. Chemnitius his famous testimony about additions. p 249.
Cajetan a Cardinal of Rome would not be buried ith Church: p. 469. Conformity
disuaded from, by one that Conformd himself. p. 474. Circumcision Defended to
be now lawful by Def. and Rej. p. 274. Convocatio^ house not Cleared by all
that the Rej. can say. p. 113. Found Guilty of much evil: of perverting the
Articles of religion, and s^tting the^ out far worse, then they were in good K.
Edwards time, decreeing less good, then the Council of Trent. p. 115.123.
Comlines. p. 77. 2. 1. Corinths. c. 14. which how interpreted by F^thers and
Schoolmen, and more honestly then now adays by Hierar hichs. p. 53. 2. p.
Contrariety, of Decency and edification displeasing, yet Contrariety of rites
serving thereunto, not so. p. 117.2. p.
D.
Dr. Humphreys letter to the Bishops. p. 269. Dr. Davenats doctrine at Cambridg
p. 79.1. p. Dr. Morton calls for abolition of Superstition without delay. p.
378. Dr. Andrews speech to the Convocation. p. 419. and 421. Dr. Fulck forsook
the College for the Surplice p. 473. Distinctions of popish writers brought
together by Rive^us. p. 299. Distinction into Coma^d and allowance, Symbolizing
with papists. p. 142. Distinctions of Against and beside. p. 28.2. p.
Distinction of traditions into Divine, and Apostolical rejected by Iunius p.
335. For denying of which distinction the Repl: was charged with unlearnednes,
yet all the Rej. learning, and more put to it cannot make it good. p. 336.
Dipping 3. times p. 242.
E
EAsterday solemnized with a pascal lamb, by a late great Bp. of England. p.
40.2. p. Easter the first apple of strife, from the Bp. of Rome. p. 85.448. and
440. Evil of our doings ^o be put away, finely explained p. 131.
F.
FAsting in what sense, worship. p. 145. Freewill offerings, no will worship. p.
153. Nor do warrant appointing of Cer. p. 152.1. p. and 151.2. Feasts of love,
their original uncertain. p. 334.
G.
GVnpowder stopped into an image. p. 513.
H.
HOokers strange speech p. 2.2. p Hooper a Bp. refused the Surplice. p. 135.
What he speaks of Bps. state. p. 408.
Holy, either by infusion or inhaesion, the Def. absurd distinction p. 179.
Human, with Bellarm. and the Rej. in one sense. p. 302. Hezekiah, whether he
le^t the images stand, set up by Col. p 369.
I.
INtended observation. p. 26.1. p. Infants Communicants, p. 37.2. p. Iunius his
remarkable speech about additions. p. 89. 2. p. and 252. His sentence of
images. p. 286. and 290.
Images for use religious mainteyned and condemned by the Rej. p. 237 283.
Images in Churches, not indifferent by the Homilies against Idol. p. 289. Iuels
prophecy about the cross p. 290
K.
KNeeling etc. proper worship by the Rej. grant p. 138
L:
LVthers advise about yiedling p. 97.2. p. How he placed the Images to make
them ridiculous p. 285. Latimers speech to the convocation, for which he was
committed to the tower p. 123.1. p His comparison of Cer. and in a Sermon
before K. Edw. p. 148.2. p.

M:
MElancht free speech against man's inventions p. 152.1: p His meaning opened p:
141.2. p: He disalloweth the Collectio^ of some from Act: 15: Ibid.
Mat. 15. and Marc: 7: of pharisees washing p. 186 etc. and zz1 Ministers how
they enter upon their Parishes in Engl: p. 412:
N.
NOnresidents a careful sort of them p: 417 Negative argument usual with the
best writers p: 43.2. p.
O.
Opinion wheter it were worship p. 125.2. p. Organs d^sliked by Schoolmen p.
40^ Not used ith Popes chapel p: 430
^fficials commanding style when they enjoyne excom. p. 410
P.
^Ope Paul 4. offered to confirm our Ser^ice book witnessed by Dr, Morton p. 203
^ope received the Host ^itting p. 429 ^apists opinion of their Cer. in regard
of worship and necessity to salvation, and the holiness they put ^n them,
together with their operation, and effi^acy, no more then is ^^ofessed of ours.
See. p. ^.70. and 73.75.1. p. and ^03.315. ^^pists give liberty to the ^ulgar
man to judge of ^^e Churches precepts ^. 79.1. p. their judgment of idle ^er:
p. 74.2. p. ^hey and our me^ agree in their answers to the place alleged,
against adding to Gods worship. p. 115 They deny operative virtue to holy water
p. 294
Popish idolatry compared with Heathenish p. 518 Policy of old Bps. to win
the Heathen by observing their holydais, condemned. p. 432. see also p. 500 P.
M. refused the Surplice in Oxford p. 463 A remarkable speech of his about men's
devises to stir up etc. p. z11
Praelats power if they pleas to command all Englishmen to be circumcised p.
107.1. p. Praela^s in a praemunire p. 111. Praelats grief when forced to
deprive answ. p. 108 Praelats office to make canons says the Rejoyn. p. 107
Parliament against silencing for such nonconformity p. 108. r.p: Parl 1610.
checked the prelates p. 106.1. p. Polanus cleared. p. 148. 1. p Praying toward
the East as ancient as any Ceremony. p. 82.2. p.
R.
REjoynders bulls frequently observed. See p. 44.83.92-1. p. again p.
6.9.25.32.36.44.92.108 217.2. p. Rej. noted for palpable error concerning
inward worship p. 1z7.1. p. For Error again in art p. 138. divinity p. 138.
His dangerous speech that Christ had laid snares if etc. p. 68.2. p.

S.
SAcred proper and reductive, examined p. 63.1. p. Sacramentals what p. 226.
Denied by pap. to work etc. p. 227. Condemned by Beza p. 244.
Sacrament and Sacramentals a foolish distinction p. z33. Saduces not so
praecise. p. zz0. Sopping ith Sacrament p. 36.2. p. Subscription how required
by parliament, and refused by none p. 10^.1. p. Superstition rightly defined.
p. 98.1. p. z15.236. by Polanus. Superstition negative. p. 101.1. p: Cast by
prevention on non Conformists p. 34. and finely taken off p. 95. etc. and 312.
Superstition, how first occasioned by yiedling too much to the infirmity of
others, p. 83.2. p. Sadcels testimony maintained p. 234. Surplice refused by a
minister in Q. Eliz. days, and why p. 435. Swearing on a book ho^ p. 357.
Souldjers new pressed by the Rej. p: 43^. Scotlands judge. to the ministers of
Engl. p. 453.
T.
TExts alleged (viz. Ios. 6. and Judge. 6.) for human Cer. p. 491. Truth may be
merry, noted in a fine speech of Tertulian to that effect p. 437.
V.
Vrsins testimony about huma^ Cer. p. 152.2. p
W.
WAldenses opposed Cerem. with such answers as now be used against them. p.
8.1. p. They used not the Cross p. 39.2. p.
Wittenburgh Confession p. 231. Whipping out of the temple twice don p. 320.
Worship ridiculously defined, examined. p. 125.1. p. Worship in what properly
Consisting. p. 132.2. p 163.168. Worship is that which is above order and
decency in worship. p. 7z. z. p Worship must be esse^tial, if worship. p. 113.
z. p. Worship figurative what p. 147.1. p. ult: Worship applied to the Cer. by
the Rej. p. 154. z. p. Worship proper, essential, necessary, how understood
by the Rej. p. 158.2. p. Worship Circumstantiall, or accessorie not permitted
only, prooved by a Sillogism from the Rej: self contradictions p. 139.1. p
Worship true and good, if according to the will of God, not hindering it, the
Papists Plea, as well as our men's. ibid. Worship, the parts of it, wha^ p.
113.2. p Worship indifferent none p. 171. Worship whatsoever, necessary. p.
138. 2. p Yet will worship may be without that opinion ibid. Worship Popish and
Sacrilegious maintained under the same Colors of reverend manner, order,
decency among Papists p. 143.1. p. Worship in Cer: p. 38.1. p. Will worship
distinguished into lawful and unlawful. p. 136. 2. p: Will worship not
defended by papists. p. 150.2. p.
Z.
ZAnchies judgment of our Cer. p 97. z. p. also of annexions and essentials.
p. 155. etc. z. p: Zeppers noble testimony of human traditions. p. z16.
GEntle reader take no^ice that through some oversight or casualty, there are
the second and third answers wanting in the 16. page of the first part, near
the beginning of the 3. chap. which the author finding after the impression, he
said he would supply after, but death now preventing speech with him, I cannot
as yet find it in his papers.

BEcause many orthodox writers have been abused and others in them, by spurious
books which have been obtruded upon the world under their names, ^t was
thought meet to represent to the reader in this ensuing Catalogue, the names of
al such books as were undoubtedly known to be made by this Author.

Catechismus. Puritanismus Anglicanus. Amesij. Bellarm. Enervatus 12. printed
A0 1630. Amesij. Casus Conscientiae 12. 1632. Amesij. Coronis ad Collationem
Hagiensem 12. 1628. Amesij. Medulla Theologiae 12. 1628. Amesij. Antisinodalia
12. 1633. Amesij. Contra Grevinchovium 12. 1633. Amesij. Demonstratio Logica.
12. 1633. A Replye to Bishop Morton, This fresh suit against Ceremonies. A
first and second Manuduction.
In Psalmos commentaria, yet to be printed:

FINIS:
A FRESH SVIT Against HVMANE CEREMONIES IN GODS WORSHIP. OR A Triplication
about Ceremonies, Opposed unto D. BVRGESSE HIS. Rejoinder for D. MORTONS
Defense of 3. Nocent Ceremonies.

With a Catalog. 1. Of the chief heads here handled. 2. Of the Rejoinder his
unworthy personal speeches. 3. Of diverse errors which crept into the press.


The First Part.

Printed in the year of our Savior, 1633.

A direction to the Reader.
THe author being constrained to be absent from the press, by reason of urgent
occasions and being altogether destitute of any help from other, w^o were
willing and able to correct the Impression (as it is the common Lot to poor
men under pressures to be forsaken of friends and means) there be many faults
escaped, in the printing, and some such, which pervert the sense, and will
prejudice the truth, and Reader: and therefore he is to be entreated, before he
read the book to mend the grosser mistakes with his penn: or else so attend and
^onsider of them, that he may have recourse to them as occasion shall serve:
the other faults which are of less consequence, common curtesy will easily
pardon and pass by.

Faults escaped: thus to be corrected:
Page* 3. lin: 21. read tartnes p 4 l. 14. for acquired r. aimed p ^. in the
margyne: for vt. r. ne p. 13. l. 18 r. polluted p. 16. l. 16. for the^. your. p
19. l. l^st. for n^udd r. mad. p. 20. l. 2. for fopling r. stifl^ng* p 29 l.
15. r. noveltyes p. 29. l 22. for if r. of those: p. 31. l. 8 for thrust^.
cross p 32. l. 8. for conserving r. conferring p. 32. l. 23. for is an action,
r. are actions: p. 33. l. 3. for acts r. arts p. 35. l. 10. for are all, are
ab^e, p. 36. l. 22. for outward r. onward p. 39. l. 13. for joined r. coined p.
42. l. 28. add. a living creature p. 45. l. 15. for n^ther r. whether p. 48. l.
12 for the means of the use. r. means of the same use p. 49. l. 17. in the
marg. for qui, r. quia p. 49. l. 20. for it is, r. it is not p. 52. l. 8 for
lawfully r. awfully p, 53. l. 11. for there r. three. p. 55. l. 8. for waketh
r. works. p. 56. l. 6. for are supposed r are not supposed. p. 63. l. 9. for
neded to r. needed not to p 66. l. 1. for if r. of. p. 67. l. 19. for mayny r.
main p 71. l. 20. for an r. from ^n p, 75. l. 24. del and p. 7^. l. 29. del^
and p. 85. l. 14. for this r. thus p. 94, l. 11 for his r. he p 98 l. 14. for
ad, r. and p, 128 l. 26. for nididuall r. individual p. 129. l. 7. for word r.
work ^, 131. l. 30 for being r. bring p. 133 l. 7 for lase r. base p. 136. l.
17. for principa. r. principal ^. 140. l. 7. for conduct r. conduce p. 144 l:
9, for man ever, r. man did ever p. 145 l. 18.20. for fasting. r. feasting p.
146. l. 14. for defend thaud r. defends and p. 14 8. l, 5. for words r. woods.

A General table showing the contents of every chapter.
Chap. 1. Touching the title of D. Burgess his rejoinder. p: 1: Chap. 2. Of
the rise and proceeding of Ceremonial contentions with variety of tenants
about them: p: 7: Chap. 3. Concerning the just and proper style of our
Ceremonies p. 16. Chap. 4. The Nature and difinition of a Ceremony. p. 21:
Chap. 5. Of the sorts and differences of Ceremonies p. 53. Chap. 6. Concerning
the difference betwixt popish Ceremomonyes and ours in regard of necessity,
holiness, and efficacy, wherein how far we join wi^h the Papists, is fully
discussed by the confession of Papists themselves. p: 76. Chap. 7. Touching
other partitions of Ceremonies p. 77. Chap. 8. Concerning the nature of a
National church. p. ^^ Chap. 9. Concerning superstition p. 94. Chap. 10. Of
Parliaments, and Convocations p. 105. Chap. 11. Touching the good and evil
that Convocations have done. p: 115. Chap. 12. Sect. 1. Of the nature of
worship. p: 124. Sect. 2. Examination of authorityes, alleged for the several^
distinctions of worship. p: 144.

A table showing the particulars of special consideration in every chapter.
Chap. 1.
Its lawful for an author upon just occasion, not to set his name to his work.
p: 2. The term of scurrility cast upon the Replyer by contempt, is wiped away.
p: 2.3.4. The difference of Lord pastor, and ministerial pastor is unlawful.
p: 6.
Chap. 2.
Thefirst rise of Ceremonies p: 8. Ceremonies refused by the waldenses upon the
same ground we refuse them p: 8. The Bishop and the Rejoy: join with the
Lutherans in mayntayning of images p: 9. The protestants most received opinion
touching Cerem: p: 10. T: C: his judgment of significant Ceremonies was ever,
that they were unlawful. p: 11. That Tenet of inconveniency without
unlawfulness, is unsound, and uncomfortable p: 12.13
Chap. 3.
Our Cerem: are mere fopperyes by the judgment of our best Divines p: 16.17.
Ceremonies are nocent and hurtful as now used: page: 18. Opposition against
Ceremonies is no cause of the mischief they bring. p: 19.
Chap. 4.
The vanity of the difinition of a Cerem: discovered in the General: p: 22.
Four things to be considered to make us conceave aright of a Cerem: p: 23.
Things may be Ceremonies when they are not actually used, as a Surplice when it
is not worn: p: 25* The contradiction of the Rej. in making a Cerem: an
external action, and requiring a purposed observation notwithstanding in the
use thereof. p: 26. Institution and purposed observation are not all one. page:
26.27. An observation of an outward action, with a special aim or reference
intended by the doer, is not required, to make up the nature of a Ceremony p:
27.28. The proper form of a Cerem: expressed in the definition, is fully
discussed and found false: p: 29. How many w^yes reference may be taken p:
30.31. That reference to another, not as a cause or part of it to which it does
refer, cannot be the proper nature of a Cerem: p: 32.33. The true difference
between sustantiall and Cerem: worship, p: 35.36. A thing may be a Cerem:
being referred to that whereof it is a cause. p. 37. The 7. Consectary of the
Rej: examined by the way: page 37. The second consectary examined, and found
false: page: 40. The 4. Consectary confuted page 42. The 6. consectary is
examined, and found faulty. p. 42. The 8. consectary discussed and found false
p. 43. In what sense it is true, that the same use and end makes a Cerem: part
of worship p: 45. Reasons why the same use and end makes a Cerem: part of
worship really p. 46.47.48. The 9. consectary opened: p. 50. Confuted and the
contradictions in it discovered. p. 51.52.53.
Chap. 5.
The 2. partition confuted as imperfect and false: page 54.55. The definition
of a sacred Cerem: opened p. 57.58. Confuted p: 59.60.61. The third partition
of properly and reductively sacred is examined, and the vanity thereof declared
p. 63.64. The 4. partition handled: p. 65.66.
Chap. 6.
How we join with Papists in giving propriety of worship to Cerem: p. 67.68.
How we make them necessary as they laying aside merit: p. 68.69. The Papists
do not hold it sin, to omit Ceremonies: without scandal and contempt.
69.70. The sum of our Agreement p. 73. That our Prelates, make our Cerem:
morally efficac^ous in the way of worship. Reasons of that 4 p: 75.76.
Chap. 7.
Unprofitableness is enough to Cashire a Cerem: of man's making p. 77.78. Seven
reasons given thereof: Ibid. Inferiors may judge of the commands of superiors.
p. 79. The judgment of the Governor, is not the rule of reteyning cerem. 80.
Whether our judgment and practice are equally bound p. 81. Things indifferent
ought not to be restrained p. 82, The sixth partition handled and examined p.
82. The Rejoy: his contradictions in his divisions p. 83. Cross signifies the
covenant of grace. p. 86.
Chap. 8.
The nature of a representative church discovered p. 88.89. The association of
churches does not require the orders nor officers of the Hierarchy. p. 91.
Chap. 9.
Answer to Collossians 2.23. p. 96. When Cessation of an evil, comes to be
worship p. 91. No definition of superstition will evince that the forbearing of
Cerem: is superstition p. 99.100. ^he not doing of things forbidden in the
first table (though upon conscience to God, is not always worship, p. 100.101.
The examples alleged by the Rej. for to make nonconformitants superstitions,
are showed to be vain p. 103.
Chap. 10.
Parliaments allow not superstition as now it is urged. p. 105. The Prelates
procedings are against Parliaments. p. 106. The grief which is pretended in
Prelates for depriving and silencing, is feigned p. 109. The Prelates are
subject to a Praemunire. p. 111. A minister cannot be deprived by law for not
using Cerem. 112.
Chap. 11.
The canons of the convocation 1571. are worse then those which were enacted to
their hands 1552. p. 115 This is showed in several^ particulars. p. 117.118.
That our convocation comes behynd the counsel of Trent in making provisions
for good canons for preaching p. 12^. etc. That they made ill canons and
executed them, they made some good, and so left them. page 121.
Chap. 12.
The definition of worship: in the general is examined p. 125. A mistake about
veneration and adoration. page ^26. Inward worship, may be as well performed
fa^sly, as so pretended, 128.129. The definition of subordinate worship
examined, and found faulty, 129. The holiness of the person, and the present
intention of the worshipper, is not essential to external worship. page, 130.
4 reasons of that, 131.132.133. The distinction of mediate and immediate
worship explicated, 135. The d^finition of mediate worship is found faulty 135.
The distinction of immediate worship into proper and improper is discussed and
confuted 136. Several contradictions are discovered in the Rej. his
distributions 136.137. That allowance is not enough to legitimate an^^ worship
immediate 138. 139.140.
Chap. 12. Sect. 2.
All examples and authorityes alleged in favor, of the former false
distinctions are explicated, and proved nothing at all to favor the Rej.
145.146.
^ Taste of the Rej. his intemperate expressions, unworthy, as well of him from
whom they come, as of them against whom they are directed.
1. Egregious wrangler p. 6. 2. Dancing without a fiddle. 14 3. He compares
the Replyer to a curre, saying he runs away from the cause, looks back at the
Def: and shows his teeth somewhat angerly. 19 4. A false Reporter. 22 5. The
man is troubled. 35 6. They that say the church may not ordain one or other
Ceremony merely Ecclesiastical do manifest a spirit that lusts after
contradiction: 37 7. Mock Dighton. Ibid. 8. Nameles libellers as this Repl:
Ibid. 9. This poor distressed man knows not what to do. 35 10. Not very apt
to blush for any thing. 47 11. God has smitten his contentious spirit with
giddines. 62 12. A man forsaken of wisdom. Ibid 13. Some men in Q: Eliz: days
were not contented that these Ceremonies should be removed, unles all went out
with them. 52 14. This libeller like to come to some shame for his factions. 61
It is a malicious surmise, scurrilous and of no use, unless it be to ingraft
himself into the affections (which he calls consciences) and applause of his
own party. 63 15. You that make a faction. 73 16. Sooner fit the moon with a
new coat, then these men with pleasing Ceremonies. 67 17. Your superstition
esteems this your abstinence to be a singular point of piety, and true
syncerity. 68 18. I see no cause of this outleap but either to ease his
stomach, or to please these of his side 37 19. Most of their writers are
nameles libellers. 38 20. The Replyer may hang down his head, he is a silly
man 61 21. This fantasye is the very top and root of separation, and
Anabaptistry. 67 22. The Replyer worse then a friar ibid 23. The Repl: gulls
and deceives. 83 24. He has not learned the substance of common honesty Ibid
25. A spirit of contradiction has carried him to shifting. 100 26. Out liar.
103 27. You seek honor one of another. Ibid 28. And presume of your own
traditions as if the spirit of truth had come to you, or from you alone Ibid
29. The Repl: censures the universal militant church. 104 30. Now well fare a
good stomach. 113 31. Boggling and scurrility. Ibid 32. The Repl: wrung on the
withers, 120 33. He need hear some lecture of logic 121 34. A Beetle brought
out of the Repl: head 130 35. A spirit full of rancor. 131 36, The Repl:
lifting up his heart to God, is much crying and little wool, as he said that
sheerd his hogs. 180 37. Contradictious spirit. 183 38. These men say to all
other men stand back I am holyer then thou. 203 39. Salt Scurrility, 204 40.
These men if it were safe would spit their gall in the face of the magistracy.
205 41. Full of Froth and venom 213 42. A spirit of separation hunted after in
the chase of inconformity. 216 43. Inconformitants of a high strain beyond
other men. 27 44. Does this Repl: and such as he who without law, without
calling, without Reason, without conscience, smite with their tongues, and
condemn to the pit of darkness the Bishops, the conformed ministers, and in a
manner all that are not of their party. 219 See also 220.221.222.226 45. The
Repl: for Faction and opposition would have that thought of others, which he
does not believe himself. 243 46. A wrangling spirit and ill conscience Ibid
47. The Inconformists are of all men that ever I knew the most impatient, which
is a sign of much partiality if not pharisaicall pride. 277 48. Counting their
opposing Cerem: a high point of devotion, and their stiffnes therein constancy
in that faith. 218 49. Tinkers luck. 424 50. It is your trims to fly upon the
faces of our Bishops. 456 51. This Repl: is the child of strife not of
judgment. 500 52. You are Godly men, all others are carnal: time-servers,
formalists that have no conscience, no syncerity, no zeal, you are the only
men. 50^
Many other flowers, of this sent, might have been gathered out of the Rej: his
Garden. But I will not trouble the Reader with them: Because I perceive the
Author of this Fresh Suit does not much regard them. Nyether would I have noted
these, but for the Rejoynders Bishoplike objecting of Scurrility to the Replyer.

A manuduction to the following dispute.
ALthough it be but dead work, void of whetting pleasure or hope of great
fruit, to spend much time, about human formalities, when as the divine
substance of religion is in present danger, yet seeing the leaders of that
course, which tends to this mischief, being themselves marched with a great
part of their main body, through the fens and quagmyers of non residence,
pluralities and ambition, toward the quicksands of Arminianisme, popery and
profaneness, have left these, as their pass and bagage to be kept and
defended by men of good note, and worthy of better employment (such as Dr. B.
is) to the amazing of many good fowls: It seems necessary to take into some
consideration (though short, as such an unpleasant business does require) what
strenght there is in these their new works: To proceed therefore in order.

CAP. I.
FIrst touching the title of D. B. his reioynder.

In which two things are observable: First; that he styles the reply a
Pamphlet of a namelesse author: in disgrace, as clearly appears in his second
part, page 38. where he styles not only the replyer, but many others, for
this very cause, Libellers: But it cannot be esteemed any disgrace, Its lawful
for an author in case, not to set his name to his work.
for any writing upon just occasion, to want the name of the author, without
involving, many excellent Divines, and diverse pennmen also of holy Scripture,
in the same blame. As for the term Pamphlet, I understand it, as noting a
little contemptible writing: But the worth of a writing does not consist, in
bulk and belly, but in synewes, veins, and arteryes, which with good blood and
spirits, may be couched into a little body: If he mean by Pamphlet the same
which after, he expresses in the term of scurrilous, that is as I take it,
full of jesting, without respect of the persons: he has to deal with. My answ:
is: That if the Rep: had written to the convocation house, an Epistle with this
Inscription, To the superstitious fathers of the Church of England: as the Def:
entituleth his epistle to us, to his superstitions Brethren, (and yet this Rej:
is not ashamed to adopt, this scurrility, and make it his own child, by
maintaining of it, even against the very nature of D. Burgess) there had been
more occasion of such a censure, then now is found, in all the Replye, as after
shall appear.

The Repl: does not any where to my remembrance, vilify the person of his
adversary, but only his arguments, and answers, together with the vile courses
of our Hierarchy, in which kind of jesting the Rej: his scurrility is far
greater, then the Repl: saving the difference, which arises out of the outward
greatness of Prelates, and the poor condition of them, which are oppressed by
them. Now the Repl: is no admirer of Bs. persons, nether are disputations
acquainted, with such court language, as they are used unto: If it please your
Lordship etc. but such is the condition of those, that have to do with
Prelates, that they are usually censured either for scurrility, or flattery, and
there is no doubt, but some will accuse the Rej: as much of flattery in blazing
his Diocesans Admirable wisdom, as he does the Repl: of scurrility, though I
will not: Those who write against Prelates, are wont to expect such a censure
from them and theirs. Sic Zwingl^us de seditionum authoribus in Epist. non
dubito fore, complures, qui lectis vel auditis his omnibus: tandem ecquid hi^
scurra vult, dicturi sunt.
So Zwinglius in his Epistle touching the authors of sedition I doubt not,
says he, but there will be many, who having heard or read all these things, at
length will be ready to say, what meant this scoffer? Calvin among others, was
often accused of the same fault, not only by those, whom he calls usually,
cornutos Episcopos, horned Bishops, but even by their diminutive aemulators
among the Lutherans, his answer therefore unto Westphalus about this
imputation may serve the Replyer. It is easy for Ioachymus to object against
me, the odious tarturs of unseemely scurrility, Facile est Ioachim^, nigrum
insalsae scurrilitatis, and sycophanticae mordaci ^is falem, m^hi objicere sed
aeque mihi proptum est, uno verbo diluere ej^s calumnians, si aspiara, reperui
^ege, quid tam odiose traducit etc. Q^^d enim facerem, quia vel silentio,
prodenda fuisset alioqui veritas, vel placida mollique action, dando^^
timiditatis ac diffidentiae signum ult. admo. ad Westph. in princip.
and slanderous bitterness of language, but it is as easy for me, to wipe away
that calumny of his with one word etc. For what course should I take, since
either the truth should have been betrayed in silence, or otherwise by an easy
and toothlesse expression, the suspicion of fearfulnes and distrust would have
been discovered.

And in very deed, let any indifferent man judge, of this imputation by any
place of the Reply, where the Rej. notes scurrility, and he shall find the
Rej. him ^elf, far more guilty: As for example page 63. in few lines he may
find these five terms packed together: It is a manifest untruth and calumny:
It is a ridiculous supposition: It is a malicious surmise: It is a scurrilous
bundle: It is to ingraft himself into affections which he calls consciences:
These are baser terms, then are to be found in any one place, or (I think) in
all the course of the Rep: And what is the occasion of them? forsooth, the
Repl. said, the Prelates have power, to suspend, deprive, excommunicate
nonconformists, at their pleasure: that the Defend: called for further help
from Buckingham: that the Defend: may be acquired at a better Bishopric: In
the former whereof, there is nothing said, which the Rej. could with color
deny, before he himself had added for matter of accusation, interpretations of
his own imagining: And in the last, there is nothing so much suspected of the
defendant, D. B. himself knows, that it is scandalously true, almost of all
Bishops, viz, that they aim at greater Bishoprics: But on the other side,
what honesty is there, in adding unto the replyers words. Further then the Law
of the State and Church require: And yet that also is true, de facto, though
not de jure, that the Prelates take power to themselves, more then the laws
require: What charity or religion is there in slighting the consciences of all
that hold with the Repl? as if they pretended conscience upon perverse
affections: What wisdom is there? in talking of the Repl. ambition, ^o ingraft
him self, into the affection of a few poor people, from whom he cannot expect
either gain or worldly credit? This I am sure of, that the Repl. being twice
putt out of all means of living, for that cause, never in those extremities
gained from that party, the Rej. speaks of, so much as the Emoluments of a
tenn pound Prebendary, which the Rej. so much slighteth Page 15. As for his
credit, until he either putt his name to his book, or seek by other means to
have ^it known, it cannot without injury be objected, that he sought it.

The other thing to be noted in Rej. title, is, that in opposition to a
namelesse Author, he names himself with such a name or title, as neither by
our Prelates rules, nor by the Scriptures does admit a good construction.
Pastor of Sutton Coldfeild in Warwickshire, Our book of ordination
acknowledges no such pastors, from whencealso it is, that in our
convocation-church-language, we never hear of a Pastor of one Parish alone,
None of our divines in the Synod of Dort, would take to themselves that tittle,
though most others did in their subscription. D. Andrews an ArchBishop in
esteem, censureth this title for a Novelty. The names of Pastor and (in this
sense also) of calling, N^vitia sun^ and Pastor^, (hoc quidem, sensu) and
vocation^s nomina, veteres niquam leg. 59. indigitas^e voce hac, quicurabant
parochias distinc tas, Resp. ad. Epist. 1. Mo^^.
are mere noveltyes, nor shall you read, that the Ancients ever styled in
these terms, any, who take the charge of distinct parishes: The Scripture
indeed does warrant this title, even to D. Burgess, (and I do not detract it
from him,) but not in such a manner as he takes it: For where he writes in
defense of a Lord Bishop over that Diocese, where Sutton Coldfeild is
contained, as a part: and every Ecclesiastical Bishop is a Pastor, he seems
in one breath, to take and resign his pastoral office: If he say, that this
variety is by human institution. D. Andrews resp. ad Ep. 3. Ergo in
regiminis forma, divinum jus no^ est, ac tum Amstelodamo be^e sit.
Moll. will take him up: It seems then, there is no divine right, in ordering
the frame of the government of the Church, and then welfare Amsterdam: which
our Hierachicall men do so much traduce and despise. If he shall say, that one
is a Lord Pastor, and the other a ministerial Pastor, inferior, and
subordinate to him, especially in Jurisdiction, then I would have him consider,
what D. Fulke says against Allen, of the Popes pardons Page 381. God has made
all Pastors stewards of his household, and dispensers of his mysteries: And if
every Pastor over his charge, be a steward of Gods mysteries, why has he not
the Key of Jurisdiction over his parish, in as large and ample manner, as the
Bishop has over his Diocese, or the Pope? seeing the Keys are not given to
one, but to unitye, as the fathers teach: why should the Bishops and the Pope
have two Keys, and they but one: resolve these things (says he to Allen, and
I to D. B.) out of the Holy Scripture. It might be here also required how a
faithful Pastor can defend a Bishop or Bishops, in obtruding human
ceremonies upon that church, whereof he is pastor, and so partake in the
obtruding of them. Certainly this is not agreeable, to the commission of
Pastors, Quae mandavi ego, non quae mandabitis non adinvenictis vos. Cajetan in
loc.
who are to teach only that, which Christ has commanded to observe: Which I
have commanded, Matthew. 28. not what ye shall command or invent. Caietan upon
the place. Neither is it to preserve the Church, from the dominion of usurpers.

CAP. II. Of the rise and proceeding of Ceremonial contentions, with variety
of tenants about them.
THe first records the Rej. brings for contentions about Cerem: are from Romans
14. but he might, (and would also if it had served his turn) have fetched it
further, from Math. 15. where the Pharisyes contend against Christ, and his
Disciples about their ceremonial observations: Or from the first authors of
that Sect, Sammay and Hills, profane dissipators of Gods Law, by their
traditions, as out of their very names, Cardinal Baronius himself notes.
Neither is that contention Romans 14. agreeable to our Quaestion, because the
Ceremonies there quaestioned, were not of human institution, nor urged by
authority of any Church or Prelates.

The second instance which the Rej. brings, is about the feast of Easter,
whereabout he says, the world was set on fire. And this indeed is worth the
observing, that so soon as Victor-Bishops begann to urge human cerem: upon
the Church of God, all was presently in a fire, but were not these presumptuous
Victors, the kyndlers of that fire? The next stepp which the Rej. takes (over
a thousand year wide) is to Illiricus, about permitting the use of a surplice,
where it is to be noted, that before Illyricus, there had been effectual
pleading against Ceremonies, The first rise of the controve^sy of Ceremonies.
even Cross and Surplice, in Helvetia, at Tigure, whereupon they were removed,
as Zwinglius relates de baptismo: And a long time before that, the Waldenses
(of whose blood were made torches to light us in the right way) did contend
against all human traditions as unlawful. Omnes consuctudines Ecclesiae, quas
in Evangelio non legunt co^temnunt, Refut. erro^u^ Waldens anonyma in Biblioth.
Pa^u^ Cap. 13. error 7.

Dicunt, quod ea quae constitaunt ab E^iscopis and Praelate, non sunt servand^*
eoque sum traditiones ^oma^m^ non Dei.


So Reinerus cap. 5. All customs of the church, which in the Gospel they do
not read, they do contemn. They affirm that those things which are appointed
by the Bishops and Prelates, are not to be observed: because they are the
traditions of men and not of God. Where also the answer given by that refuter
unto your Waldens. is very observable, for by that, it will appear, that
human Ceremonies in Divine worship, were then impugned and defended after the
same manner, they are to this day. Our allegations being the same with those,
which the Waldenses used, and our adversaries answers the same, which the
Papists opposed to the Waldenses. Resp Ecclesia no^ es^ contenta his, quae
Chri^tu doc^it and ideo potuit compe e^tes constitutiones facere: ut ^cclesia
Iudaica, Est. 9.1. Mac. cabae. 2 and 4.

Author^tates haetetic^rum Deu. 10 and 13. non ad^etis. Resp. Iudaei no^
debeb^nt addere legi aliqui^, ut insufficiens lex eo tempore videtur.

Ad Isay 29.13. Math. 15. Resp. Quod constitutiones Ecclesiae, non sunt tantum
hominum sed Dei. Ad Gall. 1.9. Resp. praeter id* est contra id.


Answ: the Church is not content with those things which Christ taught, and
therefore might make competent constitutions, as the Church of the Jews: in the
9. Est. 1. Maccabae 2. and 4. Touching the authorities alleged by the
Haeretikes, Deuteronomy. 10. and 13. you shall not add. etc. Answ: is: The Jews might
not add any thing to the law, least it might have seemed insufficient at that
time. To that place Isay 29. Matthew. 15. Answ: is: That the constitutions of the
church come not only from men but God also: To that of Gall. 1. Answ: is:
beside the word, that is against it.

2. That Illiricus in this part stood against that, which Calvin writ against,
and many excellent Divines ^ere silenced and deprived for. 3. That this
conten^^on of Illiricus was not properly about the Surplice: ^o Calvin Ep. 117.
Quod dicis Magdeburge^ses de linea vest rixas movere, quo^ sum pertineat non
video: Linea enim vestis usum (cum multis ineptiis) ta^ apud vos quam apud
illos hactenus retentu^ esse arbitror.

Non agi^u^ profecto de parvis rebus, nec est necesse, quosdam semper alba^
ves^em pro exemplo istarium actionum, sophistice imperitis proponere, multae
gravissimae plagae Eccles^^ae Christi, per istas conciliationes infliguntur.

The Bishops and Rej. join with Luthera^s about images.


That you affirm the Magdeburgenses to love contentions concerning the lynnen
garment, I perceave ^ot what your purpose is in so speaking: Since I suppose
the use ^f the lynnen garment (with many such fopperyes) to be yet ^etayned
amongst you and them. So Illiricus himself pro^esteth: Asuredly we contend not
about trifles, nor is in need^ull, that some men should always cunningly
propose a lynnen ^arment for instance of these proceedings, to such, as are
un^cquainted with them, many and those most dangerous wounds ^re given to the
Church of Christ, by these reconciliations.

4. That the ceremonies then controverted were im^osed by Papists, with Popish
intention, which kind of Ceremonies the Rej. does seem, in all his book to
dis^layme. 5. That in this Quaestion, the Rej. (under the ^ame of certain
reverend Divines, does seem to join ^im self with the Adiaphorists and the
interim, against which Calvin, and Illiricus did contend. 6. It may ^urther
also be observed, that the Rej. does on the other ^art, join with Illiricus,
in defense of images for religious use even in temples, for about these images
did ^lliricus write, against the reformed churches, as is to be ^eene in
Vrsine, Par. 2. Page 45. where he is confuted by name, and accused to have too
large a conscience, in esteeming such images indifferent; yet both D. Morton,
and D. Burgess are now come to the same largenes, that they may find room for
significant Ceremonies in Gods worship as appears in this Rej. cap. 3. sect.
7. For the Protestants most received opinion of human Ceremonies, Cassander
(whose stepps the Def. and Rej. follow in this cause) is a good witness. They
have not only omitted these Ceremonies as less profitable, Non modo illas ut
minus utiles and supervacaneas omiserunt, sed ut ineptas ludicras, ridiculas,
imo noxias and perniciosas, plerique damnandas and profligandas ducunt.

Page 8532.


and superfluous, but the most have esteemed them, as foppish, babish and
ridiculous, yea that they were to be condemned, and abandoned as noxious and
pernicious. And our Martyr book does give sufficient testimony, how diverse of
the Godly Martyrs, did absolutely condemn all human Ceremonies in Gods
worship. To name one for all: This was the first occasion of Mr. Tho. Hawks,
his persecution, and this he defended unto the death, against Bonner:
Harpsfeild, Fecknam and Chadsye: No ceremonies (says he) but those which
Christ has appointed: In which story, it is to be marcked, What opinion the
martyrs had of our Ceremonies.
that Bonners Chaplayne, and Kynsman Darbyshyre, granted as our Def. and Rej,
do, that their human Ceremonies were not necessary to salvation, but only to
instruction: In this cause of Cerem. says: Dr. Willet, Richard Gibson gave up
his life pa. 111. Synop. In the beginning of Queen Elizabeth Reign, there was
a company of honest men, that for the Ceremonies, refused to join with the
Parish assemblyes at London, as appears in the examination of John Smyth, W.
Nyxson etc. exsta^t in the book called part of a Register, will any man think,
that they esteemed those Cere: for which they made a kind of seperatio^ to be
lawful?

The first example then of human Ceremonies, by any orthodox church imposed
upon Gods people, which the Rej. brings, is in the Church of Engl. And here he
^eginneth, with famous Queen Elizabeth's days, though he fetch that very
story, out of the History of ^ranckford troubles, which were in Queen Maryes
^ayes: about the same Cerem: and before that in King Edwards: To say nothing of
the manyfold testimonies, of Martyrs against such corruptions, before King
Edward: ^s this any illustration of your Quaestion to be debated?

Now for the Tenets, which have been and are about ^hese Cerem. the Rej. noted
out of T. C. that the old ^enet of those, who opposed our Cerem., was to hold
them inconvenient only, not unlawful, But 1. he shows no such thing about
the Cross: 2. Nay the contrary appears in D.B. himself, who page 16.
confesses, that 39. years ago, he did at the least doubt, that the Cross
was unlawful, and for that cause (not for scandal, as he did the Surplice) he
refused it even to Deprivation: He would not have us think, I am sure, that he
had then a singular new Tenet by himself, but inclined to the old. 3. Mr.
Hooker P. 246. observes, that the first pleadings of T. C. against other
Cerem: either inferred unlawfulnes, or nothing. 4. The last rules, T. C. his
judgment of Cerem: significant.
and resolutions of T. C. do evidently speak, of unlawfulnes, of all
significant Ceremonies: Although the Cerem: of Crossing were indifferent and
convenient, yet to raise a doctrine of it, is unlawful, for as much as it is
not enough, to teach the truth, unless it be truly taught, and that is only
out of the word of God. 2. Reply: P. 227. This was his judgment in these, and
we have no other Tenet of significant Ceremonies until this day: Now if in the
Hypothesis of one or two signif. Cerem. he swarved a little there from, out of
extrinsecall considerations, yet that does not make his tenet such, as the Rej.
would have it, but rather it is to be held, as an occasional declinatio^ from
his Tenet, which also (he is said) by faithful witnesses to have confessed, as
an error before his death: 4. That tenet of inconveniency, or inexpediency was
never yet sufficiently explayned, and therefore had been fit work for it.

The common Protestant tenet was always, as Mr. Fox, Mart. P. 4. expresses
it, that it is reproveable to add unto Christ's intention, new found rites, and
Phantasyes of men: And Mr. Burgess in an Epistle to King James, in the
beginning of his Reign, witnesses, that in those days, many hundred worthy
ministers thought our cer. unlawful, and would surely dye, rather then use
them: which worthy men, surely were not the first authors, of that Tenet: If
they were, why did he call them worthy, who now judges otherwise of us, for
maintaining the same sentence. 5. That tenet of inco^veniency or inexpediency,
without unlawfulnes in such Cer. was never yet sufficiently explained. And
therefore had been fit work for the Rej. Civil inco^venience, or incommodity
may stand with lawfulnes: But how a thing morally inconvenie^t, or inexpedient,
while it remains such, may be lawful, is not so clear: Nothing is thus
inexpedient to moral or spiritual good, but it is impedient, or an impediment
to it, and all such impediments of good, while they are such, ^eeme to be
opposite to good, and in that regard evil. I remember, I heard it once
defended, in Cambridge, Quicquid no^ expedit, quatenus no^ expedit non licet.
in these terms: What ever is morally inexpedient, so far as it is such, is
unlawful. 6. This Tenet of the Cere: to be inexpedient, but yet lawful, has
confounded the thoughts of many, and made them to do that with grief, which
they were ashamed of Mr. Hooker P. 246. makes a speech in their persons, which
I will here write out, because I remember my self, at the first reading, to
have been much affected, and as it were bafled out of that contenance, which
stood somewhat that way. Conformers of that sort, are feigned thus to declare
their mynds, and excuse their practice: Brethren, our hearts desire is, that we
might enjoy the full liberty of the Gospel, as in other reformed churches they
do else where, upon whom, the heavy hand of authority has imposed no great
burden: But such is the misery of these our days, that so great happiness; we
cannot look to attain unto: were it so that the equity of the law of Moses,
could prevail, or the zeal of Ezekias could be found in the hearts of those
guid^ and governors, under who^ we live, or the voice of Gods own prophets
could only be heard, or the example of the Apostles be followed, yea or their
precepts be answered with full and perfe^t obedience, the^e abominable rags,
palluted garments, marks and sacraments of Idolatry, which power as you see
constrains us to wear, and conscience to abhor, had long ^ere this day,
been removed both out of sight, and out of memory. But as now things stand,
behold to what narrow streits we are driven, on the one side we fear the words
of our Savior Christ, woe to them by whom scandals and offenses come, on the
other side, at the Apostles speech we can not but quake and tremble, if I
preach not the Gospel woe unto me, Being thus hardly beset, we see not any
other remedy, but to hazard our souls the one way, that we may the other way
endeavor to save them. Touching the offense of the weak therefore, we must
adventure it: If they perish they perish: Our Pastoral charge is Gods absolute
commandment, Rather then that shall be taken from us, we are resolved to take
this filth, and to putt it on, although we judge it to be so unfitt, and
inconvenient, that as often as ever we pray or preach, so arrayed before you, we
do as much as in us lies, to cast away your souls, that are weak minded, and
to bring you unto endless perdition: But we beseech you brethren have care of
your own safety, take heed to your stepps, that you be not taken in these
snares, which we lay before you, and our prayer in your behalf is, that the
poison which we offer you, may never have power to do you harm. This is the
miserable Apology of a man, putting on the Surplice, which he thinks
inconvenient, upon such grounds as the Rej. did hold, and does not yet
condemn; This all such do speak either in deeds or words, that putt on a
Surplice in that manner: The state of the quaestion is now changed says the
Rej. and the Cerem. held unlawful, whereupon many mischeifs follow: It may be
the compass of our Prelates intention, to which the former tenet had reference,
is varyed by some degrees, toward the Autartique, as Dr. B. speaks in his
Apologye, if there be no other change, but that after more mischief don by these
ceremonies, then was before, they are now more strictly urged then ever (which
the Rej. confesses) they are now at the least more hateful, if not more
unlawful then before, This is also considerable, beside the change is little
or none, the same mischeives which the Rej. imputes to the new tenet, Mr.
Hooker in his preface charge that Tenet with, which this Rej, calls the
old: Yet neither accusations have any force or color, but upon the supposall,
that the ceremonies are innocent and lawful in their imposition and use. The
plain truth is, that in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's days, and before,
in King Edwards time, the Cerem: were accounted weeds of popery, as that
zealous and famous preacher, Mr. Anthony Gilbye does entitle them, in his
letter to Mr. Coverdall, Mr. Turner, etc. Mr. Whittingham, D. Vmphryey, and
others, who then labored the rooting of them out. They were not curious of
distinguishing of unlawfulnes and inexpediency, but contented themselves to
reject and oppose them: Some as Mr. Greenham refused to give their reasons
fully, until they should be constrained: In the mean time they utterly
refused them, as unlawful for them to use: This appears out of a book
called a part of a Register etc. Since that time, we have been forced to show
more distinctly, what grounds we stand on, and so pronounce them unlawful. In
the following pages spent principally about answering of objections, made or
feared, or at least imagined, against the Author of this Rej. few things are
found capable of any great dispute: Neither can many passages be touched,
without odious grating upon D. Burges personal credit, which I tender so much,
that I would wish more added to it, by other works, then is detracted from it
by this: I will therefore leave these things to stand or fall, without any
pains or peril of mine, or the cause, and pass forth unto the style of our
Cerem: in giving and maintaining whereof the Def. and Rej. are so tender, as to
proclaim them innocent.

CHAP. III. Concerning the just and proper style of our Cerem. Answ: to the
preface, Page 54.55.56.57.
IN answ: to the Reply. his preface, after certain words spent concerning the
number, and such like circumstances of Mr. Sprynts arguments, not worth the
repeating etc. The Rej. comes to Dr. Morton his title, which he gave to our
Cerem: that they are innocent: whereunto was opposed, 1. That Calvin accounted
them in the most favorable sense ineptias, fopperyes, and in proper speech
noxious, pernicious. To this the Rej. answ: that Calvin meant not these titles
to our Cerem: but to some other things which were in King Edwards, book of
common prayer, as lights, and crosses at the supper. Concerning which answ: 1.
not only D. B. was wont otherwise to understand Calvin as we do, but the
Prelates themselves, for so we read in D. B. his Apologye page 44. according to
D. Covells disposition of it. The ordinary speeches of the Lordship and other
Bishops were, that the Cerem: are trifles, rags, beggarly rudiments, that in
the books were multae tolerabiles ineptiae, which if it pleased the King to
remove they would be gladd.

4. The Rej. cannot give us any probable reason, why lights should be more
foppish, then the Surplice or crossings in the supper: Nay he undertaketh to
justifye both lights and crossings in the supper, and a hundred other Cerem:
upon the same terms, that he defends these.

^. Calvin did ordinarily call such Ceremon: Calvin's opinion of our ceremonies.

Adventitiae nugae: mera ludibria: Epist. 505. Ludicrae and insipidae mixturae.
Epist. 260. Adventitiae nugae: mera ludibria De vitand. supest. Pa. 4.
Ceremoniae aliae aperte Idolatricae aliae stultae and ineptae: Epist. 177.
Lineae vestis ufus, cum multis ineptijs tam apud Magdeburg: quam apud
Wittenburgenses retinentur.

Non m^do illas ut minus utiles and supervacuas omiserunt, fed ut ineptas
ridiculas, ludicras noxias and perniciosas plaerique damnandas and profligandas
putant Visyne. Tom. 2. P. 45.

Romanae superstitionis crepundia. Beza disp. 66.

Additias illas nugas.


as ours by no her name then these: Epist. 25.9. Adventitions triflles, ^ere
mockeryes: Epist. 505. babish and saplesse mixtures: ^gaine Epist. 260. strange
trifles mere fopperyes: again: Some ^erem. are openly Idolatrous others are
foolish, and unmeet: And Epist. 117. the use of the lynnen garment with many
^^pperyes is retained both with them of Magdenburgh, and ^^hem of Wittemberge.
Neither was Calvin alone in these ^^rmes. Cassander page 852. complains that
most of ^^ur writers consent in them. Not only they have omitted those as less
profitable and superfluous, but the most (meaning ^^ur Protestant Divines) have
judged them, foppish, ridicu^^us, and babish, yea to be condemned, and
abandoned, as hurt^ull, and pernicious. The puppy good of popish superstition.
Those superfluous trifles. Mr. Fox in Mr. Hoopers Story, ^rifles tending more
to superstition then otherwise, like unto stage players attire. 6. All human
religious mystical Cer. are the byrths of folly, because every man ^s foolish
in fynding out of religious worship, according to his own imagination. 7.
These Cer. are of the same ^ynd with confessed fopperyes, as the placing of
mysteries in every weather cock, upon church steeples, as some do: the Ludi
Sacri among the papists in frequent use like unto stage plays: The rocking of
a babe in a cradle all night, at the Nativity time, the Harrowing of hell at
Easter; The representation of fighting horse and foot, according to the Custom
of Mozarabo: Hist. Council. Trident. P. 642. If a May pole should be brought
into the church, for children to dance about and clyme upon, in sign of their
desire to seek things above: If a stiff straw were putt into the child's hand,
for a sign of fighting against spiritual enemies, as with a spear: there
would be no more folly in these the^ is in the cross. 8. All experience
tells us, that such human inventions are not aptae to any spiritual use,
as they are appointed unto, and therefore may justly be called according to the
notation of the word ineptae.

Again it was opposed, that these Cere: were found by woeful experience to be
very nocent and hurtful in that use, which has been and is still made of
them. To this the Rej. answ: that these mischeifs (which he cannot deny to
follow upon our Ceremon: as they have been and are urged, are accidental
events or sequells, not proper effects of them,) and that the extreme opposing
of them as unlawful, has been the cause or occasion of these evils. But 1.
these mischeifs have followed upon these Cerem: by more continual or
contiguall succession (then the Pope can plead for his chayer) even from the
time of the first urging of them, until this day. Mr. Fox speaking of a wicked
persecutor, one Blumfeild, who threatened a good man, one Simon Harelson, to
present him, for not wearing the Surplies: Adds it is pity, such baits of
Popery are left to the enemies to take the Christians in, God take them away
from us, or us from them. For God knows they be the cause of much blyndnesse
and strife among men: Ceremonies are nocent.
In his Iudgm: the Cer. were then nocent, and infamous for these sequells, and
yet the Rej. fayd, they were not until of late so extremely opposed as
unlawful. 2. Our opposition of them is no more guilty of these mischeifs, then
the message of Moses and Aaron, were of the cruelty which Pharoahs task
mas^ers used, toward the poor Israelites, Exodus 5. though ^ome people now may
think so, as many Israelites did ^hen. 2. When the Anabaptists in Helvetia
opposed human Ceremonies as unlawful, they were by pu^like authority, and
with common consent abolished: And the very Anabaptists were thanked for that
opposition. So Zwinglius (their arch-adversary) Tom. 1. P. 70.

And here truly I shall grant to the Catabaptists, and will freely confess,
that some commodity has accrewed, from that contention, which they have
stirred about Baptism: For hence it has come to pass, that those things
which the foolish superstition of human conceits had added: (as namely the
use of Exorcisme spittle and salt, and many other of the like kind, which were
brought to light) are accounted of all for vain and frivolous. Atqui hie
l^bens equidena Catabaptistis concedam, and fatebor, aliquid ^ultatis ex
contentione illa, quam ipsi de Baptis: instituerunt, evetum e^se, Hinoenim
factum est, ut ea quae humanae rationis stulta superstitio addiderat (qualia
sunt Exorcismi sputi salisque usus, and alia hujus gene^is co^plura, in lucem
protracta) ab omnibus pro vanis and futilibus habita sunt.
Who or what is in the way, that the contention of so many worthy (I dare say)
of no less respect then Anabaptists, against the same kind of Ceremonies
should be accounted a just cause, or occasion of so different a resolution, as
the severest urging of them, is from the utter cashyering of them: Certain it
is: the proper cause is to be sought in some other box, then extreme
opposition, and esteeming of them unlawful. 3. Suppose these Cerem. in regard
of some places, times, and persons not unlawful, and the mischeifs
accidental, yet that makes not the general urging of them innocent, no more
then feirce gallopping of horses through London streets, where many men, women,
and children, are endangered, want of intending mischief, would make that mudd
hurry innocent. 4. The mischeifs being so great as fearful horror of
conscience in some: Rej. P. 9. hardening, fopling, and distempering the
conscience in other, silencing of so many hundred good ministers, and keeping
off more from the ministry, troubling, unsetling, and vexing of thousands
among the people, encoraging of Popish and profane men: with discoraging, and
martyring the minds of many good: the mischeifs I say being so unaestimable
that they can in no proportion be recompensed, by all human ceremonies that
are in the world, the ceremonies which have such sequells, year after year,
are much more hurtful, then the Cart and horse, that are driven over children
in the street, and their urgers of them more guilty, then such Carters or Coach
men, as drive them: The Def. therefore and Rej. which pronounce both innocent,
and do not rather find the Cerem. forfeited, and call the drivers of them to
the bar, are neither good Crowners, nor fit to be of that Iurye: Luther
Annot. in Math. 15. gives a better verdit Viz. all human traditions or
ceremonies (even those which in his judgment may in some cases be observed)
have two properties of the Devil, as being liars, and murderers, when they
continue and are not contemned. Such innocents God deliver his people from.
Ceremonies as they be urged are more then causes by accident of evil.
5. It is the very nature of such human ceremonies as ours, where they are
urged and used (as with us) to do hurt: 1. because they are vain toys (as
formerly was showed) and therefore prejudicial to so grave a business as Gods
worship: They train up the people of God in subjecting themselves, and their
worshipping of God, unto the pleasure of men. 3. They make way for open
imagery, and other gross superstitions, 4. they challenge that to themselves
which is proper to Gods ordinances etc. ^. It is the very nature of our
Ceremonies, as they are imposed upon all our ministers, and congregations, in
such dispositions and relations as they are known to have, to scandalize many
in and out of the church, to disgrace the ministry, to force the consciences,
or undo the outward state of many good Christians, to encorage Papists, to
arm the profane, and to quench zeal against both.

CHAP. IIII. Concerning the nature and definition of a Ceremony: Page 29.30.
HEre we have the chief hynges, whereupon the doors and wyndowes of the Rej.
do always both open and shutt, brought as it were into one box, by the
examining of these therefore, we shall perceave what strenght is in all the
building.

The beginning of this doctrine is orderly taken from the definition of a
Cerem: Page 29.30.
A Ceremony is an outward action designed and purposely observed and done, in
reference to some other thing, to the substance whereof it is neither a cause
nor a part. I will no^ here use Scalligers saying: Nothing more unhappy then a
Grammarian adventuring to define. For this is not the fault of this Definition,
Nihil inf^^licius Grammatico definiente.
that it is too Grammatical, because no Hebrew, Greek, or Latin Gra^mar, no
nor Dictionarie neither, has any such word, as bears the sense of the thing
here defined: Let any man make trial, and he shall find this true, that there
is no word Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, that has any such meaning. But I may well
apply, that rule of Lawyers: A definition is a dangerous thing in law: i.e. in
those human laws, which have no ground, but man's will, such as those are
whereby our Ceremonies have their being: The unhappines of this Definition is,
that as it is recorded of Doria the Admiral of Genua in a great Seafight
against the Turks, he fetched his course so far about to gain the wynd, that
he could never come to strike one stroke, before the fight was ended: So this
Rej. seeking to get some advantage of wyndye words, does in this definition,
go so far about, that by this course, he is not likely to come orderly unto
the graple.

The vanity of the definition discovered in the general.
An outward action may be designed or referred to another thing very many ways:
now the Rej. taking in to his definition, reference to another thing in
general, and excepting nothing but causes, and parts, he makes all other
references as they are found in outward actions Cerem: D. B. wrote this his
Rej. in Reference to the Church of England, his Diocesan, and other ministers,
and people, as also in reference to the Replyer, neither is his book any proper
cause, or part of these, shall we say therefore that his book is a Cerem. of all
these? In reference to Dr. B. many tailors, shoomakers, bookbynders,
Apothecaryes, Chyrurgions, Sextons, Paritors, Churchwardens (and who not?)
have performed many actions, which yet were never esteemed his Cerem. The
Bishops corrupt and cruel dealing in troubling of many congregations, and
depriving many better then themselves, have reference to the Ceremonies, but
are no proper cause nor part of them? are they therefore the Cerem: of
Ceremonies? To prosecute the wyldnes of the definition, was too taedious a
chase: but yet we must consider how he explaineth the terms of it: remembering
always, that this explication is a Cerem: to that definition, and is no proper
cause nor part of it.

Concerning the general, that a Ceremon: is an action and external: Zwarez a
great Master of the Ceremonies, tells us, that a Ceremony is not only a
transient action, but also a permanent thing: De Resig. vol. 1. ar. ^. lib. 4.
cap. 14. and that Ceremonies may be distinguished according to the number of
the tenn predicaments, of which, action makes but one, and an external action
but half a one: But let us hear the Rej. express himself: The Cross and
Surplice, are not Cerem: but ^he wearing of the Surplice etc. P. 30. Touching
which we must understand, Things are to be considered to make us co^ceave a
right of a Ceremony.
such outward things have a fourfold consideration: 1. According to their
nature, as they arise ^ut of their principles, as the lynnen cloth of a
Surplice, ^he wood of a crucifixe. 2. That artificial frame or ^ashion that
appears in these. 3. The impression or ^rdination, which is put upon these to
this or that end. ^. The using of these, or stirring up the heart by these ^n
practice: So in the brazen Serpent, we may attend, ^. the brass or metal out
of which it was made: 2. the ^ashion of it: 3. the impression of God in or by
this so ^ashioned to such a purpose: 4. the using of this, erec^ing of it up by
Moses, the seeing and beholding of it by ^he people: whence it is easy, to see
the deceit of the Rej. his assertion: Things in the second, and third senses,
formerly mentioned, are by all writers truly called cerem: either not
attending, yea excluding in our consideration, the fourth respect which is the
use: Namely that habitude or impression which was imprinted upon a crucifix, or
brazen Serpent, by which they had a moral fitnes, either lawfully, or
unlawfully putt upon them, for their several ends, are Cerem. lawful or
unlawful. Thus the current of writers Papisticall confess: the church has
power, to make and appoint Ceremonies and enjoine the using of them, so that
they are ceremonies, before they be used, their high Altar is a ceremony, yea
holy all the time, before it be used, in bearing the unbloody sacrifice: Thus
all Interpreters, term the types of the old law cerem:, for that spiritual
disposition they have, and typicalnes which the Lord set upon them, as well
when no man used them, as when they were used: The Brazen Serpent being once
set up: had been a Ceremony in the wilderness though the people would never
look upon it, yea I ask, whether the massing vestments of Papists, such which
carry a consecrating virtue with them, are not ceremonies, when they are kept,
as well, as when they are worn, All men so speak, so write, so judge: and the
like may be said of our Surplice etc. In a word: These which were properly
types, were properly Ceremonies, but Legal institutions and rites amongst the
Jews were properly rites, as well before and after they were used, as in the
using. And therefore they were properly ceremonies, ^ome ^h^^gs are Ce^emo^*
t^^^gh they be ^ot act^al^y used.
as well when they were not used, as when they were in use, in the night as in
the day, when men are in sleep and cannot use them, as when they were awake,
and did employ them in worship.

2. If we be truly and properly said to use Cerem. then Cerem. are properly
such beside their use. Some things are Ceremon* though they be not actually
used.
True it is some Cere. consist in actions, and all actions being in motion,
when the actions cease the Ceremonies grounded upon them must needs cease: but
it is not, because they are Cerem., but because they be such Cerem., whose
foundations are in actions: In sum then it appears, that the being or
existence of the fashionablenes of the brazen serpent, and the moral
impression or appointment to its end, this being, or existence, I say is a
ceremony, when it is not used by any: and therefore some being or existence is a
ceremony point blank to the Rej. determination. He adds:

It is an external action, Page 30.
because internal actions of the mind, being matters of substance cannot duly
be called ceremonies. Peradventure these words, may have some true sense in
some specialties, but they serve not his turn in this place, because though he
only mentions outward actions: yet he requires a purposed observation of them,
which caries the work both of mind and will and therefore includes an internal
action of the man, for no man can purposely observe, but he must both judge
what he should do, and affect what he judges, so that the Rej. here speaks
daggers, nor can I see, how he can excuse a contradiction or two.

He that requires a purposed observation in a Cer. he Rej. contradiction ^.
requires an act of mind and will, and so an internal act.

But D. Burg. requyres a purposed observation in a ceremony.

Therefore he requyres an act of mind and will, and so an internal act, whence
defining a Ceremony to be an action external, and yet making it internal
also, he crosses shynns with himself.

Or thus: He that duly and of right judgment requires a purposed observation,
he requires an internal, and so a substantial act or a matter of substance.

But Dr. Burg. requires duly and in right judgment (I mean in his
apprehension) a purposed observation:



Therefore he requires a substantial matter in a Ceremony, which he denies
should be done: and that is a contradiction.

The second term, is designed or purposely observed and done, and as he
explicates himself: Institution or that which is all one, intended observation,
is essential to a Cerem: P. 30. Which words are confused, and draw with them
dangerous inconveniences, when Institution and intended observation, are made
simply all one: For neither is all institution, an observation, because many
things are instituted, which are not observed. 2. Neither is an intended free
observatio^ for one time used: an institution, 3. an institution with authority
implies much more in it, then intended observation. Dr. Iackson in his
original of unbeleif, Institution and purposed observatio^ are not all one.
page 334.335. very aptly to this purpose notes, that some expressions may
sometime be used, and observed well, which to use ordinarily, (much more to
institute) ^ould be ridiculous or impious. As Jacob did unblameablely ^ish his
son Joseph's coat, yet to have hanged it about his ^edd, or table, that it
might receave such salutations, evening and morning, or at every meal time,
might have countenanced many branches of superstition: once and use it not, may
be discretion, of those things whose continual use degenerates into abuse. All
observers of Ceremonies are not instituters of them, I think D. B. would be
loath, to institute the Cross, and Surplice, with other Cerem: which yet he
does observe: In his interpretations of subscription he refuses to defend, how
well these be imposed (that is as I take it instituted) and yet acknowledges,
the intended observation of them, to be very well: Beside all this, it is to be
marked, that the Rej. by confounding institution and purposed observance, does
exclude or forget all natural ceremonies, such as bowing of the body before
superiors, embracing of those, who are dear unto us, lifting up the hands and
eyes to heaven in ordinary worship, which nature it self does teach all nations
to observe, without any institution, though not without some government of
council, nor without such variety, as nature it self is subject unto: Again
if by this phrase he mean that a purposed observation of an outward act, with
an aim and reference to such a thing, is of necessity required to make up a
Cerem: or a Ceremonious action, in worship or otherwise, it is a miserable
mistake: Instance thus: A carnal Protestant presents himself amongst such, as
are at Mass, he professes to his companions, before he goes in, and does in
the purpose of his heart seriously loath the pix and Idol there, yet when its
lifted up, he bows as others do: Let any man in reason tell me, did he not
use or abuse rather a Divine Ceremo. in that bowing or no? If the Rej. say yes,
as he must, unless he will speak against all reason and truth: I then reply
upon his own grounds: That outward action which is not purposely referred,
that is not a Cerem. but this action is not purposely observed with any aim to
that end for the party intended no such thing, purposed no such matter, but did
it as a thing of-course, as a man should bow his knee for exercise when he is
alone. 2. Peter withdrawing himself from the Gentiles at the coming of the
Jews, he did not purposely this, with reference to any Judicial separation,
as judging any legal pollution in joining with the Gentiles, or holiness in
parting from them, and therefore he did not pra^tise any Jewish Cere. according
to the Rej. conceit, but directly contrary to the text: there is no end of
these absurdities.

The differen^ing term is placed in reference to some other matter, of the
substance whereof it is neither necessary cause nor part, Page 30. Where he
seems to expound that, which before he called a proper cause by a far
differing term of a necessary cause: what should be the intention of this
variation I cannot guess: It may be the Rej. forgot, that he was in giving of
accurate rules, and so fell into a loose varying of phrases: So likewise in
illustrating of this difference, in stead of part he names a substantial
part, as distinguishing parts into substantial and accidental, of which
addition I cannot tell what to make: How ever this is no form or essential
difference of a Cerem. from other actions. D. B. has preached a thousand good
sermons, in reference to his flock or people, yet I do not think, he esteemed
them Cerem. of his hearers: This Paradoxe he enlarges with many similitudes,
and examples, I looked he should have alleged some scripture, from whence this
might have been gathered or concluded: at the least adjoined some convicting
argument, which might have cleared this so main point of his definition, or if
none of those, that yet he would have showed some authority or author, who had
so writ and spoke, but here is deep silence, and we must take all upon the
Drs bare word, but by the Drs leave we are purposed to try his novellies and
not to take them upon trust.

Here (1) it is justly to be faulted, The second part of the definition
examined and fo^nd fa^lty against all rules of art.
that he goes against all rules of art and reason, making up the chief part of
his definition, of a negative, and so in issue tells us, what the thing is not,
not what it is: For having said, that a cerem. must be in reference, the
demand might be, what reference is that, he adds it is not a cause, or a part,
And any may in reason still enquire, if it be not either if those two, what is
it then, or what intend you by it, here he leaves himself not a muse or a hole
to escape, but even a broad field to walk at liberty in, either to affirm, or
deny what he will: For press him thus: If it be not the reference of a cause
or part, is it then referred by way of comparison? No: Is it by way of
opposition? No: And thus where shall we hold him, or make him stay, Nay where
will he himself find footehold to stand: Just for all the world, as if he
should defyne a man to be a living creature, which is not a byrd, nor a fish,
nor a lamb, nor an ox, how senseless and sapplesse would such descriptions
be, and yet this of the Rej. in this place is the like. And hence it is, that
in stead of a clearer knowledge, and apprehension of the thing, which should be
gained by a definition, I dare be bold to make it good (for I speak but what
by experience I have found) that the most ordinary, yea judicious readers, when
they thought they knew some thing of a Cerem. before: after they had read this
definition, they knew, just nothing at all: Thus his defining is like flinging
dust in the eyes of a man's understanding, to delude and deceave, at the least
to dazell and trouble his reason: I hope by the next return, the Rej. will be
content to acknowledge this fault, and will tell us in plain English, what he
means by this reference* which if he do, I am verily persuaded he will be
forced to see, how far wide he was, when he mynted and vented these feeble
conceits. How ever we will see, what we can make of it, and in this our
enquiry, it must not seem strange to the Drs learning, that being simple men,
our dull capacityes compass several ways that we may find out the
foundation, upon which this assertion is built, In which we profess in a word
of truth, our desire is not to pervert his meaning, but to understand it.

It (...) many waye^ (...) can be taken.
This reference then in the general wherein it is propounded can carry but two
significations we may consider both, that we may guess at the mind of the
author.

1. Its taken for relation, in open phrase, Coral. 6.33
and so also he declares it, and in a fair construction seems to intend it,
for so he writes. It is not divine nor human institution that makes a
C^remon: Reference in no sense can be the form of a Cerem.
for that it is the relation as has been said which constituteth. If this be
his meaning, then the two relats, betwixt whom this relation is, must be their
action referring, and the matter or thing unto which it is referred: but in
this sense it does thrust it self and caries a contradiction with it: All
relates are mutual causes one of another, And do consist of mutual affection
between each other: Constant ex mutua alterius affectione.
As there cannot be buying without selling, giving without taking: assume we
now in this sense, but the action outward to the thing whereunto it is referred,
are relats: Therefore they are mutual causes one of another, therefore how can
they be in this reference, and yet be not a cause one of another, which the
Rej. expresses and requires: this sense not houlding, let us see how the
other will serve his turn. Re^erence taken in the largest sense can not, be
the form of a Cerem.


2. This reference in a large sense implies any kind of notionall respect,
which can be considered and conceaved, beside that of a cause or part, and this
draws many absurdities with it.

1. That which belongs to substantial worship, as well as ceremonial, that
cannot be the difference, or proper nature of a Ceremony, for then they should
not be distinct one from another: but to be referred to some thing not as a
cause or part, belongs even to substantial worship as well as Ceremonial: For
each worship of God has proper and particular causes of which it is made, and
unto which it is referred, as an effect, not as a cause or part. 2. The
Induction of particulars will make it undeniable, profession of the true God,
and the truth of the Gospel is referred to both, not as a cause or part of
either: ergo, sound profession is a ceremony: Prayer in all the kynds of it,
confession to God, petitioning from God, are referred to him, not as causes or
parts; ergo, they are ceremonies.

Hearing attending conserving, examining things heard, are referred thereunto,
not as causes or parts of the things; ergo, they are ceremonies.

Nay to believe and hope in God, to love and fear him are referred to God not
as causes or parts: ergo, these are Ceremon. If it be here said, yea but these
are inward actions, whereas our Cerem. are said to be outward by the Rej. I
answ: be it granted, yet this kind of reference being the proper form of a
Ceremon: the reason still houlds good (though we have no need of this example
having so many before mentioned) for wheresoever the form or proper nature of
a thing is, there the thing formed will be, as its a sound kind of reasoning,
where there is a reasonable soul as a form, there is a man: Lastly to deride
contemn, rail, revyle Christ, his truth and servants is an outward action
purposely observed with reference to these, by persecutors, not as causes and
parts of them; ergo, these are but Ceremon: sins, and is not here wyld work,
thinks thou Christian reader.

3. That which is common to all actions, and all things, can not be a form and
difference of a Cerem. to make it differ from all other: but thus to be
referred to another, not as a cause or part is common to all outward actions,
natural, civil, religious, yea to all natural artificial things: Thus all
acts may be referred one to another, and all other to Divinity, not as causes
or parts of Divinity: are they therefore all Cer? Nay all precepts of art are
referred the former to the latter, not as causes or parts; ergo are they in
this Rej. conceit, and by the verdi^t of this definition Ceremo? Amongst the
examples of this difference, the last is to be attended unto because it has a
remarkable note added unto it? Convening in one set place at an honor
appointed unto worship says the Rej. is in that relation a ceremony of
worship: and yet as it is an observance of order it is no Ceremo. Of this there
can be no doubt, but the observation of time and place, in reference to another
thing, is according to the definition of the Rej. a ceremony: But how an
observation of this time and place, can be considered as an order, without
reference to some thing to be ordered in that time and place, that so it may be
differenced from the same order, as it is a ceremony, this is a metaphisicall
abstraction, as I cannot conceave of, let others therefore judge: When the
Apost. charge the Corinth, to do all things in order: could he be so
understood, that he spoke of order, and of the ceremony of order, and that by
doing of things in order, he meant a Cerem: because there is a relation of
order to things: but by doing orderly he meant no ceremony, because there is no
relation to things: Order without relation to things ordered, is like the
accidents in the Popish Sacrament, without any subject after transubstantion:
If the doctrine of human Cerem. cannot stand, or be understood, without such
miraculous subtilties let it go seek for those that will receave it. The note
added to the former example is: that they who oppose matters of order to
matters of ceremony, as if the same thing could not be done in double
relations, do confound several notions of things, and oppose things
coincident. Here first may be marked, how he crosses that in this conclusion,
which he laid for the ground of it: before he said reference or relation to
some other matter does distinguish a cerem. from order, because a Cerem. has
such a relation, and order as order has not: but now he tells us of double
relations one in order, and another in ceremo. Secondly he fights here
without an adversary, except he understand by matters of order, mere order,
and by matters of Ceremo. such observations, as are significant by institution,
for no man doubts but Cerem. lawful and unlawful also may be done in order.

In the example of this rule, the Rej. is so subtle in his subliming and
refining of notions, that he has these words: The observance of the order
appointed for reading, singing, praying, etc. is in respect of that order of
the substance thereof, but referred to divine service is a cerem. In this (I
say) no more good sense appears then needs must, for putt those words
together: The observance of order, in respect of that order is of the substance
thereof: without all quaestion: as a man in respect of the same man is of his
substance: So also the observance of a cerem. in respect of that ceremony is of
the substance thereof: Here is no difference, neither indeed can any difference
be intelligiblely feigned betwixt order of divine service, and order in relation
to divine service, but human Cerem. must thus be handled.

For a concl^sion of this, that we may not altogether send the Reader away with
these uncertainties, withdrawing our selves from the Rej. his by paths, we will
in a word or two, a little enquire, what the word of truth, gives us to
consider, touching Ceremonies, and see if we can hitt the old and the good
way, the Kings road of righteousness.

If then we look into the scriptures, What the Scripture teaches touching the
nature of a Ceremony.
which are all to inform us, in all things we should do, we shall find no
other names of such Cere. which the Lord has either required, or the church
used, but those: TO RAH CHOKIM MISPAT: but the Cere. part of Gods service, was
made known most usually by the last word CHO KIM, coming of a root, which
signifyes, to grave, frame, carve, fashion in manner of a statue or picture,
and is applied as the Hebrews observe, to appoint or make the first rude
draught of a thing, and so it fittly imports those services which were enjoined
the Israelites, by means of outward sensible, carnal things, all which were
but like the horne-book or prymmer, for the church to be schooled by, when it
was in its infancy and nonage, and therefore are called, elements of the world,
carnal rites, beggarly rudiments, to wit, because these were only supplementa
to those spiritual ordinances, which are called moral or substantial: for
whereas there be some ordinances of God, which carry a constant and perpetual
equity and necessity of our honoring of the Lord: As that there should be a
rule made known, to counsel and advise us, how he will be worshipped:
requisite it is, we should hear, read, meditate, conferr, suffer our selves
to be squared by this rule and word: Equi^y, ne^^ssity requires we should pray,
The difference between substan^i^ll and Ceremomon worship.
that we should have seals of the covenant to confirm us in regard of our
infirmity, how ever there needed none in regard of Gods immutability, but to
let out his love to us, in the full sourse of it: Again equal and necessary
it is, we should in the name of Christ, cast out what is contrary, and will
destroy his kingdom, his prophetical and preistly office, and so his honor:
But to have outward elements carnal, and sensible rites, to t^ach our mynds,
to carry up our hearts to God, laying aside the minority of the church, there is
not a perpetual necessity of ^hese, nor add they to the substance of the
service, but only help me, because I am weak, and dymme sighted, like so many
spectacles, to succor my dazeling eye: and therefore are Cerem. the first
draught of outward ordinances: Now all the outward types appointed ^hus by God,
which foretold Christ to come, and those other rites which by way of
signification taught our mynds, and so helped and stirred our hearts outward to
grace or duty, all these are ceremonies: And consider them, and practice them,
as they are in the word appointed, whether it be with any reference, to any
other worship, or without reference had to any other worship, they are then and
ever were at all these times in themselves, and in their use ceremonious
worship: Instance thus: To put on frontletts before the eyes, etc. commanded
15. Numb. and by them to be admonished and stirred to the obedience of the law:
take this Ceremo. in the work, and in its own nature, as a mean signifying,
teaching, and so working, this is a Ceremony, and so to do is Ceremonions
worship: referr it; referr it I say to no other thing, but only to this, unto
which it is appointed of God, A thing may be a ceremony referred to^hat whereof
it is a cause.
as a mean to work and as a cause does work this, I say look at it, as a cause
to work, (which the Rej. excepted in his definition) in this sense it is a
ceremony and ceremonious worship: the like of the rest. At a word: It is the
verdit and voice of the scripture, and consent of all men, to divyde worship
into moral, ceremonial. Whence I gather thus: If there be a ceremonial
worship, a distinct species from moral or substantial worship, then is a
ceremony in it own proper nature, as such a worship without reference or
consideration had of moral or substantial, as a man in his own nature is a
living creature, without any consideration of a beast. Again hence its clear,
that as well as moral worship has a complete nature of it own, without
ceremonial: So ceremonial has its complete nature without moral, because
they are contradistinct species.

Again hence it follows, divine ceremonies as such, are parts of worship:
every species as it is a species, is part of his genus: but divine ceremonies
as such, are species of religious worship: whence that is false which the Rej.
affirms in the seventh consectary: Page 34.

The seventh co^se^tary examined.


That actions in some consideration may be real acts of Divine worship, and as
so, be no ceremonies. For its ev^dent, he does and must needs speak of acts
Ceremoniously religious, and then beside the former argument, I would reason
thus: If a man, as he does referr a religious action to another, does worship
God, then is it a species of worship even in that reference: but as he does
referr a religious action to another, he does worship God: ergo, that action in
that reference is a species of worship: And thus much his own words in the
same consectary seem to me to evince: The outward elements and acts in respect
of the inward things they do represent and exhibit are cerem. So the Rej.
Consect. 7. P. 34. But I assume, God is worshipped by them, or they be parts of
worship, in that very use, and therefore as ceremonies they are parts of
worship: Hence lastly the vanity of the fifth consectary, is plainly discovered,
as containing empty words without any worth of matter. For when its said: To
acknowledge any thing, Page 33.

The 5. Con^ectary examined by the way.


to be ordained a Cerem. by man, to be used in the worship of God, and yet to
affirm the same to be a part of that worship to which it refers, implies a
contradiction: The answer is easy: It is confessed by all men, that Ceremo.
are not part of that substantial worship, I say that particular worship, which
they do accompany, and unto which they referr as none of the types in the old
law, were either hearing, praying, believing, etc. and yet were real and
proper ceremonious worship, in themselves considered, as being a contradistinct
species thereof: So also the Sacraments, are no part of that particular inward
worship whereunto they refer: namely, faith in God and his promises, and yet by
signifying, sealing, according to Gods institution, they are true divine cere.
and real true parts of worship in the General: So also our human Cere. as
the cross, it is not, nor we affirm it to be, part of our faith in God, or
our constant obedience to him, and yet we say as its made a token to import
these, and so made a teacher of these, its a ceremonious, yet a real species
of worship in the general, though false: So that either the Consect. is to no
purpose, carrying only an empty sound of words, or if it be taken in a fayer
sense, it will not free our ceremonies, from the charge of false worship: Thus
far we have made a little digression from the Rej. but not from the matter
(Christian Reader) nay nor yet wholly from the Rej. because all this, adds
still, to the manifestation and confutation of the desperate feeblenes of his
definition, joined merely out of his own conceit, and vented to the world,
without either proof or au^hority.

From these premises certain consectaries are deduced, the quality whereof may
easily be guessed at, by that which has been found in the praemises viz. that
^hey are either to little purpose, or false: For the conclusion being false,
all the collections which hence he gathers, must needs be as untrue, so that
either they are not sound, or else they take no force or foundation of ^oundnes
and truth from hence, if there be any in them, and therefore I need add no
further examination, for the ^ree it self falling, the boughs must needs
follow: For any collection he makes must in this, or the like form ^e
concluded: If a Ceremo. be an action external, etc. ^hen this and that and the
other will follow. Let me ^eason, and on the contrary side assume: but a cerem.
^s not an outward action instituted, etc. nor is that definition true, as has
been declared by the reply: ergo, none of all those consectaries, may be
concluded, can be collected therfrom.

Yet for more satisfaction sake, let us take a view of the several; but very
shortly: The first is, that therefore the same actions one at the same times may
in several respects be cere. and no c^re: But if the nature of a cere. does
not consist in reference or relation, as has been evicted before
sufficiently, then the change of the respect or relation, does not bring-in the
change of a ceremony.

Second Consectary is: The second co^sectary false.
That institution and observation, makes a ceremony not a natural habitude or
aptnes of any action to express this or that: Now if no natural aptness or
habitude make a Ceremo. what will the Rej. say, to things of Decency, Comlynes,
and order which are ceremonies in his sense. 42. page and in a large sense of
the word may truly be so called, do none of these arise out of the natural
aptnes and habitude of the action? The whytenes and cleanness of the communion
cloth, does not the decency thereof issue from the habitude of the thing, which
if it was foul and nasty, would not be decent, let all institution do what it
could: That a minister should turn his face to his people in the pulpitt when
he preaches, and not his back, is not this comlines in the natural aptnes of
the action: That people should stand or sit in hearing the word, and not ly
along upon their faces, does not this issue from the natural aptnes of the
action, without institution, is there not decency in th^se, or can institution
make the contrary decent? If therefore decency and comlines of some actions, to
this or that, issue from the natural habitude, then some cerem. do issue out
of this aptnes, because these are such, and so this consect. is false.

The third is: that mystical signification is not necessary to make a ceremony
(as some would have it) but relation only as appears in diverse observances
of the law: though mystical signification added, may make a double and perhaps
a triple ceremony. If this be granted no inconvenience follows to the Repl.
because the quaestion still remains, about double and triple Ceremon. such as
the cross is, whether it be lawful for men, to institute such in Gods
worship. And to argue, from a single Cerem. to a double, and triple, this is
not from the head of parity. And as for the observances in the law, I deny all
of them to have been properly Ceremon. although they be some time so called
improperly, and that with Judicious Iunius on Exodus 25. Some Ceremo. are taken
up to figure the truth of the thing, Aliae Ceremoniae sunt assumptae ad
veritatem teru^ figurandarum, etc quae proprie^ ad figuratione^ pertinerent,
instituto Dei, aliae vere co^sumptae, adject^^ que, non propter figuram rerum,
sed propter naturam figutaru^. Quemadmoda^ in his Ceremo. nijs, multa sunt,
quae proprie nihil ad naturam Ceremon. faciunt, qua Ceremonia: sed tantum ad
naturam rei, quae materiae aspectabilis modo, ad Ceremoniana and figuram
Ceremo. nialem usurpatur.
and those appertain properly to the nature of types by Gods appointment,
others are taken in, not so much, for the resemblance of the things, but for
the nature of the figures: As in these Cerem. there be many things, that make
nothing to the nature of a Cerem. as such, but only to the nature of the thing,
which thing after the manner of some matter liable to sense, is applied about
the Ceremony and the Ceremonial figure.

The fourth is: That the difference which some make betwixt circumstances and
Ceremonies is a mere nycetye, or fiction: This is a strange nycety as ever I
knew. The turning or jogging of h hour glass in relation to the measure of
time for a sermon, the sweeping of the church before the church me^ting, the
carrying of some notes for remembrance upon occ^sion, the quoting of scripture
without, or by the book, and a 100. such, were never esteemed ceremoni^s
properly so called, before men began to b^ing a mist upon religious
observances, that human presumptions might not be discerned.

The fifth has his answer before.

Page 33. The 6. Consectary examined and found false.
The sixth is: That divine or human institution does not make an action to be
a ceremony or no ceremony. These consectaries follow mavelous strangely from
the premises, when the seem to contradict both the premises, and themselves in
some particulars: I would therefore entreat the Rej. to end the quarrel at his
next rejoyning, and make a reconciliation between these.

1. To a ceremony Institution is essential, page 30. 2. It is not ap^nes of an
action, that makes it a ceremony, but Institution. Cons. 2. Page 32. 3. Now
here we are told that Divine, or human institution, do not make an action a
ceremony, whence I reason thus:
A negotione omnium specterum ad negationem generis, valet co^sequentia.
If neither Divine nor human institution make a Ceremony, then no institution
does: for all institutions are either Divine or human, and from the denial
of all the species to the denial of the Genus, the consequence is good: as it
is neither a beast, nor a man, therefore it is not.

But this sixth corallary says, its neither divine nor human institution make
a ceremony: ergo, I conclude, no institution does make a ceremony; which is a
direct contradiction to the second: which affirms, that institution does make
a Ceremony.

The seventh has been discussed and confuted before in the substance of it:
Page 33.
Page 34. only that strange kind of expression may here be observed as we
pass by: It is not essential to a ceremony simplye, that it be no proper part
of Divine worship: where let it be observed, that to be no proper part of
worship, is a bare negation, or not being of worship: now plain it is, and
manifest to all that have but common sense, that a bare negation, cannot be
essential to any thing, that has being, neither simply nor comparatively. And
by the same proportion, and upon the same ground, he might as well say, to be
no part of worship, is not essential to any thing, and therefore not to a
Ceremony: now to what profit, or purpose are such expressions, which serve
nothing to the cause in hand, but to darken the truth with words, and to dazell
the mynds of the ignorant.

The eight is; That it is not the use or end, The eight consectary largely
discussed, and found false.
which makes a ceremony to be part of divine worship, or not, but institution:
Divine institution makes any circumstance a part; but human institution,
though to the same end and use, makes only an adjunct of divine worship,
because the observance thereof cannot incurr the act of any proper worship of
God. How this is a consectary following upon the premises it does not appear.
The contrary seems to follow from the sixth consectary, where divine and
human institution is denied to make a Ceremony, or no Ceremony, but rather to
difference arbitrary, and necessary Cerem. For by the very like reason; Divine
and human institution does not make worship, or no worship, but rather makes
a diff^rence of necessary or arbitrary will worship. The reason of that is
rendered, because relation does constitute a Ceremo. And the same reason
houldeth here, because relation does constitute worship: The Institution Divine
or human does only difference the efficient cause, not the matter, form,
and end, wherein the essence of worship does consist. If Gods institution did
make any circumstance of worship to become worship, then the ceasing from
worship should be worship, because there were circumstances of time appointed,
when men should cease from solemn worship: The reason which supporteth the
other part of this assertion viz: That human institution cannot make an
action part of worship, because the observance thereof, cannot incurr the act
of worship, is just as much, as if it had been so set down: human
institution cannot make worship; because that which it makes, cannot be
worship. If men appoint even places, and times, in the same manner, to the same
ends, that God did, they are worship as well (though not so good) as the other:
If this were not so, then wherefore does the Scripture tell us, of will
worship, taken up at the pleasure of men, or according to the institutions,
doctrines, and traditions of men? For by the Rej. his rule, there can be no
such thing, and therefore it is vain to forbidd it. This may suffice for this
consectary, yet because the reflection of it does often occurr in the dispute. I
further undertake to prove, that it is neither true in it self: nor 2. is it
truly inferred from the definition, and both these charges we will endeavor
to make good.

For our right proceeding to discover the falsehood of the collection, when he
says: The same use and end makes not a ceremony to be part of Divine worship,
The meaning explicated in what sense it is true, that the same use and end
makes a cere. part of worship:
we must not understand true worship, for that all the world of orthodoxe
divines, especially his opposites, against whom he rayseth this consectary, do
confess, that only the Lords institution makes divine worship true, but there
is religious worship which is false: So that the meaning is, whether the same
use and end of a Ceremony, make it not to be in the kind of religious worship,
as well without the institution of God, as its made true religious worship by
it. Or whether: when the same use and end of a ceremony which was religious,
when Gods institution came, the institution being taken away (neither I say)
the same use, and end, is not now religious properly: we ^ffirme against the
Rej. that Divine Institution being taken away, continue the same use, and the
same end, ^here is still religious worship properly though false.

Again this also is especially to be minded, that we ^re then said to keep
the same use and end, not when we employ the same thing or action: but when we
use them as under the act of the same rule, as in the same way, as in the like
virtuall respect unto the same end: I often mention that particle of similitude
as, because though the ordinances of man, cannot have the same virtue as Gods
have, nor can attain the same end of honoring of God as his do, yet if we
take them, and use them as such, they are false worship to us, so abusing of
inventions, as the use of Gods own ordinances, are true worship: So that where
both these are, the same means in a proper religious use, to attain the end
properly religious, there is Divine worship. And this thus opened, now comes to
be confirmed.

Where the essential causes are of Divine worship, there is Divine worship.

Where there is the same use and end, properly religious; there be the
essential causes of Divine worship.

Ergo, there is Divine worship.

First reason.

That the ^ame use and end make Cerem. a part of worship reasons.


The first part is beyond all exception, nor cannot suffer a denial of a man,
that has not forsaken and denied reason: The second part or the minor
proposition, is thus made good:

Where there is the same operari, i. e. working or act of essential causes of
worship; there is the same esse or being of the same causes. It being an old
received rule, amongst not only Logitians, but even reasonable men, idem
operari, ide^esse, the same working, and the same being, go bot^ together.

But where the same use and the same end is properl^ religious, there is same
operari or acting of the essential causes of worship: Ergo, there must need be
the same essential causes: For when God has appointed such means to be used
to such an end, the appointment being past, the worship is not yet, before
those means and end come, and they carry the essence of the action. 2. We may
borrow the ground of another argument from ^he Rej. own grant elsewhere, for
page 38. speaking of superstitious Ceremoni^s he has these words: Ceremonies
are superstitious, when men worshipping only the true God, yet place and ^utt
upon their own Ceremonies, the title of Divine, as in ef^ect, when the proper
service of God is placed in them, or merit, ^r necessity, holiness and efficacy,
though by virtue of the churches institution: For what can be said more of Gods
ordi^ances then this, nay not all this truly, I mean, for merit etc. ^hence I
reason diversely.

If the superstitious incroaching in Gods service, by ^ppointing means of the
same use efficacy and end with the Lords, be a breach of worship properly
divine. ^hen also is it really and properly though falsely divine worship:
Opposita sunt in codem praedicaments.
for a sin directly contrary to the duty of a ^ommaund, is even of the same
kind with the duty: but ^he appointment and use of such means, in such a
virtue ^o such an end, is a breach of true worship really divine, ^rgo it is
really divine, false worship.

3. Again: That which makes a Ceremony properly species of divine false
worship; that adds more then an ^djunct to divine worship, for an adjunct, does
not vary ^he kind, or make a new species, but only alters the ^ame species.

But institution thus superstitious, makes an action, a species of divine false
worship: by the Rej. consent, nay by the confession of all Divines orthodoxe,
that knew what they writ or spoke: Ergo, it adds more then an adjunct to
Divine worship, for it makes it a species, which is professedly contrary to
that which the Rej. has in this consectary: namely; that human institution
makes an action an adjunct to divine worship not a part: whereas here its
plain it makes it a species, and so a part of Divine false worship. 4. Again
its lawful to add an adjunct, which is properly Divine to Gods worship, by the
Rej. learning* Page 36.37. but it is not lawful, to add the means of the use,
to the same end, which God has appointed: As i^ was not lawful to the Jews
to use other braceletts, about there necks, frontletts upon their foreheads,
wherein they should write the law, answerable to the Frontletts, and fringes,
which God appointed.

That which the Rej. adds, touching the appointmen^ of the place of meeting,
Rej. his stra^g mistake.
is a most miserable mistake: Hi^ words are; The Lords appointment of one place
for sacrifices, and of some set days for the solemn worship of God a^ the
Sabbath, and their feasts to Israel, made the observance of that very place and
these times, to be part of worship: But the churches appointment of a set
place, Page 3^.
or time, unto the ^elebration of the acts of religious worship, because it
incurreth not the worship it self, leaves the observance thereof as a mere
ceremony.

Herein (I say) the Rej. missed the mark miserablely: For the Temple was a type
of Christ's body: Pull down this temple, and I will raise it up within three
days: but he spoke of the temple of his body, John 2.19.21. and the very frame
of it by Gods institution and ordination, was holy, had an efficiency, and
virtue through God appointment, to carry up the heart to God, by that virtuall
respect, and efficacy which it had, as his means to that end. Now let the
Church institute, and appoint a place, and put this virtue, and efficacy in it,
by their institution to the same end, to which the temple was appointed, and I
suppose the Rej. himself will say, its superstition and false worship: But our
temples have no such thing, putt upon them, to no such end, and therefore are
not in the same end and use: unless the Rej. will should, that prayers better
ascend in Paulls church, when he rounds a pillar in the ear, then when he
prays abroad: and that he is of opinion, with Bishop Andrews, that we are
heard, Non qui praecatur, sed quia ibi.
not because of the prayer that is made, but because of the place in which it
is made: but I hope the Rej. is far of from such delusions.

The second thing we charge upon this consectary, is; that it is collected by
any force of reason, from the foregoing definition: for cast it into a form,
and the very expression will be confutation enough: for the frame must stand
thus:

If a Ceremony be an outward action instituted, and purposely observed, in
relation to some thing, whereof it is neither cause nor part: then it follows,
that the same use and end, makes not a Ceremony part of Divine worship. These
things have so ill connection, and sement of reason, that when they are set in
a form, they fall all in pieces, as though the consequent was afraid of the
antecedent, so far it is from following from the definition naturally, that
all the cords of reason, cannot draw them together, as it will appear, if any
man will putt it to trial, by all the topic places of invention: we will
therefore rest, until we hear what Balsame the Dr. brings to heal this wound:

The nynth and last Consectary is: The nynth Consectary gross contradictions.
That Ceremonies may in regard of their general kind and end be worship, so
far as they are in their kind parts of order and decency, and yet in their
particulars, not be of the substance of order, comlines, worship. We are at
last therefore come to a strange reckoning. Page 38.
Cer. are in their kind, parts of order, and yet (as we were told page 31.)
that order so far as it is order, is in that respect no ceremony. 2. A Ceremo.
in respect of the genus and end is worship, and yet in the consectary
immediately going before, it was peremptorily pronounced, that use and end
makes not a Ceremony part of Divine worship: I take the cause of this cross
Doctrine to be, that human ceremonies in divine worship, are such a cross
knott, that he who seeks to open the conveyances of it, must needs run cross
in his thoughts and words. To make this crossing more plain, let us first
debate (a little more fully) the truth of this corallarie, The Consect. opened.
and then see what follows therefrom. We here have three conclusions.

1. Ceremonies in their kind, as they are parts of order, and decency, may be
acts of religion. 2. Yet the particulars may not be of the substance of order.
3. That the particulars are not Divine; which propositions are plainly
expressed in the corallary, if they be not contradictious one to another, I
must confess, I must bidd all reason and logic farewell, or else the Rej.
has a new logic, which yet never saw light: And therefore I reason thus.
If every particular have the whole nature of the Genus in it, then the
general being divine, 1. Contradiction.
the particulars must be divine; but every particular of order and decency are
species to general nature of order etc. therefore they have the whole nature of
order in the general; and ergo are divine: and to affirm the contrary which
here is done, is to say a living creature has sense, but the species man and
beast has none: Or; the nature of man is reasonable, but the particulars:
Thom. or Ihon are not reasonable; and thus the 3. conclusion implies a
contradiction to the first conclusion.

2. Again the second also is more gross, if more may be added, If the
general, give his whole substance and nature to the particulars, then if there
be any substance of order, the particulars have it, but the general nature of
order gives all the substance to the particulars; ergo, they have it: the
maintaining of the contrary conceit, is to bidd battle to all reason, and to
deny a confessed common, and received principle of art. Genus est totum
partibus essentiale.
General is that kind of whole, which gives his essence to the particulars.
For now far should a man be forsaken of common sense, who should affirm, that
manhood, or the nature of man in general, should have the substance of reason:
but considered in his species and particulars. Tho. and Ihon, they should be
wholly destitute of the substance of reason: And assuredly (good reader) when I
considered, the wonderful confidence of the disputer, arrogating so much
subtility and learning, and yet to fall so foul and offend so heavily, against
the very rudiments of logic, and principles of reason, I could not but look up
to heaven, and lawfully as I could, and tremblingly remember, Isay. 29.14.
that of the Prophet: That the Lord is said to putt out the understanding of
the Prudent.

Thus we have discussed the falsehood of the Corallary, we will now reason from
it, for our own advantage, taking the false grant of the Rej. in this place.

Genus and species ad idem spectant predicamentum.
Every species under a command, stands by virtue of the same command the Genus
does, as that is a common rule in reason, the general and special appertain
to the same place, and it is a rule in Divinity received without gaynsaying:
the general command by the same stroke and compass comprehends all the
particulars under it: and when that, by way of precept is enjoined, all the
rest by the same rule, and by virtue of the same command, are also required.
We must preserve the life of our Brother, that is the general of the 6.
Command, by the same precept, all the particulars of ways and means which
are the specialls of preservation, are required: but the particulars of order
and decency are under the general of order and decency; ergo, these
particulars stand by virtue of the same command they do. And by the Rej.
grant, these standing by a command of divine worship, and being proper acts
thereof: ergo, it must needs follow that the particulars stand by virtue of the
command of Divine worship, and are proper acts thereof: we see by this time
whither the Drs. Divinity has brought him.

Again, if they be so commanded, and be such proper acts of worship: of such
acts the Rej. confesses the Negative arg. from Scripture concludes well. Such
acts of proper worship cannot be imposed by man or the Church, significant
ceremonies, which carry such acts of worship, are unlawful, and thus by one
grant, he has yielded there of the arguments, which he strives after to
answer and to overthrowe.

CHAP. V. Of the sorts and differences of Ceremonies.
THe first partition of Ceremo. into private or public, close or open, may
pass for the evidence of it, but yet it may be quaestioned, seeing institution
is essential to a Ceremony, as before we have been taught, to whom the
institution of private Ceremonies do belong? whether the convocation house may
appoint men, when they eat and drink, go to bed and rise up, to sign
themselves with the sign of the Cross?

The second partition into Ceremon. civil, sacred or mixed: Civil, when their
immediate object and end is civil; Sacred, The distrib^tion is imperfect and
excludes natural Cerem out of the world.
when the immediate object and end is matter pertaining to religion, requires
more attention. And 1. it is to be noted, that by this division, all natural
Ceremo. are abrogated or excluded, for else the first distribution should have
been; Ceremo. are either natural or instituted: Now Bellarmine himself more
considerately makes some ceremon. natural. De effect. Saeram. lib. ^ cap. 29.
Q^aedam Ceremoniae sunt ab ipsa natura ^uodammodo institutae, quae naturales
dici possunt: quale est. respicere in ^^^lum, tollere, manus, ^^ectere genua,
cum De^^m oramus.
Certain Cerem. receave institution, as it were from nature it self, which may
be called natural Cerem. as to look up to heaven, to lift up our hands, and
to bow our knees, when we pray unto God. Note also the varying of the phrase:
In civil cerem. he requires an immediate civil object and end, but in sacred
he will have it enough, that the immediate object and end, be matter pertaining
to religion. There may be some purpose in this, to exclu^e all civil Cerem.
and so civility out of matters pertaining to religion, that all things being
counted religious, human mystical Ceremo. in religion, may not be discerned
from common observations, which are equally and often used to the same
immediate end both in civil, and in religious matters. These things reserved,
the substance of this partition may pass, together with the illustrations of
it: Only one illustration I would have remembered for future use. An action
(says the Rej.) imperated of religion, or springing out of the fear of God,
may be civil, and belong to the second table. This is that which some of our
Divines mean, when they speak of mediate worship, that is, there be duties
belonging to the second table, imperated or governed by religion, but not
immediately flowing from it. This the Rej. takes hold of in many places, and
makes thus actions religious, which here he calls civil. The conclusion
drawn out of this partition is, that they have the spirit of contradiction,
which say that the church may not ordain Cer. merely ecclesiastical, but
only common, because all Cer. in religious affairs, are m^erely
ecclesiastical: And beside the cross and surplice have there civil use, as a
cross for a shop sign, etc.

But if one spirit cross another, Contradiction.
those spirits must be tried (says the Apost.) and where there is want of
reason and good ground, there is that spirit, which the Rej. blames, and
objecteth to others. Now upon a short trial, it may appear, where it waketh:
The Rej. told us before, that some ceremonies are mixed, partly civil, and
^artly sacred; now he tells us with the same breath, that any ceremony in
religious affairs is merely sacred and ecclesiastical: And by proportion any
Cerem. in civil affairs must needs be merely civil, what then is become of
the mixed or common sort: here sure is a contradiction from what spirit soever
it come. 2. What ^n assertion is this, any ceremony used in religious affay^es,
is merely sacred? If men and women come purposely in their best apparel to
church, if they compose themselves to a grave posture, give the upper place to
^he chiefest persons, and take such to themselves, as they may hear the
preacher in, and yet have no exception taken against them for it, if all the
places and seats be made cleanly and fit for a meeting, to be held in a comely
fashion, all these are ceremo. according to the Rej. his definition, yet no man
but out of contention ^ill affirm they are merely religious, or
ecclesiastical: For all these in the same manner and to the same immediate
end, the same persons would do, if the meeting were to hear the magistrate
propound unto them a grave civil business, concerning the common wealth
affairs. And surely that which remaining the same may be civil, Many
Ceremonies are of common use, in things civil and ecclesiastic.
is not merely and properly ecclesiastical, but common to both uses, and
rather merely civil, then merely ecclesiastical, because civility is
supposed and included in ecclesiastical affairs, but ecclesiastical
proceedings are supposed and included in civil. Dr. Iackson in his original
of unbeleef, page 337. does well observe: That decent behavior does change the
subject only, not alter its own nature and form, whilst its used in matters
sacred: Nor is the habit of civil complement, or good manners, such an
unhallowed weed, as must be laid aside, when we come into the sanctuary. And
indeed there is no more reason, to shutt civility out of the church, or sacred
business, then to shutt religion out of the towne-house or civil affairs. 3.
That which is added of a civil use of the Ceremon. in quaestion does nothing
agree. If a porter or baker wear a lynnen garment in the Church, upon
occasion, as at other times, no man will except against it, or account it a
ceremony, ecclesiastical, or religious.

A cross that is used for a shopp sign, has no ecclesiastical or civil use
in religion, except there be so many temples in one place, that they must be
distinguished by signs, as shopps are: As for the examples mentioned before,
of the Bishops in their formalities, and the Clerks in their surplices, at a
funeral for civil use: I answer, the immediate end of such formalities is
religious, even in that, they are characters of ecclesiastical persons, and
their religious office: Are not Rochetts and such like formalities
ecclesiastical ceremonies, being signs of chief ecclesiastical officers as
such? The furnerall, at which they are present, does no more make them civil,
then among the Papists it makes all their superstition to become a civil
order: Nay by this it appears that both civil ceremonies may be used in
ecclesiastical affairs, and ecclesiastical cerem. in civil affairs,
because both may be used in the same affairs. To traverse these notio^s more
full, I add these considerations: These words, matter pertaining to religion
added in the explication of sacred cerem. may carry a double sense. Page 35.

The definition of sacred ceremon. discussed.


1. That it is enough to make ceremonies sacred, if this be their end to be
serviciceable to some thing, which is an ordinance, or to some person, in a
holy function, or performance of an ordinance, and this seems to be the Rej.
meaning for his examples carry this meaning, when wearing of blackes, rending of
garments, in days of humiliation are made by him sacred cer. as also by those
words, wherein he is so peremptory, and expresses his lordly censuring, even
of men's hearts, in lusting after contradiction, if they deny ceremonies used in
religious affairs to be merely ecclesiastical, but this we conceave to be
false, and hope it has in part, and shall appear to be more plainly in the
following discourse.

Secondly it may carry this sense: that is truly sacred, when the object is
God, and his honor aimed at immediately, as when we kneel to God in prayer, we
do not kneel to the scripture, or man praying but God directly: or when the
next object is a holy thing, but so attended as by that, or in the use of that,
we tender up honor to God and attain that end. As the minister preaches the
word to the people, and they hear it preached, but by both and in the virtue
of both, according to Gods appointment, the heart is carried in holy affections,
and apprehensions to him, and so both hold out Gods honor: So Sacraments given
and received, excommunication dispensed, they hold out the spiritual
government of God and his honor unto us, and bring our hearts under his hand to
give that honor which is due to his power, sovereignty, and holiness, appearing
therein unto us: This only makes a thing properly sacred, but if things of any
nature, only so far attend a religious, either person, thing, or performance,
as that they help not in carrying out the act to God, and so tendering honor to
him, but stand only in a distance, and subordination as things of necessity, or
in some convenience presupposed to go before a religious work, in a common way
to that, as to other things, in the like proportion, and have the self same
work in that sacred as in civil affairs, this is not sacred at all: So place
and time, a font, will do as much to any civil action, as to a sacred: So that
only religion applies, and takes to it self, that civil circumstance, that it
might put forth his own act, as upon a stage, makes such things do as much for
him, as for any politic and natural work, Religion serve its turn upon these
occasions. In a word the ground lies here: The latter art, ever uses the work
of the former, A^s posteriot (...) titu^ ope^^

How a thing may ^^rve a sacred action, or be used ecclesiastically, and yet
not be sacred.


sometimes for necessity, sometimes for convenience, and adjoining himself to
it, does of it self, do its own work: So that the thing, is either a subject
unto which the act of religion or policy is applied, or else, that fitnes which
such things have in subordination, to have other things to be annexed to them,
is that common end, which such things hold out indifferently, by the ^ame
rule, to civil and sacred actions, and ergo are common to them both, but are
neither properly: Instance ^hus: A magistrate of the common wealth; A General
in the field; A minister of a congregation, they may successively stand upon
the same hill: the magistrate to deliver the law, and judgment, to the subject:
The Ge^erall to give his charge to the soldiers: The Minister ^o preach unto a
congregation. Is any man such a wise^^ker, as to say, this hill is a civil, or
politic hill, a warlike hill, a sacred hill, because it serves all these
actions of po^icy, war, and religion: so that to make the point plain,
because we are forced to show forth the feeblenes of the Rej. dispute, we will
now from these grounds (Reader) reason, and exemplifye, that the meanest may
understand.

If to be applied to a religious affair, make a thing sacred, then all things
almost and all arts may be sacred, because they may be applied to a matter,
thing, or person religious, as the next object and end. If the pulpitt be a
sacred thing, because it is applied to support the minister preaching: then is
the air sacred, its applied to his speech in speaking: then is the light
sacred, its applied to his eye in reading, then are his spectacles sacred, for
they are used by him, reading his text, then the two pottle potts, which hold
the wine consecrated, should be sacred potts, Nay the ministers doublett, that
covers him, yea if he was hoarse, and took some oil to help his voice, they
should now become sacred doubletts, and sacred oil. The paper book which the
preacher looked on, when he is out in his sermon, should be a sacred paper
book, and to follow the Rej. if putting on of ashes upon the head, be sacred in
the day of humiliation, then by like proportion, when God enjoines people in a
fast, to putt on their poorest and meanest attire, those ragged bands, and old
Capps, and Quoifes were sacred bands, and Quoifes and Capps: But do you laugh
at these things masters? when the Rej. is so violent in this cause, that he
breaks the bridle, and flies out against all, that will not yield to him in
this: And I would wish the reader to consider how righteous it is, with God,
to suffer men to fall foully when they will follow their own imaginations:
Erewhyle the Rej. made all things Cerem. by the loosnes of his definition, and
now to help the Ceremo. he would make all things sacred by the large compass
he gives to religious Cere. The vanity of which expression, I hope appears
sufficiently, by that, which has been said, but yet that the meanest may
feel with his finger, the grossnes of this mistake, A pregnant example
confuting the falsne^ of the for^e^ ground.
I shall add one more instance. The height of the sun, or the sound of a
clock one and the same, may at the same time, in the same city, be a direction
for Protestants, Papists, Jews, Anabaptists, and all sects to assemble for
religious service: It may at the same time by the same sound be a direction,
for magistrates to meet for judicature, for drunkards to meet to riott, for
gaimsters to meet to play, for travelers to meet to set upon their journey: so
that it has relation to all these religious politic, profane practices at
once, I would feign have the Rej. tell me, what a kind of Ceremony this is? If
he say religious, I then demand, is it Anabaptisticall, Papisticall,
Judicial, Lutheran, Protestant, Arminian, superstitious, or truly religious
cerem. is it any one of these, or all of these, for to them all it serves in
their intentions, and purposed observation, and by the institution of him that
set it up happily. Nay it has relation to many other affairs, and so it
shall be a politic, civil cerem. it serves to that end, it may be called, a
riding, a playing, a drunken ceremo. for it serves at once to all these
purposes, and in all their intentions and purposed observations has equal
relations unto all: Again those things whose end is immediately Gods honor,
they must be able to cause that honor, for each thing can reach his own and
immediate end, in the course of nature, or rational institution, one time or
other: But all things which only attend upon religious affairs, can never
attain this end, or cause the worship of God in lifting up his honor: of this
kind are time and place, being bare circumstances: the like may be said of the
font, which is no more sacred, then the mudd and banks were that contained the
water of Iorda^ where baptism was celebrated.

Thus of the definition in the general, some other specialls be, in the
explication whereof, I shall desire the Rej. judgment, and help a little, that
I may understand his meaning, at his next return. When he says, page 36. Page
36.


If the next immediate use belong to religion, as Ieroboams setting up of his
calves, that the people might worship there, the action shall be construed
religious whether true or falsely so called.

Join to this the words of the eight corallary which go thus:

It is not the same end, and use, which makes a ceremony part of divine
worship, I desire a reconciliation of these two: For: That which makes actions,
such species of religious worship as Ieroboams bowing to the Calves, that makes
them parts of divine worship, though false.

But the use and end here make actions such true and real species of false
worship religious, as Ieroboams bowing to the calves was: ergo, the use and end
makes Cerem. parts of divine worship.

Again he says: it is not so much the term from which, that shall denominate
the action, as the term to which, Page 36. Page 36.




If he mean by not so much, that is never a whitt, as I conceave he does or
must, I desire he would inform us, by his next answ: of this case: Conceave a
man (coming to do homage according to custom to the King) shall by reason of
an erronrous conceit, bow out of a sacred opinion and affection, though the
object be civil, and the act terminated in the person of the King, whether is
this action sacred or no?

Again I enquire what those words mean: The same Ceremony which is in present
use sacred, may be forth with by the change of the object become civil: Page
36.

The change of the object does (...) ^^ke the ^eremony (...) before (...).


The people bowing down worshipped God and the King, the Ceremony was
materially the same, but objectively different. These expressions need a
comment: If by materially the same, he mean the natural action is the same,
its true, but that is nothing to this purpose. Let him tell us, whether there
is a peculiar specification of those actions in themselves, before they come at
the object: Since the object supposes the being of the thing in its kind,
before it can be an adjunct to it: If there be the same specificall and formal
nature of the action, then that bowing being civil when it is performed to a
man, why might not Ihon have tendered the like to an Angel, and the angel
received it, in that he might have done it, as to a fellow servant of higher
honor and account, and the angel needed to have feared religious worship, for
he being known once to be a creature, the change of the object would have
altered the worship: But the angel it seems was of another opinion, then the
Rej. and conceaved that it was religious worship before it came to him, and
would not have been civil worship if the object had been changed.

The third partition (of sacred Ceremo. into properly sacred, is those of
divine institution, which are simply necessary, The third partition.
necessitate praecepti, and reductively so called, as those which in their
particular have no divine institution, but are applied to things divine, and
these are arbitrary and ambulatory cerem. This partition is something obscure
and therefore should not have been set down in bare words, but had some
sufficient warrant and explication: For 1. if these be true members they must
have the true nature of things sacred agreeing to them both equally and
essentially: but things which are applied to Divine actions, have not the
nature or definition of things sacred, because they be applied as adju^cts to
the subjects in a seperable manner. Its all one as if a man should divyde, a
living creature, either that which is so properly, as a man, or that which is
so reductively, The vanity of these ter^es reductively sacred.
as a garment, because it is applied to a man. 2. Proper is usually opposed
either to tropicall, or to common, or to alien, or else to unfitt, unto none of
these senses can it be referred in this place where it is opposed to reductive.
3. Sacred arbitrary cerem. are in truth arbitrary worship, and arbitrary
worship is will worship. 4. I would know to whom our Cere. are arbitrary?
Surely to the imposers only, and so all instituted Cerem. are arbitrary, though
to others, they be made never so necessary, they are not (it will be said) made
necessary to salvation. No more say I are all popish Cerem. nor all Divine,
absolutely necessary to salvation, nor so made or esteemed: Ours are made, as
necessary to salvation, as man can make them, when the ordinary means of
salvation, are absolutely denied to all those that refuse them.

The fourth partition is, The fourth partition.
of reductive sacred ceremo. into rightly so called, and abusively: which is
indeed an explication of the former division, for sacred Cerem. of Divine
institution, are rightely called and the other abusively: But the Rej. fyndeth
both these under the head of reductively sacred (Rightly reductively sacred
strange amazing terms) are they whose object and end is good, and the things
not unapt, etc. where I cannot but admire, that no place is given, to a good
efficient or institutor, with fit authority in matters of institution: we
cannot understand by this description, but a Ceremo. is as sacred and
religious, when it is appointed by a Vestrye of Layicks, as when the
convocation imposes it. 2. The papists have as good ends, and objects, and
also as much aptness in most of their Cerem. as we have in ours, and yet they
are taxed by our divines, as not rightly sacred, and they themselves are
ashamed to defend sacred ceremonies, merely human, or without special
authority of the institutors, how good soever they esteem them for object and
end: So the Rhem. on Math. 15.9. Cerem. are made by the H. Ghost, joining with
our Pastors, in the Regiment of our Church. So also Bristow against Dr. Fulk in
his Rejoi. to Bristow, page 104. Nay there is no order of Friars that will
admit of new Ceremon. to be rightly reduced upon them, what ever their object,
end, and aptness be, except they come from the institutor of the order: All
Casuists do hold it for a wrong unto them, if their Priors, Abbatts Generals,
should impose upon them the observance of any thing, beside the vow which they
have made, to observe the rites instituted by their founder: And are not we
Christians, as much tied by our vow unto Christ, as they are to Dominicus,
Fransciscus, etc. Or are we more subject to our Prelates, then they are to their
superiors, by vow of obedience? Luther also has given us a good item in Genesis
22. In religion^ nihil tentandu^ vel audendum: Querendum in talibus, quis,
qualis, quantus sit qui jusserit; Diabolus mutat haec, in Quid, quale, quantum.
In religion nothing is to be attempted or rashly adventured upon, but in
things belonging thereunto, we must always enquire, who, how good, and great
the person is who commands: But the Divill changes these things, in to what,
of what quality, and how great the thing is. Is it not strange then, that from
an ancient reverend minister of the Gospel, a hundred years after, there
should come a doctrine, of right instituted reductive sacred Ceremon. without
any respect of the authority, which is in the institutor? And yet even if these
conditions made necessary by the Rej. a quaestion may be made concerning the
cross, whether two cross motions of a finger and a thumb, be things apt to
putt Christians in mind of Christ's passion for us, and our passion and
profession for him?

Abusively reductive sacred Cerem. says the Rej. are Idolatrous,
superstitious: Idolatrous, respecting a wrong object: Superstitious made divine
in terms or in effect: Impious, casting-off Gods Cerem. or obscuring the
Gospel, by representing the History and mystery thereof by dumb shows, as in
the Pageants of the Mass. Here again the same fault is committed, that
opposite members of a distribution, are made subordinate one to another, and
may be predicated or affirmed, as Genus and Species, which is an infinite
feeblenes, in a judicious disputer: for are not idolatrous, impious: are not
superstitious impious Ceremo. as those which professedly cross the first and
second command, wherein pyety is most properly placed, and thus divisions fill
up places and breed confusion.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the difference betwixt popish Ceremon. and ours, in
regard of necessity, holiness and efficacy, wherein how far we join with the
Papists, is fully discussed by the confession of papists themselves.
TO let pass the first abuse of Idolatry: Superstition is confessed to be
present, where the proper service of God or merit, necessity, holiness, and
efficacy, by the churches ^nstitution or the doers merit, or when omission of
them is ^ounted a sin without contempt or scandal, as it is amongst ^he
Papists, says the Rej.

We are now come by this distinction, to discern the differences betwixt the
popish Cerem. and ours, theirs being condemned and abominated, and that justly
for ^hese evils which are found in them: but ours are whol^y acquitted, as
though they shared not in the same guilt: Let us therefore enquire into this
business, with that received caution, hear the other side. Audi alteram Partem.


First as touching merit, which is attributed to the doing of Ceremo. by
Papists: the difference here, lies not firstly in Cerem. in particular, but
about good works in general, the Papists making all good works of believers to
be meritorious, and we denying that presumption. But set that controversye
aside, our Prelates professed, the observation of our Cerem. to be good works
of the same kind, that many of the learned Papists do many of theirs. The
mainy enquiry lies about, propriety of worship, necessity, holiness, efficacy:
And (merit being excluded) if these be found in ours, as well as in those of
the papists, they will prove guilty as there is, and with there is to be condemned.

How we join with Papists in giving propriety of worship to Cere.

Balthazar Chavasius Iesuita de notis verae religionis lib. ^. cap. 2. sic
dicit: Minores Ceremoniae de respectu ma^orum, quod cum hae praecipui sunt
momenti, ac divinu^ cultum per se and direct recipient, illae catenus tantum
ad colendum Deum conferant, quatenus ad ornatu^ significationemque ejusmodi
cultus, vel praecipuarum ejus praetium conferant.


Enquire we then, of the severalls: 1. In the doctrine of worship I see not
how, or wherein the Jesuits do differ from the Def. and Rej. about such
Ceremonies as ours. Balthazar Chavasius the Jesuit, in his notes of true
religion says thus: Ceremonies are called lesser, in respect of those which
are termed greater, because these are held of greatest consequence, and to
appertain to divine worship, of themselves, and directely: but those to wit
such are cerem. of lesser note, they so far conduce to the worshipping of God,
as they serve for the ornament and signification of such worship, or the
special parts thereof: which is so pat the Rej. and Def. doctrine, that they
may seem to have translated his words.

For necessity to salvation, no learned Papist ever writ or taught any such
thing of all their Cerem. Darbyshyre Bonners Chapplyne, and Kynsman, professed
to Mr. Thomas Hawks Martyr, that no Ceremon. (beside those which Christ
himself instituted) are necessary to salvation, but only for instruction:
whereupon Mr. Hawks answered; God send me the salvation, and take you the
instruction. If necessity of observance be respected (which the Def. ca. 6.
sect. 3. calls obedientiall,) that is not only as great in our Cere. as in
any of the Papists, and more also, but advanced by Dr. Covell to aequipage with
the Decalogue, and Dr. B. by his silence yielding unto him, and imitating of
him, does seem to subscribe to his sentence, and certain it is, that he writ
with Achyepis. allowance. Ecclesiastical constitution, says he, does change
the nature of indifferent things, and by virtue of the commandment they
become necessary, Men's Laws while they are in force, commanding or
forbidding, bind the conscience as the Decalogut does, in his preface to the
confutation of Dr. B. his Apologye: The Rej. comes not far short of this plea,
page 42. where he says: They are ordained to be used necessarily, in respect
of order and peace, though in respect of judgment, and immediate conscience to
God freely: How the Rej. and Papists agree touching the necessity of Ceremonies.
The former part of these words, lays more necessity upon our Cerem. then the
learned Papists do upon all theirs: The latter does take away no more, then the
like words of theirs do, as by and by shall appear. In the mean time let him
that can unriddle me this: They are ordained to be used necessarily in respect
of order and peace, though in respect of Judgment, and immediate conscience to
God freely: Is there one conscience mediate, and another immediate? Is
necessity of order and peace free in judgment and immediate Conscience? Can any
creature, or is any so foolish as to say, they can lay a bond upon conscience
immediate to God? Is it not a contradiction, for men by their authority, to
bynd immediately to Gods authority? The truth is our convocation does make our
Ceremonies, as necessary as they can, either by ecclesiastical, Civil, or
Divine authority, whereas the Papists say, they can make many of theirs more
necessary, then they do, if they would: And yet in all, their highest pitch
is, they call them necessary: Non ex necessitate sal^tis, sed ex institutione
Ecclesiae.

Non ex necessitate sacramenti, sed praecepti. Bell. do effect. Sacra. cap. 21.
propo^. 2. ^


Not out of any necessity to salvation, but out of the churches institution:
and enjoined the Sacramentalia, not by any necessity of a sacrament, but of a
commandment of the church, and we do no less.

For making it sin to omit these cere. even without the case of scandal and
contempt. 1. This no learned papist does say of all their cer. as you shall
hear straight. 2. Our practice does say so much in that, bare ommission where
none are scandalized or contemned, is made a fault punishable, nay more then
that, when by the practice of them, many are scandalized, and great contempt
does follow to some users of them, yet is it, a capital fault for them to
omit them so long, until they may use them without scandal, and contempt:
And what has been said of worship, necessity, and sin as that we concur
with papists cerem. pressing our Ceremon. upon the same conditions, as they in
the former considerations, the like is true also touching holiness.

Now because some of these things, which I have affirmed, concerning the
doctrine of the Papists about Cerem. may seem strange to those, that take the
measure of their opinion, not from them, but from the occasional and imperfect
sayings of their adversary parties: It shall be necessary, to hear themselves
speak: First let us hear Cassander with his allegations, who so much
consents with D. Burges, that his Rej. might better have been called, and
entitled Cassander Anglicanus, then M. Sprints book was, save only, that there
is more passion showed in it, then Cassanders temper, and professed moderation
could be brought unto. Cassand. in consult art. 7. Illud falsum e^le existimo,
aliquos docuisse, externos lilos ritus and cerem. e^le cultus necessarios ad
promerendam justificationem coram Deo, nec aliud i^us nubus (...) quam quod
coru^ externa observatio, de vero and interno cultu nos admoneat, and ad eum
manu ducat, and (...) ex vera in Christum fide and obedientiae Ecclesiae
Christi fiant, cui Christus obtempe^ari praecepit, ead apud Deum laudem habent,
quam caetera pieratis opera: Id autem ingenue omnes confitentur, in ijs
fiduciam saluvis non esse collocandam. Idem page 869. Opinionem falsam cultus,
meriti, necessitatis. Po^tisicij ipsi (quibus illam assignat Mell.) non
agnoscu^t, sed fals^ sibi attribu^ dicunt: Sic Thomas and B^el apud cundem page
871.872. Idem pa. 875. St. huiusmodi praerepterum positivoru^ explicatione
consideretur haud multum ^ consilio, sous exhortatione differ comperientur,
etc. Si quorundam sentent a rigidior hie videtur, nemo c^edo ^rohibebit
mitiorem sentennam sequi, quae a Gersone, ut a multis optimisque viris Gersonem
imitantibus ^xplicatur, qui in hujusmodi praeceptorum transgre. Tone, in sole
scandal^ and contemptu peccatum mortale ^^ll^c^nt: Idem ibid. Alphonsus
Verbesius sic: Nostrae traditiones nihil capitalis periculi adferunt
transgressoribus, nisi adsit animus impius and contemnens. Perionius (ex
Sorbona^ opinor sua sententia) sic: (...) sunt in ecclesia Ceremoniae, quae sub
consiltum cadunt, quae autem sub praeceptum cadunt ut ca^^^ ^^^dem violatores,
omnes nostri peccati reos esse volunt nifi sort contemnant.
Cassander in his consult. article 7. I conceave that to be false, that any of
ours should have taught, those external rites and Ceremo. to be worships
necessary to procure justification before God: Neither is any other thing
attributed to those rites, but that their external observation may admonish us
of the true and internal worship, and might by the hand lead us thereunto: And
if they be done out of true faith in Christ and obedience unto the Church of
Christ, to which Christ has commanded as to be subject, they receave that
acceptance from God, which other works of pyety do: But that all ingeniously
confess, our hope of happiness is not to be placed in them: Again, the same
Cassander page 869. The false opinion of worship, merit, necessity, the
Pontificans themselves (upon whom that conceit is fa^hered) do not acknowledge,
but affirm that it is falsely attributed unto them. Of this judgment Thomas
Aquinas, and Byell are said to be by the same Author page 870.871. And in p.
875. If the explication of those positive precepts be considered, they will be
found, not to differr much for an ^dvise or exhortation, etc. If the sentence
of some may ap^eare more riged: I believe, that no man is forbid to follow ^he
more moderate opinion, which is explained by Gerson, and followed by many
worthy men, who in the transgression of such kind of precepts, place the
mortal sin only in ^candall, and contempt. The same author in the same
places. Alphonsus Verbesius thus: Our traditions bring no deadly ^anger unto
the transgressors thereof, unless the heart be im^ious and contemning.
Perionius (out of the sentence of the ^orbone School as I suppose) writes
thus: there be many Cere. ^n the church, which fall under the nature of a
counsel, but those which come under the nature of a praecept, the violators ^o
not of them, all ours would make guilty of sin, unless peradventure they
shall be found contemners.

This which Cassander says is fair, yet to make it more full, I will add some
other testimonies, and those of note. Gregor. de Valent. Tom. 4 Disp 3. qu. 1.
part. 4 Clarum cit ^endacium quod his ritibus tantum tribuan^ns. quantum ipus
Sacramentis, item quod eo loco habeatur, quasi nequeat sine illis confici veru^
Sacramentum: Si aliqui vulgares in ea part errant, and sie sentiunt, id certe
neque ecclesia docer neque Theologi: Si caetera scadalum and
contemptumomittantur, and res sit exigua, vel etiam de^t voluntas and
deliberatio plena, peccatum erit tantum veruale. Cajetan. sum voce praecept.
Vniversalis est regula, quod in ijs quae sunt positivi juris fi absque
contemptu and ref^atione (...), ex apparente sibi excusatione transgressio
fiat, ab eo qui animum habet multo pacto conse^i^^ d^^r, contra praeceptum
obligans ad mortale, non incurritur mortale peccatum, quoniam non e^t intetio,
(...) and jultae matris, ecclesiae, bonas hujusmodi animas illaqueare tam
hostili vinculo.
Gregorius de Valentia a Jesuit, Tom. 4. disput. 3. quaestion. 1. part. 4. It
is a notorious lie, that we attribute so much to these rites as we do to the
Sacraments, and that we have them in the same account, as though a true
Sacrament could not be instituted without them: If any of the vulgar sor^ err
in that behalf and so conceave, assuredly; neither the church nor divines so
teach: If they be omitted without scandal and contempt, and the matter be
small and that a seriou^ will and full deliberation be wanting, it will be only
a venial sin. So Cajetan a Cardinal: The rule is universal, that in those
things which stand by a positive law, if the transgression be made without
contempt, and crossing the end of the law, from some excuse appearing to the
party, if it procee^ from him, who has a mind no ways syding against the
command which bynds to a mortal sin, a mortal sin is no^ by that breach
committed, because it is not the intention of the holy and just mother the
church, to ensnare such good souls* with so dangerous a bond.

Bellarm. de effect. Sacram. lib. 2. cap. 29. Quaedam Cere. sunt immediate
cultu^, quaedam disponunt ad eni^um, quada^ sunt instrumeta cultus Id. ibid.
^ap 31 Calvinus indi^ar crimenesse si per contemptu^ vel crassam negligentiam
omittantur Cerem. at nihil aliud ecclesia de sum Ceremonijs d^cet. Idem de Romans
Pontif. lib 4. cap. 18. Catera non sunt l^ges, fed adm^nitiones, vel pia
institutiones sine obligatione ad culpam, qualet s^nt plurimi ritus
Christianorum: Necenim peccat, qui citra contemptum non aspergit se aqua
luftrali, cum ingreditur templum, etc.
Bellarmine also thus: Certain Cerem. are immediate worship, some dispose unto
worship, some are instruments of worship: The same author in the some place,
cap. 31. Calvyn sayt^ he judges it a fault, if Cerem. be omitted out of
contempt o^ gross negligence, and our Church teaches no other thing touching
her Ceremonies. The same author again: Other Ceremonies are not laws, but
admonitions, and wholesome institutions, which bynd not a man over to any blame,
such as many of the rites of Christians be, for he does not offend, that
without contempt, does not sprinkcle himself with holy water, when he enters
into the temple.

It was but a poor proof therefore of the Rej. to allege, that which Bell*
says of some Ceremonies, as if it did agree to all popish Cerem. and that in
the common judgment of Papists. Calvin speaking in the person of Sorbonicall
Drs, declares their opinion to be; That Ceremonies bynd consciences by
accident, to wit, Quod Cereligant co^scientias per accide^s propter
ratificationem, quia ecclesia hoc intendit, and populus consentit* Antid. ad
art. Paris. ar^. 25.
because of their ratification, in that the church intend this, and the people
consent. Lastly the judgment of Papists is clear, that they putt no holiness
in the Cerem. instituted, you must place no holiness in images, Council. Trid.
Sess. 25. By this which has been said, it is (as I think sufficiently
manifested, that the differences betwixt all popish Cere. and ours, of worship,
necessity, holiness, and sinful omission, are vainly and without ground
alleged by the Rej.

1. Do the Defend. and Rej. affirm, that our Cere. are not properly worship,
The sum of agreement betwixt the Rej. and Papists.
but only to admonish us thereof: The Papists say the same. 2. Do the Defen.
and Rej. affirm, that the omission of them without scandal and contempt, is
not a sin: The Papists say the same. 3. Do the Def. and Rej. affirm, ours
are not necessary to salvation, but necessary by the command of the Church to
be practiced: The Papists say the same, nay of some of theirs, they say less,
for they say, that many of theirs, are only appointed by way of counsel, not
of command.
There is one other difference, which is added to the former, that Sacramental
operation and efficacy is infeoffed upon Popish Cerem. as he mentions page 40.
out of Bellar. I add concerning this: 1. That Bell. does not affirm this of
all Cere. 2. that he does not ascribe this virtue to the cross as a human
Ceremo. but as an imagined institution of God: What kind of operative virtue
the Papists place in their rites.

Potissimum ^x instituto Dei De effect. Sac^amen, lib. 2. cap. 3.

Sacramentalia non opera^tur remisitone^ peccatoru^ venalium, neque instituta
sunt ad eam significandam, sed ad excitandu^ animu^ in d^testationem illorum,
Vasque^ on 3. dispie^. 28. cap. 5. art. 4.

Balthazar Chavasius de notu verae religioni^, lib. 1 ca, 21. Tantam rev^ra
differentiam po^^mus, inter Cerem. and ^a quibus accedunt, Sacra. quantum
corticem inter and truncum, corpus and anima^, foli^. and arborem, unde
concedimus illar omitti posse in gravi necessitate. Verba quadam visibilia.

That our Prelati give a moral operation to their rites and Cerem. and the
Papists do no more: Arg.


especially from the institution of God: The chief Jesuits do disclaim this
operative virtue of many Cerem. Sacramentalls do not work remission of venial
sins, neither are they appointed to signify that, but to stir up their mind
to detestation of them: So the Jesuit Vasquez. Balthazar Chavasius another
Jesuit: It is without quaestion, that we putt so much difference between
Cerem. and the Sacraments, to which they are applied, as between the bark, and
the wood, the body and the soul, the leaves and the tree, whence it is we
grant that they may be omitted in any wayghty necessity. Cassander also
Consult. art. 9. well observes, that the best Papists do make the Cere. of
Bapt. only, certain visible words: from whence it follows, that they give no
other operation to them then to words, which all favorers of sig. ceremo. must
needs give: And our prelates do give in all their proceedings, and expressions:
as by the following arg. shall appear.

1. What ever is a mean any manner of way ordained, to bring in divine
worship, and to carry the mind and heart to God in that: is so morally
efficacious, as the Papists require, and so as our Divines condemn it. Nay if
it be by teaching, and stering toward these supernatural works, as Gods
spiritual worship: Its that which the Lord condemns in images, which tell
lies, its that which the Lord threatens Isay. 29.13. that his fear is taught,
according to men's commands. And this kind of efficacy our Cerem. have by their
institution as they are appointed, and enjoined to be used. The preface to the
book of common Prayer, discovering the intendement of the imposers, has these
words: Such are retained, which are apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the
remembrance of his duty to God, by some notable and special signification,
whereby he might aedifyed.

2. These Ceremo. which are of the same kind, and homogeneal with the
significative part of the actions in the Sacrament, they may be said, to have a
real and true efficacy of teaching, and so be a work of proper worship:
because that part of the Sacrament, which is placed in signification, is so:
but these ceremonies are homogeneall, and of like nature, with that part of the
Sacrament, does baptism consecrate the child to God? and so does the cross:
does baptism signifye the covenant, between Christ and the child? so does the
cross: its openly said, to betoken the engagement, that is betwixt Christ and
the child, that he shall be Christ's servant, and soldier to follow his
colors, and to fight under his banner unto his dying day: though this image
have no tongue of it own, yet its speaks by the mouth of the Prelates
appointing, and their substitutes the ministers acting this image.

3. Consider that which is made end of our Cerem. that our Cerem. are able, or
at least are conceaved to be able to attain, for every rational means can
reach the end, now this is the end of the cross his institution, the white at
which it shoots, and the minister makes it spell this lesson, even our
dedication unto Christ* and our continual perseverance in his service, so that
as the end is, so the means are, the end is properly holy, and religious,
ergo, the means appointed thereunto (such this is) must be holy religious and
efficacious thereunto, in the intendement of the institutor.

4. Those which are of the same rank, and set in the same room, with Gods
own Cere. they must be conceaved to have holiness, and efficacy in them, for so
Gods ordinances have. But these significant Cere. thus instituted, are of the
like nature with some of Gods own spiritual rites, As the Phylacteries Nub.
15.39. were appointed by God, for this end, to be remembrances, and admonishers
of the law to those that used them: the same place our Cerem. supply, and are
ordained for the same purpose.

If it be here said, that God himself appointed his, and therefore they are holy
and religious, but ours being instituted by man have no more then man can give
them, I answ: God appoints his, and therefore they are truly holy, and
religious, and ought to be embraced: Men's inventions being set in the same
rank, are holy, and religious, but falsely and superstitiously such, and
^herfore are to be abandoned.

CHAP. VII. Touching other partitions of Ceremonies, Page
A Fifth partition is, that of sacred Cerem. some are perpetual, as divine,
some temporary, moveable, alterable, ambulatory as human, and of ambulatory
some ^re free, and some are fixed.

Of the perpetuity of Divine Ceremon. there is no quaestion, of the
alterablenes of human, 1. That is a corrupt rule which the Rej. adds viz.
that they are al^erable, when in the judgment and consciences of those to whom
it belongs to discern thereof (that is with us to the ^onvocation house) they
become not unprofitable alone, but ^angerous and hurtful. For not to repeat
here, that all ^umaine Ceremoniesare unprofitable, dangerous, hurt^ull, 1.
unprofitablenes alone is sufficient to cashyre a Ceremony of man's making:
consider well of these ^easons.

1. If Gods own Ceremonies were therefore to be removed because unprofitable,
Vnprof^tablenes is enough to cashy^e a Ceremony of man's making.
then much more ours, Heb. 7.18. 2. If we must answer for idle words, then
much more for idle ceremonies. 3. That wherein neither the governor, attaines
his end in commanding, nor the governed his in obaying, to command that is
unlawful: but he that commands unprofitable Ceremo. he attaines not his end
in commanding, nor the governed his end in obeying: Ergo. 4. 2. Coll. 18.
Those things which perish in the using, with those we must not be burdened: but
unprofitable Ceremo. perish in the using: ergo, with those we must not be
burdened. 5. Things indifferent, when they are used not in subordination to
help forward moral duties, then their use is unlawful, but when they are
unprofitable, then they are not in subordination to help forward the moral.
Ergo. 6. That which crosses the place and office of the governor, that he
must not do or maintain: but to enjoine a thing unprofitable is against his
office and place: for his office is to rule for our good, Ro^. 13.4. but
unprofitable things are not so. Ergo. 7. That which the magistrate can command
or maintain in the Church, he must do by virtue of some precept: That which
is done by virtue of a precept, will be avayleable to bring about that end,
whereof there is a precept, but unprofitable things cannot attain that end:
Ergo cannot be done by virtue of a precept: ergo, are not under the command of
a magistrate.
Again when its here referred by the Rej. to the judgments and consciences of
governors to discern of the dangerousnes of Cerem. and I would feign know,
whether the consciences of all the Christians in England, ^e so subjected, and
tied, to the flei^^e of the convocations ^onscience, that without it they may
not judge, no nor ^iscerne of the unprofitablenes, danger, and hurt of the
Ceremo. which they are to practice, surely this is more ^ervile, blind
obedience, Blind obedience brought in by the Rej.
then the wiser sort of papists ^ill admit of. The Inquisitor Silvester, in
the word ^rupulus, says that: To interpret discretly, human praecepts (...)
the court of conscience, belongs to every one, Interpretare discrete praecepta
humana in soro conscientiae pertinet ad quemlibet pro facto suo.
as touching his ^^ne practice. This was one ground that Paulus Venetus
^^lgentius, and the other Venetian divines stood upon, that every man whom it
did concern, might and ought ^ discern of any superiors praecept, even the
popes, Inferiors should judge of the comma^nds of the superiors.
^hether it were lawful and convenient or no: But ^erein the Rej. had
consented (as it seems with D. ^ovell page 19. that in such things as these
are, the prae^ept of the superior does bynd, more then the consci^nce of the
inferior can: And that the subject having ^he command of King, or Bishop, for
his warrant, ought ^ot to examine, but only to perform what he sees
^ommaunded, A very good stirrup if it be well held, for ^ help men up by, that
they may ride upon men's con^^iences, at their pleasure. Dr. Davenant taught us
other ^octrine at Cambridge: when upon Coloss. 2.13. In ^pposition to
Jesuitical blind obedience, he showed ^ven out of Thomas Aquinas, Subditt
possunt and debe^t de superio^um decre^is, quatenus ad se spectant indicare,
iudicio discretionis.
that subjects may and ought ^ judge with the judgment of discretion the
decr^ees of their ^^periors, so far as it concerns their particular: and
against ^he Rej. his contrary doctrine let these reasons be wei^hed.

If the judgment of the governor be not the rule of imposing, then is it not
the rule of removing Ceremo^ but the first is denied by all, The judgment of
the Governou^ is not the rule of retaining or removing Ceremo.
even the Rej. and therefore the second part cannot be granted. 2. If Cerem.
mus^ not be removed before they be discerned dangerous by the consciences of
the Governors, then Governors do not synn, if they retain Cerem. never so bad,
provided that in their judgments and consciences they seem no^ dangerous, that
being by the former grant the rule o^ their removeall, but this is absurd:
ergo. 3. If Governors have authority to keep any Ceremonies imposed, until
they seem dangerous and hurtful unto them then all other are bound to obey in
the practice, of suc^ Ceremo. though in their consciences they ought to b^
removed, because the judgment of the governor, is the rule of maintaining, or
removing: and thus they should be brought into a snare and a necessity of
synning, either to go against their consciences rightly informed, and s^
sin: Romans 14. last: or to go against the judgment o^ the governor, and so
against the rule (that being the rule of retaining by the new doctrine of the
Rej.) an^ so also sin: Again of ambulatory free Cerem. the Rej. give^h only
an example out of ancient times, bu^ we could wish some examples in England.
It seems* we are more fettered and less free in all the Ceremo. we have,
then any approved course does warrant: The explication of ambulatory fixed
Ceremo. is as uncouth, as their title: Their observation, must ever be free in
respect of the judgment, to be had of them, but the practice only is required*
For if all judgment, to be had of them, be free, then ti^ free to account them
unlawful, hurtful or unprofita^le. 2. Ought the practice to be required
either against ^he judgment or without it? How fat the judgment and practice
are fixed together.
A bruit practice is not re^uired, neither is there properly any good practice,
but willing out of judgment, Those therefore that so require and fix our
practice, must needs as much as in them lies, ^equire and fix our judgment in
some manner: But in ^ery deed no man or convocation of men (either de ju^e, or
de facto) can fix another judgment, concerning ^awfull or unlawful, They may
arrogate so much to themselves, and command men to captivate their wills unto
them, and by their wills so far as they can their judgments, yet the judgment
they cannot fix, but only the outward practice: Neither is it any thing to me,
what au^hority others do arrogate to themselves, concerning my practice, but
what they require me to practice: I should ac^ount him as good a master or
Lord, that should say, do this upon judgment, that thou should do it,
because I command it, as him, that says, thou shall do this, judge what thou will judge: The Rej. it may be will say, that he means a freedom of
judgment, in not accounting of them necessary to salvation: But no learned
Papist ^houlds their Ceremonias minores necessary to salvation, if he speak of
necessity of synning upon omission without scandal or contempt, that has
been handled before. Zanchius in his Ep. to Q. Elizabeth deals plainly, and
patt to the point in hand. If these Cer. be propounded to Christians they must
be propounded, either as indifferent or necessary: If this, we do impiously, to
make those things necessary, which God has left indifferent: If that, they are
then to be left free, unto the church, but by commanding and co^straining we
make the^ necessary: So Calvin de vera Ecclesiae refo^matione Opus. page 337.
The^ will except, Excipient res essemedias, quarum indifferens sit usus
Christianis, cur ergo quicqua^ omitti verant?
that they b^ things of a middle nature, the use whereof is indifferent to
Christians, why therefore do they forbidd any thing to be omitted?

A sixth partition is of simple and double Cerem. double are described to be
such, as beside their use, for order and decency, serve also to aedification,
by some profitable signification which either of themselves they have some
aptness unto, or receave by appointment, as it were by common agreement. Where
1. the Rej. seems to double with us, when he makes simple Ceremon. to serve
only for order and decency, without signification, when as before and after he
tells us, that no Cere. may be dumb, but all must have their signification,
2. Order and decency seem to be separated from aedification in some sacred
Ceremon. which he knew not of that willed all things to be done unto
aedification. 3. All significant Cerem. are supposed first to be in order and
decency, and yet after so long a time, we are to learn what use our cross
has for order, more then a circle would have. 4. By the distinction or
distribution here made, aptness of things for signification, either is in them
of themselves or not, yet in the fourth partition our necessary rule was, that
the things be not unapt unto their ends. 5. A strange power is here given unto
the convocation, to make things apt for signification and aedification, by
their appointment, which before were not apt to any such thing. This was wont
to be the peculiar of God, to call things that are not as if they were, and so
make them this or that,

7. In the next place we are told of significant Cer. impro^erly sacrame^tall,
and those are so called either reductively, such (...) are affixed to the use
of the Sacrament, whether they bear no ^ignificatio^, or bear some
significancy, either of their virtues, ^r of our duties, unto which we are
obliged by the Sacrament: Or ^^se they be analogically so called, if they be
instituted to work ^^pernaturall effects, the former are lawful, but not the
latter. The delineation of these confused distinctions is this:

Significative Ceremonies are Sacramental Properly, Improperly. reductive
which are not significative. or significative.
analogicall.

Moral,


To all which members, I could have seriously wished the Rej. would have added
acurate definitio^s or descriptions, and then he would either have been
hyndered, from the confused setting of them down, or else he would have
discovered, his infinite mistaking, and manifested to the world, how he had
bewildered himself, while he mudds the water, and so would mislead the simple.
But we will follow his foorstepps, only let us observe some conclusions out of
the frame in general.

First is this: Rej. contradiction in a gross manner
That some non significative Cerem. are significative: or which is all one,
significative Ceremo. are either non significative, or significative
Sacramental.


This desperate absurdity lies open to the eye of any, that have their eyes
anointed with the eye salve of Logic, and judicious discourse, for let but a
fresh man, runn up the special to his highest, and he shall perceave some no^
significative to be the special to the Genus of a significative cere. 2. Cer.
reductively sacrame^^all and not significative, do properly appertain to
sacred Cer. reductively, and by right so called, and have been handled before,
and are here wholly heterogeneal. 3. Its well to be noted that human Cer.
affixed to the Sacram. and bearing significancy of the Sacram. virtue, and
obligations, are such as the Rej. fights for: But these are analogically
sacrame^tall, Ce^emonies sacre^ly him ficant are ^nalog^call.
for analogy, similitude, or proportion, cannot be denied to be betwixt two
signs, which signifye the same virtues, the same duties, and the same
obligation to these duties, And though the Rej. say again and again, they
were never held unlawful: Ye^ learned Chamier in the name of our Divines and
reformed churches has these words: We observe come^y circumstances in the
celebration of the Sacrament, Honestas celebrati^ns circumstantias obse^vamus,
sed incetio d^mnamus qui ea addid^ru^, qu^bus m^steria aff^xer^nt propr^a^que
si^n^f^cation^s and quid ^^co^u^ effe^c^^^um qui (...). Quasi ^is ^erve tundem
re^ agi oportuerit, and out (...) non satis a^^um esset instituto d^v^no nisi
^um^^a timetita (...). De (...) l^b ^. cap. 6.^.27.
but we justly condemn those, who have added such things, unto which they have
phansyed mysteries, and proper significations, and that of those effects which
appertain unto the water of baptism: As though the work should be twice or
thrice do^e, and that either nothing, or that was not sufficient which was done
by divine appointment, unless human rashness should have added supply. And
the Walde^ses who first reformed their churches, and purged out all their
popish leve^, renou^ced all such human Cer. or Traditious as unlawful as
manifestly appears by all Papists and Protestants, that have set down their
confession and practice. 4. If Analogically Sacramental Cere. be impious
aemulators of Gods holy Sacraments, as the Rej. confesses, what can be said,
why human significant Cer. analogicall to divine significa^t should not by
parity of reason, be esteemed impious aemulators of Gods holy signs, Is it
forbidden to aemulate Gods Sacra. only, and not all his holy ordinances?

After all these come in moral significa^t Cer. which are only to express
some benefitt, which God gives us, or to notify, profess, or express some
duty, which we owe to him, or one to another. But I do not see wherein these
differ, from reductive Sacra. Cer. except it be in this, that it may so fall
out, that these sometimes are not affixed to Sacraments, This head therefore
seems to be added, only because D. Morton had used it before, and for his
sake let us a little further weigh it, when therefore the Rej* affirms, that
morally significant are ordained to express some benefitt on Gods part, some
duty on ours. By some benefitt or duty he must mean any spiritual benefitt,
or duty, beside the covenant, which he professedly mentions and excepteth,
How the Rej. division^ interfere and cro^^e one the other*
for if one benefitt may be signified, why not any one, and this morally
significant, are religious or sacred significant in the general, the Species
as large as the Genus: Hence again morally significant, will be a genus to
sacramental reductively significant, for that is but a particular
signification of some benefitts, and duties in the Sacrament, which are
included under this General, and so one species of the distributio^ shall
become a Genus to the opposite member, and contradistinct species. If it be
here replied that reductive significative sacramental is annexed to the
Sacrament: I answer, that is nothing to the nature of the significancy, for
take and use a cross out of baptism, in the same manner and to the same end,
as in it, and it will be the same in the specificall nature of significancy,
only so much the worse, because it is set cheek by jole with baptism. 2. I
ask what he means by those words, express, profess: is it barely to
declare? if so, then let him show who is his adversary, unless he will fall
out with his shadow, for do not all his opposites grant, that sign^
indicantia, or showing signs are lawful, but not symbolica.

Lastly, when he affirms, that these Cerem. morally significant are not to
signifye the covenant of grace: The cross s^gnifyes the covenant of grace.
I reply, if they may signifye any other spiritual duty or benefitt, if they
may signifye the several essential duties of the covenant of each side, why
may they not signifye the whole covenant? 2. If the cross signifies the
consecration of the child to God, and so entrance into the covenant, the
relation of a soldier, to a Commander, a servant to a master, and so is
continuance and faithful perseverance in that profession to Christ, and his
respect and regard of us according to those relations, then does it signify the
covenant? By this which has been said, it appears, that the quaestion is
falsely stated: for these Ceremo. are more then holy by application in his
sense formerly opened, they are pressed as necessary, and are used as
analogically sacramental, as well as properly moral, ^he state of ^^e
quaestion.
and in signification, do partake something of the proper nature of Sacraments,
as also in the significative teaching, and stirring up the heart: when its
said, they are used in worship, they are external acts of Gods worship falsely
appointed by man, and serve not for order, nor decency, nor aedification.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning a national Church answ. to the 60.61.62. of the
Preface.
OF the faithful congregations, wherein we were borne, baptized, and nourished
up in faith, there is no quaestion made, but they are our loving and beloved
mothers: Yet much quaestion arises concerning that which the Rej. teaches
viz. Page ^0 6^.
That all those churches together, have one mother, and so we have a
grandmother, that is the Church of England, considered as one church: and that
by way of representation, as the convocation house, 2. by way of association
and combination into one profession, worship, and discipline, which includes
the orders and officers, that is, the Hierarchye, pertaining thereunto, but not
by any other collective consideration.

1. I never read either in Scripture, or in any orthodoxe writer, of a visible
particular Church, either grandmother of Christians, or mother of other
Churches, if the Rej. has, he should do well to inform us, where we may find
this doctrine explained. 2. I would willingly know, whether Christians and
Christian churches also, were not in England, before this great grandmother? I
think, the Rej. will not deny it, nor yet fly for succor to his physicians,
who have found out an herb, which is called of them, Son before the Father,
Filius ant^ Patrem.
to justifye his intention of Daughter before the Mother: Filia ant^ Matrem.
He must confess, that this Grand-mothe^, is only a mother in law, The nature
of a representative church.
and that law also to be man's, not Gods. 3. All the churches of England, may as
well be considered as one in unity of profession, without any new motherhood,
as all the Latin Schools of England one, in the unity of the same Grammar, or
all Gallenicall, or Platonicall Schools, one in their kind. 4. A Representative
mother is the image of a mother, and an image, with commanding authority in
religion, without Gods command, Quod ecclesia si^is repraesentativa libe^ter
cred^mus, vera enim non estu: Sed ^sten a^te q^aso ^^de ^or^ ^ec nomen? Qui*
hoc nomint^^ (...)? Quis ^acund^ and ce^spirandi ^obis potestatem dedit? Q^is
co^de^di Canones and decreta verbo Des dis^^^mi^i^. vobi^tus fecit? Qui^ ut
ista hume^is hominum impe^eretiu, permis^t? Q^is consitentia* ut si^ gravareit^
vebis persw. sit? Vt dic^^etis b^num malum, malum benum qu^^ iussit (...)
^^clesia (...), q^a nihil (...) al et, sed picta and ce^i^la ^mnia, Scan^n est^
ecclesia ri^a s^^sa Christo ^r^ua, qua se^a ve^it. (...) and (...) Dei (...).
is an Idol: It was well therefore, to this purpose, said of Zwinglius Explan.
arti. 8. That you be a representative church, we willingly believe, for you are
not the true church: But show I beseech you, whence you had this name: who
styled you with this title? who gave you power of meeting, and combyning
together? who granted you authority of coining decrees and Canons, differing
from the word of God? who suffered you to impose these upon men? who persuaded
you thus to burden Consciences? who enjoined you to call evil good, and good
evil? You are therefore an hypocritical church, which has nothing sound in
it, and substantial, but all things feigned and painted, But you are not that
true church, that bride beseeming our Savior, who stays her self, upon the
truth alone, and the Spirit of God. He speaks these things of th^se, which
under the name of Representative churches, imposed their inventions, upon true
churches, without Scripture, which is a true representation of our
representative convocation. 5. The Rej. confesses, that this Hierarchicall
convocation is human and not divine, and he will not deny, but Christians,
and Christian congr^gations are Divine. Now what a monstrous, and preposterous
generation, then does he make (as it were in a Chymaericall dream) of Divine
Children, proceeding from human mothers and grandmothers: Our Savior was of
another mind; when he made these two opposite, from earth, and from heaven: The
Rej. has found out so great consent between these two, that earth may be the
mother, and grandmother of heaven: Beside the human mother of Divine
children, is not of their heavenly fathers choice, nor by him appointed, to
bear the person of their true mother: But she was first putt into this office,
by the presumption of men, and afterward authorized, by the Archmother of Rome,
continuing her profession, by sleight and might, to represent those, from whom
she can show no other letters of credence, for the power she usurpeth, then she
makes her self, or has gotten by stealth from civil power.

6. This representative mother, is very seldom exstant viz, when there is a
Parliament, which now we have not had these diverse years: And when she
appears, she can give no milk to her children, further then she has
commission from man: None of her children can have access unto her, only she
appointed many years since, certain servants of hers, with restraint of their
fathers allowance, to diet them, with dry ceremonies, and scourge them, with
silencing, deprivation, excommunication, if they find fault with that
provision, which is very pap, with a hatchet; Is not such a mother worthy grand
titles and honor?

7. The examples of such motherhood, which the Rej. fetches, from the
assemblyes of Israel, Scotland, and our Parliament, have no agreement. For 1.
we read of no assemblyes of Elders (by office in Israel) from whence all other
were excluded, styled either Mothers of Israel, or all Israel: Neither was
there in any such assemblyes, this motherly authority exercised, of appointing
human sacred Ceremo. unto Israel. 2. The assemblyes of Scotland, before
Perth, had no such state, as our convocation, nor power of commanding, but
only advized of, and directed those things which God had appointed, and the
churches were known to desire, yet might their judgment be well called, the
judgment of the church of Scotland, because they pronounced nothing, but that
which all the churches of Scotland, did publicly profess, even in their
solemn confession. 3. Our Parliament is not styled, the Mother common wealth
of England, yet in civil affairs, more liberty is left for style, and power,
unto public assemblies, then in religious: But if the lower house of
Parliament, were not more freely chosen, and of greater power, then the poor
lower house of Convocation, a quaere might be made, whether the state or common
wealth of England were there or no.

Now for the second way of one church, by association, and combination of all
particular churches into one profession, worship, and discipline: This is good,
thus far, and the very same with that collective consideration, which the
Repl. mentioned, and the Rej. termed a new mistie inexplicable nothing, except
combination does mistyly cover under it, the swallowing up of particular
congregations, by National, Provincial, Diocesan churches. But ^s for that
clause, that this must needs include, such orders and offices as our
Hyerarchye: this is either a begging, or a stealing of the main quaestion: For
1. this Hierarchye consists of officers and orders (by the Rej. own
confession) human, not divine: now associa^ion of profession, worship and
discipline, may certainly be had by officers and orders divine. 2. The reformed
churches of France, have their association, and combina^ion, without any
Hierarchye. 3. The Hierarchye does not associate churches, under it, but subdue
all to it self, so that, as the Pope, is sometime esteemed the Church of Rome,
and sometime, he with his assistants, so is our Hierarchye in England. Beza de
ecclesia notis paulo ante finom. Ego Pontifieijs lib^nter relinquo, totum istu^
Episcopatu^ gradum, cuius (aperte dic^) Spiritum Sanctum, non suiss^ authorem,
sed humanam prudentiam, cui nisi animadvertimus Deum maledixiss^, corte nihil
n^ nunc quidem videmus, and viperam insinu fovemus, quae tursus matrem ne^abit.
Beza in his notes of the church not far from the end, gives warning of this:
I most willingly leave the wholl frame of Episcopal authority to the Papists:
of which (I openly profess) the Holy Spirit of God, was never the author, but
human policy, which if we do not observe, to be accursed by God, we certainly
as yet see nothing at all: and nourish we do a viper in our bosoms which will
kill the mother. This prophecy is too true of the Hierarchye, as in other
respects, so in this, that it seems to devour, our mother churches title,
liberty, right and power, and in a great part has prevailed.

9. It was added by the Replyer, that the Hyerarchye, is a creature of man's
making, and may more lawfully be removed, when it pleases man, then ever she
was by him erected. To this the Rej. answers, confessing, that sundry offices
and orders in our church are human, and not divine: adding, that accidental
forms of discipline, are not determined in the word of God, but left in the
churches liberty, to devise, as all but Anabaptists, and such as edge too near
upon them consent.

Which words are worthy of a note or two: For he 1. acknowledges our
Hierarchye of Archbishops, B^ Deanes, Archdeacons, etc. to be creatures of man's
making, not divine: Now of these principally consist, our convocated mother
church, as its well known, a few ministers being added to her, for fashion
sake, so that this church is a church of man, not of God, by his own
confession, and this church is said to be devised by the church, now it
sounds strangly, A church of the churches devising: Nor know I well, what the
devising church of England can be. The Rej. tells us, that there be, but two
ways of considering, the Church of England, as one, either in the convocation
house, or in that combination, which must needs (says he) include the orders
and officers, pertaining thereunto: Now in both of these ways Hierarchicall
orders and officers are supposed and included, so that the Church of England,
neither of these ways could possibly devise these orders and officers. 3. The
distinction used betwixt the essentialls of discipline, and the accidental
forms thereof, is o^scure: And if these terms, may be interpreted, by that
sense, which is given by the Rej. of Doctrinall and Rituall, substantial,
circumstantiall worship, that must be essential, which is commanded in the
word, that is accidental, which is not commanded, but permitted. Then the
Rej. in affirming essentialls to be determined, and accidentalls not, says
nothing else, but that which is determined, is determined, and that which is
not determined, is not determined. 4. If he mean by accidental forms,
circumstances of ^yme, number, place and occasional course of proceeding, then
he accuses unjustly, not only us, but the Anabaptists themselves of opposing
so manifest a truth, by all men confessed. 5. It would be worth a little pains
of his to declare, how, and in what sense our Hierarchye is accidental, to the
church, and discipline of England? The Bishops are efficient causes, even in a
high rank, of our Discipline, they are principal members, of our Diocesan
churches, they have an Ecclesiastical rule, and command over the par^icular
congregations within their Dominion, by them and in their name, the essentialls
of ordination, institution, introduction, suspension, deprivation,
excommunication, etc. are dispensed and disposed of: who will say, that these
things, can agree to accidental forms. 6. Concerning edging upon Anabaptists,
in this point it may with better reason be objected, to those that maintain
Diocesan Bishops, then to those that oppose them, for it is well known, that
the Anabaptists, in Holland, Zeland, and Frisland, have their Bishops, which
have care of many congregations, within a certain circuit, and in all of them
(though there be others that teach) they only, at their visitations, perform
some main things belonging to the pastoral office. 7. The position (that our
Bishops are human creatures of man's making) is not only to us, but to many of
themselves, sufficient to condemn their office, some of them having publicly
protested, that if it were so, they would not keep their places one day.

CHAP. IX. Concerning Superstition: answer to 64.65.66.67.68. of the Preface.
Novum crimen (Iudicis) ^nte hunc diem ^andit^m.
BEhold a new crime (O ye Judges!) and unheard of before this day: These who
hold the relics of Popish confessed superstition, unlawful, are (in that
very name) indicted of superstition. Nay they must be content to have it for
their solemn style, in public writings, for so Dr. Morton has dubbed them
(To his superstitious brethren the non-conformists) and Dr. Burges will
maintain it. If any man take it ill, and say, that such a title does rather
beseem those, which allow of religious holy water, images, circumcision etc.
beside crosses and surplices (as these two Drs do,) he is straight way
scurlous: But let us inquire into the Indictment.

1. It was noted by the Replyer as a ridiculous piece of Rhethoricke, Page 64.
and a trick of prevention, usual with crafty men. The Rej. answers these
two titles suite not well, and the charge is weightye: which is very true, they
suite not well, neither, to them they were intended unto, nor yet, betwixt
themselves, and the charge of superstition, if it be in good earnest and upon
ground, is weightye: But not well suting, do meet often times in affected
accusations, and so do here ridiculous Rhetoric, and craftiness: She that
hasted, to call her party whore, in the beginning of their scoulding fray, for
fear she should be prevented, with that salutation, as more deserving it, was
therein crafty, and yet if she called her whorish Sister, it was ridiculous:
Ridiculous I account, a new unexpected toy, which brings some admiration with
it, Now this accusation is such, for until now, it has scarce been heard of.
The Jesuits want neither inven^ion, nor good will, in accusing such, as reject
their ceremonies with all kind of reproaches, and yet they could never yet,
hitt upon this imputation, to charge them with superstition for that cause: Nay
Balthazar Chavasius (a Jesuit) lib. 2. cap. 7. s. 54. though he would feign
have ^astened some such thing upon us, yet seeing it would not ^ake, but be
accounted ridiculous, even by his own ^reinds, he does so much as say, he
durst not do it for ^hame: We must not expect says he, Non est, quoae a
Pseudoevangelicis (reformatos puta) superstitiones multas indebit^ cultus
expectemus* ut pote quae observationes quaedam inanes, ac superflua esse
solent, illi ant^ ceremonias poene omnes insectantur.
many superstitious ex^ressions of undue worship, from those who are falsely
called, Evangelicall professors, considering th^se superstitions are ^ont to be
certain, vain and superfluous observations: but ^hey (meaning the reformed
churches) do bitterly inveigh almost against all Ceremonies. So our Rhemists on
Acts ^7. Sect. 4. discharge us of superstition: whereupon Dr. Fulk says: we
accept of your restimbnie as the witness of our adversaries: And is it not
admirable then? that our Def. and Rej. should go beyond the Jesuits in their
own element, and teach them how, and in what sense, they may here after better
accuse Calvin, and those that agree with him of superstition, then of rash
irreligious, or profane innovation, for rejecting so many Ceremonies of theirs:
which not only they, but also our Divines (if we may believe the Def. and Rej.)
esteem easily reformable to good use, and not simply unlawful: And by the same
reason, Non-residents, Pluralists, Tot Quots, common swearers of diminitive
oaths, and dicers, standing upon the lawfulnes of their practice, may upon that
supposition, call those, that gaynesay them superstitious brethren.

2. For the exploiding rather then answering or confuting of the foresaid
ridiculous accusation it was alleged: That superstition is a kind of excess
of religious worship, and that an excess, or error in a negation, was never
called by any author superstition, when he meant to speak properly, except
that very negation, be held as a special worship. That we do not abstain
from these Ceremo. but as from other unlawful corruptions (even out of the
compass of worship: That every erroneous denial of things lawful is not
superstition, and that all sorts of definitions which are given of
superstition, do touch upon our Cerem. rather then on the denial or
condemning of them. All this could not stay the Rej. but he must maintain, and
renew this weighty charge, as he calls it, and pronounce, that if we can
avoid it, it is our wit, (as if he would say) our book has saved us: Let us
therefore consider, what the accuser can say, to bring us to this extreme
pass.

3. There can be no plainer reason of this accusation (says the Rej. then that
out of Coll. 2.23. where will worship is instanced in negative observances,
Page 65. answer to the praface.

Answer to Coll. 2 23.


touch not, taste not, handle not, etc. But 1. we teach no negative observances
so called, for observances are ceremonial: Tho. 1.2. q. 101. art. 4. we make
no ceremonies of our negations, but make them moral duties: The Prelates on
the other side, appointing positive observances, do seem to include the
negations of them, as of the same kind: Bap^ize not without crossing, do not
divine service without surplice, communicate not without kneeling, so that ^y
this means they are made guilty of double super^tition.

2. The practice of superstitious persons in those days, condemned here by the
verdit of this place, caries no proportion or resemblance, with our cessation,
or negative absteining from cerem. because there touch not, ^ast not, etc. were
taken up by virtue of man's imposi^ion, and for the more special worship of
God, When ba^e cessations of evil come to be worship.
in a more peculiar manner, but we cease from ours, by virtue of another rule,
with no such intent, as to present any peculiar kind of honor to God thereby:
And thus absteining from our Ceremon. as unlawful, upon conscience (though
they were lawful,) cannot be superstition, except first it be an elicited act
of religion, or worship: Such worship it cannot be, except either in the
intention of the absteiner, or in the nature of the forbearance, it be used as
a means, to give unto God special honor, that is, other and more immediate
honor, then we do, by acts of obedience, common to the second table, with the
first: But this is neither in our intention, nor does the nature of such
forbearance as we use, implye it: For that common charge which usually occurrs
in scripture, cease to do evil, Isay. 1. Abstain from all appearance of
evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. is a duty of obedience in general common to both tables:
Now, if it be only materially determined, upon a work of the second table, not
formally elicited, from love or justice to our brother, it is no act of love or
justice. As if a man hating his neighbor, should yet for fear of Gods
judgment, abstain from killing of him, this was no act of love, or justice,
toward him; Even so, absteining from our Cerem. as evil for fear of offending
God, though it may materially be referred to the first table, yet cannot it be
an elicited act of worship, except it flows from religion, or a desire to do
special honor to God thereby.

3. These negative prohibitions, were so plainly the Commandments of men,
ver. 22. that from hence our divines do commonly argue against such popish
Cerem. as ours are: And therefore Papists in their commentaries, as Estius ad
Corn. de lapide etc. upon that place, do strive to putt-off that blow from
their Cerem. but yet are constrained to confess, unprofitable and superfluous
Ceremo. or instituted by a mere human spirit, (such as ours are) to be in
those words condemned; If therefore this place, be the plainest reason, which
the Def. and Rej. have, of charging us with superstition, it is plain enough,
there was more affection and affectation, then reason in this weighty charge.

4. Whether any definition of superstition will bear up this weighty charge,
forced upon those, that reject human Cerem. the Rej. will not try by the
Schoolmen, because he loves them not so well, but only by a Definition which
is found in D. Ames his Medulla: but passing by the Schoolmen, he might have
found in our Divines, Definitions, very fit for this trial, as that of Vrsyne
Tom. 1. in praecept 2. Superstition is that which ^dds human inventions to
divine praecepts: That of Dr. Fulk in Act. 17. Sect. 4. A will worship is, more
then ^ appointed by the law of God: That of Mr. Perkyns on ^he second command,
Superstition is worship of God, without his commandment etc. For there is not
one ^f our writers, who treats of superstition, and does ^ot give such
descriptions of it, as from them it may ^e concluded, that the rejecting of
such Ceremon. as ^^urs are, is so far from superstition, that it is the
oppo^ing of superstition: Yet let him choose by what Defini^ions, the cause
shall be tried.

5. The Definition which he makes choice of is: Superstition is that whereby
undue worship is exhibited to God: from hence the Rej. collecteth, and assumeth
1. that supersti^ion properly is in the opinion and mind of the worshipper: ^.
That a man may imagine himself to honor God in the use ^f such things, as God
has not forbidden or condemned, and ^hereupon forbear, even for conscience to
God, things lawful: ^. That the very not doing of things prohibited in the
first ^able (if it be for conscience to God,) is worship. Now the first of
these, is to fetch quidlibet ex quolibet, any thing out of every thing: For
there is nothing in the Defini^ion alleged, from whence (by any logic) it can
be concluded, that superstition is properly in opinion and mind: 2. The
assertion is as false, as untowardly col^ected, for though inward superstition,
be in the mind or soul, and springs from an erroneous opinion, yet neither
it, nor any moral vice or virtue, does properly consist in opinion, but rather
in affection, and disposition of the heart and will, as all that consider of
the matter, will easily perceave and confess: And as for outward superstition,
that consists in outward observances. 3. The second collection serves
nothing to the purpose: Neither yet the conclusion drawn from it, that there
may be a negative superstition: yet is it so intricately set down, that it
conteyneth a kind of contradiction, for the forbearing of things lawful, is
termed the use of such things, in what sense I cannot conjecture: The last
would prove something, if it were generally true as it is not: The avoiding of
sin or things forbidden by God, is an act of common obedience, belonging as
well to things forbidden, in the second table, as to those, that are forbidden
in the first: And the terminanation of this act, upon matters of the first
table, does no more make it properly worship toward God, then the like
termination of it, upon the matters of the second table, does make the same
act, properly justice, o^ charity toward men: It may, in this or that
particular, be imperated or commanded by religion to God, and in others by
charity to men, but it is not, in that particular elicited, or naturally
flowing from either, as worship does from religion and bounty from charity.

The Def. and Rej. abstain every day upon conscience from innumerable things
forbidden concerning Gods worship, as from Popish Idolatries, Mahometicall
impostures, and all the rabble of those divillish divises, which are among the
Heathen. Yet I do not think, that they themselves conceive, their acts of
daily worship to arise in account, unto such a number, as is there to be found,
of such things forbidden. The plain truth is, that an absteining from this or
that instituted, or chosen to be observed, in the worship of God, and for the
honoring of God ^herby, is a kind of Cere. worship: But the mere absteining
from this or that unlawful action upon conscience of Gods command is no
special worship, nor was ever ^o esteemed. 6. But out of D.A. who says; That
Religion is an observa^ce whereby we perform those things which directly belong
to the giving of honor to God, so much may be wru^g ^s the Rej. means, viz.
that if any observance be made of ^et doing any thing, which God has not
forbidden, of purpose and directly to give honor to God in the not doing
thereof, this must needs be an excess of religion a negative superstition.
Just so as not observing, is observance; not doing a thing, is ^erformance of
it, as the purposed absteining from that which ^ppeareth a dishonouring of God
is a dir^ct giving of honor unto him. 7. Neither is the other allegation out
of D. A. to any better purpose than the former: There is a su^erstitio^
sometimes in absteining from certain lawful things, viz. when some singular
service, and honor is by that abstine^ce ^ntended. Did the Rep. ever deny
this? Nay, does he not ^xpresly confess as much in these words; The
supersti^ions excess of religion, do^th sometimes seem to consist in a
^egation, viz. when that very negation, abstinence, or forbearing is held for a
special worship? The Rej. indeed, seems to find a difference in that term
of singular: But that is to find a knott in a rush; For by singul^r Dr. A.
meant the same thing which the Replyer meant by special, according as these
terms are often promiscuously used. The descant therefore which the Rej. makes
upon this occasion, that we fancy our non-co^formity so singular a piece of
service, a singular point of piety, and of true syncerity, this, I say, is but
a declamatory venting of bitter, but ungrounded, surmizes. We account our
abstinence from these Cerem. no special or particular worship, much less
singular for degree of excellency; nor do we esteem it a point of piety, more
singular, than to abstain from swearing by the Mass. Some point of sincerity
there is, in refusing these mixtures, but not worship, or so singular in our
opinion, as the Rej. would persuade his readers to our singular prejudice, and
wrong. Many things are singular faults, if they be admitted, the leaving of
which is no singular commendation. What if some had rather never preach the
Gospel, or receive the supper than tell a lie for those ends? Will the Rej.
thence conclude that they make the absteining from a lie a more singular piece
of worship, and piety, than either Word, or Sacraments? I would be loath to
undertake the prooving of such a wild consequence. Divine, and blessed
Bradford refused to be admitted unto the Ministry by B. Ridley, except he
might be excused from the abusive formalities, then and now, in use: yet
Gardener, nor Boner, neither did, nor being asked would therefore (as is
probable) have accused him of Superstition, as esteeming the absteining from
those abuses more singular service of God, or piety, than all he might do, and
did afterward in the ministry.

8. The examples brought by the Rej. are like unto his Reasons: 1. The
Pharisees did superstitiously restrain^ labor on the Sabbath, beyond that
which God imposed; this was a negative superstition. True; it was an human
in^tituted Ceremony someth^ng like unto Popish holy ^ayes: But the Pharisees
absteining from the feasts of Bacchus, Venus, etc. was no special worship. 2.
The ^hilas^ims not treading on Dagons th^eshold was negative ^uperstition:
True, as the former, It was an observation ^nstituted to honor Dagon by: But
their not-admit^ing of Circumcision was no superstition. When therefor upon
such wretched examples, and reasons as these ^re, the Rej is so confident in
laying his weighty charge ^f Superstition upon us, as that he pronounces all
the ^ater of Nilus not to be sufficient to wash us from gross su^erstition,
the understanding reader has no cause to ^hinke otherwise but that even the
Rej. may have a ^onfident full persuasion such as that he builds much ^n, and
yet but hollow empty supporters for the up^olding of it.

9. Such also are his distinctions, whereby (as with a wett finger) he
discharges the Convocation of all su^erstition, because they impose the
Ceremonies, not as things directly, properly, immediately, but only
consequently, and mediately, belonging to the giving of honor to God. For 1.
If they be consequently directed to God in ^eaching of men Gods will, as the
word does, they are ^irect worship unless preaching be no worship. 2. If ^hey
be worship proper to this office, they are proper worship. 3. If they be
worship belonging to the first ^able, then they are immediately worship: But
all the former are true, as was before showed, yet one thing more would be
known, what reason the Rej. has to place the observance of our Cerem. for the
kind of it, in one degree of distance, and latitude: and the rejecting of
them, in another? It seems to be as if the English day, and night should be
so disioyned that our night should be in England, and our day in China. When he
further expounds himself we shall be more able to discern his meaning.

10. Last of all, For ending of this quaestion about superstition, I require a
resolution of this not-unlike Quaere, which with change of persons contains
the same case. Seeing there be different opinions concerning our Diocesan
Bishops places, and functions, eve^ among them that make benefitt of them, some
holding them to be of divine institution, or else not lawful, so that (as they
say) without this persuasion they would give over their Bishoprics, to day
before to morrow* Others holding them only of human Institution, and yet
lawful; Let him, I say, tell us plainly, whether the Prelates of this later
opinion may call the other Prelat^ superstitious brethren or fathers, for
holding Ecclesiastical^ Bishops of Man's institution unlawful? If not, let no^
the Rej. nor his Diocesan be so liberal of this title to others that dissent
from them about human Ceremonies as unlawful, except they either think
Bishops cannot be superstitious, or that we cannot be wronged with any odious
imputation.

CHAP. X.
Sect. I. Concerning Parliaments, and Convocations: answer to 70.71.72.73. of
the Praeface.
BEcause the Def. objected the authority of Parliaments, and Convocations for
establishing of these Rites, it was opposed by the Rep. 1. that Prelates ^n
these matters have no respect unto the authority of ^arliaments, as appears
by the testimony of the Par^^ament it self An. 1610. in the Records thereof.
2. That ^o Parliament does allow subscription, and Confor^ity to be urged as
now it is by the Prelates. Which also ^as showed out of the same Parliament
records. 3. That ^he Prelates proceedings are so agt. Parliament Laws, that by
them they are subject to a Praemunire. Now see that is rejoyned.

1. The first fillip is that though the Prelates regard ^ot the authority of
Parliaments, yet that is no answer to ^his Objection, these Ceremonies are
established by sundry acts ^f Parliaments. Where the Rej. forgets that some
ar^uments, and answers are ad hominem, that is, they re^pect the thing in
quaestion, not simply, but as it com^eth from such a man. Now this was the
meaning of ^he Repl. that objecting of Parliaments by a Prelate, in ^efence of
Prelates who regard not the authority of Par^iaments, is a ridiculous plea.

2. In the second place, it is denied that the Prelates ^espect not the
authority of Parliaments, because, forsooth, they have the kings commission,
and Broad seal (...) they are by Parliament confined. That is; they neglect
no^ Parliamentary Statutes in all things. For so far as the^ can turn any
Statute Law to serve their turn, and i^ those circumstances which they dare
not, for their heads, omit, they follow that which Parliaments pr^scribe.

13. To that first Evide^ce which was alleged out of the Records of the worthy
Parliament An 1610. it is rejoyne^ that it does only prove that the Prelates
mistake (if they di^ mistake) in one point, their own authority given them b^
Parliam^nt. Now if by mistaking, he means b^d, and unlawful taking, this
which he says may be granted But if he means an error of ignorance, surely
he mistaketh the matter one way or other. For 1. Ignoranc^ of the Law does not
excuse any violaters of the same much less Scribes, and Doctors, Prelates,
which use to be among Lawmakers, and in Commission for to se^ to the execution
of Laws. 2. Those that err of ignorance, correct their fault upon
information, and knowledge: But our Prelates being diverse times warned, eve^
by the Parliament, have not mended, but more violently than before, persisted
in, and pursued this mistaking* 3. Mistaking in matters of such weight, as are
so many good men's livings, and free-holds, is a broad fault, of the same nature
(in all Law) with ill (crafty) meaning. Culpa lata viol^^ mal^s.
If the Prelates should take upon them to take away the life of some
non-conformists, directly, and by sentence (as they have, in effect, done by
long imprisonment, and should be called in quaestion therefore, it would not
^elpe them to say, they mistook their authority.

4. It is added here by the Rej. that the making of Ec^^esiasticall Can^ns do
properly belong to the Prelates. But 1. ^^cept there be some mysteriall
distinction understood ^etwixt Canons, and Laws, this is to rob both
Par^^^ment, and King also of their just authority, that Pre^^^es may usurp it.
2. Say it be so, that it belongs ^^operly to Prelates, for to make
Ecclesiastical Canons, (...) it therefore belong to them to make such Canons?
^uppose the Ceremonies to be lawful, have the Pre^^tes proper power to appoint
any lawful Ceremonies? ^hen they may institute, and appoint, in the Def. and
^ej. his judgment, not only holy water and Images, ^^roughout all England, but
also command that all the ^arliament, with the rest of English men, shall be
cir^^mcised; for the Def. Page 285. being asked, whether he ^oldeth
Circumcision as it is used under Prester John, lawful? ^he Rej. answers for,
and with him, He does so, and you ^^y nothing to disproove it; Insinuating
that if any thing ^e said to disproove it, he is ready to maintain it. Now
(...) appeal to the first Parliament that shall hereafter be ^alled, and in
the mean time, to any English man (be^yde those that are resolved to say what
Defendants, and Rejoyners will have them) if they believe that the Pre^ates
have power, and that from the Parliament, or with ^he consent of Parliament, to
appoint the people of England, even those of the Parliament it self, to be
circumcised? Have the innocent Ceremonies brought us, and the Parliament into
such bondage, that at the Prelates pleasure, we must all be circumcised? It
seems then they are bloody innocents.

5. The second instance out of the same Parliament Records (says the Rej.)
blames this in the Convocation, that it has made the refusal of Subscription
poenall, with deprivation of men's free-holde. Which is very true, and due: but
not that only; For the Parliament condemns expressly all urging of
Subscription above that appointed by the Statute of 13th. Eliz. which only
concerns confession o^ the true Christian faith, and doctrine of the
Sacraments* Neither is their mentioning of freehold so to be taken* as if they
allowed the men should for refusal of other Subscription, be deprived of their
Copy holds; bu^ only as an exaggeration of the Prelates praesumption* who do
not fear, nor spare to vihlate the fundamental Laws, and Liberties of
England, such as that is, for no man to be deprived of freehold, without the
Law of Parliament, and a Jury of 12. legal men.

6. The Parliament adds, that silencing and depriving of Ministers for
nonconformity, and non-subscription (without, and against Law) has been the
great grief of sundry well affected subjects. To this the Rej. says, that so
it has been the grief of those which deprive^ the^; who yet deprived the^
because they were commanded, leas^ their error should be still maintained,
and the Ministry of Co^formists contemned. This profession of grief in
depriving. Prelates, may be likened unto that of Queen Mary's Prelates, who
when they condemned the Martyrs, said they did it with grief. So Gardener in
his sentence of condemnation upon Mr. Rogers, the first that suffered under
Queen Mary. We therefore, said the Bps. aforesaid, wit^ ^orrow of mind, and
bitterness of heart, do condemn thee ^he said 10. Rogers, etc. Unto which
may be added M. Fox ^his Marginall note. These murderers pretend a sorrow of
^eart, and they will not cease from murdering. But to follow only the Rej. his
so grieved. It is very goodly so. The well affected subjects were, and are
grieved, in that ^e^se that sca^dalizing is called grieving: This scandal was
at the Prelates proceedings: The Prelates are grieved for their own fact, but
not to repentance, at least such, as they do not repent of. The grief of
those well affected subjects stirred up in them, and in the Parliament a
serious petition, and endeavor to stay the Prelates violence, and remoove the
scandal: but the Prelates, though they challenge the power, and care of
Ecclesiastical affairs as properly belonging to them, could never be moved,
either by others, or their own praetended grief, so much as to petition unto
his Majesty, for the remooving of the grievance, but were and are as ready as
their Paratours, and Pursuivants to do that which belongs to them about this
that grieveth the Parliament, and sundry other well affected subjects. The
Parliament grieving with those that grieved, made a good Law to make void the
Prelates Canons, as the cause of unsufferable grief: The Prelates, first
makers of the Canons, and since urgers of their execution, in which also they
often go beyond their own rules (as passionate executioners use to do) and
many of them applaud themselves, glory, and triumph in their imagined victory.
But it may be those are here meant, who, as D. B. in D. Covel page 44. urging
subscription, and conformity, stick not to say the Authority sins in not
remeoving some of these things. Now if they grieve for sinning against their
consciences, God give it may be to repentance not to be repended of: but yet
this not so as the well-affected (of whom the Parliament speaks) are grieved,
by other men's unconscionable dealing. They are commanded, fo^sooth; But who
procured that command? who should procure the ceasing of that same? And is it
sufficient for Fathers in God to say they are commanded by man to undo the
ministers, and vex the people of God? Bishop Grindal was commanded to
suppress the exerrise which was called Prophesying: yet he constantly refused
to execute such a command. Tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis. But the
Prelates, (says the Rej*) proceed^d not against them, because they were
painful, and fruitful ministers. As if the Parliament were to be so
interpreted, or rather derided! or any but the Devil of Hell would profess
such a cause of such proceeding? Wherefore then? Least their error should be
still suffered, and the ministry of others contemned. It seems then that in
the Rej: his opinion the Parliament in condemning these proceedings, went about
to maintain dangerous error, and to bring conforming Ministers into contempt.
But not to speak of his taking the question for granted, viz: which the
Ministers held a dangerous error) the Parliamentary way of making void the
Canons might have freed the praetended error from all danger, and left no
ministers in contemptible conformity, unless some would contemn Christian
liberty as having by custom their ears nay^ed to the door of servitude.

7 Concerning the Praemunire answer is given, that ^f the Prelates be subject
unto it, that is more than the Rej: ^noweth; that they might incur that
peril upon ignorance; and that by Statute Law the Ceremonies are ^stablished,
with ^he penalty of refusing them, as all men know, and some have ^elt at
Assizes, and Westminster Hall. But for the first of ^heis shifts, D: B: knows
full well (whatsoever the Rej: will know) that Prelates cannot take from any
English man his freehold, with out Parliament Authority, and yet be free from
the Statute of Praemunire: Now that they do so, the Rej: himself even now
confessed. Moreover; who knows not that the Prelates do keep their Cour^s,
silence, deprive etc, in their own names? which does evidently entrench upon
the Praerogative Royal of the Crown, and so fall into the penalty of
Praemunire by the Statute of Henr. 8.25. except they can show some special
warrant by Statute for so doing; which that they cannot do is evident; because
in King Edwards days they were enjoined to keep their Courts in the Kings
name; and since that time, have no special warrant, by any Statute, for any
such Courts in one or others name. Ignorance is here again vainly pretended,
as before was declared. Are the Prelates only ignorant of that which they have
so often been warned, and convinced of in many Parliaments? Now for the
establishing of these Ceremonies, with the penalty of refusing them by Statute,
the Rej: should have done well, if he had named that, or those Statutes where
we may find this done. As for the penalty of deprivation for refusing these
Ceremonies, the Rej: confessed before, that the Parliament Anno 1610.
pronounced against it, as contrary to Law. If the Ceremonies themselves stand
established by any Statute, it must be that of Eliz: 1. But that concerns the
book of king Edward in which this Rej: page 54.55. confesses some vain
Ceremones, now removed, to have been praescribed. Tolerabiles inaptiae.
Now either those tolerable fooleries were established by Statute of Eliz: 1.
or not these; For no difference is found in the Statute; If those, why do our
Opposites refuse them, and yet urge these upon that Law which no more
established these than them? The truth is, though the book for substance was
in some sort confirmed, yet every rubric, and ceremony which was therein
contained, though it was for a time tolerated, was not established. Why else
was subscription, by that Statute, restreyned only to doctrine of Faith, and
Sacraments? If any therefore have been deprived, either at Assizes, or other
Civil Courts, for mere refusal of these Ceremonies, (which I much doubt of)
that, (without quaestion) has been by the Praelates procuring, not by such
evidence of Law as just Judges require in such wreghty causes. It would also be
known what kind of Judges those were which are said to have been so
Ceremonious. Sometime it falls out, that a Hales is put out of Commission by a
Gardener, and another, a friend of Gardener being put in his place, strange
sentences follow thereon. At the least, it behooveth the Rej: who alleges,
and allows those Judges facts, to show us upon what grounds they proceeded?

8. Against the Convocation-house (as reasons for which the authority thereof
is little, or none in men's ^o^sciences) some known things were briefly
mentioned ^y the Replier, to which how the Rej. answers, it is ^ot unworthy
consideration. 1. Convocations consist of a ^action. No (says the Rej.) but of
men which submit themselves to the Laws of the Land, and Constitutions of ^he
Church. As for the Constitutions of the Church, ^hey are the Constitutions of
the Convocation; so that ^he answer in that part is, they submitt themselves to
their ^wne constitutions: To the Laws of the Land that they do not duly
submitt themselves, it appears out of that which the Parliament, before
alleged, says; di^erse painful, and learned Pastors ready to perform the
legal subscription, have been deprived for refusing ^aonicall subscription:
which could not be, if Canons were legal, and their makers obedient to Law.
They charge also the bodies, lands, and goods of subjects further than is
lawful, says the same Parliament. So that it is by this plain how the
Convocations may be said to make a faction even against Parliaments. Yet if
they were obedient to Laws, they may (by conspiring for their private ends
against the common good) be esteemed a Faction, as those that bare the greatest
sway in the Council of Trent, were, and are of indifferent understanding men
esteemed. So in Queen Mary's days, the persecuting Prelates, though they
submitted themselves to Law, and cried out of others that did not so, yet they
were a pernicious faction. And so (it seems) was the meaning of the Repl. in
this charge, because he adds for a reason thereof, that they never conclude
any thing for the common good of the Church. 2. They are servile to those on
whom they depend, and tyrannical over the po^re that are subject to them. This
the Rej. does not deny, but says; It may be an error of their persons, not
of their Constituti^n. But what does this help us? If we must be subject to
servile, and tyrannical Canons, which come from the error of their persons,
their Constitution will no way relieve us. Their Constitution is for substance
the same now that was in Queen Mary's days and yet we know what they did, and
thereby may conceive what they may do again. 3. They are gross Violators of
most ancient Canons, being non-residents, Pluralists etc. Neither is this
denied by the Rej. so manife^^ is the truth of it. Only, that he may not be
altogethe^ silent, he alleges that this being true, yet the Def. his speech
stands unshaken, viz. These Ceremonies are established by Canons. But I
think if the Convocations be such as have been showed, the credit, and
authority both of them, and their Canons is so shaken, that they can affoard
little establishment to the Ceremonies i^ any free judgment.

CHAP. XI.
Sect. 2. Concerning the good and evil, which our Convocations have done.
AMong the Objections mentioned against our Convocations, one appendix was,
that in memory of man they never concluded any thing for the com^on good of the
Church, more than by others was better done (...) their hands: but much evil
has come from them, and more ^ould, if their commission had served thereto.
Now because ^his is a weighty charge, and enough to slight all their
^uthority, if it be true, it is worthy to be severally, and di^igently
considered, what their Advocate can allege to the contrary. If in this point
he be brought to a nihil di^it, then let him for ever hold his peace about
such Convocations.

1. The first answer is, that the accusation is not true, un^esse the Agreement
of the Articles of Faith, and Religion were not good. But 1. this being
granted to be good, yet the accusation may be true, because this Act of An.
1571. can hardly be said to have been concluded within the memory of man. 2.
It may well be quaestioned whether in this, our Convocation has done that
which was not better done to their hands. To which purpose it shall not be
extravagant, nor unprofitable, to compare a little the Articles as they were
set forth in King Edwards days, Anno 1552. with the edition which the
Convocation of Anno 1571. has left us. In the former we find this Article De
Gratia. Gratia Christi, seu Spiritus Sanctus qui per eundem datur, cor lapideum
ausert, and dat cor carneum: ex nolentibus qua recta sunt, volentes facit, and
ex volentibus prava, nolentes reddit.
The Grace of Christ, or the Holy Spirit which is given by him, takes away the
heart of stone, and gives an heart of flesh; such as were unwilling to things
lawful, he makes willing; and such as willed things unlawful, he makes
unwilling. Which Article is, I know not wherefore, left out in the later
edition. This I am sure of, that if the said Article had been renewed in the
same manner as it was first set down, it had been one bar more than now is
found against those among us which follow Arminius, and his Remonstrants, and
one warrant for public preaching against them, Secondly, in the Ar^i^le of
Justification, it was before said, that the doctrine by sole faith in that
sense in which it is explained in the Homily of Iustif^cation, E^ sensu quo in
Homilia de Iustif^catione explicatur.
is most certain; Now in the later edition this most certain is left out, and
for co sensu is putt in an ambiguous term ut. Whatsoever was the occasion or
meaning of this change, the former words were more full against those that
broach new doctrines about Justification, such as Dr. Iackson does in his
book of Justifying Faith. Thirdly, in the Article o^ Sacraments, the former
editio^ had, that the efficacy of the^ is not from the work done, Ex opere
operato, qu^ vox ut per^^ira est, and (...) lite is (...) minime ^^um, (...)
adn^d^m superstitusum.
which expression (in their Latin) as it is strange, and not known in holy
writ, so it carries with it a sense savouring little of piety, but much of
superstition. Which words, if they had been still retained, (as they are not)
some superstitious conceits about the Sacrame^^s might by them have been
suppressed. Fourthly, In the Article De Coena Domini, the old edition had
these words: Seeing it is required to the true being of human nature, Q^^m
naturae hu^anae veri^as requirat, ut umus etusdem, a^ homi^is corpus in multis
locis simul esse non possit, sed in uno aliquo, and definit^ loco esse
operteat, ideirco Christi corpus in multis, and diversis locis, eodem tempore
praesens esse non potest. Et quontam (ut tradunt sacrae literae) Christus in
coelum fuit sublatus, and ibi usque ad finem seculi est permansurus, non debet
quisguam fidelium carnis eius, and sanguinis realem, and corporalem (ut
l^quu^tur) praesentiam in Eucharistia vel credere, vel profiteri.
that the body of one, and the same man cannot be in many places at ^^ce, but
must be in some one definite place, therefore the body (...) Christ cannot be
present in many, and diverse places at the ^^me time. And because (as holy
Scriptures deliver to us) christ was taken up into heaven, and is there to
remain unto ^he end of the world, none of the faithful ought to believe, or
^rofesse any real, and (as they speak) corporal presence of his ^^esh and
blood in the Sacrament. In the new edition all ^his is blotted out: which yet
had good use against the ^utheran error of Consubstantiatio^. Fifthly, In the
Ar^^cle of Traditions, these words (not found in the former ^dition) are
conveyed into the later. Every particular, or ^ational church has authority of
instituting, cha^ging, or abro^ating Cere. or Ecclesiastical rites instituted
only by human ^uthority, so that all be done to aedification. This addition
^emeth to be added for the better advauncing of hu^aine Ceremonies. Sixthly; The
Article about the books ^f form, is very much transformed to the wronging of
^ubscribers. Quaelibet Ecclesia particularis, sive nationalis, authoritatem
habet instituendi, mutandi, aut abrogandi Ceremonias, aut ^itus Ecclesiasticos,
humana ta^tum authoritate institutes; modo omnia ad aedificationem fiant.
For formerly it affirmed only that the ^ooke of service, and that of
Ordination of Ministers (...) far as c^ncerned truth of doctrine are good
etc. but ^^ow in the later, this limitation (quoad doctrinae verita^^m) is left
out, and in stead thereof is added, Quoad doctrina veritatem.
that the ^ooke of Consecration, and Or^ination contains ^^l things necessary
thereunto, and that it has nothing in it of it self either superstitious or
impious, and that all that be consecrated, and ordained according ^o it, are
orderly, and lawfully consecrated, and or^eined.

These changes well considered, I think D. B. himself will confess that
there was no great good done in the second edition of the Articles concerning
Faith, and Religion: Yet be it so, that this was a good work of our
Convocation, what a poor commendation is one good work, of a Mother Church in
a whole generation or age of her children? Pauperis est tumerare peous.
It Is for the poor to tell their store. But for a shepherd, in numbering of his
flock to see them brought to one head, what should he say but bemoane himself
with Alas! and weel a day?

2. The second answer is, that Convocations do good sometimes, in confirming
what was decreed before. Which is sometime true, viz. If the things decreed
before, were of themselves good, and had need of the Convocations confirmation.
But sometime such confirmations are only for fashion-sake; As when the
Council of Trent confirmed the Holy Scripture, the Apostolical Creed etc. and
then there is very little, or no good done, more than was formerly done to
their hands. Any other confirmation of good, I do not know our Convocations to
be guilty of, nor can I understand, when, whence, and how the Convocation had
Commission to confirm any thing, without making of new Canons. A Law of
Confirmation is necessary to Canons: but Canons of confirmation are not
necessary to Laws established. Neither can it be showed that so much has
been given or committed to the Convocation. Nor if it were, could that be done
without Canons (in some respect) new. And so much (it seems) Dr. B. knew,
from whence it is that he adds; Or if they have done nothing, because they
have had no commission, to which they are limited ^y Act of Parliament, where
lies the blame? If they have ^one nothing! What a miserable supposition is
this? To ^oe nothing in so long a time, is to be no Synod, no Mother Church,
nor good Milk-nurse, but a dead Car^asse, bearing an empty name of both. If
they had no ^ommission to do good, they had no commission to be ^
Mother Church. If the Parliament has limited them ^o a commission, it was
because they durst not trust them without. Yet the blame of not doing good
cannot ^ye upon the Parliament, because they never sought to ^t, or by it, for
a commission of doing any good; Nor yet of the Kings Majesty, (where the Rej.
seems to leave ^t) except they have declared what necessity there was ^hey
should do some good, and to that intent made petition for a commission; Let it
lie therefore upon the convocation it self, which repraesenteth, as an Image,
or makes show of some good but does none at all.

3. The third answer is; That in the book of Canons were many good provisions
for more plentiful preaching, and ^edressing the abuses of Ecclesiastical
Courts, which would have done much good, if they had been as carefully
executed as they were made. But 1. so there was also in the Council of Trent,
many Canons of Reformation, at most of their sessions, nay such, as (without
any straining) go far beyond those that are found in our Canons. As for
example, in the fifth Session, under Paulus 3. it was decreed that expounding of
the Scripture should be diligently observed in all Cathedral Churches, and
also in other places where any stipend was, or may be had, and that Praebends,
for that cause absent from their Chapter, should enjoy their dividents, as if
they were present. And that all Parish Priests should be compelled to teach
their people, at the least on the Lords day, and in solemn feasts. In the sixth
session, the Ancient Canons are revived which were made against Bishops that
buisy themselves in Princes Courts, or other where with secular affairs, and
so are either non residents, or non-praedicants. In the seventh, it is ordered
that all collations of benefices be upon able men, and such as will be resident
upon the same, under great penalties. Pluralities also are abolished, or made
nullities. In the fifth session under Pius 4. all taking of money for Orders,
for letters testimonial, for seals by Bishops, is condemned as simony: Nay,
the Notaries, or Secretaries are forbidden to take any thing except they have
no wages* (and then also, not above the tenth part of one Crown) under great
penalties. It is also under like penalties decreed, that none be ordained
(except upon necessity, and then with patrimony, or pension sufficient to live
on) which have not an Ecclesiastical Benefice, or special^ charge. Moreover,
it is decreed, that honest unlearned Parish Priests should have learned
Coadjutors adjoined to them upon their charges, and that scandalous Priest^
should be either reformed, or removed. In the seventh Session, non-residency
both of Bishops, and Curates, is again condemned, as a mortal sin. And
(which D. Bancroft would have called English Scotizing, or Scottish Genevating,
if it had been but mentioned in his Convocation) it was appointed, that the
names of those which ^esired to be ordained, should be the month before,
^ubliquely proclaimed in the Church, and diligent in^uisition made concerning
their life, and manners. It ^^so confirmed that none should be ordained, that
is ^ot designed to a certain place of ministry. In the ^ight Session it is
enjoined to Bishops as their principal ^ffice, to preach diligently in their
Churches, and that ^n all Parishes at least thrice a week, there should be
prea^hing. And that one man should have but one Benefice ^equiring residence
etc. With what syncerity these, and ^uch Canons of Reformation were propounded,
is to ^e seen in the History of that Council. But in verbal provisions it is
evident that that Conventicle was not behind our Convocation, but rather led
her the way, and taught her how to dissemble as if she had set down among
other Canons, Who knows not how to feign, Qui nosci^ simulare, noscit regnare.
he knows not how to reign.

Secondly: That provision which is here added (if those Canons had been
carefully executed) is as bald as any of the Canons. For 1. the quaestion being
of doing good, we are told they proceeded so far that they had done some
good, if they had come to execution, that is, to doing of good, and not
pretending it only. 2. To whom did it belong to see good Canons executed, but
to Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, which were the makers of them?
Had they commission both to make badde Canons, and execute them; but to make
only good, and so leave them without execution? 3. This whole Plea is, as if
for the cursed figtree, which brought forth no fruit, one should have
alleged that it brought forth leaves, and so made good provision for fruit,
if fruit had followed answerable to the leaves. 4. What provision was made for
preaching if it were fully ^xecu^ed, D. B. in his Apology, in the 67. page of
D. Covel, shows thus. By the Canons, no piece of the service must give way to
a Sermon, or any other respect, which computed with the accessory occasions of
Christenings, Burialls, Marriages, and Communions, which fall out all at some
times, some at all times in many Congregations, does necessarily pretend, if
not a purpose, yet a consequence of devouring of preaching, and so not widows
houses, but Gods house, under pretense of long prayers, while neither the time,
nor the ministers strength, nor peoples patience can bear that task of
reading and preac^ing too. Of which intention if we be afraid, who can
marvel, that either shall observe my Lord of Londons motion, for a praying
ministry as more needful in a Church planted, than preaching, as his speeches
since also have professed: or that shall mark how some Canons are planted
against Lectures in Market-townes, whereby the light has spread to many dark
places, and withal how skilfu^^y all his Majesty's godly purposes against the
ignorant, negligent, and scandalous Ministers, have been not so much delayed,
as deluded, and the offenders covered etc. 5. If some little good had come from
the Convocation about their Courts, yet that being covered, and overwhelmed
with so great evil which came from thence, as the remooving, or excluding of a
thousand good preachers, the vexing, and disturbing of ten thousand good
Christians, (I speak within compass of truth) should ^e no more doing of
good, than the leaving or sticking ^owne of a feather was by him that stole the
goose.

All these things being will considered, he that should ^reach to the
Convocation, may well take up, and repeat Mr. Latimers words uttered before
the same Assembly in the 28. year of Henry 8. The fruit of your consultation
shall show what generation ye be of. What have ye done hitherto, I pray you?
What one thing that the people of England has been better for of an hair? or
you your selves, either more accepted before God, or better discharged toward
the people committed unto your cure? For, that the people is better learned,
and taught now than they were in time past, to whether of these ought we to
attribute it, to your industry, or to the providence of God, and the foreseeing
of the Kings Grace? What did ye, so great Fathers, so many, so long a season,
so often assembled together, whereby Christ is more glorified, or his people made
more holy? I appeal to your own consciences. Mr. Latimer in this charge,
excepteth two exploits of that Convocation; One that they burned a dead man,
who had withstood their profit; the other, that they went about to rake another
in the coals, because he would not subscribe to certain of their Articles.
Such like exceptions may be made for our convocation, and those multiplied to a
great number. But he that should make them must look for no other fee, or
thanks, for such allegations, than Latimer was rewarded with, who (not long
after this Sermon preached) was driven not only to cease from preaching, but
also to take up his lodging in the Tower.

CHAP. XII.
Sect. 2. Concerning worship answer, to the Rej. premonition, Page
123.124.125.126.127.
WE here have the Rej. again entrenching himself, and raising up many
distinctions and definitions, as so many blinds, as it were, that the ignorant
sort, and such as are more weak in judgment, might not perceave, how the
evidence, and strenght of the arguments, which are leveled directly against the
Cerem. come in upon them, and prevail against them: As also, that in the
tumult, and lumber of these distinctions, being thus hurried, and hurled
together, those answers which are lame and wounded, may creep away, and escape
in the crowd, unseene and unsuspected by the most, who either have not skill,
or will and care, to examine things, before they pass, but are content, rather
to take these conceits (which are accompanied with ease and quiet) upon trust,
then to put them to the trial, or themselves to trouble and vexation, if they
prove not true. And because this head is of wayght, and worthy the skanning, we
shall therefore take into further trial, and examination, what ever principles
or authorities the Rej. has set down, either in the premonition to the
second argument, or in the beginning of his treatise, touching kneeling at the
Sacrament. That we may thereby discern, what succor the Rej. his cause is like
to find, when he thinks to shelter under these outworks, which he has reared
up on ^urpose to be his sense.

Worship generally taken, is thus by him defined, Page 123.124.

Worship is the performance of respect, unto any thing or person, according to
the estimation and dignity thereof.

The terms of which description, are so loose and ^yde, and so far from
laying out the bounds, of the ^^ing described, that like a ship-mans hose, you
may apply ^^em to what you will, rather then to the purpose in and: A man has
aestimation, of his life, his goods, his ^ood name, answerable to the worth and
dignity of the^, and does accordingly perform, that respect, that is fit
(...) caring for them: does he therefore worship his house, ^is goods, his
lands? Nay any Christian heart, esteems and performs respect to the worship
of God: does he ^^erfore give worship unto worship: The Rej. therefore (...) to
be desired, to make accurate descriptions, if he de^^re to give satisfaction to
a Judicious reader. Lastly we ^ave here things and persons made the object of
worship, and yet in the division immediately following, we are ^aught, that
worship distinguished according to the object, and that truly: is either of
our fellow Citizens, and so civil, (...) of our God, and so divine: In the
definition things and ^ersons are the object: And now in the division only
^ersons are the object, and things not mentioned: how this quicksilver will be
sodered together, I see not.

Worship according to the degrees, is divided into veneration which is a due
respect of Gods ordinances or app^rtenances to his service or adoration which
is due to God alone. Its a received rule, that degrees vary not the kind of any
thing, but the quantity of it: As the diverse degrees of heat, or cold, in
several things, degrees of whytenes in several walls, none of these degrees
declare diverse qualities for kind, but diverse quantities and measures of the
same kind of quality: as one thing is more o^ less hott, but both have the
like heat, for kind of it whence it follows from the Rej. his ground, that
veneration and adoration differing only as degrees of worship, they are both of
the same kind, and then veneration being due to the ordinances, and
appurtenances thereof, the essence or kind of true divine worship, is due to
some creature beside God, which not only religion and reason, but all the world
of Orthodoxe Divines deny, and the Rej. I presume also in cold blood will do
the same.

3. Third division is: Divine worship is either principal^ or subordinate:
Principal is that holy reverence and respect of the Divine Majesty, which is
inwardly performed for his honor: either by the understanding, or will and
affections: And this may falsely be pretended, but cannot be falsely performed.
I will not here be curious to pursue all the open weaknesses of these
expressions: Only let the Reader take notice, that the Rej. makes those members
of a distinction, and so, such as should be opposite one unto another, which
are yet in subordination, and that by his own ^ermes: for he makes one part
principal, and the other ^ubordinate to it, and so in agreement with it, which
^o reason will allow: As though one should divide a ^iving creature into that
which is principally so, as a ^an, or that which is subordinate, as the faculty
of ^^ughing, which is a token of a man: And that which ^^rceth him to these
inconveniences, is the fear, least (...) should make external worship, true
worship, in its ^wne nature, as conceaving, a back blow is coming to is cause
by that means.

2. I will not here ask, by what rule he makes reve^^nce the Genus to
principal worship, when the verdit ^f all writers, and text, casts religious
reverence, as a ^roper duty in the third command, whereas principal ^orship,
is made general to all the first table, and so the ^ore particular is made a
Genus to that which is more ^enerall then it self: I suppose this is the Rej.
phrasio^^gie, fitter for a declamer, and one that should descant ^hen define:
3. let it here be remembered, that the in^ard acting of understanding, will, and
affections to^ards God, is made the proper form, and that which ^ives
specificall being to principal worship, because we all have use of this
hereafter.

Only that which is most remarkable, and exceeding ^oubtfull (and therefore
desired proof and confirmation) that which is added, in the following words,
viz. In^^^nall worship cannot be performed falsely: Inward worship may be as
well performed falsely, as so intended.
which is a conceit ^eyond my shallow apprehensio^, and therefore, at his next
^joyning I desire to be satisfied in some particulars.

1. He that acknowledges one God, Eternal, Almighty, etc. and two persons:
but conceaves the Holy Ghost, not to be a distinct person beside them, but a
work proceeding from them both, and so also depend^ upon the Godhead thus
apprehended: whether dot^ such a man, falsely conceave of God, and falsely
worship him: making no expression of this his conceaving o^ dependence.

2. If there be the same ground and reason, to make false internal, as
external worship, then the one may be as falsely performed as the other: but
that there is the same ground for both, let any man compare them together, and
it will appear at the first view: For the heart, can, and does go aside as
many ways from the rule, as the outward man does, or can do: A man may fear
God, upon a false ground, after a false manner to a wrong end: as well as
preach, or pray upon a false ground, after a false manner, to a false end: So
that I see no color, nor can conceave, how those words can be excused:
Internal worship is true, or not at all: Imagnary internal worship is no
worship. For there is nothing, that can be called true, being ordered a right,
according to rule, but there is a falsehood, which will arise by the wrong
ordering, and ill disposing of the same thing: At a word, as every proper
axiom^ admitts of a contradiction, and so of a falsehood necessarily: so
likewise every indiduall action, which can admit of alteration, must needs
admit of a wrong, as well, as of a right disposition, and by consequent of a
falsene^ which may besall it in that kind.

3. All lifting up the honor of another, to whom, ^n way of homage we present
our services, that is, wor^hipping of such a party in our intent, and according
to the nature of the action: but false conceaving of the ^rue God, and fearing
of him, upon false grounds is the ^ifting up of the honor of God, in the
intention of the person, and nature of the word: and therefore it must needs be
worship of God, for of no other, it can be, as being tendered to him, but its
not true internal worship, and therefore it must be false.

Lastly, if this be not at all false worship, then at all, it is no sin, and
so must never be answered for, because unto any other head beside that of false
worship, it cannot be referred.

Subordinate worship is that which is done in token, and testimony of the
sovereignty, we acknowledge in God, and of our dependence upon him. Here
again, we have the like phrasiologie, words without wayght of reason, in
describing or defining the thing intended: For token and testimony are too
large and loose expressions to lay out the nature of this worship: Because 1. a
man may several ways give a token, or testimony of his acknowledgment, and
dependence, and yet in none of those ways be truly said to worship i. e. as
by some pledge, by his hand writing, and seal annexed testify, that he does
thus acknowledge and depend, and yet none of these ways he worships: 2. Take
actions in this reference only, as they look to our inward dispositions by
way of testification, or signification, they are not worship, (I say go no
further then that reference) but as they are presented as some services to God
immediately, and as by him instituted and required.

True external worship is said to be made up of 4. things: A person holy, 2.
action and manner warranted: 3. end right, 4. the present intention of the
worshipper bestowed, and employed upon the service. Where let it be considered,
how he broils things of all kynds together, contrary even to their nature, and
right reason: In that he requires the inward holiness of the person, and his
gracious acceptance with God: and secondly the present and religious intention
of mind, as necessary to make up external true worship, which mixture and
constitution, even the names of the things gaynesay, and their natures will not
endure.

For 1. that which was the form, and made up the proper nature of internal
worship before, that cannot constitute external worship, as common sense
teaches* but the inward performing of reverence, (and consequently present
religious intention, which is of that kind) was made the proper form of
internal worship, by the Rej. his grant.

2. All outward actions, in the frame and constitution are liable to censure of
the church, either for approbation or reprehension, but the sincerity of heart,
and intention of mind, the church cannot take notice ^f nor pass a censure
upon, provided the outward ex^ressions do not fail or be a wanting.

3. A man may be bonus ethicus, and yet not bonus Theologus, i. e. a well
cariaged man outwardly, expres^ing both the sense and practice of religion in
his outward demeanor: And yet not be a a sincere hearted Christian: So a man
may be a member of a congrega^ion, and behave himself outwardly beyond
exception, and yet want, both an upright mind, and intention sin^ere: So that
though they be rejected of God without those, yet the fault lies not in the
outward action, but in the inward and spiritual work, which God approves, and
takes his complacency in, yet he looks upon these, and loves them so far as
they be suitable to their rule, as he did in the young man, Mark 10.21.

At a word: an action may be done by the rule of Ethics, or the rule of
outward ecclesiastical policy and church discipline appointed by Christ: Or
lastly by an inward spiritual principle of grace: The two former, may be true
without the last, though a man's sins in seperating the last from the first,
because though the first be good in their kind, yet they are not sufficient:
the former therefore are to be continued, and the sin in the last to be
reformed: Hence the Prophet Isaiah 1.16. Put away the evil of your doings, the
Lord enjoynes the^ not to take away their works, but the evil of them: as
though he should have said; sacrifice still according to rule prescribed;
choose a sacrifice without blemish etc. for the matter; offer it according to
rites appointed, for the manner, as before, but being also a heart humbled, a
life reformed, wherein you have hitherto failed, keep that which is good, and
add that which is awanting.

4. Lastly, when an unregenerate minister (gifted sufficiently for outward
expressions, and called by the church) shall preach, administer the sacraments,
beyond all exception to the eye of man, and to the approbation of the church: I
ask: whether the true matter and form of right administration, may not
undoubtedly be concluded to be there, so far as those services are external.

I presume the Rej. will distaste the contrary conceit, and scorn to entertain
so silly an imagination, as to affirm, that a wicked man, cannot be a true
minister, or his actions performed unreproveablely in that kind, by what man
can see, to be true ministerial actions.

If this he grant, which cannot be denied with any color, (and if it be, I
shall be ready to make it good) I then reason.

Where the true matter and form is of external worship, there is the true
complete nature of external worship.

But in the administration of the Sacrament, etc. by an unregenerate minister,
there is the true matter and form of true worship.

Therefore in the administration of these by an unregenerate minister, there is
the true complete nature of external worship.

To this place appertains that expression in his premonition to the receaving
of the Lords Supper, cap. 3. page 3.

External worship of God is some outward action, Internal worship gives not
subsistence to the external.
done in relation to the internal worship: which (viz. the internal worship)
gives subsistence to it. Concerning which passage, I desire one case may
se^iously be considered, and it is this: Whether is it not ^ossible, that a man
(either out of ignorance as not ^nowing, or out of lase fear dissembling) may
kneel ^owne before an Idol, as Idolaters do, perform and express according
to their manner all outward actions of reverence, and yet keep his heart,
mind, and affections, ^nwardly acknowledging and loving of God.

That this practice is possible, nay too ordinary, that the heart may be carried
one way, and the action another way in appearances, needs no proof, since each
man's woeful experience gives undeniable evidence thereof: Hence then I reason.

If an action may have the real subsistence of superstition, without the
intention of the mind, the work of heart and affection: then without these has
it the subsistence of external worship.

But without internal worship: to wit without, nay against the intention of
mind, the work of my heart and affection, the action formerly mentioned has
the subsistence of real superstition.

Therefore without the internal worship, the external has subsistence.

The fourth division: External worship is either mediate, or immediate:
mediate, when any duty of the second table is performe^ immediately to man, but
out of conscience, and in obedience to God, to his honor. In this division of
mediate, and immediate worship used by some Divines: The name worship, must
need^ be taken (by a synecd. the part putt for the whole) for obedience in
general, and so they are to be understood and not in propriety of speech: For
that which comprehends both the tables of the Decalogue in it (as in this
division worship does) cannot properly be referred, either to any one command,
or any one table: And in this construction, it serves nothing to the Rej. his
purpose, but only to fill up place, and make up the number of Divisions, which
is the ready way to confound the reader: And that the Rej. cast lotts almost
what to say, it may appear, in that, he who makes external worship the Genus
to mediate and immediate here: Elsewhere in his premonition to the receaving of
the Lords supper, he makes immediate the Genus to external and internal, so
curious is he in his distributions, that in his sense, you may make the whole
the part, the part the whole: And if in such Divisions there be like to be true
sense and solidity, let the judicious reader determine.

But let us come more near his particular explication, which is this: That's
mediate worship by the Rej. his definition when any duty is done to our
brother, The definition of medint^ worship examined.
but in conscience to God.

Where I desire to be informed at his next rejoy^ing, whether he make this
worship to consist, in the ^uty discharged to our brother or in the conscience
to God, used in the discharge thereof: The former (I sup^ose) he neither will,
nor can say, (though he can say ^^range things, for then worship should first
be tendered (...) man, and to the Lord at the second hand.

I conceave then he must affirm the second, and ^ace the worship, in the act
of conscience, carried by ^ertue of a command: but then let him tell us how
^his can be called external worship, or can possiblely ^ccord with the words
of his definition going before: ^xternall worship is, the performance of an
outward action, (...) he defines, but I assume, the inward work of con^cieoce,
is not the performance of any outward action, ^^erfore external worship cannot
consist in that.

And yet if this was granted, which sense gaynsayes, ^ee how unhappy he is in
his expression, for neither in ^his would any worship properly appear. That
which ^ppertaines to the right doing of every act of obedi^nce as such, that
cannot make up the proper nature of ^orship: but to be done in virtue, and so
in conscience of Gods command, belongs to every action of the Decalogue: what
ever is not done of faith is sin Romans 14. last.

The fifth Division. Immediate worship, is either properly so called or else
reductively.

Proper immediate worship, is any action done to the honoring of God
immediately, and in that act it self, (...) are all such ordinances, which God
has appointed.

Improper worship is any act done, to the honoring of God by the orderly, and
comely usage of his own ordinances which because they point at Gods honor in
their remote end, as they determine their first end, and use upon men, as
tending to order, decency, and aedification, an^ therefore but improperly acts
of worship.

It is the nature of error, ever to be unlike it self, and he that goes out of
the rigth way, will cross himself commonly in his going, and this is the
reason; the Rej* does so often interfere in his discourse, and which is his
exceeding ill happ, though no occasion require it, he cannot conceal these
crasy, and ill joynted expressions we shall therefore again, lay open the whole
frame, tha^ the description may be half a confutation:

Divine worship proper to God pa. 124. sect. 5. mark those words ( proper to
God) is principa subordinate and external, and tha^ mediate, done to man
immediatel^ but in conscience to God, and (...) honor, immediate proper
improper determi^^^^ their use and end (...) mediately upon man.




Where some things in the general are very observeable.

1. That improper immediate external worship, is divine worship proper to God:
The Rei, hi^ contradictions.
this conclusion will appear, to any, that will but wisely apply the special
and general together, according as they be rancked in the foregoing
delineation.

2. That improper immediate worship, is mediate worship; for thus I reason:
That worship which is immediately done to man, but in conscience to God, that is
mediate worship, so the Rej. description teaches: but improper immediate
worship, is first done to man, so the very express words of the Rej. declare
evidently: ^he acts of improper worship determine, in their end, and use upon
men.

Therefore immediate improper worship, is mediate by the Drs dispute.

If it be here replied, that the actions which make up mediate worship, must be
actions of the second table, not of the first, as these be: I answer; It is the
verdit of the word, and the common consent of all Divines, that all the actions
and duties, which concern our brother as the next object and end, and so
determine upon him are required, and regulated by the second table: since
therefore these things of comlines and order, are of this nature, by the Rej.
his grant, I do not see, how it can be avoided with any color of reason, but
they must be commanded in the second table, and so come under the definition
of mediate worship, directly contradictory to the Rej. his determination.

I might also putt the reader in mind, of these twicesod-coleworts, that are
set again before us: viz. this misty distinction of properly, and
reductively, which like a vagrant wanders up and down in every coast, and
therefore should be whipped home to his own place: For it is propounded and
applied upon the like mistake, that formerly it was page 37. in the division of
Cerem. And is here, as it was there, void of all art and truth.

1. Void of Art: For what reason, or rule, does allow, any reasonable disputer,
to make a distribution and so an opposition of parts, that are in consent, and
agreement one with another, such is this here propounded. Worship is either
proper; as Gods ordinances, or improper, as the adjuncts to these ordinances,
which appertain thereunto: As if a man should say: There be two kind of byrds,
either an eagle, or her feathers.

2. Its void of truth: For who ever accounted all the civil circumstances, and
attendants of decency in the discharge of Gods worship to be worship. The band
the preacher uses, the doublet he wears are decent attendants unto him, in
preaching and praying, and it would be exceeding unseemely, to see him naked in
those parts, rudely presenting himself amiddst the congregation, in the work of
the Lord, yet did ever any, before D. Burges say, that the band and doublet of
the minister, were improper immediate worship.

A midst these many mistakes, we have a ground of grant from the Rej. his own
words: That kneeling in the act of receaving, cannot be improper, but proper
worship: For we kneel not either, to man or to the bread, but to God directly,
and it is to lift up his honor immediately in the use and end of that action,
and ^herfore it cannot be improper, but proper worship.

Anna her example of serving God with fasting, and prayer, comes after to be
scanned in the next section, only before we end, let us consider in a word of
that passage which the Rej. has page 126. To the proper, circumstantiall or
accessory worship: the permission of God, and a right intention, and use,
suffices to legitimate them. Join we unto these words, the definition of
immediate worship, under which all these improper circumstantiall worships are
ranged: viz. Immediate worship is, when any act of obedience to the first
table, is performed to honor God: out of which I thus reason:

Every act of obedience to the first table, is not only permitted, but required
in the first table.

But the acts of improper immediate worship are acts of obedience to the first
table: therefore they are not only permitted but required.

To this place belongs the considering and discussing of the variation of that
phrase used in the premonition, touching kneeling at the Sacrament, cap. 3. p.
3. False worship, is said to be of the will of man merely, True, is said to be
according to the will of God wholly. The mystery is, that no worship is false,
which has any thing in it of the will of God, And there is some worship true
and good, which is not of the will of God as a cause, but only according to it,
as not hindering or forbidding: This is the Papists plea just against our
Doctrines for their traditions. Gregor. de Valent. Tom. 4. Disp. 6. Q. 11. P.
1. Christus non vetat quo minus cultum addamus, qui divinae ligi non repugnet,
sed congruat rationi, adecque uoluntati Dei.
Christ does not forbidd that we make such addition of worship, which does not
repugne to the law, but consents to right reason, and so to the will of God.

So Estius in Tit. 1.14. The Scripture so far as it speaks in the worst sense,
touching the praecepts and traditions of men, Scriptura quoties de mandatu and
traditionibus hominum loquitur in malam pa^temea semper intelligit, qua sic ab
hominibus instituta sunt, aut praecepta ut aut omnino nihil ad pietatem
conducant, aut etiam pietati and legi Dei repugnarent: Qua ab human^ sensu and
spiritu profecta sunt, quatenus selicet homo a scipso movetur, and non a Deo.
it always understands such, which are so appoint^d and commanded by men, as
that they nothing at all conduct unto piety, or plainly oppose both it and the
law of God, such which proceed from a human spirit or appetite, to wit so
far as a man is acted of himself, and not of God. So the Rhemists on Math.
15.9.

The contrary assertion is the received doctrine of our Divines for, and out of
the word of God against the Papists, and one fundamental principle of
reformation.

Hec caput est doctrinae inost^ae (contra electitios cultus papistarum) ne quod
opus suscipimus in ijs quae pertinent ad cultum, de quo non habemus expressum
mandatum Dei: Neno cultum iactare potest, n^si verbo quasi pauniculu involutus
ac circumclusus sit.
So Luther Genesis 21. This is one main principle of the doctrine we profess
(against the forged superstitions of the Papists) that we undertake no work in
the things which appertain unto worship, concerning which we have not an
express command of God: No man can boast of the performance of any worship,
unless he be wholly as it were clothed, and confined within the compass of
the word.

Hitherto also, is to be added, that distinction which is last mentioned by the
Rej. in the forenamed place in his premonition for kneeling at the Sacram.
Chap. 3. Page 3.4.

Immediate true ext^rnall worship, is so called in respect, (...) of the
means, or manner of worship, and that which ^^ecteth means, is said to be
grounded either on special ^^mmaund, which is properly, in and of it self
worship, or upon (...) allowance only, as touching the particular, which is
^^rship per aliud, by virtue of some thing else.

1. But first, there is internal means, and manner as ^ell as external, 2.
the manner and means do de^^nd on Gods command and allowance in that also:
Immediate worship in regard of the means of wor^^^p, is just as much, as
immediate mediate worship: And is suiteth well with that distribution, which we
met (...), in the former section of significant Ceremonies, to significant and
non significant: 4. When as the Rej. (...) much to this distinction of general
and parti^^lar command, he should have told us, whether he ^eaneth by the
general, the Genus or the kind im^ediate, and next, or any other how remote
soever: ^he former sense will not help our Ceremonies, the (...) will serve at
a lift, for many popish Ceremonies as ^^ll as ours, since Gods command does
not make any (...) immediate worship, in, and of it self, for then the (...) of
a murderer should be worship, in, and of it (...): 5. What reason or sense is
there, that Gods com^^und should make a thing worship of it self, and Gods
^^^owance should make it worship by virtue of some^^ing else, when as the
commandment, does no more ^^^pect it self or other thing, then the allowance.
6. Al^^wance of this or that in general without allowance (...) it, to be
worship, makes nothing at all to be worship.

All worship, must have a command, not allowance only.
7. It may justly be quaestioned, whether the Rej. (...) this distinction of
command and allowance, do no^ symbolize with the Papists in their distinction
of commands and counsels.

For seeing this Popish distinction, cannot be avo^ded, but by another betwixt a
common precept, and particular, according to the circumstances, Iun. Cont. lib.
2. To. 9. and no worship or good work can be without one of these precepts,
certainly this worship upon allowance, without any particular precept, can
neith^^ be worship nor good work. 8. I ask whether that institution of worship
which is grounded on allowanc^ be a work of obedience to God or not? If it be,
the^ surely it has a command and not an allowance onl^ If not, then either
let works of superarrogation be a^mitted, or this institution cashyred.

The immediate external true worship in regard of manner, is said to consist
in a reverend usage of prescribed wo^ship, according to order and decency.
Where observe^ that worship being formerly defined by an action, (...) here
specifyed by a manner, whereas the manner of (...) action, is not an action, at
least every manner is not (...) 2. That in the manner here specifyed (reverend
usag^) the usage of an action differs not from the action b^ only in
reverence, which is a common adjunct of a worship, and therefore makes not a
distinct worshi^ 3. That civility, order and decency is required, in the usage
of prescribed worship, and so worship in regard (...) the manner though it be
religious, may be called c^vill: yet let the Reader be admonished, that under
the^^ ^^^re words of reverend manner, order, decency of wor^^^p, much
sacrilegious worship is mayntained by the ^^pists: As our Rhemists on Ihon
6.58. have discovered, (...) nature therefore of the things themselves, should
be ^^nsidered, and we should not suffer our selves to be ^used by words. That
which is quoted here out of D. (...), will occasion the reader to look upon
the place, ^^edull. lib. 2. c. 14. th. 25. the words of that position (...)
these: Although these circumstances of time, place and ^er like, are wont by
some to be called rites or religious ec^^esiasticall ceremo., yet in their
nature they have nothing, (...) is proper to religion, and therefore religious
worship does (...) properly consist in them, however by neglect, and contempt
(...) such circumstances, the sanctity of such religious worship, is (...) some
sort violated, because the common respect of order (...) decency, which do
equally agree to religious and civil ^^tions cannot be severed, from religious
worship, without di^inishing of the sanctity and dignity of it. What can the
^ej. gather from hence, but that these circumstances ^re not worship, being
only so required to religious ^ctions as they are to civil: If his argument be
this: they ^re not properly worship, therefore worship, it is ridicu^ous: If it
be thus framed; they are commanded in ge^erall, therefore in their general
nature, and in respect of their utmost end, they must be vouchsafed, the title
of ^ivine worship: He may as well conclude, that the office and act of a
Justice of peace, or Constable, nay a Hangman, must be vouchsafed the same
title of divine worship, for these are commanded in general, and their utmost
and ought to be the honoring of God, and sometime they may have reference to
some thing done in the worship of God: In the last place there is a memorand^^
added, that the same human Cere. which is a worship in regard of manner, may
also be worship in respect o^ a mean, but not of, and by it self. This is as
much to say That the last distinction betwixt means and manne^ is not
distinct, and that a human Ceremony cannon be grounded on Gods special
command, the late^ whereof no man ever doubt of, and the former, I do^ easily
assent unto.

SECT. 2. Concerning the ex^mplyfying of the former distinction of worship by
instances, and confirming of it by witnesses in the same treat: Cap. 4.
HAnna served God in fasting and prayer, Luc. 2.3^ Fasting here was worship,
says Dr. B. in some sense, or else S. Luke was deceaved. Whatsoever becomes
of this consequence, the example fitteth not our Ceremo. for though D. B. has
often exhorted his Auditors to worship God in fasting and praying, in the same
phrase, yet (I dare say) he never exhorted them, or any ministers to whom he
has preached amongst others, to serve God in Surplice and Prayer in crossing
and baptizing, how much soever he favors these Ceremonies: The strange
bleating such a phrase carries with it, would have amazed his people, and
affrighted the ministers, and discredited his ministry: by this alone it
appears, that the example of fasting is abused, when it is paraleled, with
cross and surplice: 2. The consequence is all too peremptorily followed, or
else St. Luke was deceaved: I should rather think, that D.B. may be deceaved in
his interpretation of St, Luke: The phrase which St. Luke uses, does no more
urge us, to make fasting worship in any sense, then St. Paul his phrase Ephesians 6.
Watching unto all supplication with perseverance, does constreyne us to make
perseverance, or watching a worship, distinct from supplication: Or then, the
same Paul's phrase Acts 20.19. serving the Lord with many tears and
temptations, do make temptations a special kind of worship. 3. Fasting may be
called worship by a trope, as being a special adjunct of some extraordinary
worship, and yet not be a special kind of immediate reductive worship, or any
other kind. 4. The truth is that fasting, is such a help to extraordinary
humiliation, as moderate fasting, is to extraordinary thanksgiving, and
therefore is no more worship, then Christian fasting: And to this purpose do our
divines answer, concerning this place, which is ordinarily objected by every
Papist, as here by the Rej. See Chemnitius upon these words: See Polanus,
Syntag. lib. 9. cap. 8. Fasting is a help to prayer, Ieiunium est adminiculum
procationu, and signum humilitatis ac resipiscentia, non autem cultus Dei.
a sign of humility and repentance, but is not a worship of God. 5. Fasting
such as Annas was, is not a human institution, as our ceremonies are, but
partly natural, when the whole man is taken up with greater, and more instant
employment, exclusive of all ordinary refreshments: and partly of Divine
application, in extraordinary humiliation, so that it has ground and example
both in the O. and N.T. which our Ceremonies are destitute of.

2. Mr. Cartwright (many degrees and ages distant from S. Luke) is brought in
next, acknowledging circumstantiall worship, only allowed in the particular,
though commanded in his kind in the second command: Now I have at hand, only
that edition of Mr. C. his Catechism, which was printed Anno 1611. and therein
I find no such thing, upon occasion I will seek for the other edition: In the
mean time I find there, that all will worship, how great a show soever it
makes, is condemned and images (in special in Gods service even as laymens
books) which the defendant defend, thand the Rej. rejoyneth for. 2. Suppose he
grant a circumstantiall worship, what is that to worship invented by man:
There is no doubt, but some parts of Gods worship, by himself instituted are
comparatively circumstantiall, but what is that to man's invention. 3. There is
a mighty distance, betwixt the general of kneeling at prayer, and such like
gestures, intended by Mr. C. (if he name circumstantiall worship,) and the
general of Cross and Surplice, as there is betwixt the general of this and
that father, and the general of all entia and things, that have being: This
testimony therefore makes nothing to the purpose.

The third witness is, Chamyer, Tom. 5. l. 20.4.5 affirming that arbitrary
vows are worship of God not per se, of themselves, but by accident, and for
some other thing, where to omit the translation of per se, of themselves,
which should have been by themselves betwixt which there is a great difference,
(as betwixt a body living of the soul, and by it self.) Chamyer in that very
place, if his whole sentence be expressed (which neglect, if it had been the
Replyers, we should have heard outcryes, proclamations and invective
accusations enough) I say ^his whole sentence is contrary to the Rej.: His
words in sum are these: To vow, Vovere, and reddere, sunt actus religionis
eliciti, quia per se, and proprie sunt religionis, at actus* qui voventur, non
nisi imperati, pertinentes ad cultum, non proprie sed p^r accident, illi
formaliter, hi materialiter.
and to perform are elicited acts of religion, because by themselves and
properly they appertain to religion, but the actions that are vowed, are
imperated by religion, and belong unto worship, not properly, but by accident,
those formally, these materially. He does not speak of vows, in that part
which the Rej. quoteth, but of things vowed, nor does he acknowledge these
worship, otherwise then the matter of an action, is an action: It were not far
from his meaning, if one should say, this bakers bread, and that vynters wine,
is a Sacrament materialiter and per accidens. Lastly he does not speak of any
worship elicitus per accidens, such as immediate Ceremonial worship is, but
only imperatus ordered and directed, such as service to ones father or friend
may be, and is not this then a worshipful testimony for Ceremonies, invented
by man and made formal, immediate reductive worship.

Iunius in the fourth place is brought in, testifying, that the human feasts
of the Nativity, and Easter, are not worship properly, but it may be
figuratively: And what is that, I wonder, to immediate reductive worship of
human invention: Worship figuratively so called, is any matter, instrument,
subject, adjunct, effect or even similitude of worship: Are all such things
immediate reductive worship? Just as bread, pottage, wine, oil, or meat,
having touched the skirt of a holy garment are holy, Hag. 2.12. Thus the words
and wildernesses where Christians meet, may be called worship figuratively or
by a figure, the place being putt for the thing done in the place: thus the
ringing of the Bell, before the Sermon, may be called worship figuratively,
because it is a sign civil to give notice that such a service will be: And
hence it is that Iunius does in the same place affirm, that such observations
are only contingent accidents, or adjuncts to worship. The same Iunius does
explain his own meaning controv. 5. lib. 2. c. 16. n. 18. warning us to
distinguish betwixt actions of worship, Actiones cultus and ordinat^^ ad cultum.

Actiones cultus, quaecunque non sunt a Deo praeceptae, sunt vetitae, nam de
illis nihil detrah^, addi, aut mutari potest.

Nulla iusta, disponend^ Dei servos, ad cultu Dei, ratio, ab hominibus
investigari pot^st, nisi, quam Deus prascripserit.


and such which are done in order unto worship, adding moreover this: Actions
of worship, what ever are not commanded of God are forbidden, for as touching
such, nothing can be detracted, added, altered: and in Levit. 9. No right way
of disposing Gods servants to his worship, can be invented by man, but that,
which God himself has prescribed.

Polanus is next, who (says the Rej.) in his syntagme defines true worship of
God to be the performance of what he has commanded in obedience to him, to
his honor, yet in his partitions page 128. he says, that an ecclesiastical
rite or Cerem. is outward worship of God, not forgetting or crossing himself,
but taking the name of worship in one place properly, and in the other
improperly, or reductively. Where it is to be noted, that Polanus says nothing
of improper, reductive worship, but those terms are putt into his ^outh, or
thrust into he speech by the Rejoyner. 2. Po^^nus writ his partitions, when he
was a young man, (...) divine, but his Syntagme was his last work: If ^^erfore
any crossing was found in these two wri^^ngs, his Syntagme was to be taken, as
his more mature ^^dgment, and preferred as his last will and testament. (...).
In this his Syntagme lib. 8. c. 1. he has not only (...) definition of
worship, contrary to the Rej. his tenet, (...) many other Items: Pertinet ad
boni operis substantia, ut opu^ illud sit a Deo mandatum, perinde and cultum
Dei, and quicquid ad cultum Dei pertinet, mandatum esse oportet: Actiones
adiaphora non sunt cultu^ Dei, etc.
It belongs to the substance of a good ^ork, that it be commanded of God, and
therefore its requi^e, that the worship of God, and every thing appertaining
^^erunto be commanded: Actions indifferent, are not the ^orship of God etc. 4.
In the place quoted out of his par^ons: That an ecclesiastical rite is outward
worship, he ^oth not cross himself, for what he there means by (...)
ecclesiastical rite, he shows in the specialls, which (...) after sets
down, as sacrifices etc. though he mingeth some human feasts, with the
ordinances of God ^or his method sake, never intending to make such ce^emon. as
ours lawful worship, and therefore opposes ^is ecclesiastical rites to those
duties, that are perfor^ed only by speech: as Invocation, confession,
thanks^iving.

6. Fenner (says the Rej.) makes bowing the knee or ^ead, lifting up the
hands, or eyes, to the parts of external ^orship: But what consequence is
there from natural gestures, to cerem. instituted by man? From actions
par^icularly commended unto us in Gods word, as outward worship, to such as
their patrons can find no al^owance for, but in a remote transce^dent racked
Genus?

Tylenus (a man, that Dr. B. should rather have written against, for his
errors, then alleged against other^ for his authority) is in the seventh place
brought in saying; that a vow of a thing not commanded, is worshi^ only by
accident, Syntag. par. 1. dis. 42. th. 17. Yet 1. (...) does not say, Cultus,
nisi per accide^s Dei cultus vocari potest.

Quatenus ad cultura illum ^lique modo refertur, ut medium arbitrarium,
continge^^, ^diaphorum.


it is worship, but that it cannot be called worshi^ but by accident. 2. He
gives this limitation, so far as (...) may, some way be referred to worship,
as an arbitrary, contingent, indifferent mean. Such as in prayer the choosin^
of the word, forgiveness, rather then pardon, is in the petition of remission
of sins. 3. The worship (...) speaks of, is not immediate in his opinion,
as appe^reth disp. 40. th. 16. as it is in the Rej. his divisions: Na^ Tylenus
is so wise, as to say, that the most proper an^ immediate acts of religion, do
not respect God per se, (...) and of themselves, Ibid. th. 18. is it any wonder
then, (...) grants a worship, not in, and of it self, but by acc^dent only.

Bucanus is the eight witness, and yet nothing out of hi^ is brought, but that
ecclesiastical rites, are not worship (...) themselves, and as a work done.
Did any of us ever affirme^ they were such worship? May be the Rej. would
gathe^ from thence, that there is a worship, which is not of i^self, and as a
work done such, which (though it cannon be gathered from that phrase, with
better reason, the^ if from this, that faith (does not justifye of it self,
an^ as a work done, he should conclude, that some grace there is, which
justifyeth of it self, and as a work done yet we may well grant of false
worship: But see how unhappy the Rej. is in his wrested allegations. Bucan^^
(...) the place quoted Loc. 43. q. 20. give^h 1. this caveat: (...) laws
appointed for order, and comlines sake only, Ne leget deceris and ordims tantum
causa latae, sint divini cultus parts: 2. Ne pro gravi honest^, utilique
ordine, inutilla, inepta, ridicula, histrionica institua^tur: qualia sunt quae
Pontificij praecipiunt, d^ dierum and vestiu^ des^rimine.

Ad solu^ verbum Dei, quod ad cultum attinet, non ad humanas traditiones
attende^dum. Nullam obedientiam deberi ritibus, quaru^ alij sunt inepti, inanes
and ludicri, alij vel per so, vel ob aliud superstitiosi crucis fabricationem,
aquam lustrale^, consecrationes altariu^, and magistrales determinationes

Non per se, sed lege charitatis.

Ceremoniae no^ humanae, sed filij Dei authoritate institut^ and mandata
adhibeantur.


are (...) of divine w^rship: 2. It should be provided, that in (...) of a
grave, seemly, and profitable order, those things be (...) instituted, which
are unprofitable, foolish, ridiculous stage^y like: And of this sort are those,
which the Papists com^^und, concerning the difference of days, and garments:
(...) the same Bucanus Loc. 33. q. 15. In things appertai^^^g to worship, we
must attend for direction only unto the (...) of God, and not to human
traditions: No observance (...) to rites, whereof some are foppish, vain, and
light, (...) either in regard of themselves or some other thing su^^^stitious,
amongst which he reckons, the ma^ing of the (...), holy water, the
consecration of altars, and magistrall ^^^erminations. And that lawful rites
of order, are to be ^^served, not in regard of themselves, but by the law of
cha^^^y: where he plainly shows, that per se is not always (...) to relation
ad aliud, as the Rej. understands (...). The same Buc. also, Lo. 47. qu. 65.
gives this rule: (...) human ceremonies ought to be used, but those which
are ^^^ointed, and commanded by the authority of the son of (...).

The last witness is Melanchton, who faith in one place: (...) man may not
institute any worship of God, i.e. works ^^ich God so allows, that he holds
himself to be honored them of themselves, or whose immediate end is, that God
(...) be honored by them: As if we did hold the contrary, (...) is not this
testimony wisely alleged, that all men (...) his opposites may grant, and the
grant of it, nei^^er hurts them, or helps him: Nay take away that clause, Gods
allowance and holding himself honored, which no human institution can infer)
we say that our Cerem. are such, for it is as an immediate end, of all
mystical teaching rites, to honor God, by them and in them as of the word, so
far as it preaches the same virtues that Ceremon. do teach: And so much is
taught by the Rej. in these very dictats, when he reduces these reductive
ceremonies, under the head of immediate worship, for nothing can be immediate
worship, whose immediate end is not, that God may be honored by the performance
of it. The same appears out of th^^ which the Rej. page 313. affirms, viz.
that the prope^ end of preaching is aedification of men, if that be joined,
which he every where teaches, that the prope^ end of significant Cerem. is
aedification: Of such Cere^* therefore may well understand. Melanchton, not only
i^ this place alleged, Mundus non intelligit quantum sit peccatum singere
cultus fine mandato Dei.

Cultus idolatricisunt omnes qutcunque sine mandato Dei instituti sunt.


but also Tom. 2. p. 142. The wor^ understands not, how great a sin it is to
forge worship wit^ out Gods command: And P. 107. Idolatrous worships o^ all
they, which are appointed without the command of G^^ Here is no distinction
betwixt worship of it self, or b^ it self and by accident reductively etc. The
Rej. his test^monies being such as have been declared, there cannon be much
force in his examples, if they be agreeable t^ his rules, whereof he has
brought such cross witness^ The first example is, of free will offerings, Free
will offerings are no allowance of our ceremonies.
when a man (...) left at liberty to offer a bullock, a goat, or sheep at his
pleasur^ where the particular was not commanded, but only allowe^ though the
manner was prescribed: Concerning which answer 1. that there were no oblations
left wholly (...) the pleasure of men, for though the particulars were not, nor
could not be determined by a distinct rule in general, yet they were
determined by the circumstances, as our Divines are wont to answer the Papists,
about their vows, counsels, superarrogations, Non lego generali, sed ratione
circumstanti^um etc.
Not by a general law, but by concurrence of circumstances. So Deuteronomy. 16.10.
Moses shows that the freest offerings were to be according as God had blessed
them, from whence it follows, it had been sin for any Israelite, whom God
had plentifully blessed, to offer a pair of pigeons in stead of a bullock, or
two, upon his own mere pleasure: 2. where that proportion was observed the
choice of a goat, before a sheep, or a sheep before a goat, was no formal
worship: 3. That it had been unlawful for the Priests out of their pleasure,
to institute any such determinate free offering, either ordinarily to be
observed, or upon occasion of a man's forwardness to such a duty, i.e. that
every free offering should be a goat, or at the least, that a goat should be
one part of it, which is the presumption of our Prelates, about the reductive
worship of the cross. 4. It was not left to any man's pleasure, for to appoint
an offering not appointed of God, in the special or least kind, but only to
choose among those, which God had instituted, that which did best agree, with
his condition and occasion, as it is also now of psalms, prayers, doctrines,
interpretations, exhortations, let every man offer, according as God has
furnished him: But from hence to infer the free choice of offering now to God,
a cross, surplice, holy water, images, this is, as if one should then have
concluded from that freedom, the free offering of certain butterflyes, or
such like pretty, odd, vermyn not prescribed in the law, nor by name forbidden.

The second example is taken from Salomons worship, at the dedication of the
temple, 1. Kings 8.2. 2. Chron. 6. and 7. which he thus conformeth to his
notions: The number of Bullocks and Sheep, were worship in respect of the end
and allowance only, the Cere. of prayer, kneeling upon a Scaffold, and
stretching out of hands, were worship reductive ad modum in genere suo, having
respect to the manner in the general kind thereof: The burning of Sacrifices
in the floor of the Court, was only lawful before the brazen altar was
consecrated, and upon the present necessity: But 1. in the number of Bullocks
and Sheep, there was not a different worship, but a different degree of the
same worship, as a longer prayer or sermon is not another worship then a
shorter, but another degree of extension in the same worship, Surely to pray
and praise God twice, thrice or seven times in a day, are no different
worships, one from another, but only more or less exercise of the same
worship. 2. Kneeling and stretching out the hands, were not worship in respect
to a general manner, but special external worship, as being natural,
immediate expressions of the inward: As for the scaffold that Solomon kneeled
on, that was no more worship, then the ass was upon which our Savior did
ride. Lastly, seeing none of these things carrying the nature of worship, were
instituted ordinary observances, neither might the Priests in any convocation,
have made such, these examples are nothing like ours in quaestion.

The other examples of Ioshuas monitory stone, Ios. 24 26. ^sas oath, 2. Chron.
15.14. Nehemiahs subscription, Neh. 9. ^^lomons 14. days solemnity, 1. Kings
8. Ezekias designing 7. days, 2. Cron. 30. Mordicayes Purim, Hest. 9. have
little ^^ment in them, as the Rej. has afforded illustration or de^^ration by
bare naming of them: It may be sufficient to any that which is barely affirmed:
yet in few words: ^^ese for the most of them were actions managed by ^ods
Spirit, suggested by secret instinct, extracted by ^^traordinary and special
occasions: and therefore (as ^r. Iackson Orig. of unbeleef, p. 332. warns) are
then (...) lawful in others, when they are begotten by like ^^casions, or
brought forth by like impulsions. 2. Jonas stone was, as Dr. Iackson Ibid. page
329. judges, but ^olemne attestation, though something extraordinary, ^^d
indeed was no more worship, then the heavens and ^^^rth which Moses and Isayah
did call to witness. 3. Asas ^^^th, and Nehemiahs subscription, were no more
distinct ^orship from the covenant, then the words of a simple ^^omise are a
distinct promise from the meaning of (...), subscription and swearing of
Canonical obe^^ence in England, were never (that I hear of) excep^^d against
as Ceremonies of worship, by those which ^ondemne them in the substance of
them. 4. The ^^olonging of worship by Solomon and Ezekias was ^^ch a distinct
worship, as Paul's continuing his exercise ^f religion to mydnight, Acts 20.
Mordecah his Purim ^ave their proper place in the dispute: Out of all these
^ules, testimonies, examples, nothing follows in fa^our fof our Ceremon.
because no sound rule, just testimony, or allowed example, is brought for any
Cerem* of Mystical signification by man instituted, and brough^ into the
solemn ordinary worship of God, for the (...) of teaching: which makes the
Rej. his full persuasion which he protests, suspected, and his triumphing
rid^culous to those that well attend to these his grounds.

Yet the Rej. has a double conclusion looking the way, 1. That this will show
in what sense we may (...) our Ceremonies worship, and yet deny them to (...)
worship, that is in such a nonsense as is usually foun^ in contradicting
shifts: The 2. to show the difference betwixt us and the Papists, which is here
showed very briefly, but has been handled, and answered at large before, and
thither therefore we referr the Reader.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE FIRST CHAPTER, OF THE NEGATIVE Argument from Scripture.
Section 1. and 2. COncerning some accusations charged upon the Replier, about
this argument. Page 1. Section 3.4.5. Concerning the faithfulness of Christ
and Moses. Heb. 3.2. P. 4. Section 6. and 7. Of David's purpose to build a
Temple. 2. Sam. 7. 1. Chron. 17. P. 19. Section 12. Concerning that phraze.
Iere. 7.31. You do that which I commanded not. P. 23. Section 13.14. Concerning
the Ancient Fathers arguing negatively from Scripture. P. 29. Section 15.
Concerning Protestants arguing negatively from Scripture. P. 34. Concerning
Rules for Ceremonies. P. 47.
Section 16. Concerning Order and Decentie. P. 51. Concerning an argument
against our Ceremonies, out of 1. Cor. 14. P. 56.
Section 17. Concerning the Ancient Fathers allowing Human Ceremonies. P. 81.
Section 18.19. Concerning Protestants witnessing against the negative argument
from Scripture. P. 87. Section 20.21. Concerning Reasons against the Negative
Argument from Scripture. P. 99. Section 22. Concerning the Assumption of the
maine Argument handled in this Chapter. P. 107.
A TABLE OF THE SECOND CHAPTER, Concerning Worship.
Section 1. OF Worship distinguished into proper or Essential, and unproper or
Accidental. P. 110. Section 2. Concerning adding to Gods Worship. P. 115.
Section 6. Concerning our Divines judgment about Ceremonious Worship invented
by man. P. 125. Section 7. Concerning Vrsines and Zanchies judgment, about
Will Worship. P. 149. Section 8.9. Concerning Mr. Bradshaws Argument to prove
our Ceremonies imposed as parts of Gods worship. P. 158. Section
10.11.12.13.14. Concerning some relics of Arguments fathered upon Mr. Hy. and
others. P. 178.
A TABLE OF THE THIRD CHAPTER, About the significant nature of our Ceremonies.
Section 1. and 2* COncerning certain Miscelaneal notions and testimonies
against human religious significant Ceremonies. P. 209 Section 3. Concerning
Augustine. P. 222. Section 4. The Judgment of Protestant Divines concerning
significant Ceremonies. P. 230. Section 5. Concerning the wrong don to Gods
Sacraments by human significant Ceremonies. P. 253. Section 6. Concerning
Jewish Ceremonies. P. 266. A Letter of D. Humphrey to the Bishops. P. 269.
Concerning Circumcision. P. 274.
Section 7. Concerning Images. P. 283. Concerning Oil, Light, Spittle, Cream,
and H. Water. P. 291. Concerning the 2. Commandment. P. 296.
Section 8. Concerning the Oath-gesture of Abraham's Servant. P. 304. Section
10. Concerning Suarez the Jesuit his stating the Controversy betwixt
Protestants and Papists. P. 309. Section 11. Concerning the Feast of Purim. P.
315. Section 12. Concerning the Feast of Dedication. Ioh. 10.22.23. P. 318.
Section 15.16. Concerning the Altar of Jordan. P. 322. Section 17.18.19.20.21.
Concerning the Brazen Altar built by Solomon. 1. King. 8.64. P. 328. Section
22. Concerning Synagogues. P. 332. Section 27. Concerning the Kiss of Charity.
P. 340. Section 28. Concerning Women's vailes. P. 345. Section 29. Concerning
the Ancient Custom of Significant Ceremonies among Christians. P. 350. Section
31. Concerning swearing upon a book. P. 357. Section 32. Concerning the
Lords-daye, Temples, and Ceremonial Festivals. P. 358.
A TABLE OF THE FOVRTH CHAPTER, Concerning Idolatrous Ceremonies.
Section 1. ABout the forming of this Argument, and the general Answer given
thereto. P. 366. Section 2. Concerning the second Commandment, and Scriptures
belonging to it; as Lev. 18.3. etc. P. 369. Section 3. Concerning Pillars, Lev.
26.1. and the name Baal, Hos. 2.16.17. P. 379. Section 4. Concerning the
aequitie of the Commandments formerly mentioned; and Calvin's judgment about
it. P. 384. Section 5. Concerning Daniels abstinence, Dan. 1.8. P. 393. Section
6. Concerning Hezekias his breaking down the Brazen Serpent. P. 394. A piece of
a comparison, betwixt the Primitive, and the praesent English Church. P. 402.
In Organical Music. P. 404. Chancelours, Commissaries, etc. P. 406. Pompous
Bishops. P. 408. Calling of Ministers. P. 411. Ministers going to Law for their
places. P. 415. Pluralists, Non-residents, and Dumb Ministers. P. 416.
Simonie. P. 418. Profane Contemners of Religion, members of the Church. P. 420.
Spiritual Courts. P. 420. Taking of money, for Ordination, Citations,
Absolutions, and change of Paenance. P. 422.
Section 7.8. etc. and 20. Concerning Councels, and Ancient Writers. P. 423.
With a Digression, about the difference of our differing from the Papists, in
Surplice, P. 426. Crossing. P. 427. Kneeling. P. 428.
Concerning Protestant Divines. P. 453.
Section 21. Concerning the Assumption; namely, that our Ceremonies are human,
unnecessarie and Idolatrous. P. 475. Section 22. Concerning the Cross, Popish,
and English. P. 489. Section 23. Concerning Scripture proof for the lawfulness
of human Ceremonies Idolatrously abused. P. 491. Section 24. Proofs of the
same, out of Ancient Fathers. P. 499. Where answer is given to B. Iuels
Allegations for the antiquity of distinct Ministerial garments. P. 503.
Section 25.26.27.28. Concerning D. Mortons reasons for human Ceremonies
Idolatrously abused. Where comparison is made, betwixt Popish and Pagan
Idolatry: And something is said of D. Burges his intemperate accusations. P.
511. Section 29.30. Concerning our Confessions and Practices, making for such
Ceremonies. P. 524. A Postscript. P. ^29.

FINIS.
Faults escaped: thus to be corrected:
Page 11. l. 5. for answer that, r. answer, says that. p. 25. l. 2. for
adventious, r. adventitious. p. 55. l. 4. for Esius, r. Estius, p. 58. l. 12.
r. wherein it differs. p. 62. l. 12. r. all that the Rejoinder. ibid. l. 30.
r. Constitutions. p. 75. l. 23. for unto, r. the. p. 98. l. 7. for but of Gods
word, r. out of Gods word. p. 108. l. 1. r. here is said. p. 112. l. 1. for as
black, r as a black. p. 118. l. 4. for pretented, r pretended. p. 126. l. 14.
for that is, r. that it is. p. 106. l. 20. for which is not, r. which is not
so. p. 129. l. 17. for may, r. way. p. 143. l. 4. for simple, r. simply. p.
143. l. 29. for a, r. u. p. 172. l. 5. for as that. r. but that. p. 186. l. 18.
for her, r. the. p. 193. l. 2. for many of godly, r. many godly. p. 210. l. 16.
r. how little soever. p. 214. l. 26. r. representations. p. 215. l. 9. r.
attention. p. 224. l. 20. r. never heard of. ibid. l. 23. r. are in Augustines
phraze. p. 225. l. 24. r. Idol. p. 227. l. 11. r. Church yards. l. 26. r.
Novalists. p. 231. l. 7. for he that with, r. he that weighs. p 238. l. 28.
r. oxen. p. 240. l. 1. for how, r. what. p. 259. l, 27. r. gibbets. p. 268. l.
3. for a more, r. more. l. 4. for of, r. for. p. 269. l. 20 for peached, r.
preached. p. 271, l. 12. for devised singularily, r. devised out of
singularity. l 22. r. fall together by the ears. p. 272. l. 1. r. Canem twice.
p. 285. l. 29. for they are in our, r. they are in this our. p. 325. l. 23. for
and, r. had. p. 360 l. 4. for those that, r. not those that. p. 362. l. 20. for
Aod, r. And p. 368. l. 24. for significent, r. sufficient, p. 371. l. 2^. for
makeng, r. make. p. 374. l. 14. for falimear, r. familiar. p. 417. l. 11. for
clouse, r. close. p. 227. l 7. for linne^ pontifical, r. linne is but a more
ponteficall ibid. l. 8. for and many times, r. are many times. p. 452. l. 26.
r. imposers. p. 456. l. 20. for hold, r. held. p. 479. l. 13. for cliving, r.
cleaving p. 518. l. 22. r. diameterly, for diademiterly. p. 521. l. 1. for
cracked, r. crack. l 25. for forbidden* r. forbad.

THE DYSPVTE about HVMANE CEREMONIES.
CHAP. I. Of the negative argument from Scripture,
SECT. 2.
MY purpose is not, to insist upon words, and circumstantiall exceptions, as
being of little moment, but only to discuss the material points that I meet
with, in their order. Yet because the Rej. comes on in the beginning, with
such a heat, if the Repl. had marvelously offended, almost in every word; I
will take his first accusations (though not ^uche material) into due
consideration.

1. The Repl. made only mention of the all-suffi^^encie, or perfect fullness
of the Scriptures. Heerat the Rej. ^raesently complains of abuse,
misreporting, and ma^^ng a false show: as if (says he) we denied the perfect
^^lnesse of the Scripture etc. Now 1. the Repl. said no such thing, but the
contrary rather, when he observe that the same was granted by the Def. as it
was r^quired by those he writ against. 2. If he had said that the Def. and Rej.
also do deny the perfect fulness of Scripture, in regard of Ceremonial
worship, he had sayd^ more then truth, for they teach, that some such worship
is lawful and good, which is not taught (...) Scripture, that many teaching
Ceremonies, which Go^ never instituted, may by man be instituted and brough^
into worship, images themselves not excepted, that additions to Gods word (so
they be not contrary) m^^ and ought to be made.) The sum of their doctrine
in this point, is that which Mr. Hooker sets down p. 125. Mucke the Church
of God shall always: need, which (...) Scripture teaches not.

Neither does it help, which the Rej. adds, (...) Scripture is as perfest in
giving general rules, as it should b^ in setting down of all particular
instances. For 1. this (...) not generally true, because general rules make
only the proposition tending to particulars, and the assumtion (...) left
undetermined, they therefore do not so fully an^ perfectly infer the
particulars, as if they were s^^ down.

General rules are given in the new Testament, for civil policy or
government of Common wealth: ye^ no man (I think) will say that civil policy
is so full^ and perfectly taught in the new Testament as it was (...) the old,
or as religious worship is now in the new.

The rule for clean beasts (says the Rej.) that they be suc^ as chewe the
cudde, and divide the hoof, was as perfect, as (...) such beasts had been
named. True, but here no de^^rmination of the assumtion was necessary, but
such the beasts themselves did make to every man that was ^ot blind, without
any institution of man. It was as ^ow it is in bread and wine for the Lords
Supper, which ^e appointed in general, without naming of wheat, (...), mislen
bread, or French, Spannish, Rhenish, Itali^^, Greek wine: but cross and
surplice (I hope) are ^ot so in general appointed. The general rules which
(...) Rej. groundeth our Ceremonies upon, are: let all ^^ings be done to
edification, with order, and decency. Now these rules are such (says Mr.
Hooker p. 95.) as stand light of reason, and nature to be observed, though the
Scrip^^re had never mentioned them. So that in them there is no ^^che perfection
of Scripture, for particulars, as if the ^^rticulars had been named. 2. betwixt
these generals ^^d such particulars in quaestion, there must come a ^umane
institution, such as (to make the example ^gree) if it had been praescribed in
the old Test. only ^ith clean beasts should be used in sacrifice, and left
to ^^e Priests for to determine, what kind of beasts should (...), or holden
to be clean.

2. An untruth is charged upon the Replier, in that (...) said, nothing was
denied by the Def. in the 2. section.

Now let any man read, over the section, and he shall ^inde nothing denied. His
answers ar these: we due ac^ept of your distinction; only the second member
must be ex^ended to general rules, permissions, common aequitie, you must and
unto this distinction; which when you do not, you con^ute your selves. Is here
any thing denied. Yea (says the Rej. the Major is denied: because it is showed
that something is warranted which is not praescribed. The major is: Scripture
condemns) that which is done either against, or without warrant of the word
of God, especially in matters of Gods service. Let any man of common reason and
indifferency, judge, whether this be contradicted, by that, something is
warranted which is not praescribed.

3. The Replier is taunted with I know not what fault, for saying here, that,
distinction to be granted, which after he denies to be the non-Conformists. As
if in dispute, it were not usual for one party to observe what the adversary
does grant himself, though he himself does not own it. The Rej. might have
spared all these words of this section, but that he affected to say much upon
little or no occasion, that his answer might seem abundantly complete.

SECT. 3.4.5. Concerning the faithfulness of Christ and Moses. Heb. 3.2.
1. The Repl. once for all notes, that the Def. his distributing of our
confirmations, from Scriptures, fathers, and Protestant Divines, as if they
were like in the intended confirmations, whereas the later are only used by
occasion of perverse praejudice in our adversaries who require such things,
and also in constant stiling the fathers testimonies, judgments, and others
confessions, the Repl. I say notes only that this is some wrong, except it
be only idle Rhetoric. For this, the Rej. flies in his face, saying he
notes himself an egregious wrangler, his notes are notorious Cavills, and
wrangles, and shows what spirit he is of. I will not say this shewe^h what
spirit D. B. is of: for I doubt not but his spirit is better then here is
showed. Yet this shows what spirit he took upon him with the person of a
Rejoiner.

Is it so great a fault to suspect the Def. of some wrong-doeing, or of using
Rhetoric, without any moment, in variation of phrases? To do some wrong
unto an adversary in propounding his allegations after another manner than he
meant, is so ordinary, that the suspicion of it, and that with exception,
cannot be accounted so heinous a crime as those toothed terms import.
Praejudice is as common fault, and all praejudice is some way perverse. The
Rej. after p. 461. accuses all those of averseness, by distraction,
stupiditie or praejudice, which do not feel that organiall music work much
upon their affections (in and to Gods worship) though he knows as good me^ as
our adversaries deny it. Yet he would not have us, nor will we, from thence
gather, what spirit he is of. Rhetoric is no more an ill word, then Grammar,
or Logic. Idle is nothing but without use: and so the Rej. himself confesses
the Def. his variations to be, in making judgments and confessions all one.
Neither could he find what to say against the former suspicion, without
fayning a new objection, which the Repl. makes not, of aequalling Divine and
humane authority. The only fault was, that such things which might be well
spoken to another, were spoken to a Bishop.

2. Concerning Heb. 3.2. (to omit altercations about what was said or not
said by the Def. and take what the Rej. will have said, or says himself.)

The Rej. says that a distinction is made, of Ceremonies whereof some are
substantial Divine, and Doctrinalls, and have particular determination in
Scripture, some are not substantial, called, Rituals, and mere Ceremonie^: the
former have particular determination in Scripture, but not the later. Now (to
let pass, that this distinction concerns not ^he proposition which formerly
was said to be denied because there is no mention in it of any term here
distinguished) let any man of reason consider the sense of this distinction:
Ceremonies are either substantial, Divine, Doctrinall, that is, such as have
particular determination in the word, or else not substantial, that is, such
as have no particular determination in the word; the former have particular
determination in the word; but the later have not. Which is as much as to say;
those Ceremonies which have no particular determination in the word, have no
particular determination in the word. This explication cannot be excepted
against, except Divine and Doctrinall Ceremonies be not all one, with
Ceremonies determined by doctrine Divine, which neither the Defen. or Rejoinder
or any considerate man for them, will deny. The Rejoinder himself for instance
of substantial, Divine, Doctrinall Cerem: puts al those of Moses, law,
many of which were no way such, but only in that they were par^icularly
appointed of God. And to put the matter out of a^l doubt, the Rejoinder p. 60.
tells us plainly: that the Def. uses, and all of his side do use in this
quaestion, the term Doctrinall passively, for a thing taught in the word.

3. For defense yet of this distinction of Ceremonies into dogmaticall, and
Rituall, or mere Ceremonial (though he confess it is not formal) the
Rejoinder names all our Divines, but cites only D.A. as distinguishing
betwixt Doctrinall and Ceremonial points of religion. Which, if it be so,
what make^h this for distinction of Ceremonies, into Dogmaticall and Rituall,
or merely Ceremonial? But let us view the places cited. The first is in Bell.
Ener: tom. 1. page 66. Where it is said, that for the most part, the fathers by
traditions, mean rites and Ceremonies, receyved without Scripture, concerning
which, we dispute not, and they were too l^berall, though when they judge out
of Scripture, they plainly condemn unwitten traditions. What is here, that can
help, the Rej.

The fathers spoke of Ceremonies, which neither Scripture, nor themselves,
judging out of Scripture, did allow of: of them the quaestion was not in that
place, though in other places it is handled by the same author, in the same
book, as De Pontifice, De Sacraementis, De cultu Sanctorum:

Ergo the distinction of Ceremonies into, Dogmaticall and Ritual or mere
Ceremonial, is allowed.

The second place is in the 71. page of the same book: the Apostles elsewhere
have written nothing in the dogmatical kind, which Paul had not preached to
the Galatians. Where Dogmaticall is opposed to Prophetical^ praedictions, such
as S. Ihon in the Revelation taught, as Bell. there alleges. And not to any
thing, not particularly contained in Scripture, Ergo (says the Rej.) the
distinction of Ceremonies into Dogmaticall particularly contained in Scripture,
and Rituall, not so contained, is allowed as good. The consequence is a baculo
ad angulum.

4. The Repl. said that Ceremonial is sometime opposed to moral, and sometime
to Substantial, but not to Doctrinall. Heerupon the Rej. concludes, that
therefore, the distinction of Doctrinall and Ceremonial Ceremonies may be
allowed, because (forsooth) as there be some moral Ceremonies, viz. all those
which are appointed of God, and some other, so there be some Ceremonial
doctrines, or doctrinall Ceremonies, and some other.

Where 1. the consequence is such as the former: Sometime Ceremonial is
opposed to moral, and substantial: ergo some Ceremonies are doctrinall, and
some only Ceremonial. 2. What a miscarying is there in that assertion, all
Ceremonies appointed of God are moral? Was there then no difference betwixt
the moral and Ceremonial law of God. 3. There neither be, nor can be such
significant teaching Ceremonies, as ours in q^^estion, and not be Ceremonial
teachings, or tea^^ing Ceremonies: which is all one with Ceremonial ^o^trines,
or doctrinall Ceremonies.

5. The Hierarchy (being quaestioned to which of these heads it belongs) is
referred by the Rejoinder to both in several respects. So then, the
distinction is not real, but rational only, in respects.

I see not why all lawful rites ordained by men, may not as well be referred
to both. Neither do I think our Hierarchy would take it well if they should
be called Ceremonial Prelates: and Doctrinall for the greatest part they are
not found to be actively, nor can so be proved passively, so far, as they
differ from those ministers many of whom they will not suffer to be Doctrinall,
because they cannot be at their pleasure Ceremonial.

6. Concerning the rest of the third section, all that is rejoyned, depends
only upon the term mereCeremoniall Ceremonies. This term the Replier did not
understand (as it seems) according to the Authors meaning; neither can the
Rejoinder interpret it, but with such sense as was formerly declared. Mere
Ceremonies are not only such as the Rejoinder p. 33. called single
Ceremonies, for in the same place, he makes significant rites, having relation
to a further worship, such as ours are, double, or triple Ceremonies. So that
this mere Ceremony can be nothing else, but a Ceremony which God has not
instituted for his worship: and so the Def. and Rejoinder mainteyne here only
this assertion: those Ceremonies which God has not instituted, are not
instituted by God. Which is so evidently true, that it cannot escape the
imputation of idleness, either to dispute for, or against it. Only this I
note, that by this distinction, God cannot appoint a mere Ceremony in his
worship, though man can: for if God appoint any Ceremony, it is (eo ipso
nomine) doctrinall, substantial, moral. No merveyl therefore if God have not
appointed mere Ceremonies, seeing he cannot appoint any such, but man only can
do that.

7. Concerning Heb. 3.2. it is further answered sect. 4. that the faithfulness
of Christ, and Moses was aequall, and alike in real faithfulness, because
they both did that which was commanded them of God. But howsoever this be true,
yet if it were Gods revealed will, that more immediate means of worship should
be instituted in the Christian Church, then Christ has instituted, who was
ordained to institute the means of worship, and Moses (as is here supposed)
instituted all such means of worship in the old Testament, as God would have
instituted, it follows, that the faithfulness of Christ, was not so extended
to all the necessities of the Church, as Moses his faithfulness was.

8. Concerning faithfulness in Rituall ordinances, the Def. mentioned the
ordeyning of two essential and necessary Sacraments. Which allegation the
Replier esteemed nothing to the purpose. Yes verily (says the Rejoinder) it is
some thing. It is in deed something, but this something is nothing at all
perteyning to mere Rituals. For so the Defend. and Rejoinder both confess
expressly, that these two Sacraments are not mere Rituals.

9. The Def. adds, that as Moses appointed Ceremonies, so Christ removed
them. Which explication of Scripture being blamed by the Replier, the
Rejoinder answers 1. That it is not an interpretation of the text, but an
answer to an objection from the text. And yet the same Rejoinder in his Sum
of the Def. his answer that it is a comparison of the fidelity of Christ and
Moses. And all the text, and objection, from the text, consists in this
comparison. 2. It is a proper answer says the Rejoinder, for if Christ was
faithful in removing Ceremonies, before necessary, then be need not
praescribe other Ceremonies then simply necessary, and so not all mere
Ceremonies. Is not this a proper consequence? there is no connection at all
betwixt the first and second part, the appointed Ceremonies are therefore only
called simply necessary, because they were appointed by Divine authority: and
yet of such it is said, that Christ need not appoint other, whereas in deed he
could not appoint other; and that he needed not appoint mere Ceremonies, that
is Humane, which if he should have done, it had implied a contradiction, mere
Ceremonies (in the Def. and Rejoynders opinion being such as are not appointed
by authority divine. 3. It is added by the Rejoinder that the fidelity of
Christ appe^red in removing those Ceremonies of Moses, and the thing compared
is fidelity. Both which are true, but not to the purpose: because the
comparison is not in fidelity abstractly considered, but in fidelity about
the building and furnishing all the house of God; of which, the abolishing of
Mosaicall Ceremonies, is no substantial part.

10. About the Repl: his answer to a place cited out of Calvin the Rejoinder
observes much irreligious way wardnesse, with falsehood, and three gross
untruthes, in one short sentence. Which it pleased him to note also in the
Table of his principal or most observable Contents: the Replier found guilty
of three gross untruthes together. p. 15. This peal of terrible words make
such a noise in the readers ears, that he ca^ scarce hear, what may be spoken
for the party accused. But if he will hearken a little, it shall be made plain
unto him that hasty passion only (in reasons absence) made all this rattling
sound.

The first wayward, false, irreligious, and gross untruth is, that the Def.
should have dealt more plainly, if he had cited Bellarmine, and why (trow ye)
is it so great a crime, for to say the Def. might have dealt more plainly?
because (forsooth) no dealing could be more plain, then to set down the very
words of Calvin, with the place, where they are to be found. Now be it so, yet
it is not so heinous an offense to say some dealing, might be playner then that
which is most plain, but as the Secretaries and Proctors of our Prelates cour^s
do in imitation of Criminal inditements (wherein always stand felonious etc.)
aggravate every trifling accusation, and citatio^, especially those which
concern a Bishop, as ungodly, irreligious, false etc. so must he that writes,
against any thing praejudiciall to Praelats, secundum stylum Curiae, But the
truth is that any other man's words set down according to his meaning, is more
plain dealing, then to set down Calvin's, beside his intention.

The second way ward, false, irreligious, and gross untrueth is, that the same
words, which the Def. cites out Calvin, are found in Bellarmine, de Pontif.
l. 4. c. 17. the contrary whereof, the Rejoinder does aver upon his credit.
Now here is to be marked, that the Repl. spoke not of every word the same, nor
understood individual samenesse, but like only, and so did the Rejoinder
understand him, when he says upon my credit there be no such words any where
in Bellarmin, of such words is the credit pawned.

This being praemised, let these words of Bellarmin in that very place exstant,
be well considered.

For as muchas the law of the OLD TESTAMENT was given to one people and for a
certain time only, as till the coming of Christ, Quia lex Testaments veteris
dabatur uni tantum populo, and ad certum tempus, nimirum usque ad Christi
adventum, votuit facile determinare omn^a in speciali, ut etiam secit. Nam in
speciali praescribit omnia etc, At lex Euangelica datur toti mundo I. E.
diversissimarum nationum populis, and duratura est usque ad finom mundi. E*
iderco non oterat tam facile determinare emnia in speciali, ut non essent adhue
necessariae leges aeliae. Neque enim possunt diversis^imi populi convenire
missdem legibus and ritibus. Itaque Deus mil ius esse judicavit si in Evangelio
traderet com^unissimas leges, de sacramentis a^^uarticulis fidei and alta magis
specialia, pro locorum and temporum diverfitate, relinqueret instituenda, per
Apostolos, corumque succ^ss^res.
that law might Easily determine all things in Special, as in deed it aid, for
in special it praescribed all things etc. But the law of the gospel was given
to all the world i.e, to the peoples of Sundry nations, and was moreover to
endure to the end of the world, and therefore this law of the Gospel could not
so easily Determine all things in particular as did the other, that no other
laws might be supposed necessary then what are found in the new Test. Nor is
it possible for diverse nations to agree together in the same laws and rites,
and therefore God judged it far better if he delivered in the Gospel the most
general and commune laws, leaving the more special things concerning the
Sacraments and articles of faith to be ordered by the Apostles and their
Successors according as circumstances of time and place should require.

Let there also a comparison be made betwixt this, and that translation which
the Rejoinder makes of Calvin's words.

Calvin says, that the Lord has both faithfully comprised, and perspicuously
declared necessaries. Bellarmine says, that God in the Gospel has delivered
unto us the most common laws, concerning the Sacraments, and Articles of faith.
Calvin says, that Christ would not praescribe singularly and specially
concerning external discip^ine, and Ceremonies, for that he foresaw these
things to depend on the occasions and opportunities of times, nor did he
think one form to accord with all ages. Bellarminus says, that all special
things could not so easily be determined in the Gospel, so as more laws should
not be necessary: because there must be diversity of laws and ritualls,
according to the diversity of Nations and Peoples, places and times. I doubt
not but the Rejoinder upon consideration of this collation, will repent him of
pawning his credit for no such words in all Bell. but I esteem D.B. his credit
better, then I will hold it from his person, let only his Rejoyning credit be
hence esteemed.

The third wayward, false, irreligious, and gross untrueth is, that in that
place of Calvin, there is nothing at all, which without gross aequivocation,
will serve the Def. his purpose. If this were not true, yet I see no wool
answerable to so great a cry.

But let us see what the Rejoinder can find in Calvines words, for the Def.
his purpose. First (says the Rejoinder) Calvin differenceth matters merely
rituall, from matters real, as the Def. does. Which as the Def. does, is
not true. For the Def. differenceth Ceremonies into substantial and merely
Rituall, p: 7. whereas Calvin does not difference Ceremonies, nor makes any
mention of mere Ritualls.

Take away that as the Def. does, and then the Repl. does so also.

Secondly Calvin (says the Def.) shows that Christ has left mere Rituals at
the Churches choice under general rules only. Now hear that aequivocation
which the ^epl. spoke of, for by Ceremonies, Calvin understands no such
thing, as the Def. and Rejoinder does by mere Ritualls. The Def. and Rej. (as
Bellarmine does) comprehend under that name Mystical Ceremonies, which the
Rejoinder calls double or treble Ceremonies: but Calvin means only single
matter of order and Decency. For this cause it was, that the Repl. said, the
Def. should have dealt more plainly in citing of Bellarmin, then of Calvin.

11. About Calvin's meaning the Rejoinder striveth much, but cannot draw it to
his purpose. 1. He grants, that Calvin meant not to teach, that men may
praescribe at their discretion mystical signs in the Church which is all
that we desire. 2. His meaning is (says the Rej) that what Ceremonies the
nece^sitie and utilitie of the Church do require, may be ordained by the
Church. This is expounded in Calvin's own words, translated thus by the
Rejoinder what soever the necessity of the Church shall require for order and
decency; which is the same that the Repl. said. 3. Some toleration of some
Ceremonies like unto the Jewish, Calvin is said to give, sect. 14. But that
which he speaks there obscurely, he does in this 36, sect interpret plainly:

Testor, eas demum Humanar constitutiones me probate, quae Dei authoritate
fundatae, and ex Scripturis desumptae, adeoque piorsur divinae sunt. Exemplur^
sit in gericulatione, d^m solemnes habentur process.
I witness that I do only approove such Humane constitutions which are
founded by the authority of God, and taken out of the Scriptures and so
altogether divine, let kneeling in Solemn prayer be an Example. 4. Because
Calvin was interpreted out of himself, to speak of things necessary in their
kind, the Rejoinder opposes, that absteyning from blood Act. 15. and such
like things are not necessary in their kind. I answer yes: because the kind
under which they were found, was absteining from scandal. So Calvin, sect. 22.
(which place is alleged also by the Rejoinder for the institution of
Ceremonies not necessary in their kind, because it is there taught, that weak
brethen first coming from Popery, and not yet seeing their freedom in some in
different things, are not rashly to be offended, by public practice of such
things) Calvin (I say) answers in the same place: Who but a calumniator,
Quis, uisi callumniator, sic novam serri ab ess leg^m dicat, quos constat
duntaxat, scandalis occurrere, quae sunt a Domino satis diserte prohibita?
Nihilo autem magis and de Apostoles dici potest (Act. 15) quibus nihil aliud
p^opositumerat off^nsio^u^ materiam tollendo quam divinam urgero legem do
vitanda offensione.
Can say that, So a new law was made by them, who only as appears, went
about to praevent scandals, expressly enough forbidden of the Lord? Nor can
ought more be said of the Apostles Act. 15. who intended nothing else by taking
away matter of offense then to urge the Divine law for avoiding offense. But
Calvin says the Def. epist. 379. teaches that some scandalous things must be
borne with, And what is this to the allowing men to institute Ceremonies
unnecessarie in their kind, which is the quaestion in hand?

5. The Rejoinder objecteth further, that the particulars, and not generals
are appointed as necessary. Which is the very same that the Rep. said, the
kind is allwaies necessary and the particular do so vary by circumstances
that some time they may be necessary, and so appointed, sometime not
necessary, and so not to be appointed. 6. When the Rejoinder perceyved that
this testimony of Calvin's makes nothing for significant Ceremonies, he at
last denies the quaestion here to be of significant Ceremonies, but of
Ceremonies. He might as well deny the quaestion to be of sacred Ceremonies, or
as he calls them of double Ceremonies, but only of Ceremonies. And thus is
that very ambiguous aequivocation wherewith the Def. was charged, by his
Rejoinder, confessed. For what is else but to aequivocate, when all men know
the quaestion to be of one kind of rites only, to bring an argument which
concern rites in deed, but not of that kind?

12. After some pretye phrases of the Repl. his running away, looking back,
showing his teeth angerly, the Rejoinder in answer to a sad argument, that
Humane Ceremonies properly of religious nature use and signification, such as
Cross and Surplice, are not necessary in any Church, nor any ways more
necessary for England, then for any other nation; or then holy water and such
other Ceremonies would, In answer (I say) to all this, the Rejoinder repeateth
again his confuse aequivocall term of Ceremony, denying the quaestion to be
here of Ceremonies properly religious in their nature, use, and signi^ication.
i. e. such as Cross and Sirplice are, as if we, disputed here of an
indetermined idaea. And upon this miserable shift, not knowing what to answer
unto the demands propounded, (without speaking directly against his conscience
and known profession) he tells the reader (both in text, and table) that the
Repl. has plainly abondoned Heb. 3.2. and so retireth again to his fort, of
phrases, of demolishing his Castle, firing his Trenches, running away, and of
his chafe and stubble, carried away before the Def. his windy words, After all
which, as a good Canoneer, he discharges (as he calls it) one piece of
ordinance after his flying enemies, which is this Basilisko: You (run aways)
teach some Ceremonies to be unlawful, though not forbidden, because they are
not commanded. Ergo. But alas this shot has no metal of truth or sense in
it, and therefore will never hurt us.

Is any man so void of reason, as to teach any thing to be unlawful, and yet
confess it is no way against law, or forbidden? Those that say, the Ceremonies
are unlawful, because they are not commanded, though they be not forbidden,
do evidently mean, that though they be not specially and by name forbidden,
yet they are generally forbidden, by that rule which forbids man to add any
thing in Gods worship, unto that which God has commanded, for such a shot
there is no need of ordinance: as good may be made out of any bell that has a
clapper in it.

SECT. 6. and 7. of David's purpose, to build a Temple. 2. Sam. 7.1. Chron. 17.
THis passage will soon be dispached, if the quaestion may be cleared. The
purpose of David, was either conditional only, if God should allow and second
the business, or else absolute, without such suspending condition, as
supposing that God did allow, and would prosperously assist him, for the
accomplishment of it. If it was of the former sort, and so far as it was
considerable within those limits, there is no quaestio^, but it was godly, and
worthy of all honor. But if it was absolute, it cannot be excused from some
mixture of praesumtion. For whatsoever a man may absolutely intend to do, that
he may do, but for the doing of such a thing, as building of a Temple then
unto God, the Rejoinder himself confesses it to have been unlawful, for
David, without further warrant: and so confesses also, that the absolute
intention could not be lawful. Hence are these speeches of the Rej. That which
may be lawfully purposed, with submission to Gods pleasure, might not be done
without his pleasure known, and leave given. We grant, that David could not
build the House, nor so much as set out the place for it, without leave and
direction from God.

All the quaestion therefore is, whether David had an ^bsolute purpose or no? If
he had not, we have no ground from this place, against absolute instituting of
religious Ceremonies by man. If he ^ad such a purpose, then the Rejoinder
does not gainsay, but our argument is good. Now that David's purpose was
absolute, it is more then probable, by that which the Rejoinder confesses,
viz. that Nathan was unadvised in saying to David, ^^e do all that is in thine
^eart, the Lord is with thee, before he had consulted with the mouth of the
Lord, to whom the designation or place, manner, and Man, did belong. Heerin
says the Rejoinder Nathan failed. For 1. Nathan so far as appears does
answer only to the quaestion of David, allowing his purpose, if therefore
Nathans allowance was a failing in being too absolute, David's purpose was of
like nature. 2. If David's purpose had not been absolute before, yet upon
Nathans counsel, from which no dissent of his is any ways insinuated, it
became absolute. 3. If David had dissented from Nathan in that point, he ought
to have admonished Nathan of his sailing, and would also no doubt have done so
or at the least, it would have bee^ concluded betwixt them two, that counsel
must be sought, and expected of God; but Nathan not being corrected, but rather
confirmed by David, as David was by him, they both were (wit^out seeking)
better informed by extraordinary revelation. 4. The Def. says, and the
Rejoinder mainteyneth it, that ^od did interpret David's affection for a deed.
But no imperfect velleities of good, are so interpreted. The will which is
accepted for a deed, must be absolute, and hindered only by defect of power.
Howsoever, out of the Rejoinder his grantes, we are furnished with this
argument:

It was not lawful for David to purpose absolutely the building any religious
house for God's Ark, without Gods special command, or warrant. Therefore it is
not lawful for man to institute and build Ceremonies double and tr^b^e
religious (as the Rejoinder calls ours) without Gods special command or
warrant.

The grant of the Rejoinder is the common sentence of our Divines well
expressed, among other, by Mr. W. Attersol, upon Numb. 3.4. David was deceyved,
that he went beyond the Commandment ^f G^d. To seek to praevent God was to be
reproved. It might have been said to him: who required these things at thy
hands?

Howsoever his purpose (or simple affection) may be comm^nded, yet the fact
(that is the absolute purpose resolving upon the fact) is reproved, He ought
not the have enterprized that, which was not commanded either to any other, or
to himself. He did not obey God, but fol^ow his own mind and device. He did
run too fast, travayling (as it were) without his guide, and sailing without
his compass.

These things being considered, it were but vain labor to prosecute the
Rejoinder in particular litigations about this matter, which would be little
else then repetition of the same things. I will only therefore consider of the
Def. his retorsion, and the Rejoinder his shot out of this place: which also
should have passed, but for the boasting wherewith they are (with provocation)
advanced above their measure.

The Def. his retortion is thus. This Act of David's without special warrant
were commended by God. Ergo, all institutions of Ceremonies by man, belonging
to Gods service, are not therefore to be condemned, because they want express
warrant. This Act. (says the Def. that is (says the Rejoinder) this
conditional affection not lawful to be brought into act. From such a
conditional affection, he argues, to absolute and actual institutions, by
what rule of consequence I know not. The Rejoinder teaches us the clean
contrary argument, as before was declared.

The Rejoinder his shot is thus in short: David (as Mr. Cartwritconfesseth) had
general warrant from the word of God, for building the Temple, and had no word
to forbid him to do it (til that by Nathan) therefore for David to purpose to
build (til that forbidding by Nathan, was lawful. I answer 1. the conclusion
(being understood of a conditional purpose (as the Rejoinder expounded it) we
willingly grant, as neither making, nor ever having made any quaestion about
it. 2. David had no general warrant, for his building of the temple, neither
does Mr. Cartwrite say any such thing, but only that it was revealed there
should be such a Temple. Which was no more warrant for David to purpose the
building of it, then other Prophecies were warrant for sum (upon supposition)
to purpose the destroying of it. 3. Though there was no word of God which
particularly or absolutely forbid David to build the Temple, yet there was word
enough in g^nerall forbidding him to attempt any such thing, until he should
receyve further Commission. So the Rejoinder before confessed: the designation
of place, manner, man, and time, did belong to God: and was therefore forbidden
to David, and so the building forbidden, until that designation should come
from God.

Now add unto this shot of the Rejoinder thus repelled but a little altering
the charge and turning the pieces mouths. viz. That our questioned Ceremonies
have not so much general warrant, as that it is any where in Scripture
revealed, there should be a Cross, and Sirplice, and that the places of
Scripture which seem to forbid them, could never yet be otherwise cleared; and
then see how it makes for the Rejoinder his cause.

SECT. 12. Concerning that phraze, Ier. 7.31. etc. You do that which I
commanded not.
THat which the Rejoinder (out of his abundant leisure) would needs enlarge
most vainly about sect. 8.9.10. and 11. I pass over with silence: because the
Repl: refused to mainteyne that which is there objected, out of unprinted and
uncertayn papers.

1. In the twelf section, we are to inquire, whether and how that consequence
in Gods worship, be good: I have not commanded this: therefore, you may not do
it.

The Def. and Rejoinder say it is not good, except by not commanding, be
unde^stood, forbidding as Lev. 10.1. Deuteronomy. 17.3. Which is thus far true, that
except some forbidding be included or (as the Rejoinder speaks) imported in
that not commanding, not commanding c^nnot m^ke a thing unlawful. But that is
the very quaestion whether in things proper to religion, not commanding, does
not include some kind of forbid^ing.

2. The place mentioned by the Rejoinder: out of Lev. 10.1. does most strongly
make against him. For the sons of Aron are there condemned, for bringing
strange, or ordinary fire to Gods worship, as doing that which God had not
commanded, and yet had not otherwise forbidden, then by providing fire proper
to his worship, and not apponting any other to be used in the tabernacle, and
this is the very plea which we make against Ceremonies of humane institution,
in Gods worship. The scope of that text we are taught, by an English Bishop,
Babington, in his notes upon that place: We may hence learn and setle in our
hearts, with what severi^ie the Lord challenges and defends his authority,
in laying down the way and manner of his worship, not le^ving it to any
creature, to meddle with, but according to praescription and appo^n^ment from
him. Content he is, that men shall make laws for humane matters etc, But for
his Divine worship, he one^y will praes^ribe it himself, and what h^e
appointed, that must be done, and that only, or else Nad^b and Abibu their
punishment expected, that is, Gods w^ath expected, in such manner as he shall
please.

He was taught this by Calvin, who upon the place says God forbad other fire
etc. to be used that he might exclude all adventious rites, and teach that he
detested whatsoever was come from elsewhere. Let us therefore learn so to
attend to the Commandment of God, that we desile not his worship, with any far
fetched devises. Alium ignem sacris adh^beri vetuit Deus, ut adventitios omnes
ritus excluderet, ac doceret se detesta^i quicquid aliunde profectum erat.
Discamnus ergo si^ attendere ad Dei mandatum (...) ejus cultum ullis extraneis
commentis vitiemus.


Mr. Attersoll also in his learned and grave Commentary upon Numb. 3.4. does
largely declare out of this example, how God disliketh, and disclaimeth men's
devises in his service, as trash, trumperie, and mere dotage: instancing (among
other devises) in Ceremonies added unto Baptism.

3. Our reason was propounded in the words of Calvin upon Ier. 7.31. Seeing God
under this title only condemns that which the Jews did, because he had not
commanded it them, therefore no other reason need to be sought for the
confutation of superstitions, then that they are not by commandment from God.
To which the Rejoinder answers, that Mr. Calvin's conceit holds true in
proper points of religious worship, which are all praescribed of God himself,
but not in matter of rites, not praescribed of God. Now if this be not a
miserable conceit, that Gods not commanding does forbid that which he has
praescribed or commanded, but not that which he has not praescribed, or
commanded, let any man of sense judge.

Other meaning I cannot gather either out of these words, or out of the
Rejoinder his doctrine of worship, which was before distinctly weighed, in the
head of Worship. Mr. Cartwrites conjecture (as the Rejoinder calls it) is the
very same with that which he calls Calvin's conceit. The Rejoinder his answer
also is the same for substance, that it is true in matter^ particularly
determined by God, but not in matters of order and ceremony, of which God has
not determined particularly. The sense of which is, that we must depend upon
God, so far as he has determined particularly, but in other things, we must
depend upon men, and in England, upon the Convocation house. But to depend upon
God, and his mouth, being to follow only his determination and what sense then
is this, you shall only follow Gods determination, in those things which he
has particularly determined, but if you please to do any thing in his
wo^ship, which he has not determined particularly, you may therein depend upon
whom you plea^e? For matter of Ceremony, enough has bee^ spoken before: and
of order, we shall after dispute.

4. The rest of this 12. section is spent about the Def, his wonderful
wondering, at our symbolizing with Bellarmine and other Papists, because that as
they distinguish sins into mortal and venial, so we (says he) make a
distinction of against, and beside the word. About which, the Rejoinder
grants that Chrysostom did well use this distinction, in matters of doctrine,
yet he says it is not to be extended unto matters of Ceremony. But (the
question being only about the distinction) it is in the Def. and Rejoinder
their opinion far more appliable to ceremonies, then to doctrines: because
they hold many Ceremonies lawful beside the word, which are not against it,
though they hold no such difference of doctrines. Now this distinction was
used by us, according to their conceit, more then our own. The like is
acknowleged of Iunius, that he distinguishes well betwixt beside and against
the Word, in the question of traditions devised for divine worship, 1. e.
essential worship, particularly determined by God. Which is not so, for in
that place, Cont. 3. l. 4. c. 17. an 10. Iunius has no question either about
essentialls, or worship, or traditions, but only about Ecclesiastical laws,
binding the conscience. And if he had, yet that clause particularly determined
by God, would spoil all: because in such things there can be nothing either
against, or beside the Word. But if it were true, what is the difference,
betwixt Iunius and us? The Rejoinder says that we confound rites with
worship, and yet confess rites not to be particularly described as the other.
Which is neither so, nor so, except he mean those rites, which he calls
double or treble ceremonies: and therein we have Iunius so for us, that not
only in other places, but also in the words next goeing before this in
quaestion, he says generally, in divine things to coin new laws is nothing
but to decline. In divinis rebu^ novas leges far, nihil ab^ud est quam
declinare.
Yet the Rej. will have it, that Iunius in that place cont. 3. l. 4. c. 17.
sect. 10. doe^h refute this distinction, as used by Bell. Mark therefore what
are Bell. words, which Iunius confuteth) viz. Only a prohibition of addition
contrary laws is understood. Deuteronomy 4 and. 1^. Intelligitur prohibitio solum de
addition^ legum contrariarum.


Which are the words also of our Defender and Rejoinder. cap. 2. sect. 3.4.5.
So that by this interpretation, the distinction is theris, and Iunius confuteth
them all, so well as Bellarmine.

The persuaders to Subscription, are also confessed to use the same
distinction, but in another meaning. Let the distinction therefore pass (for
shame) and dispute of the meaning. But the meaning expressed by the Rejoinder
is the very same with ours, save that they differ in the conclusions deducted
from it. The altercation therefore which the Rejoinder adds about some
speeches of Mr. Cartwrite, is not worth the answering.

The plain truth is, that this distinction is ordinarily used by our Divines,
against the Papists, even in case of Ceremonies. D. Fulke against the Rhemists,
on Mat: 15.9. Of Popish traditions, some be repugnant to the laws of God, and
some are beside them, as idle and unprofitable Cer^monies. It was therefore but
an affected quarrel, which the Def. picked, and the Rejoinder mainteineth,
about these terms, as if they had any reflection upon the Popish difference,
betwixt mortal and venial sins. Nay in this fashion, the Def. and Rejoinder
may accuse our blessed martyrs of symbolizing with the Papists that were the
murderers of them. For they were wont to use this distinction in the same
manner that we do. So heavenly ^radford, in his epistle to the University of
Cambridge: these which a little after he applies to Romish rags, and in his
epistle to Walden (extends them by name to Ceremonies) opinions are not only
besides Gods word, but even directly against it. It is therefore more then time
for the Def. and Rejoinder to pull in the horns of this dodmons accusation,
and confess that they were unseasonablie and rashly put forth upon
inconsiderate fantasy, easily uttered, but hardly excused.

SECT. 13.14. Concerning the ancient fathers arguing negatively from Scripture.
1. TO diverse sentences of ancient Writers, about this matter alleged, the
general answer is give^. 1. that they speak of things contrary to Scripture:
which when the Repl. grants, complaining of the Def. his wilful mistaking,
or mis-interpreting our meaning, the Rejoinder lest he should seem less
wilful, repeateth the same imputation, which yet he acknowledges to be
contrary to the Repliers own confession.

What should a man say to such Rejoyners, that know full well our meaning, and
yet will never leave threaping another meaning upon us.

We never said, or thought, that all particular rites pertaining to order and
decency, are punctually determined in the Scripture. We never dreamed that
all such rites being beside the particular determination of the Scripture, are
against it, we speak of double or treble rites as the Rejoinder styles them,
which no mere order and decency does necessarily require, but only the mere
will of man injoine.

All this the Rejoinder knows: and yet he ceasseth not to beat the air, with
endelesse repetitions of this imputation, gilded over with some variety of
tanting phrases, that it may be the easlier, swallowed by his unwary reader. 2.
It is secondly answered by the Def. that the ancient writers speak of
doctrines, not of ceremonies. Whereunto the Repl. granting that to be true for
the most part yet answers, that the truth of their sayings may be taken so
generally, as to include all re^igious Ceremonies. Here the Rejoinder objecteth
that limitation (for the most part) is only to abuse the simple, and that the
ambiguous term of religious Ceremony, is a bush to hide I know not what in.

Now for the former charge Compare here the Abrigment and Def. The later
accusation of hiding-bush, etc. cannot otherwise be avoided (as it seems)
except to avoid the same, we would upon every occasion, when we are to speak of
the questioned kind of ceremonies, repeat the Rejoinder his beadroul of
terms: double or treble significant, sacred by application, mutable,
ambalatorie, arbitrarie, reductively sacramental, moral Ceremonies, immediate
worship, in respect of means by virtue of some thing else, in respect of the
manner, and reductively, in respect of the utmost end Divine worship.

Whersoever we observe not these terms partly of his own forging, since the
Reply was written he may as well spy a bush over our head, as in this place.
It is thirdly answered, that a general proposition may well be extended beyond
one special conclusion to which it is upon occasion applied. To this (after
that out of splen (as I take it) he styleth it the man's stomach) the Rejoinder
answers that it may only be applied to other of the like kind. This therefore
is only the difference, whether those Ceremonies which bear all those titles
even now rehearsed, be not of the like kind, or have not one common nature,
with some of those things which the Rejoinder calls substantial, and
doctrinall, points: of which we have disputed before, andshall after, by Gods
grace.

2. To Tertullians words: Prohibetur quod non ultro est permissum: that is
prohibited, which is not permitted, the first answer made by the Def. was, that
our Ceremonies are permitted. Heerunto it was replied, that Tertullians meaning
must needs be of other permission then the Def. can challenge to our
Ceremonies, otherwise there should be no sense in his words. The reason is,
because the Def. does not say that our Cerem. are otherwise permitted, then
that they are not forbidden. Which kind of permission if Tertullian
understood, then his saying is: that is prohibited, which is not unprohibited.

The Rejoinder here for resolution of this difficulty says, that Tertullians
meaning was to account that not to be permitted by the word, against which any
reasons out of the word may be given, though there be no particular word against
it.

Now if he had attended unto the question, considering that it was only what
Tertullian in this place meant by this phrase not permitted, and that his
meaning for the word must be the same, with that immediately before opposed:
Quod non prohibetur ultro permissum est, he would not have given that gloss,
for then the meaning of this sentence must be: that which has no particular
word against it, can have no reasons out of the word made against it. Such
^ustian is that clause of the Rejoinder, our meaning and his, are alike, and
we hold our Ceremon^es to be so perm^tted, and therefore not prohibited. So
permitted is, by his interpretation, not to be prohibited by consequence,
prohibited must needs be ey^her the same, or else p^ohibited by particular
word: if the former, then he says thus: our Ceremonies are not p^ohibited by
consequence: therefore they are not prohibited by consequence, if the later, then
this is his saying: our Ceremonies are not forbidden by consequence only,
therefore they are not by particular word forbidden. The former is no reason; the
later neither is consequence, nor touches any quaestion.

The Def. his second answer was, that we may blush, to speak of Tertullian,
because he professes traditions in the same book. It was answered, that then
all may blush, which allege the Fathers for that which they in other places
gainesay. The Rejoinder granting, that those need not blush, because the
Fathers sometime are deaf and hear not themselves speak, and in some
particulars left their sound general principles, yet will needs have us blush
(if it be not unpossible, as his Rejoyning charity suspecteth it is) because
they never held that which we allege them for. But how does this appear,
because they allowed of sundry Ceremonies not praescribed in the word. Now
except he could prove, they were not as deaf on this the ceremonial ear, or
side, as they were on the other, or that they did not leave their sound
generals, in the particulars of Ceremonies, as well or ill as in other.

this occasion, especially with his affected exaggerations if it be not
impossible.

And that the Rejoinder cannot prove this, D. Morton shows in his appeal.
page 324. They that erred in points of doctrine, could not be altogether free
from some sprinklings and spots of Ceremonial corruptions.

Moreover, how the best of those ancient writers allowed of sundry humane
Ceremonies, then in use, Augustine shewe^h, epist. 119. Multa husu^modi,
propter nonnullarum, vel sanctarum, vel turbulentarum persona^um scandala
d^vitanda, liberius im^^obare non audeo:
Many such things I dare not so freely gainsay to avo^de the offense partly of
some holy minds and partly of some turbulent Spirits.

Which is the very case of the best English Divines that do so sparingly speak
against our Ceremonies, and yet sufficiently insinuat, that they would speak
more, if they durst for the times. How also our Divines do not blush to
allege their testimonies against humane Ceremon. though they know that in
other places they speak for them this may be seen in D. Whitaker. tom. 1. page
116. Augustinu^ n^s illis paucissim* Ceremonijs content^s esse vul^, quae in
Canonicis Scripturis continentur. Si quid usquam scripserit quod cum hac
sententia minus conveniat, in conciliandit ejus singulus dictis, non magnam
operam insumam.
Augustine will have us be content with those very few Ceremonies which are
contained in the Canonical Scriptures. If elsewhere he have written ought that
may less agree with this sentence* for my part I will not much tro^ble my
self to reconcile all his speeches. D. Fulke, Rejoinder to Martial, ar 1.
says plainly: The gates of hell in idle Ceremonies did assault the Church.
The fathers (in them) declined from the simplicity of the Gospel, and art. 3.
Every idle Ceremony that praevayled, had the Praelates of the Church, either
for authors or for approvers, But Christ committed his Church to them, to be
fed with his word, and not with dumb signs, and dead images, which things he
has forbidden.

SECT. 15. Concerning Protestants arguing negatively from Scripture.
1. THe first quotation by the Def. chosen to answer, is out of D. Mortons
Apology: of which it is said by the Replier, that the Def. his answer is, he
meant not matters mearly Ceremonial, but doctrinall, and so he affirms the
meaning of our argument to be, if by mere Ceremonies, he mean mere order and
decency, as he interprets himself in the end of this section, Heerupon the
Rejoinder asks, if we call this a Reply? I answer yea: because it shows,
all that is opposed, though it be granted as true, nothing at all to cross or
contradict our argument, in the right meaning of it. Now mark what he has to
say, why it should not be called a Reply. 1. The Def. tells not only what
he meant, but where his meaning does appear, and the Reply shows not that
he has not meant as he said. As if either the place where a thing is spoken,
did add any weight unto the speech! or all, that mean as they say, do speak
to the purpose. 2. It is partiality to take up the word mere in this place,
and not sect. 3. But this does rather show, that though the Replier took no
knowledge of this me^e shift, when he first met with it, yet afterward, seeing
it often repeated, marked some emphasis to be placed in it, and so did not
spare it before, upon partiality to one section more then another, which
seems a strange conceit.

Howsoever this does neither prove the reply none, nor yet non-sufficient. 3.
He pronounces it untrue, that the question here is not of mere Ceremonies and
rites: which charge he groundeth upon the word specially in the service of God.
But that word does show the specialitie of our question to be about the
matters of Gods service, or worship, such as significant Ceremonies are, and
mere order is not. 4. He is styled a deceyved man, that thinks signification
put upon a Ceremony, does necessarily make it more then a mere Ceremony.

To which I answer, that if he that thinks so, is a deceyved man, then the
Rejoinder does deceyve, when in his Manuduction, page 33. and 39. he teaches
that special instituted signification, does make a Ceremony double or treble
more then mere single rites of order.

2. The second quotation is out of D. Mortons Appeal, l. 2. c. 4. sect. 4.
where is confessed, he speaks of Ceremonies, but of Doctrinall only, such
as sopping in of bread into the cup, etc.

Whereupon question was made, why this Ceremony should be accounted more
doctrinall, or more unlawful, then the Cross in Baptism.

To the former part of this quaere, the Rejoinder answers that the Def. he
himself and all such, in this question mean by Doctrinall, a thing taught in
the word and that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is taught in the word. As
if it had been asked, why the Sacrament is more doctrinall then the Cross? and
not if Sopping be so? But here it is diligently to be observed, how we are
deluded in this wholle argument, and other also, with the shadow of a wordly
distinction, betwixt Doctrinall, and Rituall Ceremonies. We say, God has
appointed all Ceremonies properly religious, which are to be used. They answer,
that this is true of all doctrinall Ceremonies, but not of rituall: that is to
say, as here we are taught, God has appointed all Ceremonies that he has
appointed, but not all that he has not appointed. We say, it is not lawful
for man to add unto Gods institutions, in religious worship. They answer, this
is true of Doctrinall, but not of Rituall additions: that is, by this
interpretation, Man may not add unto Gods institutions, any of Gods
institutions, but man's only. Let this be borne in mind for all answers that
hang on the hinges of this distinction.

To the other part of the question, the Rejoinder answers that sopping of bread
in wine is worse then the Cross. 1. because the cross makes no alteration,
of what Christ did ordain saying do this. 2. it is not substituted in the
place of Baptism, as sops in wine were by those Haerteikes in place of the
Supper. 3. it is not esteemed an isntrumental sign of any grace given by the
use of it, as they took their sops to be. 4. their sopping destroyed the very
Sacrament. And for these differences, the Repl. is bidden to hang down his
head, for asking such a quaestion. But 1. Addition is as evil as alteration.
For when Christ said, do this, he meant as well, do this only, as do this
all. Fac hoc totum: fac hoc tantum: as Zanchie expounds it. Addition also is
some alteration, if not of the things instituted, yet of the institution, as
making it unsufficient, or incomplete, by it self alone.

2. Sops and wine were not substituted in place of bread and wine, but were
bread and wine. Neither were they first or only, or (for any thing appears)
at all* used by Haereticks, as the Rejoinder for his advantage, without ground,
avoucheth, but by ancient Churches, at least in some cases: as is manifest out
of Prosper, de Promissionibus, Dimidium temporis, cap. 6. Puella particulam
corporis Domini intinctam percepit, etc. Sopping was so far from being a
matter of Haeresie, that as it seems, it was receyved among the Fathers, so
long as infants communicating in the Lords Supper, which was, as D. Morton
confesses, Appeal, lib. 2. cap. 13. sect. 3. for six hundred years.

3. Sopping of bread in wine, considered abstractly from bread and wine, was no
sign instituted as an instrument of grace.

For so says Cassander page 1027. out of Ivo: this custom of Sopping
prevailed only through fear of shedding and not by direct authority. 4. It is
too severe a sentence, Invaluit hac intingendi consu^tudo, non aut^ritate, sid
timore effusionis.
against those ancient Christians, in Prospers time and (which is more) as
Cassander and Hospinian judge, in Ciprians, that they destroyed the very
substance of Sacrament. The setting forth of Christ's death was not excluded,
though some part of the blood was representatively joined unto the body. A man
is dead, that lies in his blood, though some of it soak again into his body.
The Fathers, six hundred years together, did not destroy the substance of the
Sacrament. Hitherto therefore appears no cause for the Repl. to hang down his
head. Let us see if more cause be in the comparisons he makes betwixt sopping*
and crossing.

The first was, the bread and wine (the only things used in sopping) were
ordained by Christ: so is not the Cross. The Rejoinder answers here nothing
to the purpose, save only, that they were ordained to be used apart. From
whence it follows only that it is unlawful to use them not apart. And so it
follows, that Baptism must as well be used apart, orseparated from the
Cross: because it was ordained so to be used, and the Cross was not ordained
for any religious use, either apart, or with other things.

The second is, that sopping has some agreement with reason, Crossing has
none. The Rejoinder hence makes two consequences: 1. Ergo Christ in ordeyning
the Sacrament otherwise, has done some thing not agreeable to reason, 2. Ergo
the Church in Crossing has been void of all reason, fiftee^ hundred year.
And upon these grounds, he cries out of madness. But so madness may be
found in any assertion, if it be first put out of the right wits or sense, as
this is. For the meaning was not, that Sopping is agreeable to right reason in
the Sacrament, but in civil use, where the aeriall Cross has none. Yet* it
may be added, if it were lawful for men to add to Gods ordinances in the
Sacraments, then there would be found more probability of reason to bring in
sopping into the use of bread and wine as a manner of food, the^ a mystical
aereall cross into the use of water which is no manner of washing. As for the
Church, it has not universally used the cross so long, except the
Waldenses, and others like unto them, were none of the Church.

The same Church, that used crossing, used also for diverse hundreds of years,
to give the Sacrament of of the Supper unto infants, without reason, and the
continuation of the Cross more hundreds of years, adds no reason unto it,
except reason in such things does increase with their age. Many things have
been used in the Church without reason: or else there is reason we should
still use all that have been used, caeteris paribus. If there be any good reason
in the cross, let that be tried by reason, and not by slipperie conjectures
taken from the persons using it.

The third comparison was, that Sopping was used by Christ, at the very table
of the Supper, but Crossing was never so much honored by him or his Apostles,
as to use it at any time. The Rejoinder answers, that this argument would
prove as well, that the eating of a Paschall lamb before the Sacrament, to be
better then Sprinkling of water on the fo^ehead of the Baptized. Because CHRIST
did that, and not this. But this is not so well. For that 1. Sprinkling of
water is no instituted ceremony distinct from that washing which Christ and
his Apostles used. 2. It is very probable that the Apostles goeing into the
colder part of the world, did use sprinkling.

3. Concerning a Paschall lamb, used before the Sacrament, as a Ceremony
morally significant and reductively Sacramental, I see not why it should not
be praeferred before the Cross or any such invention, even because Christ did
use it, if that Circumcision be now a lawful Christian Ceremony, as the Def.
and Rejoinder profess and mainteyne, page 285. It is also credibly reported a
great Bishop, not long since living, that every Easter day, he used to have a
wholle lamb, praepared after the Pascall manner, brought to his table. D. B.
knows well who it was, and of whom he has heard it.

The fourth comparison was, that sopping was no new sign, but Crossing is. The
Rejoinder opposes that it had been an abomination to eat the Pascall lamb
sodden, but the addition of sitting or leaning on couches (though a new sign
added by them selves) was lawful etc. Of which speech, the first part is
granted, viz. a sodden lamb had been an abomination: neither isa sopping
communion excused. In the second, there is observable partiallitie, in that he
calls setting an addition to the Passover, and yet in the same answer, with
the same breath, denies the cross to be any addition unto Baptism. The
ground of all is rotten, viz. that sitting was a religious significant
Ceremony instituted by men.

These things considered, let any man judge what cause the Rejoinder had to
talk in this place, of the Repl: his roome-conscience, contentious spirit,
smitten with giddinisse, forsaken of wisdom?

In that which follows about sopping, there is no new matter to fasten any
dispute on, proper to this place, but only why some ceremonial sopping may not
be used, as near to the Communion, as the Cross unto Baptism? The Rejoinder
answers. 1. because it is not so safe, to use visible elementarie signs in
holy actions, as a transient Character. 2. Because such sopping were worse
then the use of any other bodily element, as coming so near to the very
institution. Where 1. it is to be marked, that a religious Ceremony, of soppes
and wine, immediately before or after the Communion, is not found unlawful, but
only not so safe as the Cross. By the same proportion, Ceremonious eating of
flesh, and fish, in the solemnity of the Communion, is only not so safe, not
unlawful. Has not the Cross brought us to a fair market? 2. If the Cross
be not a visible elementary sign, what kind of sign is it? Character notes
a most proper sign: aereall is elementarie: crossing is either visible, or
else it is no sensible sign: because it cannot be heard, felt, tasted, or
smelled.

If he means a permanent substance, beside that he crosses his own
definition of a Ceremony, an action etc. in other places he defends images,
in this very section, he leaned even now, upon couches, as upon safe Ceremonies
among the Jews.

3. The outward neernesse or likeness of a humane Ceremony, to a Divine
Sacrament, is allowed on elsewhere by the Def. and Rejoinder both: as when cap.
3. sect 7* they mainteyne as Christian, a Ceremonial sprinkling of men with
holy water, wherein, both water and sprinkling, have as great an outward
neernesse unto the outward elements of Baptism, as any thing ca^ have.

If the outward material show of neernesse unto a Divine Sacrament, does make
a Ceremony unallowable, then much more, such a formal significant
neernesse, as is betwixt Baptism, signifying our putting on of Christ
crucified, and the Cross signifying our putting on of courage to fight under,
and for Christ crucified.

See here what further is to be said of Iuel, and Whitakers, after the Def. and
they are conferred.

3. The Replier, affecting brevitie, and finding no new matter of dispute about
the allegations out of B. Jewel, and D. Whitaker, passes them over, with this
reason: in excusing of them, nothing is said by the Def. which has not
formerly been confuted.

Now the Rejoinder does not go about to show that any new thing is brought
forth by the Def. about the^, which had bee^ to the purpose, but only catches
up that word excusing, and repeating the accusation, of impertinent alleging
them for the negative argument from Scriptures, in case of Ceremonies, which
they do except, he takes upon him to discover an undoubted close meaning of
the word excuse: and thereupon accuses not only the Repl. but I know not how
many ( they, them) of being scornful out of pride of spririt. Who would have
thought that one word (used according to the ordinary courteous fashion of
those which in stead of plain denying, use the phrase, ( excuse me) could have
stirred up such a passion, or occasioned such an injurious surmize? But to
excuse this, which I hope we may do without any offense, I will yield so much
unto his importunity and challenge, as briefly to show, that neythe B. Iuell,
nor D. Whit. did except such Ceremonies as ours, when they speak of the
Scriptures fulness. Iuel in the first article sect. 29. alleges for the
negative argument, Origin, concluding that in the Lords supper the bread is to
be eaten, and not reserved unto the morrow, because that Christ did not
command that reservation to the morrow. Now that this reservation is a
ceremony, and a lawful one also in D. Morton his judgment, appears
plainly ou^ of his Appeal, where (lib. 2. cap. 5. sect. 1.) he says plainly,
that we may grant a longer time of reservation then two or three days, with a
reference unto the intent of participating of it by eating.

D. Morton therefore cannot be defended in saying that Iuel excepted ceremonies.

For D. Whitaker his not excepting of significant Ceremonies from the Negative
argument, may appear partly by his negative silence, and partly by his express
assertion, de Sacramentis, page 203. for unto Bellarmine his assertion, that
the Church may institute new Ceremonies, for ornament, and for signification,
he grants that of ornament* as he does after of order, but no such consent
is given of signification, but rather the contrary: Rudes non sunt Ceremonijs
erudiendi: dedit Deas, Scripturas, vt ex ijs rudes institutionem necess^riam
haurirent. So in Oper: tom. 1. page 116. Augustinus nos illis paucissimis
Ceremonijs contentos esse vult, quae in Canonicis Scri^turis cont^nentur.

The truth is, that our Divines do ordinarily reject the Popish Ceremonies,
upon this ground, So Gallasius in Exodus 22.7.

(* Nihil tale a Christo aut factum, aut institutum. Ergo ne sapientiores nos
ipso and Apostolis fore arbitremur.)

* There is no such thing by Christ, either done or instituted, therefore let
us not deem our selves wiser then he or his Apostles.

4. Another omission, whereof the Repl is accused, for which he is called a
gentle man, is, that the Def. in the end of this Argument, recalleth the state
of the question, distinguishing betwixt mere Ceremonies, and mixed, by mere
meaning altogether indifferent, and by mixed, some way forbidden, All which
(says the Rejoinder) the gentle Replier passes by. Now sure he might also him
self have passed this by, with more credit of the Def.

For what sense is in such a stated question: whether the Scripture does
condemn such Ceremonies, as it leaves indiff^rent, or only those which it
some way forbids? All that pass by, may see, that this was not worth the
taking up.

Yet concerning the mixture of ceremonies with opinion of holiness, justice,
merit, efficacy, or real necessity, which here the Rejoinder makes the
only grounds of forbidding, he is now, in such gentle manner as is requisite,
answered, in the head of Difference betwixt popish Ceremonies and ours.

5. After this, the Repl. is charged with quarrelling, only because he says
the Def. answered nothing to a maine point, upon which this first argument, in
the Abrigement, does depend, namely the rules of Ceremonies, that they should
be needful, and profitable, for aedification, the more comely and orderly
performance of Gods instituted service, which being wanting in our Ceremonies
they cannot be innocent, though all were granted which the Def. mainteyneth.
And why is this a quarrel?

The Repl. (as it seems) can neither by speaking, nor houlding his peace,
gain so much favor with the Rejoinder as that in either he may pass without
some shrewd censorious note. If he hold his peace, he is a gentle man, if he
speak, he is a quarreller. But what are the reasons of blame in this place?

1. The Defender (forsooth) was not tied to the Abridgents order 2. It were
idle to speak of directive rules, if all humane Ceremonies be unlawful. 3. If
God has left rules for direction of his Church in rites and orders
Ecclesiastical, then he has not determined of them in his word. 4. The
Defender has mainteyned, that our Ceremonies are agreeable to the rules of Gods
word: so as no Friar dare deny it, nor the Replier professing his name. In all
which there is nothing of any moment. For 1. though it were granted, that the
Def. was not tied to the Abridg, order, yet he may be tied to their matter, if
he meant to give them a full answer. 2. Though it be needless to speak of
directive rules in unlawful Ceremonies as they are simply unlawful, yet
seeing rites of order and decency, which are confessed lawful, are by the Def.
and others confounded with Cerem. by others esteemed unlawful, it is very
necessary, that at least the conditions of lawful Ceremonies should be
Demonstrated to agree unto such Ceremonies as are defended to be lawful. 3.
Though God has left rules for rites of order and decency, yet he has
determined of all Ceremonies significant by institution. 4. If the Def. had
mainteyned our Ceremonies to be agreeable unto these rules of Gods word, it had
been the most compendidious way for the Rejoinder to have showed, where, and
how?

For that of the Friar, I easily believe it. For not one friar of a thousend
dare say that any allegation for Popish Ceremonies, though it be out of a
leade^ legend, is not as plain a demonstration as any is in all Mathematickes.
As for the Repliers concealing his name, that is a poor imputation, For I dare
undertake, that the Rejoinder may have names enough for that which is said, and
upon second thoughts, he may profess his own name among them, except he can
show, where and how the Def. has indevored to prove our Ceremonies agreeable to
those rules about which this question is moved. If the Def. had performed this
before, what need the Rejoinder to have made here a solemn digression,
touching the rules for Ceremonies. Which digression of his, shall now have a
hearing.

Concerning Rules for Ceremonies.
1. IN the first place, he takes great exception against one rule propounded
by T. C. Rep. 2. page 62. that Ceremonies offend not any, especial^y the
Church of God. To this, D. Witgifts main answer was, that it was a rule for
private men, and not for the Church. Of this the Rejoinder seems ashamed:
and therefore seeks after other exceptions. The first is, that the buisinesse
for which this rule is given. 1. Cor. 10.32. was no matter of Church
Ceremony, but of conversatien. Where he should have considered. 1. that some
Church Ceremonies had of old their place in ordinary conversatio^, so these
two are not apposite one to the other. 2. that the eating of things offered to
idols, was a heathenish Ceremony, and therefore the absteining from it required
in Christian Ceremonies. 3. that howsoever this rule is in this place applied,
yet Romans 14.15.20. it is by the same Apostle applied to some kind of Jewish
Church Ceremonies.

The second exception is, that this rule is moral and general, belonging to
all our actions not particular, for Ceremonies. But if by particular, he
means proper, then he overthrows by this exception, all those rules by
himself acknowledged for good (edification, comelines^e and order:) because
none of these are proper unto Ceremonies.

The third is that a negative (such as not to be scandalous) may well be a
caution, but not a rule. About which I will not contend.

It is sufficient for our purpose, if it be a caution strictly to be observed
in Ceremonies, for such a rule as is. Thou shall not murder.

2. Another rule urged by T. C. (that Ceremonies tend to the glory of God) is
also rejected by the Rejoinder as the former. But no new reason is brought, but
only that it is a common rule, not proper to Ceremonies, which in many words is
enlarged. Now for this (being the same with that formerly objected about not
scandalizing) the same answer which before was given is sufficient. Yet this
moreover is to be observed for both these rules: that though they be not proper
to Ceremonies, our Divines notwithstanding do usually apply these and such
like general rules unto Ceremonies, because the breach of these rules is
common to (and as it seems inseparable from) humane significant Ceremonies
proper to religion, taken from Papists. They tend not in their nature to Gods
glory, but rather to the glory of them from whom they have receyved their
being. They are scandalous both to Protestants and Papists, as afterward is
declared.

So Vrsine, tom. 1. page 365. gives one rule for Ceremonies, that they be not
impious, which is not proper to Cerem: as Bucanus among the receyved rules of
Cer. makes this one, that they be not opposite to the analogy of faith.
Because many of the Popish Ceremonies are impious and opposite to faith. And
the same Vrsine adds among other rules, that they be not scandalous. Iunius
also in his Hidelberg, theses de tradit. th. 58. requires in a good Ceremony,
that it be to the glory of God. So others many. D. Willet in his Synopsis,
page 110. gives 4. rules for Ceremonies: two of which are 1. that all things
be done to the glory of God. 3. that all things ought to be done without
offense.

Yet these rules in T. C. are such as may not pass without the Rejoinder his
censure, laid out in diverse digressing pages.

Lastly the Rejoinder himself when he would give a rule for distinguishing good
Ceremonies from bad, uses to make this one, that they be free from opinion of
merit etc. And yet he will not say that such opinions are proper to Ceremonies.

3. H. I. is in the last place brought in, as not holding the rules of T. C.
Which (were it true) is little material, or to the purpose. But what is noted
out of H. I. repugnant? He injoineth the same rules to be observed in the
determining of mere Circumstances either Civil, or occasional, but denies
the Churc^e to have any power of appointing Cerem^nies merely Ecclesiastical.
And this is in effect to take those rules away, removing the Ceremonies which
should be fram^d by them.

Nay rather this in effect, and cause both, to acknowledge the rules, and only
to point out the true objects to be ruled by them, and to give warning of
abusive objects which have crept in under the colors of those true. Whether
this discretion of his betwixt Circumstances, and properly religious
Ceremonies, be justifiable or no, that question belongs not to this
digression, but to three wholle chapters of this dispute. But if the Rejoinder
would know who does directly take these rules, and the other also which he
acknowlegeth, as they are Scripture Rules, it is one to whom both he and the
Defend. are much beholding to Mr. Hooker by name, who p. 95. says plainly
of one, as well as of other, they are Rules and Canons of that law, which is
written in all men's hea^ts. The Church had for ever, no less then now, stood
b^unde to observe them, whether the Apostle had mentioned them, or no. Neither
says he therein much amiss, except that same no less bound. So that as it
seems, the Defend, and Rejoinder making such courtesy of proving our
Ceremonies agreeable to these Rules can very hardly show, that they are agreeable
to light and law of nature. After this light skirmish about 2. rules, the
Rejoinder sounds a retrait, and says, he will refer the consideration of
the Agreement of our Ceremonies to the true Rules, unto a fitter place. But a
fitter place can scarce be found, for here it was challenged by the Replier,
here it was promised by the Rejoinder when he craved leave to speak more fully
of rules ^o be observed: and this is registered in the table, Rules about
Ceremonies showed in a digression. Now after all this, to make only a few
pragmaticall exceptions against 2. rules which he terms irregular, and out of
square, not once touching upon the rules which the Replier required
satisfaction about ( v. 13. if our Ceremonies be needful, and profitable for
the aedification of the people, by the more comely and orderly performance of
that service, which God has expressly praescribed in his word) and so to put
of the buisinesse unto another invisible and uncertain place, this is nothing
else but to be the Def. his Second, in the fault he was accused for, but not in
releiving of him at all. It was not for nothing that he called the challenge a
quarrel, as insinuating it was not a thing fit to be meddled in. The truth is
the Rej. in his Conscience, holds our Cerem. incommodious, or inexpedient,
though not simply unlawful: and therefore can find no place to show, that
they are needful, and profitable for aedification. I doubt, whether another
special Command from the King, would bring him to printe a treatise about
that question?

SECT. 16. Concerning Order, and Decency,
1. Cor. 14.40. The only place (by the Rejoinder his confession, for
Ecclesiastical power, in constituting Ecclesiastical Ceremonies.


THe Defender beginning to confronte and confute our tenent, neither brings,
nor can bring any Scripture, for the authority of Churches to ordeyne
Ceremonies, but only this one, 1. Cor. 14. He says, in deed, that he names
only this place, not to trouble us with any other at this praesent. But the
Rejoinder more ingenuously confesses, that this is the only place in the New
Testament, by which all Divine^ do conclude, that a power is given to the
Church, to constitute Rites etc.

This place is all the answer they give, or can give, to those that are wont
to trouble them with a quo warranto.

If this place then fails them, or serves not their turn, are not our
Ceremonies confessed to be appointed without any warrant of the word, at least
in the New Testament?

1. Now that it does not make to the purpose, it was first showed, from this,
that the Defend. himself concludes no more from thence, then that the Church
may by virtue of this permission, ordain any Ceremonies that may be fit for
the better serving of God. Which makes nothing to the purpose, except first it
be proved that God is better served with our Ceremonies, then without them. The
Rejoinder here 1. denies this to be his Conclusion, and yet they are his own
words, and no other conclusion is mentioned by him, as appears in the
Rejoinder it self, page 74. But by this (says the Rejoinder) he undertakes to
prove another thing. Let it be so, yet he must first prove this, which he
immediately draws out of the text, which he does not.

Neither does he so much as name that other thing which he undertaketh to
prove, much less perform his undertaking. This was therefore no fit place
for him to vente his phraze, of shooting beside the Butt. 2. He accuses the
Repl. of insult^ng, because he denied the Consequence, and gave a reason of it:
and yet refers the answer of that reason, to a fitter place I know not
where. Only he repeateth the often exploded evasion, that the question is
whether all lawful things be particularly, or expressly commanded in the
word, which none of us ever writ, said, or thought. Yet we must be troubled
with this groundless, useless repetition, over and over again.

2. The only back of the Consequence made out of this place, is that all
Fathers, and all Divines, (the Rej. adds, of whatsoever Religion not
excepting Socinians, nor yet Anabaptists, whom he uses to acknowledge
adversaries to his Conclusion) do use this place for one and the same
conclusion.

Now this is easier to say, then to demonstrate, I do not find this place
much used to any such purpose by the Fathers. Chrysostom expounds it of
moral virtuous carriage, opposite unto such perverse walking as if a man go
upon his hands, with his feet upward. Ambrose extends it no further then to
things mentioned, in that Chapter: secundum ordinem suppra dictum Oecumenius
also makes it a recapitulation of things formerly mentioned, of speaking by
course, and women's being covered etc. (...). He Summarily gathers together all
that went before. Basil expounds it of time and place, ed. gr page 530.
(...), and of proportion to be observed betwixt diverse members. page 459. These
are some Fathers* Hen^ste, (...), ut uno oquente, alij taccant, and mulieres in
Ecclesia non loquantur, etc Secundum ordinem, ^ e. ut primo unus and postea
a^rus loquatur and perpartes, etc.
and (as I amperswaded) more then either Def. or Rejoinder can bring, so to
argue from this place, as he does* Among the ancient Schoolmen, it is hard to
find, where any one of them does conclude Ceremonies proper to religion, out
of this place. Thomas in his Comm. upon it, does so interpret it, that he
leaves no ground for any such conclusion: Honestly] 1. e. while one Speaks
that other be silent, Quemadmodum praescripsi, cuncta siant cum deco^o and
ordine, n. quid ^urpstudinis, aut tum^ltus exoriatur Paraph
and that women speak not in Church. in order] 1. e. that first one and then
another speak. etc.

Erasmus consents: Decently and in order that no uns^emelines or tumult arise.

In locis suis titulo, de tradi^nibus humanis, e^tat verba hac Apostols (omnia
honesta somnia honest and secum dum ordinem fiant) ut comprehet traditiones
Episcoporum quibus etc esse anthenticat and cum conscie^tia obedientia
servandas. Verum non est praescriptum hec Apostoli ad quasvis Episcoporum
traditiones referendum, s^d ad ca qua ips^ Ecclesijs trad^derat.
Among later writers, these words are often applied to rites, but in a diverse
manner. The Papists, and some other do prove from hence, their double treble,
analogic^ll Sacramentalls, as the Rejoinder calls them. See Hosius his Conf.
de ritib. Bap. c. 37. Bell. de effect Sacram. l 2 cap. 31. Balthazar
Chavassius. l. 1. cap. 21. and l. 2. cap. 7. where from hence they dispute
against Calvin by name. ^ccius (says Musculus upon this place) In his Commune
places, in the title of humane traditions cites these words of the Apostle let
all things be done etc. To justify the traditions of the Bishop^ as authentic
and such as ought to be kept with a C^nsciencie of obedience, but this
praescript of the Apostle is not to be applied to any Episcopal traditions,
but the Apostles own, to wit such as he had delivered to the Churches.

Our Divines (f^w of note excepted) do only from hence conclude rites of mere
order and decency. And some of the graver, Papists, Ad decentiam pertinet no
mulieres in Ecclesia loquantur ad ordinem, ne plure, simul loquantur.
to this day can find no more in it as Esius in his Comm. upon the place: It
belongs to decency that women speak not in the Church, to order, that many
speak not at once. What is now become of All Fathers, All Divines, for one and
the same conclusion? Mr. Hooker, page 95. does directly oppose the Def. his
conclusion, contending that the Rules set down in this place, are the Rules of
natural reason, and not of the Apostle, or properly of the Scripture, For if
this be true, then that is false which the Def. so confidently averreth, that
the Apostle does here grant a general license and authority to all Churches,
to ordeyne Ceremonies: except the Apostle did give Churches license, and
authority, to do that, which by the law of nature, they might do, and by the
light of nature, know they might.

3. The Def. was requested to show, by what Logic he forms his consequence
from order, decency, and aedification, unto such Ceremonies as ours?

The Rej. has no other Logic to show for it then this: Sundry Divines do
manifest the Consequence, because the same particular circumstances, wo^ld not
be comely and to aedification in all places and times, the Church must have
power to institute and alter them. But 1. this is not the consequence, meant by
the Repl. expressed by the Def. The Apostle says. let all things be done
orderly, decently, and to aedification. Ergo, he grants a general license
and authority to all Churches, to ordeyne any Ceremonies, that may be fit
for the better s^rving of God. 1. e. such as ours are.

Neither yet is the Consequence, which the Rej. would have implied by the Def.
upon supposition of the former: The Apostle has granted a general license,
and authority, to all Churches, to ordain Ceremonies, that may be fit for the
better serving of God. Ergo, all Rites and Ceremonies, which are beside the
prescription of the word (such as ours are) are not unlawful. It is in deed,
the very same sentence, which the Rejoinder did so spurn from him, page 72.
when it appeared under the name of Mr. Jacob: in the distinction, betwixt mere
Circumstances, Civil, or Occasional, and Ceremonies merely Ecclesiastical.
What a miserable cause is this that our Opposites defend, which deeply
concerns the Consciences of all that urge our Ceremonies, or allow of their
urging, and yet cannot be fathered, but on one only place of Scripture, and
that with an invisible and inexplicable consequence?

Concerning an Argument against our Ceremonies, out of 1. Corin. 14. Which is
acknowledged to be the only place in all the New Testament, that can be
alleged for their imposing.
1. THe Replier, seeing that all the cause (on the imposers part) depends on
this place of Scripture, and finding nothing by any Logic could be drawn from
it for our Ceremonies, thought good to try, if there may not, from the same
place be formed a better argument against them. This the Rej. calls beating
up of a new Hare, and loosing the way: as if all the Def. his Retortions, and
all the Rejoinder his paper shot which he makes after the Repl. when he
imagines him to fly, or run away, were new Hares, and exorbitations. I know
not else what privilege he has, to use a weight and a weight, one for the
Defend. with him self, and another for the Replier.

2. The Argument is thus put together, by the Rej. page 77. All that is left
unto the Churches liberty, in things pertaining to Gods worship, is to order
them in comely manner. But to appointe and use the Ceremonies as we do, is
not to order in comely manner any thing perteyning to Gods worship. Therefore,
to appointe and use the Ceremonies as we do, is not left to the liberty of
the Church, I. e. it is unlawful. The Rejoinder answers first to the
proposition, and then to the assumption, but so as he mingleth both together,
in many words: Yet I will follow his order.

3. First of all he denies the proposition to be found, in the Repl. his
meaning. But I can see no reason of this denial. 1. He says, that Order and
Ordering is taken sometime largely, for all discipline, or policy, sometime
strictly, for rancking of persons and actions handsomely one before, and
another after, and so is opposed only to confusion, as in this place, 1. Cor.
14.40. Now this is far^ from overthrowing the proposition, in the Repl. his
meaning. For the Repl. meant order in the strict sense, which makes also for
his purpose: and this the Rej. grants to be the meaning of the Apostle in
this place 1, Cor. 14.40. Which place the same Rej. page, 75. confesses to be
the only place (in the N. Test.) by which power is given to the Church to
constitute Cerem: From both which laid together it necessarily follows that
all which is left unto the Churches power under the title of order, is
ordeyning in the strict sense, 1. e. rancking of persons and actions
handsomely, as the Rejoinder expounds it. Yet immediately after he accuses
the Repl. for saying order to be the right placing and disposing of things
instituted, for time, place, etc. not showing why this disliketh him, or wherein
differs from his own explication. Only he says that etc. often by the
Repl. put to time, and place, is a blind. Which is not so, for by etc. is
meant all circumstances of like nature with time and place, as number, measure,
vicissitude etc. How many Psalms shall be sunge, or chapter read, what, and
how much Scripture shall be at this or that assembly expounded, how one part
of worship shall succeed another etc. without a blind.

4. In the next place, the Rejoinder finds a wrong meaning in the Repl. his
use of the phraze (in comely manner:) because afterward in the end of the
Assumtion, he says, that comeliness is nothing but the seemelinesse of order.
For (says the Rej.) beside that comeliness of order, there is other
comeliness. Now this the Repl. professes immediately after the words quoted:
other where comeliness may conteyne all natural and civil handsomeness. etc.
Neither will I contend about this, but it implies so much in this very place.
So that the Rejoinder has not given any reason, why the Proposition, or first
part of the Argument should not be admitted. Yet after that he has fathered it
upon Mr. Jacob and made the Repl. his disciple, he comes to examine the
proofs of it, though he himself (as is now showed) has given sufficient
assent unto all contained therein.

5. The first proof is, that it is manyfestly collected out of the place in
question, 1. Cor. 14. and the Def. seems to grant as much. To which the Rej.
answers. 1. that in that place, three distinct things are propounded,
Edification, Decency, Order: and these three cannot be one. But edification
being the end, Decency and order the means, they may well be contained in
one: decent order, tending to edification, or (which is as much to our purpose)
in two: decency, and order, for edification. A holy Sacrament, decently, and
orderly administered, for edification, is not fowr distinct things, but one.
His 2. is, that these words are the conclusion of the wholle Tract. beginning
at the eleventh chap. wherein are handled some things only concerning
Decency, some more properly perteyning to Edification, and some which belong
more peculiarly to Order. Ergo more is commanded in these words, then the
comely placing of one thing after another. Let this be granted, yet it
follows not, that more is left unto the Churches liberty, then order, and
decency, unto edification. For all things that are commanded, are not left
unto the Churches liberty.

But that speaking in unknowe^ tongues which the Rej. does refer to
edification as distinct from order and decency, is by good Divines accounted
to offend against the order and decency, spoken of c. ^4. and 40. So D.
Whitaker, de Script. q. 2. c. 18. disputes against the use of an unknowen
tongue in Gods service, out of this very place: pugnat hoc vero cum (...) quam
maxim. 1. Cor. 14.40. 1. e. this mightly overthrowes that good order which he
so much stands for. His 3. is, the Defend does no way seem to grant the
proposition: because the Repl. undertaketh by argument to rescue this place out
of the Def. his hands.

But this nothing at all argues, that the Def. and the Repl. do not agree
about the proposition, though they dissent about the place, as it is handled in
the assumtion. The Papists grant us, this proposition: No phraze is used by
Christ, in those words: this is my body, but a Sacramental one. Yet because
they deny the assumtion: transubstantiating words, are not a Sacramental
phraze, we undertake by argument to rescue this place out of their hands. So
the Def. requiring no more, then order and Decency unto Edification, to be
left unto the Churches liberty, for the establishing of our Ceremonies, does
seem at least to grant, that all which is left to the Churches liberty is
order and Decency unto edification, though he deny these to conteyne no more
then mere circumstances, which is the assumtion. Of Edification there is not
mention made in the proposition, because that as an end, is out of question,
and allways included.

6. Peter Martyr is cyted, out of D. Whitaker, de Pontif. page 841.844. as
agreeing with that which the Repl. would have. Here the Rej. inlargeth himself
much for the sake (as he says) of those that are unlatined.

1. He tells us that P.M. does distinguish, though not divide, comeliness
from order. Which we do also, For take the Repl. his words in the most
rigorous sense you ca^, yet comeliness of order, does distinguish co^linesse
from order, no less then comeliness of a man, does distinguish it from a
man. 2. He adds, that P. Mart. does there instance in the Ceremony of
thrice dipping, and in the observation or institution of Feasts. But let the
Reader know, that those words, Ceremony, observation, institution of feasts,
which the Rejoinder has set down in a differing letter, to be noted as P.M.
his words, are not to be found in the place of P.M. but are added by the
Rejoinder for advantage. P.M. expounds the meaning he had in all his
instances by what place, what time, what manner. If therefore the Repl. did not
look upon that place, Quo loco, quo tempo^^, quo mod^.
but took it on trust, from the trusty hand of D. Whitaker (as the Rejoinder
objected to him) yet it proves good and fitting. So that the Rejoynd.
forgets himself much, when upon this uncertain, and momentlesse
conjecture, he compares the Repl. to a hungry creature (or dog) that
runs away with a bare bone. D. Morton once (at the least) alleged some
testimonies on trust: and therefore, being challenged for them, he confessed
that he had them from Mr. Stock. Yet the Popish adversary (author of the
Sober reckoning) did not compare him to a dog, but only said, that he sent
to stocks and stones, for satisfaction about them. Which I do not allege to
the disparagement of either D. M. or Mr, St. but only to show by comparison
how the Rej. does sometime overflow, in his terms. 3. For D. Whitaker, he
tells us, that he only says, that Ecclesiastical laws belong only to
order, or orderinge, but not as it is distinct from comeliness. As if any of
us did so. The Repl. his words: ordering in comely manner, do not (I hope)
refer all to order, considered a part from all comeliness.

This is the full sum, of all that Rejoinder had to except against the first
allegation. And yet here upon this nothing, it pleases him to accuse not
only the Repl. but these men, of haughty and Magistrall fashion, gulling, and
deceiving, great and shame^ull sin, and the poor Repl. at the least, for a
man destitute of common honesty. It seems he was very angry at something.
Let the understanding Reader guess, at what?

6. For more manifestation of the Repl. his vacuitie of common honesty, the
Rej. refers us to the second testimony out of Iunius, against Bell. co^t.
3. l. 4. c. 16. n. 86.87. and cap. 17. n. 9.10.12.13.

Omitting therefore unnecessarie repetition, let us hear the reasons of
extraordinary dishonestie, 1. Iunius ca. 16. n. 86.87. says only first, that
those humane laws are only necessary, in the Church, which tend to this,
that all things may be done decently, and in order, 1. Cor. 14.40. Secondly,
that these are improperly called laws in the Church, being more properly
constitions, or Canons.

Now out of the first saying, the Repl. concluded, that Iunius did judge the
Apostle to leave no more to the Churches liberty, then to order Gods
ordinances in decent manner: And out of the second, he inferred the same
conclusion: because any Constitution, above ordering in decent manner that
which before was injoined, is properly a law. What ex^raordinary dishonestie is
here? 2. Iun^u cap. 17. n. 9. says only that to make new laws in divine
things is to decline 1. c. in points of faith or necessary rules of
sanctimonie. But Iunius makes no mention at all, either of faith, or
sanctimonie, or necessity, Nor Bell. himself in that place. Neither is the
question there handled, of points of faith or things absolutely necessary to
sanctimonie. All double treble Ceremonies reductively Sacramental, and
worship, are by the Rej. his own dictates double sacred: and that is it which
Iunius means by divine. 3. Bell says that the addition forbidden Deuteronomy. 4. is
of laws contra^ie to the law of God. Whereunto Iunius n. 10. answers, that
any laws at all, added to Gods laws, are contrary to the law of God, speaking
of proper laws, without any backing of Gods law, binding the Conscience, as he
shows cap. 16. n. 86.8. Here 1. the Rej. left out those words of Iunius,
neither cantrarie nor beside the word: which if he had translated, then the
Readers memory might have recalled, how this place cited before for the
defense of that phraze, was but shifted by the Rej. p. 46. 2. It is to be
marked, that the Def. and Rej. there answer to Deuteronomy. 4. is the same with Bell.
p. 134.3. That exposition of laws without backing, is of the Rej. his own
forging. No such thing is found in the places quoted, nor yet did Bell.
profess to defend any such thing.

Of binding the Conscience, enough has been said in the head of Difference
betwixt our Ceremonies and Popish.

4. Iunius n. 12. answering to Bellarmines his saying, that God (in the N.T.)
gave only the common laws of faith and Sacram. leaving the specialls to the
Church etc. affirms Gods laws to be perfect re, ratione and modo, and those
of the Church to be but Canons and disposings of conveniencie, for better
observing of divine laws.

Where note 1. an example of an etc. for a blind, or blindinge, which the
Rejoinder formerly told of. For in that ete. is contained, pro locorum and
temporum diversitate: quia non possunt diversissimi populi conuenire in ijsdem
legibus and ritibus. 1* e. for this cause, special laws of rituall things,
are left to the Churches liberty, because of variety, which falls out now
by occasion of times and places: Which is the very thing that the Rejoinder
pawned his credit, Bell. never said, page 15.16. Note also 2. that Iunius
does not in this place mention Canons, as the Rej. pleases to alter his words
in reciting of them. But Cautions, and dispositions. Now a Caution about the
performance of any thing, is not an institution of a new thing. 3. Iunius is
found to say as much as he was alleged for, and to the contrary we have from
the Rejoinder a nihil dicit.

5. Iunius n. 13. says only that Christ is the only lawgiver, that is, to
give laws, that in themselves and by the very authorite of the lawmakers, do
bind the conscience. As if Iunius in confuting of Bell. did only say the very
same thing, with him that he goes about to confute! for Bellarmine in that
very place says: Christ is the chief lawgiver who by his own Authority can
judge and make laws. Christus solute^^ legislator crima^us, qui potest sua
propria authoritate judicare and leges far.


Now out of all these allegations, the Rejoinder makes his interrogatories. 1.
Where be these words all that is requisite, as spoken of Rites and Ceremonies?
Answer the sense of these words as spoken of all Ceremonies above mere order
and decency, is cap. 16.86.2. Where find you in Iunius that the Church may
constitute no new thing? Ans. cap. 17. n. 9. this in things Divine is to turn
aside, Hoc in divini^ rebut est declinate.
for the Rejoinder his interpretation of those words, that they mean points of
faith, and necessary rules of sanctimonie, is confuted, by conference of
Bellarmines words there opposed, who in that place instanceth in Ceremonia^l
and Judicial laws, and speaks not at all of faith and necessary
sanctimonie. 3. Where are those words, ordering in seemly manner? Ans. cap. 16.
n. 86. those only humane laws are necessary in the Church, which make that
all things be done decently and in order. 1. Cor. 14.40, 4. If the Church may
appoint no new thing, but only see to decency and order, then says the Rej.
what patent has she to make particular ordinances for time, and place? unless
these be no new things. I Ans. 1. Time and place considered as mere occasional
circumstances, are no more new things in Gods service, then concreated time
and place, were new things in Creation, distinct from the created world. And
Calvin inst. l. 4. cap. 10. sect. 22. severely censureth those, that call such
kind of determinations new laws: Quis nisi calumniator, sic novam ferri^b ijs
legem dicat, quos constant duntaxat scandalis occu^rere, quae sunt a Domino
satis diserte prohibita? If procuring that scandals be avoided, be no new
thing, then neither is procuring that disorder, and undecencie, for time,
place, etc. be avoided, any new thing.

As for a patent to appoint double, treble, sacred Ceremonies, it is a vayn
thing for them to plead it, that cannot show it under the great Seal. I do not
think, that any earthly King would have his subjects submit themselves to
that power, which is fetched out of a Patent, invisible, and only avouched by
conjectures.

7. A reason was given of the foresaid proposition, out of Iun. de Transl. Imp.
l. 1. c. 2. n. 26.27.31. viz. that the Church has only a Ministry, to
observe such things as Christ has appointed, not authority of appointing
new things. Here the Rejoinder 1. observes, that those words, (new things)
have no foot steps in Iunius. As if new things could be appointed lawfully
without authority of appointing. Surely, he that denies all authority of
appointing, and leaves only ministerial performance of things appointed, he
denies appointing of new things. 2. He argues thus: If the Church have a
ministry to appoint and do such things as Christ has commanded, then must
she needs have a Commission legative to appoint and use rites serving to order
and decency. Add to this only, and then it is not only that, but all that
which we require. 3. He cries out of miserable perversion, either by gross
negligence, or mistaking.

And why so I pray? Because (forsooth) all that Iunius says is good to prove,
that no Ecclesiastical person has any power by his calling over temporal
Princes. But this is nothing against their delegated dependant power, by
Commission. But 1. these are very strange distinctions: they have not any power
by their calling, but some by commission. They have not any power over
temporal Princes (though they be members of the Church) but over the Church
they have. 2. The Rejoinder makes Iunius only to deny that which Bellarmine
never affirmed, viz. absolute independent power of Ecclesiastical persons, as
supreme Lords. Nay Bellarmin answers to Calvin in the very same manner that
the Rejoinder does: The Pope is not the chief lawgiver but the vicar of
Christ, Pontisex non est legislator primarius ^ed Vicarius Christi, and Christi
authoritate leges condit De Pontif. l. 4. cap. 17.
and by Christ's authority makes laws. 3. He adds that Iunius disp. de
trad. distinguishes betwixt decency, and the seemlinesse of order alone.

As if this were the maine question? Or any part of the Proposition! or denied
by the Repl. at all. The Rejoinder having little to say that was to the purpose,
cacheth hold of one word in the end of the Assumtion used by the Repl.
seemlinesse of order (which yet is immediately there differe^c^d from other
decency, as well commanded as this) and that he makes the maine matter of the
proposition: whereas the meaning is, that nothing is left unto liberty in Gods
worship, above decency and order, for which these testimonies are brought, and
not for the other.

8. For more full support of the foresaid Proposition, a reason is added, from
the fulness of a perfect law, which leaves no more unto Ministerial judges,
then needs must.

For answer, the Rejoinder 1. observes, that some cases are ^f necessity
variable, and so left. So the occasions of different Rites and Cerem^nies a^e
so various, that if our Lord had fixed any one certain fash^on, he should have
made rather snares then l^ws for his Church. As, if he had appointed sitting
at a table in the Communion: or kneeling in prayer. This is strange stuff. 1.
So much is granted, as is desired, viz. that God has left nothing (about his
worship) undertermined in his word. 1. e. uncommanded, and unforbidden
particula^ly, save only that which he could not command or forbid. Now let
any man think* and judge, whether it had not been possible for God in his word,
either to have commanded, or forbidden the signing of those that are Baptized
with the sign of the cross all so well, as Baptizing of them with water? 2,
How can that too too bold and inconsiderate assertion be excused: if our Lord
had fixed (or commanded) any one certain fashion of Ceremonies, he had made
rather snares, then laws for his Church. If it had pleased God to command or
forbid the sign of the Cross in particular, what snare had it been? When God
appointed all the Ceremonies of the old Testament, he did not (I hope) make
snares for his Church, though he did lay a burden upon it. 3. Whereas the
Rejoinder makes sitting at a table, in the Lords Supper, and kneeling at
prayer, to be such things as the Lord could not command, but as snares,
because sometime a table may be wanting, or something to sit on, or ability to
sit, and so of kneeling, this is as poor a snare to cache any man of
understanding in, as one sh^l lightly see made. For 1. Many affirmative
commandments of God there are, which in extraordinary cases cannot be
fullfilled, and cease to bind: as praying unto and praising of God, with our
voice: which is no snare, to him that cannot speak.

The appointing of wine for the Supper, is no snare, though some Countries have
it not, and some me^ cannot well drink it. See Beza ep. 2. Pareus and Symb.
Sacram. l. 1. cap. 9.2. I would know, whether it had bee^ a snare, if God had
appointed sitting at the Table, with exception of such extra ordinary cases?
if yea, then m^che more when men appoint kneeling, sirplicing, and crossing, if
no, then our Argument may proceed.

Kneeling in public prayer, might have been appointed without snaring, as
appearing before the Lord thrice in the year, was appointed to every Male in
Israel. Deuteronomy: 16.16. For (without doubt) many men in Israel, were, by accident,
more unable to travel up to Jerusalem, then any Christian that has knees, is
to kneel.

After this observation, of which the Rejoinder says it may be as we will, he
answers, that our Lord has left nothing absolute to the will of his
Officers: but has left even ambulatorie Rites, under general rules, which
will try them as perfectly, as if every one had been named, and with less
cumber. But 1. this is nothing to the purpose: because so the imperfectest law
that is in any nation upon the earth, if it be worthy the name of Law, leaves
nothing so absolute to the will of inferior Officers, as that it should be
without the general rules of justice, common good, etc. Nay not without the
rules of order and decency. 2. Concerning the comparison of perfection,
betwixt general and particular rules, though enough has been said before,
upon like occasion, yet this I will add.

If he means, that a general rule if it be perfectly understood and applied,
does as perfectly try as particulars. I grant it to be a truth. And so was
the old Testament as perfect a rule of Christian faith as the New, thou shall
love thy neighbor, as perfect as the six Commandments of the second Table.
But if he mean that a general rule is as fit and full for our direction of us
imperfect men, as particulars are, then I think no man conscious of humane
frailty, will beleiv him.

Neither do I beleiv, that he himself is so fully persuaded in Crossing the
Baptized, by any rule which he has out of Gods word, for that, as he is for
Baptizing, by the rule of that.

9. The Repl. having (as he thought sufficiently grounded the general, that a
perfect law leaves nothing more then needs must, unto inferior Officers, goes
on to assume, that in the worship of God, all, but particular Circumstances of
order, might easily, be (as indeed they, were) appointed by Christ, and
therefore need not be left to the Churches wisdom. Upon this, it pleases the
Rejoinder to say little to the purpose, in many words. 1. He says, that
Circumstances of order were not harder to determine, then those of decency.
Now it is plain enough, that the Repl. here, naming Order, did also understa^d
Decency, though he named Order only. 2. He asks, what School of Divinity
has taught the Repl. to say, that our Lord forbore the determining of such
circumstances, because all else was easy. I Answer, no rule of Divinity did
either teach the Repl. to say so, nor yet the Rejoinder to impute unto him,
which he never said.

But if he means (as it seems he does) because it was not so easy to
determine circumstances of time and place as real worship.

I then answer, that this (as I think) the Replier learned out of that
Divinity School, out of which the Def. and Rejoinder learned. That which they
cite out of Calvin, page, 15.16. Iunius is cited to the contrary, out of Cont.
3. l 4. cap. 17. n. 12. (which place the Rej. looked upon, by occasion of the
Repl. his former citation of it.) But he in that very place, distinguishes
betwixt laws, properly so called, and cautions, leaving only cautions to the
Churches liberty, which is the very same that the Repl. means. The plain
truth is, that supposing Gods will to be, we should worship him in any place,
and any time fitting, it was necessary, that the particular choice of fitting
time and place, should be left undetermined to any particular time or place,
exclusively.

Calvin also is cited, as more comely expressing the cause to be, that Christ
would not, then that he could not determine such matters.

Now though Calvin, being so excellent in his expressions, may easily be
granted to have expressed the same meaning in more comely manner then the Repl.
yet here was no cause of noting disparitie. For the Repl in saying, all things
but particular order and decency may be easily appointed, did not say what
Christ could do, but what might be easily for us appointed, or with our ease,
or with the ease which we do conceyve of in law giving, or of an ordinary law
giver, having such authority as Christ had. And who does not see, that it is
not so easy, to appoint every particular place, and time, wherein God shall be
worshipped, throughout all the world, then with what worship he shall be served?
For that particular description, a thousand books, so great as our one bible,
would not have suffized.

The world (as John says) would not be capable of the Volumes that must have
been written. The Rej. himself page 89. tells us of cumber, and much ado,
that would have been, in naming every particular, is not this as much as less
easy? Yet it pleased him to seek matter or altercation about this phraze, and
that (which agrees not) immediately after he had without reason accused the
Repl. of picking quarrels page 88.

10. A Second reason, of the Repl. his proposition, was, that whatsoever in
worship is above order and decency, is worship. Bec. whatsoever is acted by
him that worshippeth, in that act, beside ordinary civilitie, must either be
an act or means of worship, or an orderly decent disposing of those acts, or
else at the least idle, and so unlawful. The Rej. answers 1. that a
significant Ceremony for edification, is lawful, yet comes not under any of
those heads. But he himself confesses a significant Ceremon: instituted of
God, to be essential worship, and instituted of man to be worship, though not
in it self, of which distinction, enough has been said, in the head of
worship. Yet this by the way: A significant Ceremony for edification, is the
same, in it self, by whomesoever it be inst^tuted: because institution is
extrinsicall to the thing instituted, and alters it not in it self, internally.
If therefore it be essential lawful worship, in it self when it is instituted
by God, it is also esse^tiall (though not lawful) worship, in it self, when it
is instituted by man. Beside that Ceremony whose proper sole end is
edification, toward God, is properly done to the honor of God, and so properly
divine worship.

His 2, answer is, that comeliness grounded on civil humane considerations, is
not mere civilitie, in sacred actions, and use, but sacred by application.
Which is very true if civil application be meant by mere civil, but then it
is nothing to the purpose. For sacred by application is seemly clothing, put on
for to go to Church in, and yet is in it self mere civil. The question is
not of application, but of internal nature.

Sacred things applied to Civil buissinesse, do not therefore become Civil,
for who will say, that Prayer, at the beginning of a Parliament, is a Civil
act, though it were used in the Upper, and lower house, and applied to that
Civil meeting, as it ought to be? And why then shall application of Civil
decency unto Sacred buisinesse, make it alter the nature or name of it?

His 3. answer is, that all means of worship are not worship. But he knew well
enough, that this was meant of proper means of worship.

His fourth is, that ordering and manner of disposing, is ill divided from
comeliness. Neither did the Repl. intend so to divide, but rather to conjoine
them, understanding by that manner of disposing, comeliness. But if the
Rejoinder had not cached up some show of confounding comeliness with order,
which was not intended by the Repl. he had been in this argument wholly at a
loss.

His 5. and last answer is, that by Basils leave some things, in themselfs,
may, and sometime must be tolerated. But he should have remembered, that the
question here is not of tolerating, but of appointing and using.

Now if it be lawful, to appoint and use empty and unprofitable Ceremonies in
Gods worship, let those Worshippers judge, that tremble at the Majesty of God,
and are afraid in any manner to appear empty and unprofitablie before him.
Mandata inutilia prorsus, and vana, inutiles, and frivolae Ceremonia solo
spiritu humano adiaventa.
Nay (to pass by our Divines) let the Papists themselves judge. Bellar. de
Pontif. l. 4. c. 17. ad 4. confesses those Ceremonies to be forbidden, which
are unprofitable altogether, and vain praecepts, unproffitable and frivolons
Ceremonies, only by humane Spirit invented. Inanes and inutiles. Estius in
Tit. 1.14. Supervacanca, etuibil ad piet item condu^evic^.
And de effect. Sacrament l. 2. cap. 32. empty and good for nothing. Morethen
needs, and not a jot tending to any Godines, and who not?

11. Thus far concerning the Proposition of our Argument: the Assumtion
follows, which is this: To appoint and use the Ceremonies as we do, is not
to order in comely manner, any thing pertaining to Gods worship. The reason is,
because order requires not the institution or usage of any new thing, but
only the right placing and disposing of things formerly instituted.

1. The Rejoinder answer 1. that order requires new time, place, and measure:
which is a Sophistry in the Proposition before abused, and confuted.

2. His second is, that ordering in comely manner, or comeliness requires the
institution of such formalities, as shall be suitable to the dignity and
variety of divine actions. Where the term formalities is not so formal, that
a man may spy in it the difference it has from other things, the Rejoynd. in
his manuduction, page 36. appropriateth it to Bishops Roshe^s etc. eve^ as they
are distinct from Surplices: the Bishops went before the Hearse in their
formalities, the Clearks in their Surplices. So that it seems to mean some
Ceremonies of state, and dignity: of which kind neither Cross, nor Surplice
is any. Howsoever, unto ordering of one thing does not require another new
thing, but only disposing of that one. For if it did, then that new thing
(because that also must be ordered) would require another new thing, and that
also for order sake another, so that no one thing could be ordered, without an
infinite heap of new things.

As for the Dignity of divine actions, that is best suited with man's reverent
and humble simplicity, not with outward shows of dignity, invented by man.
The woman's ordinary veil was more suitable to the dignity of Gods worship,
then if she had adorned her self with gold, and precious stones.

Paul's plain cloak was more suitable then the richest Coap in all Rome. If
Order requires outward shows of dignity, then Rome, which is a confused
Babel, may be to all Churches an imitable example of religious order, for the
Council of Trent sess. 22. professes, their mass Ceremonies to be invented.
That the Majesty of such a Sacrifice might be set out.

Quo Majestas tanti Sacrificij commendaretur.
12. To show further that Order requires not such Ceremony as ours, the
notation of the word was brought in, signifying no such thing. Now the
Rejoinder grants that originally the word does not conteyne within the
compass of it, such kind of Ceremonies, though by usage it may. Which is
very true: but helps not, except the Def. or Rejoinder whose principal
Argument is taken from this place, and only retorted by us, can prove, that in
this place, the word order is extended beyond his original signification. He
will not therefore stand with us, about the signification of the word in this
place: let order (says he) in this place signify no more then placing. But he
makes his retrait to the word Comeliness: asking if comeliness be nothing? I
answer yes, it is some thing: but the Replier did not insist in that word,
because he took the force of the Def. his Argument from this place principally
to lie upon order.

But seeing the Rejoinder has given up Order, I will add a word or ^wo
concerning Comeliness.

I take this for granted, that seeing the Rejoinder confesses Order here to be
taken in strict signification, as opposed only to confusion, page 78. he will
also consent with us, that Decency in the same place and sentence, is to be
taken in strict signification, as opposed only to the vice of undecencie. Now
hence it follows, that Decency requires nothing but that which is
necessary to the avoiding of undecencie.

I ask therefore, if undecencie in Gods worship cannot be avoided, without
double, treble, sacred significant Ceremonies, of man's inventing? If not, then
the Apostles did much forget themselves, in their public worshipping of God,
before men had invented such Ceremonies, for that is no answer which the
Rejoinder after gives: all Churches are not bound to this or that particular
way of Comeliness. All Churches are bound to avoid undecencie, and to do
that which Decency requires, or binds them unto. If yea, then Decency
does not require such kind of Ceremonies.

Neither does it in deed, any more the^ Order. Decentiae est cum cultut Dei,
idone^t atque convenientibut temporis loci, personae and gestus cire^^ stantijs
absolvitur. De ha^ Decentia, Apostolus loqui tur. 1. Cor. 14.4^.
So Mr. Perkins, lat. to. 2. p. 888. Decency is, when the service of God is
performed with convenient and fit circumstances of time, place, person, and
gesture, and hereof the Apostle speaks. 1. Cor. 14.40.

The plain simple truth, without Ceremonial affectation, is, that Decency
is (in this place) nothing but good civil fashion, D^^^rum apponitur vanita^i,
sordibut, ^uxni: non est in casuli^, cappl^, aut ceremoniarum lar^is, etc.
agreeable not only to worship, but also to any grave assembly. Decency
(says Pareus upon the place) is opposed to vanity, Spots, ryott it stands
not in hoods, Caps, or vizardes of fond Ceremonies. etc.

I dare appeall to D.B. his conscience, if Baptism be not as decently
administered without the Cross, as with it? and public prayers made as
decently without a Surplice, as with it? Let Conscience here speak, and the
Rejoinder hearkening unto it, will (without doubt) confess, that Decency in
this place does no more require either Cross or Surplice, then Order, and
that both of them together does no more require those Ceremonies, then a
hundred other, which in England (though not at Rome) are denied unto them.

To this purpose, Mr. Attersoll, in his second book of the Sacram. cap. 5.
says well: If they refer all this trash and trumperie (of humane Ceremonies
in Baptism) to order and comeliness, as Hosius does, do they not thereby
blasphemously accuse the Baptism of John, and of the Apostles, of
uncomelinesse and disorder? whereas the comeliness and dignity of the
Sacraments is to be esteemed by the word of God, by the institution of Christ,
by the simplicity of the Gospel, and by the practice of the Apostles: Nothing
is more comely, decent, and orderly, then that which Christ commands and
allows: nothing is more uncomely and unseemly, then that which man inventeth
in the service of God, and in the celebration of the Sacraments, thereby
inverting and perverting the holy ordinances of God.

12. The receyved definitions of Order are brought in to the same purpose, by
the Replier. And the Rejoinder yields so much as they importe, viz. that
order in strict signification does not implie such Ceremonies as ours.

He must therefore either prove, that in this place. 1. Cor, 14.40. that word is
not taken strictly, which he himself formerly granted, or give up this place
which is (by his own confession) the only place of all the New. Testament,
for warranting of such Ceremonies, or fly to Decency, upon which he cannot
any more fasten then upon order, as has been showed.

Nothing material is added in the rest of the Rejoynd. his answer unto this
Argument (where our Divines are observed, to distinguish order and decency
from mystical Ceremonies, the context of the chapter. 1. Corinthians 14. Is
declared to respect no mystical Ceremonies, the phrase of Scripture is showed
to consent,) nothing (I say, and the Reader may see) is added: but only the
same things are repeated about Order, and Decency which are now sufficiently
discussed.

So that the Rejoinder has nothing to say to the contrary, but that we may
safely conclude, Ergo, to appoint and use the Ceremonies as we do, is not left
to the liberty of the Church, 1. e. it is unlawful.

If there were nothing else against them, in all the Scripture, then this place,
beside which the Def. and Rejoinder can find none in all the New. Testament,
for them, any indifferent man would say they are not allowed.

Those that are devoted to the Ceremonies, may shufle up and down, first to
order, and when they are beaten thence, to Decency, and from Decency, when
they can defend that no longer, to Edification, as the Rejoinder does: but all
will not help. Let them pitch or insist upon one of these grounds, without
starting, I will pawn my head, their anchor will come home to them again as
finding no fast ground, either in Order, or Decency, or edification, for
double significant Ceremonies (such as ours) to ride at.

The Def. could frame no Consequence out of any of these words, the Rejoinder
says there is one, but he cannot show it. To the contrary consequence nothing
is answered of any moment.

And is not this a miserable cause, which has no place in all the New
Testament, which the best Advocates can allege for it, but only that; out of
which it is utterly confounded? To the Defend. and Rejoynders mainteyning such
a cause, this testimony may be given that they would willingly, so far as
they can, favor things which the times favor, and therefore strive to make
something, of that which makes nothing for them. In the former section, when
Order, Decency, and Edification, should have been handled as Rules, according
to the title of the digression, the Rejoinder soddainly breaks off, referring
them to a fitter place. Now here in this place, he was constreined to touch
upon them, but so softly and sparingly, that it appears he found this no
fitter place then the former, for those reserved considerations. When shall we
come to the fitter place?

SECT. 17. Concerning the ancient Fathers allowing of Humane Ceremonies.
1. OF these, the Repl. answered, it cannot be proved, nor is probable, that
from the first beginning of the Primitive Church they brought in any new
inventions. Upon this, the Rej. accusing not him alone, but others also, that
they can believe no truth cross to their opinion, because they seek honor
one of another, and praesume of their new traditions, as if the spirit of
truth had come only to them, or from the^ alone, answers that it is a
matter of fact, proved by Records of Churches, against which nothing can be
said. But if he could keep-in his passion, so long, as to hear this only
word, that there are no sufficient Records of any such thing, exstant from the
beginning, then he might see that sufficient answer is given, unto the name of
all Fathers, allways.

Yet I will add one conjecture, to show, that those observations which seem to
have been universal, in the Primitive Church, were not so in deed, without
exception. Praying toward the East, has as ancient testimony, as any other
humane Rite. Tertullian Apol. cap. 16. witnesses, that that was one cause why
the Christians were esteemed to worship the Sun. And yet Socrates, lib. 5.
cap. 22. does witness, that at Antioche which was the first Church of
Christians by name, they used not to place their Mysteries which directed their
posture of prayer, toward the East, but rather toward the West. And why may we
not conceyve the like of Easter, as well as of this East observation?

2. It was secondly answered, that those, Feasts, which the Primitive Church
is said to have observed, were not by Canonical imposition, but voluntary
accommodation to the infirmity of some, as appears by the variety of their
observation, and Socrates his testimony. Mark now, what a Rejoinder is given?
1. He tells us of a strange conjecture of his, even from this answer* viz.
that the Churches held, it not only lawful, but also convenient, to impose
upon themselves such Feasts. As if occasional accommodation, were all one
with imposition, or voluntary joining in action for the good that is in it,
were always a certain argument of holding that opinion which others do affixe
unto it. But if they had thought them so co^venie^t, yet that Arg. would be of
little force. For many Ceremonies were thought then convenient, which long
since are universally thought otherwise of, and therefore left off, though no
reason of inconvenience can be showed, which did not agree to those times as
well as to succeeding times, except further abuse: which cannot be denied of
our Ceremonies in question, as religious use of milk, honey, and absteyning
from washing ones hands for certain days after Baptism etc. 2. That which was
mentioned of infirmity occasioning this accommodation, the Rej. (after his
manner) cries down as a fiction, boldly delivered, without proof, or color,
merely for opposition sake: Whereas notwithstanding it is so clear, that the
infirmity of men newly converted from Iudaisme, and Gentilisme, did bring
into Christian Churches customs like unto those in use among Jews and
Gentiles, that Cardinal Baronius, from that ground mainteyneth many Ceremonies.
Quid mirum, si imolitat apud Gentiles (add etiam and Iudaeos) consuetudines, a
quibus eos, quamvis Christiani effecti essent, penipus posse divelli,
impossible videretur, easdem in Dei cultum transferri, sanctissimi Episcopi
cineessetunt: ad an. 58. p. 606.
What wonder if the grown customs among the Gentiles (and we may add the
Jews also) were such as from which, tho they were converted to Christianisme,
they were yet so hardly taken, that it might seem impossible to putt them
quite off, what wonder I say then if the most holy Bishops have granted them
place in the worship of God?

Doctor Iackson, in his Original of Idolatry sect. 4. chap. 23. shows the
first occasion of Superstition in Christians, to have been the infirmities,
whereby it came to pass, that heathenish (and Jewish) Rites, whereto men had
been long accustomed, could not easily be extirpated. Where also about such
accommodations, he has this remarkable observation. To outstrip our
adversaries in their own policies, or to use means abused by others to a
better end, is a resolution so plausible to wordly wisdom that even
Christians have mightily overreached and entangled themselves, by too much
seeking to circumvent or go beyond others.

About the Variety which was of old in the observation of these feasts, the
Rejoinder answers, that it notwithstanding, the agreement for the things
themselves was universal. Which if he would take with a grain of salt, viz.
that after some space of time, it was (for ought we know) universal, but not
upon any Ecclesiastical imposition, nor upon any known grounds out of Gods
word, it is the same that the Repl. affirms, and Socrates lib. 5. cap. 22.
laboreth to confirm.

3. Mention was further made of the mischeife that came in by those humane
observations. To which the Rejoinder answers, that the Anniversarie
solemnities have not obscured, but praeserved that simplicity of the Gospel.
And if they had so done, by accident Satan's malice, and man's frailty, that is
nothing but what may be affirmed of Divine ordinances, But 1. the Def. his
position was in general of universal Ceremonies by humane institution, and
not Feasts alone? Now those first Ceremonial observations are guilty of
opening that gate, for all the humane praesumtions to enter into Gods house,
which pressed in after them: which gate could never be shut from that day to
this. 2. Those very Feasts made a composition or mixture of humane institutions
with divine, and therefore did not praeserve simplicity. They also were from
their first rise not only aequalled unto, but also extolled above the Lords
day. Easter brought in a superstitions Lent to attend upon it, made Baptism
wayt for her Moon: and conformed our Lords Supper unto the Jewish Passover in
unleavened bread, etc. It was the first apple of contention among Christians,
the first weapon, wherw^^h the Bishop of Rome played his prises against other
Churches, and after slew so many Bri^tons with, by Austin the monk. Holie-days
in honor of Christ invited unto them Saints holy Days etc. 4. It is
praesumtion, to make men's inventions as guiltless of evil consequences, as
Gods holy ordinances. They are active efficacious occasions given of evil:
these are only passive occasions taken.

Neither is there any corruption of Gods ordinances, whose original occasion
may not be found in men's (nay fathers) Ceremonious praesumtions.

4. It was finally answered by the Repl. that the allways of these Feasts,
cannot include the Apostolical times, and for other allways, Bellarmine Cont.
1. l. 4. c. 9. has the same plea, and the answer given unto him by our
Divines, may serve here. The Rejoinder here 1. insinuates that it is very
likely, these Feasts, or some of them, were on foot while some Apostles lived:
because Polycarpe praetended John to have taught Easter.

On foot indeed was the mystery of Antichristian corruption in the Apostles
times. But that which Polycarpe is said to have praetended, was for the
fourteen day of the month, and is confuted by a contrary praetense of the
latin Churches, from Peter and Paul. Socrat. l. 5. cap. 22. He 2. adds,
under Augustines name that it is insolent madness, to think that not to be
well done, which has been done by all the Church, though it began after the
Apostles times. Now though I find no such saying of Augustines, in the
epistle quoted for it, but to the Contrary, I find this rule, that it is
lawful or not lawful to believe or not to believe other witnesses or
testimonies besides that of the Scriptures) so far as you see they bear or do
not bear weight to make us give more credit to a thing. Alijs testibut, vel
testimonijs (preterquam Divinarum Scripturarum) c^edere, vel non credere,
liceat, quantum ea moments ad faciendam sulem, vel habere, vel non habere
perpenderis.
Which being granted, the fact of the Church cannot so confirm, this or that
to be right and well, as that it should be madness to deny it. Yet let it be
his saying, I answer, if this be true then it must needs follow, that giving of
the Communion (and that as is most likely sopped) upon opinion of necessity,
cannot be denied well and good, for that (as is well known) was done generally
in Augustines time, and long before. It must follow also, that they were
special insolent mad men, that first began to disalow either that, or any
other ancient thing of general observatio^: Ecclesia Dei, intermultam pal^am,
multaque, Zizanta, constituta, multa toleravit.
which Augustine would never have said, who professed of his time, that the
Church of God set in the heap of chafe and tares, did only suffer many
things, only ep. 119.

He 3. distinguishes betwixt Bellarmines, and the Defendants alleging of
traditions, because Bell. spoke of doctrines necessary to salvation. Which is
not true for Bell. in that chapter makes no mention of doctrines necessary to
salvation: and in the next chapter but one cap. 11. he confesses, that all
things absolutely necessary to salvation, are written in the Scriptures, and
(which is much more) all things that are either necessary, or profitable for
all men to know.

SECT. 18.19. Concerning Protestants witnessing against the Negative argument
from Scripture.
1. BEllarmine was brought in by the Def. as an indifferent Adversary,
confessinge that Protestants hold the Apostles to have instituted some
things, perteyning to rites and order, which are not written. Which was also
granted unto him, as making nothing against us. Only the vanity of that
allegation was in some particulars declared, which how they are cleared (it
being a matter of no moment) I refer to the Readers judgment.

2. Chemnitius was alleged, saying, there be some Ecclesiastical Rites, which
have neither command, nor testimony, in Scripture, which yet are not to be
rejected. Answer was made, that this in a right sense is granted by us. The
Rejoinder taxes this as an idle shift: because 1 Chemnitius did not intend
such a restrictive sense. 2. Circumstances of Order have command and
testimony in Scripture. But 1. It is no idle shift so to interpret an
allegation objected, as that the interpretation cannot be confuted, but barely
denied. 2. As Circumstances of order and decency have their general command
or testimony in Scripture, so have those Rites which Chemnitius understands,
or else his sentence is without any ground out of Scripture.

3. The same answer is given, and no other Rejoinder made, about Calvin,
Danaeus, Whitakers and Zanchie, saving that of Zanchie, it is observed and
urged by the Rejoynd. that he says some Ceremonies may help for the
furtherance of piety which have no foundation in the word: giving instance of
the solemnities of Easter, etc. Tract. de Sacra. Scriptura. For whom I answer,
that his sentence must be understood of no particular foundation, or else he
should give more then any Papist will require, concerning their humane
Ecclesiastical Ceremonies. As for his instances in the solemnities of Easter,
it seems he reckoned them among Ceremonies of order and decency, because as
the Def. and Rej. confess, that is the only place authorizing humane
institutions in Religion. If he meant otherwise, he did as a man, cross his
own rules, as after (God willing) shall be showed.

For the present, let that testimony of Zanchie be well considered, which he
sets down in Col. 2.8. It is certain, that this consequence is very good:
this or that is not according to Christ: therefore it is not to be admitted.
This ought to be enough to any Christian man: It is not according to Christ:
therefore I admit it not, in the buisinesse of atteyning to salvation. Where
is to be noted, 1. That according to Christ, is opposed (by the Apostle) to
according to the traditions of men, and therefore is all one, with not appointed
by Christ. 2, that all Ceremonies instituted to teach the doctrine perteyning
to salvation, are part of the means whereby we are supposed to be helped and
directed, in seeking and atteyning salvation.

4. About Iunius, there is more ado, because his words are set down at large
on both pars. But as for that which the Def. and Rejoinder cite out of him,
page 109. I cannot say much more then has been answered to the other Divines,
until a consequence be framed out of them, more effectual to the purpose,
then is in that which the Rejoynd. only quaestioneth. And does the rule 1.
Cor. 14. concern nothing but circumstances of Order? Or can our opposites be
accorded with this saying? For it has been formerly manifested what that rule
does require, and how it may be accorded with our tenent.

On the other part, this professed, sworn sentence of Iunius is alleged: If
any man, either by Civil, or Ecclesiastical authority, will add things not
necessary, nor agreeable to Order, we would not pertinaciously contend with
him, but desire only that he would seriously consider of three things. 1. By
what authority, or example, he is led to think, that the holy Church of God,
and the simplicity of the mysteries of Christ (whose voice only is heard by
his sheep) must be clad with humane traditions, which Christ does reject? 2.
To what end he judges, that these things should be added unto those that are
divine? For if the end be conformity with others, it were more aequitie, that
other Churches should conform to those, which come nearest to the Word of God
(as Ciprians counsel is) then that these should conform to the other. If the
end be comeliness, what is more comely then the simplicity of Christ? What
is more simple then that comeliness.

If there be no other reason beside will, then that of Tertullian is to be
thought of: The will of God, is the chief necessity, and that the Church of
God is not tied unto man's wisdom in things Divine. The third thing to be
thought on is, what event allways has followed upon humane traditions, as
long experience does show? Ecclesiastici, lib. 3. Cap. 5. This testimony is
so full, and clear, that it needs no candle of Commentary, or Consequence,
to be set by it. What can the Rejoinder answer?

1. His first is, that Iunius does not here condemn our Ceremonies even
because they are not commanded in the Word. But he might have remembered out of
sect. 2. that the argument is of warrant and direction from the word, not of
direct and special commanding. Now Iunius plainly denies authority or
example of the word, or any thing but man's will, to be the ground of such
Ceremonies, and for that cause would have them avoided.

2. His second is, that Iunius wrote not this of such Ceremonies as ours:
because he speaks of those that are neither necessary, nor according to
order, rejected by Christ, added to Divine things, which must needs import
necessity and worship a^ fixed unto them. But had it not been better counsel,
for the Rejoinder to have held his peace, then to let every man see what
miserable shifts he is driven to? 1. Iunius having made this conclusion: that
Magistrates may not constitute, and change persons, things, Ceremonies at their
pleasure, and that those which teli them they may (as our Def. and Rejoinder
do in part) are therein no well willers to the Church, propounds this
question: if it be not in the Magistrates power, to appointe, or abrogate such
things? to which he answers negatively: because all necessaries, and
essentialls are appointed by Christ, and as for other not necessary things,
above the sphere of order, he gives those reasons, which are in the words,
largely cited. Now 1. what a wreched evasion is this, that he spoke not of our
Ceremonies?

He spoke of all not necessary not appointed by Christ: but yet he spoke not
of ours.

This is as some should deny that rule which some logicians call de omni and
de nullo, to hold in Ceremonies: or affirm that to be false of English
Ceremonies, which is true of all Ceremonies. 2. When our Divines speak against
Popish Ceremonies, the Rejoinder his ordinary answer is, that they speak of
Ceremonies held necessary, and therefore not of such as ours. Now when Iunius
expressly speaks of Ceremonies not necessary, the Rejoinder concludes, that
he could not mean ours or such like. How should any man speak, to put such
a Rejoinder from having some thing to speak? 3. Iunius said, that those
Ceremonies are unlawfully appointed, which are not convenient to, or required
by Order: Ergo (says the Rejoinder.) he could not speak of such as ours are.
And yet the same Rejoinder manud. page 33. confesses our Ceremonies to be
double or treble Ceremonies and those of order, to be only single. Neither
could he ever yet find any fit place, to show our Ceremonies agreeable to
order.

Nay when the Repl. by this argument, out of 1. Cor. 14.40. proved these
Ceremonies unlawful, the Rej. fled from Order, to Decency, and Edification.

And yet here in this place, being beaten out of those coverts by judicious
Iunius, he betaketh himself again to that halfmoon of order, which before he
had quitted. 4. Iunius says, such Ceremonies are rejected by Christ: Therefore
(says the Rejoinder:) he cannot mean such as ours. As if he should say, those
that affirm our Ceremonies are rejected by Christ, cannot mean our
Ceremonies. 5. Iunius speaks of Ceremonies added to divine things: and so
(by the Rejoinder his collection, not of such as ours, because that must needs
import necessity, and worship affixed to them. And yet both Def. and Rej. cap.
2. sect. 3. can find out many additions to Divine things, which are intended
only for praeservation of them, and the^fore (by their own judgment) must
not needs import necessity, and worship. Such turning, winding, and running
against walls, you shall seldom see an ingenuous man use in a good cause.

5. Two things yet the Rejoinder notes in the by: 1. Iunius would not resist
such things pertinaciously, as the Repl. does 2. Iunius speaking against
cladding Gods ordinances with the garments of humane Ceremonies, had another
meaning, then the Def. p. 3. Rejoinder page 5. where he calls such
Ceremonies as ours, the garment of Religion: because by clothing Iunius meant
adorning and hiding of nakedness, but the Def. opposed garments to members of
the body: and therefore the Repl. need not by his marginall note have applied
Iunius his clothing to the Def. his garment. Now for the first of these, there
is difference betwixt pervicatious contending, without reason and measure,
which Iunius modesly puts from him, and that constant restistance which he
himself teaches here in this place, where he affirms that Christ's sheep
(even in such Ceremonial matter) will not nor ought to hear any voice but
Christ's. For this, he foreseeing that it would be accounted pervicacie,
disclaimeth that, and yet does thoroughlie resist. So would the Rep. if he may
have leave: If not, I see not why he may not do the same thing, though he be
censured for it, as Iunius feared he should be.

And this I may truly say, I have heard the Repl. more then once profess, that
when, in studying of Divinity, he was something perplexed about Ceremonies and
such like humane institutions, by reason of some ambiguous, and ill consenting
passages of some others, this one place of Iunius (so solemnly confirmed with
the oath of such a man, for his synceritie and unpartiallnesse in the
buisinesse, and alleging such grave reasons for his judgment therein) did very
much affect him, and first setle his mind for such matter. So that if he be
deceyved, Iunius has deceyved him. But he has now more cause then before, to
esteem much of this place because, the utmost that the Rejoinder could say to
it, is as good as just nothing.

As for the difference which the Rejoinder would find, betwixt that clothing
of Religion, which Iunius taxes, and the garment of Religion, which the Defend
mainteyneth, I cannot discern it.

For 1. If Iunius meant adorning, as the Rejoinder says he did, that is one
office of a garment, and such a one as the Rejoinder ascribes to Ceremonies
in respect of Religion, page 95. where is said that they are comely
formalities, suitable to the dignity and variety of divine actions. 2. If
Iunius meant hiding of nakedness of Religion, he meant it only in the esteem
of those which impose such Ceremonies. And so all they that add their
Ceremonies to Religion, as useful garments, do seem to account it (in
comparison) naked without them. 3. If the Def. meant to show, that our
Ceremonies are not essential limbs of the body of Religion, so did Iunius
mean to show, that those which add their Ceremonies to Gods ordinances, do
pretend, they add only clothing, not members, to the body of Religion.
Neither is this snaching at words, as the Rejoinder terms it. For it is, and
has been an ordinary comme^dation of Ceremonies, that they are as a garment
to Religion. Whence it was that a Scottishman (as I remember) at the first
coming of King James into England, hearing them mainteyned under that name,
answered that he wondered then how Religion did live, and thrive, in the cold
country of Scotland; without such linsiewoolsy garments?

6. Unto this full testimony of Iunius, the Repl. added the words of Zanchie,
another witness of the Defend. His words in his epistle to Q. Elizabeth, are
these: the Church must be ordered by the rule of the Apostolcall Church, as
well in Ceremonies, as in doctrine. The Rejoinder answers 1. that this is no
more contrary to the Def. then to Zanchie himself, acknowleging (elsewhere)
some Ceremonies lawful, which have neither command nor testimony of
Scripture, which he would never say of doctrinals. Now 1. If it be also against
Zanchie himself, yet it disableth his testimony, for the Def. 2. This which is
alleged out of him, for Ceremonies without testimony or foundation in
Scripture, has been answered before, that it must needs be understood of
particular foundation. And so he might well say the same of doctrinalls. For in
this there is no difference betwixt Ceremonies, and many other things, which
are not Ceremonies, and yet apperteine to Conscience. As the Apostle said: let
all things be done comely and in order, so said he also: whatsoever things
are venerable, or honest, just, of good report, and praise, let them be done.

All the particulars of these latter, are not Ceremonial: and yet many
hundreds of such things have no more command, or testimony in Scripture,
then the particulars of order and Decency: Neither have the generals of order
and Decency, less command and testimony in Scripture then the general of
these.

His 2. answer that Zanchies comparison is to be understood of similitude, not
of aequalitie, is in the former words answered.

For no disparitie can be showed, betwixt many particulars of Doctrinall
points, in their cases of practice, considered with all circumstances, and the
particulars of Decency and Order: much less betwixt their generals. As for
example it is as difficult for D. B. to fetch from any doctrine in Scripture,
this particular: It is venerable, just, and of good report, for him to write
su^he a Rejoinder as he has done, as this particular: the Cross in Baptism
is orderly, decent, and to edification. I take both to be impossible. But
suppose both to be probable, the former (being no Ceremony) is no more
determined in Scripture, then the later.

There has been a fashion taken up of speaking otherwise, but no reason can be
rendered of it. Let any man show the reason, and I will yield.

The epistle out of which this quotation is, was written in deed against our
Ceremonies, yet the Repl. leaving to a fitter place, noted only for the
present purpose, that it was written of them. But the Rejoynd. being great with
an observation or two, adds about that: Moreover Zanchie when he wrote to Q
Eliz. to persuade her not to urge the Ceremonies so severly, did write at the
same time to B. Jewel, that Ministers should rather yield to them, then leave
their places: because they are not simply unlawful.

To which I answer 1. Zanchie writ to Q. Eliz not only that the Ceremonies
should not be so severe^y urged, but also that they ought not to be urged,
imposed, or allowed of at all, but abolished. And of this his judgment, he
gave such effectual reasons, as can never be answered. Among other, one is
proper unto this place, and fit here to be remembered, because it overthrows
all that warrant which the Def. and Rejoinder have hitherto, or can hereafter
plead for them, out of 1. Cor. 14. Order, Decency, Edification. These
Ceremonies says he make not for edification, but for public dissension,
private perturbation of conscience, with scandal of good and bad. They make
not for order, but disorder, and confusion of good Ministers with evil or
Popish, who ought even in garments to differ. They make not for decency of
Christ's Spouse: because they are a strange ridiculous, idolatrous attire of
this Romish whore.

2. Zanchie when he writ unto B. Jewel, gave no reason of this counsel for
yielding, but left them to be invented by B. Jewel. Now because those reasons
of yielding were never yet made known, whereby the former reasons directed by
Zanchie against urging can possibly be overborne, I cannot otherwise think,
but this later counsel was more out of charity guided by humane erring
prudence, then out of judgment grounded on Scripture. Howsoever our question
is, not only of yielding in case of extreme necessity, but also of
appointing and urging men to that extreme necessity.

3. Zanchie does not persuade to allow of these Ceremonies by subscription, or
silence, but only in extreme necessity, to yield unto them, and that with
Protestation. Etsi fortitorestistendum est Magistr^it illis traditionum et
leges: Po^tificum acriter v^tuperand^, quib^s in Populum Dei,
Now this was according to a kind of charitable Policy, which Luther is
author of about all Popish Ceremonies: de Liberate Christiana, in these
words: Although we must manfully resist those Masters of traditions, and the
laws of the Popes wherewith they overrun the people of God are tartly to be
dispraised, ^t assantur, tarbae tamen pavi dae parcendum est, quam captivam
tenent eisdem leg^^us impij illi tyranni, donec explicentur, In liges and
legissatores ivehu^is, et tamen simoul serves (...) infirmis, donec et insi
tyrannid^m cognos^ant and liberta^^m suam intellegaus.
yet the timorous multitude (whom those wicked Tyrants lead captive with the
same laws) must stoop till they be pl^inely laid open. You may inveigh against
the laws and law makers, but withal you may observe them with the weak,
until both they do know the Tyranny and come to understand their liberty.

But 1. what warrant have we for such a course but of Gods word? 2. Mr.
Hooker, page 247. derideth this course, as a Theorie neither allowable, nor any
way practicable in England.

3. Our opposites, that defend, and commend the Ceremonies, as orderly decent
things, tending to Edification, cannot without contradiction assent unto this
counsel. D. B. in deed did formerly begin after some manner, to put some
piece of this course in practice. But the ill success that he found in it,
has since made him, and others, keep far from that part of it, which concerns
Protestation, and in stead thereof, to turn them unto Commendation. Did ever
any that writ for our Ceremonies, write such an Epistle as Zanchies, unto
Queen, or King? Can they say so much, and do as they do? Nay is there any
Bishop, that dare license Zanchie his Epistles, to Queen Eliz and B. Jewel,
both together, for to be printed in English?

These things being so, I leave it unto consideration, unto whom the Rejoinder
his affected censure belongs: Now wel-sare a good stomach: He cannot
resist, but he will not yield.

SECT. 20.21. Concerning Reasons against the Negative Argument from Scripture.
1. THe Def. his first reason is: Whatsoever is unlawful is a trangression of
some law revealed in the word. Ergo against it. Ergo not only beside it. The
Repl. grants all: and shows, that it is a mere fantasy, before confuted,
as a cavil, in the Reply, and long since, by Mr. Cartwrights, 2. Rep. p. 56.
not agreeable to the very words of the Argument, to which it is opposed. Upon
this the Rejoynd. powers out words He turns head: O strange! a Babe owned
from the birth, suckled by many Scriptures, an ill favored faced brat, absurd,
contradictorie, when he is taken in a snare, he says he is mistaken. And what
reason has he to back or bear out all these words with? If the Scriptures
(says he) condemn what soever is done not only against, but beside the
direction thereof, then does it condemn something as unlawful for being only
beside it, and not any way against it. To which I answer, that it does not
follow: because a thing may be only beside the word some way, and yet some way
against it. Only beside the particular praescript of it, and yet against the
general command of it.

If a Father charge his son, or a Master his servant, first that for a
certain time, he do nothing beside that which he shall bid him: and then
command him for that time, to read in a certain book, if that son, or
servant, shall beside reading paint antic f^ces in his book, he shall do
only beside the particular command, and yet against the general charge, and
both ways censurable. Let the Rejoinder therefore spare his words, and see
better to his Argument, or rather eat both, that others be not troubled with
them.

2. The second reason, brought by the Def. was: Nothing that is indifferent,
can be pronounced simply unlawful. But some Ceremonies of man's invention are
indifferent. Ergo, not to be pronounced simply unlawful. All which is
granted of circumstances of Order, if by invention, be meant determination;
otherwise, the Assumtion is denied. Though it was added also (
exsuperabundante) that things indifferent are sometime taken so generally,
that in that sense, the proposition may be denied. Against this, I cannot
discern what material thing is Rejoyned. He says, that it is easy to say
the Assumtion is false, and not to show wherein. But I have hitherto thought
that it is sufficient for answer to any Argument, to deny the Assumtion,
until it be proved: and that the falsitie of any sentence, does consist in
this, that it pronounces otherwise then the thing is, and therefore in saying
an assumtion is false, it is not needful, to show wherein.

He says also that the largest sense of things indifferent, does make no
variation of things indifferent. But the Author, and place, was named to him:
Sopingius in his Apology ad lib. Anonym. page 166. Where the case is very
pertinent. For Doctor Sibrandus was challenged by a Remonstrant, who entitled
his book, Bona fides Sitrandi, that as in an Epistle Dedicatorie to the
Arche-Bishop of Canterbury, he had, to win his favor the more against
Vorstius, and his, declared his judgment of the Hierarchy (and Ceremonies) of
England, to be things indifferent, so he spoke of the Magistrates power, under
the same term unfitly, Sopingius, a godly learned man, who had bee^ a
Scholar under Sibrandus, and so desired to help him out of this brier, had no
other way to do it, but by saying that all those things are sometime called
indifferent, which are not necessary to salvation, or without which a man may
be saved.

Now in this sense, the Repl. said, the proposition might be denied: viz. that
nothing indifferent 1. e. not necessary to salvation, is unlawful. The
Rejoinder ^it seems) had not the book, and so ventured to contradict he knew
not what.

3. The third argument was: There must needs allways be variety of Ceremonies
in several Churches. Ergo all are not praescribed.

The Repl. answers, that there neither need, nor ought to be any variety, but
only in particular circumstances of order, for time and place etc. Here the
Rej. (complaining of Coleworts, and of not caring to say any thing, so it be
in opposition) brings in to the contrary some examples of civil decency,
variable according to times and places. But all such things the Repl.
contained in his etc. He adds also variety of solemn feasts But before
those can have place here, it must be proved, that such feasts must needs be.
But (says he) never any Divine so spoke before Mr. Jacob. And has he soon
forgotten, what was even now recited by himself out of Iunius? Such kind of
Rejoynders will never be wanting.

4. The Def. his fourth reason was, that the Nonconformists like well, that
every Minister in his Parish, should determine of Rites and Orders: whence
would follow variety. Ergo they hold some rites of humane invention and
ordination, lawful.

To this the Rejoinder adds, as an explication in text, and table, that
Non-Conformists set up Parish-omnipotence without referen^e to Bishops, as some
teach, or to Synods, as other. Whereby a Minister, and some of his
Parishioners, may ordeyne some Rites and Ceremonies for their use, and the
King, and Church under his authority may not. Now before we come to the Repl.
his answers unto the Def. his reason, let us consider a little the Rejoinder his
addition. 1. The malignant imputation of Parish omnipotency, ill beseems our
Opposites, except that they can show, more power to be given by us unto
Ministers and Elders, in their several Congregations, then by them is given to
Bishops, For until they can show this (which they are as able to do, as to
call effectually that which is not, as if it were) in accusing us, of setting
up Parish omnipotency, they confess themselves, to set up Diocesan
omnipotency, Convocation-omnipotencie, etc.

2. It worse beseems D. B. then most other, except he will confess, that he,
when he was Minister at the Hagh, in Holland, and with the consent of his
people, ordered things in that Congregation (as to receyve the Communion
sitting at the table, to leave out the Cross in Baptism, and Surplice in all
Divine service) did then and there set up Parish-omnipotencie. 3. It is an
injury, more then ordinary, to make us (any way) extol the authori^ie of a
Minister, above the authority of the King, in any matter of appointing and
ordeyning. For though a Minister may do something in his administration, which
no other man can lawfully do, yet none of us ever thought, that he may appoint
and ordeyne any thing to be done, with coactive authority, which the King may
do, in all things lawful, and convenient; even in Church affairs. So that
our tenent is, that the Minister, and his people, may use no Ceremony, nor
exercise any public act of worship, which the King may not appoint, command,
and compel them to. For in holding that no such thing is to be done, beside
that which Christ has appointed, and that the King may, and ought to see that
all Christ's institutions be observed, we must needs be confessed to hold that
assertion, which is the conclusion of these two. 4. The fallacious ground of
this accusation is, that the Minister with his people, may occasionally order
some things, which no man absent can, not for want of authority, but for want
of presence to observe the occasion: as what time the Church meeting shall
begin, upon that day, that the Communion is to be administered, together with
Baptism, and other buisines, more then ordinary. 5. That which he
intermixeth, of reference to Bishops, brings all the Churches of France,
Netherlands, etc. under his Censoriall note, of Parish-omnipotencie.

Thus much for the Rejoinder apart. Now to the Def. 1. His Argument is
rejected, as supposing, all Circumstances to be of like nature with these in
controversy. No (says the Rejoinder) but only that one would like one thing,
and one another. But I say yes, or else he cannot argue from one to the other.
For what consequence is in this: Men may determine of simple circumstances for
order and decency: Ergo they may ordeyne double, treble, sacred, significant
Ceremonies proper to Religion? beside he names in his supposition Festival
days.

2. The second fault, found in the Def. his argument was, it supposes all
circumstances to be of institution. No, says the Rejoinder again. Let him
therefore put ordeyning out of the Sum which he has made of the Def. his
reason, and confess also, that this reason makes nothing for men's instituting
of Ceremonies.

3. The third was, it supposes contrary circumstanc^s, ceremoniously to be
practiced, by the same men as of institution. Not so (says the Rejoinder:) but
only cantrarie fashions practiced by several men, out of their election. Yet
it seems to be for the most part so: because the question is of Ceremonies,
and Ceremonious practicing, not of incidentall fashions. Of institution, which
the Def. calls ordeyning, not of voluntary occasional election. If by
variety of observing Festival days, and not observing them, was by the Def.
understood of several men, then in that part he was misunderstood by the Repl.
Now upon these premises, the Rejoinder concludes all the Repl. his answer to
be nothing but bogling and scurrilitie. What would he have said, if one had
accused him of setting up Diocesan, and Convocation omnipotency.

It seems that (though he abounds in that faculty) he would have wanted
reproachefull words, to express his indignation of such an imputation.

5. In opposition to this misshapen Argument of the Def. taken from
Non-conformists confession, the Rep. propounded one, from the Conformists
confession: You say these Ceremonies are Divine, and yet dare not deny, but
the rejecting of them in other Churches, is Divine.

You retain these Ceremonies as Divine, and yet reject other Ceremonies, of
like nature, as divine as these. What divinity (or agreement) is in such
courses? To this, the Rejoinder answers, that this argues an ill conscience:
because the Def. does not say that these our Ceremonies are Divine, but that
in respect of permis^ive appointment, and in these, they are divine, in
particul^r, and hypothesi, humane. And this may be said of the different
Ceremonies of several Churches. For ill Conscience, I will not be so liberal
in charging the Rejoinder as he is prodigal of it toward the Repl. But ill
science I can easily prove. For 1. He denies the Def. to call our Ceremonies
Divine: because (forsooth) he calls them so in the general, and not in their
special: for so the Def. does interpret his own terms.

Which is as much as to say, he that does not call them every way Divine,
does not call them Divine. 2. He passes by the main terms of our Argument
Divine rejecting of the same Ceremonies in other Churches, Rejecting of other
Ceremomonies, as Divine as these in our Church; and for these he puts
only, different divine Ceremon. in several Churches. This sure is no
scientificall kind of answer. 3. No Divinity will suffer any thing to be
called Divine, but that which (all circumstances considered) may at least
necessarily be concluded out of the Divine law. Otherwise all good humane laws
may be called Divine laws. Now we have hitherto exspected in vain, when our
Ceremonies may be so concluded.

It is altogether impossible, that the institution, and Rejection, of Cross,
and Surplice, in diverse places, should be both Divine, or that the urging of
these, and abolishing of Images, should be Divine, in the same place, and time.
This part therefore of the Argument, the Rejoinder thought good, to answer with
silence.

SECT. 22. Concerning the Assumtion, of the maine Argument, handled in this
Chapter.
1. THe Repl. set down the Def. his plea, with a general answer thus: After
all this ado about the Proposition of the first Argument, Now we are told of
an Assumtio^, out of the Abridgement, and Mr. Hy: viz: that Ceremonies have no
warrant out of the word of God being humane inventions, For Mr. Hy: I cannot
say much (because his reasons are not in printe) but for ^he Authors of the
Abridgement, they have great wrong done them. Whosoever will turn to the
place quoted by the Def. in the Abridgement, shall see, that the words which
our Def. has turned into a Proposition, are there but part of an illustration,
belonging to this proposition: All Ceremonies that swerve from the Rules given
in the Word, for the Churches direction, in matters of Ceremonies, are
unlawful. The Assumtion of which is: But the Ceremonies in question, do
swerve from those Rules. Now all this chief pith, both of Proposition, and
Assumtion, is by the Def. omitted: A by thing is put in place of the
Proposition. A new assumtion is formed: and yet all fathered upon the
Abridgement. What has the Rejoinder to say against all this? 1. This demurrer
should have come in at the first. But first, or last, if it be true which here
said, the Def. cannot be defended.

2. The Repl. granted the whole Argument, sect. 2. In saying (forsooth) that he
took for granted, whatsoever was there said for the all-sufficiencie of
Scripture.

3. This of it self, is an Argument against our Ceremonies. What then? the
Authors of the Abridgement, may yet have wrong, if it be made theirs, against
their will. 4 It is fit to be the first Argument, because if this be granted,
all other rules are vain. The question is nothere of fitness for place, but
of fitting it to the Abridgement. Yet this whole Argument being granted
(according to our meaning) of those that the Rejoinder calls double triple
Ceremonies, the Rules have use about single ones. 5. The Proposition is taken
out of the Abridgement, page 44. and the Assumtion is fitted to it, Let it be
so, yet if that be made a proposition of theirs, which only was an
illustration, or confirmation of their proposition, and (a new assumtion fitted
unto it according to an adversaries pleasure) the whole argument fathered upon
them, as a first and chief one, this surely cannot be excused from wrong doing.

2. To the Def. his answer unto the Assumtion, viz. that in general and
permissive appointment, our Ceremonies are (not humane but) Divine, the Repl.
said that he understood not a permissive apointment, to be other then an
appointment without appointment: because to permit, is neither to command or
appointe, nor forbid.

Here the Rejoinder among many shrewed words, has this reason that the same
things are commanded, in general, but in particular are only permitted, And
for ignorance of this, he twi^teth the Repl. with want of logic. But I cannot
yet see, out of any logic how a general can be commanded, generally, and any
true special or particular of it be only permitted. He that commands all
order and comeliness, commands also every special of it. Every general
command, applied unto his true special subject, makes that specially
commanded.

It is commanded in general that every husband should love his wife, not in
special, that Aquila should love Priscilla: yet suppose Priscilla to be Aquila
his wife, she may challenge conjugall love, all so well as if hername had been
in that Command in special. Else we may as well say, that superstition,
will worship, or at least disorder, to which order is opposed, is forbidden in
general, but some specialls of them or it, are only permitted. The truth is,
Cross and Surplice, cannot with any show of reason, or common sense, be said
to be commanded in general, any more then in special, no nor yet permitted,
either in special or in general. The Rejoinder has yet found no fit place,
to prove the command though it mainely concerns his cause, and of it self
alone might satisfy any man's conscience, if it could be proved, and the
permission is the maine question of this whole Dispute.

Chapter second, Concerning worship.
ALl the material doctrine of this Chapter is before discussed, in the
Manuduction, sect. 5.6.7. Where the nature, distinctions, and differences of
worship, are weighed, and found of no moment for our Ceremonies aid. It shall
suffize therefore here, to refer the Reader unto those places, adding only
some notes, upon some passages, formerly not declared.

SECT. 1. Concerning worship, distinguished into proper, or essential, and
unproper, or accidental.
1. THe Def. says, that by proper and essential worship, he understood
Ceremonies so necessarily required to Gods service, as that the contrary
thereof must needs displease him.

Hereupon the Repl. inferred, that all Ceremonies, which serve for decency,
and edification, must needs be proper and essential worship: because the
contrary of decency and edification must needs displease God, in his worship.

Mark now the Rejoinder his answer: The contrary of decency and edification
displeases God. But the contrariety of particular Rites, serving to decency
and edification, do not displease him: because they fall into one and the same
general kind, without contrariety thereto, or therein. As fire and water are
not contrary to an element, nor black and white, to color, nor reasonable,
and unreasonable, to a creature: so contrary orders, contrary formalities of
decency, and contrary means of edification, are not contrary to order,
decency and edification. All this answer depends upon a distinction betwixt
general, and special.

Now 1. This is a certain, infallible rule: what essence soever is found in
any general, that must needs be in every special, contained under it. There is
no essence in an element generally taken, which is not both in the fire, and
water, none in color so taken, but is both in black and white, none in the
notion of a creature, which is not in man and beast. From hence therefore it
necessarily follows, that if Order and decency in general, be essential
worship, every true special of them must needs be so.

2. It is not of, or for nothing, that the Rejoinder does so waver in his
speech: contrary Ceremonies serving to comeliness, and edification,
contrariety of orders, contrariety of formalities of comeliness, and means
of edification. For this means, all his answer is at least put out of comely
order serving to edification. For that which serves to comeliness, and order,
all formalities of them, and all means are not specialls, under the genus or
general of decency, order, edification, but under the general of means,
formalities, etc. So that the wholle distinction is confounded, by this wordy
explication of it. 3. Contrariety of orders he confesses, and yet denies
them to be contrary to Order: As if order contrary to order, were not
contrary to order! He will say no, not to order in general. But then that
order in special, must have some specificall difference, not contained in the
general of order, making the contrariety: which should (if it could) have
been declared. By the same proportion, also as he acknowledges contrary
orders, he must also acknowledge contrary decencies, and edifications: and
this has need of declaraiion, because it is a new inventio^* not to be
trusted, before it be tried. 4. By order, in this place, must needs be meant
good order, otherwise, it were as well order, to set the carte before the
horse, as the horse before the carte. Now in good order, the things ordered
may be someway contrary, as black and white horse set before the carte, and
yet the order one and the same: and so in decency. Edification is only an
end. But good order, and decency of the same things, in their particular or
inviduall use, can be no more contrary to any good order, and decency of the
same things in the same use, the^ blackto black and white to white. 5. The
plain truth is, that order and Decency (as they pertain to our question)
do arise out of the outward disposition and temper of things, as health does
out of the inward disposition and temper of the body, and therefore does admit
no more contrariety, then good health does.

2. Because the Def. in his distinction, placed Edification only on the part
of Accidental worship, that was noted as a flaw. To which the Rejoinder
answers, that essential parts of worship serve also to edification, and
worship of themselves. But 1. this can be no more gathered out of the Def. his
words, then that all essential worship serves for decency: for he places
these two together, as ends of accidental parts of worship, that they serve
for decorum, and edification. 2. This is but to help a broken leg, with a
broken crutche. For esse^tiall worship tending to worship of it self, is as
broken a phraze, as the former was a distinction.

3. It was noted also, that the Def. confounded appurtenances, and parts of
worship. The Rejoinder answers, that those things which are appurtenances
only in proper, simple, and strict sense, are parts of worship improperly,
and in a sort. So in deed at the University, among Sophisters improprie,
laxe, modo quodam, quodammodo, are wont to help at a dead lift. But that
which is only an appurtenance of worship, is no more worship, then a Bishops
Rochet, is a Bishop.

4. About the same distinction, a question was made how any worship can be not
essential, that is, not having the essence of worship in it. The Rejoinder
answers, that these appurtenances have in them the essence of accidental
worship, but not the essence of substanciall. So then, they are essential
accidental worship: and why not as well substantial a^cidentall? A Rochet
has no more in it the essence, then the substance, of an accidental Bishop.

5. The Repl. his last, was, that those which the Def. calls accidental
parts of worship, have not (by his own express confession, in this sect.) so
much communion with the essential, as the hair of the body (which is but an
excrement) has with the body, and therefore cannot be accounted a part of
worship. The Rej. here. 1. answers, that they are in deed no part of
essential worship, but of the complement of worship, as garments are of men's
external honor. So that now we are come to have that expressed, which before
was implied, the Ceremonies may be called worship, as a Bishops Rochet, or
other Bishoply garment may be called a Bishop. Though it might be also further
inquired, if Ceremonies be parts of the complement, what the other parts of
that complement may be? Certes he that divided worship into essential and
accidental parts, did not mean worship, and the complements of worship, much
less, parts of essential worship, and parts of complement. If he did, his
speech, and meaning, do not well agree together. 2. He takes great exception
against the term of excrement, as not well appliable to the hair of ones
beard, savouring of a spirit full of rancor, to be judged of God as a reproach,
tending to breed scorn and abhorring of these Ceremonies, in the minds of
ignorant me^. At all which a man might have laughed, if Gods name had bee^
spared, in so frivilous a matter. All Philosophers, that ever I I heard, or
read, heathen, and Christian, call and define the hair of men's bodies, an
excrement. All Divines, when they speak of hypocrites in the Church, compare
the^ to the hayr of a man's body, under the term of excrement. I therefore would
not be loath to hear one call the hayr of my beard, an excrement. Neither can I
smell any savor of a rancourous spirit, or any reproach, in that phrase. As for
breeding of scorn in the minds of ignorant men, one would think, it should
not be objected by him, that a little before spoke of Parish-omnipotencie, and
stuffeth his book with such terms, as I am loath (for his sake) to repeat,
but that they cannot be more gently refuted, then by bare repeting, after the
occasion of them is discussed.

SECT. 2. Concerning adding to Gods worship.
IN the second section, the Rejoinder has nothing materially, to be newly, or
now first confuted, save only that about adding to Gods word, and worship:
which only therefore, needs here to be discussed.

1. Gods laws of Praemunire, against all humane presumtions, in his Worship,
are famously known. Deuteronomy. 4. and 12. Thou shall not add any thing thereto. No
man ever writ one sheet of paper against Popish Ceremonies, which did not
confute them by these places. The Papists have marked this: Haeretiti
accusantes Ceremonias a Deo non institutas, superstitionis, and idolatriae,
fundantur praecipue in Deuteronomy. 12. Swarez de Relig. vol. 1. lib. 2. cap: 1. The
Def. and the Rejoinder their answer, is the same, that most Papists use: In
these places, where addition is forbidden, is meant only addition of
corruption, not any addition of preservation and additions made divine, not
humane. Now 1. for the first part of the first distinction, God forbids
only an addition of corruption, It is worth the considering, which learned
Chamier answers, De Canone, lib. 8. cap: 6. Inductio contrarij pracepti, non
solet, imo nec potest quidem Additio nominati In Additione ^nim utrumque manet:
at cantrariae s^invicem tollunt.
The bringing in of a Contrary praecept is neither used for, nor can be called
Addition, for in Addition both remain, but contraries destroy each other. He
that sets a house on fire, or poysoneth a man, or corrupts any thing, is
not usuallly said to add unto them. 2. By the second distinction, no addition
unto Gods will and testament, is more forbidden, then unto man's. As it were a
sin to add any thing unto Gods Testament as divine, so also were it to add
any thing unto man's testament, or testimony, and make it his, when it is not
his. None may add any thing to D. M. his Defense, or D. B. his Rejoinder, and
make it theirs, when it is not theirs. Such additions, are usually called
lies, sufficiently forbidden by the ninth Commandemenr: so that no indifferent
man will think, that nothing more is contained in these prohibitions, so often
and earnestly urged, in strict reference unto the holy ordinances, and worship
of God, which by this interpretation, can challenge no privilege from them.

2. For the second part of these distinctions: humane additions of
praeservation, the Repl. observed, that addition was, in the text, expressly
forbidden, as a means of keeping or praeserving Gods word, and worship: Deuteronomy.
4.2. To which it seems a contradiction, that addition may be for Keeping, or
praeserving. To which the Rejoinder answers nothing else, but that, therefore
addition hindering is forbidden, but not addition keeping. That is, he denies
the conclusion, but answers not to the proof. But he adds an example: He
that leaves a jewel to be safely kept, does not forbid the provision of a
Cabinet, with lock, and key, to keep it in. True: Neither does any man
dream, but the Kings authority, and Churches care, may, and ought to be as a
Cabinet with lock, and key, to praeserve Gods ordinances and worship. But what
is this to additions? and to such additions, as our Ceremonies in question?
The Lords ordinance is, that the Sacrament of Circumcision should cease. For
the preservation of this ordinance, the Def. and Rejoinder page 285. provide a
lawful Cabinet, under lock and key, that Circumcision as it is used in some
places, may be lawfully appointed, and commanded. The Lords ordinance is, that
Baptism should be administered according to the primitive institution, without
such sacrilegious crossings, as are in use among Papists. They have provided a
Cabinet, under lock and key, for this, that all which are baptized, shall be
crossed. The Lords will is, that his holy supper should be receyved, and used
as a supper, notadored.

They have provided, that all men shall kneel in the receyving of it, for a
Cabinet, like to the former.

3. Cardinal Cajetans interpretation, was (by the Repl.) alleged addition is
forbidden even with the pr^etext of keeping the commandments of God, as more
judicious, (Inhibetur additio, etiam pratextucustodiendi mandat^ Dei.)
and religious. The Rej. answers, that Cajetan does allow the distinction,
of additions, into corruptive, and praeservative, in Thom. p. 3. q. 6. a 8. and
that in the alleged words, means additions corrupting, though pretented for
keeping. Now this is as true an interpretation of Cajetans meaning, and ours
also, as can be invented: only that is wanting, whichCajetan (with us)
intended, that all additions for preservation, are but pretenses. But as for
Cajetan his allowing this questioned distinction in 3. q. 60. (for 6. was an
error) whosoever will look upon the places, shall find, that neither in
Thomas, not in Cajetan, is any mention of addition preserving, which here is
the only question. They speak in deed of adding words, to the form used in
Baptism, and note, some words do corrupt the sense, and some do not: but not
a word of adding Ceremonies preservative. The wordy additions, which they speak
of, are as Thomas has it, I Baptize thee in the name of the Father, the Son,
the Holy Ghost, (and the Virgin Marie:) or as Cajetan has it: I baptize thee (
Sexton what is a clock) in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. If these be additions of preservation let any Christian, that regards
Baptism, judge.

4. It was wished, that the Def. had set down some examples, of preservative
additions. The Rejoinder undertaking it for him, names for the Text diverse
readings, marginall notes, etc. and for the sense, interlineary glosses, notes,
marginall references, and commentaries, and then, readings by sections,
building and ordering of Synagogues, and a thousand such. And in deed he might
as well name diverse thousands, as these. But 1. if so many thousand Ceremonies
may be added lawfully to Gods law, what meant Augustine, and all our Divines,
out of him, to complain of such an intolerable burden of Ceremonies, in
regard of their number? 2. Diverse readings, are no more additions, then
Coningstable and Constable, are to the Statute of Constables. Marginall notes,
no more, then an exposition is to the text, which kind of addition, the
Papists do wickedly allege for their doctrinall traditions. Interlinearie
glosses, notes marginall references Commentaries of the same nature. Reading by
sections, building, and ordering, are evidently things of mere order, of
which, if any man shall say they are additions, then if he be a poor man, he
may make great addition to the little money he has, by dividing it into
sections, placing it fitly, and disposing of it orderly a hundred ways, to the
increase (as it were) of a hundred fold: which would be a welcome doctrine (if
it were true) to many a poor man, and even to those which are impoverished by
the Bishops silencings, deprivations, and excommunications, for not allowing of
additions to Gods worship.

5. It was also justly questioned, if there were not a deminution, or taking
from, for preservation, as well as an addition of that kind: because in the
Text they are joined together, as drawing in one yoke? The Rejoinder answers
no. And denies the consequence, by example of hardening, and showing mercy,
joined together, without the same mertiorious cause. But 1. the example does
not agree: because the question was not of a meritorious cause, but of a
final. And in the chief or last end, hardening, and showing mercy do agree.
2. I can easily, find out a detraction, as of good praeservation, as the
addition of a Cabinet with lock and key.

For from a sword, or any other iron weapon, a man may well detract rust, for
the preservation of it, From an aguish man, blood may be detracted, for the
preservation of his life, nay sometime a leg, or an arm, may be cut off, for
praeservation of the body. So that, all things considered, the Rejoinder will
upon second thoughts, either cashier in Gods worship, his addition of
preservation, or else add unto it, a detraction or deminution of preservation.
Calvin in his nineteenth sermon upon Deutrinomie, has this remarkable sentence.

Let us assure ourselves, we shall ever be unruly and wild-headed, until our
Lord has tamed us, by long handling, and made us stick to this ground, that
it is no more lawful for us, in any wise, to add any thing to his law, then
it is lawful for us, to take any thing from it.

6. It was likewise observed, that this praetence has been allways the
shoeing-horne, to draw on superstition with. For (as Calvin notes on Matt. 15)
Legislatoris ipsi non jactabant, se novum quicquam tradere, sed tantum add^re
cavendi formulas, quae media ossent adminicula, ad servandam Dei legem. The
old Masters of Ceremonies praetended always, that they meant only to
bringe-in additions of preservation. Like enough (says the Rejoinder:) But
this very inlet of superstitious things, under the praetence of bringing in
only preservative means, does witness that such additions as are
preservative, were allways allowed by Gods people, as confirmation of error by
Scripture, does show the dignity of holy Scripture. This is in deed as fair
a praetence, for an inlet of superstition, as can be made. But withal it is
manifest from thence, that is is no sufficient, but a very suspicious answer,
for Ceremonies, accused of superstition, to say, and not to prove, that they
are preservations. Yet these Ceremonie-mongers had all their pretense properly
from means of preservation, which are and were always allowed by God, and his
people, not from additions.

Our Parliament statutes made for establishing of true religion, are a means
of praeserving it in England: but I think that Hon. Assembly would take it
ill, if the Rej. should publish to the world, that their Laws are additions to
the word, and worship of God.

The Rejoinder adds, that Calvin in the place alleged, does account these
praetented additions to have been corruptions, from the first. Now (though this
is not here, but in another place, after to be handled) let the Reader guess of
Calvin's account, by these his words: Afterward there came teachers who did not
think themselves should be esteemed acute enough unless they did patch
something of their own to the word of God. Superveneran^ doct^res qu^se non
^uta^ant sat^s acutos ha^itum ^ri, nisi aliquid assuerent vervo Dei Nulla
tollerabilis est ad legem Dei accessio Secundarie illae leges a curiosis
homin^bus inventae sunt, quasi simplex Dei mandatum non sufficeret. Novas
ablutiones comminisci, otiosa vanitatis fuit. Si acqutevissent in leg^ Dei,
magis illi probata suisset modestia, quam scrupulosa anxieta^.
Yet no addition to that word is tolerable. Those secondarie laws are devised
of curious men, as if the single and simple command of God were not enough. To
invent new washinges was an idle vanity. Had they rested in the law of God
their mod^sty wou^d have been more pleasing to him, then their Scrupulous
anxiety in doing otherwise.

If this be not enough, to show Calvin's judgment, of Ceremonious additions,
let that be added, which he says to Cassander, and therefore to the Def. and
Rejoinder teaching the very same doctrine of Ceremonies, Statuit, Ceremonias a
Christo institutas, cast, and integre observandas nihil eornm institutions,
tan quam mutilati^, and imperfectis, addendum. Est hoc quidem aliquid quamvis
non totum: quia alios omnes ritus obliqu^ artificio, in Ecclesiam admittit. Sed
haec dimidia veritas evertitur, qua^do Apostolis, corumque successoribus jus
concessum esse credit, Ceremonias instituendi quae in Sacramentis
administrandis, ornatus loco accederent. Ergo, qui nihil addendum conf^ssus
erat, nune adve^ritias traditiones, non medo admitrit se^eti^^ commendat. Verum
arguto effug^o se expediet: modo ne Sacramenta putentur mutila, aut imperfecta,
fereacas esse accessiones. Ita quibuscumque mixed uris, prope in novam figurom
murata fuerint Sacramenta, nihil erit vit^j, m^do ne palam Christo exprobret
ur, mancum esse, vel mutilum, quod instituit, etc.
that Cassander did. Opusc. page 355. He taught that the Ceremonies ordained by
Christ are to be kept entirely, and incorruptly: and nothin^ must be added to
their institution as if they were lame or imperfect, which indeed is som^what,
but it is not all, because by an indirect shift he would let into the church
all other rites. But this half truth is overturned, when he believes a right
given to the Apos^les and their Successors, to institute such ceremonies in
the administration of the Sacraments which may be for ornament. Therefore he
which confessed before nothing should be added, does now not only admit such
by-Ceremonies, but also commands them. Yet will he help himself with a subtle
shift, viz. additions are to be endured, if the Sacraments be not held lame or
imperfect, therefore with what mixtures you will, the Sacraments may be wholly
changed, and yet all be well, so be you charg not Christ to his teeth, that any
of his institutions go lame, and halting etc.

7, It was lastly added, that this answer of the Def. was Bellarmines answer to
Calvin, about this very point and place: de effect Sacr. lib, 2. Cap. 32.
Prohibit Dominus additionem corrumpentem, as the Def. translateth it, an
addition of corruption is forbidden. Which was the rather added, because the
Def. had so vainly objected unto the authors of the Abridgement, symbolizing
with Bell^^mine. It might otherwise have been added, that it is not only
Bellamines answer, but also Gregory's de Valentia, tom. 4. disp. 6. q. 11. p.
1. et tom. 3. disp. 6. q. 2. p. 7. Swarezes, de Relig. vol. 1. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Baroninses; ad an 53. page 459. and that it is the common answer of Papists, in
defense of their Ceremonies against this place, urged upon them by our Divines.
Yet some few spying the vanity of this answer, as being ashamed of it, have
found out another, of like stamp: For Cornelius a Lapide, in his Commentary
on Deuteronomy. 12.32. so expounds the words of this prohibition: In rebus and
Ceremonijs Dei, fac tantum illud, quod Deus, vel per se, vel per Vicarios suos,
puta sacerdotes praeceperit. Which agrees well with that of the Def. and
Rejoinder. Use those Ceremonies only, which God, either by himself, or by the
Convocation house does command. And some more ancient, and therefore less
praejudiced Papists, confess, this law did forbid all humame Ceremonies to the
Jews. So Tostatus, Defensorij par. 2. cap. 8. as also in Deuteronomy. 12. q. 12. that
consequencie is found among the Hebrews about the observation of Ceremonials.
Something is not found written in the law, therefore the Jews are not bound to
keep that. Yea which is more, it was not lawful for the Jews to observe any
Ceremony about the service of God, unless that were written in the law as
appears Deuteronomy 12. Valet insta consequ^ utia inter He^raeo^, circa observe
irio^em ceremonial^um Auquid n^n reperitur sc^iptum in lege. Ergo non
obligantur Iudae^ observare illud Im^, quod plus ^st, non licebat Indaeis,
observare aeliquam ceremoniam, circa cultum Dei, nisi illud scriptum ^sset in
lege, ut patet Deuteronomy. 12.


The Rejoinder has many words, wherewith he raises up a great dust, to darken
the cause with all. But no man can discern any direct answer of his to the
allegation, save only his confession, that the Def. his answer, was
Bellarmines answer to Calvine, about th^s very place. All that he adds to
that confession, has been before confuted. It shall be sufficient in this
place, to set down Calvin's resolute conclusion, out of Sermon 85. in Deuteronomy. It
is divelish blasphemy, to say, that God has not taught men all that it
behooveth them to do. The common by word here has place: thou art the Devils
servant: for thou have done more then was commanded thee. Here is no
limitation, of new worships properly so called, which is the Rejoynders shift,
but all that it behooveth us to do, is limited to Gods command.

In the fourth section, about Isa. 29. Mat. 15. Col. 2.27 has nothing
material in it, beside those distinctions of worship, which before in the
Manduction, section 5.6. and 7. are distinctly examined, and discussed. To
those places therefore I refer the Reader, for satisfaction, if there be any
needful.

SECT. 6. Concerning our Divines judgment about Ceremonious worship invented
by man.
THough those three staple sections of the manuduction. 5.6.7. may be
sufficient also for clearing of all the materials here exstant, yet referring
the Reader thither for the maine, I must add something, about diverse
particulars.

1. The Replier said* that Worship does not vary according to me^ opinions,
but consists in the nature of the action it self. This is (says the Rej.) to
speak monsters. If he had said, things to him unknowen, it had been enough.
For all that he has not known, are not monsters. But what is his reason of
this so deep a censure? because (forsooth) opinion, by error of opinion, does
make that to be essentially false worship, which without such opinion, were no
such worship. Of which I may as well say, that this opinion, by error of
opinion, does make the reason essentially false. For 1. the question was not
here of essential false worship, but of essential, and accidental worship,
whether op^nion did make the difference? which the Def. affirms, the Repl.
denies, and the Rejoynd. declineth. 2. The Rejoinder has not yet (that I know
of) nor can (as I think) define unto us, what is essential false worship,
according to his rules.

3. Every error of opinion does not make essential false worship: he should
therefore have told us, what error he meant. The Def. names opinion of
justice, sanctity, efficacy, or divine necessity: and the Rejoinder
mentions often such and such opinion, held of the Papists, concerning all
their Ceremonies. Of this enough is said, Manud. sect. 7. For the present, I
deny, that such an erroneous opinion, by it self, and of it self, does not
make essential false worship. Opinion is but an adjuvant efficient cause of
that affective act, wherein the essence of internal worship consists: and the
external acts of worship, though efficiently differenced by opinion, or faith,
are essentially distinguished by their form, and end. A man may have an
opinion, that is just, holy, efficacious, and necessary, to perform diverse
works of the second Table, nay upon some occasions, to tell a lie, even
against the second Table. Yet none speaking properly, will call, that
essential false worship, which is a sin directly against the first Table.
Hitherto therefore, I see no monster of the Repl. his making. And if we consider
his reason well, which the Rejoinder made to it, the mishaping of things will
be found on the other side. If (says the Repl.) worship did vary occording
unto men's oppinions, then a man may go to Mass, conceyving another private
opinion to himself, then Mas-mongers use to have: and our Convocation may
appoint us the grossest of all Popish Ceremonies, if they set another opinion
upon it. The Rejoinder his answers are diverse, and some of them strange ones.
1. His first is, that goeing to mass may be a sin of scandal and
presumtion, though a man go not thitherto worship. By goeing to Mass
(acording to the use of our speech) is meant, doing all those external
actions, which Mas-mongers use to perform. Now the question is, whether he
that performs all those external actions (intending only to save his life
thereby, as having no opinion of any other good in so doing) does only sin
of scandal, and praesumtion, or else over and beside this, is guilty of
external false worship? the Rejoinder seems to say, no, he is not guilty of
false worship. But when the Christians of the Primitive Church, did with such
an opinion, lay but a little incense upon the Heathens Altars, they were by all
Orthodoxe censured for Idolatry. The story of Origin is well known, how he
delivered Palm, to those that offered it to the image of Serapis, with this
expression of his intention: come, and receyve the bows, not of the image, but
of Christ. Yet was he therefore censured as a worshipper of that Idol. Calvin
writing of purpose concerning this very case, of goeing to Mass with such an
opinion, accuses them that do so, of externally professed idolatry: and
therein was justified by Melanchton, Bucer, Martyr, Opus. de vitandis
superstitionibus. And if this be not right, then all external acts, and real
professions, whether symbolizing with Papists, or with Turks, or Heathens, may
be in themselves, (set scandal and danger aside) easily excused. So Calvin
argues, in the forenamed treatise and in a Homily, Opusc, page 532. he
shows, that those wise men which think otherwise, would have derided the
simplicity of Sidrac. Misach, and Abednego, if they had then lived, in such a
fashion: Miserable men, you may do that external act which is required of
you: it is no worship, so long as you have no faith, trust, or devotion to that
idol. 2. His second answer is that those which are present at false worship, by
violence, are not false worshipers, and upon this he triumphs, with fie man,
fie. I may better say, alas alas, that good D. B. (I speak as I think) should
be driven to such extremities, in defense of those Ceremonies, which he never
loved, nor does at this day. For goeing to Mass, or doing all those
external acts, which Masmongers use to perform, implies more then violent
carrying thither, and deteyning there. 3. His third is, that nothing but opinion
does make humane inventions essential worship of God. Which is an essential
denying of the conclusion. 4. For that which was inferred of the Convocation
house, he says first, it is a flinge. Let it be so, yet it may hit that
Ceremonious Goliath, as it is such, in the fore head. He adds, that the
grossest rites of Popery cannot pos^iblie be washed from their opinion. Which
is not for a Rite, being an external thing or act, any Rite may be separated
from any internal opinion. The last is, that some other Popish rites might be
lawful, if they could be cleansed, though we need them not. As if the grossest
might not be lawful, if they could be cleansed, or the Rejoinder had showed
that we more need the Cross, then those other.

2. Because the Def. placed so much in opinion of sanctity, the Repl. in the
second place, opposed, that Sanctity cannot be separated from such
Ceremonies, as are proper unto Religion, only used in the solemn worship of
God: because they are neither civil, nor profane, and therefore holy. Here the
Rejoynd^r being put to his shifts, as before, answers that they are in deed
holy by application, but not with inhaerent, or adhaerent holiness in them, or
their use as those which God has sanctified, nor so as they sanctify the
actors, and actions, which is proper to Gods ordinances. Now how many strange
things are here? 1. That Ceremony, whose essence consists in application
and use, is holy by application* and yet not by any holiness that does adhere
to them, or their use. Holiness is an adjunct receyved by the thing that is
holy, and therefore either inhaerent, or adhaerent. 2. Is this a good reason:
they are not holy truly, as Gods ordinances, therefore they are not by men made
holy? 3. Have any outward ordinances of God inhaerent holiness in them? 4. If
God has no way sanctified our Ceremonies, who can make them holy? 5. Do not
Ceremonies teaching holiness, sanctify the actors, actions or spectators,
after the same manner, that the teaching word does sanctify them?

3. Upon occasion of the other part, in the Def. his distinction, (that
Accidental worship is any rite, which serves for the more consonant, and
convenient discharge of essential worship,) the Repl. whereas he might have
said, that this is a misshapen definition of Accidental worship in general, as
it may be divided into true and false, good, and bad, opposes only this: that
no judicious Divine uses to call circumstances of mere order and decency,
(which notwithstanding serve for the more consonant and convenie^t discharge of
essential worship) that is a Pulpit, a Table, a faire-Cloath, etc. Worship.

The Rejoinder answers, that in deed, the Ceremonies themselv^s cannot be
called worship without madness, but only the use and application of such
circumstances, and rites. Now 1. mark here, how the Rejoinder who defines a
Ceremony, it is an action etc. and laffeth at the Repl. (because he said, some
Ceremonies may be put to other good use, as if all Surplices were turned into
poor-folkes under-garments) as if the good wife of Bilson had burnt a
Ceremony, when she burnt a Surplice in her oven, mark (I say) that this same
Rejoinder does distinguish Ceremonies from their use and application. 2. Who
ever was so mad (because it pleases him to use this term) as to say, that
standing in a Pulpit, the better to be heard (which is all the use of it) is to
be called worship? 3. Crossing with such expression of the signification
thereof, as is used in Baptism, can neither be distinguished from the use of a
Cross, nor aequalled to the use of a pulpit, not yet lawfully styled true
worship, without a spice of one disease or other.

4. The first witness brought in for us, is Calvin, inst. l. 4. cap. 10. sect.
8. All those constitutions are wicked, in the observation whereof we place any
worship to God. The Def. answers, he meant not by worship, circumstances of
order. Which the Repl. readily granted: because it were non sense, to say, all
observations in which circumstances of order are placed, be wicked. To this the
Rejoinder says first, it is a babie. 2. he says, that Calvin meant not to
comdemne all constitutions of order: which is as true a babie as the former. 3.
Calvin (says he) defines what Constitutions are contrary to the word of God,
namely such as are ordained and imposed as necessary for consciencie, etc.
But Calvin does only show that such are of the forbidden kind: and every
notifying of a special, is not a definition of the general kind. 4. He
adds, that Calvin does allow of some significant Ceremonies sect. 14. Of
signification, we are to consider in the next chapter. In the mean time this:
Calvin generally speaks against all worship invented of men, without any
distinction. One ambiguous phraze of Ceremonies in general, without any
example, save only Divine, in which he instanceth immediately after the words
cited, does not make a co^tradiction to the former sentence. All the rest of
the Rejoinder his allegations out of Calvin, about this answer have their
answer, in the staple sect. of the Manuduction. 5.6.7.

The Def. having thus told us, what Calvin did not mean, adds that Calvin
meant by wo^ship, the inward virtue of worship, which consists (says he) in
an opinion of holiness and justice. The Repl here justly noted the ill sound
of those words: the inward virtue of worship consists in an opinion, to which
the Rejoinder says just nothing. And yet in all this chapter mainteyneth all
that doctrine of opinionated worship, which the Def. let fall. But a man would
think, that upon this occasion, he should have declared, how, and how far
worship does constift in opinion? As for inward virtues and vices consisting
in opinion, it is as great a paradoxe, and greater also, then that of the
Stoickes, who made all other differences of men's estate, beside virtue and
vice, to consist in opinion.

In the second place, it was asked by the Repl. how an inward virtue, can be
planted in an outward Ceremony? the Rejoinder by error of opinion. But it is
more then error, nay more then ordinary madness, for any man to think, his
inside, is in his outside, his heart is in the feather that he wears on his
hat.

The Repl. added in the third place, that the proper nature of worship, does
not consist in holiness, and justice, but in the honoring of God: so that all
external Ceremonies, whose proper use, is the honoring of God, are external
worship. This was directed against those words of the Def. the inward virtue of
worship (placed in outward Ceremonies) consists in an opinion of holiness,
and justice. Now what says the Rejoinder? 1. No man can in any action aim at
Gods honor, without opinion of justice and holiness in that action. Which may
be granted, if justice (in this form of speech, whereby our Divines use to
condemn many Popish Ceremonies) did not signify justification as it does.
But yet it does not follow from thence, that every opinion of holiness, and
justice, does make worship, much less inward worship, and least of all, the
inward virtue of worship.

2. Then (says he) all external Ceremonies must needs be worship. And this is
that which we avouche, of all Ceremonies, whose proper use is the honoring of
God. 3. It is not (as he adds) the immediate and peculiar use of our
Ceremonies, to honor God, but to a aedifie man unto the honoring of God.

No more (may I say) is it any otherwise the immediate end of preaching the
word, to honor God, but only by aedifiying of men, to the honoring of God: and
yet preaching of the word is essential worship. 4. Pulpits. Fonts, Tables,
Table-cloths, and Cups, are as much appropriated unto religious uses, as our
Ceremonies in question. But this is confuted in the staple section of the
Manuduct. 3. and 4. And the difference is acknowleged by the Rejoinder, in
that, he makes Pulpits etc. to be only simple Ceremonies, and ours in
question, double and trible. For by that it follows, that our questioned
Cerenies are twice, or thrice more appropriated to worship, then Pulpits.

5. Calvin (says the Rejoinder) does mark out false worship by a false
opinion of worship and necessity: He does so in deed: but never meant to make
it a convertible, or reciprocal mark, much less that wherein the essence of
all false worship consists, as has been cleared. Paul Phil. 3. marketh out
Dogs, by urging of Circumcision: but he never meant, that there were no other
Dogs but such. Calvin also many times marketh out false worship by an
opinion of merit: yet surely a man may use false worship, without such an
opinion.

In opposition to these allegations out of Calvin, the Repl. names one place,
epist. 259. where he says, according to the Rejoinder his own translation: If
it be well and thoroughly looked unto, what it is, that does so much provoke
man, to the making of Ceremonies, we shall find, that they all flowed from
this springhead, because every man made bold ^o fancy some new worship of
God: whereas God not only refuses all forged worships, but utrerly abhors
them. This (says the Repl.) is a direct confutation of the Def. (and I add,
of the Rejoinder.

For if all humane Ceremonies flowed from affectation of will worship, then a
Pulpit, and such like matters of order, and decency, are no Ceremonies. If
all the worship which is placed in humane Ceremonies, be unlawful, then no
such Ceremonies are lawful, what opinion soever there be of their necessity,
etc. If this be so (answers the Rejoinder) then Calvin has confuted his more
public writings, in a private epistle.

Which is nothing so, but only it follows, (as the Repl. said) that he has
confuted the collection which the Def. made from a shred or two of his more
public writings. He has expressed so much in public writings as he does
in that private epistle. As to add one place of note, opusc. page 356.
disputing against Cassander, who mainteyned humane Ceremonies, upon the very
same grounds, terms, and condition, that the Def. and Rejoinder do, Cum
velit Deu^ ex praescripto legis sua coli^^^ proinde fictitios ^ultus
det^stetur, fide^ certere^ ugnat, quicquam o^us mandatis addi, hominum arbitri^.
he says of them: Seeing God will be worshipped by the rule of his law, and
therefore detests all feined services, it is undoubtedly contrary to faith
that any thing be added to his precepts by the judgment of man.

But that answer being only for a flourish, the Rejonder his second is, that
Calvin spoke of mystical Ceremonies excescively multiplied. As if both these
could not stand together, for to speak against any sin excessively multipied,
and yet withal against sin. The Prophets often speak of multiplying idols
altars, fornications, according to the number of cities, or towns, on every
^igh hill, under every green tree. Do they not withal speak simply against
all idolatry? But Calvin (as the Rejoinder adds) allows in some case, the
mixture of a like water with wine, in the Lords Supper. What? for a religions
Ceremony? show the place, and after that, see how it can be justified, against
those accusations, which the Rejoinder lays upon Sopping the bread in wine,
page 61.62.63. Calvin (as he lastly adds) epist. 120. could have wished, that
Hooper had not so much strugled against the Cap, and Rochet, or Surplice. But
beside that Calvin did not, nor we neither esteem a Cap, or a Rochet either (a
Surplice is added by the Rejoinder) so evil as the Cross in Baptism, Calvin
could not say so much, without a shrewed item ( ut illa etiam non probem,
though I do not allow of such things.) Which manyfestly declare that his
wish was not grounded on such an opinion, as the Def. and Rejoinder
mainteyne. It might also be added, that Calvin in the same place accused them,
of wicked perfidiousnesse, who though they seemed to favor the Gospel, yet
made a party against Hooper, about that trashe, unto the hindering of his
Ministry: which is the case of al our depr^ving and silencing Prelates.

5. The second witness, produced by the Def. for to be answered, is
Chemnitius. To whose condemning of all worship instituded without the word, the
Def. answered by his wedge, saying, that he meant only that which is made
essential worship, not accidental. Concerning this distinction, enough has
been said in the 5. and 6. staple sect. of the manudiction, let this only be
remembered, that it is all one, as if he should divide worship, into worship,
and no worship: for both Def. and Rejoinder often say accidental worship is no
worship. They add some time, for explication, that it is no essential
worship: but so they may say e^sentiall worship is no worship, and then add
that they mean no accidental worship. The Repl. therefore justly required, that
should be showen, if Chemnitius distinguish will worship, as he does, into
lawful and unlawful.

Upon this occasion the Rejoinder 1. criethout of a falsehood shameful, and to
be blushed at, for saying that the Def. distinguishes will worship into
lawful, and unlawful. But let any man judge where is the falsehood, shame, and
cause of blushing. The question is of worship invented by man, which Chemnitius
(with other Divines) call will worship, whether it be lawful or no? the Def.
answers by a distinction, that some is unlawful, as essential, and some
lawful, as accidental. What can be more plain? But (says the Rejoinder)
Accidental worship, be denies to be properly worship, and therefore denies it
to be will worship, unless it be imagined essential. What a consequence is
this, to bear up so weighty an accusation? It is not properly worship, and
therefore it is not will worship. He may as well say: it is not properly
worship, and therefore it is not lawful worship. May it not be improper
will worship, though it be not properly worship? Or no improper worship come
merely from the will of man? It is rather a property of Ceremonies, to depend
merely on the will of the institutor. So Tostatus in Exodus tom. 1.148. et in
Levit. page 585. A Ceremony is a certain observation, or a special mauner of
worshipping God determined out of the sole Commandment of of the lawgiver.
Ceremonia est observatio quaedam vel modus specialis colendi Deum, determinatus
ex solo mandato legislatoris.


His second exception is frivolous. His third is this: Chemnitius has this
distinction in substance, though not in terms. For he says, that right inward
worship being supposed, right external expressions will follow of their own
accord, and they are external worship, though not acceptable in themselves.
Where 1. Mark the partiality of the Rejoinder.

In the former answer, he requires the Repl. to show the distinction which he
attributes to the Def. in his words, or terms, otherwise he may blush for
shame. Now, when he is urged to show his distinction out of Chemnitius, he
forsakes words, or terms, and flies to substance, without once thinking of
shame and blush^ng. 2. This substance is a mere shadow. For first, Chemnitius
acknowlegeth no outward expressions to be right worship, but only those, that
flow of their own accord, without any institution, from inward worship. And
who will say, that the Def. and Rejoinder their accidental worship, of Cross
and Surplice, do so flow from internal. Secondly, those external
expressions, are as essential to external worship, as profession of faith is
to a visible Church. Nay there is no external worship, beside the expressions,
and setting forth of the internal. Thirdly, Though those expressions, be not
acceptable of, or in themselves, being separated from the internal, yet it
does not follow from thence, that they are in their nature accidental
worship, and no ways substantial. For the Rejoinder confesses, that all Gods
ordinances are substantial worship: and yet he will not say that Gods outward
ordinances are acceptable unto him, when they are separated from internal
worship.

Upon supposition (which now appears true) that the Def. could not show his
distinction out of Chemnitius, he was desired, at the least, to show, that there
is some worship, which is not necessary: because otherwise he must needs
sincke under Che^nitius his charge To this the Rejonder answers, 1. that
Chemnitius understands by will worship, whatsoever of man's device, is
imagined necessary. 2. that there is some external worship, which is not in
the particularities of it necessary. For the first of which, enough is said,
in the 7. s. of the manud. Yet here I may add, that it is so far from
truth, (no will worship can be without imagination of necessity) that on the
contrary, whosoever does take upon him, for his will sake professedly to
apoynt any worship, cannot possibly imagine it absolutely necessary, but
acknowleging there has been worship, without his addition, he professes to
add something, not simply necessary to the being, but only to the better
being of it. As for the second, In Gods own ordinances, which were
substantial, and essential, by the Rejoinder his confession, the
particularites were not allways absolutely necessary Levit. 5. a lamb, or two
turtle doves, or two young pigeons. And this answer may serve for all that is
further rejoyned about Chemnitius. For it bears wholly upon perpetual
necessity of the same particularities. The expressions which he instanceth in,
are natural gestures, such as kneeling, lifting up of eyes, or hands to
heaven etc. which have as manifest impressions in them, of Gods will, without
man's institution, as the offering of doves or pigeons ever had, and in their
particularities upon occasion carry as much necessity with them. What is this
to such unnecessarie worship, as Cross and Surplice?

6. About Peter Martyr his testimony, beside the repetition of that thread
bare distinction of worship, into essential and accidental, he loses also a
knot by it. Peter Martyr says, it is lawful for men, to appoint circumstances
of ord^r, but unlawful to appoint any worship. The Def. contradicts him
thus: if it be lawful to appoint circumstances of order, then it is lawful to
appoint some worship. The Rejoinder excepteth here 1. that the Repl. calls
that some worship ambiguously, which the Def. called accessorie, and
accidental worship. The accidental worship belike may be called worship, but
not some worship, without ambiguitie. 2. He answers, that P.M. condemns
only the framings of essential worship. But first P.M. his words are, No quid
butetur facere ad cultum, Apostolut prorsus damnat omnem cultum voluntarium.
lest any thing should seem to make for worship the Apostle absolutely damns
all will worship.

Secondly he discerns all worship from order and decency, Thirdly he
opposes order, to significant Ceremonies, of man's institution, admitting the
one and rejecting the other. Alij ita ratio^inantur: Populus est in doctus and
rudis: ergo tenendus est Ceremonijs. Sed hoc discrimen est inter nos and
veteres, ilii plurimas habu^runt Ceremonias, nos paucifsimas. Esse tamen
oportet aliquas quae faciu ut ad ordin^m and de^^rum.
Others argue thus: the people is unlearned and rude, therefore to be held in
with Ceremonies. Put this difference is between us and them of old, they had
many Ceremonies, and we exceeding few, but some there must be for order and
decency.

To the instance of bowing the knee, called by P.M. external worship, answer
was given a little before. It is no voluntary invention, or institution of men.

7. In the next place, D. Morton set down himself, as last at this table:
which was excepted against by the Repl. because diverse others were invited to
this meeting. Heerupon, the Rejoinder after a few words of form, not all sound
(as that he would have him that set himself down last, not to be too hasty,
though he shut the door for have against others that were invited) takes
occasion to say something, o^ Melancton, Bullinger, Bucanus, Polanus,
Cartwright, Fenner, Tilenus, Chamier, and Perkins.

But he brings no answer of moment, but that wether-beaten distinction of
essential and accidental worship, which is examined, Manud. sect. 5.6.7.
Where also is handled of Tilemus, Polanus, Bucanus, Cartw. and Fenner, by name.
It is not therefore needful to add much in this place: yet something in
brief, of the rest.

8. Melancton (says the Rejoinder) reckones it an error, in constitution of
things indifferent, to account them worship: but he means, with opinion of
rightousenesse, and necessity, worship of themselves, whose immediate end is
Gods honor, not vestments, Feasts, and fasts, etc. Now concerning all these
exceptions, enough has been spoken, Manud. sect. 5.6.7. Yet concerning
Melancton, he means by righteousness, justification, by neces^itie, that
which is necessary to justification, by of themselves, considered apart from
Gods ordinances, by immediate end, that which belongs to the first table.

Now 1. the Rejoinder will not say that any humane worship, is lawful, beside
that which is held absolutely necessary for justification, for then it may be
lawful, though it be every way aequalled to many of Gods ordinances. 2. The
sign of the Cross, to signify our courage, and constancy in Christ's
service, were worship, though it be considered, or were used alone by it self.
3. Our Ceremonies belong to the first table, so far as they belong to any
part of his law. 4. Vestments, fasts, and feasts also, are accounted by
Melancthon, matters of mere order. For so Tom. 1.297. and 305. he compares
them to order of lectures in schools, and to the order of reading and praying,
in families, morning and evening. And so far, we also allow of them. Yet one
thing is worth the noting, that whereas imposers of Ceremonies do much ground
themselves upon the Apostles example, Acts. 15. and are therein allowed by the
Rejoinder page 45.46. of his manuducction, Melancton does so disalow of this
collection, that therein he condemns all imposition of such Ceremonies as
ours. For Vol. 3. page 91. he says thus.

It follows not: the Apostles retained the rite of blood and things
strangled, Non valet consequentia: Apostoli ritum de sanguine, and suffecate,
retinu^runt. Ergo licet nova instituere tanquam cultus. Neganda est
consequentia: quia Apostoli non instituerunt sed retinuerunt hunc ritum.
Deinde, etiamsi quid novi instituissent, non sequitur, innovationem concessam
esse: Semper haec imitatio nacuit Ecclesia. Episcipus est auditor, et accepet
verbum, and ritus, ab Apostolis, cum certo mandato, ut haec non mutata tradat
Ecclesiae.
therefore we may set up new things as matters of worship, t^is Consequence is
false, because the Apostles did not Establish this rite, but only take it up
for a while. 2. Though they had instituted some new thing here follows nothing
for innovation. This imitation has ever been hurtful to the Church. The
Bishop is the hearer, and takes the word and rites from the Apostles with a
certain charge, that he delivers them over to the Church unchanged.

9. Bullinger (says the Rejoinder) undoubtedly condemns all worship of God,
which is merely of man's tradition: but not Ecclesiastical laws, nor worship
agreeable to Gods word, as public meetings for worship, set times, places,
manner of administration, holy days, and fast days.

Now in all this we fully agree with Bullinger, understanding only by
holy days fit times of preaching and praying and by days of fasting,
occasional times of extraordinary humiliation.

10. Chamier (says the Rejoinder) To. 3. l. 20. c. 5. four times, uses this
distinction, of worship proper and accidental. But Chamier only calls those
special material acts, which are conjoined with formal acts of worship,
accidental parts of worship: as if a man vowed to drink no wine for a certain
time, his absteyning from wine perteyneth to worship, only by accident. So if
in solemn prayer for a Prince, his titles, and style be rehearsed, or any
special terms of honor, this perteyneth to prayer, by accident. What is this
to such instituted worship, as the Cross?

11. Mr. Perkins (says the Rejoinder) condemns that worship instituted by
men, which is so simple, and in it self. For he grants a bodily worship
necessary (as kneeling, lifting up of hands, and eyes etc.) terming it less
principal worship. As if this were not the very same thing that we profess.
But if any man see Mr. Perk. on the second Commandment, in his gold chain, in
his explication of the Decaloge, and in his treatise of idolatry, he shall
find this constantly taught by him, as a positive doctrine, that all worship,
all things obtruded under the name of worship (without any exception) if they
be not by God commanded, are unlawful, superstitious worship.

12. Now last of all (in due place) the Rejoinder answers for D.M. that he in
that place, Apol. par. 1. c. 89. condemns Romish Ceremonies, because they
were so many and burdensome. Now except he means, that these were the only
causes, it is no answer, and (though I have not his Apology now at hand) I
dare venture something on it, that other reasons are there alleged. This I am
sure of, that in his Defense, cap. 6. sect. 6. he condemns them not only for
their number, but also for their nature. And it is as manifest, as any thing
can be, that a number of them have no other nature then ours have. Beside one
or two humane Ceremonies may be burdensome.

If Circumcision were imposed in England, a the Cross is, upon which
condition, the Def. and Rejoinder allow of it, page 285. I think these
allowers of it would account it a burden. And howsoever the light aeriall
Cross is not so burdensome to the body, as that, yet to the Conscience of
many thousands, it is altogether as importable a burden.

13. Upon occasion of that reason which the Def. rendered for condemning of
popish Ceremonies, the Repl. adds: because he had heard men often speak in
this manner, of the fault that is in multitude, he would willingly know, what
certain limits, and bounds are set, by Gods law, for the number of humane
Ceremonies, such as ours? If there may be three, why not four, five, six, and
so forth, as many as shall please the Convocation? Surely (says he) if once we
depart from Gods institution, there will be no place to rest our foot on, but
we must ever follow wind and tide, which in religion is baseness it self. The
motion is reasonable, even according to receyved grounds: because we must have
a rule for number, if some number does make Ceremonies to be justly condemned:
and if that number does make them condemned by the word, we must also have
that rule out of Gods Word. Now see what fluttering and flying answers are
given, by the Rejoinder. His 1. is that all our D^vines do censure Popish
Ceremonies for their number. So did all or most of the Prophets censure not
only the Idols of Israel, but even their high places, for their number. His 2.
is, that just so many Ceremonies must be allowed, as shall not clog an
overcharge the Churches, in the judgment of those, to whose discretion it
belonges, to judge thereof: Where he means the Convocation house, for England.
Now to pass by here, that which formerly has been noted, (how corrupt this
posi^ion is, to appropriate the j^dgement of discretion; even in Ceremonies,
unto Prae^ats) if this be all the rule, then Augustine was too rash, in his
time, to judge the number of Ceremonies used then to be a burden more then
Jewish. For it did no more belong to him, for to discern of Ceremonies used
especially out of his Diocese, then it does belong to every Minister in
England, to discern what Ceremonies he and his people may use. Nay then all
our Divines do wrongfully charge the Popish Cer^monies, for their number:
because in the judgment of those among them, to whose discretion it belonges
to judge of such things, as well as to our Convocation, they are not thought
to clog and overcharge the Churches. Thence also it would follow, that no
Praelats could offend, in instituting of Ceremonies, without sinning directly
against their Consciences: whereas we are more charitablie persuaded of many,
eve^Co^vocatio^ me^. His 3 is, from a comparion, of Kings laying up of
treasure, and multiplying of horses, Deuteronomy. 17. as likewise of eating more or
less.

But 1. if there be no more certain rule of institu^ing of mystical
Ceremonies, then for these things, th^n wiser men then any in our Convocation,
may abuse the people with them. For so Solomon without question did, both in
horses, and treasure. 1. King. 10. And so what assurance have our Consciences,
from their judgments of discerning? Kings multiplying of treasure, and horses,
concerns (in conscience of acting) only themselves, and their officers. but
the Ceremonies (in acting) concern all the Churches. In that there is not only
a disparitie, and dissimilitude, but such a one, as requires the rule to be
more accurate in one, then in the other. 3. Within a latitude, it were easy to
determine, how much treasure, and how many horses, ordinaily are lawful to be
multiplied, by this or that Kings, as also how much is lawful, for an
ordinary man to eat at one meal. But if the number of Ceremonies do depend
wholly on the Praelats discretion, there can be no other rule given of them,
then: so many as the Convocation house think good to injoine. His 4. (as I take
it) is, that on the margent, from another comparison, one or two cruches may
help a weak man in his goeing, whereas 6. or 7. would hinder him. Which is very
true. But if it should be appointed to all men in England, to go upon three
Cruches, though they do not see, nor any could show them, that they had any
need of them, only upon this ground that the Parliament judged, they had need
first of cruches, and then of just three cruches, were not this (think you) a
wise statute and to be observed as a law? His 5. and last is, that peril of
leaving Gods institution, there may be some, in matters of faith, and
necessary duties to salvation: but in other matters, to speak of peril, is
ridiculous. But some in matters of faith, and principal obedience? none to be
feared but ridiculously, in point of Rites? It is strange that ever any man of
D.B. his knowledge, and profession, should let fall such a sentence.

He himself will recall it, when he has considered how deadly a thing it is to
depart from Gods institution in fundamental points, and also, how great
mischief has arisen, by leaving Gods institution even in Rites. It is well
known that Ceremonies and rites, opened the door and paved the way for
invocation of Saints in heaven, and evocation of men out of Hell, for the
Sacrifice of the Mass, and Idol of the Altar, and such like pretty stuff to
enter into the Church. And they were Ceremonies which came in with the wind
and tide of custom, to which wind and tide if we yield our selves again, God
knows, what will become of us.

But this especially is in the conclusion, to be marked: the Def. and Rejoinder
have hitherto said much upon the general rules for Ceremonies, Order,
Decency, Edification, as if they did try the taste of every occurrent
Ceremony, as perfectly, as if every one had been named: they are the Rejoinder
his words, page 89.

Now when we are come to the issue, they are found to be nothing, but only
wind and tide of custom. As if wind and tide did try the taste, or discern
distinct^y of every ship, or boat, that is carried by them. What meant they to
trouble us about certain rules, if every wind and tide be enough? If the
practice of this be not baseness, in any kind of worship, essential, or
accidental, then it is not base, for a Christian man's consci^nce, in some
worship, to be led through hedge, or diche, only because some went before, or
to crouche upon every Maisterly man's word, or nodde, which certainly is against
the dignity both of Conscience, and also of Worship: because neither of them
are subject to any mere pleasure or custom of men. Mr. Latimer Sermon. 3. before
King. Pd. seems to respect Ceremonies, when he said, that the Lutherans, in
Germany, made a mingle-mangle hotchepotche of Popery with true religion, as
in his country, they call their hogs to the swine-trough: Come to thy
mingle-mangle, come pyr, come pyr. If this be not base, to be thus called to
mingle-mangles, let any man judge, that is not wont to be fed with husks.

Beside, one question yet remains* when winds, and tides, fall cross, as
often they do, the winds of authority driving one way, and the tide of good
Christians bent, the clean contrary, what is here to be followed? If we may
make conjecture of D. B. his judgment, in such a case, by his practice, it
will be very uncertayn.

SECT. 2. Concerning Vrsines and Zanchies judgment, about w^ll-worship.
1. Here (for brevitie sake) the question was repeated, in these words:
whether all willworship, wh^tsoever, is to be condemned, or no. The Rejoinder
upon this, first accuses the Repl. of falsifying and changing the proposition.
Now he cannot mean this of words: because the verity and falsitie of a
proposition, does not consist in words. And the sense he cannot deny to be
falsified. For humane Ceremonies, imposed and observed as parts of Gods
worship, must needs be worship proceeding from man's will, or will worship. This
therefore is but a blushing at the name of that which without blushing is
defended. 2. The Rejoinder himself does, in the very next words, confess so
much, when he professes, that some will worship is not condemned.

But I wonder from what good Divine he ever learned this assertion? The Papists
are ordinarily charged by us for teaching, and practicing of will worship: yet
diverse of them are ashamed to profess the defense of such a monster, in
plain terms. ESTIVS upon the Epist. to the Col. Cap. 3. ult. disputing
against some one or two Jesuits, that had been forced to let fall such a
speech, says of them, as we say of the Rejoinder, Docere non poterunt (...)
usquam accipi in bono. They can never show, that will worship is taken in good
sense, (...) wed of and not condemned. All our Divines might here be opposed to
these two Doctors opinions. But it shall suffize, to allege only two for the
contrary, and they are Vrsin, and Zanchie, whose authority are so much urged
by the Def. and Rejoynd. in this section, Vrsin in the place quoted by the Def.
upon the 2. Commandment says thus: All fained worship is forbidden: all
worship which is not of God, Prohibitur omn^s (...) fictitius, omnis cultus qut
non a Deo, sed ab hominibus est instirutus, cum ve o Deo cultus, seu honor
fingitur prastari, aliquo opere quod ipse non praecepit.
but set up by men, when worship or honor is fained to be done to the true
God, in some work which he has not enjoined. Zanchie also upon the same Com.
q. 4. thus: We may not worship God with any other worship (though it be in the
kind of ex^ernall and Cerem^nia^l worship) then with that which he has
required in the holy Scriptures to be worshipped of us by. 3. Concerning the
examples, Nullo alio, etiam externi and Ceremonialis cultus genere, colere Deum
licet, quam quo ipse in sacris ^^teris se colt a nobis juss^t. Apostolus Col.
2. omaes damnat (...). 1. e. voluntarios, extra verbum Dei, excogitatos and
electos ab hominibus cultus.
which are here brought forth of warrantable will worship, free will offerings,
vows, and kneeling in public prayer, enough has been answered before. Yet
briefly again free will offerings were only to be made of such things as
were manifestly known to be praescribed by Gods revealed will: and so not the
offering, but undertaking of it, at such a time, or in such a measure, was
left unto the free choice of men, according to occasion.

It is no will worship, to pray thrice or seven times in a day, or to preach
thrice in one Lord's Day upon special occasion. Some vows are no more worship,
for the matter of them (and that only is left unto choice, no^ the manner)
then fighting in a lawful war, upon the bond of an oath, is religious
worship. Kneeling in prayer is expressly allowed by Gods revealed will: and the
determination of it to this or that time, is to be ruled by occasion. 4. As for
that conclusion which the Rejoinder draws from the former grounds, viz. that
order comeliness and edification. 1. Cor. 14. give power to men, for to
appoint accessorie parts of ext^rnall worship, first, it has no connection with
them, as has been showed in part, and may further be observed by this, that
the inference is, from free-will-offeringes, vows, and Kneeling, that therefore
the Apostle 1. Cor. 14. does give Churches power to appoint such formalities
as our Cross, and Syrplice: which is to tie harp and harrow together with a
rope of sand. Secondly, suppose it had, then it is not fully and resolutely
expressed: because from will worship of free will-offeringes may as well be
concluded essential, as accessorie will worship to be in the Churches power
for to appoint it: because they were as essential offerings, as other
sacrifices, which were by name commanded. If by accessorie worship, he means
that which is appointed by man, in opposition to essential, as appointed by
God (which his manuductive interpretation bears) then in stead of a
conclusion, we have a mere confusion: the Church may appoint that will worship
which God has not appointed, but man does. Thirdly, the appointing of this or
that, does not follow upon the practice of free-will-offerings, and vows,
except it be understood, that the Church might have appointed men, what, and
how many free will offerings they should offer, which were to turn free
worship into forced.

2. About Vrsines testimony, we have such turnings, and windings of words
obtruded upon us, as aff^rde no matter capable of sad dispute. It shall be
sufficient therefore to note only the passages, which seem to look toward the
question. The Rejoinder page 179. told us, that the Def. offered to confute,
out of Vrsine, this proposition: All human Ceremonies which are imposed, and
observed, as parts of ^ods worship, are unlawful. Now first upon this, the
Repl. brought forth the maine assertion of Vrsin, in the place alleged, viz.
that humane Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, not only are not the worship of God,
but also they bind not the conscience. To this the Rejoinder answers, that
Vrsin in his answer to an objection made against this assertion, says, that
such Ceremonies are not worship in themselves, therefore (adds the Rejoinder)
his meaning is, that there is some true lawful worship, improperly, and by
ac^ident.

Which is as if from these words: man's clothes, or armor, are not a man by
themselves, one should conclude, that therefore they are affirmed to be a man
improperly, and by accident.

Secondly, the Repl. noted diverse words of Vrsin, sounding wholly to the
denial of the honorable title of good worship unto human institutions. Upon
which the Rejoinder complains, of wilful omitting these words of Vrsin:
worship properly so called does so please God, that the contrary of it would
displease him. Where (says the Rejoinder) we have an exact description of
worship properly so called. But he is herin deceyved. For if this be an exact
description of proper worship, then when a child honoreth his father, he does
properly and immediately honor and worship God: because such an act does so
please God, that the contrary of it (dishonoring of ones father) must needs
displease him.

And so, in very deed, was the meaning of Vrsin, to call the moral duties even
of the second table, worship properly so called. Which form of speaking,
though it cannot be excused from great improprietie, yet makes it nothing for,
but rather against the Rej. because Vrsin heerby denies human Ceremonies so
much to participate the nature and name of worship, as any mean moral duty of
the second tabledoeth, no not so much as the hang-mans office, in the due
execution of it.

Thirdly the Repl. observed, that the Def. concludes the very same thing out
of Vrsin, which we mainteyne, and he undertook to confute, viz. that divine
worship properly so called, is that which is ordained of God.

To this the Rej. answers (after an angry charging the Repl. with a
contradctious spirit, that this is not alleged, because we deny it, or to
confute our proposition, in the sense of Vrsine, but to show what sense we must
hold of it.

Now did not the Rejoinder himself tell us page 1794. that the Def. offered to
confute out of Vrsin, our proposition? How can this be excused from
contradictions (I will not say spirit, but) dealing, to say, and unsay the same
thing, in the breath of one and the same section?

Fourthly, to that which the Def. said, of Ceremonies, in a large sense, to be
held worship, the Repl. answered, that thts should be proved. The rejoinder
is, that the large sense it set down, viz. as circumstances apperteyning to
the setting out of divine worship.

As if we had not required a proof, but only an explication. Yet this
explication has no more truth in this large sense, then if one should say,
that all circumstances appertayning to the setting out of a man area man.

But (says the Rej.) Vrsin, or at least Pareus says, that the genus commune
nature of these Cerem. as well as of civil laws is moral, and therefore
worship. What could he have said more to confute both Defendant, and Rejoynder^
they are worship, (and that only in their general nature) just as civil
things: that is not otherwise then all good deeds are worship. So forbidding,
or hindering of false worship (which may be done by Atheists) is worship, in
this uncouth manner of speaking.

One argument yet is of the Rejoinder his own invention: Such things done to
the honoring of an Idol were idolatry, as to build a temple, to the honoring
of an Idol. Therefore the same things done by the rule, to the right end, are
some way a worship to God. Wherein there are two ambiguous phrases observable: 1.
such things. 2. to the honoring of an idol.

If by such things, he means such as cross and surplice, we not only
grant, but urge, that such things done to the honoring of an idol, are
idolatry, and therfrom conclude, that such things done to the honoring of
God, are (not some way but) properly, latria, or worship of the true God,
though (being destitute of his allowance) false, or superstitious worship. But
if he mean such as circumstances of time, and place, then he accuses all
Princes, that ever granted time, and place, for idolatrous worship, to be
Idolaters. Let him consider, how far this stretches.

Secondly, if by to the honoring of an Idol, he means a devout intention of
such an honor, we grant, that the taking up of a straw directly to such an
immediate end, is idolatry. For howsoever such intention is not necessary to
external worship, yet the praesence of it does make that worship which
otherwise were none.

Yet all circumstances of time and place, which are occasionally applied to
idolatry, are not idolatry, either essential, or accidental. For then the
same circumstances, should be (in diverse Ci^ies) both Idolatry, and also true
worship of the true God, as being circumstances of both.

3. Concerning Zanchie. His name is by mistaking, much abused. For howsoever
he distinguishes worship into that which he calls essential, and such
thing as are annexed unto it, yet under these annexions, he comprizeth such
things as God has commanded, all which the Def. and Rej. call essential
worship. His words are these: Things annexed to worship are holy ordinances
which among the Jews were very many, as their temples, Altars, persons,
garments, vessels, times etc. And afterward Ministers, Elders, Deacons, Lords
Day etc are the holy things of the Christian Church. Annexa cultui sunt s^cra,
qua apud Iudae^s permulta erant templa, altaria persona, vesti^^enta, vaesa,
tempora, etc. et postea: Mini^^ri, Praesbyteri Diaconi, Dies Dominicus, etc.
sunt sacra Ec^lesiae Christiana.
So that Zanchie calls those annexed, which these men call essential
worship: what an unhappie witness is he, that does not agree with them of
whom he is produced: But to take all that the Rejoinder would have, this is the
sum: If human Ceremonies be some part of external worship, and yet not of
that worship which is essential, as Zanchie shows, then (in a large sense)
Ceremonies applied to religious actions, may be called parts of Gods worship,
though not essential.

To which I answer, that according as Ramus shows, about distribution,
sometime adjuncts of a thing may (in a large sense) be called parts, and yet
they cannot have the abstractive name of that subject attributed unto them:
because the adjuncts of a man cannot (with any sense) be called men. The
consequence ^herfore of this argument is rotten at the root.

But such a reason, as that from the adjuncts of a man, to a man, was thus
propounded by the Repl. the cross is annexed to a Sacrament. To this the
Rejoinder answers, that the Cross is not annexed to the Sacrament, but only
to the solemnity of the Sacrament, and so it is not a part of the Sacrament,
but of solemnity.

Now here let any man of reason judge, 1. If the Cross in Baptism, be not so
much as a circumstance a Ceremony, or Rite (which all Papists, Lutherans, and
our Conformists ordinarily, acknowledge) annexed unto Baptism? Common use of
speech calls that annexed, which is joined unto another thing, as an adjunct.
Now who can doubt, but the Cross is so joined to Baptism?

2. If the Cross be not an essential part, or member of the solemnity, and
therefore not an annexed adjunct of it, no more then a man's hand is to be
esteemed a thing annexed unto him, or his body?

3. If this being granted, that the solemnity of Baptism is annexed to
Baptism, it does not follow, that the Cross, a maine part of that
solemnity, be not also annexed to the same Sacrament? Such figleaves, so
ill-favoredly sowed together, cannot cover the nakedness of will worship.

SECT. 8. and 9. Concerning Mr. BRADSHAW his argument, whereby he proves our
Ceremonies to be esteemed, imposed, and observed, as parts of Gods worship,
viz. because they want nothing to true, or right worship of God, but only a
right efficient cause, or author.
1. THe 8. section was neglected by the Repl. as containing nothing but
affirmation on one side, and negation on the other. This omission (says the
Rejoinder) was for advantage, because (forsooth) here the Def. his assertion
was clearly set down, namely, that our Ceremonies are not imposed, or
observed, as proper, essential and necessary parts of Gods worship.

But 1, If this had been a clear explication, yet seeing we meet with it, and
handle it in a hundred several places, before, and after, little reason had the
Rejoinder to suspect advantageous craft, in passing by the same terms in this
one place. 2. There is no clearness at all in heaping up terms, without any
explication of them. 3. When these terms, proper, essential, necessary
worship are now expounded, by the Rejoinder to mean nothing else but worship
specially commanded of God, the sense is so absurd, that it was for his
advantage, if they were omitted. For what answer is this: men appointing
Ceremonies of their own making, do not say that they are specially app^inted
of God?

2. The argument was thus formed by the Repl. Those Ceremonies, which have the
kind, nature, and definition of worship belonging to them, so that they want
nothing but a right author, to make them true worship, those are in their
imposition and use, worship, and for want ^f a right author, false worship. But
our Ceremonies are ^uche. Ergo. Here the Rejoinder first complayneth again,
that the term Real. is left out of the assumtion, into which it was put by
the Def. But 1. who gave license to the Def. for to put new terms into our
arguments? It is not true, that he put any such term into the assumtion, but
only mentioned in the title of this section. 3. Except such a ridiculos sense
be put upon this term Real, as was even now observed, of prop^r essential,
ne^essarie, it may be understood both in the proposition, and in the the
assumtion also. For if the kind, nature, and d^finition of worship do agree
to our Ceremonies then they are not only verbal worship, in some fashion of
speech (as the Rejoinder distinguishes, but real worship.

3. Upon occasion of that scorn which was cast on the authors of this
argument, viz. that this learning never saw print before, as the Def. thinks,
Mr. Bradshaw was named, as a man not to be slighted for his learning, who had
long since put in print, without receyving any printed answer, unto it, or the
book wherein it was contained. To this diverse things are rejoined, not worthy
any answer, but that they tend to the disgrace of a godly learned man, whose
memory is worthy of all honor. 1. Mr. Bradshaw is ranked among discontented
persons. Which imputation if it be understood of distentment for want of
preferment, or great living, could hardly have lighted upon any man in England,
whose course and conversation would more beat it off then Mr. Bradshaws did, in
the consciences of all indifferent men that knew him.

2. His tracts of indifferency, and worship are styled little Pamphlets, such
as do creep in the dark, and are hard to be seen of men that walked by day
light. This is (up and down) the language of great prelates, when Goliah-like,
they confute their adversaries with scorning of their little stature, and
ignoble state. But the Def. or Rejoinder might have put that little pamphlet
into the belly of a whale, by setting it forth with a large confutation, in
folio, and so also have helped it from creeping, to some kind of riding on
horseback.

Neither is it harder for daylight men, to see such treatises, though thrust
by their command into dark corners, then it is to open their mouths for to
ask after them, and then their eyes to look on them. Howsoever, if this be a
sufficient answer, then what shall become of many little books for instruction,
and help, dispersed by good men among the Papists, where public authority
does make the^ to keep the^ selves in a little compass, and to creep in the
dark, for fear of being apprehended by the inquisitours daylight walkers? Mr.
Bradshaw was made for accurate, short, and mere logical fashion of writing. So
much appears out of other treatises of his: as that of Justification. For to
have drawn forth him unto large wordy discourses, it had been as hard, as to
confine wordy men, unto the accuratenesse of mere logical dealing.

3. Because the learning of this argument was derided by a Bishop, the Repl.
doubted not to aequal Mr. Bradshow, for his skill in framing of an argument,
unto any of the Bishops. To which the Rej. answers, that this is no more
praise to him, the^ it is for a Carpenters boy, to drive a pin as well as his
Master. Which might be admitted for true, if there be any Bishop, that may in
this kind of learning be Magister ejus. Howsoever, it is not to the purpose,
except the Master carpenter, may deride his boy for driving a pin, which is
as well driven as he himself can drive any.

4. The Rejoynd. raises up a report, without showing from whom he receyved
it, that Mr. Bradshaw reversed his own opinion of things indifferent. Which
until it be some other way confirmed, then by an adversaries bare telling, and
that in a humor of disgracing his person, it must be accounted a mere tale.
But he had good reason to reverse his opinion (says the Rejoinder) because
against all reason and sense, he resolved that there is nothing indifferent.

If this were so as it is related, reason would persuade to some recantation.
But it is only the Rejoinder his telling again, without any show of proof.

I, for my part, can find no such words in Mr. Bradshawe his treatise,
neither any thing from whence such a raw sentence may be reasonably collected.
He concludes in deed cap. 3. that there is no absolute indifferent thing. 1. e.
evereway, as well in order of nature, as of morallitie. He affirmed also cap.
7. there is nothing actua^ly indifferent, which is not potentially good or
evil, and cap. 8. there is no action of man's will so indifferent, but the
doing thereof, by some circumstances, may be evil. There is no action that a
man can do, by the power of his will, that is merely and absolutely
indifferent. These passages come the nearest to that which is here fathered
upon the treatise: in all which this cruditie appears not: there is nothing
indifferent. Nay the harshest of these assertions, may be found not only in
little Pamphlets made by Carpenters boys, against learning and sense, but in
great volumes, written by those that go for very learned, and sensible in
such matters as this is. Thomas Aquinas, in the great book, called his Sum,
prima secundae, q. 18. ar. 9. has this conclusion: Humanu^ actu^ ^ndividuo
consideratu^ ex deliberata ratione procedentem, vel bonum esse, vel malum,
necesse est.
It must needs be that every individual act of man (proceeding from deliberate
reason) is either good or bad. And all (or almost all) those which have
written upon that place, do confirm, and defend the same, who yet were men,
that in questions of such a nature, did not usually write against all learning
and sense.

4. At lenght, we have leave given, to examine the Argument it self: but with
this remembrance, that is not like to be very sound, which all this while came
into no man's head, ti^l Mr. Bradshaw rise up. But who told the Rejoinder that
it never came into any man's head before? though if that were true, the
soundness may be likely enough.

Many reasons have been in other men's heads, which never came to the knowledge
of our Def. and Rejoinder. And he is immediately told, that it is for substance
in every one of our Divines, which has written of worship: because they all,
teaching that the common nature of worship required no more, then that it has
the honoring of God for the direct end of it, they add, that if this be
according to Gods commandment, it is true worship, if not, false. And the Def.
was urged to show one instance to the contrary. The Rejoinder is made, 1. by
repeating over the empty terms, of in it self proper, essential, real,
necessary, etc. Which have been so often discovered to be nothing but terms,
that it were an idle tedious buisinesse, for to insist upon them again. Yet
some few things may be observed, as proper to this place.

First we are told here, that it is essential to proper essential worship,
be it true or false, that it tend of it self, and immediately, to the honor of
God. So then we have the common nature of proper worship, as it is common to
true and false worship. Now add unto this that which is added, page 125.126.
that this worship, if it be required of God, is true, if not, false. Now this
being granted, our wholle Argument is granted, so far as it concerns proper
worship. For by this confession of the Rejoinder it is plain, that the
institution of God does not make a thing proper worship, but only true proper
worship, and the want of it does make proper worship false.

And this is all that we intend in this Argument, for which also we are
twitted with new learning by the Def. page 185. where also he affirms that
Gods institution does distinguishe essential worship from accidental, and
therein he is mainteyned by the Rejoinder as by and by we shall see.

But how can these things stand together Gods institution is first the
specificall difference, whereby essential worship is distinguished from
accidental, and yet the specificall difference also whereby true essential
worship is distinguished from false? Can any one thing be a specificall form
of diverse effects, or difference of diverse subordinate things, such as
essential, and true essential worship are? Can there be ore and the same
difference, betwixt a living and a livelesse creature, and also betwixt a
reasonable and unreasonable living creature.

It is in the second place observable, how the Rejoinder seeks to convey, or
(to speak plainly) steal away from us, that which he had given. Divines (says
he) do distinguish proper worship, from that which is after a sort so called,
by immediate end, and per se.

Be it so: this does not contradict any thing here in question: and it has
been expounded before, in the head of worship. The Divines of Saxony, and
Wit^enberge, Vrsin also, and Zanchie are alleged for the same purpose, 1. e.
nothing to the purpose, Of Vrsin and Zanchie, enough has been spoken in the
former section. As for the other, see how they agree.

It was required, that one of our Divines should be named, who handling the
common place of worship, does not distinguish true worship from false, by
this, that one is appointed of God, and the other not.

He brings in some Lutherans not fully consenting with our Divines, neither
treating on any common place of worship, but only writing a brief confession,
teaching a difference betwixt lawful rites of order, and proper worship, which
we never doubted of. He takes hold of those terms immediately, and of itself,
by which (says he) these divines distinguish proper worship from that which is
after a sort so called.

But it is more probable of the places cited, that they rather distingu^sh
worship (by those terms) from mere rites of order and decency, which they do
never call worship, after a sort. Beside, of our Ceremonies, it has been
showed, that their immediate end, is to honor God: in which respect also, the
Rej. himself ranketh them under the head of immediate worship.

As for per se, or of it self, it may mean also as much as ex opere operato,
the mere work wrought. In which sense some Divines pronounce generally of all
external worship, that of it self, and in it own nature, it does not please
God. Perkinse, in his Cases, lib. 2. cap. 6. Howsoever, to show how the authors
of these confessions did not esteem significant Ceremonies Cross, Surplice
etc. to be matters of lawful order, those words of the Wittenberge Confession
do sufficiently declare. It is not lawful for Bishops, to thrust upon the
Church, the Ceremonies of the old law, etc, where come in the words quoted by
the Rejoinder and immediately after, these: Neither is it lawful, either to
restore the old Ceremonies of the law, or to devize new, to shadow forth the
truth already laid open, and brought to light, by the Gospel: as in the day
light, to set up candles, to signify the light of the Gospel, or to carry
banners and Crosses, to signify the victory of Christ thorough the Cross. Of
which sort is all the furniture of Massing attire.

Upon such grounds as these, the Rejoinder concludes thus: Therefore the
institution of God alone is that which makes the same things to be worship
truly, and really, which without such institution, were no such real
worship, though done to the same end, and in the same manner. But I know not
how the term truly, and then again such worship came into the question. We
stand upon this, that Gods institution of worship, does make true worship, and
deny only that it makes that worship, which otherwise, or without such
institution, were no worship at all. How can then the Rejoinder be excused in
confounding true worship, with real worship in this conclusion? Now take away
this intruded truly, and then let any man tell me, how this conclusion can be
reconciled with those his principles of concerning worship, page 125? Any
action done to the honoring of God immediately, and in that act it self, is
proper immediate, external worship of God. If God requires it not, then that
worship is false. And even now: such an act is proper worship of God, be it
true or false. Proper and Real to him are all one: and yet granting some
proper worship to be false (for lack of Gods institution) he denies it to be
real worship, if it want Gods institution: as if Gods institution did make
that real proper worship, which for want of that institution is false worship.

This wild conclusion is further confirmed by a reason out of Tilenus, which
is answered before, in the head of Worship, and by one example out of Fenner,
whom the Rejoinder is pleased to call our own Master. Where, I will not say,
what kind of men may (by like reason) beproclaimed his own Masters, but
only desire him to consider, what reason he had, to avouche, that to hold the
Ceremonies unlawful, is a new tenet lately broached, contrary to that which
was held in Queen Elizabeth's days, whenas he accounteh Mr. Fenner our Master
in this doctrine, who had to do in the first infamous silencing of Ministers
for Ceremonies, in the beginning of D. Whitgifts Dominatinon? But what is that
which is brought forth out of our own Master? Nothing but this: that after
public worship, the people are to use a reverent gesture, as bowing down the
head before the Minister. Whereupon the Rejoinder demands, whether this
adoration be essential, necessary worship or no? and in what sense this
respect of the Minister be by him called worship of ^od? To which I answer 1.
that I do not find it by him called worship of God at all 2. that it were a
great absurdity for him to call a respect of man, worship of God, as the
Rejoinder does. 3. that the adoration spoken of Neh. 8.7. from whence he took
that observation, was proper essential external worship. In this therefore
nothing is found to purpose.

One observation is added further by the the Rejoinder, namely, that diverse of
our Divines do make this part of the defini^ion of proper worship, that it be
according to the commandment of God. To which I answer, that such difinitions
are to be understood of true and lawful worship, even as those definitions of
an oath, which require the true God to be sworn by, are to be taken of right
and lawful oaths only, because swearing by false Gods, is swearing, as all
worshipping, of false Gods, is worship, though both unlawful.

In the next place, answer is tendered to this reason of Mr. Br. The bare
ratifying of the present use of any thing, cannot make it true and lawful
worship, if it had not before some nature of worship in the use of it. The
force lies in this, that bare ratifying or authorizing of any thing to have
that use which it had before without such authority, does not change the
physical entitie, essence, or use of it, but only the authority, or
legalitie of it. The instances brought by the Rejoinder to the contrary, may
have some show, but have no force to that purpose. 1. The sole stamp of the
King, makes that current money, which was not money at all before, but only
used by way of bartery. In which comparison, he utterly mistaketh and varieth
the quality wherein it consists. For on the one side, it stands thus: If
God should command and us to use our Ceremonies, after the same manner that we
have used them, without his command, they should be parts of Gods proper
outward worship. On the other side it stands thus: if the King command that
piece of metal to be used for current money, which before was not used so,
but only for bartery, it should be current money. Here is no similitude,
because no proportion of quality.

2. As the sole word of God, made living creatures of those that were not
living, before, so says the Rejoinder the sole institution of God, makes that
action to be true worship, which was before no real worship at all, though
used to the same end, and in the same manner. But 1. the creating word of that
which was not before in being, differs so much from that ratifying word which
presupposes the being of the thing ratified, that here is not so much as a
show of proportion. 2. This is a direct contradiction to that which the
Rejoinder teaches, page 125. If any thing be done to the honoring of God
immediately and of it self, which God requires not so to be done, it is proper
immediate external false worship. For hence it immediately follows, that
nothing can be done, to the same end with true proper worship, but it must be
proper worship, either true, if it be required of God, or false, if not so
required. 3. The place of Sacrifice, before God had determined the particular
place, though used to the same end, and in the same manner, was not in it self
any part of real worship to God: and yet after Gods determination, it was. I
answer. There was a great difference in the manner, wherein the place determined
(so as it was) ought to be used. For there was special mysteriall signification
to be observed in the one, which was not in the other.

Otherwise, I see not what more real worship there was in Jacobs place of
sacrifizing at Bethel, upon Gods special determination, Genesis 35. then in
Abraham's sacrifizing at Hebron, without any such special determination of
God, Genesis 13.

When all other Essays fail, the Repl. himself is brought in as guilty of
contradiction, because he affirms these two things: the institution of God
does distinguish true wo^ship from false: and yet it does not alter the
common nature of worship. For (says the Rejoinder) it is as if one should say:
the reasonable soul does distinguish man from creatures that have not
understanding: and yet it does not alter the common nature of the creature.
But the Repl. had answered this before, if the Rejoinder would have attended
unto his words, as they are by himself set down, page 189. alter the common
nature of worship, that is, make that worship, which otherwise, being used to
the same end, and in the same manner, without Gods institution, were no
worship at all. In which words he plainly expressed, that by altering the
common nature of worship, he meant nothing less, the^ making true worship of
false, but only creating or making the common essential nature of worship.
And certain it is, that the reasonable soul (as it is reasonable) does not
make the common essential nature of a living creature, for then there could be
no living creature, without a reasonable soul as the Rejoinder affirms, there
can be no proper worship, without Gods appointment.

5. Against the Def. his invention of indifferent worship, it was excepted (to
pass by repetitions) that no Scripture, Divines, or good reason does
acknowledge any such worship. The ground is, because in Scripture, all worship
is either approved as good, or condemned as evil: all Divines do distribute
worship into true or false: and they have reason so to do. To this the
Rejoinder opposes nothing but the contrary assertion, grounded upon examples.
1. So far (says he) as we may call the particularities of external
disposition, in the m^nner of worship, respectively t^ their end, worship, so
far may we call them indifferent worship: as kneeling, standing, bowing, or
prostration, the place, and hour of worshipping, singing of this or that Psalm.

I will not here write over again, that which has been declared about these
things in the head of Worship. But in brief thus: 1. The question is not, what
this or that may be called, by a Rhetorical trope, but what it is in the
nature of it. 2. Respect to the utmost remote end, does no more make matters
of order, time, and place, worship, the^ it makes worship of eating, and
drinking, and whatsoever we do to the honor of God, 1. Cor. 10.31.3. In place,
and hour, or in the election of one Psalm, before another, there can no
worship be placed, except we will make one worship to be worshipped by another,
when it is timed, placed, and chosen. 4. There is no special worship in one of
the gestures named that is not in the other. Neither is any of these gestures
so indifferent, as that it may be lawful, to forbid, or refuse any of them,
generally, and for all occasions, nor yet so, as that by circumstances (without
any law or canon) they may become necessary. These examples therefore serve not
the turn they were brought for.

2. There is also (adds the Rejoinder) an arbitrarie choice of essential
Divine worship, as when we will pray or read, etc. where in respect of this
liberty of choice, the kind of worship is indifferent in some respect. Of
which assertion I know not what to say: Necessary worship is in some respect
indifferent. Certainly that respect must make a worship, distinct from that
necessary worship whereof it is a respect: or else, as (by the Rejoinder his
doctrine) all things in respect of their relation, are Ceremonies, and in
respect of their utmost end, worship, so all things, or at least all human
actions, are also in some respect arbitrarie and indifferent. There is no end,
or bottom in such reasons. The truth is, that this when which is here spoken
of, is one and the same thing with hour which was mentioned in the former
instance, and therefore needs no new answer.

6. The Def. for proving of his assertion (that Gods institution does
difference necessary and essential worship, from indifferent and accidental)
did bring in the instance of lambs for color unspotted, which was necessary
and essential (as he affirmed) after the law, though before indifferent and
accidental.

To this it was first answered, that this law of offering lambs for color
unspotted, is no where exstant, and therefore that this instance was alleged
either out of ignorance, or for want of due consideration. The Rejoinder being
constreined to grant this exception to be just, turns himself to those last
words, either ignorance, or want of due consideration: and for them accuses
the Repl. of flying in the Def. his face, without Christian moderation. But if
it be so great a crime, to impute either some ignorance or some
inconsiderateness (such as no man alive is wholly free from) unto the Def.
and if this be unchristian flying in his face, I am sure the Rejoinder has
gone beyoynd the face and stabbed deeper into our Vitals, in many passages of
his Rejoinder.

As succedaneall instances to the former, which was found failling, the
Rejoinder brings in diverse, out of the Leviticall, or Ceremonial law, which
were arbitrarie before the law, and necessarily essential after. To all which,
the second answer to the failing instance, gives direct satisfaction. As for
those Rites, which are further alleged, out of the Legende of fabulous
Rabbines, by Mr. Ainsworth, and ratified by the Rejoinder we regard them no
more, then the Popish leaden Legendes. Only the marginall conclusion out of
these Instances is observable: The Repl. fallaciously supposes, that all
worship is only true, or false, not observing a subdivision of true worship,
into substantial, and circumstantiall.

For 1. what reason can he render, of that which he lays upon the Repl. as if
he had supposed all worship to be only true or false.

The Repl. never denied, but all worship is also good, or evil, internal, or
external, natural, or instituted, etc.

2. The reason which he brings, is only from the subdivision of true
worship. But that does not hinder a superdivision, or aequidivision, into
common, and special, Ecclesiastical, and domestical, as Mr. Perkinse
divides in the place before cited. 3. That division into substantial, and
accidental, cannot possibly (with any reason) be more applied unto true then
false worship, except the Rejoinder will say, that no false worship is either
substantial, or accidental.

The second answer to the former instance (belonging to all those by the
Rejoinder adjoined) is, that i^ before the law, the same worship had been
performed, with the same mind, that is, in the same manner, and to the same
end, it had been as essential worship, as after, though not so true, and
lawful.

The Rejoinder here first, observes a contradiction to that which was formerly
said sect. 6. worship does not vary, according to men's opinion. But if he
understand the matter well, he shall find both sayings well to agree. For
though the want of some opinion does not vary the nature of worship, so as
that the absence of this or that opinion, does make any external worship, not
essential: and yet it does so vary the nature of worship, as that the
presence of some opinion, does (as an efficient, not as a formal cause) make
some external act essential worship. The Rejoinder his second observation is,
that our Ceremonies are hereby discharged from will worship, and superstition,
except it can be proved, the imposers, or users of them, do hold, that God is
better pleased with them, then without them, in themselves, or that they are as
pleasing to him, as if he had commanded them.

The consequence of which heerby conclusion, no logician in the world can make
good. Yet (taking out in themselves, as an intrusion) all the consequent part
may be mainteyned. For if there be any more good h^lde in the imposing and
observing of them, then in the omitting of them, then God is better pleased
with them, then without them. And that which is lawfully and justly commanded
by men authorized thereto, is as pleasing to God as if he had commanded it. Nay
^t must be receyved, as commanded of God himself.

7. It was also by the Repl. brought into the Def. his remembrance, that
matter, and form do usually make up the essence of things, and that to
instituted means, a proper end is also required, but a right efficient cause
not so. About this, the Rejoinder shows himself perplexed. For 1. he
answers, that this notwithstanding, actions have as it were matter, form and
essence of accidental, though not of essential worship.

Where he manifestly separateth the essence of worship, from essential
worship, as if the essence of a man could exist without an essential man, 2.
He gathers from that which was said of respect to the end, in institutio^s,
that thereby their assertion, is cleared: viz. that Cer. respecting the honor
of God mediatly, are not properly parts of Divine worship. As if here had been
any mention or question, of mediatly, or immediately, proper, or improper, and
not only of essential. But for so much as the Rejoinder would needs here
cite D. Abbot, for his term immediately, I would desire him to consider of the
wholle sentence in that place pronounced by him, viz. Def. of Mr. Perk. page
844. Order and comeliness (says the popish Bishop) is some part of Gods
worship. But (says D. Abbot.) Who taught him this deep point of Philosophy,
that an accident is a part of the subject, that the beauty, or comeliness of
the body is a part of the body? Order and comeliness properly and immediately
respect men, and therefore can be no parts of the woship of God. If this be not
a plain refuting of the Def. and the Rejoinder their assertion, then none is
attempted in all the Reply.

3. He in like manner concludes, that every respect of the honor of God, does
not make a thing to be properly religious worship. As if the Repl. had ever
spoken, or dreamt of such a fantasy, except it were in the Rejoinder his
name! His words are: beside the respect of the end, is also required
institution of means to an end. What Paracelsian can draw so wild an
assertion, from such a ground as this?

8. It was (in the last place) demanded, whether, if the Temple of Jerusalem
had been built, with institution of all the appurtenances, sacrifices, and
observances, there used, without any Commandment of God, according as they
were by his appointment, whether (says the Repl.) they had not been essential
false worship, erected to God? The Rejoinder answers: Yes no doubt, if we may
call (as the manner is) essential disworship, essential false worship: either
in respect of the things themselves, or in the opinion conceyved in their use.
Now mark (all readers that have sense) how this Rejoinder (here in the
conclusion of all) is constreyned to confess, that to be true, which he has
hitherto striven against as false. 1. The Repl. his assertion was, that Gods
institution does make that worship, which being used in the same manner and to
the same end, were otherwise no worship, or (as it pleases the Def. and
Rejoinder to speak) no essential worship? The Rejoyn-hitherto has contended
against this, as against a great error.

Now in the winding up of the wholle Argument, he confesses, that some
essential worship may be, without any institution of God. Certainly, if this
be so, then the institution of God, is not required to essential worship,
neither is it of the essence of essential worship, that it be instituted of
God. 2. He affirmed before, page, 125. that proper immediate, (or essential)
worship are only such things as God has to that end ordained Yet here he
confesses, that essential worship may be without any command of God. 3. The
Rejoinder before, made essential and accidental worship to be a subdivision
of true worship. Now he confesses, that there is an essential worship under
the head of false worship. 4. He acknowlegeth, that in all the former
senseless assertions, he did not speak, as the manner of speech is.

That was therefore against the manner of speech, which the Def. and he used
before. 5. He grants some worship to be essential, in respect of the
things themselves, separated from men's opinion. Yet hitherto, he would have
made us believe, that opinion did vary the nature of worship, as sect. 6. If
this be not a plain yiedling, and granting of the wholle Argument, there can be
none, save only in plain terms, to say, I yield.

SECT. 10.11.12.13.14.
THe former argument being (though demonstrative) yet to the Def. his
apprehension new, was derided as new learning: these following are excused from
that censure, as being more popular, and seeming more fadomable. Of which it is
to be observed, that most of them are fetched out of incertaine papiers, under
the name of Mr. Hy. and others, upon the Def. his credit: wherein, what aequall
dealing has been used, it is very suspicious to any judicious reader, and some
of those others, (for Mr. Hy. is past writing to) being asked, have testified,
that in diverse passages they are much abused. Yet even these relics of
Arguments are defensible.

1. The first is: because they are imposed to breed an opinion of holiness, by
Mr. Hookers doctrine and therefore, as parts of Gods worship. To which the Def.
answers, that it is no meant of operative holiness, either by infusion, or
inhaesion, but only significative. Whence he concludes, a perverse purpose of
calumniation: and the Rejoinder (adding another distinction, betwixt holiness
in them, and in the users of them) makes mention also of dotage. But 1. the
Def. his distinction is vain: because even significative holiness is also a
part of Gods worship. Otherwise some holiness must be fained, which having no
other immediate end but that which directly and immediately tend to the
honoring of God, is no part of his honor. The Rejoinder also is vain in
limiting the matter to holiness in them.

For those things which are instituted to that immediate end only, that they
may breed an opinion of holiness, and so holiness, in others, do (in all
reason) deserve the opinion of holiness some way causall, or operative in
themselves: because all breeding is causing, or working, 1. e. operative.

It was also observed by the Repl. (only in a parenthesis, by the way) that
holiness either by infusion or inhaesion, were unreasonablie by the Defend.
disjoined.

This the Rejoinder excepteth against, and says, in those terms there is no
more disjunction, then in these love or charity, Magistrates, or Governors.

But he forgotte the proper English note of disjunction, either, or.

Where did he ever read such a phraze: either love, or charity, either
Magistrates, or Governors?

It was also replied, that Mr. Hooker attributed operative holiness to the
Cross, in allowing all that the Fathers ascribed to it. The Rejoinder his
only material exception is, that the instance was here not of the Cross, but
of the Surplice. Yet the question is of our Ceremonies, which is as well
concluded from one, as another, and the Rejoinder himself, even now, spoke of
holiness in them, as of many, not in it, as of one Ceremony only.

Neither is there any more holiness in one, then in the other, if both be only
significative.

The Repl. further affirmed, that Mr. Hooker spoke of reverence to be signified
toward the Ceremonies. To which is rejoined I know not what. But let Mr.
Hookers words, goeing before those nakedly cited by the Def. and Rejoinder, be
considered. The wise man could not mention so much as the garments of
Holiness, but with singul^r reverence, and it will be evident, whereto he
required reverence.

In the last place, Mr. Hookers opinion is slighted, as private. Whereas all
know, that he is in our Ceremonial controversies, of as public note, and
approbation, as Bellamine in any Popish.

2. The second reason being sle^derly propounded by the Def. out of Mr. Hy. his
mangled manuscript, was thus by the Repl. distinctly explained: A holy assembly
of Spiritual Lords, and their Assistants, if they be truly holy, and
spiritual in their authority, and in the exercise of it, will appoint no
Ceremony but holy: and by the observance of the said Ceremonies, have some
spiritual honor redounding unto themselves: because the virtue which is found
in any effect, does redounde allways to the praise of the cause. Of this
argument, the Rejoinder pronounces, that it is a pouring out of sal^
scurrilitie, to the very lees, a scornful jest, ascoffing, a spiteful jest,
a vagrant thing, the very noting whereof is answer enough. Now how should a man
deal with such disputers?

The Def. brought this Argument out of unknowen papers, into a public book,
and answered it with sharp words. The Repl. only showed the force of it: and
for that, he is set upon a fresh with new words, like swords and daggars.
Could they neither suffer this reason to sleep in the dark, nor endure any
light of explanation should be set by it?

And what fault can be found with the repeating of those titles, which the
Prelates in Convocation take to themselves, or in drawing a conclusion from them?

In the second place, our Rejoinder undertaketh to give a real answer to this
reason. To which purpose, 1. he denies that our Ceremonies are of the
institution of the Convocation-house. And yet the same Rejoinder in answer to
the Repl. his preface. page 61. complains of us, for infringing the liberty
of the Church in her Convocation, touching the appointment of external Rites,
or Ceremon. And page 71. as in diverse other places, he tells us that the
Convocation house makes and establishes Canons upon and with the Kings
Commission, and allowance.

They are the words also of the Parliament, set down page 70. that the Clergy
of England made the Canons. Neither can any man doubt of this, that have but
looked on the book of Canons. The ratification of such things by Civil
authority, does no more take the institution of them from the Clergy, then
the like ratification of any point in true worship, does take the institution
of it from God and Christ. 2. He denies the consequence: because a holy
assembly may ordeyne them, and yet not make them holy.

But it is manifest, that a holy assembly, as it is such, gathered together
in the holy name of Christ, as their efficient, and final cause, cannot but
put a holy form upon their ordinances. Qualis causa, tale effectum.

3. His third answer is that these Ceremonies may be called holy, because, they
are used in holy actions. Which is just so, as a pesse, hassok, or cushin may
be called holy, because it is used to kneel upon, in the holy act of prayer.
But instituted significant Ceremonies are evidently of another holiness, to
all that do not of purpose shut their eyes.

4. The Repl. (after the Def.) goes about to prove that the Convocation may be
called a sacred Synod, and holy in regard of their function. Which is so far
from being denied by us (upon the supposition of the lawfulness of such a
function, as they take upon them) that it is the ground of our reason, to prove
their ordinances holy. So that the Rejoinder might (in this place) have spared
those sweet words of his: stomach, without wit, or learning: these men say (in
effect) to all other men, stand back, I am holier then thou, they are
censorious, and uncharitable. Yet the Repl. could not consent, that our
Convocations should be so accounted holy as Churches instituted of Christ, and
gathered for true holy worship: because neither of these do agree to our
Convocation. Heerupon the Rejoinder (having nothing to say that was pertinent)
speaks something of right Ecclesiastical Synodes, accuses the Separatists
with Mr. Jacob, and lastly affirms our Convocations to be gathered for a
special duty of Gods service, though he will not tell us, what it is, and
confesses, that little good is sometimes (he might have said at any time) done
at their meetings. Which kind of answering I leave to the judgment of any
reader.

3. A third reason, feched out of M. Hy. his papers, is, that Cross and
Surplice are set apart from civil uses, and appropriated unto the acts of
religion in Gods service. To which the Def. answered, by equal comparison of
Pulpit-cloth, Communion cup, and place of meeting in like manner appropriated.
Whereupon the Repl. was, in general, that the Def. did well understand what was
meant by appropriation. This put the Rejoinder into a passion, expressed by
many words: a pretty slight, for that which cannot be defended, by those
which are pusled and toyled, a f^im (...), lent by Mr. Jacob, a mere shift,
proceeding out of an haughty desire of defending that which has been once
spoken. And this is all that I find rejoined to that passage. To which I say
nothing.

A reason was rendered of the former assertion: because a Pulpit-cloth
Communion-cup, and Meeting Place are only civil, being taken from the
ordinary civil customs of men. To which the Rejoinder opposes, that no
civil man will say, that they are only civil in their application: Which is
very true. Nor will any Grammarian say, that good Hebrew, Greek, or Latin,
are only gramaticall in their application, because they are applied to the
expressing of all kind of trueths and falsehoods: and yet they are only
gramaticall etimologie and syntaxe. No Naturalist will say, that the earth and
air are only natural in application, and yet they are only natural beinges.

It was further added, that clothes, cups, meeting places etc. are of the same
use out of Gods service, that they are in it.

This is occasion of admiration, and exclamation to the Rejoinder. But he might
have considered, that the immediate end of a clothe, is to cover; of a cup, to
drink out; of meeting places, to meet in: and then where is the strangeness
of this assertion? Is there not the same immediate use of a man's eyes, in reading
one book, as another, of a man's ears, in hearing one voice, and another, how
soever the subject seen, or heard, may differ in nature or kind.

A distinction was likewise used, betwixt appropriation of this or that
individual, and of the kind. To this it is rejoined, 1. that the individualls
are nevertheless appropriated. Which is not so: because appropriation of the
kind and individual both, is more then of the individual alone. Individuals
may be extrinsicallie, and accide^tally appropriated, the kind remaining
intrinsically common, and indifferent. 2. That some individualls (without all
their kind) have been appropriated to holy uses. Of which no man doubts:
because one individual may be so used, without other. But is there therefore no
difference, betwixt extrinsecall, accidental appropriation of one Levite to
the Ministry, and the whole tribe? 3. Not all kind of linen garments, or
crosses are appropriated to religious uses.. As if the question were of linen
garments simply, though they were used without any such institution as a
Surplice has, only for the natural conveniencie of it, or of crossing the
fingers, upon occasion, to drive away flies, that come cross upon a man's face.
There was (in the last place) mention made of the significancie of our
Ceremonies, which makes them in their intrinsecall nature (as such) without
any further expectation of occasional application, to be proper to religion.
But of this our Rej. would not hear, in this place. Let it therefore pass to
the next chapter.

4. A fourth confirmation wholly depends on Matthew. 15. Where the Def. would
have it, that our Savior condemns not the act of washing (that is says the
Rej.) the monitorie significant sign of washing, used by the Pharisees, but
their intention, and opinion, in attributing legal and operative sanctity, to
that their own invention. Now concerning monitorie significancie, enough has
been spoken, in the head of Ceremonies, and it remains to be discussed in the
following chapter.

For the present, it was first noted by the Repl. that some intention and
opinion of holiness cleaves to our Ceremonies. This is denied by the Rej. and
yet in his whole dispute, he makes them worship, though accidental,
arbitrarie, and improper. Neither can any man impose a double or treble
religious Ceremony without intention and opinion of some holiness belonging
to it, more then to that which is not so religious.

It was in the second place observed, that more holiness was attributed to
those washings, then is by many among us to the cross, cannot be proved out of
the text, there being no one circumstance in it, which may not fitly be applied
to our Ceremonies. To which the Rej. says 1. that those are blind and
superstitious persons, which attribute such things to the Cross, not the
Church imposing. Just as Bellarmine, in the place by and by to be cited,
answers Calv. about the same matter: Si qui sunt inter Catholicos rudioras,
etc. Eos corrigendos putamus, etc.
If there be any more rude among her Catholics, we hold them worthy to be
corrected. But are not our blind Protestants, and those rude Papists, hardened
in their superstition, by the imposing and urging of those things which they
superstitiously dote on?

The Pharisees (adds the Rej.) were so strongly conceyted of this washing,
that they thought, without it, the very creatures of God should defile them.
But that of the very creatures defiling, is not in the text: It is but
probably collected out of our Saviors following discourse, that they estemeed
some defiling to follow upon the eating of the creature, not as it was a
creature, but as it was so used against the tradition of their Elders. And are
are there not many to be found in England, that their very Baptism is
deficient, unsufficient, and so defiled: if it want the Cross?

For further answer, it was alleged by the Repl. that not only Calvin in Mat.
15. but also Bellarmin himself (de eff. Sacr. l. 2. cap. 32.) says, that the
Pharisees washing was condemned as vain, and unprofitable, setting aside,
intention, and opinion of legal, operative holiness. The Rejoinder answering
first for Bellarmine, says he is abused: because (forsooth) he speaks that
falsely, to defend the Popish Ceremonies. As if it were not the common notion
of all Christians, that vain and unprofitable Ceremonies are to be condemned,
or as if Bellarmine alone said this! or as if this could defend the Popish
Ceremonies, which are more easily defended from any other charge, then they can
be from this, that they are vain and unprofitable.

Who would have thought, that D.B. would defend vain and unprofitable
Ceremonies, in Gods solemn worship? But Chemnitius (says he) observ^s, that
Christ condemned not these washings simply as profane fopperies, nor as
simply unlawful, but in respect of religion placed in them. Not simply
profane fopperies, that is, void of all show from Scripture, or reason, nor
simply unlawful, if the acts in themselves be considered or abstracted from
all relations by institution added unto them: but in respect of religion placed
in them, 1. e. superstition adjoined unto them. Now there is superstitio not
only pernicious, but also vain, and superfluous. Filucius, tract. 24. cap. 2.
And chemnitius, in the same place affirms, the Pharisees washinges to have
been condemned, for that (notwithstanding their vanity; and want of Divine
institution) they were made some part of Gods worship.

As for Calvine, the Rej. does not deny, but that passage alleged is found in
the place, the inventing of Ceremonies was an idle vanity, before the high
opinion of Religion was added unto it. Yet (says he) 1. he clears our
Ceremonies, which was cast upon the Jewish superstitious washings. From some of
that blame, (it may be granted) but not from all. For then those words (which
the Rejoinder confesses him to set down) should have bee^ a contradiction to
the other. 2. This shread (added he) is falsely alleged as touching the
intention. And why so I pray?

Because (forsooth) Calvin's meaning was, that to devize new washing, to the
like end, and with the like opinion of them, as of those which God had set, wa
of idle vanity.

But if this were his meaning, how can that meaning agree with the meaning of
these words: It was of idle vanity before the high opinion of Religion was
added unto it?

Was there any higher opinion of Religion added unto those washinges, the^ to
the washinges which God had set? Extremity drives men to hard shifts.

For the fuller clearing of this reason, that idle and vain or superfluous
worship is condemned by Christ, Mat. 15. let these testimonies, and reasons be
well considered.

The Priests had brought in many Novelties, tho Moses with great terror had
threatened them not to ad any thing, Plurima nova introduxerant sacerdotes,
quamvis Moses, magno cum terrore, comminatus suerat, no quid adderent, ex
quibus illasuere, de loti^nibus Duplex fuit culpa. Nam and innovatio ipsa non
parvum erat crimon, and quia illas observationes magis curabant, quam mandata
D^^. Crimen illud prius non statim a^guit Chirstus, non ^rivolum id esse atque
superfluum, dicit, ne inflammarentur.

Tolet, upon Lic. c. 11. annot. 84. Altora causa, propter quam has lotiones
sprevit, fuit illorum superstitio. Pharisai induxerant has lotiones, non ob
civile^ quandam and naturalem decenriam, and mun. di^iem, sed quasi ad
religionem pertinentes, ut qui contemnerent, contra Dei cultum agere
^enserentur, quivero servarent, Deum in eis color viderentur. Hoc autem eis
non licebat, quibus proh. bitu^ erat a Deo, Deuteronomy. 4. no quid adderent, Obid,
quasi superstitiosas lotiones hujusmodi Christus rejeci^ Quam causam indicat
Matheus, cap. 15. Omnis plantatio quam non plantavit Patermeus, eradicabitur.
Similiter Marcus cap. 7. in va^um me colunt, d^^entes doctrinas and praecepta
hominum, etc. Qua propria inventione constitu^nt, contra Dei mandatum.


of which number of additions were those things of washing. There was a double
fault for the innovation it self was not a slight metter and then this, that
they stood more upon those observations of their own then they did on the
Commandments of God. 1. That first offense Christ does not praesently
reproove them for saying it was a frivolous and superfluous, thing, lest they
should have been inflamed.

Another cause for which he despised these washings was their superstition. The
Pharisees had put in the said washings, not for any natural and civil decentie
or cleanelinesse, but as perteining to religion, who so did contemn the^ were
judged to offend against Gods worship, and who so did observe them seemed
chiefly to regard, Gods worship in them. But this was in no wise lawful for
them to do who were so straightly charged of God, Deuteronomy. 4. that they should
add nothing. For this Christ rejected these washings as superstitious, which
reason Mat. 15. chapter intimates when he says: Every plant which my heave^ly
Father has not planted, shall be rooted out. And Marc. chapter 7. In vain do they
worship me teaching the Doctrines, and praeceps of men, etc. Such things as men
set up of themselves against any Commandment of God.

Estius in Tit 1.1. Mand^ta homanum ad pi^tatem nihil conducentia intelliguntur
Mat. 15 and Mar: 7. in lo^ionibus multis supervacuis.
In Mat. 15. Marc. 7. the Commandments of men do mean such Commandments which
conduce nothing at all to piety, as those Superfluous washings.

5. In the fifth place, another reason (or charge) was brought out of Mr. Hy.
his papers, that the Ceremonies imposed, are (for their use and practice)
preferred before principal parts of Gods worship: because this is the Pralats
Canons: wear a Surplice, or preach not: Cross, or baptize not. This the Def.
accused of dull Sophistry: because by this means, only an orderly discreet
preacher is preferred before one that is factious and exorbitant. Of this base
Bonnerly speech, the Repl. showed his just detestation. For which he is
censured by the Rejoinder of casting it out of the mouth of his stomach, of
malice, intemperat railings, and a furious spirit. All which I leave to the
readers judgment. Only this I observe, that he would excuse all or most of
the Prelates, from willing silencing any able and godly ministers for omission
of our Cerremonies, and does absolutely deny, that the Def. ever silenced any
Minister (willingly or unwillingly (for only omission of Ceremonies.
Concerning which terms ( willingly, and only omission) some light of
explication were needful. For only omission of Cross, or Surplice, by
oversight, or other accident, the Pope himself will not silence a Priest, as
all Popish Divines tell us, in affirming that to be no mortal sin. And how
those which make Canons for silencing upon purposed continued omission, and
execute the same partly by themselves, and partly by their instruments, can be
said to do it unwillingly, this requires interpretation, which will certainly
be found tardy. For clearing of this charge, from the imputation of dull
Sophistry, the Repl. first propounded it in this manner: an able godly
Minister without the use of these Ceremonies, is not suffered in the
Ministry, whereas an unable and ungodly one, with the use of them, is
suffered: therefore they are praeferred before maine things: Upon this, the
Rejoinder 1. observes, that from hence does not follow that conclusion:
therefore our Ceremonies are made parts of Gods worship. As if this conclusion
were once named by Mr. Hy. or by the Def. in this charge.

If he will make it supposed, he must show us Mr. Hy. his concealed papers for
the proof of that supposition. He adds 2. that all Prelates are to be charged
with this practice: and that they have no such power for depriving of bad, as
they have for depriving of good Ministers. To which I answer, the question is
not here of all, but of that which stands by our Canons, and Canonical
practice. Yet neither any authors, nor any defenders of the Canons, can be
excused from partaking in this practice, no not the Rejoinder himself. And as
for those Praelats, which have great power to do evil, and little, or none, to
do good (or which is all one, power effectually to hinder good, and not evil)
they have a very dangerous standing, dangerous (I say) as well for others, as
for their own selves. Yet, when our Prelates procured that authority of doing
evil, they might as easily, and more lawfully have procured the other, of
doing good: not to say, that none of them do so much for reforming or
removing of bad Ministers, Estius in Ti. 1.1. Man^ honunum pi^tatem conducentia
intelliguntur Mat. 15 and Mar: 7. ^^ionibus ^tic superv.
as is in their power to do, either by themselves, or by other means. Nay is
it not known, how such kind of catle are not only borne with, but borne up
by the Prelates in bad causes?

The third Rej. is of a calumniation, because some inconformable Ministers are
suffered, and some unable, and ungodly deprived. But 1. this calumniation
concerning some inconformable suffered for a time, extraordinalie, besides, nay
against Canonical order. 2. He can scarce name one, that he has known
deprived for that he was unable. 3. The Turks and Infidels would cashier their
Priests for some ungodliness. What a poor rejoinder is this?

A fourth consideration is, that a far less offense defended, is more
punishable then a greater confessed, and that certain evils, in themselves
lesser, may do more hurt, then others in themselves greater. Which
consideration, if it be applied to the purpose, will appear in the proper
colors: If a Minister confess himself unable and ungodly, he is not so
punnishable, as he that defends the Ceremonies are not to be used. The
refusing of our controverted Ceremonies, may do more hurt, then an unable and
ungodly generation of Ministers conforming. In that which is further added,
under the title of lastly I find nothing but words and assertions, without
backing reasons. Valiant igitur, quantum valere possunt.

The same charge was (in the second place) thus framed, by the Repl. Though
there cannot be found able and discreet conformable Ministers, enough to supply
all the Parishes of England, yet many of godly men are shut out of the
Ministry for unconformitie. Therefore Conformity is praeferred before the
maine duties of Gods worship. Here the Rej. having little to say, sets
notwithstanding two colors on the matter. 1. That the consequence is not
simply true, but only that they conceive the non-conformitie may, by
consequence, be a greater hurt, then an able and godly Ministry, in such
places, as want it, would recompense. As if this crying sin were only their
conceyt, not their practice, or that their conceits could make this sin no
sin! or that the salvation of many thousands of souls, could not recompense
the hurt that would come upon the refusing of human Ceremonies? What is this
other then daubing rotten walls with untempered mortar.

His second color is, that non-conformitans are no less blameable, who had
rather have no worship, then conformity. Which is as much as if he should
say, that whosoever will not sin for Gods glory, does as much offend, as
he that will not suffer God to be glorified by those which will not to that
end be content to sin against his conscience.

Because this reason was accused of dullenesse, it was noted (by the way) that
every Plowman, being a good Christian, did usually make it in this blunt
manner, against the Praelats proceedinges, and that the Repl. (being, as it
seems first brought up among such plain people) had from his childhood
took it to be unanswerable. Heerupon, the Rej. 1. answers the blunt
argument, with this sharpness: It is like as if one should say, that God,
admitting no man to the Priesthood with bodily blemish, did therefore praeferre
bodily perfection before spiritual. Wherein, he deceyveth himself, and others
much, whether he respects the first explication of this reason, or the
second. For according to the first, it must be affirmed, that God would suffer
men blemished in their bodies, to be priests, though they had no spiritual
fitness for that office. And according to the second, he should have said,
that God having otherwise to furnish the Priesthood, according to a superior
law, which he might not of his will dispense with, did notwithstanding exclude
some of those which that law did allow. But both these assertious are too
absurd for the Rejoinder to own.

His second note is of Plowmen, and Children, that they are not the best
Logicians. Which though it be true, yet is nothing to the purpose: because
many Plowmen have good natural logic, to reason withal. Otherwise they did
very inconsideratly, who vented so good reasons under the title of the prayer,
and complaint of the Ploughman, as in Mr. Fox is to be seen, Edw. 3. among
which reasons (a remarkable thing) this very slighted argument is one. For so
are the words: O Lord, for breaking of thy law, the Praelats will set men
penance, or pardon them, and maintain them, as often as they trepasse. But Lord,
if a man once break their laws, or speak against them he may do penance but
once, and after be burnt.

The sum of which, Mr. Fox, in the margent, thus gathers: The breaking of
the Popes law is more punished, then the breaking of Gods law. And as for
children, I am persuaded, that D.B. himself, had some trueths so evident unto
him, that by no contrary show of logic they could ever be wrunge out of him.
Sure I am that Timothy, knowing the Scriptures from a child, had many such.

Neither was there mention made either of plowmen or children, But only to show
the evidence of this truth, not the logical Demonstration of it.

That which was added, by way of limitation, to the name of a plowman, namely,
that it was understood of such a plowman, as is also a good Christian, is very
bitterly, and yet as very unreasonablie carped at by the Rejoinder as savouring
strongly of that spirit of Separation, which has been hunted after in the
ch^se of inconformitie. For (says the Rejoinder if any will believe all his
conceytes) this shows, that with these men the adversaries of Ceremonies and
Bishops are the only good Christians.

Which is a strange streine, to come from D. B. who both has been an
unconformist, and since he has changed that title, cannot but know, that
sundry unconformists have carried themselves toward himself, in all respects,
as toward a good Christian. And what strong savor is in this: every plowman
that is a good Christian does unsua^ly make this Argument. Does he imagine,
that only those plowmen, that are professed adversaries to Ceremonies and
Bishops, do^ make it? Nay he knows, that many, and many of those that could
otherwise well digest both, yet do apprehend this course of Bishops silencing
Ministers for such Ceremonies is ungodly, and Antichristian. If he did not
know so much, yet he cannot be ignorant, that the word here interposed by the
Repl. for limitation, usually, does except some more ignorant, or less
attentive good Christians. And I doubt not, but the Rejoinder will affirm,
that every good conforming Minister in England, does usually account them for
scismatickes that condemn the Ceremonies: yet I would not thence conclude,
that with him, those of that judgment are the only good Ministers. For there
is as much sin against charity, in rash accusing others of
uncharitableness, as there is in being uncharitable: of which fault, the
Rejoinder can never clear this affected passage, which he in opposition let
fall from him.

For overthrow of the former reason, an instance was brought in by the Def.
taken from a Chancellor, who may (says he) put out of Commission him that
refused to sit in the place appointed, without praeferring that place to the
Kings service. To this the Repl. 1. answered, that no wise Chancelour, would,
for his own pleasure, or for the circumstance of a place easily change, or put
out of Commission a grave wise man, when another like unto him cannot be found.
These last words another like unto him cannot be found, are cached up by the
Rejoinder and under the show or sound of them, the Inconformists are by him
tossed (as it were) in a blancket, as being of a high strain, beyond all other
men, in their own persuasion etc. But he might have considered (if sinister
affection had not hidden it from him) that the case immediately goeing before
this answer, was of shutting out able godly Ministers for inconformitie, when
there cannot be found able and fit conformable Ministers enough. Whereupon is
inferred, that the comparison of the L. Chancelour will not help the Def. in
this case.

Now what kind of strain is this then in the Rejoinder to conceal the case,
and stretche the words as it were with his teeth, unto such a strange odious
meaning of so witless a brag. Yet if there had been no such dependence of
these words upon that case, they might be well defended, as understood of an
absolute comparison (either for ability, or piety) but in relation to this or
that people; from whom such Mininisters are sometime plucked away by
violence, whose like, in regard of that people (which have been much edified
by them, and more inwardly known, and also (upon good ground) affected unto
them, then they can suddenly unto any other) cannot be found.

Otherwise, D. Burges, in his Apology (toward the conclusion) would not have
alleged against the silencing of himself, and others like him, that those (at
the least) should succeed the^, which were not so well acquainted with the
condition of their sheep. It might be also added, that though another like
might be found, yet it is not in the power of that L. Chancelour, or the
Bishop to find, bring, and place him in the same Commission, because (for the
succession) he must depend upon the Patrons pleasure, not limited to another
like the predecessor.

But that this wresting of the Replyer his words, was affected (in some sort
against conscience) it may appear by this, that no man will surmize, the Repl.
to think, that to no unconformable Minister a Peer may be found: because it
is to be supposed (at the least) that another unconformable one may not only
be equal, but also superior unto him in all absolute perfection.

It was also observed, for answer to this instance of a L. Chancelour, that
about the circumstance of place, for Commissioners to meet in, there can be no
Conscience pretended, whereas in our Ceremonies, solemn oaths are offered,
that no thing but conscience does keep us from them. The Rejoinder 1.
opposes, that this unlikenesse makes, nothing to the question. And yet it
shows, that a Chancelour may in civil matters, where no conscience can be
pretended, take more upon him without preferring, or comparing the matters,
then a Bishop can, where Conscience evidently withstandeth: because Co^sciece
is not to be vexed, except the matter be so great, that (in respect of Gods
glory) it cannot be neglected. He 2. opposes, that many more of the
Conformitans, are ready to take it s^ upon their oath, that nothing but
conscience makes them conform. To which I say 1. that he who was immediately
before, so curious in houlding to the question, should not presently have
digressed from it: as the Rejoinder here does, in turning the comparison,
which was made betwixt a L. Chancelour and a Bishop, in respect of a conceyted
Commissioner, and a conscionable Minister about preferring one thing before
another, into a new comparison, betwixt the consciences of Conformitants, and
of those which refuse to conform. 2. Of that so, if the same meaning be kept
on both sides, I much doubt.

For our Conscience is, that in no place, nor uponany man's command, we may
conform: and theirs is, that upon great urgent extremities, they may some
time, and in some place conform. I am persuaded, that if it had been free in
England to use these Ceremonies, or not to use them. D. B. himself has no
conscience, that would ever have made him conform.

After this, the Repl. added something, about the Def. his Pontifical terms,
factious and exorbitant men. opposed to orderly and discreet Preachers. As 1.
that the Def. himself in his conscience will not say, that Mr. Midsley of
Ratsdale, and others like him, were factious and exorbitant men. 2. That this
is the language of that evil servant, who beat his fellow servants, better
then himself: Mat. 24.49.3. That all those who are placed in the room of
silenced Ministers, are not orderly and discreet Preachers. 4. That faction and
exorbitancie may better be charged upon the Prelates, for breaking many
substantial, ancient, wholesome Canons, then upon us, for breaking a
Ceremonious Canon. Now (setting aside the Rejoinder his wandering words, with
the honey and gall of them) see what he brings to the purpose. 1. The first he
grants to be true. But denies that the Def. meant so generally. And yet the
Def. his words are: who sees not, that to deprive men of their Ministry for
not using of the Ceremonies (for that was objected) is to prefer an orderly
and discreet Preacher, before one that is factious and exorbitant. If this be
not generally spoken, let any reasonable ear discern.

2. The second he does not absolutely gainsay but casts the like, or rather
a far greater fault in our faces: that we (forsooth) do condemn to the p^t
of darkness. Bishops, Conformitants, and in a manner all that are not of our
party. Which is so manifest a slander, that the evil servant spoken of
Matthew. 24.49. could hardly vent one more shameless.

3. The third he confesses: But would make it impertinent though it clean
overthrows the Def. his general assertion, before expressed. He adds also
certain frothy words, containing little else, beside manifest slanders, which
if he were put to such an oath, as they call juramentum calumniae, he would
not own.

4. The Prelates wilful, and continual breaking of many, substantial, and
wholesome Canons, is not denied by the Rej. but yet to save their credit, he
adds, that all such Canons do not bind every particular Church, but her
own. In which words there is neither rhyme, nor reason. The Canons objected,
may be seen in Master Parker, part. 2. c. 9. sect. 4. to be Canons of our own
Church. What then has the Rejoinder said to the purpose? His other stuff
has been sundry times examined, and found nothing worth.

5. All these considered, it will appear, that the Rej. had more will, then
power, to maintain, that the silencing of Preachers for our Ceremonies, is the
praeferring of orderly discreet Preachers, before those that are factious and
exorbitant.

6. After all this, out of Mr. Hy. his papiers, it pleased the Def. to bring in
some pieces out of the Abrigement: which for substance are such as diverse
times have been handled before: and therefore need not much labor in this place.

The first is, that many people in our land, are known to hold the Sacraments
not rightly and sufficiently administered or receyved without them. For the
force of such an opinion in the muliitude, many testimonies are alleged in
the Abrigement, and applied unto this assertion, not in deed to prove the same
simply, but to show what is the consequence of it. All these the Def. left
out, and the Rej. had no mind to take them in, but chose rather to rest in
this: they are no proofs of the assumption. It was added by the Repl. the
opinion even of a few, may make some action unlawful, which the opinion of
many other cannot make lawful. 1. Cot. 10.28. To avoid this, the Rejoinder had
nothing material to say, before he had changed unlawful into simply
unlawful.

The just number of those that are so minded, cannot be proved, or disproved,
without numbering and examining all the people. It was not therefore any meaning
of those that gave the rule to reckon by the poul* as the Def. and Rejoinder
would have us.

Neither is this observation brought in to prove imposing and observing,
conjunctly, as they would bear the reader in hand, but only for the observing,
other proofs being added for the imposing. Yet it was observed by the Repl.
that while actions of this kind are superstitiously observed, they that still
impose them in those places where they are so observed, may truly be
interpreted so to impose them. To which the Rejoinder gives no other proper
answer, but only leaving out the pith of that assertion, may be truly so
interpreted, substituteth another; of a purposed end: and then misinterpreteth
actions of this kind, as if they were meant of the special kind of things,
and not of unnecessarie actions known to be superstitiously abused.

It was also noted as ridiculous in the Def. that those people which think
that Sacraments are not rightly administered, or receyved without the
Ceremonies, are brought into that conceyt by our condemning of the said
Ceremonies. The Rejoinder answers, that this condemning of them, must needs
make some think that they are imposed as parts of religion, and so occasion
the simple to think that we esteem them so.

In which answer, beside that I know not who are meant by we, and that an
occasion of the second or third hand, is made a cause, there is no mention made
of right or unright Sacraments.

For lessening of the number of those which so esteem of our Ceremonies, the
Papists are first removed, as having no great conceyt of them. Which I leave to
experience. Only because the Rejoinder requires testimony, I can inform
him, that Gretser, Apol. pro Greg. 7. p, 8. has these words: A Lutheran,
preaching in ^erteine garments like the Ape of the priests, Pradicans
Lutheranus ut Sacerdotum simius, vestibus certit indutur, Missam Germa nicam
celebrat.
celebrates a German Mass. And the Rejoinder himself confesses in the next
words, they have a better conceyt of them, then of the contrary, and that
such as has been held likely to araw them to our service, and that they have
a great disaffection to those that will not tollerat the resemblance of their
religious Ceremonies. Add further, that after B. Babington, and B. Andreos, D.
Morton himself, in the last words of his Protestants Appeal, has confirmed the
rumor, that Pope Paulus quaertus, did offer to confirm our wholle Service and
Liturgy. The Papists therefore have no cause why they should not have a good
conceyt of our Ceremonies, which of all the Service come nearest to, and make
most for them.

As for the rest, that so conceyt of the Ceremonies, which are not of your
disciplining, says the Rejoinder) and yet are conformable they are not many.
As if those of our disciplinating, were so conceyted, or those of Wales,
Non-residents, and dumb-residents forlorn charges, who are not disciplined by
us, were either few or of reformed judgment. Surely D.B. is not like himself,
when he upon engagement defends that which cannot be defended.

7. The second thing brought out of the abridgement, is about the punishment
inflicted for omission of our Ceremonies, greater then for breaking of Gods
law, in perjurie and adultery. Now this has formerly been handled. In this
place therefore, it shall suffize, to set a few notes, upon the Rej. his
answers. 1. He distinguishes betwixt punishing, and punishing as a sin. As
if punishment in the internal nature of it, were not of sin! 2. He
distinguishes betwixt internal peace of the Church, consisting more in
observance of Gods commandments, and the peace of her external policy,
impeached by the neglect of her constitutions. Whereas he should have made the
distinction betwixt one consisting, and another, or betwixt one impeaching, and
another.

And yet both the consisting and impeaching of the Churches peace, does
principally depend on the keeping of Gods commandments: which is all the Repl.
affirmed. 3. He distinguishes betwixt an offense every way less, and in it
own nature less, whenas the question is not, whether the neglect of our
Ceremonies, be not only in it own nature a less offense, but also in all the
circumstances of it. The Def. and Rejoinder themselves confess, that this
neglect, in the nature of it, is no offense at all. 4. Because such answers
were termed Sophistical evasions, the Rejoinder twice cries out of railing:
forgetting (without doubt) how often he had abused the same term against the
Repl. and that in the next former section, he had mainteyned the Def. his
accusing a plain popular argument, not only of Sophistry, but even of dull
Sophistry. For the Rejoinder certainly will not confess himself a rayler. The
rest is not worth repeating, that paper should be twice blotted with it.

Against the Def. his distinction, betwixt omission, and contempt, the Reply
was 1. that mere omission has been punished with suspension. Of which the
Rejoinder requires a continued instance. To which I answer, that one instance
may be given in Ispswiche, where D. B. was Preacher. For most of the Ministers
were suspended upon the complaint of one Web, who professed, that he would not
put on the Surplice except others did. D. B. may inquire easily if it was not
so. As for continuance, it makes not to the purpose, except all malefactors be
not only put in prison, but also continued in the same, above the Judges
pleasure.

The Repl. for affirming, that punishments for mere omission, are provided for
by Canon, is accused by the Rejoinder of an untrueth in print.

Yet the Rejoinder cannot be ignorant (beside other examples) that every man
not kneeling, is to be denied the Sacrament, and that the Minister administering
to such, is by the Canon, to be suspended.

So that this was truth in print, ever since the Canons were in print: except
suspension from the Sacrament, and from the Ministry be in his account no
punishment.

8. The last thing noted out of the Abridgement is, that non-Co^formitants are
accounted Scismatikes, Puritanes, and excommunicates, ipso facto, without
appeal: which is without example. The Rejoinder here 1. denies that flatly,
without more words, which is plainly cited out of the 6. Canon, let the Canon
therefore be looked upon, and that is enough. 2. He says that the old anathema
sit was as much as to excommunicate ipso facto.

And yet King James himself, in his answer to Perone, does show, that the old
anathema sit, was only a declaring who ought to be excommunicated, and not an
excommunication de facto. 3. He says for Appeal, that none is admitted, from
the highest Court, such as the Convocation is. As if either the Convocation
were the highest court, or any court at all, for ought that I ever heard of the
Court of Convocation, as I have of a Court of Parliament, or as if so much
liberty were left unto a poor Minister, now standing at the Bishops bar, as
to appeal to the next Convocation. The Rejoinder surely did not well consider
what he spoke.

4. Whereas the Def. granted, that we have reason perhaps to wish, that some
poenalties were released, the Rejoinder interprets this reason to be such as
all men that feel the smart of punishment (for whatsoever offense) may have.
Which is nothing else, but to look on, with laughter, at all the grievous
things which any Ministers have suffered, for this cause. And yet every foot
the Rejoinder puts on another person, and (as I am persuaded) has another
heart.

After this, the Rejoinder comes to the slanders of Puritamisme, and Schism.
And as for Puritanisme, he says the Def. slided by it, as a term not imposed
upon us by him. As if we may not complain of, or infer a consequence, from
any term, except it be imposed upon us by D. Morton, or D. Burgess or at the
least, they were not bound to answer for any terms, except such as they
themselves have imposed!

For Scisme, and Separation, after some sparkeling words of rash-blasphemous,
and fiery Sirs, he tells us 1. (1. that nothing may be established in the
Church, which God has not commanded in his w^rd, 2. that all forms of worhip
and all m^re Ecclesiastical rites, not praescribed, are will worship. 3. That
the calling of our Bishops, and consequently of our Ministers, is
Antichristian. 4. That our Ceremonies are idolatrous,) are the first principles
of Separation. Now if it would please the Rejoinder either to declare what is
Separation, or what is a principle, this question would be easily decided. In
the mean time, I answer. 1. the first principle is from Moses, if it be
understood, as we mean it: thou shall not add any thing thereto. 2. The second
confounding mere rites, with forms of worship, is not ours, but only by the
Rej. his fiction. 3. The third supposes, that which we utterly deny, that the
calling of our Ministers does essentially depend upon the Bishops calling. 4.
The fourth is made scismaticall, by a scismaticall conceyt of the Rej. namely,
that every Church is to be utterly condemned* and so separated from, that has
any thing in it, by participation idolatrous. His ever being of this opinion,
may be answered in that fashion which he answers the like phraze withal,
page 216. He has not ever been the best Logician. His profession, of
separating (this day, ere he sleep) if he did believe these principles, is
nothing else but a rhethoricall flourish, which he would twice recall, before
he would separate from those that bow to Altars, or even those which worship
an ubiquitarie body, in the Lords supper, though these are more palpablie
idolatrous (in his conscience) then the Ceremonies questioned are in ours.

As for the addition, with a yea, that Mr. Bradshaws very arguments are
pretended for Separtion so as they cannot be denied with any forehead, etc. It
is not worth a refutation: because Mr. Bradshaw himself in a book entitled,
the unreasonablenesse of the Separation) has sufficiently showed how
unreasonably they are pretended, and abused. If the Rejoinder has any thing to
rejoigne thereto, I would willingly see with what forehead he can do it.

The other talk of this section, as also the recounting of a confutation in
the 15. section, I leave to be counted as it deserves, by him that will
compare what has been said, with the wordy rejoinder to it, so vainly
opposed, and so often repeated.

Only (in few words) let it be noted 1. how in the 15. section, he slighteth
the sentence of D. Covell as not worth any answer) who confuted his Apology,
and in that writing (at the least) was a kind of public wrighter, having had
as much approbation, as this Rejoinder has for his rejoinder as appears out
of the Rejoinder his Praeface page 18. namely of the then L.A. D. Bancroft,
etc. 2. How he makes the imposers sentence, to be an adequate rule of
observance, de facto. 3. How he denies some divine worship only to be unholy
in the kind: as if some singular true divine worship may be unholy. 4. What a
wild consequence he builds upon: if the cross be no part of the Sacrament,
then it is no part of worship: because it may not (in the Repl. his opinion) be
a part. 5. How unreasonablie he defends this consequence: our Ceremonies are
changeable, and therefore not essential worship; when yet he confesses the
Popish Ceremonies to be changeable, and yet essential worship. 6. What science
there is, for a Rejoinder upon such grounds to charge the Repl. for violating
his conscience?

CHAP. 3. The third Argument, taken from the significant nature of our
Ceremonies.
SECT. 1. and 2. Concerning certain miscelaneall notions and testimonies
against humane relegious significant Ceremonies.
1. THis Argument pleads, that no humane Ceremonies, appropriated to Gods
service, ordained, or instituted, to teach any spiritual duty, by mystical
signification, are lawful. About this the Rejoinder threateneth blows. But we
have had now such experience of his forcelesse indevours in other Arguments,
that the fear of his blows is past.

2. The first proof of our proposition was taken from the second Commandment:
which the Def. omitted in this place, and the Rejoinder will not have any man
to take exception against the said, omission: but with what reason, let his
reader judge.

3. A second proof was, that Christ is the only teacher of his Church, and
appointer of all means whereby we should be taught and admonished of any holy
duty, and all Christ's doctrine, with the means thereof, is perfectly contained
in the holy Scripture. Here (says the Rejoinder) the Def. forgot to tell, how
absurd this collection is, Christ is the only authentic teacher of his
Church etc. therefore they may be no means of teaching or admonishing unto
duties, but such as be ordained as necessary. As if it were sufficient for
the Def. or Rejoinder to tell us any thing as they please, how little ever it be
to the purpose.

He makes show of a distinction, betwixt an authentic teacher, and another,
what do you call him? to which we cannot say much until he remember to tell
us the name, style, and office of that other by-teacher?

Only this, by the way, I would learn: how we can acknowledge and receyve any
means of religious teaching with faith, except it appear to be appointed by an
authentic teacher and lawgiver? And how our Prelates in oppointing means of
spiritual teaching which Christ appointed not, can be accounted (therein)
Ministerial teachers under him as their and our only authentic teacher? As
also, if Christ be our Authentic Teacher in all good that we learn about
religion, who taught our Prelates such good manners, as to put fescues, of
their own making, into his hand, and so appoint him after what manner, and by
what means he shall teach us? P. Mart. (in Reg. 8. thus disputes. For as
much as God is most wise he needs not our devise for instruments to stir up
faith in us which also no tradesman in his kind would endure, Cum Deus sit
sapientissimus, non opus babet ut nostro cogitatu, illi par^mus instrumenta (ad
fidem in nobis excitandam) quod etiam quisquam Artifex in sua facultate minime
serret, se dipsomat velles su^ arbitratu, sibi deligere.
but would choose to himself at his own pl^asure what he should think most
fit. Nay I would be resolved of this doubt: whether this be not a doctrine
religious in England: The sign of the cross does signify unto us that we
should not be ashamed of Christ crucified etc. If it be (as no Conformist can
deny) then I would know: whether and where Christ, our only Authentic
teacher, does teach this doctrine? or if our Prelates may bring in a new
doctrine into the Church, and cause Ministers to preach it? He leaves out of
our proof, that Christ is the only appointer of means, as also that those
means are limited to admonition of a holy duty: and in stead of our
conclusion, he brings in another, of ordeyning as necessary.

The support also of our collection he omitteth: to acknowledge any other means
of teaching and admonishing us of our duty, then such as Christ has
appointed, is to receyve another teacher into the Church, beside him, and to
confess some imperfection in the means by him ordained. Yet in the midst of
this shufling, and cutting, he tells us, that our collection is absurd. His
reason is not by manifesting the fault of our consequence, but only by
objecting some instances, and those also nothing to purpose. Then (says he) it
should not be lawful to use any help of Art Memorative, nor to set up a
gybbett, or a traitors head on a pole, to give men warning against murder, or
treason. Had he so soon forgotten, that the question is of Ceremonies,
appropriated to Gods service, teaching by ordination, or institution? If he had
not, what did he mean, to instance in things that were never called Ceremonies
(before this Rejoinder made all things in the world, in some respect,
Ceremonies, by his wild definition of a Ceremony,) things that have no use
in Gods service, much less appropriated thereto, things not teaching by
virtue of any ordination, or institution, but only by their natural relation,
nay things not teaching at all any spiritual duty directly, and immediately?
Characters and such like helps of memory, do no otherwise teach trueh, then
error, and haeresies no more spiritual duties, then carnal lusts, as experice
does teach. One of the ancientes, and learnedest Schoolme^ of our Country
(Alex. Ale^sis, p. 4. q. 1. m. 1.) teaches us, Literae significantes sacras
sententias, non significant eas in quantum sacra sunt, sed in quantum su^ tres.
that Letters that signify sacred sentences do not signify them as they are
sacred, but as they are things. And if it be lawful to institute significant
Ceremonies, for all things, that we may note in characters, for memory sake
the^ certainly our Convocation may instituteCeremonies properly Sacramental,
even such as do signify and seal the Covenant of grace. For there is no
doubt, but that we may note in characters or writing all that belong to that
Covenant. Gibbets, and traitors heads (besides the former exception out of
Alex. Hales) are remembrances of death inflicted upon such malefactors: but
neither to be appointed by any, without that authority, by which death is
inflicted, nor in their use imposed upon any, nor determined by institution, to
the teaching of any thing, which they would not otherwise teach, not yet such
remembrances as may be brought into Gods worship. Nay, from them some good
Divines do reason against images in Churches, and such like significant
Ceremonies. D. Fulke against Sanders of images, has these words: Images (says
Sanders are profitable: because they bring us in remembrance of good things. I
deny this argument: because nothing is profitable in religion, but that which
is instituted by God. For otherwise we might bring the gallows into the
Church, which brings us in remembrance of Gods justice.

4. To pass by those exceptions of the Repl. against the Def. which the Rej.
calls wranglinges (though they be defensible enough) The first proof of our
proposition is taken from Mar. 7. and Matthew. 15. where (as we allege) our
Savior by this argument (among others) condemns the Jewish purifijnges, and
justifies himself, and his Disciples, in refusing that Ceremony: because
(being the praecept of men) it was taught, and used, as a doctrine, by way of
signification to teach what inward purity should be in them, and how they
ought to be cleansed from heathen pollutions. To this the Rej. (supplying again
that which the Def. had forgotten) answers, that this reason (among others)
of signification, is our fiction. Now (though these places of Scripture have
formerly been handled, in the second chapter) let any man considerthis
observation: we find in our Saviors answer, three reasons of reprehending
the Pharisees: 1. That their washing was praeferred before the Commandments of
God. 2. That it was hypocritical. 3. That it was a vain worship, and
therefore sin. If any say, it was not vain, as significant, we reply, it
could be no outward worship, but as religiously significant. For washing,
without signification had been mere civil. And Marc. 7.4. The Pharisees are
reproved, for mere undertaking to observe washinges, no mention being made of
any other reason, but only that observance, which must needs be understood of
all observance, which was not civil, but (by institution and intention)
religious.

5. For this interpretation, and collation, many good Divines were cited as
fathering the same. They are all abused, says the Rej. Now of Chrysostom,
enough has been said, in the former chapter. D. Whitakers his approbation of
the same sentence is shifted of, with binding of conscience, and holiness
placed in them. But these shifts are sufficiently discussed in the former part
of this book. To the Confession of Witenberge it is answered. 1 That it does
not so much as give any glance at Marc. 7. Which how true it is, may appear
by these their words: Non lice^, vel vet^res legis vitus restaurare, vel nov^s
comminisci, ad adumbrandam veritatem Euangelicam jam patefactum: quales sunt.
Uti vexillis, and crucibus, ad significandam victoriam Christ's per crucem: quod
genus est universa panopliae vestium missalium, quam aiunt adumbrare totum
passionem Christi, and multa id genus alia. Da hoc ^enere, Ceremoniarum and
sacror^m, Christus ex Isaia concionatur, f^ustra (inquiens) colunt me doc^ntes
doctrinas, praecepta hominum.
Nor is it lawful to restore either the old rites of the law, or to devise new
in their place to signify the truth of the gospel now come to light, as for
example, to use banners and Crosses to sign Christ's victory on the Cross: of
which kind of i^ly devised repraesentions, is the whole furniture of Mass
accontrements, which they say does set forth the whole passion of Christ, and
many such like things. Of which sacred ceremonies Christ preaches out of
Isajah; In vain they worship me teaching for doctrines the preceps of men.

Which last words are (in every syllable of them) found Marc. 7.7. Is not
this so much as a glance at Marc. 7? Suerly here the Rej. had more affection
to his cause, then attentation to the place in quaestion,

6. Of Calvin, see the former chapter. Yet here also let these words of his be
remembered: Omnes (...) damnars mini^ me obscurun^ est. Eos errare* Christus
pronunciat, qui loco doctrina obtrudu ut hominum mandata, fixum illud maneat
fictitios omnes cultus coram Deo vanos esse
In these words it is evident, that all will worships are condemned. Christ
pronounces them erroneous, which for Doctrine obtrude men's p^aeceps. Let this
stand firm, all devised worships are most vain before God. Under which
censure and sentence, that he includes such significant Ceremonies as ours
are, it appears, as out of his condemning them in the Lutherans, against
Westphalus, so out of his own practice in Geneva and France, where all such
are abolished: for he professes ( de necess. ref. Eccl.) We have touched
nothing no not with the least finger to remove it except that which Christ
accounts nothing, Nil vel minimo digito attigimus nisi quod pro nihilo Christus
ducit, cum frustra coli Deum humanis traeditionibus pronunci^t.
seeing he pronounces God is vainly worshipped by humane traditions.

7. Virel (in Catechism. in praecep. 2.) extends the second Commandment,
unto the forbidding of every humane religious likeness. The Rej. also
confesses, that the same Virel, there conde^neth all superstition: to which he
if he had added his definition of superstition, viz: that it is a worshipping of
God by rites and Ceremonies devised of man, all would have been plain. Neither
is it material, that Virel points not to Marc. 7. (as the Rej, notes) seeing
he groundeth his doctrine upon Matthew. 15.9. where the same words are found,
which in Marc. 7.7. are repeated. The Rej. therefore had no show of reason to
say, that Virel was abused, in that he was cited as interpreting Mark, because
(by his own confession) he does interpret the same words which are found in
Mark.

8. Zepperus his testimony (which was not his alone, but the common sentence
of diverse Protestant Synodes, as appears out of his praeface) is so full,
that the Rejoinder in him forbear his common accusation, that he was abused.
His words are these, de Pol. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 10. reg. 3. Cum D^us per
humanas traditiones frustra colatur, Mat, 15.9. perque illas in hominum
cordibus efficax esse non velit, oneras illas (...) esse, opinionem tantum
sapientiae habentes, per quas nullam animorum devo tionem, fidem, invocationem,
and poenitentiam veram, in cordibus excitare velit. and reg. 4. Ceremonia ab
hominibus administrationi Sacramentorum assutae, tetidem sunt varierum errorum,
idololatriae, and superstitionum seminaria and fomenta Tales Ceremoniae sunt
abolendae Mat 15 6. Mar. 7.9. Hinc manifestum evadit, abroganda esse circa
Baptismum, oleum, sal, aquaem lustralem, cereos, characterem Crucis, etc.
Since God is worshipped in vain by humane traditious Mat. 15.9. Nor will be of
an efficacy by such things in the hearts of men, and being mere
will-worships, Carrying but an opinion of wisdom through which God will never
stir up devotion, prayer, faith, and repentanc^ in us etc. And again. The
ceremonies Cobled or botcht by men to the administration of the Sacraments are
so many seminaries and nurseries of error, idolatry and superstition such
ceremonies are to be abolished Mat. 15. Marc. 7. Whence it is manifest that
about Baptism oil, salt, holy water, tapers, the sign of the cross etc. are
to be abrogated.

If these words be not to the purpose, in the Rejoinder his own conscience,
then I despair of satisfying him about any testimony that makes against that
tenet which he is resolved to mainteyne (as they say) by hook or crook.

9. D. Fulke (says the Rejoinder did not think humane Ceremonies to be
condemned for being significant, when no religion, or service of God is placed
in them. Which is as much as if he had said: D. F. did not think humane
Ceremonies to be condemned for being significant, when they are not
significant: For (as has been showed in the former part, all religious
Ceremonies instituted, by their signification to raise up the heart unto the
honoring of God, have some religion and service of God placed in them. And that
D. Fulke did mean by placing of religion, or Gods service in them, the using of
them unto religious use, it appears by a like place in Act. 17. sect. 5.
Though it be not simply unlawful, to express in painting the visible shapes
showed in Visions to the Prophets, yet to make those shapes for any use of
religion, is abominable idolatry.

10. For D. Raynolds, the Rejoinder answers 1. that he gives no hint
touching the interpretation of this place. 2. that he only inveigheth against
the multitude and burden of Symbolicall rites, showing their use in Popery to
be Jewish. 3. that D.R. judged our ^ignificant Ceremonies lawful to be used in
case of silencing and deprivation. Now for the first, I answer, that as there
are hints of interpretation for many places of the old Testament, in the new,
which yet are not cited there, so may it be that D. R. gave a hint, without
quoting. About the third point, I 1. observe, that by the Rejoinder his own
relation, D. Rain, was not of his and D. Mortons judgment. For he judged our
Ceremonies only tolerable in case of extremity: but they allow the very
institution of them, as good and profitable for order, decency, and
aedification. 2. D.R. never manifested to the world in public any reasons for
that judgment, but rather for the contrary, as by and by we shall hear. 3.
There is a kind of suspensive judgment (such as Cyrill, Peter Lombard, as
Estius in 2. d. 21. alleges and interprets them, say Eve had, about the
Serpents speaking) to which the iniquity of times do draw many godly and
learned men, not only about Ceremonies violently urged by and with grievous
poenalties, but also about greater matters, as experience in all ages has
showed. But that is nothing to others as being destitute or forsaken of
certain grounds or supportes.

Concerning the second and main point, the best way is, to set down D.R. his
own words, which are these: Were it so, that the Popish Unction had another,
either work, or meaning, with the Papists, then with the Jew, as after a sort,
it has, yet might the Ceremony be Jewish notwithstanding, as sacrifizing of a
lamb, to signify Christ already come. At the least S. Peter did constrayne
the Gentiles to Iudaize (Gal. 2.12.) though he, and those Gentiles had another
meaning, then that wherein that choice of meats was praescribed to the Jews.
Adv. Heart. chap. 8. sect. 4.

Thus far I had in my notes, out of the English editio^ but there is this more
in the book, as I now find in the latin copy, not having the English at
hand: your rites in the very kind are Jewish or as the Jewish were. Now out of
these last words I argue thus: Vestri ritus ipso genere, Iudaici sunt, quales
Iudaici exstiterunt.
1. If all umbraticall rites be Judicial, and therefore unlawful, then all
religious significant Ceremonies are Jewish and unlawful.

But D. R. says the first: therefore he teaches also the later. 2. Out of the
former I conclude thus: if a Jewish rite may be without a Jewish opinion, then
our Ceremonies may be Jewish, or Popish, without a Jewish, or Popish opinion,
or doctrine.

But the first is affirmed by D. R. therefore the later also. Which if it be
true, then both the Defend. and Rejoinder have taken a false ground of their
Ceremonial doctrine, in affirming so confidently upon all occasions, that it
is the opinion and docdrine only which makes a Ceremony Jewish, Popish, or
any way unlawful.

All this notwithstanding, the Rejoinder could not forbear, to accuse the
Authors of the Abridgement, his old reverend friends, of sh^mefull abusing the
world, with false allegations of these Divines, nor to triumph in his
discovering of this shame.

But I could wish, from my heart, that he, and his best friends living, had no
more cause to be ashamed of his Rejoinder, then they had of these allegations,
which none of the Authors, if they were on earth alive would disavow.

11. In the last place, upon occasion of our disliking all the significant
Ceremonies, brought in by the Pharisees, it pleased the Def. to tax us for
being too like the Saduces, in refusing such Ceremonies. Now of this
accusation the Replier only desired the Def. to consider, if it did not touch
our blessed Savior himself, who by his example, and doctrine opposed the same
Ceremonies? Heerupon the Rejoinder answers, that our Savior walked a middle
path, betwixt the excess of the Pharisees, and the praecisenes of the Saduces,
in Ceremonies, observing many humane significant Ceremonies in religion, as the
Feast of Dedication, embaulming at burialls, sitting at burialls, sitting at
the Passover, and the Synagogues, with their formalities. In which answer, the
Rejoinder has showed, that upon occasion, he dare go as far, and say as
much for humane Ceremonies, as any that went before him, if not more, and that
with such confidence as is not abated with reverence of our Savior himself,
whom this passage does concern. But beside this audaciousnesse, I find no
truth in these words, For. 1. That which he says of the Saduces praecisenesse
in flying all human Ceremonies, is not true. The Saduces (says Epiphanius lib
1. c. 14.) omnia aequabiliter cum Samaritis observant. i. e. they observe all
that the Samaritans observe: and who can doubt but the observations and
Ceremonies proper to the Samaritans, were all inventions of men, with the
Devils help. The Saduces also were sometime high Preistes at Jerusalem, as for
example, Annas is noted by Josephus (l. 20. c. 15.) and by like historians, to
have been a Saducen. Now it is not credible, that any high Priest in those
times, did absteyne from all humane Ceremonies, used commonly by all the Jews
Mar. 7. 3. At the least the high Priest did observe the feast of Dedication,
sitting at the Passover, and such like (in the Rejoinder his account) humane
Ceremonies. 2. The Saduces were profane beasts, not hoping for Heaven, nor
fearing Hell, and so were allways ready to observe any Ceremonies that made for
their temporal advantage, of what kind soever they were. 3. It appears out
of the premises* that our blessed Savior (in favor of our paltrie base
Ceremonies) is wronged in his holy name, as if he had been more observant of
humane mystical constitutions in religion, then many of the worst Jews, whom
yet he reproved for following traditions of men. 4. Because the Rejoinder
speaks of a middle path, betwixt the excess of the Pharisees, and
preciseness of the Saduces, observed by our Savior, it would be known,
whether that middle were medium participationis, or medium abnegationis? i. e.
Whether it was only a third way partaking of neither extreme? or had in it part
of the Pharisees excess, and part of the Saduces preciseness? The former
sense we may (upon the Rejoinder his supposition acknowledge: and that makes
nothing to the purpose.

If the later meaning be the Rejoynders, then he must show us, how far our
Savior did agree in practice with the Pharisees? And to clear that, he must
prove that the Pharisees had lawful authoritte, for appointing or instituting
mystical Ceremonies, and which of them were allowed by our Savior? 5. The
examples here given, pertain nothing to the question. The feast of Dedication
comes after to be handled. Embalming at burials, was no significant religious
Ceremony, but a civil rite common to the Israelites with the Egyptians, and
other Heathens. If it were, yet being from the time of the Patriarchs, how
will the Rejoinder prove that it was instituted without Divine direction?
Sitting at the Passover can neither be proved to be mystical, nor yet
instituted by man. Synagoges were no more significant Ceremonies, then was the
school of Tyrannus, Act. 19.9. The opening, closing, and delivering of the
Book, Luc. 14.17.20. was no more mystical a Ceremony, then the opening of a
man's mouth, when he speaks, and the shutting of it again, when he has no
more to say. Are not these worthy grounds, for to conclude upon, that our
Savior was an observer of humane religious mystical Ceremonies?

SECT. 3. Concerning S. Augustine.
1. AVgustine, in the Abridgement, was among other Divines cited, as allowing
of one proof belonging to this Argument, taken from significancie. This the
Def. catched hold of before the time or place of it, as matter of a section by
it self, distinct from the testimonies of other Divines. Which dealing we must
not speak of: because the Rejoinder says, it was orderly done. But if their
Printer-hath failed in right noting the numbers, he will needs have that a very
slipery trick. If also the Def. brought in this testimony out of place, that
was (in the Rejoinder his language) because he would not teather us up too
straight. All this we may let pass, as formalitie of words, suitable to his
Ceremonies, which he seeks to mainteyne.

2. But (says the Rejoinder) if in stead of lib. 3. c. 35. be put in lib. 2.
cap. 1. as the Repl. would have it, yet nothing is found to the purpose. Now
(though it skilleth not much: because this place was but conjecturally pointed
at, in stead of another miscited yet) in that place, this is to be found, so
much to the purpose, that I know not how the Rej. will avoyde the weight of
it: that S. Aug. distinguishing betwixt natural, and instituted signs, says
presently after, that there is no use or cause of instituted signs, nisi ad
expromendum, and trajiciendum in alierius animum, id quod in animo gerit is qui
dat, i.e. but to declore and make intelligible, what the institutor means.
From whence, we gather, that our Prelates instituting significant Ceremonies,
can signify no more then what they would have, and not what God would have.

3. Another place of Augustine was alleged. out of Ep. 5. Signs when they
belong to divine things are called Sacraments. Signa, cum ad res divinas
pertinent, Sacramenta appollentur^
Of these words. the Rej. (differing from the Def. says) that his meaning was
to show, that the name of Sacraments belong properly to divine things, and
not to all signs of holy things.

But it is plain, that his meaning was, to show, that all things instituted
imbuendo virtutibus animo, i. e. to stir up the mind to virtue, as he speaks
immediately before, are Sacraments. In defense of the Def. he answers, with
the Def. that in Augustines language, all signs of holy things, are
familiarly called Sacraments, and that we bewray small acquaintance with
Augustines language.

Where (because both the Defend. and Rej. would seem so familiarly acquainted
with Augustines language) I would desire only, that they would interpret unto
us (strangers from it) the meaning of these words of his, Epist. 119. Dies
natalis Domini, non in Sacramento celebratur, sed tantum in memoriam revocatur,
quod gestum est. Pascha sic agimus, ut Sacramenti significationem non
omittamus. Sacramentum est in celebratione quum rei gestae ita commemoratio fit
ut aliquid etiam significari intelligatur quod sancte accipiendum est. i. e.

The celebration of Christ's nativitie is no Sacrament: but the celebration of
Easter is a Sacrament. Here we must have a new distinction, never head of since
Augustines time, or else it cannot stand (which yet they, who will seem so
versed in Augustines phraze, will needs dictate unto us) that all signs of
holy things, are, Augustines phraze, Sacraments: except perhaps (against their
often professed tenet) they will say, that holy days no not that which is
appointed for memory of Christ's own nativitie, is a sign of a holy thing.
Neither can it be (according to Augustines phraze) but all such significant
Ceremonies as Easter was, must have more then the mere name of Sacraments.

4. And this was that, for which Augustines testimony was only brough in
for, viz: to show that religious significant Ceremonies participate part of the
Sacraments nature. To this (after some words of course) it is rejoined, that
the name Sacrament improperly given to other things, does not prove them to
participate the property and nature of Sacraments, no more then the Swanne in
Houlborne, or the Idols of the Gentiles, do participate the nature of a
Swanne, and God: such denominations not being real, and proper, but logical,
or relative. And if it were so, then the taking away of that name from our
Ceremonies, does discharge them from partaking the nature of Sacraments. To
which I have this to say 1. that our Argument is not taken from the mere name:
for we know that some names are common to things quite differing in nature, so
falling (as they say) by chance, But this community of the name Sacrament,
was not so: it was communicated to Mystical Ceremonies upon certain counsel
and reason. And that reason was not mere similitude outward, such as is
betwixt the picture of a Swanne and a living Swanne: Because there is no such
outward likeness betwixt the Cross, and any proper Sacrament: but from some
proportion of inward nature, either in men's esteem, as an Idols was called
God, or in deed wholly so far as man's institution can effect, as ^he Popish
five Sacraments are so called, or else in part, as this kind of significant
Ceremonies, which are in quaestion. Now that this last was the reason,
Augustine himself teaches in the for-alleged sentence, concerning Easter: and
Chemnitius, out of him, does largely declare, in the beginning of his 2. tome,
de Sacramentorum numero. Bellarmin also (de effect. Sacrament. l. 2. T. 24.)
gives the same rule, Sacramentae dicuntur omnia, quae mysticum sensum habent,
and f^gue sunt and typt aliarum rerum.
and reason: All are called Sacraments which have a mystical sense, and are
types or figures of other things. 2. From the former answer, the Rej. his Host
in Holborne can gather, that not the picture of a Swanne, but a living Goose,
has that proportion to a living Swanne, which is betwixt other mystical
Ceremonies, and proper Sacraments. 3. It is but a picture of a reason, which
the Rejoinder makes, from giving of the name Sacrament, to the taking of it
away. For no man will say, that a name taken from the nature of a thing does
argue more the nature of it, then the taking away the name alone, does argue
the taking away of the nature. The ancient naming of such Images as the
Papists are, did argue them to have an idolatrous nature: but the removing of
that name from them, by the Papists, does not argue they are now of idolatrous
nature.

5. From the name Sacrament, which first was given to this kind of Ceremonies,
it came that afterward they were called Sacramentalls. For so says Swarez de
Relig. Vol. 1. tract. 3. lib. 4. cap. 14. Sacramentalium nomin^ significari
solent, vel generalius omnes Ceremoniae and benedictiones sacrae, qua in
Ecclesia fiunt.
) They use to be styled Sacramentalls, or more generally allCeremonies and holy
blessings done in the Church. To this observation of the Replier, the Rejoinder
answers, that the name Sacramental, taken properly, is given out of relation
to Sacraments, not out of participation or resemblance of their nature. And
that analogically such Ceremonies as are consecrated to s^gnifie and work
supernatural effects are called Sacramenta^is. The first of which
interpretations we do not deny: saving only, we see not why the Rejoinder
should say in that sense only that name istaken properly.

In the second, he confesses as much as we desire: saving that he shufleth in
two terms unfitting: consecrated to work. For many Mystical Ceremonies were
not consecrated at all among the Papists (as the aereall sign of the Cross
etc.) and some were consecrated in Augustines time, (the practice whereof is
here defended by the Rejoinder) nor can be condemned by those that consecrate
Churches, Churche-yarders, Altars etc.

And as for working, if it be understood of moral working by admonition* then
it cannot be denied unto mystical signs by institution admonitorie.
Sacramentalia non operantur remissionem peccatorum venialium, neque instituta
sunt ad came significandam, sed ad excitandum animum in detestationem illorum.
Howsoever a principal Jesuit may profess as much at Rome, of Popish
Ceremonies, as the Rejoinder does here of ours. So Vasquez (in 3. Disp. 128.
cap. 5. ar. 4. Sacramentals do not work remission of venial Sins nor are
instituted to that end, but to stir up the mind to detest them.

6. It was in the conclusion of this passage, granted by the Repl. that neither
Augustine, nor other fathers, did constantly in doctrine, and practice reject
humane mystical Ceremonies. Whereupon the Rejoinder infers, that Augustine
therefore is wronged, and we are mere Navalists. But here he forgot, that all
our Divines, and also our English Articles of confession with our Apology, do
reject diverse things (as prayer to, and for the dead, men's falling from grace
etc.) which those Fathers did not constantly in doctrine and practice, reject,
and yet are neither to be esteemed mere Novalists, not yet accused of wronging
those Fathers, when they cite some testimonies out of their writings, against
those errors. Concerning Ceremonies, it is the commune sentence of our Divines,
which Beza expresses (ad Bald winum) It is not to be doubted but that most of
your ancient Bishops were somewhat too busy in devising rites etc. but unhappy
was the Counsel. Extra controver^iam est, in excogitandos vitibus, ple rosque
veteres Episcopo^ ^lus aquo fuisse soli^itos etc. Hoc autem confilium fuit
infelix


7. To make an end of this one testimony, which it pleased the Defend. to
take into so large consideration, for advantage. Augustine Epist 119. ad Ian.
is cited by all, as condemning the multitude of humane Ceremonies which were
then crept into the Church and worship of God: and therein (without all doubt)
he said that out, which many other godly men did inwardly conceyve: yet neither
he, nor they, did constantly reject that multitude, nor he declare his mind,
but when he was urged by Ianuarius. The stream of the times, bearing toward
Popery, made him (with others despairing of reformation) yield too much unto
such abuses. Yet in that famous place (Epist. 119.) not only the number, but
even the nature of such Ceremonies is condemned. 1. For the manifesting
whereof, I note these passages: 1. He notes these Ceremonies, that they were
instituted, ut quasi observatio Sacramenti sint. i. e. so that they partaked
the nature of Sacrament. For as quasi contractus, and quasi peculium castrense,
do in the Civil law note participation of the nature of such things to
which they are quasi; so does, quasi Sacramentum. 2. He professes, that by
reason of times, he durst not speak against such Ceremonies so freely as his
judgment did lead him: liberius improbare non andeo. 3. He calls them
servilia onera, and humanas presumptiones: servil burdens, and humane
praesumtiones. 4. He accounts the Church, in regard of them, to be troubled
with much chafe, and tares: inter multam paleam, multaque zizania
constitutam. 5. He says, that such Ceremonies, though they were tolerated,
yet they were not to be allowed of, but upon the first opportunity to be
cashiered resecanda, yea though it were not discerned, how they made against
faith or good manners.

Let any man now judge, if Augustine did in this his clear sentence about
Ceremonies, agree with our Def. and Rejoyner.

SECT. 4. The judgment of Protestant Divines concerning significant Ceremonies.
1. THe Rejoinder was not so large in the former section, about one Divine, but
he is as brief, in this, about many. For first in general, he would persuade
us with words, that the Def. in answering four testimonies, had answered all,
in one word: that no Protestant Divine (except Beza) has spoken absol^tely
against signs symbolicall and merely significant*

Which kind of rejoynding, had had some sense, if mere denying of a
conclusion, were a sufficient answer to an argument drawn from diverse
testimonies alleged for the proof of it. But yet not trusting to this kind of
answering, he adventureth, to clear the particular allegations: which was more
then the Def. would undert^ke. One would have expected, that here he should
have answered, that which is so pertine^t to the purpose, found in the
Abridgement, page 32. because he put it of before (page 247.) with a tale of
boy, and promised after to show, that it is nothing to the purpose. The
allegation is this: To them that say Images may stand in Churches, as helps to
stir up devotion, and to put men in remembrance of good things (with whom
the Def. and Rejoinder consent) it is answered (by P. Martyr, Gwalter, Lavater,
Vrsine, Polanus, and others) that the Lord himself has appointed means enough
to do that; and that no means may be used to that end, but such as he has
ordained. This certain was to the Rejoinder as it were a noli me tangere: that
no means must be used to stir up devotion, and to put men in remembrance of
good things, but only those which God has ordained. He was therefore
contented to pass it over without meddling with it. And he that with ^is
answers to the other allegations, may think that the be^ter way for him, had
been, to deal in like manner with all. This will appear in the examining of
them, one by one.

2. In the first place, therefore, we exspect his answer to that which is found
in the Harmony of Protestant Confessions, generally approved, by Reformed
Churches. About which he is very brief, as his cause required. The Divines of
Witenburge (says he) and those of France, and the Low Contries: viz. that
they speak only of those significant Ceremonies, which serve to shadow out
the Mysteries of the Gospel, or to supply the office of true Sacraments. Now
(for the present) we will not stand much upon those phrases, shadows of the
Mysteri^s of the Gospel, supplying of the true Sacraments office. It shall be
sufficient, to reci^e the words which he has so easily and often answered.
The Wittenburge Confession (sect. 17.) says thus: It is not l^wfull, either to
restore the old Ceremonies of the law, or devise new, to shadow forth the
truth already laid open, and brought to light, by the Gospel: as in ^he
daylight to set up c^ndels, to signify the light of the Gospel* or to carry
banners and crosses, to signify the victory of Christ, through his Cross. Of
which sort, is all that Massing attire, which (they say) does shadow out the
wholle passion of Christ, and many other things of that kind etc. The other
words are these: No Mysticull rites (that is, which carry some mystery, or
signification, in them) though not otherwise impious (as namely such as should
be parts of Gods doctrine, or kinds of Sacraments) but only such laws as
pertayne to order and decency are lawful. Let any man that undetstandeth
English, and reason, judge, if these words ought, or can be interpreted, only
of (I know not what) mysteries of the Gospel, or Ceremonies supplying the
office of true Sacraments, further then our Argument does importe. If not,
then the Rejoinder granting the premises, denies the conclusion as he did
before.

The Confession condemns banners by name and Crosses, signifying the victory
of Christ through his Cross: Our men defend the sign of the Cross,
signifying that Christians shall not be ashamed, to fight manfully against
Satan under Christ's Banner. The Divines of France and the Low Contries, (with
the Confession) reject all Ceremonies, that carry some mystery or signification
in them: Our question is, whether humane Ceremonies of mystical signification,
be lawful? If these testimonies be not plain enough, I know not what is
plain.

3. Peter Martyr (on 1. King. 8) is the next witness of whom the Rejoinder
says, that he speaks of Exorcisme, oil, spittle, and exsufflation, to all
which the Papists ascribe operation, and to that end do consecrate some of
them, by prayer. Beside (says he) Martyr did approve these our Ceremonies as
lawful, and bowing of the knee at the name of Jesus: so that he wondereth
Martyr should be alleged in this cause. Now therefore let us hear P. Martyr
himself speak: Cum Deus fi^. sapienti simus, non opus habet, ut nostro cogita
tu, vel industria illi paremus instrumenta (ad fidem in nobis excitandam) Quod
etiam quisquam Artifex, in sua facultate, minime ferret, sed ipsemet vellet suo
arbitratis sibi deligere. Magna est it aque audacia horum hominum, qui Deo
velint organa praescribere, quibus, ad nostram salut emoperetur. Signa
mult^plicant, quae sacra esse volunt, adhibendo oleum, sputum, exsufflationes,
et alia h^jusmodi. Quo circa unum Baptism^ Sacramentum, in multa de gene^at.
Nec audiendi sunt, quando ut simplicibu^ illudant, distinctionem inter
Sacraementa and Sacramentalia confingunt, qua omnino Sop^istica est.
The most wise God needs none of our help to devise means to excite faith,
nor would the meanest Mechanie endure to etc. See before, how bold then are
these men who will praescribe to God wherewithal to help forward our salvation.

They multiply signs which they will leave to be sacred as oil, spittle,
exsufflations etc. and that one Sacrament of Bapt. is much degenerate. Nor are
they to be heard when to abuse the simple they use to distinguish between
Sacrament and Sacramentals mere Sophistry. As for operation, we have often
showed, that many Papists ascribe no more of that, nor no other wise, to many
of their Ceremonies, then the Def. and Rejoinder do allow of in ours.
Consecration by prayer, may as well be used about a Surplis, as about a
Churcheyard. It is plain by the words, that P. M. does condemn all means
instituted by man, for the stirring up of our faith: which are in the Def. and
Rejoinder his language, mystical moral ceremonies, serving for aedification:
saying that no Carpente^, or Mason would be so dealt with in his occupation, as
the institutors of such mystical Ceremonies do deal with God. He accounts
humane sacred signs in Religion, to be humane Sacraments: and will not admit
of such distinctions, as the Rejoinder has multiplied: Sacred properly, and
reductively, rightly, or abusively sacred, simple or double sacred.
Sacramental, or moral, reductive, or analogicall Sacramentalls, etc.

Yet we deny not, but the same P.M. being sometime perplexed in the case of
England, did suffer his affection to carry him so far, that he seems to make
some of our Ceremonies, in some case, tolerable. But then any man may perceyve
wavering in his words: as when (in his epist. to Hooper) he requires five
conditions in such Ceremonies, 1. that the Church has liberty to ordeyne
them: 2. that the worship of God be not placed in them: 3. That they be few: 4.
Not burdensome. 5. Not a hinderance to better things.

The two first of which conditions are the very question: viz: whether the
Church has any such liberty, and whether all such Ceremonies be not part
of worship: Quid pro sunt in Baptismo, Exorcismus, consecratio aquae, cereus
sal, sputum, oleum, v^stis candida, nolae, etc. Nunc ad Baptismi ornatum,
additamenta illa pertinent? Number igitur sunt prudentiores Jesus Christo, qui
instituit Baptismum, tanta cum simplicitat^, and puritate, quique melius novit
quam ^mnes simul homines, quae illi conveniant ornamenta? Qua est hac
arrogantia, adji^ere institutioni Jesus Christi Gal. 3.
and for the two last, experience teaches, how burdensome our Ceremonies have
been, and are still, to many good men's consciences, and how much good has
been hindered, by the urging, and practizing of them.

4. Sadeel is put of, with the like shift, of consecration, necescitie,
efficacy Sacramental. Now these terms have been sufficiently unmasked before,
in the first part. Let Sadeel here only be heard, and he will tell his own
meaning. The exorcisme holy water, taper, salt spittle, white garment, the
little bells, etc. what good do they do in Baptism? Do they indeed being added
to Baptism ad at all to its ornament? but what are these devisers of such
things wiser then Christ Jesus who instituted Bapt. with such simplicity and
purity as knowing better then all men besides what ornaments suite best with
his own ordinances? what arroganice is this to ad thus to Christ's institution?
Gal. 3. the unction added to Bapt. we allow no more the^ that of Confirmation.
Bec. it belongs to God only to appoint Sacraments The old pastors of the
Christian church did more then was mete accomodate themselves to Jews and
Gentiles whence many cere: cr^pt into the Church but Experience shows God
blessed not such Counsel. Chrismae so^ unctio Bapt. adhibita, non magis novis
probatur, quam Chrisma Confirmationis* quia unius est Dei constituer^
Sacramenta. Veteres Ecclesia Pastores plus aequo sese voluerunt, tun^ Iudaeis,
cum Et buicis acco^modare. Vnde multa Caremonia in Ecclesiam irrepferunt. At
experientia declaravit, Deum non be nedixisse hi^c consolio. etc. adverb. Mon.
Burd^g, ^rt. 1^* 13.
In these words 1. all humane addition to Gods institutions are absolutely
condemned. 2. Those that undertake to add such Cerem. are censured of
intolerable arrogancy, as presuming to be wiser then Christ. 3. Lights, and
white garments, are by name condemned, which only offend, in their mystical
signification upon man's will. 4. Chrisme or oil in Baptism is esteemed a
Sacrament, though the Papists deny it conferreth grace, as the Sacraments. 5.
The first bringers in of Ceremonies (only significant) into the Church, are
taxed for departing from the simplicity of Gods word, as therein finding rather
the curse, then the blessing of God upon their presumptions.

5. Daneus is the next (who makes it blasphemy, to think, and teach, that
any outward things (of humane institution) may be made a sign, in the
Church, of spiritual things) the first answer is, that this was spoken in
opposition to Bellarmines consecrating of creatures to signify, and work
supernatural effects. Which is very true: but this must be added: that in
this se^te^ce, he touches only the signification, not the operation of those
Cere. as any that reads his words, may observe. The second answer is that
Daneus (elsewhere) allows some significant Cere. But the Rej. should have
done well, to name the place or places, which he meant by elsewhere. For we
cannot by conjecture find it.

This I am sure of, that it is not Isagoge, p. 3. l. 3. c. 11. where he says,
that the teaching under the law was (...) signs, and earthly figures, as a
Schoolmaister speaks to young children: but under the Gospel, open, and
man^fest, as one deals with grown men. They then that thrust in significant
Ceremonies, what do they but confound the most wise dispensation of God, and
make a mingle-mangle of those things, which he has separated asunder?

6. Polanus (misprinted, or uncertainly printed in the Abrigement) is said to
allow some significant Ceremonies, as feasts, Fasts, Gestures: and his
definition of Superstition, is thought to make only against Ceremonies
Sacramental, not Morally significant. The only way therefore is, to set down
his words, out of which his judgment about this point may appear of
superstition, he says thus (Syntag. l. 9. c. 3.) Superstition stands in
choosing worship to God, or exceeds measure therein. True religion worships the
true God in a manner prescribed by the word: false, (that is to say
Superstition) worships God otherwise then he wills or enjoynes. In another
place whatsoever perteines to Gods worship must by him be required. Again it
is a foolish ill zeal of the popish clergy to use such playerake apparel in
Divine service and by apparel to be distinguished from laics, that difference
and variety was in the old Testament typical, but the substance being come,
what mean they to require types any more? Superstitio est in eligendo cultu
Dei, vel modum excedit in colendo. Vera religio colit Deum verum, modo verbo
Dei prascripto: falsa (i.e. superstitio) v^rum Deum aliter colit, quam ipse
vult and mandat. lib. 8. c. 1. Quicquid ad cultum Dei pertinet, a Deo mandatum
esse aportet. lib, 9. c. 38. Inopta est (...) Cloeicorum Papistorum, qui
vestitu theatri^^ in sacris utu^tur, et vestitu laicis distingui volunt, Illa
defiintio and varieras, erat in V. T. ^ypica: veritate autem ixhibita, quid
amptiu^ typos reguirunt?


7. The next witness is Mr. Perkinse, on Gal. 3. but (by variety of editions)
uncertain what verse of the Chapter was designed.

The Rejoinder therefore guesseth, that the words upon v. 2. or rather 1. were
intended, where Mr. P. condemns the setting up of Images, to be laymens
books. To which he answers. 1. That he also does blame the same. 2. that
Mr. P. in some persons and places, prefers dipping, before sprinkling, in
Baptism. Now for the first of these, if the Rejoinder when he writ these
words condemn (with Mr. P.) such images or pictures as are laymens books,
it is wonder, he forgot, or changed this judgment, before he came to the
seventh section of this very Chapter, where he does defend them. And this is
plain, that if images be to be condemned, as they are lay men's books, or
teachers, then all humane signs, ordained to be laymens teachers, in
religion, are also to be eondemned with them.

The second is an affected flim-flam. For dipping (upon just occasion) rather
then sprinkeling, is no more a humane Ceremonie^, in Baptism, then drinking a
convenient draft of wine rather then slight tasting is an humane significant
institution.

But yet (howsoever the Rejoinder upon conscience of the consanguinitie,
betwixt Images, and significant Ceremonies did suppose this first verse of the
Chapter to be meant by the Authors of the Abr.) I think rather that they
intended the four and twenty verse, where M.P. does distinguish betwixt
Ceremonies significant, and those of Order, and says that the former sort were
alsolutely abolished, but the other only in respect of their special
determination.

8. Master Merbur^e was cited (out of a Manuscript, (as it seems) as giving
the same judgment of significant Ceremonies. But in his later time, he crossed
not so much others, as himself in blotting out this sentence I leave therefore
his name under that blotte, and other like, wherewith he soiled himself in his
later times.

9. D. Witgift him self, is brought in (by Abr.) dissliking any praescript
apparel, should be used in Gods service, for significat^on. Def. page, 291. To
this the Rejoinder answers 1. that in the same place. P. Martyr is alleged,
as approving white apparel, for Ministers (who are compared to Angels) to use
in signification of their office, because Angel app^ared in white: which should
have put him (at the least) out of our Bill. But it follows not, that
therefore all testimonies of Martyrs, must be put out of our Bill, because he
varieth from them, in this. In the other places, he speaks from good grounds
of Divinity: but this reason of his, has no more force in it, then if from
the picture and apparation of Angels, it should be gathered, that no Minister
should wear a black nightcap, a black tippet, or a black hood, which our
Canons do command: or that every Minister should have six wings fastened to
his body, with certain, vizard faces, like unto the faces of Lions, Eagles, and
open, because Angels have so appeared, Isa. 6. Ezech. 1.

It is answered 2. that we should believe the said D. Whitgift in this, that
our Surplices are not appointed for any moral signification. But we cannot
beleiv, whatsoever one Prelat says of our Ceremonies, (for to avoid the dint
of Argument, though it be against the common profession of our Church, in the
very Service Book,) is presently to be believed.

The 3, answer is, that D. Whitgift did use, defend, and urge, significant
Ceremonies, which is true, with shame and all: but many a man, upon the rack
of an Argument is brought to confess that, which other while he is wont to
deny. Finally this consequence is denied: D. W. did not approve of the
Surplice for signification: ergo of no significant Ceremony: the reason of
which consequence is given in the Abridgement (p. 35.) because no good reason
can be given, why the Church may not injoine a prescript apparel for
signification, as well as any other Ceremony.

Thus the Rejoinder has tried what he could say to those testimonies, which
the Def. had omitted, in this place: and does so please himself therein, that
he begins a plaudite to himself, saying that he has openly whipped the
Repliers friends: he means the Authors of the Abr. who were wont to be his
reverend friends also. But this whipping of his, is just as if a man should
whippe thorns, and pricks, with his bare hands, getting more gashes thereby,
then he deals or gives blows. It is not safe so much as to handle sharp
edges much less to whippe them, with naked fingers.

10. Now we must hear, how the Rejoinder does say for the defense of those
answers which the Def. gave to four^ Divines, chosen out by himself to answer,
of whom, Calvin is the first. Of whom it is said, that he condemns only
such Ceremonies, as are subs^ituted to the very office of Sacraments. Where if
he means part of the office of Sacraments, Si Isayat sua sponte Loc f^cisset
merito irris^s stusset. Nihili sunt ea symbola, quae Deum Anthorem non habe^t.
Quod diligenter notandura est adversus Papistas, qui manes Ceremonias pro veris
Sacramentis obtrudunt. Ipsit haec regula a^ ponenda est: Si presiciscuntur a
Deo ea ^mplects debemus: sin minus intrepide repu diare licet, imo sine Dei
contumelia non r^cipiuntur: quiatum ejus aut bovitatem sibs usurpant mortales.
he and we consent about Calvin but if he mean the wholle complete office of
Sacram. then he wrongeth Calvin. For upon Lev. 4. 21. his meaning cannot be,
that all the old Ceremonies of the Jews, had such a complete Sacramental
office, as Circumcision, and the Passover had. Upon Isa. 20.2. speaking of
Isays goeing barefoot for a sign of future captivity (which was not the full
office of a Sacrament) he says: If Isaie had done this of himself he might
well have been laughed at. Those rites are of no worth which have not God for
their author, which we are carefully to note, against the papists who obtrude
upon us empty ceremonies for true Sacraments. This rule is for them: if they
come from God we are to embrace them, if not, to scorn them, nay they cannot
be received without dishonor to God, when therein mortal men take upon them the
authority of God. And upon Mat. 21.25. he has this doctrine: no sacred sign
ought to be admitted among the godly, unless it be shewwen to be of God,
Doctrina est utilis* nullum sacrum signum deberae inter pios admitti, nisi a
Deo profecta esse constat, nec esse in hominum arbi^rio quicquam (...) udere.
nor is it in men's choice to mint any thing. But the Rejoinder affirms, that
Calvin does expressly allow Symbolicall signs, as excercises, and incitements
of piety. The Place he means is Inst. lib. 4. c. 10. sect. 14. where there is
no express allowance at all, of mere humane Symbolicall signs, but only of
some Ceremonies, to help the ruder sort of people in their unskillfulnesse.
Now this kind of Ceremonies Calvin himself in the 28.29. sect. of the same
chapter, does manifestly declare, to be matters of mere and necessary
decency. The end of decency is, Decori finis est partim ut dum adhibentur
ritus, qui venerationem rebus sacris concilient talibi^s adminiculis ad
pietat^^ excitemur. Illud nobit decorum erit, quodita erit ad sacrorum
mysteriorum reverentiam aptum ut sit idon^um ad pietatis exercitium, etc.
that (while such things are used which purchase respect to holy things we be
stirred up to piety. That is a Decoium which so makes for the reverence of holy
things that is that it be a fit exercise of Godliness. This being considered,
and withal, that the Rejoinder in his great Charter, (cap. 1. (...) 16.)
dureth not build his mystical Ceremonies upon that decency, which Paul does
appointe, and Calvine only admits, it is plain, that Calvines exercises
and incitementes of piette, are not his more humane (...) Ceremonies.

11. The second witness, whom it pleased the Def. to take notice of, is
Zepperus, or rather, sundry Protestant Synodes, by Zepperus divulged, as he
shows in his praeface. Now his words are set down before in the 1. and 2.
^ection of this chapter: so that here we are only to consider what the
Rejoinder has to say against, or upon them. And first he flesh to his old
muse of Ceremonies efficient of grace, in Popery. But this muse-hole has been
formerly stopped. And if it were open in other assaults, yet Zepper has
sufficiently provided for it here. For beside that he directed his censure of
Cerem. (in a great part) against the Lutherans, who deny all efficacy that
the Rejoinder denies, he says plainly that by these humane mystical
Ceremonies, God will nor sti^^ up devotion, faith, and repentance, in the heart
of Christians not at blancke cross to our Def. and Rejoinder his tenet. For
the releiving of that weak shift, the Rejoinder (in the second place)
affirms, that Zepper (cap. 16.) does allow of dipping, and thrice dipping,
in Baptism, as an humane Ceremony stated in Gods worship to signify the
Trinity, and our Lords resurrection on the third day. Now in the 16. chapter,
there is no one word of these matters (which kind of misciting or misprinting
the Rejoinder uses to make a great matter of in others) but in the 12.
chapter, I find such a fond allegory of thrice-dipping merely related out
of Augustine, but no allowance of the same. Nay, if the matter be well
considered, I think the Rejoinder himself will scarce allow of it. For 1. there
can be no better reason given for placing of a mystery in thrice dipping for
Baptism, then in dividing of the bread to be receyved in the Supper, into
three parts, as the Papists do for a mystery, among other of their massing
toys. 2. This thrice-dipping for mystery, is so mingled with the true Mystery
of Baptism, that (to all appearance) it is made a part of that Holy Sacrament
3. For man to institute an outward representation (as an Image) of the Holy
Trinity, is a very great praesumption, against the second Commandment. Christ
himself never appointed any such mystical real sign neither can that
incomprehensible mystery be fitly represented by any such triplicitie as is
of man's making. 4. To invocate the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost over the baptized, and then by thrice redipping, or sprinkling, upon man's
pleasure, to signify they are three Persons, is as if one should light a
candle, for the manifesting of something, and then put a bushel over it, for
signifying of the same thing. 5. How can the same three at one and the same
time, signify three Persons, and three days? Can men give manifold disparate
senses to one and the same Ceremonies, as literal, allegorical,
tropologicall, and anagogicall? 5. Why may not as well three Crosses be made
upon the Baptized; for the same mysteries? 6. It could not be of any moment,
for those ancient Bishops, sometime to dip thrice, for signifying of the
Trinity, and some time once, for signifying of the Unity. Seeing Trinity and
Unity are not to be separated in the solemn signification of them, and
Heretics are not confuted with humane signs.

12. Jewel is the next in order. But for so much as neither his words are
quoted, nor the place where they may be found noted, (on either side) but
only according to one English Edition, which I have not, I cannot say much of
them: Yet this I may truly say, that the Rejoinder is put to hard shift, in
opposing of the Repliers answer, when he distinguishes betwixt graces, and
duties, actually performed. For these two are expressed by the same name, of
the Apostle Paul, 2. Cor. 8.1. I do you to wit of the grace of God, bestowed
on the Churches of Macedonia etc. But it seems that humane mystical
Ceremonies are of like nature unto those old legal Ceremonies, which only
signified what men ought to do, but gave not grace to do it: so that they are
to be referred unto the killing letter.

In searching also for the place, in my latin copy of Iuel, Sacramenta
Domini, multit^din^ quadam supo^stitio sarum and puerilium Ceremoniarum commacu
laru^t Pontificij, eisque sanctiones ejusmodi addidot^^^, etc.
I found these words Act. 1. page 23. The Papists have blurred Christ
Sacraments with a number of Superstitiou^ and Childish Ceremonies, and have
added such like Sanctions to them. Now if by the superstitiousnes, and
childishness, which is found in the Popish Cere. before their multitude, and
before their sanctions binding consciences to them, he did not mean their
mystical signification, upon humane institution, I would willingly learn of
the Rejoinder what his meaning was?

13. Beza was by the Def. granted to speak for us. But the Rejoinder (having
now exercised hmself unto confidence in such elusions) will needs have it,
that Bezas phraze only, not his meaning does make for us. Let us therefore hear
his reasons. 1. Beza (says he) condemns all Symbolicall rites, Graevis^ime a
veterihus toties peccatum esse dico, quoties ullas Sacramentales. i.e. verum
spiritualium significativas Ceremonias in Dei Ecclesiam introduxerunt. Ritus
omnes symbolycos semol ex Ecclesia Christiana, in quam nullo unquam jure inve^^
potuerunt, profligari op^r^ere, nec eti manentibus, suam Ecclesia nativa^
pulchritudine restitui posse existimo.
which he calls Sacramental, that is signifying spiritual graces, not
duties. Now Bezas words (ep. 8.) are these: I affirm that so often as the
ancients brought into the Church any Sacramentals i. e. Significative
ceremonies of Spiritual things so often they greivously offended. Withal I
think that all symbolical rites should be once profligited out of the church
whereinto by no right they could ever enter nor as long as they remain can the
Church have her native bewty restored. Here is no mention at all of graces, but
only of spiritual things: and yet the Rejoinder would persuade his reader,
that he says not spiritual duties, but graces. His gloss is naught.
Spiritual things comprehend so well spiritual duties, as graces. How this
reason will be excused, I cannot guess: except perhaps it be answered, that
humane Ceremonies do signify duties as they are carnal, and not as they are
spiritual. It is further to be marked, that Beza there speaks of of such
humane significant Ceremonies, as were in common use among the ancient
Fathers. Now the Rejoinder will not say that they had in common use, so many
humane Sacraments, as Beza notes them to have had significant Ceremonies. 2.
The second reason, by which the Rejoynd. would prove that Beza meant not
simply to condemn all significant Ceremonies, is, because he allows some
Feast-days, confesses the Surplice and kneeling to be in their nature
indifferent, and says that the Cross might sometime of old have had lawful
use. For the former of which, if the words of Beza, had been noted, more might
be said. In the mean time, let this suffize: If Beza did allow of some humane
Feast-days, it may better from this place be gathered, that he did not account
them significant of spiritual things, then it can from them be gathered, that
in this place he did not condemn all such significants of man's making.
Neither does he affirm a significant Surplice to be indifferent. And as for
kneeling, that is more excepted against for other causes, then for instituted
signification.

But in the last, there is odd dealing. For whereas Beza says of the Cross, ut
olim aliquis fu^rit usus ejus etc. which is as much as to say though this were
granted, that there was some use of it of old, the Rejoinder make^h him to say
that there was of old a lawful use of it.

It is enough for any man, to read over Beza his eight and twelf Epistle, for
understanding not only of his meaning, but also of his reasons.

14. Because the Def. made Beza a singular man, in opposing all humane
mystical Ceremonies, the Replier added out of Bellarmines observation (de
effectu Sacram. l. 2. c. 30.) that at least Calvin, Barentius, and Chemnitius
were of the same mind. Now concerning Calvin, enough has been said before.
For the other, mark what the Rejoinder has to say.

The question (says he) in that place of Bellarmine disputed, is of Ceremonies
meritorious, and binding the conscience, out of the case of scandal. And is
this all? Surely then the Rejoinder had no reason to object unto the Abrigers,
and the Replier, abusing the Reader. For (to omit that which in the first
part of our Dispute, has been answered, concerning merit and binding) any one
that looks upon Bellarmine, de effect. Sacr. l. 2. cap. 30. may see, that he
divides the controversy betwixt us and the Papists, into six heads, the
fourth is about binding the conscience, and the fifth about merit, but the third
is whether the Church may appoint new Ceremonies? The Afirmative of this
question Bellarmine proves, from the Feast instituted by Mordechay, and that
of Dedication, Nostra propositic solum assarit, contra Haeriticos, ^icere
Ecclesiae ^ns^ituer^ novas Ceremonias, non ad just^ficandum a pec^at is
mortalibus, sed ad alios fines. cap. 31.
instituted in the Machabees time, etc. which are the Def. and Rejoyners chief
arguments for significant Ceremonies. And professes plainly (as our men do)
Our Proposition is no more but this against heretics, that the church may
appoint new Ceremonies not indeed to justify us from mortal sins but to other
ends. On the Negative part, Bellarmine names Calvin, Brentius, and Chemnitius.
Now the Rejoinder to darken all, confounds the third, and fifth question into
one hoche-poche. Who then does abuse the Reader? Of Calvin, enough has been
said before as also of Brentius, under the title of Witenberge Confession,
Chemnitius only (being altogether passed over by the Rejoinder though he was
not only propounded by the Replier, out of Bellarmine but also in the
Abridgement, page 32,) is here to be represented, in his own words. Yet
concerning Bre^tius first, a few words may be needful. The words of
Wittenburge Confession (before cited) are plain. It is not lawful, to devize
new Ceremonies, to shadow forth the truth already laid open, and brought to
light by the Gospel: as in the day light to set up Candles, to signify the
light of the Gospel, or to carry banners and crosses, to signify the victory
of Christ, thorough his Cross. Of which sort is all the massing attire. Of
this Confession Brentius was the penman: and therefore Bellarm. cites the same
as Brentius his sentence about Ceremonies. The Rejoinder answers 1. that
Bellarm. says only that Brentius reproves the hallowing of water, oil. etc.
consecrated to signify and work supernatural effects: because the mysteries
of faith should not now be shadowed out. De cultu Sanct. l. 3. c. 7. Which to
be nothing so, the very words of Bellarm. will show. for neither out of
Brentins, nor against him, does Bell. make any mention of consecrating such
things to work, but only to signify spiritual effects. Primo benedicuntur
ad significando ispirit^^ ales (...) ut. Nam cinaris aspersio significat
poenit^^tiam, etc.
First they are blessed to signify spiritual operations. For the sprinkling
of the ashes signifies poenance, etc. Nor does the reason of Bre^tius of
adumbration hinder, Neque ob^at r^tio Brentij de adumbratione. Nam istae
significa^i^tes on sunt proprie ^d^mbration^s, sed repr^sentationes externae
I^rum praes^nt^um ^nvisibilium, and spiritu alium, vel etiam re^um praeteri^a
um, quae utilisitmae sunt ^d affectu^ oncitandum.
for those significations are not properly adumbratious, but outward
repraesentations of praesent invisible things, and of things spiritual. Or else
of things past, most useful to stir up the affection. Hence it is plain, that
Brentius is opposed by Bellarm. for houlding the Proposition of this our third.
Argument, that his reason is ours: and that Bellarm. his answer, so well as his
tenet, is that which the Def. and Rejoynd. do maintain against us. 2. A
second answer, or rather objection, is used by the Rej. that Brentius allowed
Lutherun Crosses, and Images, as being a Lutheran. Now it is well known, that
Brentius at the first did write as became a grave Divine: but after broke out
into the Vbiquitary faction, siding against those whom he called Zwinglians
and Calvinists. That which we allege, was written in the name of the Church of
Wittenburge, and so praesented unto the Counsel of Trent, out of his and
others best judgment. If either out of security, or out of faction, he did,
and writ otherwise, after, it ought not to be put in balance against this
Confession. It is no great mervayll, if a Lutheran does cross his own
Doctrine, even about Ceremonies.

For in the same kind they have Luther himself for their example: Nemo (says
Calvin 2. Def. de Sacram. ^^^rius quam Lu^herus covectus ^st in illas nugas,
quo^ tam^n pr^ temporis infirmitate, ^^tinui^ Quod tanta vehementia usus est,
loudabile est, quum ita exigeret necessitas. Quod non ab^^usit (...) ^ predis,
ignosetinus.
No man did more hardly inveigh against those triffles then Luther did, and yet
retained them for the times sake. That when occasion required he was so
vehemente we commend him, but that while he contended against them, he
submitted to the them, we pardon in him.

Something like was the case of Chemnitius, whose words the Rejoinder thought
good to pass over in silence. They are these (de ritib. Sacr. ad Can. 13.)
When Christ himself so instituted the Sacraments that he required them to be
used with such and such rites, Cum ipse filiu Dei Sacramenta ita instituerit.
ut ea certis institutis ritibus praeceperit administraeri, valde ardua est
question, an hominibus permissum sit, alio^ praeterca, et quidem mult^s ac
varios ritus quocunque confilio supperadder^: quasi Ceremoniae illae qua in
administratione Sacramentorum Divinitus institutae sunt, non satis sunt vel
idonea, vel sufficientes Institutioni Divinae sicut nihil detrahendum, ita
etiam nihil addendum est, Quod vero bratendunt, per illos ritus ab hominibus
additos multa pie and utiliter significari, moner^, and doceri, ad illud
responderi potest, figuras propriat esse Veteri^ Testamenti, quae vero in Novo
Testamento Christus mo^eri ac doceri voluit non umbtis, sed luce Verbi, tradi
ac proponi voluit Et de Verbi, non antem de figuratum ab hominibus inventarum,
efficacia, habemus prom (...) nem: quos ve^^ ritus ve^bo adhiberi voluit, eos
ipse instituit. etc.
it is a very hard question whether it be lawful for men to add other and that
so manyover and above. As if what rites Christ himself prescribed were either
not enough, or not fit enough. In divine institutions as we must take nothing
from, so we must add nothing to them. But whereas they say by such rites many
things are proffitably signified, we answer that belonged to the State of the
Old Testament, but what Christ in the New Test. would have learned, must be
taught with the light of the word, not by shadows. And we have a promise of
the force of the word; but not of the efficacy of shadows devised by men. And
what rites he would have used by the word, those he himself appointed, etc.

There was some cause, why the Rejoinder did not care to insist on these words.
For Chemnitius makes it a very hard thing to justify humane significant
Ceremonies in Gods worship. The Rejoinder says, it is as easy as to justify
writing by Characters. Chemnitius makes them additions to Gods Institution.
Nothing less (says the Rej.) no more then a Cabinet, wherein a Jewel is kept,
is an addition to it. Chemnitius judged them repugnant to the New Testament.
The Rej. says, that there is manifest allowance for them, and authority left
unto men for instituting of them: (as forsooth) in those words of Order,
Decency, and Aedification.

15. The Replier added unto the witnesses aforesaid, Iunius and Daneus. But
concerning Daneus, we have already considered what the Rej. had to except.
Iunius only remains: whose words were quoted out of his animadversions upon
Bell. de cultu Sanctorum, lib. 3. cap. 7. an. 12. Here the Rej, rouseth up
himself, as if he had gotten a great advantage, putting on such confidence, or
rather forth such shows of it, as if it had been mere folly in the Repl. to
make mention of Iunius. His rejoinder therefore is to be considered in all the
parts of it. 1. First, he concludes that the Repl. is no wise man, in not
telling them, to what objection, or assertion Iunius does there answer:
because (forsooth) the Repl. himself had said, it was no wisdom for any man,
to take up an answer made to an objection, before he considers the assertion
against which the objection is made. As if it were all one to consider the
assertion, and to tell them what it is. Is not this a fine consequence? 2. He
attributes unto the Repl. a Sophistical wit, in concealing, that the
assertion of Bell. by Iunius opposed, was, that the Church may of her power,
consecrate creatures, to signify, and work supernatural effects, etc. But
from hence nothing can be gathered, for the advantage of the Def. and Rej.
except it appear, that Iunius did only speak of the working, and not
distinctly of the signifiyng, which Bell. would have given unto those
Ceremonies: which how false it is, shall praesently appear. 3. He notes a
shameful falsification of Iunius his words, in the translation of them.
Iunius his words are: Homo non potest creaturas ad significationem adhibere.
The Translation is: Humane Ceremonies cannot be lawfully used for
signification. Where is that great falsification, which drew from the Rej. Are
you not ashamed? or can you not blush? The Rej. his own translation of the
same words, is: No man-can lawfully apply things to signification. He must
discover the mystical difference betwixt using for signification, and applying
to signification, before he can cast such shame upon the Repl. and none upon
the Rej. 4. To show Iunius in his own posture, and the mis-reporting Repl. in
his own colors. The Rejoinder translateth that wholle passages of Iunius, and
notes upon it, first, that Iunius speaks of consecrating ceremonies. To
which I answer, that in the words, as they are by the Rej. translated, he
expressly condemns all applijnge to signification. And if consecration were
included therein, I hope the Rej. will not disavow consecrating of Churches,
Churche-yardes, Altars, etc. Secondly, he observes, that Iunius does
professedly sever the point of signification, from that of efficacy. As if the
Repl. had confounded them, and not rather distinctly insisted upon
^ignification only which Iunius does as distinctly and professedly condemn,
as efficacy, Nay it is the Rej. his common fault, that where the Papists
speak of efficacy and signification, and our Divines distinctly answer of
both, he will have no answ^r, no not those of Calvin, Brentius, Chemnitius,
Daneus, nor this of Iunius, to belong unto signification distinctly, and by it
self. In the third place, he tells us, that Iunius in the two next
annotations, does allow voluntary significant Ceremonies. Let it therefore be
considered, that Iunius in the thirteenth annotation, insinuates at the least
his doubt, whether any voluntary significations can proceed from good: a bono,
si forte. 2. He says they proceeded from simplicity, and turned to
superstition. Which phrases of his, he so interprets other where, that it may
easily appear, he did not allow that which here he calls simplicity. For
cap. 5. annot. 15. he calls it vanity, in opposition to the simp^icitie of
Christ. And in the second book, de reliquijs and imaginibus, cap. 27. annot.
29. he calls it plainly simple superstition. In the fourteenth annotation,
he mainteyneth this assertion: In rebus divinis, and sacris ad Ecclesiam
pertinentibus, mul te adumbrationes in Ecclesia recte adhibentur, nisi quas
instituit Deus.
In divine things no shadows are rightly used in the Church but what God has
instituted. But (says the Rej.) he does by name allow standing in prayer, on
the Lords days, as a significant Ceremony, as also holybread: annot. 10.
Whereas Iunius testifies plainly, in the 9. note, immediately before, how he did
only excuse, as comparatively tolerable, such ancient Ceremonies of the
Fathers. Primum suit tolerabile: Patrum simplicitatem piam excusamus. So that
Iunius being seen in his own posture, and the reporters in their colors, let
the Reader judge, where is the cause of shame and blushing?

SECT. 5. Concerning the wrong, that is done to Gods Sacraments, by humane
sigmificant Ceremonies.
1. THe Argument depends on this: that humane Ceremonies appropriated to Gods
wo^ship, if they be ordained to teach any spiritual duty, by their mystical
signification, usurp a chief part of the nature of Sacraments. This was in the
Abr. backed with many testimonies: which the Rej. having before eluded (so well
as he could) here contenteth himself to say, they are counterfeit, forced, or
forged stuff: The contrary whereof has been declared. Now for the naked Arg.
he affirms it to have no sienws which must be tried by the answers, and
defense of them.

The Def. first answers, by a distinction, betwixt the signification of grace
conferred, and the signification of man's duty, the former whereof he makes
Sacramental, but not the later. To the which was replied, that Sacr. also do
signify the duty of man toward God. This (says the Rej.) is not true: bec.
Sacr. do only implie that duty. But I would know of him, 1. how the Sacr.
as signs, do implie that which they do not signify, all so well as our
sign of a cross does signify any duty? The aerall cross does (though
very untowardly) represe^t the woodde^ cross, whereon our Savior was
crucified, and so by a trope, Christ crucified: and then implies our duty to
Christ. And do not Sacraments signify Christ, and our duty toward him so
well as this? 2. I ask,

If Baptism do not signify our wholle mortification, vivification, and
putting on of Christ? 3. If the Sacraments do only by themselves, implie
these duties, yet that implication being explicated in their administration,
what use is there of putting that explicated duty under a bushel, or bed of
man's making?

2. The Rejoinder not trusting to that denial, says further, that if the
Sacraments did signify man's duty, yet that is not a chief part of their
nature. To which I may reply, that if it were not a chief part of their
nature, but a part only, yet it is presumption for men to take any part of the
Sacraments, and set it upon other things, at their own pleasure. But seeing by
the nature of the Sacraments, is meant their office, and use, and there be many
offices and uses of them, some of which come not so near their chiefest office
as this signification does, it may with good reason be termed a chief part.
Calvin (Consens. de re Sacram.) says thus: Sacraments are notes and badges of
our Christian profession and incitements to thankfulness, Exercises of piety,
and bonds under our hands to tie us to Gods service, but their chief end is to
signify and ^igure the grace of God to us. Sacramenta no^ae sunt ae ^essara
profession^s Christianae, five societatis, item ad gratiatum actionum incitam
enta, pietatis denique exercitia, and syngrapha ad 'Dei cultum nos obligantes:
finis tamen praecipuus est, ^ratiam Domi^^^ testari, repraesentare, atque
obsignare.


Now though this last be the chief office, yet among the former one is more
chief then another, and which of them more chief, then this of signifying
spiritual duties with obligation to the performance of them?

3. To prove that the Sacraments signify moral duties (which first the Def.
and in defense of him, the Rejoinder denies) it was alleged, by the Repl. that
the wholle Covenant is in them signed and sealed, betwixt God and man in which
Covenant man's duty, thorough grace is there professed, and represented.
Whereupon the Rejoinder 1. concludes, that such signs as do neither sign
nor seall the covenant of grace, cannot partake the office, or special nature
of Sacraments. Whereby he gains nothing but his own ideal shadow. 2. He
gathers, that unless signifying, without sealing, be a more principal part
of the nature of Sacraments, then sealing, such signs as communicate with them
only in signifying, do not participat any chief part of their nature. Which
is as mere non sense, as if one should say, that unless teaching, without
sealing be a more principal part of Sacraments, the^ sealing, then the
preaching of the doctrine which in Sacraments is signified and sealed, does
not participat any chief part of their nature. 3. He answers, that the
Sacraments do confirm our obligation unto sanctimonie, in general, but not
signify any moral duty in particular. Here then is the mystery: the
Sacraments to confi^me (by signification) all our duties, but not this, or that
duty.

If our Convocation had been of the Counsel, when Sacraments were appointed
they would (as it seems) have made them more perfect. But this is certain,
our Savior meant to put a difference, betwixt the old A. B. C. and the new
manner of t^aching fitting for riper years: and therefore did not s^o^ll out
every letter concerning our duty, in signs, as of oulde, but give us the
sum in a few signs. Whosoever therefore goes about to multiply significant
signs, crosses the very intention which was respected, in the institution of
two Sacraments only. Beside, the Cross it self, does not signify our duty
of constant fighting under Christ, in pa^ticular, against this or that
temptation of sin, the world, or the Devil, but only in general, so that
by this reason, we should, or may have as many significant Ceremonies, as there
be particular temptations to be resisted. Whither shall we come, at length, by
walking in this Ceremonial way?

4. The second Argument, to the same purpose, by the Repl. alleged, was, that
the name Sacrament, as it signifies an oath, or obligation, does import, that
the Sacraments signify our duty to God. To this the Rejoinder answers, that
the Sacraments do in deed implie, but not represent any moral duty. Now let
any reasonable man judge, whether dipping under the water, and rising up
again, or taking of food for strength, and growth, does not more represent
spiritual duties, then making a Cross with ones finger, in the air?

5. The third reason mentioned, was taken from the name Eucharist, notifiing
thankfulness, and the taking of the same, in remembrance of Christ. The
Rejoinder his answer is, that the word Eucharist is no Sacrament, but a term
brought in by men to put them in mind of their duty in receyving it. But that
word does notify the nature of the Sacrament, at least in the judgeme^t of al
Divines, that have in this meaning used the term, though it be not a
Sacrament. And they are more then that the Rej. his judgment can
counter-ballance. Yet if significant Ceremonies be like unto words and
characters, as the Rejoinder formerly maintained, that very word must needs be
a Sacrament, or a significant sign of a Sacrament: because it was brought in
to put men in mind of their duty in receyving, as the Rej. speaks. He
adds 2. that there is no element, nor action of that Sacrament, so
particularly repraesenting thankfulness, as kneeling does reverence, or
humility, Where first, he makes kneeling a significant Ceremony, which
hitherto he has seemed to deny. 2. I answer, that the very action of
receyving so great a gift, in a cheerful humble manner, does repraesent both
thankfulness, and humility, so far as Christ would have it repraesented by
signs. The very celebration of a great benefit receyved, is a sign of
thankfulness. Otherwise, let the Rejoinder tell us, what repraesentation of
thankfulness was in the Passover, for that benefit of passing over the
Israelites houses, when the firstborn of the Egyptians were slain?

6. Instance was given (by the Replier) that both sanctity, and constancy,
which are the things ^ignified by Surplice, and Cross, are signified in
Baptism. The Rej. his answer is, that they are not barely or only signified
in Baptism, as duties, nor by any distinct sign repraesented. As if this were
the question, and not this: if Sacraments do signify moral duties!
Certainly, if Sacraments do signify these virtues as graces and duties (as is
proved, and also confessed) no Christian need desire to have them ^ignified
over again barely and only as duties, no more then after an instrument made
betwixt the Lord of Manner, and his Tenent, containing the conditions of both
parts, the tenent should seek for a new instrument, signifijng his conditions
a part: and not only so, but after that his conditions had been expressed
generally, that he should keep all the land in good culture, according as he
found it, he should seek for one instrument about the woods, another for the
^arable land, another for the meadows, another for the pastures, and another
for the broom feilds, or for every aker one, and that not from the Lord of the
manner, but from some Justice of peace, or high Constable of the Hundred.
Neither is it a thing profitable, for Christians to remember their duty,
without remembrance of Gods grace thereto apperteyning.

7. Against mysticall-morall Ceremonies, of humane institution, the Repl.
brought this Arg. in Mr. Baines his words: To be a teacher of my
understand^^g, and an exciter of my devotion, are such effects, as require
virtue, inhaerent, or assistant, to those things which should be causes of
them. But no sign of man's divizing, has any such virtue, in it, or with it.
For then it must come either from the word of creation, or from Gods after
institution.

But from neither of these, have the signs of man's divizing any such virtue.
Therefore no sign, of man's divizing, can be a teacher of mine understanding, or
an exciter of my devotion.

This the Rejoinder confuteth first, with skornefull words, as a sickly
childish, and long some objection. After, he answers, that our monitorie
Ceremonies, are only external occasions, and objects, whereby the mind of man
works upon it self, not causes working by some virtue in them.

Where 1. observe, how he mangleth and marreth the Argument, that he may
master it: the words are, that such effects require virtue inhaerent, or
assistant: he interprets them only of virtue in them, i. e. inhaerent,
leaving out assistant: and yet dares affirm, that upon this fiction of virtue
in them (which is his own fiction) the wholle objection is builded. 2. He
makes our Ceremonies to be only occasional objects, and no causes: whereas
every instituted sign is a means, and so a cause of that effect for which it
is appointed, as Logic teaches. And if they were mere occasions of conceyving
that which they signify, then a white Surplice would not prove half so
significant a Ceremony of Ministers sanctity, as a white Cock, especially
when it croweth, nor an aeriall Cross, so significant, as a Gallows. Beside,
if our Ceremonies be occasional objects only, then no man is tied to regard
the whiteness of his Ministers Surplice, thereby to think of his sanctity,
any more then he is bound to regard the fowlnesse and soil of it, when for a
long time, it is unwashed, and he also uses it in stead of a handkerchif,
about his nose, thereby to think of the imperfection, spots, and blots, which
are found in Ministers disposition, and conversation. Concerning, Letters,
Characters, and Giblets, mentioned here again by the Rejoinder, answer was
made before, in the first section of this Chapter.

8. To like purpose, the Repl. used this reason: If humane inventions be such
moral admonishers, in spiritual duties, then our consciences are bound to
subject themselves to their admonitions, and so to those mortal men, who made
them admonishers. The Rejoinder his answer is like his former: humane
significant Ceremonies have no virtue of teaching the understanding, or
exciting the devotions of me^: but only external objects tending by their
signification to those uses, to the use of which, the consciences of men are
not bound simply but only collaterally, and for another thing. In which
answer, 1. there is a strange mystery confessed: that humane Ceremonies are
appointed to do that, which they have neither antecedently, nor consequently,
any virtue to do. 2. External objects are made opposite unto admonishers with
virtue to admonish: as if no external objects (as Baptism administered to a
child, before mine eyes) had any virtue of admonishing 3. As strange a
distinction is made betwixt simply, and collaterally, and betwixt simply, and
for another thing: which are such sustian stuff, that there is no fear, they
should satisfy any but such as take terms without reason^ or right reason.

9. Another reason of the Repliers, was, that every teaching sign, of public
use in the Church, ought often to be interpreted, in preaching, and also
defended if they be called in question, in the same preachinges, which kind of
preaching, upon Cross and Surplice, were very absurd, especially in those
Parishes, that scarce have Quarter-Sermons. The Rejoinder answers 1. that the
Cross having interpretation with it, need not be interpreted: and that the
Surplice signifies, he does not well know what, but such a thing as may be
soon taught. Now that which he says of Cross, he may as well say of the
Sacraments, that because in their administration, they have the interpretation
goeing along with them, therefore no Minister need much preach of them. But
indeed, there is special need, that the very interpretation which goes alonge
with the use of the Cross, should be well interpreted: because few or none,
either of the people, or of the Crossers themselves do understand, how it has
that signification which the Convocation has laid upon it, any more, then any
other toy, which may easily be devized by the same Convocation: as if they
should put a straw into the childs hand, in stead of a spear, to signify,
that he should manfully fight, against all enemies of Christianity. And of the
Surplices signification, seeing the Rejoinder himself is not yet certainly
informed, what it is, there must needs be great use of much preaching about it,
first to declare certainly (if it may be found) what it signifies, secondly
to show the ground of that signification, or authority from whence it comes,
lawful, and thirdly to urge it upon the consciences of those that are to make
use of that signification. His second answer is a bundle of phrases: and so let
it pass. Only let it be noted. 1. that he calls it fury, to charge our
Ceremonies of superstition and yet in sobriety, mainteyned before, that those
which count them unlawful, are superstitious brethren. 2. that he determines
absolutely, upon his refuted grounds, that we have stopped our own mouths,
from preaching the Gospel, by calumniations. Whereas all England knows, that
those which never preached, or writ against the Ceremonies, have their mouths
stopped by his Prelates, though they only profess, they cannot use them, by
reason of scandal, of which number, Doctor Burges himself has been one. 3. He
would persuade the world, that some of us place all religion in opposing
Ceremonies by speaking and writing: which is greater calumny, then any he
charged us with, or then he can prove of any one. 4. He affirms us to be of
all men he ever knew, the most impatient of opposition, and so most partial,
and Pharisaically proud as if his Prelates were very patient toward those that
oppose their Ceremonies, no way so partial, nor drew any thing from the
Pharisees, or as if himself in this Rejoinder, had not showed more of these
virtues, then any other. 5. He shows where the store lies: in rooting of
them out of the hearts of their people, by clamours, and calumnies. We cannot
then defend our practice, but with clamours and calumnies, nor answer for our
hearts, without rooting them out of peoples hearts.

10. For the further manifestinge of the useless signification of our
significant Ceremonies, the Repl. appealed to the consciences of the best
conforminge Christiansin England, whether ever they found themselves truly
stirred up to holiness, by the Surplice, or to constancy in faith, by the
Cross? The Rejoinder answers, that no man is stirred up by them, as by
causes, but only as by the sight of the creatures, or other memorialls: of
which use if men deprive themselves, it is their prejudice or negligence. Now
of causes there was no mention in the quaere. And the question being made of the
best conforming Christians (among whom the Rejoinder himself is one)
prejudice, and negligencie of some, make up no answer. The truth is, that he
himself could not say, out of his conscience, that ever he felt such motions
within him, by occasion of a Surplice, or Cross, and therefore baulked the
question. Yet this is here to be observed: that by the Rejoinder his
confession, our sacred Ceremonies are no more admonishers unto spiritual
duties, then any creature of God, i. e. then any butterfly is. And are not
then our Ceremonies very sacred, or religious. Or is our representative
Churches institution, of any more force, or worth, then any childs, that
catches butter-flies?

11. It was added also which by experience, it is found) that in some one
Congregation, where these Ceremonies have not been used, more holiness, and
constancy of faith has appeared, then in many Cathedral Churches, where they
were never omitted. The Rejoinder his answer is, that where other helps stand
equal, there is no difference, save only in a Pharisticall opinion of those,
who count their very opposition of Ceremonies an high point of devotion, and
stiffenesse therein, constancy in the faith.

Behold the man, that even now complained of clamours, and calumnies. The
reasonable part of this answer is, that in Cathedral Churches, other helps
(as diligent preaching, catechizing, admonishing, directing in Christian
duties) are not aequall or answerable to that which is found in diverse
Congregations where the Ceremonies have not been used: otherwise there were no
difference. Now heerin, 1. he confuteth himself, in confessing that his
Prelates, even those whose admirable wisdom he extolleth, though they have
power enough, do not provide the chief helps of edification, for their
Churches, aequall to those that are found in poor Congregations, which
receyve not their Ceremonial helps, and yet will not suffer those poor
Congregations to enjoy their helps. For do they not by this, place a high
point of devotion in their Ceremonial helps? 2. How can this stand with
reason: where other helps are aequall, there is no difference? Certainly, if
our Ceremonies be helps to Edification (as the Def. and Rejoinder maintain)
then where other helps are aequall, the Cathedral Churches have a great
advantage in helps, above other, that want those Ceremonies. Nay one
Cathedral Church exceeds another in this kind: as Durrham, for Ceremonies,
does Chester, and Lichefeild.

12. Because the Def. (to make way for an injurious accusation) changed the
phraze used in the Abrigeme^t, a chief part of the Sacraments nature, into
another more obnoxious unto exception, the chief part, the Repl. justly noted
this, as no plain dealing. The Rejoinjoynder (being loath to leave any of the
Def. his words un-mainteyned) answers, that the Sacraments have but two
parts, signification, and obsignation: and therefore if signification be a
principal part, it is also the principal part: so that the Defend (says he)
dealt heerin fairly, and pressed us with such words as our Argument requires.

But 1. who authorized the Defend. to change the terms of our Argument, and
then press us with his changelinges? Let him reserve such fair dealing for
other occasions, when it may pass with less notice taken of it. 2. What does
the Rejoinder mean, to imitate the Defend. in attributing unto us, that we make
mere signification, without any qualification or limitation, either the or a
chief part of the Sacrament? The Abrigement says only, that such
signification as is ordained mystically to teach and admonish us of spiritual
duties, is a chief part of the Sacrament. 3. Mr. Hooker, (lib. 5. page 3.10.)
says that there are great store of properties belonging to the Sacraments* as
that they are bounds of our obedience, obligations to mutual charity,
provokation to godliness, preservations from sin, memorialls of great
benefits, marks of distinction from strangers etc. How then can the Rejoinder
so resolutely determine of two only offices, which belong to them? 4. If all
essential parts of the Sacrament may be reduced to these two, yet the lesser
of these may be called a principal part, without any prejudice to the other,
in respect of those me^, which make accidental, circumsta^tiall, and improper
parts of Gods worship, and so of his Sacraments, as the Def. and Rejoinder upon
every occasion do shift off Arguments with those terms. The rest of this
section (beside words of no weight) conteyneth nothing which has not been in
the former passages, sufficiently cleared.

SECT. 6. Concerning Jewish Ceremonies.
1. IN the Abrigement, after the former reason, now mainteyned, this was
brought in: that In the time of the Law (when God saw it good to teach his
Church by significant Ceremonies) none might be brought into, or receyved in
the worship of God, but such only as the Lord himself did institute. Ergo.
And after that, this: It is much less lawful, for man to bring significant
Ceremonies into Gods worship now, then it was under the Law. For God has
abrogated his own (not only such as prefigured Christ, but such also, as
served by their signification, to teach moral duties) so as now (without
great sin) none of them can be continued in the Church, no not for
signification. Upon which last ground, they infer thus: If those Ceremonies
which God himself ordained to teach his Church by their signification, may
not now be used, much less may those which man has devized.

Now the wisdom of the Def. was, to pass over the former grounds, and only
to insist upon this last inference derived from them. But let us see what he,
and the Rejoinder have to say of that.

2. About this inference, many testimonies of great Divines, were alleged in
the Abrigement: all which the Def. passes by, as not worthy answer: for
which, he was challenged by the Replier. The Rejoinder answers 1. that this
is wranglinge, spoken not out of conscience, but out of a spirit of
contradiction, etc. To which I answer nothing. But that which the Def.
neglected, the Rejoinder takes to supply, least we should brag, as it
pleases him to phrasifie. See therefore how he discharges that which he
undertaketh. 1. The Nicen counsel (says he) is twice falsified: first; that it
is supposed to condemn significant Ceremonies, by man devized, upon this
reason, that God had abolished his own, and secondly, that the Council is
affirmed to condemn such Ceremonies at all.

It seems the Rejoinder has more skill (about this cause) in multiplying
falsities, then in dividing of them from trueths. For the Nicen Council was
brought in as speaking for one proposition: and the Rejoinder makes two false
assertions of that one simple axiom. Beside the words of that Council, or
Constantine, speaking for it, are (in the Abrigement) only brought in as
testifying this* that the old Ceremonies of the law, being abrogated by God,
cannot (without sin) be now continued in the Church for signification. In
stead of this, the Rejoinder faineth two other propositions, and then faith,
that they are two falsifications: which if they be, let him (who is the coiner
of them) see how he can excuse them. The words of Constantine are: It seemed
unworthy to celebrate the Passover with imitation of the Jewish custom. Let no
(such) thing be commune to Christians, with the Jews. We have receyved
another way from our Savior, a more lawful and convenient of our holy
Religion. This is pat to the purpose, for which it was alleged.

2. The testimony of all the rest (says the Rej.) are perverted. 3. Sundry
of the witnesses are known to have allowed our, and all, some significant
Ceremonies. It is a shame therefore for men gloring of synceritie, in refusing
the Ceremonies, thus to leave all synceritie, in alleging of Authors. In which
never any protestant writers abused the world so much, as the Abrigement, and
this cavilling Repl. Now 1. for the perverting of all testimonies, it is
affirmed only, but not proved. Only some general suppositions are brought
in, to support the accusation, all which have formerly been confuted. 2. Among
those which he says were known to allow of our Ceremonies, he names D.
Humphry, of whom Cambden in his history of Q. Elizabeth, observes, that he
(though very learned and worthy) never was raised to Ecclesiastical
preferments, because he allowed not our Ceremonies etc. Harding also objecteth
him by name, with Mr. Samson, as one that had rather loose all, then use our
Ceremonies, and Iuel (Apol. c. 5. div. 1.) does not deny, but defend it:
besides how well he allowed of our Ceremonies, let all men judge by a certain
letter of his here printed, written to the Bishops, the Copy bearing this
inscription.

A letter sent to the Bishops from Doct. Laur. Humphrey president of Magdalen
College in Oxford and Reader of Divinity lecture there.
YOur Lordships letters directed unto us, by our vice-Chancelour, although
written in general words, yet has so hearted our adversaryes, that we are
now no more co^pted brethren and friends but enemies: and sith the old mass
attyres be so straightly commanded, the mass is self is shortly looked for. A
sword now is put into the enemies hands of these that under Q. Mary have drawn
it for Popery, and under pretense of good order are ready without cause to
bewreck their popish anger upon us, who in this will use extremity, in other
laws of more importance partiali^y, I would have wished My Lords rather privy
admonition then open expulsion, yea I had rather have received wounds of my
brother, then kisses of mine enymye, if we had privily in a Co^venient day
resigned, then neither should the punisher have been noted of cruelty, neither
the offender of temerity, neither should the pap. have accused (in their
seditious book) protestants of contention. Religion requires naked Christ, to
be peached, professed, Glorified that Graviora legis, by the faithful
ministrye of feedinge pastors, should be furthered, and after that orders
tending to edification, and not to destruction, advanced, and finally, the
spouses friends should by all means be cherished favored and defended and not
by counterfite and false intruders, condemned and overborne, and defaced. But
alas a man qualified with inward gifts for lack of outward shows is punished,
and a man only outwardly confornable, inwardly clean unfurnished, is let
alone, yea exalted, the painful preacher for his labor is beaten, the
unpreaching Prelate, offending in the greater is shot free, the learned man
without out his cappe is afflicted, the capped man without learning is not
touched. Is not this directly to break Gods laws? Is not this the Pharisees
vae? It not this to wash the outside of the Cup, and leave the inner part
uncleansed? Is not this to praeferre mint and anis to faith and Judgment and
Mercy? Man's tradition before the ordinance of God? Is not this in the school
of Christ, and in the Method of the Gospel aplayn disorder? has not this
praeposterous order a woe? That the Catechism should be read is the word of
God. it is the order of the Church, to preach is a necessary point of a Priest,
to make quarterly sermons is law, to see poor men of the poor men's box
relieved, vagabonds punished, Parishes Communicate. Roode lofts pulddowne,
monuments of superstition defaced service done and heard, is scripture, is
statute, that the oath to the Q. Majesty should be offered and taken, is
required as well by ordinance of God as of man. These are plain matters
necessary, Christian and profitable. To wear a Surplys, a Coape, or a cornerd
cappe is (as you take it) an accidental thing, a devise only of man, and as
we say a doubt or question in Divinity. Sith now these substantial points
are inall places of this realm almost neglected the offendes either nothing or
little rebuked, and sith the transgessors have no color of conscience, it is
sin and shame to proceed against us first, having also reasonable defense of
our doings. Charity My Lo. would first have taught us, equity would first have
spared us, brotherlinesse would have warned us, pity would have pardoned us,
if we had be^ found trespassers God is my witness who is the beholder of all
faith. I think of your Lordsh. honorably, esteeming you as brethren,
reverencing you as Lords and Masters of the congregation: alas why have not you
some good opinion of us, why do you trust known adversaries? and misttrust
your bretkren? we confess one faith of Jesus, we preach one doctrine, we
acknowledge one ruler upon earth, in all things (saving in this) we are of your
judgment, shall we be used thus for a surplus? shall Brethren persecute
Brethren for a forked Cappe, devised singularly of him that is our enemy? Now
shall we fight for the Popish Coat, his head and body being banished? shall
the controversy so fall out in conclusion, that for lack of this necessary
furniture (as it is esteemed) laborers shall lack wages? Churches preaching?
shall we not teach? shall we not exercise our talents as God has commanded us.
Because we will not want that which our enemies have desired, and that by the
appointement of friends Oh that ever I saw this day that our adversaries should
laugh to see bethren fall together to the ears! Oh that Ephraim should thus
eat up Manasses, Manasses Ephraim. My Lords before this take place consider the
cause of the Church, the Crests and triumphs of Anti Christ. The laugher of
Satan, the sorrow and sighs of a number, the mysery and sequel of the tragedy:
I write with zeal without proof of my matter at this time present, but not
without knowledge of it, nor without grief of mind. God move your spirit at
this praesent to fight against Carnem, Circumcisionem, imo Concisionem, against
literam et legem, which principally is now regarded and rewarded. Speak I
humbly beseech you to the Queens Majesty, to the Chancelour, and to Mr.
Secretary and the rest, that these proceedings may sleep, that England may
understande your zealous mind toward the worship of God, your love toward
the poor welwillers, your hate toward the professed enemies your unity in
true conformity, the other neither be needful now, neither exacted in any good
age. So shall the little flock be bound to you, so shall the great sheepherd
be good to you.


By this we may judge of some others, whom he only names.

3. That all allowed some ^ignificant Ceremonies, is manyfestly proved false,
in the former allegations. 4. We glory no more of synceritie, in refusing the
Ceremonies, then the Rejoinder does in using of them. 5. It is no abusing of
the world, to allege general sentences of men condemning that which they seem
to allow in their practice. If it were, I can name one protestant writer, who
has more abused the world, in this kind, then any, or all of us: and that is
no other, then our Def. D. Morton. For he has written many books of good use,
against the Papists, the chief grace whereof is, that (having a good Library,
and using it with deligence, and discretion) he has alleged many thousands of
their own testimonies, for the disproving of those errors and superstitions,
which the same Authors, in other places, or at least in their practice, do
apparently either allow, or admit of. This is the wordy answer which the
Rejoinder gives unto the testimonies alleged in the Abr. (page 33.34.) for to
praevent our bragging: now let us try if the Argument naked of testimonies,
will not stand.

3. The Argument is this: If those Ceremonies which God himself ordained, to
teach his Church, by their signification, may not be used, much less may
those which man has devized, The Def. his first answer is, that the use of
some Jewish rite, without any Jewish opinion, as Circumcision, and Easter. In
which answer nothing is found, that touches any term of the Argument. Yet
upon the occasion of it, the Def. was asked how a Jewish Rite, can be used,
without some part of a Jewish opinion?

The Rejoynd. answers, materially, but not formally, and in use, But he
should have remembered that the Argument is of significant rites using, and the
Def. his answer is of Jewish significant rites using: so that in his grant,
there must needs be granted some formal use for signification. Beside, in all
using of humane mystical rites, upon due consideration, there is some part of a
Jewish opinion. I prove it thus: All they that consideratly use carnal,
beggarly rudiments, in Gods service, have this opinion, that such rites as the
Jewish (set praefiguration aside which no Christian ever admitted) are good in
the Christian Church. But all that so use humane mystical rites, use carnal,
beggarly rudiments, in Gods service. Ergo. The assumption I prove thus: All
that use mystical rites, whereto there is no Spirit annexed by God, as unto the
Evangelical institutions of the new Testament, use carnal beggarly rudiments,
in Gods service. But they which use humane mystical rites, use mystical
rites, whereto there is no Spirit annexed by God. Ergo. The Proposition cannot
be denied, until a better definition of such rites be given: nor the
assumption, except an Evangelical promise can be showed of Spiritual blessing
upon the use of humane mystical rites.

Concerning Circumcision.
4. Because the Def. for an example of a Jewish rite, lawful for Christians to
use, named Circumcision, the Repl. concluded, that belike, he houldeth
Circumcision, as it is used under Prester John, to be lawful.

The Rej. therefore resolves us, that He does so: and also chalengeth the Repl.
for saying nothing to disprove him. Upon this provocation, it is necessary to
say something against these patrones of Circumcision. Where it is to be
marked, that the quaestion is of Ecclesiastical Ceremonies devized by man for
signification of moral duties; whether it be lawful, for a Church
repraesentative, (such as our Convocation) to appoint, and urge Circumcision,
in this kind, and to this purpose, upon those Christians who are under their
power?

5. Now of this quaestion in the formal state of it, I find not, that scarce
any doubt was among understanding Christians, before this Def. and Rej. being
urged thereto by direct consequence from their principles, have now found it
necessary, to mainteyne the affirmative part, for defense of our beggarly
Ceremonies.

There was some difference betwixt Hierome, and Augustine, about observing of
legal Rites, and in special about Circumcision (as appears out of the
Epistles which passed betwixt them, yet exstant) but both of the^ agreed on
this, that as well to Jew, as Gentile, all religious use of Circumcision, for
Ceremony, etc. is now after due publication of the Gospel, unlawful or
deadly. All that have written since, agree about the same truth, except
Caietan in one place; who is forsaken and opposed therein by all Papists, the
Jesuits themselves not excepted. Our Divines are so confident of this, that
from the unlawfulness of Circumcision, they usually dispute against other
humane Ceremonies: and the Jesuits in answering, are forced to fly unto this
(which must be our Def. and Rej. their answer) that the Ceremonies of the old
Testament, are not absolutely abrogated, but only in regard of their special
manner, end, and intention. Greg. Valent. tom. 2. disp. 7. quaest. 7. punct. 7.
Bellar. de effect. Sacr. l. 2. c. 32. which answer is called by D. Fulke (ag.
Saund. of images, page 672.) a beastly doctrine.

But because it were an infinite and needless labor, to allege the testimonies
which may be easily alleged, against Ceremonial Circumcision, among
Christians, as unlawful, I will pass on to reasons against it; that the Rej.
may no more say, You say nothing to disprove it.

6. First, The only place, in the New Testament, by which all Divines (as the
Rejoinder speaks, page 75.) prove a power in the Church to constitute
Ceremonies, is 1. Cor. 14.26.40. Edification, decency, order. But the Apostle,
in that chapter, does no way give leave either unto our, or any other Church
to constitute Circumcision for a Ceremony. Therefore no Church has power to
constitute Circumcission for a Ceremony. For Order, and Decency, no man in
his right wits will say that Circumcision comes under their notion, And as
for Edification, it has been formerly showed, that it does not require new
instituted significant Ceremonies, much less a rejected or abrogated
Ceremony, but only is the end of orderly and decent carriage of things
instituted by God.

7. Secondly, no part of the partition wall, betwixt Jews and Gentiles, may by
any Convocation-house, or other Church be reared up again. But Circumcision
is a part, nay a principal cornerstone of that partition wall, howsoever it
be interpreted, so it be appointed. Ergo.

8. Thirdly, Circumcision cannot be esteemed more lawful to be instituted for
a significant Ceremony, then a Paschall lamb: and they two being brought into
the Church, what shall hinder (if it please our Convocation house) but the
greatest part of the old Ceremonial law, may in like manner follow? For the
Rejoinder cap. 2. sect. 6. acknowlegeth no other limits, or bounds for number
of such Ceremonies, then the judgment of those to whose discretion it
belongs to judge thereof.

9. In the fourth place, It is not lawful for any Church to impose
Ceremonial burdens upon Christians. But Circumcision is a great burden to them
upon whom it is imposed: as our Convocation men would confess, if it were
imposed upon them. Ergo.

10. Fifthly, It is not lawful for any Church, or Convocation-house, to usurp
authority over the bodies of men, especially unto blood. But appointing of
Circumcision is usurping of authority over men's bodies, to the shedding of
blood. Ergo. Add unto this, that the Convocation-house may better appointe,
that all English men, should have their lips, or their ears pared, or their
ears nailed to their Parish-Churche door, for signification of that duty,
which they are bound to perform with their ears and lips, then such
Circumcision as is in use with the Jews, and Prester-Iohn. These things
considered, I think there is no reasonable man, but will sooner reject our
Ceremonies, for bringing such a foul tail after them, (as that our
Convoca^ion may cause all Englishmen to be Circumcized) then admit of
Circumsicision, for love of our paultrie Ceremonies.

11. Presently after the Def. had excused Jewish Rites, if they were used
without Iewi^h opinion, he confesses (without distinction) that all
Iewish-Rites are abolished. Wherein the Repl. noted a contradiction. But the
Rejoinder (to help at a dead lift) distinguishes betwixt Jewish Ceremonies,
as they were typical or figurative and necessary, and Jewish Ceremonies, as
they are morally significant, and free. Now for necessity and freedom, enough
has been spoken in the first part. In the other distinction, he disliketh
nothing but typical signification: so that (in his imagination) any Jewish
Ceremony may be now used, and by our Convocation-house imposed upon us, if
typical signification of Christ to come be taken from it. And is not this a
Christian doctrine of Ceremonies; that sacrifying of a lam^e to signify Christ
already come (as D. Reinolds ag. Heart. cap. 8. div. 4. does conclude from the
like answer of Hart^ is now lawful? It may be he will answer, that he does
not allow of Ceremonies signifying Christ at all.

But it has been formerly showed, that our sign o^ the Cross does
immediately and directly signify Christ his death upon the Cross.

But let all this be as the Rej. would have it: what i^ this for the defense of
the Def. who said even now* that a Jewish Rite, without a Jewish opinion, is
not unlawful; and then adds, that yet it is more safe to inven^ new
Ceremonies, then those Jewish rites now abolished? Is ^ Jewish Rite used
without a Jewish opinion, typical* Or is it only less safe, to use abolished
types, then new invented Ceremonies? This is nothing else but to make ropes of
sand.

12. Upon the former grante (that all those Jewish rites, which were once Gods
institutions, are now abolished) the Repl. concluded, in the words of D.
Whitakers: Number vero veteres figurae sublatae sunt, ut locus esset novis? Number
Divinae sublatae sunt, ut humanae succede^ent? Are Divine Ceremonies abolished,
that humane may be erected in their place?

The Rej. heerupon complains of manifest abusing and perverting D. Whitaker
his words. And why so, I pray? 1. D. Whitaker spoke of Divine figures, and the
Repl. by corrupt translation makes him to speak of Divine Ceremonies. As if D.
Whitakers did understand by ^igures typical praefigurations of things to come
only, in his di^pute against the Papists, who by Bellarmine in that place
confess, the Ceremonies of the old Testament were figures of the new
Testament, and therefore when the thing it self is come should cease.
Ceremoniae veteris Testamenti figurae erant Testamenti novi, and proinde re
ipsa praesente cessare debuerunt.


And what else could he understand, but significant Ceremonies? Does not the
Rej. rather pervert D. Whitakers meaning, in making him to conclude against
typical praefigurations, which Bellarmine did as well disclaim, as himself?

2. He cuts off by the wast, D. Whitakers his sentence, says the Rej. Let us
therefore take-in the next words, according to the Rej. his own translation:
Therefore if the Ceremonies of Moses were removed because they were typical,
why should not the Popish Ceremonies be removed which are not less typical?
Is not this above the wast, against significant Ceremonies? Certainly It was
not the meaning of D. Whitaker to charge the Papists with typical
praesignifications of Christ yet to come: and therefore he must needs
understand, by typical, significant Ceremonies.

3. The wholl^ intention says he) was, to condemn the Popish Ceremony, as
necessary, or Sacramental, But this could not be so: because Bellarmine in
that place, first answers about their figurative nature, and then after
adds: Ad id quod obijcitur de unmero, and gravi^ate legum Pontificiarum.
to that which is objected of the number and weight of popish laws. 4. D. Wh.
(adds he) did all^w of humane signi^icant Rites: as certain Feasts. Now if D.
Wh. yielding something to the stream of time, and custom, did account some
such humane institutions tolerable, that is nothing to the purpose. For we
urge here his general rule only: of Feasts we shall after answer. In the
mean time, concerning D. Wh. his general sentence of humane significant
Ceremonies, let these his words be considered: Bellarmin says, the Ceremonies
are instituted of the Church to help the ruder sort. I answer the rude are not
to be instracted with Ceremonies, God has given Scripture that out of them the
rude may draw instruction. Bellarminus ait, Caeremonias ab Ecclesia institutas
ad juvand^s rudiores Respondeo, rudae non esse Ceremonits erudiend^s dedit Deus
Scripturas, ut ex ^is rudes ins^itutionem necessariamhaurirent, etc. De Sacram.
page 203.
And it is to be observed, that D. Wh. in that place confuteth the one and
thirty Chapter of Bell. his second book, de effectu Sacram. But the
confutation of the two and thirty Chapter is wholly wanting: in which this
Argument was to be handled, in defense of Calvin's, Chemnitius, and Brentius his
reason: God would have this difference between us and the Jews, teaching them
as children by sencible signs, us, as men more simply without signs. Deuteronomy hoc
discrimen esse volu^t inter Iudaos and nos, quod illos ut pueres docuit per
signa sensibilia; nos ut viros, simplicius sine talibus signas.
Now that D. Wh. in his Lectures passed over that Chapter with silence, it is
not credible; but it seems rather, that honest Mr. Alle^son found his
sentence there so cross to our English tenants about Ceremonies, that he durst
not set forth his words in printe. For of D. Wards fidelity, in setting
forth what Mr. Allenson had praepared for the press ( ne verbulo immutato)
cannot without wrong be doubted of.

13. For the backinge of the former consequence, this reason was added, by the
Repl. If it had been the will of God, that we should be taught, by other
signs, then those which are appointed in the N. Testament: He could easily,
and would surely, either have chosen some of the old, for that use, or
appointed some new in their places. The Rej. his answer is, that God wills
humane significant teaching Ceremonies, only permissively, not praeceptively.
Of which distinction I know not well what to make: as being uncertayn whether
he means, that God has only permitted in general, that Christians may be
taught (if men shall think fitting) by humane signs; or that he has
commanded that in general, and only permitted the particulars to men's
discretion! Howsoever, those who usurp this authority, must show good
evidence of this permissive will of God, before we can find our selves, either
praeceptively, or permissively willed of God, to subject our selves unto their
institutions. But that evidence we have hitherto exspected in vain. The Rej.
to darken the cause objecteth, that It is Gods will, that we should worship him
constantly in one set place, at such an hour, in such an order; and yet
these are not praescribed by God. Where it is not true that it is Gods will, to
have us bound constantly to one place, time, and order of worship. 2. So far
as we can discern Gods will for to have us use any one place, time, and order,
we discern that will to be praeceptive, and not merely permissive.

For all know, that God has commanded most convenient place, time, and order,
for to be observed in his service: When therefore (all circumstances considered)
we find this place, time, and order, most convenient, we observe it as
commanded of God. The like cannot be said of our Ceremonies: except first it be
showed, that God has commanded humane significant Ceremonies in general: and
after it be made apparent, that our significant Ceremonies are more convenient
for us, then others.

14. The Def. having given a reason, why it is safer to invent new Ceremonies,
then to use those old ones of the Jews: because they might engender an
opinion of necessity: and so might bring in all the Leviticall law: was
answered by the Repl. 1. that though more danger may be in some respect, on the
one side, yet more may be absolutely on the other. To this (though it be
evident) the Rej. answers with a bare denial. 2. The Repl. observed, that
the inventing of new humane Ceremonies have engendered an opinion of necessity
in them: and have brought in all the Popish law of Rites: so that the
comparison, even in these respects, may be quaestioned.

The Rej. here first observes, that it was formerly alleged out of Calv. Ep.
259. that the original of all humane Ceremonies was, that men would needs
forge new worships of God. In which words, he finds more then any other man
can: opinion of necessity: and upon that accuses the Repl. of I know not what
varying uncertaintie, without any reason at all. Afterward, he observes, that
Jewish Ceremonies have more color of necessity, because of their first Divine
institution.

Now let that be so: yet if preaching, or the Churches sentence declared in a
Convocation, be sufficient to remove from Ceremonies all false opinion (as the
Def. and Rej. would persuade us) that makes no such difference, but that the
comparison may still be quaestioned.

SECT. 7. Concerning Images, etc.
1. A Third reason brought against significant Ceremonies, was, that they open
a gap to Images, etc. where the Reader must remember, or consider, that the
meaning is: Images instituted for signification of moral duties, may as well
be set up in Churches, as Cross and Surplice. The Def. his answer was (to
pass over superfluity of words) that Images are not to be accounted Popish,
or unlawful, but only in regard of superstitious adoration. Whereunto it was
replied, that then Cassanders Images ( not for adoration, but for information
and incitement) are not Popish: which the Rej. does not only grante, but
also proves it, by the consent of Calvin himself, Instit. lib. 1. capit. 11.
sect. 12. where he says, that Historical Images, or Pictures, may have some
use, in teaching, and putting, in remembrance.

Now for this, let it be considered, that Calvin in that section, speaks
only of ordinary pictures, for teaching and putting in remembrance of that
which they repraesent of themselves, without any Ecclesiastical institution,
as certain words written do signify a certain meaning, without any
special institution. Such (it may be) would be the picture of Ananias in a
white Surplice, signifying with other pictures agreeable to the story, that
Paul esteemed and called him a whited wall, Act. 23.3. But in the very next
section, which is the thirteenth, Calvin, disputing against setting up of any
Images in Churches, does sufficiently declare, that he allowed of no
Ceremonial religious use of Images, such as is of our Cross, and Surplice.

2. The Replier alleged against this defense of Ceremonial religiouse use of
Images, especially in Churches, the common consent of our Divines. Against
this, the Rej. first opposes Luther and the Lutherans: and then asks if they
be none of our Divines? To which I answer, that they are in most maine points
our Divines: but about this buisinesse they are no more our, then about
Vbiquitie, Consubstantiation, etc. for which they disclaim us, even the
wholle Church of England, as no part of the Catholic Church, but Sectaries,
Sacramentarians, etc. Secondly, the history of Luther about Images is well
known: how in opposition to Carolastadius, who brake down Images without his
consent, he would have them to be tolerated, only for a time, until men were
more fully instructed. But that he allowed them for good Ceremonies of
religion, that cannot be showed. Mr. Fox, in the story of Luther, has this:
Luther misliked the rashness of Caro^astadius, in stirring up the people, to
throw down Images, without authority, and before the people were taught, that
Images serve to no purpose. Not that he would mainteyne Images (as he said) to
stand, or to be suffered: but that this ought to be done by the Magistrate etc.
This was Luther enforced unto, by the slanderers, that accused Protestants of
sedition and tumultes, etc. This is no argument, for the Magistrate to let
Images stand; who may and should remove them, and will not. The cause why
Luther did so stand with the standing of Images, was time, and not his own
judgment. He wished them away. Nay (as Zuinglius relates) he turned them,
some with their feet upward, and some with their faces toward the wall, and
their backs to the people, for to make them not religious, but ridiculous.
Thirdly, the Lutherans make this one of their controversies, against Calvin,
Beza, etc. whether Images may be tolerated in Churches, or in religious use.
Fourthly, Polanus (who was borne among the Lutherans in Silesia) in Ezech.
cap. 11. testifies, that the Lutheran Images, are worshipped of most
Lutherans, etc. and therefore are Idols to be avoided. Lutheranorum Imagines,
a plerisque Lutheranu coluntur, etc. sunt igitur Idola fugienda*
And will the Rej. then defend the Lutheran use of Images?

3. In the next place, the Rej. asks, in mumminge fashion, if Vrsinus,
Iunius, and Mr. Perkins be not of our Divines? or if they do not acknowledge an
historical use of Images lawful? To which I answer, that they are in our
consenting Divines.

For Vrsine, his words are plain (part 2. page 45. they must needs have
large consciences, Spatiosissimos and amplissimos utique illis ^p^rtet esse
con^cientia re^essus, and licentiam patentissimam, qui rem pessimi exempli, ex
Ethnico ritu and consuetudine, in Ecclesiam, maximo cum ejus dedecor^, and
damn^, translatam, in adiaphoris numerare non erubescunt.
who blush not to reckon a thing of the worst example, and from heathenish
rite, and custom brought into the Church, not without the great disgrace and
hurt thereof, among indifferent things. Where it must be observed, that he
disputed against Flaccius Illiricus, about Images, even in the Lutheran use,
which our Def. and Rej. maintain. Iunius also is ours. His words are these
(adv. Bell. de Imagine. lib. 2. cap. 12. v. 30. It is Gods cause and ours (as is
plain out of the word, that neither his Image nor Christ's, nor any of the
Saints for a religious end, be set up in any place (specialy that is
appointed for Gods worship) or at any time without his order. Verily those
Images are to be reckened not only among things Superfluous, Interest Des and
nostra (ut Verbo sacro exponitur) ne ipsius imago unquam, and ne Christi, aut
Sanctorum imago, de causa religiosae, in loco ullo (praesertim religioso) and
temporo, sine authoritate sius statuatur Profecto, ista Imagines, non inter
superflua selum, sed etia^ inter vetita, and damnosa sunt numerandae.
but Scathie and Forbidden things. Mr. Perkins (being in every man's hands) may
be easily consulted with, upon the second Commandment, and in his treatise of
Idolatry.

4. Beza, with his fellow Ministers of Geneva, are next brought in, who
allowed many pictures, to be set forth in the French Bible. Beza his judgment
(even of Lutheran Images) is plain in his answer to Westphalus, a Lutheran,
capit. 36. The placing of Images in Churches we think a 1000. times flatly
forbidden by the word of God. Whosoever would see Bezas resolute judgment,
about the Lutheran use of Images, which the Def. approves of, Imaginum and
statuarum collocationem in Templu, putamu^ expresso Des Ve^bo millies
interdictam.
let him look upon his Antithesis ad th^s. 4. Witenbergentium, in Colloquio
Mompelgardensi: and ad Colloquium Mompelgardense, part 2. And he shall find
enough to satisfy him, not only about Bezas judgment, but (if he be a good
Protestant) concerning the cause, or quaestion it self. For no answer of
moment could ever be brought forth, by any either rigid, or gentle Lutheran,
from that time, unto this day.

As for those pictures in the French Bible, they are not significant
Ceremonies of religious use by special institution; but such signs as
Characters or letters, concerning which, answer is given, in the first section
of this Chapter, out of Alexander Hales: They signify holy things not as they
are holy, but as they are things. Significant sententias (a^^ res) sacrae non
in quantum sacra sunt, sed in quantur^ res.


The Rej. therefore foreseeing what would be answered, goes about to praevent
it, by saying, that the Def. condemns all religious use of Images, properly
so called, 1. e. whose determination must be to Godward, as Polanus in 2.
Praecep. expresses the meaning. Which expression I cannot find in Polanus,
but this to our purpose: Images are not to be allowed in Churches for laymens
books. Non sunt Imagines in Templis tollerande, quae pro libri^ sint imperitae
multitudu^i.


Neither can the Def. or Rej. deny all religious use of Images, properly so
called; except they deny significant Images, appointed for commonefaction and
institution of men in religious duties, to be a religious use. Which if they
could have done, they needed not have admitted Images into the same rank with
their income significant Ceremonies, accidental parts of religious worship. By
this also is answered that which he adds of simple hystoricall use of Images,
as separated from all religious use.

5. Of having Images for religious use, the negative is defended by Calvin, and
the affirmative by Bellarmine, de Imag. lib. 2. cap. 9. in which quaestion, it
was observed by the Replier, that the Def. takes Bell. his part.

The Rejoinder here first makes a kind of doubt, whether Calvin did not
therein contradict himself! But not trusting to that, he adds, that the
quaestion was, whether Images may be well (recte) placed in Churches? because
things lawful in them selves, are not lawful in all times and places to be
used. Now the mere looking upon that Chapter of Bell. will praesently manifest,
that Calvin, calling Images in Temples, Idolatrous signs set up wherewith the
Churches are defiled, Erecta signa Idololatriae, quibus Templa dehonestantur.
never meant so to minse the matter, as to make them lawful, but not
expedient. And in deed, if Images may be used for commonefaction, and
institution, as Ecclesiastical significant Ceremonies, there can be no reason
given, why they should be shut out of the Church, where Ecclesiastical
significant Ceremonies have their chiefest use.

This is certain, that the Def. expressly denies the bringing in of Images
into Churches, for some such uses as Bellarmine speaks of, cap. 10. For
instruction, and erudition, for stirring up unto imitation, and for praeserving
of the memory of Christ, and Saints, he denies (I say) this to be any part
of Popis^ use or abuse about Images, when he says, that Only in regard of
superstitious adoration, the use of Images is to be called Popish.

6. It was added by the Repl. that the Def. his assertion is directly against
the Homily against the peril of Idolatry, unto which we are bound to
subscribe. If this be true (says the Rejoinder) the Bishop deserves to be
suspended: the Replier, if it be untrue. Now I do not desire that he alone,
(separated from the rest either partaker of the same or guilty of equal
faults,) should be supended: but I dare adventure my suspension, against his,
that neither he nor the Rej. can clear his assertion, from direct contradiction
unto that Homily. I will take no other words for proof of that which the
Repl. says, then that found in a book written against Mr. Richard Mountague,
about the like sentence, called A dangerous Plot, etc. page 94. and 95. where
these words are quoted out of that Homily: The words Idol and Image, be
words of diverse tongues, and soundes: yet used in the Scripture indifferently,
for one thing allways. To bring Images into the Churches, is a foul abuse,
and great enormitie. They be forbidden, and unlawful. They are not things
indifferent, nor tolerable. If the Def. will say, that his assertion is not
contrary to these words, then I am contented, that his suspension should be
deferred longer then Mr. Mountagues promotion was, after he had written this,
and such like scandalous doctrines, tending directly to the overthrow of our
religion. And this reason may be alleged for him: that Mr. Mountague in some
points went so far beyond D. Morton, that he reckons him among the
Puritan Bishops.

7. The Repl. noted also, that the Def. his assertion confirms Bellarmines
foul words, who says, that the Apology of the Church of England lies, in
affirminge the Council of Franckford to have decreed the abolishing of Images:
de Council. lib. 2. cap. 8. because the only answer is that which Iunius (in
his notes upon that chapter) gives: He that forbids Images to be worshipped,
does forbid having of Images worshipable, especially in Churches: which answer
this Def. does flatly deny. The Rej. answers, that the meaning of B. Iuel,
in that place of the Apology, was, not that the Council did simply take away
Images, but contrary to the Council of Nice, which required the adoration of
them. But 1. If these words do not show Iuels meaning, yet certainly they
declare Iunius his mind and judgment, plainly. How then dare the Rej.
avouche Iunius to have allowed Images worshipable? 2. Iuel his words are:
Charles the Great had a Council at Franckford, contrary to the 2. Nicen
Council, concerning the taking away of Images: where the taking away is not
limited by contrariety to the Nicen Council, but manifestly explaineth the
sentence wherein that contrariety did mainly consist. 3. Learned Iuel knew, how
to write plainly, so that his words and meaning may be understood. Now what
his judgment was of Images for religious use, (adoration set a part) apeareth
evidently, as in his 14. Article, so especially in that notable and
Prophetical sentence of his, concerning the Image of the Cross of Christ, as
it was in some place or places of England: Si illa mala Crux stat, nos cadimus.
If that evil Cross stand* we (or our religion) must fall.

This is related by D. Humphrie, in the history of B. Iuels life and death, a
little before the end. And in very deed, except those which write against the
Papists, do refute all Images instituted for religious signification, they do
not make any difference bewixt us, and a great part of Popish Doctors. For (as
Bilson, against the Jesuits Apology, page 572. well observes) this is the
doubt, betwixt us and the Papists, whether we should not content our selves,
with such means as God has devized for us, and commended unto us, thereby
daily to renew the memory of our Redemption; or else invent others of our own
heads? Nay if we admit of significant Images, as religious Ceremonies, I
would fain know how we in England can condemn, those that wor^hip before them,
or them commemoratively, or recordatively, as Petrus de Crabrera (in 3. q. 25.
a 3. disp. 2. n. 35.) speaks, and Vasquez defends to be the common tenet of
the Romish Doctors. For that is nothing else, but at the beholding of a
Crucifixe, or such like Image, and calling to mind Christ, and our duty to
him, upon the same to worship him which (upon the supposition of their
religious signification lawful) can hardly be condemned by those which hold
kneeling at the Communion good.

Concerning Oil, Light, Spitle, Cream and H. Water.
8. In the Abrigement, unto Images were joined Oil, Lights, Spitle, Cream, and
Holy Water. But it pleased the Def. to pass over Lights, and Cream, untouched.
And concerning Oil and Spitle, by the Rejoinder his own correction of the
Repliers collection, his answer is: that they, having their birth and being
from an Apish imitation of a miraculous employment of them, are therfo^e to be
kept out of doors, though some significant Ceremonies be let in. Now this is
no answer (as the Replier observed) except the miraculous using of any thing
does forbid, that it should at any time after be used for signification.
Which the Rej. would neither affirm, nor deny; but only calls it a flout.
But it is such a flout, as being granted, it ca^hiereth the Cross, as being
above all other Ceremonies for fame of miracles wrought by it, and the Surplice
also, as being, in part, an Apish imitation of the Angels miraculous
apparitions in white. But the truth is: our Prelates do place it in the
Churches power, to retain, as Ceremonies of Baptism, Chrisme, Salt, Candles,
Exorcismes, Ephata, and the Consecration of the Water, so well as the Cross.
These are the very words of Lancelot Andrues, the late famous B. of
Winchester, in his answer to the 18. Chapter of Cardinal Perrons Reply, page
12. or sect. 17. For Holy Water, his more distinct answer was, that their (i.
e. Papists) sprinkling of water upon the People, for remembrance of their
Baptism, if it were applied only for to make them often mindful, and
careful to keep their vow of Christianity, made once to God in Baptism, it
might be called a moral Ceremony and Christian. But as it is used in Romish
Church, as operative, to the purging of venialb sins, and driving away of
Devils, it is Popish and execrable. I am constreyned to repeat the Def. his
words, that they may discover the vanity of the Rej. his exceptions against
the reply to them opposed: which was, that Calvin Inst. lib. 4. cap. 10. s.
20. And Iunius in Bellarmine de Cultu Sanctorum, libr. 3. cap. 7. n. 8. were of
another mind: etc.

The Rejoinder 1. blames the Replier for making show, as if the Def. were
fairly inclined to let in the use of Holy Water: But without any cause, except
he will deny the Def. to be fairly inclined, to let in the use of a moral
Christian Ceremony, as the Defender calls it. 2. He observes, that the Def.
named not H. Water, but sprincking of Water upon the People. Now the Rej. says
expressly thus: We come to that which they (the Papists) call H. Water their
(i.e. the Papists) sprinkling of Water upon the People, etc. confounding
plainly these two terms. 3. He notes, that the Defender did not say it may
be, but it might be called Christian: that is (by the Rejoinder his
interpretation) if superstition had not stained it. Now I cannot see any
difference betwixt that which the Replier says, it may be accounted Christian,
were it not for this or that; and this of the Rejoynders: It might be so
accounted, if it were not for this or that. But if a stain of superstition,
does hinder, that a humane Ceremony cannot be after called Christian, though
that superstition be taken from it, by doctrine and profession, what will
become of our Ceremonies, which the Rejoinder does so labor to mainteyne as
Christian, that he has scarce one thread left about him dry, or free from his
sweating? 4. He denies the Defender to have said, that were it not for the
operative power which is ascribed unto it, it might be accounted Christian.

Wherein whosoever will but look upon the Defender his own words, even now
quoted, must needs wonder, what subtle difference the Rejoinder can conceyve
betwixt his formal words as only making mindful, it is Christian, but not
as operative: and that sense which he denies. 5. Because both the Defender and
Rejoinder do make so much of operative virtue ascribed by the Popish Doctors
unto Holy Water, for cleansing from venial sins, as that therein they place
all the Popery and fault of it: let them know, that diverse of the best
learned among them do flatly deny it. As Estius in 4. page 14. Some speak
improbably, that Holy Water Con^erreth remission of venial sin, only by the
deed done. Improbabiliter dicunt quidam, aquam benedictam confer remissionem
venialium peccatorum ex opere operato.
Vasquez in 3. disp. 128. cap. 5. ar. 4. Sacramentals do not work remission of
venial sin, nor were instituted for any such end, but to stir up the mind to
abandon them. Now as for necessity, Sacramentalia non o^erantur remissionem
peccatorum ventalium; n^que instituta sunt ad eam significandam: sed ad
excitandum animum, in detestationem illorum.
wherewith the Rejoinder would put off Calvin: Bellarmin himself (de Pontif. l.
4. c. 18.) answers: It is an admonition or holy institution only whithout
any obligation to a fault if it be omitted. Est admonitio, vel p^a institutio*
sine obligatione ad ^ulpam. Non peccant, qui citra contemptum, non asperguns se
aqua ^ustrali quando Templum ingrediuntur.
They sin not who (without contempt) do not Sprinkle themselves with Holy
Water, when they enter the Church. Iunius his words are so full and plain,
that they admit no answer: no humane ordination can make it good. 6. The Rep.
conclusion: that such sprinkling of water as the Def. allows, may perhaps be
called I^wish: but not Christian, without taking Christ's name in vain; cannot
be eluded by the Rejoinder his comparatively Christian, no more then some
uncleanness may be called Christian, in comparison of filthiness contrary to
nature.

9. In the following passages, concerning abuse o^ imposing humane Ceremonies,
and P. Martyrs, judgment, nothing is worth the answering, which has not been
formerly cleared. Only about that which the Def. affirms, concerning the
shutting up of the gap, which was said to be opened by this doctrine of humane
significant Ceremonies, in Gods worship, something must be answered unto the
Rejoinder his fierce accusations. 1. The Rejoinder asks, If any more
significant Ceremonies have been brought-in this threescore years? To which I
answer, first that there have been of late more bringing in of Altars, with
bowing unto the^, then was before: and at Durrham, the third Seat of our Def.
more superstitious observations are now said to be urged, then in threescore
years before. Secondly, it is well known, that in threescore years, there have
scarce any general significant Ceremonies been newly brought into the Church
of Rome: yet Chamier (tom. 2. page 1299.) answers to the like evasion: We are
to regard not only what is brought in, but what may be brought in. For while
such authority is challenged, the ^oke is not certain, but wavering. Rituum
non tantum inductorum habenda est ratio sed and e^rum qui induci possunt. (...)
enim authoritas talis vindicatur, ingum non est c^rlum, sed in fl^xu.
2. Because the Replier said, that the gap is every day made wider and wider by
such defenses as this is, which allow of Images themselves, for some religious
use; because by this means any Crucifixe may come in, that is not greater then
the Church door: the Rejoinder accuses him of a steeled conscience, if he
does not bleed for such an injurious jest of falsehood, tending to bring them
into suspicion, and hatred: so that in his charity, we can no longer be
accounted sincere men. And I pray you why? Forsooth the Def. does not allow
all Images, and in Churches too, and for religious use. Now (if his heat be
over) let him consider the Def. his words, cited, allowed, and mainteyned by
himself, page 291. the use of Images, only in regard of superstitious
adoration, is to be called Popish, and not true. What distinction is here
betwixt Images? though he was not by the Replier accused, as favoring all
Images, but only a Crucifixe. And let him tell us, if he does (or can by his
grounds) disalow of all Crucifixes? or if there be no use of such Images, in
Churches, but only for superstitious adoration? or if there be no religious use
of a significant Image beside adoration? The case is so plain, that every man
may see the Rejoinder in this place, breaking out into an intemperat passion,
for want of a reasonable answer to that which he was ashamed to confess.

3. The Rejoinder confessing that our Prelates can when they please, open the
gap, to many other Ceremonies like to these which now they urge upon us, adds
notwithstanding, that the Replier his spirit in saying so, transported him, to
involve his Majesty, and the State, by an uncharitable surmize. And that this
gap shall never be opened, unless our janglings, and our sins bring Gods
displeasure upon our land. Now alas, what involving is this of Civil powers,
to say, that the Prelates, by their permission, may bring in threescore
Ceremonies, as well as three. And what humane religious Ceremonies can be
brought into England, without our sins desert? As for his intermixing of our
janglings, as a possible cause, it is not worth any jangling.

Concerning the second Commandment.
10. One Argument is yet to be handled, either omitted, or (as the Rejoinder
says) put off unto another place, by the Defendant. The Argument stands
thus: The second Commandment forbids to make unto our selves, the likeness
of any thing whatsoever, for religious use: as Bucer, Iuel, Fulke, Andrews and
Bilson do interpret it. Therefore to make, appoint, or use significant
Ceremonies, of man's devizing, is unlawful.

The Rejoinder answers, in general, that Religious use, by these forenamed
Authors, is taken. 1. For worship to the Image: 2. Worship to God, by the
Image: and not simply, that which may any ways confer to the furtherance of
Religion. Wherein, he says nothing but truth, and yet no truth at all to the
purpose: except he understands in the that which he affirms, only, 1. e.
that they meant no more, but worshipping to, and by: and in that he denies, by
simply, no difference, betwixt any of those things that help forth or further
Religion: as if civil circumstances, and instituted religious Ceremonies, were
all one. And if this be his meaning, it requires more then his simple
testimony, to confirm it.

11. For the backing of this Argument, it was first observed by the Replier,
that the word likeness, used in the second Commandment, is general, and
comprehends under it, all religious similitudes: because they are homogeneall
to Images, there expressly forbidden. To this the Rejoinder answers nothing:
but only says, that our Ceremonies are not religious similitudes in such a
sense as the Commandment intends, and Divines understand. And that the
Replier speaks ignorantly: because the Commandment does as expressly forbid
such similitudes, as any graven Images.

Now the first of these sayings, we cannot understand, until the Rejoinder
explaineth him self, what that sense is, in which the Commandment intends to
forbid all religious similitudes? As for the second, to leave the Repliers
ignorance unto the readers judgeme^t, more in it is granted, then was demanded:
viz: that all religious similitudes are expressly forbidden in the second
Commandment.

12. It was secondly added by the Replier, that significant Ceremonies are
external acts of religious worship, even as they are used to further
devotion* Suarez, in 3. q. 65. ar. 4. Bell. de Eff. Sacr. lib. 2. cap. 29, and
31. and therefore being invented by man, of the same nature with Images, by
which, and at which, God is worshipped. The Rejoinder here (for want of a better
answer) flies to his old Sanctuary, of meritorious, necessary, and immediate
worship grossly held by Papists of their Ceremonies, whether they be
significant, or not significant. But he has in the former part of this
writing, been so beaten out of this burrow, that we need not again spend time
in digging about it. Let any man look upon the places quoted, and he shall
find, that (merit necessity, and immediatnesse set a part) significant
Ceremonies are external acts of religious worship: which was all that this
argument required. And I dare leave it (though not to the Rejoinder yet) to D.
Burgesses judgment, if merit, necessity, be things either chiefly, or at
all, forbidden in the second Commandment, more then in any other? Certainly,
meritorious conceits are generally forbidden: but in no one Commandment
specially: and necessary binding of Conscience by man, belongs to the first.
The Replier looking for an answer something like this, of essential and
accidental worship, for praeventing of it, said that such a distinction would
help no more here, then that of the Papists, betwixt (...), and (...).

For this the Rejoinder accuses him of an uncharitable heart, and an unlearned
head. But I see no cause: as has been fully showed in the confutation of that
distinction, both in the first part of this writing, and also in the second
Argument, or Chapter, of this part. Yet because the Rejoinder is so impatient,
of hearing his distinction of essential and accidental worship, compared with
the Papists vain distinctions: let any man consider a little the Popish
distinctions, which Rivetus has well noted and expressed in his Cases, on the
second Commandment: Worship religious is either of it self, or by accident
proper or improper of it self, Per se aut per accidens, proprius aut
improprius: per se, aut per aliud, propter se, aut ratione alterius, primarius,
aut secundarius, proprius, aut analogicus: absolutus, aut respectivus: simplex,
aut secundum quid: directus, aut reductivus perfectus, aut imperfectus.
or some other thing, for it self, or in regard of another. Primarie or
secondarie, proper or Analogicall. Absolute or respective, simple or according
to some respect. Direct, or reductive, perfect or imperfect. And compare with
them the Rej. his distinctions of Ceremonies, and worship, in the first part
examined. I doubt not, but he will say, they come nearer together, in the very
terms, then one would have exspected.

13. The Replier in the next place, argued from the affirmative part of the
second Commandment, unto the negative, thus: This Commandementinjoigneth
obedience to all the worship appointed by God, all which was significative,
Heb. 8.5. and 10.1. therefore it forbids any significative Ceremonies to be
brought in to the worship of God, devized by man: etc. The Rejoinder here 1.
answers out of Mr. Cartwright, that the Affirmative part injoineth us, to use
such as himself does approve in his word. Now though in that edition of Mr.
Cartw. his Catechism printed an. 1611. the affirmative part is thus expressed:
Do that which I command thee, and do no more; Yet that which he quoteth, out
of another edition, is enough to cashier all humane significant Ceremonies. For
what can be more plainly spoken against them, then that only such outward
means must be used in Gods worship as himself has a^lowed* But (says the
Rejoinder) Mr. Cartw. reckons the reverend gestures of the body, among those
outward means* What then? Then bodily gestures in religious actions are either
determined by God, or may be lawfully appointed for signification, by man. A
strange consequence: as if, when God allowed for an offering either a pair of
Pigeons, or two Turtle doves, without particular determination, the Priests
might have appointed for signification, that only two Turtle doves should be
offered!

His second answer is, that all worship of God among the Jews, was not
significant in his sense of significant. What his sense is, I know not: but the
sense and words of the Replier his argument, was of worship appointed, or
instituted, beyond that which is naturaall, or necessary, without any
institution, except the law written in every man's heart, be an institution;
which he seems not to have conceived.

14 The last consideration by the Replier propounded was, that significant
Ceremonies, which are by institution, must needs belong unto the second
Commandment; as he that makes an accurate distinction of the Commandments,
will presently see: but to man the second Commandment is (in regard of making)
wholly negative. Ergo. The Rej. answers first, that significant Ceremonies
may belong rather to the third Commandment, as D. Ames refers them; or
accidentally to the fourth. Now as for accidental belonging to this or that
Commandment, it is not in question. To the third Commandment they cannot be
directly referred, according to that distinction of the Commandments, which
the Rej. himself produces, in the next words as accurate. As for D. Ames, let
any man look upon his Medulla, lib. 2. cap. 13. th. 34.35.36. and he shall see
how the Rej. mistook him.

His second answer consists in distinguishing the Commandments of the first
Table: Wherein (to let other things pass) he makes the second to provide,
that from God we take the prescription of all that, by use of which we may
really worship him, and esteem him to be truly and properly honored of us:
and the Third to provide, that in all acts of his worship, we carry our selves
syncerely and reverently, from this he concludes, that the right use of
Ceremonies, belong rather to the third Commandment, then to the second, as
touching their end. Of this I know not well what to make: 1. The argument was
of significant Ceremonies, in regard of their institution and making, the Rej.
answers, touching their end. 2. Touching their end, I cannot understand (nor
I think any man else) how the proper end of the Cross in Baptism, should be
syncerity and reverence; except mixture of humane inventions with Gods
ordinances be syncerity; and presumption of doing so, be reverence. 3. If the
second Commandment does provide that we take from God the praescription of
all real worship; then also of significant Ceremonies, except they be
fantastical worship: and yet even figmenta cerebri, cordisve humani, the very
fantasies, or images of the mind, not prescribed by God, are (by the most
interpreters) held as well forbidden, as outward real images. If the same
Commandment do^th bind us to Gods prescription, in all true worship; then
humane significant Ceremonies, being not prescribed by God, are fa^se worship.
If also in proper true worship; then they are only metaphorical worship, like
unto true worship, or at least tropicall; which has been sufficiently
confuted in the first part, and in the second Chapter of this.

The third answer given by the Rej. is, that in the second Commandment,
nothing is forbidden, as touching making, but the instituting, or fancying of
our own mere devises, as an immediate means of worshipping God thereby. The
force lies in those two terms, mere devises, and immediate means of worship.
Now for the distinction betwixt immediate and mediate worship, it has been
sufficiently canvized in the first part. The other evasion, of mere humane
devises, is the common refuge of Jesuits, when they are pressed with this
argument. So Bellarmine ( de effectu Sacram. lib. 2. cap. 32.) to Calvin,
alleging that all humane will worship is condemned in Scripture, Vo^atur cultus
humanus and voluntarius, qui est mere humanus etc. Quae autem ab Ecclesia
docentur non sunt mere humanae.
answers: That is called humane and will worship which is merely humane.
etc. but what the Church teaches is of another nature. Beside, lay these two
terms together, and then this is Pes computi: man's devises may be even
immediate means of worship, if they be not merely man's.

15 In vie of those grounds, laid by the Repl. against humane significant
Ceremonies, out of the second Commandment, the Rej. by way of Reconvention
faineth two grounds to the contrary: the first whereof is taken from supposed
true worship, and means necessarily inducing thereto, as only forbidden in
the second Commandment: and the second, from our placing the worship of God,
in forbearing these Ceremonies, which he has not commanded us to fo^bear. Now
to both these earthy dead grounds (or Capita mortua) answer has been given in
the first part; partly in the chapter of Superstition, and partly in that of
Difference betwixt our and Popish Ceremonies. So that nothing need here be
added. Yet in few words, 1. He forgets himself much, in distinguishing
significant Ceremonies (which he confesses to be some kind of worship) from
true worship; except he will confess them to be false worship. 2. He
considered not what he writ, when he speaks of means necessarily inducing
to true worship. For no Papist ever conceyted, that their Ceremonies, were
either necessary to true worship, as if no true worship could be without them:
or necessarily inferring true worship, as if he that used them, howsoever he
did it, must needs perform true worship: and yet one of these senses must
needs be the meaning of that phraze, if it has any meaning at all. 3. He
takes the wholle quaestion for won, or granted, when he speaks of our
forbearance of that, which God has not commanded us to forbear: and thereupon
concludes thus: God has not commanded us to forbear humane ^ignificant
Ceremonies. Ergo.

SECT. 7. Concerning the Oath-gesture of Abraham's Servant.
1. IN this section, the Def. begins a confutation of the fore-proved
Proposition: All humane Ceremonies, being appropriated to Gods service, if they
be ordained to teach any spiritual duty, by their mystical signification,
are unlawful. His Scripture confutation (for want of rule or praecept) is
only by Examples.

Now to omit words of no weight, his first example is Abraham's directing his
servant, to put his hand under his thigh, when he did swear. Genesis 24.2. Against
this, the Replier first excepted, that in probability, Abraham was not the
appointer of this Ceremony. The Rej. answers, that this is not material to
the point, what man appointed it, so that it was not of Divine appointment. So
that their first proof of Ceremony appointed by man, is from an example
appointed they know not by whom: only begging of us to grant, that it was not
appointed by God, which they ought to have proved. Yet the Replier for citing
Calvin and Iunius, as leaving it most probable, that is, was an ancient custom
before Abraham (which any man looking upon their interpretations, may see to be
true) is called by the Rej. a false man in all his allegations. But let that
go.

2. Because the Def. for magnifying of this example, said, that there is not a
more Divine service of God, then the taking of an oath; the Replier denied
this: affirming the proper, and principal end of swearing is (not to worship
God, but) to confirm a truth. To this the Rejoinder answers 1. that so the
proper end of Preaching, Sacraments, Petitioning, is edification of men,
confirmation of faith, and obteyning of mercies. Where if he had repeated the
Repliers other term, proper and principal end, his exception had been at an
end: because the principal end of these means, is to honor God. Beside
those very ends which he mentions, edification, confirmation of faith, and
obteyning of mercy, are illfavoredly distinguished from Gods worship, as no
more appertayning to it, then the fidelity which a Vassal, or Copi-houlder,
does by oath confirm ordinarily unto his Lord. The Rejoinder his second
answer is, the Replier before placed worship in the nature of the action it
self* and yet now places it in the end of the action. As if the nature of an
action, may not be gathered from the proper or natural end of it! Nay the
Replier before declared, that the end of an instituted means, is part of the
nature thereof, and has a place in the definition of it.

D. Iackson (in his Original of unbelief, page 327. and 328.) by the
difference given of the Replier, does well answer the Popish Proctors for
Images, who allege as like, the Ceremony used in an oath: Particular oaths,
given only for satisfaction of men, are not such proper acts of Gods service,
as supplications, thanksgivings, and solemn vows are. The honor of God would
be no whit l^sse, if the use or necessity of oaths among men, were n^^e. In
supplications, and thansgivings, it is far otherwise, the more often and
solemnly we praise God, or pray unto him, the more we honor him; because these
are direct and immediat^ acts of his service, etc.

3. Because the Def. proved nothing to the purpose, about this Gesture, he was
required to prove it significative of some spiritual duty: For it was in
probability only a common sign of subjection, as well out of an oath, as in
it, without any respect unto Christ. The Rejoinder in stead of a proof, says,
that some Ancient and Later Writers do so conceit. And if the Def. and he also
do conceit it so, we do not strive with them, about that: but men's conceits
are no great proofs. He adds 2. that if it were a sign of subjection yet
might it be significant of a spiritual duty. But may be, and might be, is no
proof.

He subjoigneth 3. that it was a common sign used in solemnity of that kind,
as well out of an oath, as in it; this (says he) is barely and boldly
affirmed, and implies a contradiction, as importing other solemnities without
an oath, of the same kind with thi^, wherein was an oath. Now for bareness, or
boldness, of a probable conjecture, by way of answer, it should not be
objected by him that brings mere conceits and might bees, for proving
Arguments. And as for contradiction, if he had repeated the word subjection,
then he might have discerned signs of that kind, as well without, as with an
oath. By the noting of this also he may see how the Replier herin agreed with
Calvin. For no Gesture of subjection to a superior man, is wont to be proper
unto subjection signified in time of swearing.

Neither is the Repliers observation (that as imposition of hands, in those
parts, did allways signify some superiority: so this underposi^ion of hands
was, by proportion, fit to signify inferioritie, or subjection) this I say was
not a mere fiction, as the Rejoinder would have it. For, beside that the
meaning was, of the usual imposing of hands in blessing, where the lesser is
blessed of the greater, as Scripture teaches: the Rejoinder has brought but
two examples, to infringe the generality of it Act. 13.2. Lev. 1.4. and in
both of these it houldeth. For they that laid hands on Paul and Silas, did it
not only in the name of the wholle society, which in such cases has some
dispensative superiority over particular members; but also by Commission from
God, which gave them in that buisinesse superiority. And he that brought a
beast to be sacrifized, Lev. 1. had certainly power over it. If the Rejoinder
could have showed us, where, and when, a servant imposed his hand upon his
Masters head, or a son upon his fathers, that had been to the purpose. We
on the contrary say with Tostatus on Genesis 47. that the putting under of the
hand, was never used, but by an inferior, to his superior.

4. Yet the Rej. has more to say: namely, that the sign of a servants duty
to which he is bound by oath, is a mystical sign of some spiritual duty:
because all the law is spiritual; and obedience to masters, for conscience
sake, is a service of God. Whereto I answer, that I never heard the Hang-mans
office, which is servile, called a spiritual duty; no though he be bound to
it by oath. 2. The oath makes the thing sworn to, no more spiritual, then a
carnal obligation unto it (which may concur with the obligation of an oath)
makes it carnal. 3. The Law is all spiritual, in the manner; but yet all the
works required by it are not spiritual, nor so esteemed. The Apostle (1. Cor.
6.) distinguishes (...) things pertaining to this life, from spiritual
things. All Divines usually distinguish the common moral duties practiced by
light of nature, from such as are spiritual. 4. Obedience to masters for
conscience sake, is a service, or obedience to God, as it comes from
conscience toward God: but every sign of subjection, is not a sign of it as
it comes from conscience toward God.

5. In the last place, the Replier, supposing all true that hitherto the Def.
and Rej. have striven for, yet denies that any thing could be concluded from
thence, for our Convocation-power in appointing such Ceremonies: because such
Prophets as Abraham might do more then our Convocation.

The Rej. here, would have us show that this was done by Prophetical
inspiration: and because this is not done, he calls this answer a boulting
hole, fit for a distressed and wilful disputer, whose cause cannot be
defended and yet his stomach will not yield. But if he had well considered,
that it belongs not properly to the answer, but to the Opponent, to produce
reasons; and how unreasonable it is, for to require a reason proving a thing to
be done, of him that judges it false, and only for disputation sake grants
his adversary to suppose and take it as true, he would never have abused so
many words by misplacing of them. All these things considered, I doubt not (as
the Replier said) but Abraham's servant, if he were here present, and need
required, would swear, that his example makes nothing for our Ceremonies.

SECT. 10. Concerning Suarez the Jesuit, his stating of the Controversy,
betwixt Protestants, and Papists.
1. IN this section an objection of ours is brought in, without rank or file,
in the middle of Examples, forgotten (as the Rej. says) in the proper place.
But nothing of moment is answered thereto, either by the Def. or Rej. which is
not sufficiently cleared in the first part of this Writing, Chapter the sixth;
except the state which Suarez makes of the question betwixt us and Papists.
This therefore (as being very observable) remains here to be declared.

2. The place quoted is in 3. tom. 3. Disp. 15. Sect. 2. The words (as the
Replier has them) are these: The first error is, that only those signs
which are written, ought to be retained and used in the Church. The second,
that no outward worship of God is lawful, but only that which is appointed by
God. The third, that the Church has not power of commanding, and ordeyning
those things, (he means mystical Ceremonies) which are necessary for
convenient celebration of the Sacraments. Of which three points, there is none,
wherein Suarez and the Def. do not jumpe. To this the Rej. first answers,
that Suarez does not propounded these three points, as three errors of the
Protestants: because he mentions not Protestants, but Heretics, which
reason is not worth the answering: because he mentions Heretics of this
time, which phraze is oftener in the Jesuits writings, understood of
Protestants, then of any other, as all know that have looked upon them. By the
^ame reason, one may argue, that he understood no special Sect, or persons:
because he mentions not any by name. But it shall appear, that his meaning
could be of no other then Protestants.

3. He adds in the second place the words going before those quoted, he
spoke of Suenkf^l^ians. And this is true: but nothing to the purpose. For he
leaving them as desperate phantasticks, passes on to others, that is,
Protestants, as by and by shall appear.

4. In the next place (says the Rej.) Suarez speaks of such as allow some
external worship of God, but refuse all Ecclesiastical Ceremonies in his
worship, as the inventions of men; and hold nothing to be lawful in Gods
service, but what is commanded in holy Scriptures; which is the ground of those
three errors mentioned by the Replier. This may be called truth: but it is
not all the truth, which belongs to our present purpose. For Suarez his
words are these: Others reproove Ecclesiastical Ceremonies as humane
inventions without authority or precept in Scripture: Alij Ecclesiasticas
Ceremomonias reprehendunt, eo quod sint humana inventa, absque Divino
praecepto, vel authoritate in Scriptures contenta. Putant enim ifri, non licere
Deum colere alio cultu, nisi illo qui in Scripturis nobis praeceptus est. In
quo fundamento tres isti errores continentur etc. Putant isti, non licere Deum
colere alto cultu, nisi illo qui in Scripturis nobis praeceptus est.
For they think it unlawful to worship God with any other worship then is in
Scripture enjoined. In which ground three ^rrours are contained. Here may a
great difference be observed betwixt the Rej. his translation, and Suarez his
words; especially in that for those words: They think it unlawful to worship
God with any other worship then is in Scripture prescribed, the Rej. gives
these: they hold nothing to be lawful in Gods service, but what is commanded
in Scripture. For many things are lawful in Gods service, which are not
worship: as civil circumstances, etc.

5. After those three errors, the Rej. abserveth Suarez to speak of some that
dissalow not Ceremonies in general, but impugn the Ceremonies of the Church
of Rome, as vain and superstitious. These no doubt (adds the Rej) are the
Protestants: to whom he imputes there no other error, but their opposition
against Romish Ceremonies, as vain and superstitious, as the Defender does.
Concerning this, 1. This therefore was not mentioned by the Replier, because
Suarez himself testifie^h, that it is concluded in the former: Which error
cannot be founded, but upon one of the three above reject^d errors. Qui error
non potest nisi aliquo ex supra rejectis (tribus scil. illis) fundari.
2. Suarez also adds that these men of whom he in these words speaks, say
nothing against all their Ceremonies, but only, that they are used with
intention of worship, q^oda nobis fiunt intention cultus, and tanquam
pertinentes ad virtutem Religionis.
as pertaining to the virtue of Religion: that they are done by us with
intention of worship and as pertaining to the virtue of Religion. This they
hold Superstitious* For though in the Sacraments we are to observe a measure
and due circumstances, yet this they will only have as a certain humane
polity, not out of intention of worship and religion: for this they say is
Superstitious. Hoc s^^e stitiosum esse dicunt: quia licet in Sacramentis,
oporteat servare modum, and debitas circumstantias, tamen hoc solum esse volunt
propter quandam humanam politiam, non vero ex intention cultus and r^ligionis:
nam hoc dicunt esse superstitiosum.


Out of these two observations, I make these two conclusions: 1. If this error
be necessarily founded on those three mentioned, (as Suarez says, and shows)
then such Protestants as hold this (among whom the Rejoinder professes the
Defend. and his own name) hold also those. 2. If Protestants hold this
tenet, that it is Superstition, for to intend worship in humane Ceremonies (as
Suarez says) then our Defender and Rejoinder in this point are by Protestants
found guilty of Superstition. For they place special immediate, though
improper, accidental, and secondarie worship in humane Ceremonies; as is to be
seen in this Rejoinder page 125.127. etc.

Here they cannot ^scape, by alleging (as they use to do) that the Papists
place proper essential worship in all their Ceremonies. For Suarez in the same
place expounds the Popish tenet, concerning worship, just as they do theirs:
Sacramental Ceremonies belong to secondarie worship: not only because they
contain External worship, but also in the very External worship it self,
they are as it were accidents of other more noble actions. Ceremoniae
sacramentales pertinent ad cultum secundarium: non solum quia continent cultum
ixternum: sed etiam quia in ipsomet externo cultu, sunt veluti accidentia
aliarum a^tionum nobiliorum.


6. Hitherto we have had noting directly answered, concerning the three errors,
which the Replier said Suar^z imputed to Protestants, about Ceremonies in
general. Nor is any other given but this: that Suarez charge those errors,
not on Protestants, but on Anabaptists: who hold this negative argument:
whatsoever is not commanded in the Word, is unlawful. This the Anabaptists,
and not the Protestants, houlde, fanatically even about rites, and formalities,
etc. To which I reply 1. that if Suarez his words be taken as before they
were recited, and not as the Rejoinder does ill-translate them, then no man is
conversant in the Protestant writings, or have read over that which is formerly
cited out of them in these three general Arguments, but must needs confess,
the very same sense is to be found in most of our principal Divines: and the
same words in many: Non licere Deum colere, alto externo cultu, nisi illo, qui
in Scriptura nobis praeceptus est: Inventae bumana, quae absque Divino
praecepto, vol authoritate in Scripturis contenta, esse reprehendenda.
It is not lawful to worship God with other external worship save with that
which is in Scripture praescribed us. And humane inventions without warrant
from God in Script. are to be reprehended.

2. If all things be Ceremonies, which are circumstances of order, and decency
(as the Defender and Rejoinder do not only affirm, but make their chief
Anchor) then (whatsoever Gui de Er^s discourses of one furious company of
them) much injury is done to the Anabaptists, in making them to hold, that
all Ceremonies are unlawful, which are not contained in the Word.

For it is well known, that they have certain times, and places of meeting for
worship; certain order of preaching and praying; nay in Baptizing of men-growne
more formalities then many Protestant Churches; and even Bishops over diverse
Congregations, for order sake (as they say.) D. B. having lived in Holland, can
scarce be ignorant of these things.

3. To put it out of doubt, that Suarez, under the name of Heretics, in this
place, meant Protestants, let any man look upon his book de Religione, Volume
1. treatise 3. lib. 2. cap. 1. and there he shall find these words, to the
same purpose: The Heretics of these times say every ceremony, and all
worship not praescribed of God, or not contained in the Gospel is Superstition,
yea and Idolatry. They stand much upon Deuteronomy. 12. Hae^etici huius temporu,
dicunt omnem Ceremoniam, and omnem cultum, a Deo ip^o non praceptum, seu in
Euangelio non contentum, Superstitionem esse, imo and Idololatriam vocant.
Fundantur praecepue in Deuteronomy. 12.
Now 1. this cannot be understood of the Anabaptists: because they make no
such account of Deutronomie, or the old Testament, as that they found any
doctrine chiefly on that. 2. Suarez himself, in the same Chapter, shows
plainly that he there meant Protestants. For he sends the Reader, for
confutation of these Heretics, to Gregorius de Valentia, tom. 3. disp. 6. q.
11. p. 1. where he disputes against Herbrandus, a Protestant, not an
Anabaptist: and to Lessius de just. and jure, l. 2. cap. 43. dub. 4. where he
disputes about this quaestion, against Calvin. And (lest any man should
think, he meant one kind of Heretics there, and another in this place
quaestioned, he there refers his reader, for further satisfaction about that
quaestion, unto this very place, in 3. tom. 3. disp. 15. What can be more
clear? When as therefore the Rejoinder upon such sandy grounds, concludes,
that we are somewhat encamped in the Trenches of Anabaptists; because we do
not jumpe with Suarez, in condemning these three Errors; we may better
conclude, that he and the Def. by rash undermining of us have, unawares, broken
into the works of Papists; because they do condemn with Suarez, those three
Protestant trueths. And withal (seeing so great a School-Papist as Suarez, in
stating of the controversy, makes no mention of merit, necessity, efficacy,
number, or holiness, either inhaerent or adhaerent) it is but an evasion of
the Defend. and Rejoinder upon every occasion, to fly unto these, as only
differences betwixt us and Papists, about Ceremonies. And so we have more
cleared, then that, for which Suarez his testimony was produced by the
Replier: namely, that learned Papists have no opinion of all their significant
Ceremonies, which the Defender and Rejoinder do not mainteyne.

SECT. 11. Concerning the Feast of Purim. Ester. 9.
1. THis example was, seven hundred year since, objected by Papists, unto the
Waldenses, for humane Ceremonies: and since, by all Papists that have written
against Protestants about Ceremomonies; as Gregorius de Valentia, Bellarmine,
Suarez, in the places before noted. And we need not seek for new answers about
it, seeing that which our Divines have answered is sufficient. Our first answer
is that of Iunius to Bellarmine, de Cultu Sanct. lib. 3. cap. 10. Praeceptum
^uit politicum: which words because they were translated, a praecept of order,
the Rejoynd. catches occasion to conclude from thence, that order does
require institution of new things. But therein he misseth, except he can prove
some new religious thing instituted, beside a circumstance of time, which the
Replier (whom he seeks to involve in a contradiction) does expressly
distinguish from things. His answer is, that though this praecept were
Political, yet by Iunius himself, annot. 17. it was also significant. Wherein
he mistaketh Iunius his meaning, which is expounded annot. 28. It signifies no
days, nor repraesents mysteries, but is a commemoration that day instituted.
Non dies sign^ficat, aut repraesentat mysteria, sed commemoratio in dic illo
instituta.


2. It was added by the Replier that some of our own writers at home, say that
it was appointed for a civil rejoicing day. Here the Rejoinder (naming M.
Jacob for such a writer) accuses him of making it a Guttide: As if no Civil
day of rejoicing could be without Gutting. Yet there be men reverend for
learning, and piety, which say some such thing as the Rejoynd. detorteth M.
Jacobs words to. For Pellicanus upon that place of Ester, Hebrae. convi^^^ se
consolati (...).
says thus: The Hebrews solaced themselves with feasts. We read of a festival
Solemnity instituted, and that for two days, ^olemnitas as a^^das leg^tur
instit^ta, ^^que ^^^iuana, in qui(...) (...) and (...), etc. Eum aut^m r^tum
spente su^repetunt Iudai, pro^^. vieres ad ga^^ia v^nt^^^, quam ad fiductum
sutri^us in De^^mde quo illis tempori^us Ordentur (...) curosse.
wherein they please themselves with meats and drinks, etc. But the Jews took
up that rite voluntarily as being more prone to the Contentments of the belly,
then to the Confidence of the Spirit toward God, whereof in those times they
seem to have been little Careful. And for this sentence, it seems to make,
that the Jews are said to have made such feasts, before and without any
public institution: and that nothing is mentioned in the text: Which two
observations do not agree to the Feast of Tabernacles, Neh. 8. which the
Rejoynd. would make like unto this. Add heerunto, that, if Josephus may be
credited) the heathen King, Artaxerxes, was the instituter of this Feast,
among the Heathen, and, the Jews at Susan following his order, it came to be
propagated by Mordecay, and Hester, unto all other Jews. Josephus, lib. 11.
cap. 6.

3. Another answer is, (upon supposition of a religious Ceremony instituted by
Mordecai) that it was by Divine direction. The Rejoinder to this returns, 1.
that no man ever so defined before. But he might (when he was a Student in
Cambrige) have heard D. Whitakers thus defining. For in his printed Lectures,
de Sacramentis, page 206. it stands so: Respondeo: and hoc Mardochaeum
fecisse, Deo inspirante and forsan. Prophetae cujuspia^ monitu and authoritate.
Etsi vero non legimus, aut Deum ipsum, aut aliquem Prophetam, hoc Mardochao
mandasse, tame^ quia in libro Canonico, hec factum reperitur, and commendatur,
non dubium est, quin divina authoritate nitatur.
I answer that both Mordecai did this, God inspiring him, and peradventure by
order from some Prophet. And however we do not read that either God, or any
Prophet did require this, yet for as much as it sta^ds approved in Scripture
there is no doubt but it was done by Divine authority. As for the several
Holy Days instituted 2. Chr. 30. cast in here by the way of the Rejoinder as a
President for the Feast of Purim; they agree not. For they were not yearly
Holy Days; nor Holy Days at all, of institution properly so called: but an
occasional continuation of free will offeringes, (which might be offered any
day in the yeear, without new Holy Days) for that one time. If it had been by
men appointed, that every year, 14. days should be observed for the Passover
Feast, it had fitted to the purpose. But that had been no less praesumption,
then if they should have decreed, that every year after, the Passover should be
celebrated in the second month, as it was then, by occasion.

SECT. 12. Concerning the Feast of Dedication. John. 10.22.23.
1. A Feast of Dedication is brought-in as an instance of a humane Ceremony
appropriated unto Gods service, out of John 10. Now what Feast of Dedication
this was, and whether it were merely of humane institution; this has allways
been, and is still in great quaestion. Nonnius takes it for that which Solomon
appointed: Chrysostom, Theophilact, Euthymius, Cajetan, Calvin, etc. interpret
it of that which began in the time of Ezra: Others of that instituted by the
Macchabees 1. Mac. 4. This last the Defender took for granted, and thereupon
builds his Argument: and yet neither the former, nor this can easily be so
evidently proved merely humane, as it may be made a foundation for humane
Ceremonies now. Iunius de cultu Sanct. lib. 3. cap. 5. thus answers
Bellarmine, affirming that God did not appoint this Ceremony: It is false:
Solomon, Ezras, the Machabees, followed the Analogy of that place Ex. 4. Lev.
8. the right of which law if it had not been, yet we must needs say that as
Prophets they were led by extraordinary and singular revelation, not to be
Exemplarie therein to us. Falsum est: Solomon, Ezras, Macchabat sequnti sunt
praceptum, Exodus 4. Lev. 8 ^n juris legalis analogia. Quod jus si non
extitisset, tamen dicendum f^ret, seciss^ cot ut Prophetas, revelatione
extraordinaria, and singulari, quae in exemplum non potest tral^^.


2. The Replier first observed, that this example is much alleged by Papists,
against Protestants for their Ceremonies: and so indeed it has been always,
from the time of Waldenses, as was noted, in the 2. Chapter. of our first part.
Bellarmine has it twice: once, de Rom, Pont. l. 4. c. 17. and again, de Cultu
Sanct. l. 3. c. ^. To this the Rej. answers, that this example served (...)
Bellarmines turn, for imposition of Ceremonies upon the conscience as of
necessity to be observed, as Gods laws; but it serves the Defender his turn:
because as Iunius says, Co^r. 3. l. 4. c. 17. an. 5.) it was not enjoined by
way of authority, but taken up by consent. He would make us (as it seems)
believe, that our Ceremonies are not enjoined by way of authority: and if he
can do this, he may also persuade us, that we are for refusing them, excluded,
suspended, deprived, excommunicated, fined, and imprisoned, without any way
(lawful or unlawful) of authority. Concerning necessity in conscience, see
the first part, chap. 6.

Another answer of the Rejoynders is notorious: Bellarmine (says he) allegeth
this feast of Dedication, to prove the Dedication, or Consecration of
Churches: which is nothing to our question of significant Rites. Now surely if
Dedication and Consecration of Churches be nothing to our question of
significant Rites; the Def. and Rej. say nothing to the purpose, when they
prove this question of signifying Rites, by the Maccabees Feast of Dedication.
And if that Feast of Dedication, does not prove humane Dedications lawful;
much less does it prove the lawfulness of other significant Ceremonies, such
as ours are.

3. The Defendant for backing of this instance, added, that our Savior seems
to approve that humane Feast, by his presence, Ioh. 10. To which it was
replied, that he seems only: because we only read, that he walked in
Solomon's Perch, at that Feast: which he might do, without observing or
approoving of it. This is Iunius his answer to Bellarmine, alleging that Christ
by his presence honored that Feast: Non sestum proprie honorawit Christus, sed
coetum piorum convenientium festo: nam omnes ejusmodi occasiones seminandi
Evangelij sut, observabat, and capieba^ Christus Con. 3. l. 4.6.17 an. 6. So
Peli^anus in Mac. 1. cap. 4. Nec aliud in his Encoenijs) Christus egisse
legitur, quam praedicasse in Templo.
Christ did not properly honor the Feast, but the Congregation of the
faithful at the Feast: For Christ took all such occasions then, to wit,
before those solemnities were abolished, of sowing the seed of his Gospel: Nor
did Christ ought that we read at those times, but preach in the Temple. And
sure I am, that neither walking in the Porch, nor declaring that he was that
Christ, belonged properly unto the solemnity of that Feast. If he had preached
of Dedications and Consecrations, with allowance, that had been something.

The Rej. objecteth 1. That we plead Christ's approbation of marriage, by his
presence. This indeed added unto evident grounds, adds some honor unto that
state: especially, in that a miracle was wrought to the furtherance of a
marriage feast: if we had no other plea for lawfulness of marriage, but that
mere presence; I, for my part, would as soon separate from my wife, as the
rejoinder says he would from the Church of England, if he were of our mind,
about Ceremonies; that is, to day, before to morrow. His 2. objection is, that
Christ whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, Ioh. 2. Ergo. Which
makes directly to the clearing of this cause: For there were two whippings of
these Merchants out of the Temple; the first whereof was this Ioh. 2. in the
beginning of his preaching; the other toward the end of it a little before his
passion; so that it appears plainly, they were not so driven out, but they
came in again, and continued their merchandise there: and yet in the mean
space, our Savior was often present in the Temple, without allowance of that
their practice. So had he often condemned the traditions of men, in Gods
worship; and yet was present some time, where they were observed. Beside,
because the Def. and Rej. are wont to accuse the Jews for placing holiness,
necessity, efficacy, and proper essential worship in humane traditions,
whereby they would avoid the dint of that general censure which our Savior
gives of them, Mat. 15. Mar. 7. etc. I would feign learn of them, how it
appears, or may be conjectured, that they placed not as much holiness,
necessity, efficacy, etc. in this and such like humane Feasts, as in washing of
hands before meat. If they did (as any man will think) then how can they say,
that our Savior condemned the one, and allowed the other?

The following 13. and 14. Sections are spent about some objections taken out
of Mr. Cartwrite. But because the slitenesse of this Instance is already
sufficiently discovered, I will not cloy, nor deteyne the Reader about them, at
this time; but pass on to the next Instance.

SECT. 15. and 16. Concerning the Altar of Jordan. Josh. 22.
1. IT is the Def. and Rej. their fashion, to produce Instances, without proof
of their fitness, and so exspect from us that they should be disproved: which
is all one, as if John a Styles should in a great traverse, bring forth
against John a Nokes, some instrumens, for evidence of his cause, which few, or
none, beside himself, can read, (at least so as to discern any thing in it
making for him) and plead that in them was evidence enough, except John a Nokes
could prove the contrary. So it is here, about the Altar of Jordan: no
demonstration is first made, how it agrees to the purpose: but we are
challenged to show how it disagreeth. Yet yielding them this liberty, we have
enough to oppose.

2. And first of all, we answer, that this Altar of the two Tribes, was not in
the state, or use, religious, as the Cross is, by the confession of an English
Bishop, Babington on the 2. Commandment.

The Rejoinder 1. opposes out of Mr. Parker, par. 1. sect. 34. and 36. that
religious in use is that which has a religious end: and religious in state,
which is Ecclesiastical, belonging to Gods service. Ergo. But Mr. Parker in
those sect. told him, that religious in a sense common, or mix^ly, all things
are, that are done to an holy end: and religious in sense special, or in
state, all those things are, that have Order, Obligation, and a kind of
Immobilitie, in Gods service. Now the quaestion is not of the former common
mixed sense: but of the later special state: according to which, no man can say
the Altar of Jordan to have been religious, upon ground of Scripture or reason.
Let any man judge then, whether partiality did put out Mr. Parkers eyes (as
the Rej. speaks) or blear theirs, that see not the vanity of this allegation?

3. B. Babingtons words on the 2. Commandment are these: They erected that
Altar, not for religion, but in deed for a civil use, as you may see, Josh. 22.
The Rejoynd. answers, that he calls the Altar civil Analogically, because
it was ordained by consent of fellow-Citizens, which is as mere a shift, as any
yet invented by the Rejoinder. For 1. he calls not the Altar, but the use,
civil. 2. He opposes this civilitie not unto Divine Institution, as the
Rejoinder would have him, but unto the same fellow-Citizens erecting of an
Altar for Religion. 3. What he means, appears plainly, by his third
Proposition, there set down in these terms: It is lawful to make pictures of
things which we have seen, to a civil use, but not to use them in the
Church, and for Religion.

4. To pass over circumstantiall passages, the Def. (proving this Altar to be
appointed unto Gods service, because it was a pattern of the Lords Altar, as
our Cross is a resemblance of Christ's Cross) was 1. reproved by the Replier:
because the Cross, whereon Christ did suffer, was no more holy then Judas: and
so not to be compared unto the Lords Altar. To this the Rejoinder in many
words, makes show of saying something, but I leave it to the Reader, if he
says any thing. I (for my part) can not discern what it is.

5. The Replier also in the second place alleged* that every resemblance of a
holy thing, is not therefore holy: because then every Alehouse picture taken
from holy things mentioned in Scripture, should be holy; and a model of the
Temple, carried by a Tyrian workman, into his country for news, should have
been holy.

To this the Rejoinder (after a few words of course) answers, that this is
to separat the resemblance of a thing, from the use of it. As if the Def. had
not argued simply, and merely, from the resemblance, making, as yet, no mention
of the use! If there be any Sophistry in this argument (as the Rejoinder says
there is) it is first found in the Defender his uncouth reason.

6. The Defender went about to prove, first, that this Altar did mystically
signify a spiritual duty, in respect of the Gileadites then living; viz: to
teach that the Lord was God.

To this it was replied, that it does not appear out of the text, that there
was intended any use for the praesent age, that then lived: nay the contrary
may be gathered out of the 24. and 25. verses: We have done it for f^ar of this
thing, saying: In time to come, your children might speak unto our children,
etc. So shall your children make our children cease from fearing the Lord. The
Rejoinder opposes, that there is afterward mention made of us, and you. But
that is nothing: because it notes only, that the generations to come, may
deny us, on this side Jordan, not to have been joint Tribes with you on the
other side of that River. Upon this, the Repl. concluded, that this Altar was
no direct help unto devotion. To which is rejoyned, that it was not a direct
(that is immediate) help unto devotion; but immediately significative, and
collaterally for devotion it was. Such distinctions I never heard, nor read.
Any man may see, that a Ceremony directly and immediately signifying a
spiritual duty, is a direct and immediate help to devotion. To what other
help, this help was collateral, I would fain know.

A further reason of this conclusion was added: viz: then most of the other
Tribes should have had use of it, and also reason, to have set up Altars of
devotion at every three-way-leet, as Crosses stand. The Rejoinder is 1. that
the other Tribes (no doubt) had use of it, as of a witness that the Lord is
God. Now let any man consider, whether they which ordinarily resorted to the
Tabernacle, and Altar of God, had need of a humane Altar, far remooved from
their sight, to put them in mind, that the LORD was God? And whether the two
Tribes and a half, without the consent, or knowledge of the chief Priests,
the chief Magistrates, the far greater part of people, and power to appoint
unto all Israel a solemn significant Ceremony, for their common use? The Rej.
adds in the 2. place, that all are not bound to the same helps to devotion,
and the other tribes needed no such monument, or pattern, having the Altar it
self in possession. Where 1. except he holds the two Tribes, and a half
bound to set up this Altar, he makes in that no difference: if he so
holds, then it is no instance of a mere Arbitrarie Ceremony. 2. The two
tribes had the Lords Altar in present possession, as well as diverse of the
other: so that by this reason, they also for the present need no such monument
and pattern: which is the very point in this place questioned.

7. The Replier affirmed, that ( in regard of posterity) the immediate end of
this Altar was, to testify, that those Tribes beyond Jordan, belonged to the
same people, and so had right to the same worship, with those of this side
Jordan: which is nothing to a Ceremony of state and immediate use, in the
special solemn worship of God. The Rejoinder asks if this were not a holy
religious end? I answer, It was so holy and religious, as every Land-marke of
a Parsons Glebe-land, or every sign of a Parish-bound is holy and religious:
but not so as mystical Ceremonies. B. Andrews (against Perone, p. 18.) gives
some light to this, by the ancient use of Lights, and incense: There were
lights (says he) there was incense, used by the Primitive Church, in their
service; not for any mystical meaning, but (as it is thought) for this cause,
that where the Christians in time of persecution, had their meetings most
commonly in places dark, and so needing lights, and dampish, and so needing
good savours, they provided lights against one, and incense against the other.
After the Churches retained these things, to show themselves the successors of
those ancient Christians, etc. the After-ages devized meanings and
significations of their own, which from the beginning were not so. If this be
so (as it is thought) then there may be signs of succession unto religious
forefathers, without any mystical meaning: which is all that by us is pleaded
about this Altar of Jordan.

And for further manifesting, (...).
that it was so in this Altar, let it be well considered: what Josephus, one of
the learnedest, and most ancient Jews now exstant, says, Antiq. lib. 5. cap.
4. They placed an Altar on the bank of the river as a memorable sign of the
neerenesse and affinity of them that dwelt beyond Jordan, viz. with them within
Canaan: Again, it was not placed for worship, but symbolically and as a
memorandum of their relation to you.

8. The Rejoinder as having sufficiently confuted all other answers, brings
in one made to himself in conference, (though he has not found it in print)
as a grand absurdity: namely, that the Gileadites did ill, in erecting this
Altar; and the rest also in allowing of it. Now as for allowance by the High
Priest, Princes, and all the Congregation of Israel, which he speaks of, I
find it not evident in the Text. About the other, I find this: 1. that D.
Fulke, no absurd Divine, (against Sanders, of Images, page 649.) writes thus
in print: The two Tribes and a half, Josh. 22. made not an Image, but an Altar
for a memorial: and yet their fact was not commendable, though it was, in some
sort excusable. 2. I find also that Calvin, before him, upon Josh. 22. says
thus: Duae tribus, ^um dimidia, non leviter peccarunt, etc. The two tribes and
a half did very ill: Which is the great absurdity that the Rejoinder had heard
in conference, but not seen in print, before now.

SECT. 17.18.19.20.21. Concerning the Brazen Altar, built by Solomon. 1. King
8.64.
1. THe Defender brings for instance, a Braze^ Altar, built by Solomon. It
was replied, that in the Text, there is no mention either of Altar, or Brass,
or Building, but only of Sanctifying the inner part of the Court. The Rejoyner
answers, tha^ ^he word Brazen slipped in by oversight; the Court may well be
called an Altar, in respect of praesent use. The Rej. before, upon far less
occasion, talked of slipper^^ tricks, etc. but I leave this slipping in, and
out, unto the Readers censure, so that no advantage be made of it, in
prosecution of this Instance.

2. Yet because not only the Defender named a^ Altar, but the Rejoinder also
mainteyneth it for good let us see, what may be answered unto the Replier hi^
collection therfrom; namely, that if man may on hi^ own head appoint an Altar
(as they say) then man may appoint not only accidental worship, but also
such a^ is greater then some essential worship; because the Alta^ which
sanctifies the Offering is greater, then the Offering Mat. 23.19? The
Rejoinder here accuses the Replie^ for want of Judgment, in this allegation:
because tha^ which our Savior says, is proper to that one only Altar in the
Temple, by reason of the special command of God to use them, and their
superadded mystical signification: whereas other Altars were only permitted,
and so helps to the Offerings, but not sanctifiers of them; nay they were
sanctified by the Offeringes; as also the Altars of Gods appointment, in the
time of Moses, Solomon, Ezra, and Machabeus, were first sanctified by the gift
that was offered on them, and so installed in their peculiar privilege, of
sanctifying the Gifts which were afterward offered upon them. For all this, no
consent is showed of any Divine: Only we are bidden to see Zanchie, de Redem.
lib. 1. cap. 16. these. 2.3. Now 1. Zanchie has nothing to the Rejoinder his
purpose: he does not distinguish betwixt Altars commanded and Altars
permitted: but says of the commanded Altars, that they were annexed unto the
acts of worship. And so he does of the Arc it self, and all the principal
and most essential means appointed by God. What can the Rejoinder make of
this? 2. The special command of God was as well for the Offeringes, as for the
Altar: so that cannot be the reason, why the Altar did sanctify the Offering,
more then the Offering the Altar.

And the same aequalitie is in the superadded mystical, and typical
signification. 3. I am sorry to hear from D.B. that the Altars built by Abraham,
Jacob, etc. before Moses, were only permitted. He may as well say, that all
the Sacrifices before Moses, were only permitted. Bellarmine himself, de Eff.
Sacr. lib. 2. cap. 31. confesses, that they were by inspiration, and impulsion
Divine: and all our Divines, disputing against Papists about will worship, make
that Divine instinct, for substance, a Divine command. 4. How could Altars be
sanctified by Offeringes, when the Offerings themselfs were not in state of
sanctification actually, and properly, before they came to the Altars? He that
left his gift at the Altar, that is ready to lay it thereon, and then went to be
reconciled with his brother, had not yet actually sanctified the same. 5. The
Altars of Moses, and Solomon, were not first Sanctified by Offeringes upon
them, but by Moses his Annoynting: the manifestation of Gods glorious praesence
in a Cloud, filling the Tabernacle, and Temple: and by that fire which came
down from heaven to consume the Sacrifice. Ex. 40. Lev. 8. and 9, 1. King. 8.
2. Chr. 7.6. If Salomons sanctified Court* did not sanctify the Sacrifices
offered thereon, then either those Sacrifices were less holy, then those which
were offered on the Altar, and sanctified thereby: or else they had more
sanctifying virtue in them, then the other, which did not sanctify their
Altar, as those did their Court. The like may be said, and more also, of
Abraham's Altars, etc. but this is enough.

3. Our first answer is the same that D. Whitakers, D. Sutlife, etc. gives to
Bellarmine (who de Pont. lib* 4. cap. 19. has the same objection against
Calvin) Quicquid Solomon fecit, id Dei authoritate and Spiritus Sancti nutu
fecit (says D. Whitakers) that is, Solomon did this by Divine authority, and
instinct of the H. Ghost. The Rej. excepteth 1. that Bellarmine would prove by
this example, proper, essential worship, by man ordained. But if he had looked
upon the chapter quoted, he might have seen, that the only quaestion there,
is, whether it was sin, for men, by their own authority, to erect a new
Altar in the Temple? And this the Def. and Rej. with Bellarmine deny, against
Calvin. 2. He adds, that all our Divines do not give this answer alone. As
if we also did not follow them, in adding other answers to this!

4. Our second answer (for I will not dwell on words) is, that Solomon did
this from aequitie of the Law. This is Iunius his answer to Bellarmine, Cont.
3. lib. 4. cap. 9. It was done extraordinarily and by singular occasion and
ac^ording to the Analogy of the commune ground, whereby they did other things,
and it may be by special revelation. Hoc factum est extra ordinem, and
occasion singulari, on necessitate prasenti, cui per analogian communis juris,
prospectum e^^ a Salomone, Rege: forte etiam particulars revelatione.
To this the Defend. answered, that this interpretation overthrows the
former. Nothing less (says the Replier) because Solomon might be directed, to
see, and authorized to follow that aequitie. The Rej. here, having little reason
to oppose, puts down, in stead of it, great words: as this is to confound
Ordinary, and Extraordinary; Special, and Common; Scripture Light, and
immediate Revelation; and so has no sense in it. And what show of wool for this
great cry? May not one be extraordinarily, specially, and immediately
directed, to see that Scripture Light which in it self has ordinary, and
common shining? Surely, the Apostles had ex^raordinarie, special, immediate
direction, to see the meaning of diverse passages in the old Testament (as the
allegorical meaning of Sara and Hagar, Sinay and Sion, etc.) which was before
contained in the Scripture.

Yet (adds the Rejoinder) Solomon (by this reason) needed no special
Authority. Which I grant, if he be considered as a perfect man; but if he be
conceived as Peter, who after he was sent unto all Nations, needed after a
Vision from Heaven, to send him unto the Gentiles, then this consequence is
nothing worth.

4. Passing over the third answer (in pity) the fourth is, that this
sanctification of the Court by Solomon, was no addition of a diverse kind. This
is Danaeus his answer to Bellarmine, Cont. lib. 1. cap. 19. To this the
Defender answered nothing, which either the Replier thought worthy any answer,
or Rejoinder of improving. So that I need not add any thing to it, but only a
fitting explication which I find in Tostatus (in 3. Reg. cap. 8.) thus
expressed: It was lawful to do^ what Solomon did, because though it were
forbid to offer sacrifice elsewhere then at the Altar of whole burnt-offerings;
yet now upon necessity it might be, when the Altar was not sufficient to hold
all. Nor did Solomon against the Law, because now sacrifices were burnt at the
Altar, and on the Altar together, and so the whole Court of the Priests was in
a manner but as one Altar, and the intent of the Law was no other, then that
they should not offer in diverse places, but here was but one continued place.
Licin^^ fuit quod (...) Solomon quia, licet prohibitum asset, of^erri
sacrificia alibi, quam in Altari Hol^caustorum, tamen nunc ex necessitate,
licuit, cum non possint capi sacrificia super Altar^. Etiam non videbaturagi
contra legem: quia nunc cremebantur sacrificia apud Altar, and simul in
Altari, and ^ic videbatur totum Atrium Sacerdo^^m esse tanquam unum Altar.
Intentio autem Legis erat, ut non offerrerentur sacrificia in diversis locis.


SECT. 22. Concerning Synogogues.
TO this simple instance, the Replier answered, 1. that Synagogues were no
significant Ceremonies. 2. That it is most likely, they were first founded by
those Prophets, which brought in Schools of the Prophets. 3. That in them,
there was (of old) no significant humane Ceremony used. To the first is
rejoyned, that the Synagogues bare some representation of the Sanctuary. But I
ask, How? Was this representation in matter, or form, or use? He seems to
refer it unto use, in resorting to solemn worship. Now let any man consider,
whether every place apppointed for solemn worship, be a significant Ceremony?
If so, then no Anabaptists ever denied significant Ceremonies of
mansappointing, which yet the Rejoynderaccused them for. But this fond conceyt
is sufficiently confuted in the first part of this writing, Chap. 4. and 5. Yet
suppose the Synagogues had been a repraesentation of the Sanctuary, which was
a Ceremony; is every repraesentation of a Ceremony, a new Ceremony? then any
man may make more Ceremonies, then there are men in his Parish. The second
(about the founding of Synagogues by Prophets) which the Repl. said, is most
likely, the Rejoinder makes a bold affirmation, without proof. But what
boldness is, in conjecturing that to be likely, which no man can give any
likely reason against? The third (of no humane significant Ceremonies used in
Synagogues) is absolutely pronounced false. But no reason of this sentence is
given out of the Scriptures, but only that they used there reverend gestures:
as if all reverend gestures were significant Ceremonies of man's invention! The
rest that he quoteth out of Purchase his Pilgrimage, are wandering Pilgrims,
without house or home, and therefore worthy no other answer, but that which our
law has provided for Vagabondes

SECT. 23.24.25.26. Concerning Love Feasts.
1. THe Instances out of the old Testament were such, as we have now showed
them to be: Out of the new Testament first are brought in the Feasts of love,
or charity. Now concerning these Feasts, no man can certainly inform us, who
did appoint them! I mervayl (says the Apostle, according to Erasmus his
Paraphrase, on 1. Cor. 11.) Quis ritus istos i^ vos invexerit: who brought-in
these Love Feasts? No man can tell us, what religious signification was by
institution annexed unto them? Nay it cannot be showed, where they are spoken
of, without reproof? Yet the Defend. and Rejoynd. will needs have them
significant humane Ceremonies, ordained, and used by the Apostles.

2. To this, it was 1. answered by Mr. Nic. that if they were of Apostolical,
then they were of Divine insti^ution. Then which (says the Defender) he could
not have uttered a more unlearned position. Nay soft (it was replied) this
censure is too too Magisteriall: because to say that that which came from the
Apostles, as Apostles, came from the Spirit of God, is no unlearned Position. O
yes (answers the Rejoinder) because the Apostles ordained some things, not as
Apostles, not by immediate revelation, but by the direction and authority of
Gods Word. In which kind of rejoyning, I see no more learning then needs must.
1. The quaestion was of Apostolical institutions: the answer is of that which
the Apostles did, but not as Apostles, that is not properly Apostolical. 2.
That which is manifested by the Holy Ghost shining ^n the Word (they are the
Rejoinder his words) is de^ied to be Divine. 3. No example is, or can be
brought, of a new significant Ceremony instituted by the Apost^es, without
immediate revelation. The allegations op^osed, may fill up paper, but not
satisfy any reasonable Reader.

3. For removing of that Magisteriall censure of the ^reat unlearnednesse of
the fore-sayd Position, it was no^ed that some learned men, were authors of it,
or parta^ers in it. Iunius is one: who (Cont. 1. lib. 4. cap. 2. an. 6) ^ayth,
that this distinction betwixt Divine and Apostoli^all traditions, is almost
imaginary and superfluous. Where ^he Rejoinder has nothing to catch at, but
only that ^article almost. Take therefore another place of the same ^unius (in
his Hidelberg Theses de Traditionibus, th. 24) where without almost, he says
fully thus: The distinction of traditions into Divine and Apostolical is a
false distinction, because such traditions are of one sort, for there be no
Apostolical traditions but such as are delivered from God. Falso divinae
traditiones a^ Apostolicis distinguuntur, quae unum reipsa sunt: nam
Apostolicae nullae sunt, nisi a Deo tradit^.


4. It was added also by the Replier that Danaeus (upon the same place) calls
it a childish distribution. True (says the Rejoynd.) but he means by
Apostolical, things determined by the Apostles, by their ordinary faculty,
as Pastors, and yet having the same authority with their writings: Now let the
Reader mark, that the Defender his charge of unlearned rudeness, depended on
this, if Apostolical traditions may be called Divine, as being commanded of
God. To talk here of faculty, ordinary, pastors, authority equal to
Scripture, etc. it is nothing else, but to bring him unto loss. Neither is, or
can this limitation be justified by any other proof then the Rej. his own
testimony.

5. When the Repl. spoke of more learned men allowing of the foresaid position,
and rejecting the distinction made betwixt Divine and Apostolical traditions;
the Rejoinder stays him, and confesses that the distinction is ridiculous,
in the Papists sense: yet (says he) in another sense (not telling what) it may
stand. And is the great charge of a most unlearned Position come now to this:
the contrary words in some sense may stand? Be sparing (my masters) in crying
down your poor neighbors, for such extreme want of learning, when you^
opposite learning can scarce stand in any sense.

6. After these testimonies, the Replier inquired into the Logic of this
distinction between Divine and Apostolical traditions. But the Rejoinder
corrects his interpretation, and says this distinction is taken chiefly
from the different Authors, Christ, and the Apostles. Be it so: yet it were not
extreme rudeness, to say that whatsoever the Apostles as the Apostles of
Christ, appointed, that Christ himself appointed. But says the Rejoinder,
some things were appointed by Christ himself immediately, and others by the
Apostles occasionally. Which is true: yet 1. this overthrows that which was
even now alleged, that this distinction is chiefly taken from different
Authors: because this is only a difference of manner, as Polanus (Syntag. lib.
1. cap. 47.) does clearly manifest, in his large confutation of this self
same distinction. 2. By the same or somewhat like reason, a distinction may be
made, betwixt the word of God, and the word of the Prophets, 3. It were worth
the knowing, upon what occasion these Feasts were ordained by the Apostles?

7. It is brought in by the Def. as a second answer of Mr. Nic. That these
Love Feasts, were abrogated by the Apostles. From which he gathers, that then
they were not of divine institution. No say we, nor yet Apostolical. For it
was only said before, that if they were of one, they were also of the other:
but not positively that they were of either. So that the Defender forgot, when
he inferred: So this second answer confuteth the first.

8. The third answer of the same Mr. Nic. was (as it is reported) that these
Love Feasts were not of mystical signification, nor yet merely
Ecclesiastical. And this the Replier undertook to mainteyne: because no
signification was added unto their nature by any institution, so far as by
any certain evidence can be declared.

The Rejoinder opposes, that the appropriating of their natural
signification, to the signifying of Christian love, might be in that use, by
Ordination. Where, First might be, is not a proof: and we require in an
instance objected for an Argument, that it should be prooved fitting. Secondly,
Every Ordination does not infer mystical signification. I^ it be ordained
(as it is) that Collection of Alms, for the poor, be used in the Church,
has it therefore a new mystical signification put upon it above that which it
would have out of the Church?

9. Ecclesiastical the Replier denied these Feasts to have been, or
Religious, because they were used in the same manner, or to the same end, out
of the assemblies, that is, to the relief of the poor, and maintenance of
brotherly love. The Rejoinder, First, opposes appropriation: as if all things
used in the Church, were appropriated to it! So common salutations used at
Church should be appropriations. He secondly concludes from thence, that (by
this reason) Eating of things offered to Idols, in the idols Temple, should not
be religious. But this does not agree; except the meat used in Love Feasts,
were first sacrificed to God: which yet has not been prooved: nor then,
except the eating of things offered to Idols, were merely religious; which the
Christians of Corinth (ep. 1. cap. 8.) did not think, nor the Apostle teach.
Yet might those Eatings have such a relation unto the Idols, as might make them
superstitious (even without that superstitious opinion which the Defender and
Rejo. require unto superstition) though such a relation unto the true God, and
his religion, do not make feas^s by man invented, truly and merely religi^us.

10. It was finally replied, that the Ordination of these feasts cannot be
showed, to have been Apostolical: and to that pu^pose P. Martyr was alleged,
in 1, Cor. 11.22. The Rejoinder opposes 1. that the Argume^^ so much the
stronger: Videmus holoco quam sit periculosu^^, Divinis institutis addere. Quod
factum est a Corinthiis, qui sine Verbo Dei, convivia haec admiscuerunt etc.
because then they were merely of humane institution, and yet had Apostolical
approbation. Secondly, that P. Martyr confesses the same feasts to be
mentioned every where in the fathers, as a thing descended to them, from the
Apostles, as their Springhead.

To the first, I answer, Frst, that the Def. his Argument which was taken from
the ordination of the Apostles, cannot possibly be strong at all, Hinc
videmiuin totum displicuisse Apostolo conviva^di morem, etiamsi abesse^ ille
superior abusus. Vitiosum est conv^rtere in alienes usus sacrum conventum etc.
if these Feasts were not of Apostolical ordination. Secondly, Apostolical
Approbation of them, has not yet been prooved. As for P. Martyr, his
testimony is clear. We see here how dangerous it is to add to divine
institutions, which the Corinthians did, setting up these feasts without
warrant from the word. To P. Ma^tyr, add Calvin, upon the same place: In
Agapis, hoc primum reprehendendum fuit quod Christi D. institutum non
simplicite^ observarunt, sed ei aliquid addiderunt. Apostolot eo^ ad primam
institutionem revocabat. Sed non tanta ejus fuit apud posteros authoritas, quo
minus, ad Corinthiorum exemplum multo quidem zelo pio, ac ^ono, inconsulto
tamen instituerint, quae tandem nocentissimas superstitiones p^pererunt.
We may see hence, that their manner of feasting wholly ^ispleased the
Apostles, allbeit the forementioned abuse were away. It is not well to turn a
holy meeting into strange customs. As for the after-continuation of like
feasts, which the Rejoinder makes so much of; Hospinian (Histor. Sacram. lib.
1. cap. 6.) answers fully: This was first to be found fault with in their
love feasts, that they did not in simplicity keep the institution of Christ,
but added somewhat thereto. The Apostle recalled them to the first institution.
But it seems his authority was not such with them that came after, but that as
the Corinthians had done, so also they would appoint many things in great
zeal, I confess: but very unadvisedly, which also in time brought in most
pestilent superstitions.

SECT. 27. Concerning the kiss of Charity.
1. THis instance is like the former, in that neither the institution, nor the
mystical signification of it can be showed out of Scripture. Our answer also
is the same with that before: It is a natural indicant sign of peace and
reconciliation; used in those parts, as embracing, and shaking of hands, with
us. For this Mr. Nic. is accused, as more civil, or rather uncivil, then
spiritual. But with whom the civility or uncivility about this matter rests,
neither the Def. nor Rej. are fit Judges. It may prove this charge has as
little ground, as the other of an extreme unlearned Position.

2. The Replier passed over allegations mentioned by the Def. as Oratoriall
Phrases: but the Rejoinder will have them Explicatorie; and sets them down
again, at large. I will therefore take the said Allegations into a summarie
consideration. He cites Justin, Origin, Tertullian, Cyrill, Clemens Al. not
noting the places where their words are to be found. But Baronius had An. 45.
(out of whom he seems to have borrowed these quotations) affords us some
light that way. Where this is by the way to be marked, that Cardinal Baronius
himself concludes no more out of them then this: Centilium oscula, pacis and
amoru symbola, non tollenda, sed moderand^ inter Christian^s, eurarwit
Apo^^oli, dum ecs se invic^m salutare debera osculo sancto, se^e admonuerunt.
The kisses of the Gentiles being tokens of peace and love are not to be quite
taken away but with a kind of moderation to be used among Christians, as the
Apostles provided when they so often put them in mind of Saluting one another
with a holy kiss. Out of the two first, nothing is alleged, but that when
Prayers were ended, Christians were wont to salute one another with a kiss:
which proves nothing more then we grant.

Tertullian calls it Signaculum Orationis, the Seal of Prayer; the words of
prayer therein used being Peace be unto thee. Now though Tertullian makes no
words of this form of Prayer to be used; yet suppose all: 1. this is
manifestly an Oratoriall phraze (which the Rejoinder denied) not Explicatorie,
but needing explication; which yet I will not spend time about. 2. Tertullian
according to his hyperbolicall fashion, ascribes so much to this Kiss, as
smells of Superstition: Quae orati^ cum divortio sa^cti osculi integra?
What prayer is there perfect which is separated from a holy kiss? He shows
notwithstanding that it was used in private houses as well as in the
Congregation: Potet domi forsan differ pacem.
At home perhaps you may put of till another time the Salutation of peace. 4.
He discovers a custom something contradictorie to his former assertion. At
Easter we do well to lay aside the Kiss. 5. Die Paschae, merito depenimus
osculum.
There were even in Tertullians time, diverse superstitions creeping in among
Christians, about prayer, as he in that his treatise of Prayer shows:
Washing, doffing of cloakes, sitting upon beds. What then can be made of this
testimony?

Cy^^ll is the next, who calls it Signaculum reconciliationis, quo in sacris
utim^r: the Seal of reconciliation used in Divine Service. But 1. we may well
quaestion the Author of that Catechism, whether Cyrill was he (as D. Andrues
says, in his answer to the 18. chap. of Person, page 3.) 2. Whosoever was the
Author, he was so prodigal of dealing significations, according to his
pleasure, that we may say of him, as Ierom of Origin, His brains were the
Churches Sacraments: Ingenium suum Ecclesia fecit Sacramenta.
so that he has no credit left about such things. 3. How do Tertullian and
Cyrill agree in their testimony? One says, the Kiss was a Seal of Prayer;
the other, that it was a Seal of Reconciliation. 4. The same Cyrill, in the
same place, Cat. 5. gives another mystery of Kissing: Because Christ's body
goes thorough our mouth. Just so therefore we kiss the mouth as we do the
doors we enter into the Church by. Quia per o^ nostrum ingreditur corpus
Christi: illud ergo osculamur, perinde ac januas osculamur, per quas in
Ecclesiam ingredimur.
How does he agree then with him-self?

Clemens is the last: who calls this gesture Mystical, (Paedag. lib. 3.)
But this was a Rhetorical phraze. For it signifies nothing else (as the
fore-goeing words show) but that they should not use it, qui non habent intus
amicitiam; but as a true sign of good will. In the words also next following
that common salutations ( dilectorum in via salutationes) should be with
mystical grace, mystice, intus, amanter and benign alloqui. Now let the Def.
and Rejoynd. cast up their accounts, and tell, what they have gained by these
Testimonies more then before was given them?

3. But yet (says the Defend.) this gesture is called Holy, and the object of
it is Peace: It Is true: But all our civil actions ought to be such as
becomes Saints, 1. e. so far Holy for manner, that they be free from sin;
and to the Glory of God: many also have Peace for their direct object.

Furthermore, if this Kiss was holy in the nature of it, I ask whether a
repraesentation of it may not be made also for a holy use, as the Altar of
Jordan, and the Synogogues were in the Def. and Rejoynders opinion? And if so,
why have we not a Pax to kiss at the Communion? I see not (by these tenets)
what should keep out Paxes, more then Altars, with bowing to them, but only
the mere pleasure of our Prelates Regent.

Now we have thus dispached the Defender we need not trouble our selves with
his Second, the Rejoinder proceeding another way, against the Replier. Yet I
will note what new weapons he uses.

4. The Rejoinder thinks it strange, that constant Application by direction,
or custom, should not be Institution. But it is no more strange, then that the
common using of one way from Lichefild, to Coventrie, or from thence to
Coldfeild, may be without Institution; or that the same word which of old
signified Love, is now among Christians commonly applied unto Christian Love,
without any new institution.

5. He says, that natural fitness for signification, does hinder
Institution. True: but fitness, with actual use for signifying of true love,
does praevent an institution of the same signification: as the former
signification of the word Love, does so hinder a new institution of the same
word to signify Christian love, that it would make the Authors of such an
institution, ridiculous, and idle.

6. He affirms, that the ordained seating of a Minister in an higher place,
in way of Reverence to his Function, is as Mystical a Ceremony, as the Cross
in Baptism. Then (say I) a Mothers kissing of her froward child, in the
Church to still it, in reverence to Preaching or Praying, is as Mystical a
Ceremony, as the Kiss of Peace. And what need any other institution, then
constant application of such gestures, by the Rejoinder his rule?

7. He quoteth Calvin, upon the place, as for him, whom every man that will,
may see to be against him. So Beza, and Paraeus. Only he has a little show
(but no substance) out of P. Martyr his words, upon 1. Cor. 16.20. Who yet
upon Romans 16.16. in few words, shows his meaning all one with ours: and his
judgment of humane significant Ceremonies has been before declared.

8. Notwithstanding all this weakness of his praemisses, he concludes
strongly, that those which do not yield unto his proofs, have themselves,
above all other men, in estimation for soundness of judgment. To which I will
only say this, we have (by Gods grace) more judment, then either to accuse
others so vainly, or to make any account of this accusasion, as if it would
prejudice us with any man of judgment.

SECT. 28 Concerning Women's Vailes. 1. Cor. 11.
1. THe last example of Apostolical Humane, Significant Ceremonies by
Institution, and Appropriated unto Gods worship, is a Woman's Veil, such as a
Huik is, in the Low Countries, or a french Hood, with a Bon-grace, was wont to
be in England. Now at this it was answered, that the Veil was neither
Apostolical, nor merely of humane institution, nor of instituted
signification, nor yet appropriated unto Gods worship: but a civil order of
decency, used as well out of Gods worship as in it. And the Rejoinder
grants, that it was a civil custom: but adds, that it is as absurd, from
thence to conclude, that it was in religious worship civil, and not religious,
as to affirm this of blowing of Trumpets in the new Moons, etc. Where first,
he should have remembered, that we are here in answering, not in prooving, and
concluding, which is the Def. his part. Secondly, The Replier said it was a
civil order of decency, expressing the immediate end, which it had as well
in, as out of worship, which will well bear this conclu^ion: that it was no
more religious, then Women's proper apparel, long garments, etc. (to which
Chrysostom upon 1. Cor. 11.) compares the Veil, as one part to another, or
their shoes, or slippers are. 3. Concerning Trumpets, in some use of them, we
have their instituted signification, expressly set down in the Word, Nunb. 10.
show the like, for going to Church in shoes, or Vailes; and then we will
confess a paritie of reason.

2. The Def. proceeding by interrogatories, makes this the first: whether the
Veil was not significant of some good thing? To which the Repl. answered, yes,
it did declare, or argue a good thing, as indeed all civil apparel of modest
fashion does. For this he is checked, and bidden to stand by, with his answer
while his elders speak. As if we were now in the High Commission; and he as
Commissioner, might prescribe us when, and how much we may speak for our
selves, though much without ground be spoken against us, and interrogatories
propounded to the prejudice of our cause!

3. He asked secondly, what it did signify? Answer was made, that it signified
subjection to superior power. Then a moral duty was professed by it, says
the Rej. just so, as modesty, and shamefastness, gravity, and care of not
offending, are professed by all apparel of modest honest fashion. And yet I
never heard all modest apparel called a mystical religious Ceremony.
Theophilact (in Cor. 11.) makes a man's beard like and equal unto his
uncovering in signification. And will the Def. and Rej. say, that Beards are
religious mystical Ceremonies?

4. The Def. added, that it had some relation unto God. To which it was
answered, that so there is in an upper Seat, of an Heathen Magistrate, sitting
in judgment: which yet is no mystical Ceremony of religion. The Rej.
(altering first* the case, into a throne set up to that end, to represent the
Sovereignty of God, for religious cognizance, and document) affirms the Seat
of a Heathen Judge, to be a mystical Ceremony of Religion. Now set aside his
changing of the question, and take him as answering, that everry Seat, of
judgment among all Heathen, is such a Ceremony; and then, let any man
consider, if he has not brought his pigges to a fair market? Seats of
Justice, are religious Ceremonies, even among those that know not what religion
means: what is become of intended immediate, though improper worship, which
he is wont to require as necessary unto a religious Ceremony of mystical
signification? He may as well say, that such vailes as Tamars was wherewith
she deceived Judah, even unto incest, was religious Ceremonies among the
Heathen; because a Veil (in the nature of it) declares a moral duty. For
many of those Seats (in their nature tending to justice) are but vailes of
injustice, as Tamars was of uncleanness. If those High-seates be religious
Ceremonies, then the bowing of inferiors unto them, kissing of their feet, or
foot-stooles, must be such also. Why then did the Def. seek (as with a candle
and lant-horne) in every dark corner for instances or examples of religious
significant Ceremonies of man's appointing? every civil meeting, every Company
of Soldiers, every School of Children can afford examples enough, and more
then enough.

5. It was added, by the Repl. that the Def. allegeth nothing out of Divines,
which may not as well be applied to the Judges Bench, as to the Veil of
Women. Yes, this (says the Rej.) that the one used in civil actions, is
religious in use only, not in state: the other used in religious actions, is
religious, both in state and use; which is (says he) Mr. Parkers distinction.
Now 1. there was no such distinction as this, alleged by the Def. out of our
Divines: so that this contradicts not that which the Repl. affirmed. 2. This
distinction as it is here explained, was never used by Mr Parker, or (as I
think) by any reasonable man, before now: A circumstance used in civil
actions, is religious in use; the like used in religious actions is religious
in use and state. Is the Criers O wize Religious in use, because, or as it is
used in civil actions? And is the Paraters citation religious in state,
because, or as it was used in Spiritual Courts? 3. What if ^udges have a
peculiar Seat in the Church, as in diverse places, they have? Is that Seat
therefore religious in state, as an Altar, a Cross, the Chair of Peter, etc.?

6. The Repl. also observed, that the Veil was of the same nature with long
hair, such as becomes women; and therefore, no religious mystical
Ceremony. No (says the Rej.) because long hair is of nature; and the Veil
of institution, which to a Ceremony is essential. To which I oppose 1. the
true observation of P. Martyr, the Def. his chief witness, about this
instance: A woman ought seeing her hair is given her of God, to follow this
his institution, and to imitate her Maker, and cover her head: which if she
will not do, as much as is in her, she throws off the natural veil. Debet
mulier, cum dat asit ipsi coma a Deo, hoc illius institutum sequi. and imitari
factorem suum, ut caput conte^at: quod si sacere nolit, quantum in ipsae est*
natural t^gmen ex^usit, etc.
where he shows that it is so natural, that it cannot be imitated without
some violation of nature, by any woman, though no new institution impose it
upon her. 2. Chrysostom (upon the same place) has this: That is from nature
it self, Illud a natura institutum est, quod scilicet velaremus caput
(mulieres) and non velaremus (viri) Natura ut mulier regeretur, voluit, ut inde
docta regeretur.
that we women should cover our heads, and we men should uncover our heads.
Nature would that women should be covered: she is taught to be covered even
from thence. 3. Paul himself says not only that nature it self has taught
women to use a veil; but also, that the disguising of it is all one, with
shaving: so that long hair, and a veil, according to the Apostle, is all one,
for the ground of it. If therefore special institution, above nature, be
essential to a Ceremony, then certainly vailing of women is no Ceremony;
much less religious, and mystical significant, by institution humane.

7. The Def. his third demand was, whether these Ceremonies of covering, and
uncovering, were not instituted to be observed in Gods public worship? Answer
was given (by the Repl.) that this indeed was required, in every grave meeting
of men and women: but not primarily, and principally instituted for Gods
worship. Paul surely did not institute them for new Ceremonies, but only urged
the Corinthians, not to neglect them, as being natural. The Rej. opposes 1.
that requiring is an institution. As if the Kings requiring his subjects to
observe Christ's institutions, did therefore institute the Sacraments, etc. 2.
His second answer is, that application, by injunction, was (as it were) an
institution. So that by and (as it were) the Lords Sacraments have been so
often instituted, as they have been applied, and enjoined; that is an hundred
thousand times, and more. But if any man will needs use the term institution
in such a sense, that is nothing to our question; which is of Ceremonies, whose
first author and appointer, in special, was man. Otherwise, all Divine
Ceremonies will prove humane institutions; and so the Rej. has disputed all
this while, about nothing. The rest of the Rej. his words, in this Section,
are either mere repetitions of confuted fictions, or such as need no
confutation, I may well again repeat (as justified) the Repl. conclusion:
Seeing the Def. could find but three examples of humane Ceremonies, in all the
new Testament; and none of those there can be showed, to be of mystical
signification, or appropriated only to Gods worship, or of humane institution;
the Prelates may be ashamed in such domineering fashion, to urge humane
Ceremonies upon the consciences of Ministers and People of the new Testament.

SECT. 29. Concerning the Ancient Custom of Significant Ceremonies among
Christians.
1. AS the Def. was passing over from Scriptures, to humane writings, and
customs, he was told by the Replier, that here he may find more fish for
his net, in the troubled waters of man's infirmity, then were to be looked for
in the Scripture fountains. This the Rej. thought not worthy of any answer.
Let the Reader yet take knowledge, that we esteem not any thing like of a
thousand objections fetched from testimony subject to error, as we would have
done of one plain testimony Divine, if it could have been produced.

2. The oldest Records we have (says the Rej.) do mention humane mystical
Ceremonies in Gods worship, as Apostolical traditions. Which 1. is not true:
because those which call them Apostolical, use not to call, or esteem them
humane. 2 The Records of the first age, which we have, are so imperfect, and
uncertain, that God (in so disposing of them by his Providence) does in a
manner warn us, not to depend on them, but only on his written Word. 3. The
great variety that was found, in the first ages, about the observation of
Lent, and Easter, does manifestly prove, they were not Apostolical: as
Chamier shows (De jejunio, cap. 7.) Not out of any certain law, but out of
private devotions, and consequently Superstition. Not ex ul^a lege ce^ta, sed
en privat^s religionibus, atgue adeo superstitionibus*
In the next place, for a maine ground of this assertion (that the universal
Church observing humane Rites, took them to have been of Apostolical
allowance) the Rej. brings in the common text of Papists, out of Augustine,
ep. 118. Such universal observations, not being written in Scripture, must be
understood to be commanded by general Councels, or from the Apostles. Where 1.
he faulteth twice in the translation, in (turning dantur intelligi, into must
be understood, when D. Morton himself (Pr. Ap. lib. 2. cap. 28. ^. 3.) makes
a strong probability only; and in turning commendata, by into commanded. 2.
This being but a probable rule, and And Augustines conjecture of that
probability, being also but probable, it may fail, with all that is built upon
it. 3. Chamier (in the place forementioned) answers Bellarmine about it,
that it must either include the Apostles time (whose history is in Scripture)
and so the humane Ceremonies come not within the compass of it; or else it may
be denied as false. 4. If this rule be good, then Apostolical Ceremonies
cannot be known from other, but only by those who know certainly what is and
has been always observed in all Churches: which will fall hard upon most
Christians. 5. Augustine (in the same place) complains of men's presumptions
and burdensome Ceremonies, contrary to Christ his merciful institution;
requiring the easiness and lightness of that yoke or burden which Christ has
imposed in his Sacraments, to be still preserved in the Church. Now those
Ceremonial observations, which are said to have been universal in the
Primitive Church, did not agree to this rule. For they had then in common use,
beside other solemnities, fifty Holy Days, betwixt Easter, and Pentecost,
Ambrose in Luc. 17. of which Tertullian boasts (lib. de Idololatria, cap.
13.) that they were more then the Heathen used: Excerpe singulas Solemnitates
Nationum, and in ordinem ^exe, Pentecosten explor^ n^n possunt.
Reckon all the observations of the Heathen in order, and they will never fill
up Pentecost. They had also with Lent and all) more then fifty fasting-dayes.
Add unto these, the Ceremonies the which Tertullian reckons up, de Corona
cap. 3. and then, I ask, if any man can upon consideration, believe, that all
these were either Apostolical, or so accounted by Augustine? Certainly, to
exced or equal the Heathen, in humane observations, was not agreeable to the
Apostles rules, nor the Fathers. 6. It is a received rule, that the writings of
the Apostles, are the only certain rule of true Apostolical traditions. D.
Fulke, Rej. ag. Brist. cap. 7. But this rule, as it is understood by our Rej.
makes those writings not the only certain rule.

4. The Fathers practice (says the Rej.) interpreted their rules touching the
perfection of Scripture, and purity of Gods worship, to be understood of
necessary doctrine, and proper worship. The contrary whereof appears, partly
by the forementioned place of Augustine, where he complains of the
Ceremonies which he practiced, as disagreeing from the Doctrine of the Gospel
which he taught. Beside, (because proper worship has been discussed in its
proper place) it would be inquired, what the Rej. means by necessary
doctrine? If he means only that doctrine which is absolutely necessary to
salvation, it is a poor commendation of Scripture-perfection: because that is
found in every good Catechism; and Bellarmine himself does not deny that
perfection to Scripture. I cannot guess at his thoughts, by his words: because
(to my remembrance) this distinction (betwixt necessary, and unnecessary
doctrine) is (...), in this place only let fall. But for the interpretation of
doctrine, by practice, if the Rejoinder will have this hold in the ancient
times, what reason can he give that it should not also hold in our time? If so,
then why is not our argument good: Calvin, Bucer, Beza, the Divines of
Helvetia, France, Netherland, etc. have in their practice, banished Cross,
Surplice and kneeling, Ergo, their doctrine is against them?

5. The Rej. calls it, a spirit of singular singularity, to think, the whole
Church, in the days of purest zeal, and frequent martyrdom, did not du^ly
exami^e the^r Cerem^nies. And yet the same Rej. (without any spirit of singular
singularity) acknowledges, that in the two first ages, after the Apostles,
there was either want of clearness, or a manifest touch of error, about some
sixteen points of doctrine, very important: page 458. Which if he will
reconcile with this affected accusation, he must say, that Christians in those
times, more attended to certain humane Ceremonies, then to diverse points of
divine doctrine, though in the maine power of Godliness they went beyond those
which are purer both in Ceremonies and doctrine. But the truth is, he spoke
there for excessive commendation of our English-Church-doctrine, and so, in
comparison, depressed the Primitive; and here he seeks to defend our
Ceremonies, by theirs, and so extolleth their judgment of Ceremonies; in both
places (according to occasion) exceeding the just measure, as it usually
falls out to those, who dispute out of affection, more then out of judgment.

6. The Rej. takes it ill, that the Repl. should say, that the bringing in of
humane Ceremonies, made any way for Antichristian supers^ition. But seeing that
the Antichristian Papists, argue so strongly from those first humane
Ceremonies, to diverse of those which they use, and by us are rejected, that
they cannot be fully confuted, but by rejecting of both, I see no reason for
his indignation. Gideons Ephod, in the argument of the eight chapter of Judges
(according to our new translation) was a cause of Idolatry. And was not the
old crossing, at every step, at every coming to and going out, Ad (...)
progressum, atque promotum, ad omnem ad itum, and exiitum, ad vestitum and
calceatum, ad lavacrae, ad monsat, ad lumina, ad cub^iie, ad s^dil^a (sert. a^
Corona.
at the apparreling themselves, at washing, at eating, at lighting candles, at
sitting, etc. as a great cause of that Idolatry which has been, and is-used,
about the cross? D. Fulke (in his Rej. to Bristow, cap. 3.) mainteyneth, that
many abuses and corruptions, entered into the Church, immediately after the
Apostles time, which the Devil planted, as a preparative for Antichrist. The
same Doctor also (ibid. sect. 4) proves many Ceremonies of the Primitive
times, to have been unprofitable; because they are abrogated. And (cap. 9.) he
says plainly, that the error of conceiving and using some superstitions, or
superfluous Ceremonies, is common to the Fathers, with Papists.

6. A great matter is made of that which the Replier said, concerning 1500.
years experience of humane significant Ceremonies. For about this the Rej.
says, that it is wonderful rashness, answering the spirit of montanus, to
challenge the whole Church of error, in this matter, for 1500. years. But 1.
it is rashness in the Rej. to accuse one of challenging the whole Church, who
mentioned not, in his challenge, either Church or whole. 2. The whole Church
cannot be understood, except the Waldenses and all like unto them, that is the
purer part, be excluded out of the whole Church. 3. Doctor Morton himself
(Prot. Apol. cap. 25. sect. 9.) maintains this sentence of Mr. Calfhill: the
Fathers declined all from the simplicity of the Gospel, in Ceremonies; if by
simplicity be understood a virtue, opposite, either unto superfluity, or
superstition. And And are not superfluity and superstition, errors? 4. From the
primitive times by the space of six hundred years, the Church generally
erred, in giving the Lords Supper unto infants, as D. Morton shows (Prot.
Apol. l. 2. cap. 25. sect. 10.) and after that for many hundred years, it
mended (for the common course of errors) as sour ale does in Summer. 5. The
Rej. cannot name any Church in all that time free from errors: neither can he
deny, but the Church that erreth in doctrine, may err in Ceremonies. Ergo. 6.
He was unhappie in mentioning Montanus his spirit, which breathed, and
broached so many humane Ceremonies, that the Church has ever since been more
wronged thereby, in Ceremonies, then in any other respect, or by any other
spirit of that time, as all men know, that have read those writings of
Tertullian, which were dictated by a piece of Montanus his spirit. Montanus
would have three Lents, in stead of one: Montanus advanced the Cross unto more
honor, then ever it had before: Montanus (in one word) was of a ceremonial
spirit.

SECT. 30.
IN this section, four or five Protestant Divines are named, as allowing of
some significant Ceremonies. But there is not any one of them, whose judgment
to the contrary, has not been manifestly declared. I will not therefore so
much distrust the Readers attention, and understanding, as to weary him with
needless repetitions.

SECT. 31.
Here the Defend. urges upon us, the ordinary form, of swearing upon a
book. To which if the Replier has not said enough, I leave it to the Readers
judgment, after he has compared the Rej. opposed: which speaks 1. of
Gamballing; 2. of Bucklers and Quarrelling; 3. of a proof necessary to an
answer; 4. of swearing by a bocke; 5. of Sophistication, in confounding our
Churches esteem, and the truth about this form of swearing; 6. of equality
betwixt special solemn worship of God, and occasional swearing, in civil
Assemblies. I will only add, as an explication of the Repliers answer, that
which D. Iackson answers the Papists, about this fashion (Orig. of unbel.
sect. 4. cap. 35.) We use the book, only as a complement of the civil act,
whereby we give satisfaction unto men; or as a visible resemblancer partly, to
by standers, or spectators, whose eyes by this means may become as true
witnesses as their ears, that such protestations have been made; partly unto
him that makes them, who will be more wary and circumspect what he avoucheth
and protests, when he perceives his speeches must be sealed with such
remarkable circumstances, as they cannot be often recalled to his own and
others memory. To the same end, men of honorable place and calling, use to
lay their hands upon their hearts, when they take a solemn oath.

SECT. 32. Concerning the Lord's Day, Temples, and ceremonial Festivals.
1. THe Def. having spoken of his much sailing in the maine, and narrow Seas,
comes to object the observation of the Lords Day, as a fit example of a
humane Ceremony: whereupon, the Replier continuing his similitude, says, that
he was at this time, either sea-sicke, or sleepy, with his much sailing. This
the Rej. calls a scurrilous jest, and scoff: so liberal is he of terms,
when reasonable answers are not at hand. But if he had thought of the ordinary
sayings, Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus; animi perturbatio est quaedam ejus
aegritudo; he would have spared an innocent usual phraze of speech, and not
marked it with so foul pich or tar as Scurrilitie.

2. Now let us hear, how he can excuse the Def. his allegation, from all
sickness, and drowsinesse! The observation (says he) of the Lords Day, in
place of the Jews Sabbath, is not a humane institution: but the analogicall
and allegorical instructions, lawfully rais^d from that Day, are of humane
institution, not divine. I say again, as the Repl. said, (without fear of the
Rej. his Spitte of scurrility) this is a sick or drowsy answer. For 1. it
makes all analogicall instructions, instituted Ceremonies: as if nothing could
be gathered from any fact, or text, in the Scripture, by analogy, or
proportion, but it must be straight a ceremonial institution! 2. These
analogicall instructions, are, (as the Def. expresses them) meditation of
Christ's resurrection, and of our eternal rest to come. And who ever heard or
read, that these were humane insti^utio^? what man instituted them? when? by
what authority? upon what necessity? Are they ambulatorie, or mooveable
Ceremonies, which our Convocation may change at their pleasure? Awake, awake,
both Def. and Rej. and see the vanity and scandal of this allegation.

3. As a Parallel of the former example, Temples were added by the Defend. And
to make it agree, the Rej. is driven to this issue, that if it be lawful by
accommodation, to put men in mind of heavenly things by earthly; then it is
lawful to institute things to that use. Which is as if he should argue thus:
if it be lawful, by accommodation, to put men in mind of Gods faithfulness
in keeping his Covenant of Grace, by the constant course of nature which he
has set in heaven and earth, or by the faithfulness and constancy of men
morally honest; then it is lawful for men to institute sacred signs for
confirmation of the Covenant of Grace, and so new Sacraments properly so called.

4. Concerning Ceremonial Festivals, of man's m^king, our practice cannot be
objected: because we observe none. We take occasion of hearing, (...) sed Ve
(...) and a^censione (...).
and praying upon any day, when occasion is offered. We say (with Hospini^n de
Orig. Fest. Christ. cap. 2.) Not the day, but the Word of God, etc. puts us in
mind of the nativity, resurrection, and ascension o^ Christ. And this might be
the reason, why the Repl. passed over this example, as of no moment. For we do
not fear (as the Rej. imagines) lest all the Churches of God will condemn us
herein. Those that consent with Geneva, nor those of Scotland; (except some of
the new edition) no nor any that follow Bucers judgment (in Mat. 12. Ferias
alias (prater diem Dominicum) sive Christi, etc. optarim abrogatas universas.
Zelus ille quo introductae fuere, omni verbo and exemplo Scripturae caruit,
mereque rationem secutus est, ut ferias Ethnico rum, seu clavum clavo truderet.
Tantis sup^rtitionibus contaminata illa festa fuerunt, ut mirer, si quisquam
Christianus fit. qui ad nomina little non exhorrescat, etc. Dominicum diom,
resurrectionis Christigaudium, festiviorem nobis reddidit, etc. Nullum
prudentem virum audivi, qu^ non censeat magnam p^r^m aliorum festorum
abolendam. Maxim consentaneum est cum princa institutione, and cum scriptis
Aposteli^, ut unus tantum dies in s^ptimana, sanctificatur.
) I would to God that every Holy Day whatsoever beside the Lords Day, were
abolished. That zeal which brought them first in, was without all warrant of
the Word, and merely followed corrupt reason, forsooth to drive out the Holy
days of the Pagans, as one nail drives out another. Those Holy days, have
been so t^inted with superstitions that I wonder we tremble not at their very
names. See the place. Occolampadius (in Isaiam, cap. 1. v. 4.) thinks that no
wise Christian will condemn us. I never heard wise man yet, who did not judge
that a great part at least of other feasts beside the Lords Day should be
abolished. He insinuates manifestly more then he speaks. Zanchie (how
favorable soever he speaks of some festivals) cannot condemn us by that
sentence of his, (in 4. praec) It is most agreeable to the first institution
and Apostolical writings, that only one day in the week be kept holy.

SECT. 33.
IN this Section (which the Repl. thought to require no answer) the sum is,
that we are cross and contrary to the Authors of our Seruice-booke, who
thought our Ceremonies to be the better for being significant. Now if this be
understood so, as if we disliked the significancy of them, because those
Reverend men did like it; then we are uncharitably wronged by rash judgment.
If so, that though such excellent men did think so, yet we think otherwise;
then our answer is they were men; and though they saw much evil in Popish
Ceremonies, yet not all; and therefore judged some tolerable for a time, which
were free from some faults, that others were guilty of; though they banished
diverse, which were as free from darkness and dumbness, as those they
retained. Why they removed those, we see good reason: why they retained, or
rather tolerated these, more then them, we see none, that experience has not
confuted.

SECT. 34.
1. IN this last section, this reason is brought (accordding to the Rej. his
construction) If all Ceremonies (properly so called) must some way be
significant; then either all Ceremonies are unlawful, or some significant
Cer^monies are lawful. To which I answer 1. that all outward actions designed
or purposely observed, and done in reference to some other thing, beside the
cause or part thereof, which is the Rej. his definition of a Ceremony,
Manuduct. p. 29.30. are not mystically ^ignificant, by the Rejoinder his own
doctrine, ibid. page 32.33. Mystical signification, or the want of it, does
not make a Ceremony, or no Ceremony. A character of significancie, makes a
double or treble Ceremony; Relation without signification, makes a single
Ceremony* So, page 39. Simple Ceremonies are those, whose use is only for
order and decency: Double are those, which serve also to edification, 1. by
some profitable signification. 2. If all Ceremonies were significant, yet it
does not follow, that they all teach a spiritual duty, by their instituted
mystical signification: of which kind of signification, all the question is
in this chapter, as is to be seen in the first section. 3. If all Ceremonies
be significant, then there is no sense in exposing double Ceremonies to
significant: because none are, or can be dumb. And yet this opposition is made
use of by the Def. and Rej. as other where, so in these two last sections.

2. The Repl. taking from the Def. this proposition: Nothing is properly called
a Ceremony, if it be altogether destitute of signification; says that this
convinces not us at all: because, if this be true, then our tenet is, that all
ceremonies properly so called, of man's invention, should be packed out of the
Church. What? (says the Rej.) even Sitting at the Communion, and a
Communion Table? Yea, say we, even these if they can be prooved to be
Ceremonies of man's invention.

3. From the former consideration, the Defen. was challenged, for having gone
about to deceive us, often times before, by confounding all circumstances of
order and decency, with properly called Ceremonies; whereas now, in the winding
up of all, he confesses, that they cannot be properly called Ceremonies,
except they be significant. The Rejoinder his answer is, that all such
circumstances are some way significant, though not symbolically: because they
signify some way what is to be done, or where, or when, or why, or how. Now
though every circumstance does some way argue that whereof it is a
circumstance, and so in a large sense may be called a sign of it; yet 1.
every circumstance is not a sign of what is to be done: because some have no
place, until the thing be done. 2. Both the Def. and Rej. have hitherto
confounded indicant and symbolicall signs, except only one place, where (for
a shift) the Rej. says, Beza, differing in phraze from other Divines, means
by Symbolicall, Sacramental signs, page 264.265. Here therefore to
distinguish them, is to confess their former dealing not fair.

4. If all circumstances belonging to time, place, person, instruments or
manner of actions sacred, be sacred significant Ceremonies; then not the Clock
only, but the leaden weights of it, not the ground only upon which men stand
in worship, but the Rushes also strowed by occasion upon it, or the Besome
wherewith it is swept; not the Preachers voice only, but his black Cap, his
comely heard; not the Communion Table-clothe only, but the color of it; not
distinct speaking only, but every Preachers proper Tone, are sacred,
significant, ceremonial Weights, Rushes, Bezomes, Caps, Beards, Colors,
Tones, etc.

See what an argument the Def. made against us, according to the Rej. his
explication: If Signs Indicant that is, such as by the nature of the things
themselves, without any religious signification put upon them by institution,
are lawful; then Symbolicall signs, that is, those which teach a spiritual
duty, by their mystical instituted signification, cannot be unlawful. In
striving to help the Def. out of the water, he has sunk, and followed him
deeper in, then before he seemed to be plunged.

5. Calvin (said the Def.) and some other, do accuse some Popish Ceremonies,
because they are dumb. They accuse them also (answers the Repl.) for
speaking: as the Scripture does condemn images, both for being dumb, and also
for teaching lies.

Well said, (says the Rej) When the Ceremonies are altogether dumb, they
condemn them for not speaking: when they speak idly, or falsely, they
condemn them for speaking amiss. But you condemn them simply for not being
dumb. But here is a great mistaking of the Rejoynders. For we condemn humane
Ceremonies for speaking idely, that which Gods Ordinances do sufficiently
speak; and falsely also for their manner of speaking, as if they had just
commission to speak in Gods name, when they have not. When an image of the
blessed Virgin, spoke in the Church, to Bernard* good morrow Bernard, good
morrow; Bernard answered, (...) Madam you forget your Sex: it is not lawful
for a woman to speak in the Church.

The Scriptures also condemned the same image for standing (at other times)
dumb in the Church. Even so we condemn humane Ceremonies, both for standing
in the Church dumb and unprofitable; and also for speaking in such a place,
idely, and above that which beseem their Sex or degree. I repeat therefore
again, not as a mere jest, in which name the Rejoinder puts it off, but as
a sad and serious truth, that which the Replier concluded this Argument
withal: Lay all together which our Divines say, and you shall find, that in
their judgments, Humane Ceremonies in Gods worship, are like a fool in a
place of honor, who whether he speaks, or holds his peace, still shows
himself unworthy of that place.

CHAP. 4. Concerning Idolatrous Ceremonies.
SECT. 1. About the forming of this argument, and the general answer given
thereto.
IN the former Argument as being most essential, I suffered my pen to run a
larger course, then in the beginning I intended. Here I purpose to hold it
shorter. Passing over therefore by-matters,

1. The Argument was thus propounded in the Abridgement: It is contrary to Gods
word, to use (much more to command the use of) such Ceremonies in the worship
of God as man has devized, if they be notoriously known, to have been of
old, and still to be abused unto Idolatry, and Superstition, by the Papists,
especially, if the same be now of no necessary use in the Church. But our
Ceremonies are such. Ergo.

The Def. his answer was so set down, that (by the Rej. his own confession)
no sense could be discerned in it. But the said Rej. (after three patchings of
the words, and the distinctions, about abolishing, abused, and necessary)
brings, for account, this answer, out of all: If by abolition, be meant,
Abscission, and not Cure, the Proposition being meant of things indifferent, is
false. But if in the exception, of things, necessary, be meant not an absolute,
but a convenient necessity, the Assumption is false, which says: that our
Ceremonies are of no necessary use in the Church. Here we have three
distinctions, betwixt 1. abscission, or cutting off, and curing; 2. things
evil in their nature, and indifferent: 3. necessity absolute, and convenient.
Now 1. see how they agree among themselves: In the first, the Ceremonies are
considered as members of our Religion, or worship, which must be either cut off
or cured (for so the Def. explaineth it of cutting off the members by the
joints) whereas they were never members joynted to our religion, or worship,
but to the Harlot of Rome. In the second, they are considered as no members,
but things indifferent; and in the third (at the best) only convenient. 2. For
the first, it is well known that they are cloutes, which have lien upon the
plague-soares of Idolaters, many hundreds of years: and what wise Physician,
or Surgeon, was ever known, to go about the curing of such clouts? 3. For the
second, it is a mere affectation of casting a mist before the Readers eyes.
For both the Def. and Rei. knew well, that the Authors of this Argument, hold
our Ceremonies not indifferent, but unlawful in their nature, and yet upon
supposed indifferency, undertake to make good their Proposition; as having all
sense on their side, namely, that things otherwise merely indifferent, receive
some difference, by their notorious abuse to Idolatry. 4. For the last, The
Ceremonies are here, only in a blind distinction, (as it were in a
parenthesis) affirmed to be of convenient use in our Church. Now let any man
consider of this dealing, whether it be not more necessary for the Def. and
Rej. then convenient for the Reader. In the Abridgement, page 42. and 43. etc.
it is largely prooved, that these Ceremonies in controversy, are not
convenient. The Def. (professing a full answer to all that is objected) gives
no answer to any thing there alleged to that purpose. When he was challenged
by the Repl. for not showing them convenient, the Rej. page 167. accuses him
of more impudency, then he would have expected from any Friar, and yet
directs us not to the place, where he has gone about any such matter. The
Rej. himself, undertaking to manifest their conveniencie by the Rules of Gods
Word, suddenly breaks off, page 74. and refers that demonstration to a
fitter place: which place hitherto he could not find, nor ever will. Beside,
the Rej. confesses, a multitude of godly learned men, (among whom were)
Calvin, Beza, Martyr, Bucer, Hooper, Jewel, Fulke, Rainolds, Whitakers,
Humphrie, Perkins, etc.) to have held our Ceremonies inexpedient, or
inconvenient, at the least. Nay he himself has been in the same haeresie.
All this notwithstanding, he thinks it not significent, in one word, to say
(for a shift) without any proof or declaration, that they are convenient for
our Church. Convenience is esteemed when as a thing after the consideration of
all circumstances, isfound to bring more good (at the least) then evil with
it. And I dare appeal to the Rej. his own conscience, whether our Ceremonies
have been causes, or occasions of more good then evil? They may do hurt
(says Beza) but they can do no good. God knows (says Mr. Fox) they be
the cause of much blindness and strife among men.

Let this (by the way) be well observed out of this general answer, that the
particular answers following, in this argument, are nothing worth, but only
upon this supposition, that our Ceremonies are not only curable and
indifferent, but also convenient for our Church: which neither Def. nor Rej.
nor any for them, will ever be able with any show of reason, and honesty, to
demonstrate, while the world stands. So that this whole fourth Argument is
here in the first section, sufficiently yielded, For all that we desire, is
plainly granted, concerning the unlawfulness of all such human Ceremonies in
Gods worship, as are notoriously known to have been and be abused unto
Idolatry and Superstition, if they be now of no convenient necessary use in
the Church.

SECT. 2. Concerning the second Commandment. Lev. 18.3. and 19.19.27.28. Exodus
23.24. Deuteronomy. 14 1. and 12.4. and 30.32. 2. Cor. 6.14.18. Rev. 18.4.
1. THe second Commandment was here alleged, in the Abridgement, as forbidding
all provocation unto spiritual fornication, as the seventh does unto that
which is carnal. This the Def. passed by in silence; and therein is defended
by the Rej. because, according to his method, in one particular argument, he
takes knowledge of it, par, 2. c. 2. s. 2. As if John a-Stiles his plea, for
3. akers of ground, were sufficiently answered by John a-Noxe, if he cold with
any show ward it off from 1. aker. His own answer is, that as the seventh
Commandment does not forbid the use of all such things, as accidentally do,
or may provoke some men to base uncleanness; but only such, as in and of
themselves, are working incitements thereto; so neither does the second
Commandment forbid the use of all such things, as the lust of some Idolaters
may turn to spiritual fornication; but only of such, as have in themselves,
or in such use of them, an habitude, or aptness, to provoke thereto. But 1.
Our Divines generally teach (as Zanchy de Red. lib. 1. cap. 14. briefly
expresses their meaning) The sum of the second Commandment is, that in the
worship of God, or Ceremonies thereabout, we are to devise nothing of our own
brain, or borrow ought of Heathenish idolatrous rites. Summa est secundi
pracepti, in externo cultu, qui Deo debetur, seu in Ceremonijs, nihil nobis
esse ex nostr^ capite comminiscendum, neque ex ritibus gentium Idololatrarum
adhibendum, etc.
2. Let this be so: the question yet remains; whether our Ceremonies, the
Cross (for example) has not some habitude, and aptness, to provoke toward
Idolatry? I think it will not be denied, but the Cross is an Idol, at Paris,
at Calis, and among the Papists, in England. Now suppose a known harlot to be
brought out of the Stues at Paris, or Calis, unto Dover, and lodged there in an
honest man's bed, or bedchamber (as the Cross is in the bed of our Religion,
the holy Sacrament) would any man say, that there were no habitude nor
aptness, in such a harlot, and her lodging, to provoke, even an honest man,
and much more, a dissolute companion, unto filthy folly? Difference I know
none; but only that the spiritual folly may be more secretly, and mystically
provoked, and exercised, then carnal can. The Rej. should have done well, if
he had given us a certain rule, whereby we might have distinguished, betwixt
those monuments, or relics of Idolatry, which have an habitude or aptness in
them to provoke unto Idolatry, and those which have not. For then more might
have been said therefrom, either for, or against our Ceremonies. Now we cannot
tell where to take hold, saving only in this; that habitude and aptness of
provoking, toward Idolatry, is in every consenting relation that any Ceremony
(otherwise unnecessary) has to any Idol: and all such relation of our
Ceremonies to Idols cannot be denied: neither can their necessity to true
Religion be with any show of reason, or honesty, mainteyned. Beside, what
jealous or wise husband, if his wife should receive any thing from a known
adulterer, who has also gone about to undermyne her honesty, and keep it
always in her bosom, would take this for a sufficient excuse; that such a
thing has not in it self any habitude or aptness of provoking unto Adultery?
And does not God tell us, that he is in like sort, a Jealous God? From hence
it is, that Mr. Perkins, with diverse others, in writing on the second
Commandment, doctrinally, without special meddling with controversies, making
one head of things therein forbidden, the monuments and relics of Idolatry.

2. To Lev. 18.3.4, and 19.19.27. the Def. his answer was (according to the
Rejoinder his extraction) that these places do not prove the abolishing of
things indifferent in nature, merely for the abuse of them to Idolatry, which
was (says he) the point to be prooved: because cutting off the flesh for the
d^ad was evil in it self; and sowing with diverse seeds in one field, was
forbidden for a typica^l docum^nt of that syncerity which God required in his
people. Where 2. he mistaketh, or perverteth the question: which was not of
things indifferent, but not necessary, nor of all things not necessary, but of
Ceremonies. 2. Cutting off the flesh for the dead, with a good meaning, nor
was, nor is more evil in it self, then Circumcission, which both the Def. and
Rej. allow as lawful, under Prester John. page 285.3. That typical doctrine
of syncerity, forbids plainly all mixing of Idolaters relics, with Gods
holy ordinances.

3. The Repl. alleged, that the words Lev. 18.3.4. are general: after their
doings ye shall not do: neither shall ye walk in their ordinances. To this
the Rej answers, that these general words are to be restrained unto the
ma^ter spoken of, that is, incest, and such mad doings of the Egyptians, and
Canaanites. But 1. why are these words more to be restrained unto the matter
spoken of in the same chapter, then those, 1. Cor. 4.40 Let al things be done
decently and in ord^r, which the Def. and Rej. extend as far as it pleases
our Convocation to call things decent, and orderly. 2. That they cannot be so
restrained, is manifest out of the context; where the ordinances of Idolaters
are opposed to all those Ordinances, Statutes, and Iudgemenes of God, to the
doing whereof is promised life. 3. Iunius a judicious Interpreter, in his
Analysis of the place, makes the four first verses of this 18. chap. to
perteyne unto diverse chapters following, and not, to the 18 only: ne alienis
exemplis, aut legibus vivant. Pelican also upon the place, speaks home, in
this manner: God, by this one law, would have them cast away and abborre,
whatsoever had (in worship) pleased the Gentiles. Much more care ought
Christians to have of this; who being taught to worship God in spirit and
truth, ought, first and last, to have abhorred the idle, unreasonable, and
deceitful forms and rites of Idolaters. Which if the ancient Bishops had well
considered, the Church had never been pestered with so many profane rites, and
base Ceremonies; by which it came to pass, that some Christians differ little
from Gentiles, save in the names of their Idols. Voluit Deus una lege,
abominari, and abjici voluit quicquid istis populis pla^uisset. Idipsum fuerit
long studiosius cavendum Christianis, quos ut in spiritu and veritate Deum
colere edocti, a ceremoniis otiosis, and irrationabilibus, deceptionumque
multiplicium formis, and ritibus Idololatraru^, oportuit imprimis, and deinceps
maxim abhorruisse, Id si olim Episcopi considerassent, non tot scatuisset
Ecclesia profanu ritibus, non prolapsaesset in tam sordidas, and a pietate vera
abhorrentes ceremonias, ut fere nihil immutatum cernamus a pristinis Gentium
ritibut. praeter idoloru^ vetustorum nomina, and imagines, quibus successerunt
(proh dolor) nova.
Lyra also (a Papist) on Lev. 18. says plainly: He intended to exclude from
the children of Israel every rite of the Gentiles. Intendit excludere a filiis
Israel, omnem Gentilem ritum.
And on Lev. 19.19. This is commanded, for detestation of Idolatry: because
Idolaters did so, the Israelites may not do so. Pr^cipitur hoc in
detestationem Idololatriae: quia Idololatr^ faci^bant, propterea talia
prohibentur.


4. Exodus 23.24. (says the Rej.) Speaks of superstition, or vicious worship.
And this (say we) is the point by us intended: viz: that Ceremonies borrowed
from Idolaters, are vicious and superstitious worship.

5. To Deuteronomy. 12.4. (Thou shall not do so to the Lord thy God) the Rej. after
many words, answers (with the Def.) that not unlawfulness, or abuse, but
another reason produced this Law. To which it shall suffize to answer, that the
other reason was, as Pelecan upon the place notes; In Ceremonies, we must
hold us strictly to the word of God; least we should transgress either in
number, or in form, if men's traditions were to be followed. Ceremoniandu^
juxta verbum Dei, no quid excederetur, mul^itudine, aut forma, si ad humanas
traditiones standum fuisset.


6. Deuteronomy. 30.32. was (as it seems) misprinted, for Deuteronomy. 16.22. and so
comes after to be handled in the next Section.

7 As for 2. Corint. 6.14. (says the Rej.) that place condemns only marriage
or familiar society with infidels, and v. 17. partnership with men in
uncleanness, by consenting thereto. But he should have remembered 1. that the
general condemnation of Fellowship, implies more then marriage, or familiar
society. 2. That using of Idolaters Ceremonies, is more religious fellowship
with them, then falimiar society civil. 3. That Idolaters Ceremonies cannot
be wittingly and willingly used, without implicit consent unto them, hitherto,
that their Ceremonies are lawful.

8. To Rev. 18 4. the Rej. answers in many words; but to the purpose thus: As
concerning Ceremonies only separating from those of Babylons Ceremonies is
enjoined, which cannot be separated from sin. Which if it be understood of
sin in the religious use of them about Gods solemn worship, is as much as
we desire: we only add (which is our defense) that such an use of them is
sin in it self.

9. Calvin's grave collection, on Lev. 19.27. was by the Replier alleged, which
thus sounds, according to the Rej. his own emendation of the translation:
Although rounding, or cutting the hair, was in it self indifferent, yet God
would not have it indifferent to his people that they as little children, might
learn by small rudiments, that they could not have his favor, unless they
should be unlike to the aliens, and uncircumcised, and be altogether and far
different from their examples, especially in those Rites wherein religion was
showed. The Rej. answers 1. that the cause of this restraint, was the Jews
childlike estate, by Calvin's own words. But Calvin's meaning is removed from
the right center. For that he meant not to exclude our age, he shows in the
next words: Experientia docet, etc. Experience does (not did) teach. And this
childlike estate was the cause (according to him and truth) not of the doctrine
taught, concerning unlikenesse unto Idolaters, but of the manner, or means,
wherein it was taught, namely, by absteyning from that fashion of hair, and
beards, which Idolaters used. God teaches us to teach our children, agreablie
to their age, not that afterward they should forget, that which was taught
them, but that they may remember what they were then taught, and not depart
from it, when they are old. Prove. 22.6. And did he give us a contrary
example? The praecepts given in the Churches minority, are her direction (by
proportion) in her ripest years. And what direction is in these praecepts, for
us, the Rej. does not show. Surely, I should think, if the common sort ofGods
people might not fashion themselves then to Idolaters, then neither now our
Ministers: if not then in a matter of passion, much less now in actions
pertaining to Gods worship: if not then in a tuft of hayr, much less now in a
Ministering garment, a Ceremony consecrating us and our children to Christ, and
a solemn manner of receyving him in his mysteries. The difference of
childhood, from perfect age, may teach us, that we should not look for such
particular warnings now what things of Idolaters we are to shun, as were
given in the Churches infancy, but make use of them; being now also generally
warned to fly from all Idolatry, and that in the same forms of speech which
then were used. 2. He answers, that It pleased God to set up a partition wall
betwixt Jews and Gentiles, in things otherwise lawful. Which is very true:
but among those things, otherwise lawful (as Calvin clearly insinuates)
Rites of human invention, wherein religion was showed, had no place. 3. The Rej.
adds, that neither Calvin, ever affirmed, nor any learned and advised man,
dare affirm, that no conformity with Idolaters in any Rites, abused by them
to Idolatrous superstition, is lawful to be used of Gods people in his
service. To which I answer 1. that if he takes any Rites so largely, that
among them he reckons Gods ordinances, then he says nothing but truth, and
yet nothing to the purpose. For the quaestion is, of Rites devized by man, not
necessary in the Church: as may be seen in the terms of our Argument,
expressed in the Abrigement, though in part omitted by the Def. which omission
was so approved by the Rej. that he accuses the Repl. of wrong-doeing for
mending it. Page 404. We see now for what advantage. 2. If we may have leave to
put in that part of the quaestion, as it stands in our Argument (Rites
devized by man, not necessary) then hear Calvin's and some other learned and
advized man's judgment. Rectius ac sanius dicitur: quae Deus ipse instituit,
nullo abu^^^ aut vitio posse abo^eri: qua autem humanitus tradit^ sunt,
postquam errore sunt vitiata, si little usus nec^at, and pariat offendiculum
fratribus, esso abstinendum. Magna pars superstitionum, quibuscum hodie bellum
gerunt very Dei cultores, a lacunis nescio quibus manavit: omnes impijs
erroribus delibutae sunt, qui nunquam elui possunt, nisi a^rogato illarum usu.
Cur ergo non simpliciter quod verum est agnoscimus, n^cessarium hoc esse
purganda a sordibus Eccle^^a remidium. Cum vellet suas significationes, in
vestibus, and suis a magieis nihil evariantibus signis obtrudere: no^ contra
proponebamus, Christum, purius docuisse Patrem (nempe spiritu and veritate)
esse adorandum, sublatis umbris adorandum. Cumque sanctus Rex Hezechias non
consuit tantum incumbendum, ut tolleretur superstitio, quod agree sciebat so
impetraturum, sed prorsus serpentem ignominiese iussit comminuendum, quid
Christianis Du^ibus and Magistratibus non est faciendum, in ijs quorum
superstitio and cultus omnem Idololatriam Iudao^um sup^rat? i^ ijs qua homines
male seriati erex erunt, quibus significationes e^ arbitrio addiderunt?
Calv. Resp. ad Versipellem: It is more right and sound, to say, that the
institutions of God may not be abolished for any abuse: but humane
institutions, being defiled, and so proving hurtful, and offensive to our
brethren, are to be absteyned from. The superstitions against which true
worshipers of God do fight, came (for a great part of them) from unknown
pudles: and all of them are soiled with ungodly errors, which never can be
remooved, but by utter abolishing of their use. Why then do we not simply
acknowledge that which is truth, namely, that this remedy (of abolishing their
use) is a necessary remedy, for taking of dross from the Church? Mr. Farrel
Calvin's fellow-minister, and in some sort, Father, Epist. Calv. 49. disputing
against a popish fellow, whose name was Carolus, says thus: When Carolus would
obtrude his significations, in garments, and other magick-like signs; we
opposed, that Christ has taught us a purer manner of worshipping the Father,
in spirit and truth, without shadows. And Princes may learn by Hezechias his
abolishing of the brazen serpent, what they are to do in those Rites which idle
men have erected, and added significations unto, according to their own
pleasure. Beza, their son, Disp. Genev. 66. Addititias illas innumerabiles
nugas quae mox in manif^stam superstitionem abierunt, ut (...) abol^vimus D.
84. Male Ecclesijs suis consulere affirmamus, qui in suis ditionibus, inutilium
Ceremoniarum reliquias vol retinuer^^^, ^el aliquat e^us corrigere (prapo^^^r^
qu^dam judicio) quam semel abolere maluerunt.
The trifles which had proceeded unto manifest superstition, we have abolished
as will worship. We also affirm, that they which reteyne the relics of
unprofitable Ceremonies, and (out of preposterous judgment) correct them
rather then abolish them, deserve ill of the Churches. Yet some there are, Idem
de Coena, adv. Harchium, page 4. ant^ finem. Non desunt qus Pastores vellent,
in illis, si non origin^, at certe usu, vere Baaliticis v^stibus apparere.
Ieuel. Def. cap. 2. div. 9. His Ceremonijs vo^ tam estis abusi, ut nis^ maxima
nos religione nos obligare malimus, retinore ista amplius nequeamus.
who would have Pastors put on garments, which if not by their first bringing
in, yet by their abuse, are Baals garments. You Papists have so abused these
Ceremonies, that without violating of religion, we cannot retein them.

D. Morton, our Defend. Appeal. lib. 1. cap. 2. Sect. 25. Pope Stephen
prescribed in such like cases of humane inventions: If our Ancestors have done
any thing which is afterward turned into superstition, it is to be abolished
without delay. Which was also the only remedy which the ancient Council of
Eliberis propounded against Idolatry. To omit particulars; it has hitherto
been received for a ruled case among our Divines, as Rivetus (one of our last
writers) shows, on the fourth Commandment: It is a rule, that things
indifferent, not being necessary, if they be polluted with horrible Idolatry,
are to be abolished. Regula est illa, Adiaphora non necessaria, horrenda
Idolomania polluta, esse abolenda.
The Rejoinder his confidence therefore in this point, did exceed all comely
measure. The opposite assertion may be better maintained: viz. that no learned
and advised Divine, can be named, free from manifest prejudice, arising from
the use and urging of such Ceremonies in that Church where he lived that does
not condemn all conformity with Idolaters, in their religious unnecessary
Ceremonies.

SECT. 3. Concerning Pillars, Lev. 26.1. and the name Baal, Hos. 2.16.17.
1. IT was said by the Repl. that for preventing of an evasion, or stopping of
a muse, the Abrigers added; that even such things are to be cast away, which
had a good original, and use, (if they be not still necessary and commanded of
God) when once they are found to be defiled by Idolatry, as Lev. 26. 1. etc. To
this the Rej. (abounding as it seems with leisure, and words) says diverse
things in general, not worth much refutation. 1. He objecteth Tinkers-lucke,
because then all our Churches must down. But this Ting-tong shall not have the
luck to stay us: because we hold our Churches commanded, in general, though
not for their particular places and forms; which particularity was neither
mentioned, nor meant in the Argument. 2. He seeks more then one knot in that
rush (necessary or commanded) as if in either sentence that particle or must
needs be disiunctive, and not the same with and; which he himself will not
affirm in his second thoughts. 3. He affirms some distinction to be betwixt
things originally evil, and those that are successively evil: which we deny
not; but only say, that distinction does not make such a difference, as that
therefore one should be rejected, and the other received. 4. He denies the 2.
sertion plainly: which he might have done with ^ewer words, to as good purpose.

2. Concerning Lev. 26. it was alleged by the Rep^. that those (at lest some of
those) titular pillars were first* only set up for civil use. To which the
Rej. answers, that this was not the first beginning of their religiou^ use:
which is nothing to the purpose, except no use be good but religious. 2. that
though many statues which afterward only for worship, were at the first, for
civil respects and had still a civil use, (for this antecedent only is the
Repliers) yet it does not follow, they were civil at the first* which answer
is by it self confuted.

3. Calvin's collection or conjecture, was objected: that these statues were
erected, to represent God: and this was answered, that according to Calvin's
phrase, there is a representation of God, in all pictures that corrupt Gods
spiritual worship. The Rej. opposes, that Calvin on Deuteronomy. 12.3. shows his
meaning to be only of such representation as was in the golden Calfe, and
Michas Seraphim; not such as Jacob set up for a monument. Which may be Calvin's
Conjecture of that place in Deuteronomy. though not of this in Lev. Yet to such a
monument as Jacobs was, being grossly abused unto Idolatry, Hezechias would
have shown no more courtesy, then he did to the Brazen Serpent. So Pelicanus,
upon the place, collecteth: We must ceremonize according to Gods Word only.
Ceremoniandum est secundu^ Verbum Dei solum.
as upon Lev. 26.1. Even triumphall statues were forbidden. Statuam erigi
prohibet, etiam triumphalem.
And Lyra, The memory of Idolatry is totally to be wiped out. Memoria
Idololatriae totaliter delonda.


4. The Def. objected Jacobs pillar, Genesis 28.18. So (^ayth the Replie^ he did
offer sacrifices, in other manner, and place, then after the Law, was lawful.
To this the Rejoinder answers, 1. that that which Jacob did, was not
unlawful by the moral Law. But he is mistaken; not dis^inguishing betwixt the
moral Law forbidding religious Ceremenies of mere human appointment, and
allowing the same derived from Divine inspiration. So Tertullian (de Idol. cap.
5.) answers him that defended Images by the brazen Serpent: Idem Deus, qui
lege ^etuit similitudinem fieri, extraordinario praecepto, serpentis
^imilitudinem indixit. Si eundem Deum observas, habes le^em ejus. Imitare tu
Mosem, ne facias adversus legem, simu^achrum aliquid, nisi and tibi Deus
jusserit. 1. e. The same God which in his Law forbad images, did
extraordinarily command the image of a Serpent. If thou will obey that God,
thou have his law. Imitate thou Moses, not making any image (contrary to the
Law) except God command thee. So all our Divines in answer of Papists,
objecting this and such like examples for will worship) refer these doeings
to Divine revelation or instinct. Among these (for this cause) ^ reckon D.
Iackson: who in his Original, page 332. gives us this Catholic remedy and
rule, seriously to be considered. Such actions as have been menaged by Gods
Spirit, suggested by secret instinct, or extracted by extraordinary and
special occasions, are then only lawful in others, when they are begotten by
like occasions, or brought forth by like impulsions.

5. To Hos. 2.16.17. (where the very name of Baal seems to be forbidden,
because it had been given unto Idols) the Defend. answered (says the Rej.)
implicitly, i. e. so as I have now answered to all that he has brought about
this fourth Argument. But he undertaketh, by a little change of words, to make
that answer satisfactorie. For this end, he allegeth first, that the word Baal,
in religious use and application, was originaly, o^ from the first use of it,
evil: because before Moses was borne, the great and common Idol of the
Gentiles was marke^ out by it, as by a proper name. But 1. If the civil use of
this word was originaly good, that is sufficient to our purpose. For our
Argument speaks only generaly o^ good originals and beginnings. 2. If this
word Baal did originaly signify Lord, Master, Husband, (as it is generaly
taken) then by the Rej. his interpretation, it did originaly signify a
religious relation. For he holds every sign of a servants duty for
conscience sake, to be a mystica^ sign of a spiritual duty: page 314. And is
not every sign of a Lords, Masters, or Husbands duty, or state, for
conscience sake, of the same nature? 3. There is some quaestion among the
learned, whether Baal was derived from King Bell, or King Bells name from Baal?
The most probable opinion is the later: as Sir Walter Raughly shows lib. 1.
c. 10. sect. 6. because Bell, Beel, or Baal, was as much to say as God. And
Arias Montanus, in Hos. 2. says it signifies Numen, or the chief sovereign
power, whatsoever it be, without restraint to this or that Idol. Now if this be
so, what more evil was there in the first use of the name Baal, then of God?

6. In the next place, the Rej. undertaketh to prove, that all religious use of
this word Baal, in application to God, is not forbidden; but only as it might
further ^he practice, or bear the appearance of gross Idolatry. In which
answer, if he does not distinguish gross Idola^rie from slight; nor has any
mental reservation, about ^ppearance, nor yet takes might further, otherwise
then ^he words sound, he says nothing but that which we ^ot only grant, but
also make our plea. To this end ^e allegeth the use of it in Is. 54.5. Ier.
31.33. Nah. 1.2. ^o which I answer 1. The Lord, in this place of Hos. did ^ot
speak of every time, but of that day. 2. He did not ^orbid himself to use this
or that term, at his pleasure, ^ut men. 3. The word Baal Is. 54. Ier. 31.
seems to be ^sed in an allusion only reproving, and upbraiding the ^dolatrie
of the people, which had followed Baal; as ^^ewing that what they had sought
for in Baal, was to ^e found only in Jehovah. Otherwise it may be answe^^d,
that the word appellative is used, without any re^^exion unto the proper. And
Nah. 1. it is no more gi^en to Jehovah, then the name Idol is given to men,
when ^n worthy teachers are called Idol-shepheards; or then ^he name Jehovah is
given to dumb creatures, when ^hey are called Jehovah Iireh Genesis 22. Jehovah
Nissi, Ex. 17. ^ehovah shammah, Ezech. 48.

7. He brings four interpretations of the place: of which, the first only
(as he says) may serve our turn ^n any part. But the first, third, and
fourth, are in di^ers Interpreters conjoined. And there is scarce any grave
Interpreter, which does not gather so much from the context, as we require.
See Ierom, Arias Montanus, Oecolampadius, Calvin, Zanchie, Tremelius, Iunius.
Sir W. Raughly, himself, in the fore-noted place, observes the sum: Although
the name of Baal be justly to be used toward God; yet in respect that the same
was given to Idols, God both hated it, and forbad it. And it is not credible,
that so many, and such Divines, should make a collection, which has no
foundation in their intrepretation of the text.

SECT. 4. Concerning the aequitie of the Commandments formerly mentioned; etc.
1. THe third proof (says the Replier) in the Abrigement stands thus: The
aequitie of these Commandemens is thus set down in Scriptures: 1. The
detestation which our jealous God bearreth unto all instruments and tokens of
Idolatry, Exodus 20.5.6. Deuteronomy. 7. 25.26. 2. That we cannot be said sincerly to
have repented of Idolatry, etc. except we be ashamed of, and cast away the
instruments and monuments of it. 1. Chron. 33.15. Is. 1.29. and 2.20. and 3^.
22.2. Cor. 7.11. See Calvin in Deuteronomy. sermon. 52. Ephesians. 86. 3. that we shall be in
danger to be corrupted. Ex. 34.1^. 15. Deuteronomy. 7. 25.26. Judge. 2.13. Gal. 2.5.4.
We shall harden Idolaters. Ezech. 16.54. 1. Cor. 6.10. 5. There is more danger
in Popish Ceremonies, because the Pope is Antichrist, and we converse more with
Papists, then with other Idolaters. Now of all these reasons, and allega^ions,
the Def. answers directly to nothing, but only to those words: See Calvin.
The Rej. does not deny, but the proof was such as has been said: neither
could he say, that the Def. had answered to any thing, but See Calvin.

Yet 1. he goes about (by many words) to persuade ^he Reader, that here was no
fault. To this end he speaks of a Mark sh^t^^t, and hit by the Def. of the
Def. his professed method (to profess a full answer unto all ob^ected, and
answer what he pleased to object to himself) of perverse and injurious
dealing, that he should be told of this truth; of welts, guards, and gallant
shows, and garnish only, in so many reasons, and Scriptures: What aile you?
(says he) What mean you? To all this, I answer nothing. 2. He himself
undertaketh to answer all. To this therefor I will attend, according to the
skill I have.

2. His general answer is, that these five reasons of equity, do not prove,
that we are bound unto all and the very same ways of repressing Idolatry,
etc. which the Jews were bound to. This we confess, as the Rej. testifies,
neither could they, upon that supposition, be called five reasons of equity
only, but of rigor. And what a kind of answering is this; to say, reasons do
not prove that which they were not brought to prove? The question is, whether
they do not prove, that it is contrary to Gods Word to use (much more to
command the use of) such Ceremo^ies in the worship of God, as man has devized,
if they be notoriously known, to have been of old, and still to be abused
unto Idolatry, by the Papists, especially if the same be now of no necessary
use in the Church? This was the opppsition, for proof whereof, these five
reasons of equity were brought. And for this we have all our Divines that
confound Popish Images, out of the selfsame places of Scripture, as Vrsine on
the second Commandment, Polanus, Syntag. lib. 9. cap. 26. and whom not?

His answer in particular, is first, to Exodus 20.5.6. Deuteronomy. 7.25.36. Isai.
1.29. and 30.32. that these places speak o^ Idols themselves, or their
garnish, not of indifferent Ceremonies. But 1. these places were not alleged
against indifferent Ceremonies; but against Ceremonious instrumen^^ and tokens
of Idolatry, not necessary unto true worship, 2. If they make against the use,
or urging of those things which are either Idols, or Idols garnish (as is
confessed) it is sufficient. For the Cross is an Idol, and both Cross* and
Surplice, are the Garnish of Idols.

4. Some of these places (says the Rejoinder) a^^ grossly mistaken,
misalleged, and abused. as Isai. 1.29. an^ 2.20. where confusion, and not Godly
shame for sin is spoken of: Ezech. 16.54. not speaking of hardening others:
1. Cor. 8.10. speaking of a thing in it self evil: Exodus 34.12. an^ Deuteronomy.
7.4. speaking of marriage and league with Heathen^ and Gal. 2.5. not respecting
Ceremonies abused. To the first, I answer, 1. that the shame and confusion
judicial which is brought upon Idolaters, is because they are not ash^med unto
repentance. 2. All those of whom the Prophet speaks, were not judicially
confounded, but penitentially ashamed. Ier. 31.19. Ezech. 16.54. should have
been joined to the former allegations, as speaking of men's shame in
themselves, not of hardening others. 1. Cor. 8 10. condemns embolding others
to sin, by eating things offered to Idols, though it were otherwise ^awfull, as
appears, 1. Cor. 10.29. And a question may ^e made, whether it had been more
unlawful, to eat ^uch things in the Idols Temple, then to take from ^hence
things notoriously known to be such, and eat them in Christian Congregations,
at Love Feasts? Exo. ^4.12. Deuteronomy. 7.4. speak not only of a civil, but also
of ^ religious league, such as should hinder them from brea^ing down their
Altars, Images, Groaues, etc. as Iuni^s (in his Anal.) notes, and the words
immediately fol^owing show. Gal. 2.5. placing danger in conformity to ^ewish
Ceremonies, does insinuate as much (at the ^east) in conformity to Idolaters.

5. The Rejoinder adds, that Isai. 1.29. and Jude 23. ^^nfute our Assertion:
because men may pray in Gardens; and (...) garment spotted with the flesh,
being washed, might be used. and such confutations the Rejoinder abounds
with. ^ut we can distinguish betwixt Gods good necessary ^reatures, and man's
inventions of Idolatrous abuse, and ^nnecessary use.

Yet Gardens might not be used by the Jews, for their ^eremoniall solemn
worship. Neither is every washing (...) polluted garment sufficient to make it
fitting for an ^onest man, that has other clothes to put on. The wa^^ing of a
Cross, is like the washing of a piece of clay, or ^f a Leopards spots.

6. Now Sir (says the Rejoynd.) You have your will. ^he third proof is
examined, and found to be light, facing, ^o be repented of, as having abused
men. Bate an acequoth ^oulton: The whole proof is not examined. Nothing is
said to the substance of the reasons, but only to the testimonies, which yet
are not found to be leight, facing, abusive, etc. And nothing at all is said to
the fifth reason: Seeing the Pope is revealed to be that great Antichrist, 2.
These. 2. Apoc. 17. and his Idolatry troubles the Church, at this day, more
then any other, and our people converse more with Papists, then with any other
Idolater, there is more danger, in retaining the Ceremonies and relics of
Popery, then of any other Idolatry whatsoever: Lev. 18.3.

See Calvin.
7. Calvin was alleged in his 52. Sermon on Deuteronomy. speaking thus: If we have
any drop of good zeal in us, it must needs vex and grieve us, to see the
marks and signs of Idolatry: and that we must to the utmost of our power,
deface them. The Rejoinder answers, that he spoke this of proper instruments
and monuments of Idolatry; and namely of Images. Which we willingly grant
except he mean by proper such as never any beside Idolaters, either before,
since, or at the same time, did use. And we add, that the Cross is more then
a proper instrument of Idolatry: because it is an Idol: Neither has either the
Defend. or Rejoynd. denied, as yet, that it is an Idol. We add also, that
mystical Ceremonies, are (in Calvin's phraze) Images, either living, such as
Gods institutions, or dead, as men's inventions. Inst. lib. 8. cap. 11. sect.
13. Add lastly, that seeing the Def. and Rej. have admitted historical
Images, as of the same nature with other mystical Ceremonies (in the former
Chapter) it is too late now to distinguish their natures.

8. A second place of Calvin, is out of epist. 87. where he warns the L.
Protector of England, that nothing upon pretense must be tolerated in the
Church, which came either from Satan, or from Antichrist. To this the Rej.
(calling for all Calvin) answers, that Calvin in that Epistle, speaks
against precise extremities about Ceremonies: and that he professedly intended
rather to exempt our Ceremonies from those he condemns: as appears by his
judgment of the Service-booke in Q. Mary's time, the heads whereof were sent
unto him from Franckfort, by M. Knox, and M. Whittingam, not one whit bettered
(as the Rej. says he dare say) and out of his Epist. to Bull. an. 1551. etc.
Now 1. because he will have all Calvin, he shall have enough of Calvin.

Thus therefore he writes unto the L. Protecteur, I come to the other head about
abolishing and plucking up by the very roots ^buses and corruptions, Veni^ ad
capu^ alterum, de abolendis and evellendis radicitus abusibus and corruptelis,
quas invexit Satan superioribus seculis in Dei ordinationem Constat
Christianisimi Papatus plane esse nothium and adulterinum. Quar^ si al illa
voragine plibe^ educere est animus, exemplo Apostoli utendum est* 1. Cor, 11
Jude colligenda generalis doctrina: cum de legit^ma reformati^ne, and qu^ Deo
accepta sit, agitu^, a^ ipsum purum Dei verbum redeundum nobis esse. Quot enim
supererunt mixturae ex bominu^ ingenio pralatae, totidem exstabunt pollutiones,
quae homines distrahant a recto little usuquae Dominus in little ^alutem
instituerat. Proinde dum istiusmodi sentina ex part tantum exhauritur, res suo
loco vero restituta dici non potest, ubi Christianismus larvatus pro syncero
and nativo deprehenditur. Atque illud a me ideo dicitur, quod multo^ long
aliter judicare intelligam, tolerandos nempe esse abusus, neque attingendos,
dummodo crassissimae corruptelae sublatae dici pos^^t. Atqui ex opposito, i^sa
experientia edocuit, quam sertilis sit mendaciorum seges ^umanum ingenium, ut
v^l minut^tis granis cons^ersum, in altissimum cumulum assurga, uti totum
natu^a eo ferri constat. Long vero a^ia est rati^ quam tradit Scriptura David
de Idolis agens, ne ipsorum quidem nominis se recordaturum testatur, ut
estendat, quam illa sibi omnibus modis detestanda judicet. Ab omni Satanae
fermento quam longissime pedem re^eramus. Quid enim illae Cerementae fuerunt,
quam totidem lenocinia, quae miseras animas. Ad malum perducerent, uti ad ip^as
illaqu^andas omnino positae erant? Iam si de cautione agitur (this is to our
Defend. and Rejoyn a cu^e) monebuntur homines, scilicet, ne ad illas nunc
impingant. Quis tamen non videt obdura^i ipsos nihil ominus ni^il ut infelici
illa cautione obtmeri possit Quare si quid istiusmodi intactum relinquetur,
certi^simum erit g^avio^i^ obfirmationis in malum somentum, idemque velamen
oppositum, ne syncera doctrina quae propener^tur, adm^tat^^ ut par est.
which the Devil in the ages past has brought into Gods ordnance. It is
evident that the Christianity or religion of Popery is bastardly and false.
Wherefore if we resolve to bring the people out of that gulf, we must follow
the Apostles example 1. Cor. 11. From whence is generaly ta^ght: that when men
would reform as they ought to do and acceptably to God, they must then betake
themselves to the pure word of God. For look how many mixtures (which man's
brain has hatched) do remain; so many pollutions are there which distract
men from the right use of those things which the Lord had appointed for their
Sa^vation. Wherefore while such a sink as that, is but in part pumpt out,
things cannot be said to be as they should be, specia^y when religion appears
rather masked, then sincere and with open face, which I therefore note because
I perceive many now a-dayes of another judgment; as if petty abuses were to be
let alone, as long as grosser matters be remooved. Whereas contrari-weise
experience it self shows what a fertile soil and fruitful seed-plot of
lies, man's invention is, that being but thin sown (as it were) with lesser
grains, grows to such a heap as if his nature did intend nothing else. Now
the Scripture is far different from this. When David speaks of Idols, he
professes their names should not go in or out at the doors of his lips, to
show extreme detestation. Let us remoove our foot as far as possibly we can
from all the leaven of Satan. For what were all thos^ Ceremonies but so many
who^rish inticements to lead s^ely souls unto mischief* yea even snares to
catch them in? But if we talk that the people may be warned (forsooth) lest
they stumble, yet notwithstanding who does not behold men hardened by them? So
little does that warning avail to any purpose. Therefore if any such thing b^
left untouched, it will be but the foment and fuel of greater mischief, and a
very blind set up to hinder sincere Doctrine from all entrance as were meet.

Then follow the words which the Rejoinder cites for all Calvin. Let any
understanding Reader judge now of Calvin's judgment: if we require any more
praecise rigor then Calvin did not only wish, but also contend, for, and that
with such Arguments, as no De^ender or Rejoinder will ever answer? 2. Whereas he
says that he dare say Mr. Knox and Whittingam sent the heads of the
Service-booke not one whit bettered, insinuating that they made the worst they
could of it, quoting the D^scourse of Frani^so ^t troubles, it is as much as to
say, he dare deny, that which those good men said, and proved (by
repraesenting their writing) concerning their own fact, without any reason.
Surely their conclusion was this: Other things not so much shame, as pity,
compels us to keep close: etc.

Note (says the Author of that Discourse) that the description is very
favorably put down. If you confer it with the Book, and the usage of the
same in many Churches of this Realm* you can confess no less. And thereof you
may gather, what M. Calvin would have written, if they had noted all the abuses
of the same. Beside the Letter it self (written by M.K. and M. Wh. unto Calvin)
is to be seen and read, in that Discourse; where mention is made of the
Surplice, Kneeling, and Cross; But none of Confirmation, Offeringes, Women's
Purification, and such other things as the Rejoinder would have Calvin only
to have respected*

3. For Calvines Epistles to Bullinger, 1551. they were two: and in the first,
epist. 120. he excuses only as tolerable in extremity, the Cornerd cap, and
Rochet: and what is this to our Ceremonies using and urging? In the second
epist. 121. he exhorts the Protector, to help Ho^per, standing even against
those fopperies, What can the Rejoinder gleane from hence. 3. As for that the
Rejoinder adds, that Calv. Instit. lib 4. cap. 17. sect. 37. (for Easter day
was handled before) professedly allows our Kneeling, it is nothing so. For he
speaks only against the Papists kneeling unto the Host in Procession; and
for aggravation of that Idolatry, says* that in the Supper it self, we may
kneel to Christ. There is not one word of such kneelinge as ours is. There is
no Nonconformist, which refuses to kneel unto Christ, in the celebration of
the Lords Supper.

9. But Calvin (says the Def.) has these words: that in laboring to remoove
such things as may seem to nourish Idolatry, we must take heed of being too
supersti^ious, i^ urging too vehemently things in their own nature
i^different. To which there needs no answer, then this: we assent to those
words, without any exception. Afte^ Calvin, the Replier made mention of Martyr,
Gryncu^, Wolphius, Vrsinus, Machabeus, Zanchius, Simlerus, Z^pperus, Fulke, and
the Authors of our Homilies, as quoted i^ the Abrigement (page 24.) to the same
purpose. Bu^ the Rejoinder thought not them worth the answering in special: and
therefore I must leave them to considention only. To the rest of this Section I
answer nothing but, Nihil dicit.

SECT. 5. Concerning Daniels abstinence.
Here nothing is handled but Daniels example, Dan. 1.8. Neither does the
Rejoinder add any thing to the Defendant, but only, that Daniels forbearance
of the Kings meat, was grounded on special ceremonial injunctions of God, and
not upon our moral rule, that the abuse had made the use unlawful; nor was
this a Ceremony in Gods worship. To which I answer 1. that our argument is also
grounded on the equity of Ceremonial injunctions, and that equity is our
moral rule.

2. It must needs be, that if good meats (not otherwise unclean) were
unlawful unto Daniel, then it was because they were defiled by Idolatry: which
is all that this place was alleged for.

3. If this was not a Ceremony of Gods worship, the Argument is so much the
stronger: because all Christians know, that whatsoever is unlawful out of Gods
worship, the same (not being by God appropriated to his worship) is much more
unlawful in it.

SECT. 6. Concerning Hezekias his breaking down the brazen Serpent.
1. THis example is so pregnant, that it has by all sorts of Divines been
used and improoved to so much as our Proposition does require from it. The
Superstitious Authors of the Canon Law, could not shut their eyes wholly
against this light. For so D. Abbot (Def. of Mr. Perk. part. 1. page 168.)
translateth that law, Did. 63. cap. Quia. If our Pred^cessors have done some
things which at that time might be without fault, and afterward be turned to
error and superstition; we are taught by Hezekias breaking the brazen Serpent,
that the Posterity may abolish the same, wit^out any delay, and with great
authority. And the same Doctor Abbot confesses, the force of this consequence
from Hezekias his example, to make against such private use of the Cross, now,
as Constantine, and the ancient Christians had of it* What then but the time,
did hinder that good and learned man, from seeing that it makes much more
against the public use of the same Cross in Baptism? I never yet could meet
with that Papist, which denied the consequence: The brazen Serpent (having
been Gods own ordinance) was for Idolatrous abuse, to be abolished. Therefore
human inventions, for like abuse, much more. Yet the Def. and Rej. deny it.
With what reason, shall appear^.

2. The Def. gave five reasons for Hezekias his abolishing the Serpent. To
which it was replied, that no man doubts, but Hezekias had reasons, more then
five, for that he did: and that the like may be alleged for abolishing of our
Ceremonies. This last (says the Rej.) should have been showed. So it is (say
I) in the following dispute.

Let them (adds the Replier) be abolished by public authority, and I will
undertake, reasons to justify the action done, will easily be acknowledged,
even of those that now can see none to persuade unto the doing of it. Like
enough; (answers the Rej.) and well enough: because it is lawful, and just
to abolish them as inconvenient. Now let this be well noted. In the general
answer to this Argument, it was pleaded (page 406.) that Ceremonies abused to
Idolatry are to be abolished, if they be not conveniently necessary. Here our
Ceremonies so abused, are confessed to be such, as that, if they were once
abolished by public authority, reasons could easily be found to prove them
justly abolished as inconvenient. So that nothing but public authority, does
make them justifiable, or free from such inconvenience as deserves and
requires the abolishing of them. And who can conceive such a virtue in public
authority, as to make that morally convenient which before was inconvenient? or
to make reasons forceable, for justifying an action done; which are not
forceable for justifying the same, as to be done? Our cause by this confession,
wants nothing but one Fiat, or act of public authority, to make it
justifiable; so far at least, as concerns this question: whether the
Ceremonies are to be abolished or no?

3. Because the Def. did make this one ground of denying our consequence from
Hezekias zeal against the monuments of Idolatry, that He did not abolish the
Idols which Solomon suffered to be set up in favor of his strange wives;
because they were (at that time) neglected Idols. It was replied, that it may
well be thought, they were destroyed by Hezekiah, and set up again before the
time of Josiah. This the Rej. calls rashness to be repented of: because it
is said (2. Reg. 23.13.) that Io^iah destroyed those high places, which Solomon
had set up. And was it such a rashness, to say that it may be thought so? the
phraze is more modest then theirs, who peremptorily affirm those Idols to have
been neglected until after Hezekias time; when the Scripture testifies
plainly, that Ahaz, Existimamus etiam, vivo Salomone, omnem illam Daemonum
officinam disruptam fuisse, dilaceratam, atque disperditam. Videnturque
referendae illa statuae, and luci, and ara, and reliqua idololatria monumenta
(a Reg. 23.13.) ad Manassem, and Ammonem (qui excitaverant illa in eodem loco,
and supra eadem fundamenta) non ad Salomonem, ante annot 250.
Hezechias his father, worshipped Mol^ch (which was one of those Idols) by
making his son to pass through the fire; and was so madly given to
superstition, that he sacrificed under every green tree. 2. Reg. 16. Nay less
was said, then some learned have with great probability affirmed: namely, that
these Idols with their appurtenanceces were first defaced by Solomon himself,
after his repentance; and being restored after by Idolaters, were again
defaced. Salianus (in his Annals ad an, 3309.) says thus: We think also that
while Solomon lived, that whole shop of devils was broken up and ruined. And
withal, the statues, the groves, and altars, as also the rest of ido^atrous
monuments 2. King. 23.13. to have reference to Manasses and Ammon (who had set
them up in the same place, and upon the same foundation) and not to Solomon,
who died 250. years before. 250. extinctum. Incredibile dictu est. tantum
scandalum ab Asa, Iosaphato, Ioiada, cum lat e idololatriam disperderent, in
oculis ipsis positum, non vid^sse, aut non ausos attingere, and ad annum 3406.
Mirum profecto si Idola illa post tercentos 50. annos subsisterens, quae
Solomon ipse poenitens, and caeteri Reges boni sustulissent. Vtique dicendum
videtur, ab impijs Regibus extructa suisse ejusdem generis fana, and Idola quae
^lim Solomon in ijsdem locis extruxerat: ut illud quae aedificaveret Solomon,
fit idem ac si dixisset, qualia aedificaverat.
It is incredible to speak that when Asa, Iosaphat, and Ichoiada did far and
near destroy idolatry, they notwithstanding suffered a skandall so apparent.
And to the year 3406. it were very strange if those Idols after 350. years,
should yet remain, the which Solomon after his repentance, and other good
Kings had abolished. So that it is probable that such like temples and Idols
were repaired, and bui^t up again by other succeeding ungodly Kings, which
Solomon in former time had made: that that which Solomon builded should be all
one with such like as he had builded.

Where he shows by diverse instances, both out of Scripture, and out of common
speech; how that word which, does not always note the same singular
substance; therein confuting all the ground that the Rej. had for censuring the
Repl. of rashness to be repented of. This sentence is the more also to be
favored; because according to the other, which our Def. and Rej. maintain, it
will be very hard to answer that objection against Solomon's repentance, which
Rabanus on 2. Reg. 23. groundeth on that superstition: Solomon never truly
repented of his idolatry: for if he had manifested fruits worthy repentance,
he would have taken order with those Idols, which he had set up by remooving
them, and (being so wise a man) never have left them to stand for stumbling
blocks to fools, as if what he had erroneously devised, had been well and
wisely done. Solomon de admisso idololatriae scelere, nunquaem perfect
poenituit. 'Nam si fructus poenitentiae dignos faceret, satageret ante omnia,
ut Idola quae aedificaverat, tollerentur and non in scandalum stu^torum, quae
ipse cum fuisset sapientissimus, erronea secerat, quasi sapienter a^ recte
sacta relinqueret.
Beside all this, it is not credible, that the same individual Temples stood
by Jerusalem from Solomon's time, to Josias; if it were but for this, that the
Assyrians came even unto the gates of Jerusalem, spoiling and breaking down
all costly buildings, (such as Solomon's Temples were) not sparing* but deriding
the gods of Nations. 2. Reg. 18.

4. It was added by the Replier that those Idols should have been destroyed,
(though they had been for the time, neglected) because that evil for which
Iosu destroyed them ought as well to have been praevented, as corrected. To
this the Rejoinder answers 1 that this is not true, except Hezekia had
suspected that evil. And who will say, that there is no cause to suspect evil
of an Idol, though it be for a time neglected? Or can any man think, that if
Israelites had neglected them, no Sidonian, Moabite, or Ammonite, gave occasion
of any evil to be suspected by those Idols? The Spanish and French Papists
(to say nothing of English) when they, in passing by the Cross in Cheapside,
do reverence unto it, give they not cause to suspect, some evil to cleave
unto it? 2. The same means (says the Rejoinder) are not allways requisite for
praevention, which must be used for recoverie. Yes truly, about Idols (if we
judge out of the Scripture) the very same means. Burn then (says the
Rejoynd.) all your Popish bockes, lest they fall into the hands of Popelings to
abuse them. So will I certainly, if you can show me, that they must be burned
when Popelinges have had them in their hands, and abused them which here you
grant concerning these Idols.

5. Zanchius was cited by the Defend. to prove, that this abolishing is not the
universal remedy for all abuses of Ceremonies (he means) unto Idolatry.
And because the Replier could not find the place, we are by ^he Rejoinder
directed to the later edition, page 678. where I find these words: This rule
is to be observed: that things grown to abuse and defiled by superstition,
Tenenda est haec. regula: Quae in abusum venerunt, and superstitionibus
^ontaminata fuerunt, sisiat adiaphora, tolli^a prorsus possunt, and sape etta^
debent.
if they be indi^ferent may, yea oftentimes ought, to be taken away. Here (I
hope) is nothing against our proposition. And yet the Def. has nothing else to
catch at, nothing else (I say) but those words: they may be removed, as
signifying, that ^hey may also not be removed: As if every thing that may ^e
removed, may also not be removed! The Rejoinder ^ddeth, that he admits of
some Feast-days, as tolerable. I ^^ant, he speaks something favorable of
them: but ^herin, he ney^her speaks to our quaestion directly, nor ^heweth
how that which he says may be accorded with ^is own rule. But page 800.
(says the Rejoinder) he ^estrayneth the consequence to things manifestly
Idola^rous, not to indifferent Rites. So do we also: But the ^ejoynder as it
seems, makes Salomons Idols, (if ^hey be for a time neglected) indifferent
rites, which ^anchie never did. N^y Zanchie page 649. from this ^xample of
Hezekia, reprooveth those that keep in secret ^he monumens of Superstition,
though out of Chur^hes. True (says the Rejoinder) but betwixt such Mo^uments,
and indifferent Ceremonies, he distinguishes. And ^o do we, in some sense:
but that things otherwise in^ifferent, may by becoming monuments, prove
un^awfull, Zanchie never denied. To Zanchie, were added (in the Abrigement,
page 24.) as witnesses of our consequence from Hezekias his example, Augustine,
Calvin, Martyr, Wolphius, Lavater, Sadeel, Jewel, Bilson, Fulke, Rainolds,
Andrues, and Perkins. To all these it was unseasonable (says the Rejoinder) to
answer at full, in this place. We must therefore wayt (though in vain) for a
place which will seem seasonable.

6. The Defender in fine, noted two disparities betwixt the brazen Serpent, and
our Ceremonies: 1. That the Idolatry of the Jews about that was public,
general, and in the same Church; which is not so with our Ceremonies. 2. That
there was no other means to cure the Idolatry of those times; as now there is.
To the former it was answered 1. that these circumstances are not rendered as
reasons of abolishing the brazen serpent, in the Text, but invented by the Def.
True (says the Rej.) yet any man may conceive that they might be reasons. But
for generality, I cannot conceive how it can be prooved: and the public abuse,
though it might be a reason, yet not such a one, as that with it, abolishing
should be used, or suspended. But our Ceremonies (adds the Rej.) must in
comparison be likened to the brazen Serpent used well, at Jerusalem; which
ought not to have been abolished, for such another in relation to that, set up
at Bethel, and made an Idol. Wherein he mistaketh much, For first our
Ceremonies were never good, or well used. Calvin is allowed of by the Def. and
Rej. for his moderation about them. Let him therefore speak: I answer the
turne-coate, What is there in the Papacy unlike the brazen Serpent, except
only the original? Epist. 265. The Popish Ceremonies are naught from the
beginning. Resp. ad Versipellem. Quid in Papatu non simile serpenti aneo,
prater originem? Epist. 265. Ceremoniae Papales a suo principio vitiosa sunt.
2. The Papists did not take these Ceremonies from us, but we from them. 3. It
may be very well questioned, whether the serpent at Jerusalem, considered as no
way commanded of God, should not have been abolished, if the ten Tribes should
have taken occasion by it of Idolatry? It was answered 2. that private idolatry
is also to be remooved, as well as public. That cannot be de facto, says the
Rejoinder. Yet thus far it may be very well de facto, that nothing be used in
public, which is known to nourish idolatry in private. It was answered 3.
That all these circumstances did more then agree to our Ceremonies, in the
beginning of our reformation. To this it is rejoyned 1. that our Ceremonies
were never the object of gross idolatry: which he would not have said, if he
had thought of the Cross, or that the proper means of idolatry are as well to
be abolished, as the objects. The 2. rejoinder is, that though they ought to
have been remooved; in the beginning of reformation, yet now not: which is as
if a debtor should plead, that he owed indeed so much money to his creditour
long ago, but now (though it has been every year called for) he is quit by
deferring the payment. Sure (says the Repl.) our Ceremonies are not grown
better since the reformation, by any good they have done. That is not here
considered (answers the Rejoinder) but if they be not grown to less abuse?
As if less superstition, with much mischief, were not enough to cashiere such
Ceremonies as do no good!

To the second disparitie, it was replied, that this is the very quaestion,
whether any other means be sufficient to cure the disease of human Ceremonies
idolatrously abused, beside abolishing? This (says the Rej.) you make a
quaestion of. And was not the Defend. disputing against us? what reason then
had he, to make ou^ quaestion an argument, or answer against us? It was replied
also, that experience ha^h showed the disease of our Ceremonies is not cured,
in the Dominions of our Hezekia. Yet (says the Rej.) the means (without
abolishing) may be sufficient, if they were well applied, that is, given and
receyved. As if the same means would not have been in like manner sufficient
in Hezekias time, against the Idolatry of the Serpent, if they had been well
applied i. e. given, and receyved! Heerin certainly is no disparitie.

A piece of a Comparison, betwixt the Primitive, and the praesent English
Church.
1. Because the Def. 3. or 4. times, repeated, and urged, (as much making for
his cause) that our Church is so truly reformed, that it does most lively
express the face, and full body of her Primitive Mother-Churche; the Repl.
therefore at last, was forced to say something to this; especially in this place,
where it is quaestioned, if we will allow it to be called a reformed Church.
He answered therefore in general, that in the maine points of doctrine, and the
grossest superstitions, our Church is reformed; but in regard of
Ecclesiastical government, and some Ceremonies, it is not. To this it is
rejoyned, 1. That by face and body, was meant only doctrine and religion, not
government, or Ceremonies. The Defend. therefore understood this term, as
Cardinal Perone; and the Replier as D. Andrues, who in the beginning of his
answer, has these words: Points of faith seem rather to pertayne to the
inward parts, then to the face. It is the Agend (of the Church, ^e should have
held him to. In that is the face of the Church, etc. After this, the Rejoinder
making all the Primi^ive Church, that was within diverse hundreds of years after
the Apostles age, out of the Centurie-writers, and others, gathers a
catalogue of errors and defects, in doctrine, and observances, which by little
and little, began in those times; and thence concludes, that our doctrine is
purer then it was in the Primitive Church, and also some observances. Now 1.
this extention of the Primitive Church is taken without leave. 2. Those errors
of doctrine may no more be attributed to the Primitive Church, then the errors
of Mr. Mountague, and others like him (who are neither few in number, nor mean
for power, as things go) may be to the English Church, 3. In the other matters
of Ecclesiastical Policy, and Ceremonies, we hold that for which the Rejoinder
formerly objected unto us, as a spirit of singular singularity, page 384. and
now confesses to be true; namely, that the Apostolical purity began presently
after to be corrupted, and so proceeded in defection more and more. Yet all
this does not hinder, but diverse corruptions may be found among us, which were
not known in the first primitive ages. Nay let it be marked well, how strange
an assertion is made up by this reckoning of the Rejoynders! In Hezekias time
(says the Defendant) the idolatry about the Serpent, could not be cured but by
abolishing the Serpent: but in our most truly reformed Church, which does most
lively express the face and full body of her Primitive Mother Church, this
disease would be found curable without any such extremity. The meaning is
according to the Rejoinder his interpretation: the disease of idolatry is more
easily cured, in that Church, which does lively express the face, and full
body, of those Churches, which were infected with many errors, and declining in
many things, to superstition, then in Hezekias Church, most purely at that time
reformed. Surely the Rej. in a great part of his gloss, forgot his text:
otherwise he would never have in this manner confuted it.

Cathedral music with Organs.
2. THe first question was, If the Primitive Church had such chaunting
Idol-service, as is in out Cathedral Churches? The Rejoinder after some words
spent about singing, (about which he brings not the least resemblance of that
in question, until the fourth age after Christ) excepteth first, that Organall
music was gods ordinance in the old Testament, and that not significant, or
typical; and therefore is sinfully called Idol-service. 2. That all men whose
hearts are not averse, by distraction, stupidity, or prejudice, feel such
music to work much upon their affections. To this I say 1. that his denying
of Organall music to have been significant or typical, is without reason,
and against the current of our Divines; taken (as it may seem) out of
Bellarmine de missa. lib. 2. cap. 15.) who uses this evasion against those
words of P. Martyr: Musical organs perteyne to the Jewish Ceremony, and agree
no more to us, then Circumcision. So that we may neglect it, and take him as
saying, that nothing which was ordained in the old Testament (no not
sacrificing of beasts) is now an Idol-service. 2. For that, and the other, both
together, it is fit the Rejoinder should be put in mind how many, and what
kind of men, he accuses of distraction, stupidity, or prejudice!

1. Thomas Aquinas (in whose time this faction was not in general request,
Instrumenta musica non assumit Ecclesia in divinas lauds, ne videatur
Iudaizare: Musica instrumenta magis animum movent ad delectationem, quam ut per
ea forractur bona dypositio. In et Test. usus erat taiium instrumentorum,
tum-tum quia aliquid figurabant Operosam quandam, and theatricam musi^am in
sac^as a^es induximus, tumultuosum diversarum vocum garritum, qualem non opinor
in Graecorum, out Rom morum theatris unquam auditumsuisse. In hunc usum, magnu
sala^ijs aluntur puororum greges, quorum omnis aet as in perdiscendus hujusmodi
garnitibus consumitur, tantus sumptibus oneratur Ecclesia, ob rem pestiseram,
etc.
much less in the Primitive) in 22. q. 91. a. 2.4. opposes thus: The Church
uses no music for divine praises, lest it should seem to Indaize, and
answers thus: Musical instruments do more stir up the mind to delight,
then frame it to a right disposition. In the old Testament there was some need
of them, both, etc. and also because they did figure out something. Erasmus, in
1. Cor. 14. says thus: We have brought a tedious and player-like music into
the Church, a tumultuous noise of many voices, such as I think was not heard
among the Theaters of Grecians or Romans. For which purpose, whole flocks of
boys are maintained at great charges, whose age also is all spent in learning
such gibble gabble. At such cost is the Church ^or a pestiferous thing, etc.

It is evident that that some Eccl^siasticall chanting and roarings in our
Temples (scarce also understood of the Priests themselves) is a most foolish
and vain abuse, Zuinglius, Act. Disp. 2. page 100. Ecclesiasticum ittum
cantum, and templorum boatus, ab ipsis quoque sacerdotibus non intellectos,
abusum stultum, and inanem, ^^^pietatis verae temoram pernitiosissimam esse
constat. Calvin in Psalm 23 Mihi d^bium non est, quin totum illud musicae
genus, pars fuerit legalis padagogia. In solemni Dei cultu, nihilo (...) ad
canendas Dei laud^s congruere arbitror, musica instrumenta, quam si quis
suffitus, lucernas, and similes legis (...) bras in usum revocet. Vltra
progredi, quam docemur, 1. Cor. 14. impiam pervicaciam esse dico.
and a most pernicious let to piety. I make no question but all that kind of
music was a part of the legal pedagogie. In the solemn worship of God, I
do not judge it more suitable, then if we should recall the incense, tapers,
and other shadows of the Law, into use. I say again, to go beyond what we
are taught, is most wicked pervicacy.

It would be too tedious, if I should reckon up all that have assented to
these. I will add only the two and thirty grave learned men, which were
chosen in King Edwards days, to reform Ecclesiastical laws, and observances
they judged this law fitting, De divinis officijs cap. 5. Vibratam illam and
operosam musicam, qua figurata dicitur aufetri plac^t.
It likes us well to have this tedious kind of music taken away. Certainly
these were neither distracted, nor stupid men: whence their prejudice came, let
the Rejoinder himself judge.

Chancelours, Commissaries, and Officials.
3. The second question was about these children of the earth, dealing with the
keys of Christ's Heavenly Kingdom, whether they can be found in the face, or
body of the Primitive Church? The Rej. 1. answers plainly and roundly, No.
Yet these human creatures, are those that keep most mis-rule among poor
Christan men and Ministers also, in Ecclesiastical censures, of suspension,
and excommunication, with intolerable exactions. That assertion therefore of
the Defend. that the Church of England does most lively express the face and
full body of her Primitive Mother Church, is in one great part of it, dashed by
the Rejoinder his No. 2. The Rejoynd, adds, nor did any Presbyters execute
any Church censures, without leave or consent of their Bishops, or unprea^hing
Elders at all, execute any censures of the Church. Now (...) this is nothing to
the purpose, but a mere diversion, that something might seem to be said
beside No. 2. For ^he first, I answer with Iunius in Bell. Cont. 5. lib. 1. cap.
^4. an. 27. Censures are in common to be acted by the Presbytery: so that as
the other Presbiters did not act them without the consent of the chief
Presbyter, or Bishop, ^o neither could any Bishop do it without them, of and ^y
himself. That Bishops afterward dared so to do, it was tyrannidis indignae,
mere tyranny. 3. For the confu^ation of the second, I propound a remarkable
place in ^rigen, against Celsus lib. 3. extant also in his Philocalia,
^ollected by Gregory Naz. and Basil, set forth in greek and latin, by
Tarinus: were cap. 18. Unto Celsus, ob^ecting that Christian teachers sought
for simple foolish ^uditors, Origin answers, that Christian teachers did
first discern and try their auditors; and of the approo^ed, they had two
orders, Nonnulli praepositi sunt, que in vitam and mores ^orum qui admittuntur
exquiran^s ut qui turpia committunt, ij^ communi coetu interdicant, qu^ ver^ab
istis abhorrent, ex animo complexi, meliores quotidie redda^^.
one of beginners (that were ^atechised) and another of those which had made
fur^her progress. And among these latter (distinct from ^eachers) he relates
thus: Some are appointed who are to ^ook to the life and mann^rs of such as are
admitted, that they which do ought unseemely, may, as need shall require, be
ex^luded the Congregation, and they which do otherwise, may ^e cherished, and
dai^y grow better. This is the translation of Tarinus. The rest of the
Rejoinder to this question has nothing in it but words.

Pompo^s Bishops with sole power of Ordination and Excommunication.
4. The quaestion is if any such were in the Primitive Church? The Rejoinder
1. answers concerning Pomp, that Peace and beneficencie of Princes brought
in this difference of outward state. But all difference of outward estate was
not meant by Pomp. For so (...) Ministers, that have convenient means for a
libe^^^ kind of life, with hospitality, should be pompous. W^ are not so
simple, as to account the Pastor of Sutton Col^^feild, (as such) pompous. There
is certainly a pomp^^^ that does not agree to a Minister of the Gospel: as the
pompous state of a Baron, or Earl (which the Defende^ himself, at his third
flight, unto Durrham, is risen to that requires many idle attendants, for no
other us^ but only for Comportment, and Luster of state; that which must have
so much time spent in brideling of the Bishops horses, as the ancient B b.
took to preach dive^^ sermons in, as M. Hooper speaks; that which make^ a
poor man afraid to speak unto his Minister, without such trembling, as Majesty
breeds; that which would make it ridiculous, for a mean man to desire a
visitatio^ of him, for himself, his wife, or children, in sickness^ or other
perplexity; that which requires a Chaplain^ not only to do other duties of
religion for him, bu^ even to give thanks at his table, and that standing,
whi^^ he sits; that (to omit other characters) which makes all his doeings
Lord-like, by way of Commandment: I will not here speak of, draw an
excommunication against him; take him Pursiva^t; Iailour, see to your prison^r;
as being notorious in diverse of them: but only note one example, out of mine
own experience, which many others can parallel by ^heirs: I was once, and but
once (I thank God) before a Bishop: and being praesented unto him, by the chief
Magistrates of ^n Incorporation, for to be preacher in their town; the lowly
man first asked them, how they durst choose a preacher, without his consent?
You (said he) are to receyve the preacher that I appoint you. For I am your
Pastor, though he never fed them. And then, turning to me, how durst you (said
he) preach in my Diocese, without my leave? So that without any other reason,
but mere Lordship, the wholle Incorporation, and I, were dimissed, to wayt his
pleasure: which I (for my part) have now done this twenty year, and more. If
this kind of Pomp were in the Primitive Church, or if it be not in ours, the
Replier may be blamed for mentioning Pomp in his Quaere.

2. Concerning Ordination, the Rej. his answer is, that the Bishop do^th it not
(regularly) all alone. What is this to sole power of doing it? If an Irish or
Welsh Bishop, ordeineth one at London in his chamber, or in some Chapel, and
admits him that commended the person to him, for to join with him, for
fashion sake, in the gesture of hands-imposing, be he of what place or Diocese
soever, in whom is the po^er o^ Ordination? If the Bishop of London, ordeyneth
a minister at large, and bids his Chaplain, or Chaplains, do so much as
add their hands to the business, isthere power in the Chaplain, more then in
any other, that by chance may be present? Power of Ordination is not given (by
our Laws) to individua vaga, that is to say, Vagrant men, of whom the Law
takes no notice, such as were wont to be called Hedge-Priests, but to
authorized Prelates. These are toys, to mock the Church (if not God) with.
Such doeings were never heard of in that Church which deserves the title of
Primitive. Of Excommunication, the same answer is given; and so the same answer
may serve. Johannes Hone, Legum Doctor, Offi^ialu, etc omnibus and singulis
Rectoribus etc. Cum nos rite and legitim^ procedentes, omnes and singulos,
quor^m nominae subscribuntur, etc. excommunicando^ fore decre verimus; cumque
discretus vir, M Roulandus Allen, Presbyter, eos d^m ex officio nostro mero
excommunicaverit in scriptu: vobu igitur committimus, etc. ut palam denuncietis
etc. Datum sub figillo Officialitatis nostra, die tali, anno tali.
Let this only be added, that therein, the Bishop has such absolute power,
that he may derive the same to his Chancelours, Commiss^ries, Officials, and
such like Underlings, to be dispensed by them, even unto the commanding of Gods
Ministers for to denounce their Censures, without any discerning what aequitie
there is in the cause, and what assistance of Ministers is required, appears
by this style: John Hone, Dr. of Law official etc. to al Rectors, etc. For as
much as we (proceedi^g rightly and lawfully) have adjudg^d all and every one,
whose names are underwritten to be excommunicated; and since the discree^e Mr.
Rouland Allen Priest, has excommunicated them, by our mere office in writing;
we do therefore committ to you etc. to denounce openly, etc. given under the
Seal of our Officiality, such a day, and such a year. If any footsteps of
such an approved power could be showed in the Primitive Bishops, all Christians
might merveyl at so sudden and monstrous a defection. But both Defend. and
Rejoynd. know, that it is a relic of Popedom.

Calling of Ministers, without express consent of the Congregations over which
they are set.
5. The quaestion was whether any such tingh was in the Primitive Church? The
Rejoinder his answer is ^ffirmative; that it seems there was such a thing:
because ^^. It is said only of the Apostles, that they ordained Elders ^o the
Churches, Act. 14.23. and Titus, Tit. 1.5. appointed ^he Ministers. 2. Sometime
Ministers were chosen by prophecy; and sometime by lot. 3. The peoples consent
was not held ^f divine necessity. For the grave Council of Laodicea, Can. ^3.
restrained the people from choice of their Ministers. Beside, ^he people of
this Land have given their implicit consent in Parliament, to such as the
Patrons and Bishops call: And if ^hey do their parts, it is as well, and
sometime better, then if ^hey were chosen by the people. Finally, God has not
forbidden our manner of calling Ministers, nor commanded the other. Where 1. let
it be marked, that the quaestion was only of ^he peoples consent; concerning
which the Rejoinder ^n all these words, answers just nothing. 2. The first
place he brings against the peoples election, Act. 14.23. is the chief place,
which Protestants use to bring for it; as Bellarmine (de Clericis. lib. 1. cap.
7.) observes of it. Hoc Argumentum ^ex Act. 14 est pr^cipuum sundamentum
Illyrici, Calvin's, Kemni^ij, and aliorum.
This argument is the chief foundation of Illyri^us, Calvin, Chemnitius, and
others. Of Bellarmines answer, the Rejoinder mak^th an Argument, against our
Divines, who have confuted that answer, and so sufficiently answered his
Argument, long before he framed it: which yet he takes no knowledge of, but
nakedly propounds it, as if this were the first time of beating it off the
stage. It is (says he) only said of the Apostles, and not of the Churches,
that they did ord^yn Elders. Act. 14.23. So (say I) it is only said of the
Apostles, and not of the Churches, in the very same verse, that they did pray
and f^st: does it follow from hence, that the Churches had no hand, part or
consent, in prayer and fasting? If not, then neither does the only mentioning
of the Apostles in creating Presbyters, exclude the peoples formal choice, much
less their consent. If any man desires large and full clearing of the place,
he may find it in I^nius his Notes on Bellarmine, Contr. 5. lib. 1. cap. 7.
annot. 59.63.64. where the Conclusion is, that Bellarmine does in this
argument nugari, nothing but trifle, disioyning things that ought to be
conjoined, as if there were a contradiction betwixt these two Propositions: The
Apostles ordained; the Churches ordained. If the Rejoinder would have brought a
fitting example, he should have showed us, that Paul, or Barnabas, being at
Jerusalem, ordained a Minister, and sent him to Antioche, Iconium or Lystra,
signifying by letters, that such a man was appointed their Pastor, though they
never knew, or heard of him before. For that had been something like unto the
practice of a Bishop, who upon the Patrons praesentation, whersoever he be,
sends his Minister from the place, or Palace of his residence, unto a
Congregation 20.30. or 40. miles of; which poor despized People, must be
content, with towling of a Bell, as sufficient notice given of their Ministers
fitness, and their necessity to ^cknowledge the same. 3. In the second place
Tit. 1.5. whereas our translation has, that Titus was to ordeyne Ministers, the
Rejoinder turns ordeyning into ap^ointing, and I may better turn it into
setting, or placing. Now (which soever translation be admitted) the Rejoy. ^is
argument is lighter then a feather, except it be sup^osed that Titus could not
effect that Ministers should be in every Church of Creete, neither by, nor with
the Churches consent: which is too absurd a proposition for any reasonable man
to father. Take the Rej his translation in ordinary rigor; Our King does
appoint Bishops; and yet they are not placed in their Seats, without some kind
of consent and election of others. And yet I hope the Rej. himself will not
say, that Titus took so much upon him, as this comes to.

4. As for choosing Ministers by Prophecy, that was very extraordinary, and
therefore has no place in the question of ordinary calling. Yet 1. Prophecy
did no less require the concurrence of the Churches consent, in an ordinary
Minister, then it did the Presbyteries ordination in Timothies person. 1. Tim.
4.14. It was only an extraordinary cause of that consent, which otherwise
should have been grounded on the persons qualification. Prophecy also or
Vision did sometime follow the Churches election, as in Celerinus, of whom
Cyprian (Epist. 34. ed. Goulart.) records: Cum consentire dubitaret
Ecclesiae, in visione, per noctem, compulsus est, no negaret.
When he wavered about consenting to the Church, by a vision of the night he
was forced to assent.

5. As for election by lot, I do not think any example can be given of it,
wherein the Churches election of diverse persons betwixt whom the lot should
design, with their consent, did not concur.

6. As for the Primitive Churches tenet of Divine authority, nothing can be
prooved out of the Council of Laodicea, which was after Iulians time. The
Synod of Africa (Epist. 68. Cypr. ed. Goul.) does inform us thus: The people
it self has power both to choose worthy Priests, and to refuse unworthy ones.
The which also we see to come from Divine authority. Plebs ips^ maxim habet
potestatem vel aligendi dignos sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi. Quod and
ipsum videmus de Divina autheritate descendere, etc.
Yet Calvin answers, that even that Laodicean Council did not restrain from
election, but only from disorderly electing, by themselves. And is therein
learnedly seconded against Bellarmines rejoinder, by Iunius, in Bell. Cont. 5.
lib. 1. cap. 7.

7. As for implicit consent in Parliament, it makes nothing to the question.
And yet it cannot be prooved, that every thing decreed by Parliaments, have the
Churches implicit consent. For then the Church did implicitly consent unto all
the alterations of religion, in King Henry's, King Edwards, Q. Mary's, and Q.
Elizabeth's days, how opposite soever they were one to another, neither can it
be showed lawful, for the Churches of Christ, to leave their privileges which
Christ has given them, to the pleasure of any Parliament.

8. To say, that the Patrons and Bishops sending without the Churches consent,
is as good, or better then the Churches free consent, well ordered, and
directed; is all one as to say, it is as good, or better, that Women should be
married without their consent, then with it.

9. As for the final answer, I refer the Reader partly to that already said,
and partly to D. Ames his answer unto Bellarmine, tom. 2. lib. 3. cap. 3.

Ministers going to law for their places.
6. The question is, if this was known in the Primitive Church? It is rejoyned
1. that Bishops were often inquestion at Synods, about their title to their
places, which was as much. But 1. This was not in the Apostles time. 2.
Questioning before Synods, about Ecclesiastical affairs, is of
Ecclesiastical nature; going to law, not so. In Synods all things ought to be
determined by Gods Word: at the Kings Bench, and Assizes, the Judges pronounce
sentence by man's law. Yet the good ancient Bishops, were so far from seeking
a title to their places, by Synodicall judgment, that they withdrew
themselves, as being afraid to have such a title put upon them, either by
Churches or Synods: examples of which modesty, we have even in declining times,
Basil, Gregory etc. A law we find also (Cod. de Epist. and Cler.) mentioning
the same disposition: Tantum ab ambitu debet esse sepositus Antistes, ut
quaeratur congedus, rogatus, recedat, invitatus, effugiat: sola illis
suffragetur necesittas excusandi. Profecto enim indignus est sacerdotio, nisi
ordinatus fuerit invitus.
The Prelate ought to be so far from ambition, that nothing but compulsion
should draw him, though he be desired, let him give back, and when invited,
let him shift, etc. For certainly he is unworthy the office of Priesthood,
unless he be ordained unwillingly. Certainly, these men would never have
sought those places by course of law, which they hardly accepted, being
obtruded upon them. 2. The Rejoinder says, Lawing about places arises upon
the title of Patronage, a civil inheritance. Whereas the question is not from
whence it arises, but if it appeared in the face of the Primitive
Mother Church? This answer is as much as to say, our Church has a special
wound, or sore in her face, which the Primitive Church had not; and therefore
must have a plaster upon it now, in those times unknown: that is, our face
does not lively represent that face, which is the question. Beside, if the
lawing be necessary, about the Patrons civil title, what has the Minister to
do with it, except ambition or covetousness, does cause him to take other
men's business upon him, for his own advantage?

Pluralists, Non-residents, Dumb-Ministers.
7. About these, the Rejond. confesses that they are the sore of our Church,
but not allowed, or tolerated, fur^her then Mr. Hooker shows. Now 1. If they
be sores, being also in the face, that is, our chief eminent, Convocation men,
bearing them in their ^ore-heads, surely they must needs dis figure the
Primitive face. 2. Though I have no more leisure to seek and confute Mr.
Hook^rs mitigations, then the Rejoynd. had to allege them; yet I dare say, if
the Stues be tolerated, and allowed at Rome, th^se sores are tolerated, and
allowed in England, they are as well known; more publicly professed; they are
practiced in the Bishops Palaces; and not only the Court of Faculties, but
most Bishops do gain by them. But (says the Rej.) If you can tell us the
Certain and safe remedy of this sore, I am persuaded the Church will thank
you. But I am neither so persuaded of the Convocation-Church, not yet that the
Rejoinder himself is so persuaded Men do not usually give thanks, for that
which formerly they did not desire, and if this Church had desired a remedy,
the Convocation-men would long since have begun (according to their skill and
power) with themselves, their Chaplains, the Benifices in their gifts, etc.
They would also have hearkened unto Parliament-remedies of wise and careful
Physicians, which have been often prescribed, prepared, tendered, and almost
applied, but by the Convocation-men, refused, and opposed, as the world
knows, and the Rej. is not ignorant of it. In the clouse of this question,
the Rej. insinuates, and (as half ashamed) only insinuates a secret
distinction, betwixt carelesse-Non residents, and another kind, of them that
are careful: the former of which he affirms to have been often condemned,
though never remooved. Of which distinction, as being left obscure, I cannot
speak so much as I muze. Only this: Careful Non-residents seem to be such
as have great care to get some pretense in Court, University, or some great
man's house, for absenting themselves from their charges (which God has laid
upon them, if they be lawfully called) and some care to provide a tolerable
Curate, for supplying their places. Now these the Rej. seems to excuse, for
which they are more beholding to him, then the Churches are, upon whose spoils
they live, and aspiring by them unto higher places. And as for the careless
Non-residents, how comes it to pass, that non conformity can as easily be
remooved, as condemned; and such condemned fellons as these, be so long
reprived, after their condemnation? Certainly, if they were as great enemies
to the Bishops kingdom, as they are to Christ's, a quicker dispatch would have
been made of them.

Simony.
8. Of this, it was asked, if it were so ordinary either in the Primitive
Church, or (almost) in the Popish, as it is in England? Here the Rejoynd.
venteth a proverb, that almost saves many a lie; adding, that the Papists
faces are washed with fair water, and foul water cast upon us: and then
tells of a Canon imposing an oath for prevention of Simony: and not only the
guilty man loses his place, but the Patron his title, for that time. Now
though all this be nothing to the Primitive Churches face, yet it is not so to
be passed over. For (to begin with the last) 1. The course taken against
Simony, which he speaks of, is no Canon of the Convocation house, but a
Parliament-law. Canons (I hope) do not deprive Patrones of their title, which
they have by civil inheritance, as the Rejoinder told us even now. 2. This
oath imposed (if it be generally urged) does make our English Simony worse
then that which is found among Papists, as adding perjury unto it. 3. Because
the Rej. will not take the considerate limitation of almost, in other sense,
then as if it were the cover of a lie, I am content it be left out, and then
desire him to prove the assertion a lie. If he cannot, it had been sufficient
for him (who so familiarly accuses others of scurrility) to have denied that
which was said, putting us to prove it. And prove it we can (so far as
vices of that nature use to be prooved) by the general voice, even of
conformable men. Doctor Andrews (long since) in a latin Sermon before the
Convocation, told them enough, after his playing fashion: They give out, Non
solum nos minoritas, vel pecunia, vel pejori condition, Rectorias nostras
paciscimur, sed and vet Majoritas, sic Cathedras vestras, vel pacuniarum
summis, vel Ecclesiarum spolijs, foede canponari vulgo dictitant Quo morbo male
iamdiu and habet, and andit Ecclesia nostra.
that not only we Minorites do with money, or more basely purchase our
Parsonages, but also you Majorities do either with great sums of money, or
with the spoils of the Churches, unworthily hukster your Cathedral places, of
which disease our Church has long been sick, and for which it has long been
ill spoken of: Did his fere, or almost all save a ly? Ifit did then, now it
has not so much to save. For many conformable men, will almost (if I may use
that word with good leave) swear, that nothing has hindered them all their
days, from Benefices, and kept them in Curateships, but only the general
abuse of Simony. Every Page, and Lackie, at the Court, and many Scriviners, can
tell, how much this and that Bishop, or Deane, gave to such or such a
Buckingham; and how much the said Bishop received from his under Officers, and
other, by him promoted. Neither is all Symony in buying of Benefices, and
Bishoprics. Selling of Visitations (which is an usual practice of our
Prelates) and such like tricks are in the same nature in the fourth degree. 4.
As for washing the Papists faces with fair water, the Rejoinder may as well
say, that he washed Sodoms face with fair water, who said, that Israel, and
Judah, had justified Sodom in her abominations.

Profane contemners of Religion, members of the Church.
9. The question was, if so many such, were members of any Primitive Church?
This the Rejoinder does not affirm: but denies any members of our Church to
contemn professedly our Religion. Which I leave to the judgment of every
Reader; if he does not know some in England, who contemn Religion? I would to
God, the Rejoinder were (in this point) on the true part, and and the Replier
on the false. But when the practice of Religion is derided on stages, and that
derision applauded by so many spectators, when those that make conscience of
sin, be they never so conformable, are scorned by so many, as Puritans; when
in all Pulpits that are possessed of good Preachers, warning is ordinarily
given, of scoffers and scorners at Religion: I think the Rej. will not find
so many assenting to this negation, as he shall to the point of Conformity.
His meaning is such, that by the same reason, it may be said, there is no
professed contemner of all Christian Religion, among the Papists, nor of all
Religion, among the Turks.

Carnal proceedings in Spiritual Courts.
10. The quaestion was, if such courses were in the Primitive Church? The
Rejoinder confesses no. But (says he for excuse) they are not instituted, nor
allowed by our Church. The confession I accept: the excuse cannot be excused.
Are not those courses instituted, or allowed, which are every day practiced, in
the Bishops, Chancelours, Commissaries, and Officials Courts? Is it not the
Church that practizeth these things? Does the Church neither institute, nor
allow that which it continualy practizeth? The Rejoinder in his Definition of a
Ceremony, confounds Institution and Observation: now, constant observation
is without any institution. Is our Church a Medea, in professing, she allows
better things, and professedly practices worse; meliora video, pro^oque;
deteriora sequor? If this be true, what need any man make any conscience of
those Excommunications, which sent from our Spiritual Courts, fly about the
wholle land, to fetch in money? the Church does not ^llow them. It is no
scurrilitie (I hope) to repeat that which D. Andrues preached to the
Convocation-house: The Church Censures now a-dayes do only touch the purse.
Censurae Ecclesia, solam jam crumenam pulsant. Malefici, ubs stipem
persolverint, dimittuntur impuniti. Stipem si nulli numereut, si nummus in
promptu non est, tum vero disringitur in eos mucro Epis^opalis: confestim, uno
ictu abscinduntur ab Ecclesia, Sathama traduntur, publicani, ethnici, anathema
denun^ia^tur. Ridiculis in rebus, idque in optimum quemque volitant bruta
fulmina, and soli metuenda crumena.
Evil doers when they have paid their fee return scot-free. If no money then
have at the offenders with the Episcopal ^word; praesently one blow they are
cut off from the Church delivered over unto Satan, proclaimed Publicans,
Heathens, Anathema. For the most ridiculous things, and against every good man,
these brutish thunderbolts do fly up and down, and only to be feared of the
purse.

Taking of money, for Ordination, Citations, Absolutions, Change of Paenance,
etc.
11. Concerning any show of these abuses, in the Primitive Church, our
Rejoinder has nothing to say* He turns himself therefore to deny, or defend
them, (...) our Church, so well as he can. 1. No man with ^^ (says he) may
take money for Ordination. To which I answer, if may be understood of a lawful
may, I think it i^ true, not only of our Church, but also of Rome, as may be
gathered out of the fifth Session at Trent. But such mays are kept in the
pocket, both there, and here, when the contrary may, de facto, appears
publicly in the face and forehead. If any one Minister be ordained, o^
instituted, without giving of money, a hundred other may wonder at him, and the
Star or Planet, that was then over the place. 2. As for Citations, and
Absolution^* they (says the Rejoinder) are things of industry, necessarily to
be recorded, and therefore money may be taken for them. As if there were more
industry in Absolution, then in Ordination, in Baptism, or any other
Ecclesiastical Act! o^ther were more necessity of recording Absolution, then
Ordination, or Baptism! And if there were such a difference, or if all these
required industry in recording of them, I hope the revenues, and in-comings of
our Bishops may suffize for that industry, without new exactions of money. 3.
He affirms Commutation, or Panance to be grounded on Exodus 21.29.30. where it
is written, that the price of an Ox, or Bull, may be taken for he head: and it
is allowed (adds the Rejoinder) by ^. Ames, Cas. Consc. lib. 5. cap. 54. number.
48. where he ^^yth, that the party condemned to pay twenty pound fine, may
^^wfully pay it, before it be required, to escape the extorting ^f forty pound,
or a greater mischief. But if either this, or that, make any thing for changing
the public confes^ion of a scandalous sin, into paying of money; I leave
(with this wholle comparison o^ faces) as the Rejoyn^er does, to the Jury of
discreet, unpartial, and honest ^en.

SECT. 7.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.19.20. Councels, and Ancient Writers.
THese testimonies were as illustrations briefly brought in of the Abrigers:
but largely ranked by the Defender into so many sections, as (...) the main
burden did lie upon them. The Replier ^^erfore conjoined them in brief: and so
will I not pas^^ng upon the Rejoinder his many words; who says (...). That in
the Abrigement, they fill seven whole pages: ^hen as these answered by the
Defend. in 14. Sections, make in the Abrigement, little more than one page.
(...). He desires us also to help their dullness, who cannot ^istinguish,
betwixt testimonies, and proofs. To which, though it be but skornfully
propounded of them that accuse us of dull Sophistry, cap. 2. sect. 11. I
answer, that common use of speech does show a difference, betwixt some
testimonies or witnesses, and proofs. For all good Christians are said to give
witness unto God and his truth, but not properly to prove either God, or his
Word.

2. Out of a Carthaginian Synod, two things were alleged: 1. that certain
Altars in high ways, erecte^ in memory of Martyrs, should be abolished. 2.
Tha^ all relics, and monuments of Idolatry should be utterly destroyed. In
the first, the Replier confessed, that there is nothing express to our
purpose: because those Altar are noted which are destitute of Martyrs relics.
Ye^ (says he) there was as good reason, for abolishing other as them. No
(answers the Rejoinder) because by th^s^ Altars destitute of relics, the
Church was mocked. And s^ was the Church mocked (say I) by those which had
relics in them: not only because they had no certain rule of discerning
true relics from false; but also, because they were by such means induced,
to place a special holiness in those places, and led-on to the invocation of
Saints departed.

The second place is expounded by the Defend. an^ Rejoynd. only of Idols and
immediate instruments of Idolatry: which cannot be true, except all places
groves an^ green trees (there mentioned) which had served to the use of
notorious Idolatry, were immediate instruments. And if that were so, why not,
or were not once ou^ Ceremonies as immediate? Because (says the Rejoynd, they
were rather subjects of superstition. Which is a new nothing. For subjects
often are al one with objects, and ma^y objects of superstition are Idols.
Places were rather ^ubjects (distinct from objects) then Images, such as our
Cross is. The sum is (^ayth the Rejoinder) that ^ynode in the former Canon,
reformed and continued a hu^an Ceremony notoriously abused to superstition: and
in the ^ater, were zealous against all monuments of idolatry. Zea^ous indeed
they were against known Idolatry: but ^hey did not discern all the
superstitious and idolatrous ^eedes, which at that time were springing up among
them, in immoderate and unwarrantable honoring of ^aints. As for their
reformation of Altars with relics, (...) was no more, then diverse Popish
Synods have profes^ed to do. But this I would have marked, that Altars ^ith
Relics honored as they were in those days, are now with the Rejoinder
accounted good religious Ce^emonies.

3. A council of Braca, or some other (it is all one) ^orbad Christians to
deck their houses, etc. in such ^aner, and at such time as Idolaters did, that
is says the ^ef. and Rej. at the same time, in the same place, and man^er.
This the Replier accepted: and assumeth, that ours ^iffer not in these
circumstances, but in opinion only.

The Rejoinder here first rejoyneth, that this Canon ^s to be understood so,
as if it had said, we must not keep the festivall-dayes of Pagans, with them,
as they do: but may ^eepe in a Christian manner unto God, the same days,
which ^hey observed impiously to the service of the Devil. Now let this be
understood, for me (though his marginall quo^ations prove it not) in his
sense, Chrysostom. hom. 1. de Laz. speaking of no more Christian observing that
day, then the day following. Hesternum diem, etc. A^e it^que and hodie, etc.
And more ancient testimonies may be brought even against sending of Newyeares
gifts, at tha^ time (Tert^ll. de Idol. cap. 14.) Let this (I say) be granted:
yet the allegation is strong to our purpose, except it can be showed, that our
Ceremonies have no mo^^ agreement with the Papists, then preaching and praying
upon New-yeares day, has with the Pagans idolatrou^ luxury, upon the same day;
or that they have not th^^ proportion unto Popish Ceremonies, which bay leave^
and green bows used of Christians would then have ha^ to Pagans bay leaves,
and green bows.

After this, the Rej. takes great pains in a large digression, that our
Ceremonies differ from the Papists Cere^^nies in time, place, person, and not
in opinion only. Which is very little to the purpose except lawfulness and
unla^fulnesse do depend on that difference of time, place, an^ person. For the
Replier did here respect those passages, wherein the Defendant flies only to
opinion for succor, in differencing our Ceremonies from Popis^^ that ours may
be lawful, though the Papists be unlawful: as cap. 2. sect. 6. Yet ^ee in
short what the Rej. ha^^ found out.

Surplice.
1. It must (says the Rej.) among Papists be hallowed or consecrated. But this
is nothing to time, place, and person: neither is consecration of Surplices
more unlaw^ull, then of Altars, Churches, and Churchyards.

2. Among Papists, no act of ministerial service may be ^awfully performed
without it, except the mass. This is not ^rue in either part. For they preach
without Surplices though diverse in England hold them on in the Pulpit) and the
Masse-garment of linen, Pontifical surplice; and many times put over the
Surplice. So the Rejoynd. ^imselfe testifies in his third difference: which
therefor answers it self, and their practice of putting on more magnificall
vestures, at high Masses, or high pla^es, either upon that, or without that, is
sufficiently practiced, according to our Canons, in Cathedral Chur^hes, Coapes.

4. They in Popery pin a number of mystical significations upon the parts of
it. But this pertains to opinion, not to ^ime, place or person: and
contains no difference, save only in number.

Crossing.
1. The Minister (says the Rejoinder) with us, may not cross himself, the
people, or other things. Now though this be nothing to the purpose, yet I would
feign know, out of what Canon, he fetches this may not with us? And if there
were any such, upon what reason it is grounded, that will not take our crossing
of the baptized person, by the nose?

2. With us, the child may not be crossed before Baptism, nor after, with
Chrisme-oyle. But of that same may not before, I ask as before. And as for
crossing with oil, I would be informed, what religious difference there is,
betwixt dry Crosses, and oil, as G. Parisiensis distinguishes them?

3. The Cross is so used with us, that it neither adds virtue to the
Sacrament, nor capacity of grace to the child. No more it is among the
Papists, by the judgment of many learned, as has been showed in the first
part of this writing (though this be but matter of opinion, which concerns
not the present question) See Thomas Aquinas, 3. q. 66. a. 10. But why is it
used? To intimate what Baptism binds unto. That is, to do that by man's
institution, which Baptism had done by Gods appointment. Whether this be a
good reason or no, I here inquire not: this I affirm; The Papists profess
the same.

Kneeling.
1. This gesture (says the Rejoinder) may before, (...) by occasion of any of
Gods ordinances, be performed lawfully to God. By occasion, I grant: but before
imports more, Might the Jews kneel before the Cherubims of the Veil, as
they might before the Arc? Might they kneel before the Brazen-Serpent? Might
they before every Ephod? May we before every Pastor? When the Rej. has
resolved these questions, we shall further consider.

2. The gesture of kneeling, in the act of receiving, was never any instituted
Ceremony of the Church of Rome. Then the Rejoinder deceived us, when in his
Manuduction, page 30. he told us, that institution, and intended observation,
are all one. For he himself confesses, in the next page, 479. that among the
Papists, the receivers of the Host, do kneel, of an ancient custom. Custom
surely, ancient, and constant, has (by all law) more in it, then every
intended observation.

3. Bellarmine and the Masse-booke, mention not kneeling in the act of
receiving. They mention not indeed the peoples kneeling; because they make
small account of their receiving, the mass being complete without it, and that
being (with them) an accidental complement of it. But they mention the Priests
bowing to the Host many times, in his receiving.

4. The Pope himself receives the Host standing. The Pope is a lawless man,
and may do what he please, as also impose what he please upon others. But yet,
in the place quoted (Sacrae Ceremoniae, lib. 2. page 181. Colon. 1558.) no such
thing appears. In the page next before, I find this: The Pope boweth low, at
the ^omming of the Sacrament, and reverently adoreth it. And one thing (worthy
of observation) concerning the Popes receiving, I find in Alexander Hales, Si
quaratu^ quare Dominus Papa sodendo comm^nicat, potest dici, quod he fit in
recordotionem quod beatus Petrus, and alij Aptstoli sedendo corpus Dom^ni in
c^n^ ultimo acceperunt.
(in the last words of the second part of his Tractate concerning the Mass,
which is the tenth question of his fourth part) that the Pope was wont to
receive sitting, in imitation of Peter and the other Apostles, Confirming that
which our Defend. and Rejoinder doubt of. If it be asked wherefore Sr. Pope
receives sitting, it may be answered, in memory of B. Peter, and other
Apostles, who ate the last Supper sitting. This may by some be imputed to the
Popes great pride, for that as it is in that book of Ceremonies which the
Rejoinder quoteth, Romanus Pontifex nemini exonino mortalium overentiam facit,
assurgendo manifest, aut caput inclinando, seu detegendo.
page 160. The Romish Bishop does reverence to no man under heaven, by rising
up to him, or by inclining, or uncovering his head. So it may be thought from
the same principle, he does not reverence to the Host. But I the rather
assent to Alexander Hales, because I have read some where, I think it is in
Hospinian de Templis, that the Pope has no Organ-piping-musicke in his Church
or Chapel. And these I account the relics of ancient simplicity, in
worship, which the Pope received from the first Bishops of Rome, and regarded
not to make alterations of, without advantage.

5. The People which receive not, do reverently bow themselves. Much more
therefore they that receive.

6. True it is, the receivers do kneel, of an ancient c^stome; but only for
conveniencie of putting the Host into their mouths, by the Priest. The former
part indeed is true. But the latter is so false, that the Lutherans themselves,
who as Apes of the Papists in this part, put the Host into the receivers
mouth, in like manner as they have received the custom from the Papists,
Tarnovius de ministerio, lib. 2. cap 31. Pratermittendo hanc venerastionem
Christi externam (genu flectionem scit) communicantes praesentiam Christi
secundum corpus, negare, and se Calvinianis conjungere viderentur.
profess, and mainetayne, that they do it for adoration. By omitting this
outward veneration of Christ (viz. kneeling) the people seem to deny Christ's
bodily presence with the Calvinists. All these things being well considered, it
will be found, that (opinion of some set aside) our Ceremonies differ not so
much from Papists, as the Popish shaving of Crounes do differ from that which
was in use among Jews, and Gentiles, of shaving whole heads, according to
Baronius his distinction, and an. 58. or then the Britons square shaving of
crowns did differ from that round shaving, which Augustine the Monk, sent by
Gregory, enforced upon them: wherein Pitsens a Papist, in his historical
relations of England, page 19. does note one part of that Controversy to have
consisted: or rather (to return unto the argument of this section) the
difference is (by the Rej. his plea) as if Christians should have in old time,
hung out bay-bowes, unconsecrated, out of an upper-chamber, in the afternoon;
when the Heathenhung them out consecrated, before noone, in their lower
chamber; and that upon institution, when the Heathen did it only upon an
ancient received custom. Are not these fine distances from idolatrous, and
superstitious abuses?

4. An African Council condemned certain Feasts used in memory of Martyrs,
because they were drawn from the errors of the Gentiles. This the Replier
affirmed to make against our Ceremonies. The Rejoinder answers 1. That this
is not enough to defend the Abridgement, nor to oppose the Defendants answer.
But if the Ceremonies be hereby condemned, it is all that the Abridgement
sought for; and as much opposition to the Defend. as the Replier cared for. He
answers 2. That the Council does not condemn any Feasts used by
Christians, Illad etiam petendum (ab-Imperatoribus) ut quae contra praecepta
divinae, convivia multis in locis exercentur, quae aberrero Gentili attracta
sunt, etc. vetari talia i^beant.
but only the very Feasts of the Heathens. But it seems otherwise, so far
as I can conster these words of the Council: And this we are to seek of the
Emperors, that such Feasts as are in many places contrary to Gods Word, and
from the errors of the Gentiles, be forbidden. I remember not any such phraze
of those times, wherein Gentiles are said to draw from the errors of Gentiles.
They did certainly traduce Feasts unto Christians, findeing them too ready for
to draw such things from them. They were not Heathens, that are spoken of, in
the third Council of Toledo, cap. 22. The people that should attend divine
Service, give themselves to unseemely dancings. Fopule qui debens off^cia
divina attendere, saltationibus turpibus in^igilant, etc.
Hospinian (de Orig. Fest.) after Beat. Rhenanus, in Ter^ul. de Coron mil.
speaking of these, and such other Feasts, declares the truth in these words:
The old Bish^ps were wont when they could not call men from the superstitions
of the Heathens by the preaching of the Word, to seek at least to do it by
observing their holy days, with their own worship. But this was to drive out
one nail with another, no way to take off the Superstition. Albeit then the
beginning of these Solemnities were tolerable at first, yet at last they grew
to such a heap of superstitions, that they became the fountain and beginning
of most horible things. Voluere veter^s Episcopi, quum ipsi pradicatione verbi
non possunt homines a superstitionibus Gentilium avocare, saltem hac ratione
mitigare, and in fuam religionem transfer voluere, sui^ Sanctis sosdem dies
and ritus consecrando. fuit aut^m hoc clavum clavo ^rudere, superstitionem non
^ollere. Licet igitur principia hujusmodi solemnitatum tolerabilia primo
fuerunt, adm^xti^tamen palarim superstitionibus, tandem fons and origo
horribilium errorum, and superstitionum fu^run^.
Yet suppose the meaning to be of Heathen Feasts, the reason notwithstanding (
drawn from the errors of the Gentiles) pertains to Christians, except
Christians may draw from the error of Gentiles, though Gentiles may not. In the
3. place the Rej. undertaketh to prove, that the Council did establish those
Feasts of Mar^yrs: because the petition made for abolishing Heathen Feasts, was
to provide for the due and free observation of the Martyrs Feasts. Whereupon he
concludes, that the Church may lawfully make use of an human Ceremony, for
her good; though the same kind of Ceremony, have been notoriously abused,
by, and to Idolatry. And in the parting, he gives us gentle thanks for these
Witnesses. Now 1. for his thanks, the matter is not so much worth. We can
afford him (without any damage to our cause) ten times as many witnesses, who
in their practice have confuted that, which sometime in their doctrine they
have taught concerning Ceremonies. 2. I will grant him also, that it was not
the in^ention of that Council, wholly to abolish the Celebra^ion of Martyrs
birth or death-days. Yet those Feastings (Convivia) which were used at them, in
imitation of the Heathen, they did (in all probability) labor to abolish. For
Augustine, who was then alive, and is likely to have had a hand in the Decree,
did wish them abolished. This ^ppeareth every where in his writings: As Epist.
64. and ^19. And great reason there was for that, and more also. For the
superstition, and luxury of them was intolerable. Those luxurious banquets
(says he* Epist. 64.) are supposed of the sorry people to be as well the solace
of the dead as ^he honor of Martyrs, whosoever carry their meats thither
which the better sort of Christians do not and almost all the World over is
neglected) yet whosoever does that will have ^hen sanctified by the merits of
the Martyrs. Luxuriosa convivia in comiteriis, non solum honore^ Martyrum, a
carnal^ and imperita pl^bo credi solons, sed etiam solatia mortuorum. de Civit.
lib. 8. cae. 27. Queunqu^ epula^ suas ^o deferunt (quod quidem a melioribus
Christianis non fit, and in plerisque terrarum ^ulla est talis consuetudo*)
tamen quienuqu^ id faciunt, sanctificari ca^ volunt per m^rita Martyrum.
And as for ^he Celebrations themselves, they were partly used by Christians,
as the same Augustine says (cont. Faustum.) For the Prayers and merits-sake of
the Martyrs. If the Re^oynder houldeth this a due observation of a human
Ceremony, and so teaches, we have no cause to thank him for it.

The Papists confess in deed, that there is no example of such Feasts in
Scripture, much less praecept: but yet they will hardly grant them to be
human. Vt meritis Martyrum consocientur, atque orationibus adjuventur.
Baron. ad ^n. 58. We grant them to be human: but the common doctrine of
Protestants deny them to have been duly observed at the least in that time,
and in that manner which Augustine declares, it being not only without
example or praecept of Scripture, but also directly against the rules of it.

D. Abbot (Def. of Perk. page 886.) says more, namely, that Offerings yearly
made for the dead, and for birthdays, were first brought in by the Haeretick
Montanus, who made gain of them.

5. Tertullian (out of Coron. milit.) was cited in the Abr. thus: We may give
nothing to the service of an Idol; nor borrow any thing from it. If it be
against religion, to sit at table in an Idols temple; what is it, to be seen in
the habit of an Idol. The Defender answered, he spoke of habites then dedicated
and appointed unto the service of Idols: but our Ministers are not urged, to
reverence the Mass Priests brazen Idol, or to put on the very same Romish
Surplice, now used at their Mass, even therefore, because it is Popish. Of this
the Replier proves, that this samenesse is vainly alleged, and less then
nothing. The Rejoinder for succor, says that this individual samenesse was a
straggling soldier, and confesses it to be taken prisoner. But in an answer
grounded on dissimilitude, where the same quality is affirmed of one thing,
and denied of another, if that quality be straggling, in either part, and so
taken prisoner, the wholle answer must needs be held captive. And this captive
soldier may easily be taught to fight against him from whom he was taken; as
once (by report) it was in this manner: A Minister in Qeen. El. her days, was
urged by his Ordinary to wear the Surplice, who after other delays, alleged,
that the Surplice proffered him to put on, was the very same that the
Mass Priest was wont to sacrifice in: the Ordinary admitting that excuse,
commanded another to be made: which being done, when it was brought him in the
Church, he took it up, and spoke thus to those praesent: Good people, the
Bishop himself confessed, that the former massing Surplice, was not to be worn
by a Minister of the Gospel; and judge you if this be not as like that, as one
egg to another? let this therefore go after the other: and so he justly c^st it
away.

Yet let us see what other soldiers the Rejoinder can find in this squadron,
not straggling and taken? There are words set down (says he) in a different
letter: dedicated and appointed. As if a different cassok did save a soldier
from straggling! The buisinesse depends on him that wears the cassok: and
who was that soldier in the Defender his answer? or what was the thing
dedicated and appointed, but the same individual habit? if other, then first
show the congruitie of the Defender his dissimilitude; and then show also, that
other Crosses, and Surplices are not dedicated and appointed unto the service
of Idols, by Papists. The Defender also (adds the Rej.) adds, that the
comparison betwixt Papists, and Pagans is not altogether so aequal. He said in
deed, that he would hereafter show such a thing: but with soldiers promised, or
threatened only, I never knew any serious combat fought.

After this, the Rejoinder allegeth, that it cannot be said of these our
Ceremonies, (as Tertullian said of the habits he opposed) that they were
dedicated and appointed to the service of an Idol, from the first, and never
used by any godly men. But first, this can be no good explication of those
words: we may borrow nothing from an Idol: i. e. nothing which has not been
used by some godlyman. Secondly, he says not, that no godly man had ever used
Crounes. Thirdly, Every old usage of godly men, does not lessen the Idolatry
of it. For then sacrifizing of Oxen, should now be less Idolatry, then of
unclean Beasts. After these skirmishes, the Rejoinder finding that there was no
houlding of ground with such soldiers as the Defender had mustered, presses
new* at his own charges. And first he brings in one persuasion, that
Tertullians clear and professed judgment, was directly against our assertion,
and for conformity: because he says* Finaly those things agree to our, ^Ea
d^mum nostra and superiorum usibus, and Dei rebus, and ipsi Christo compotisse,
quae ^^eras utilitates, and certa subsidia, and honest^ solatia, necessaris
necessitatibus vita humana pro^ura^
and the use of others above us, and to the things of God, and to Christ
himself, which indeed are proffitable to the life of man. Meaning the Sun,
the Moon, the Stars, Fire, Earth, and such like good creatures of God. If
this be against us, then we are also against our selves. For never any
Nonconformist, in England, or (as I think) in the World, dreamed (no not in an
ague) any thing to the contrary. And that this may directly make for
Conformity, the Rejoinder must show, how our Ceremonies are mere profitable
helps unto the necessity of man's life? In the next place he makes use of
Diversion, alleging that Tertullian brought other arguments withal, against
the Garland. But we keep our standing upon the argument of borrowing from the
service of Idols: let others shift for themselfs.

Thirdly, he adjoyneth Accusation, that Tertl^ian di^^emper^d; in bitter
contention, and factious opposition, wrote that b^oke against the Church:
quoting for it, Renatus, or ^as I understand him) Rhenanus, and Doctor Abbot.
But ^eyther of these can help. For Rhenanus in the Argu^ent of that book (de
Coron. mil.) defends Tertul^^an, about the Garland; and shows him to have
main^^ed the same sentence in his Apollogie, which was his Master piece,
written without distemper, and not equal^ed by the best tempered writing
extant, of the same kind. ^octor Abbot. speaks sharply of Tertullian, for
his ^aintaining of ceremonial traditions; wherein he was to ^e blamed: but not
for his general rule of not borrowing (...) the service of Idols: whereas the
Defendant and Re^oynder allow those traditions, as appears in this Re^oynder,
page, 493. and oppose this rule. And it is most ^^rtaine, that Tertullian did
not receive any distemper, or ^^ctious disposition from Montanus, against
Ceremonies ^^used to Idolatry. For Montanus brought in the blood (...) Children
into the Supper, but about the Cross he did ^n the judgment of Doctor Abbot,
and all our best divines.

I have somewhat merrily answered, in this passage, ^y occasion of the Rej. his
mentioning of a straggling ^ouldier: if any man will accuse me therefore,
Congruit and veritats ridere, quia latans de emulu suis ludere, quia socura
est. Curandum plane, ne rifus ejus rideatur, si su^rit indignus. Caeterum
ubicunque dignus r^sus, officium est.
of this or ^^at fault, as the Rejoinder does the Replier, upon like ^ccasion,
Tertullian, whose cause I plead, shall make ^^y Apology: It will agree to
truth to laugh, because it is ^f a pleasant disposition; and to sport with her
competitors, ^^cause it is secure, and fears not the walls of her Bulwark.
^nely this would be regarded, that our laughter be not unworthy lest it be
laughed at, but if it be worthy, it may be a duty.

6. Another place Tertullian (de oratione, cap. 11. and 12.) was objected,
where he says, that Christians might not wash their hands (for a Ceremony) or
lay aside their cloakes, before prayer; nor sit upon their beds, after prayer;
because the Heathen used to do so. The Def. his first answer being that these
Ceremonies were not condemned merely for resemblance with Idolatry, but for
opinion of necessity; it was replied, that Tertullian speaks plainly:
therefore it d^servethto be prooved in us, because it is observed in the
service of an Idol. To which the Rej. opposes nothing, but that the Heathens
might use their Idolatrous Ceremonies with opinion of necessity. Let it be so:
yet Christians may be reprooved for mere likeness unto them, though either
they have not the same opinion, or the consideration of that opinion set apart.
Merely does not always signify only; nor can it so stand in the Def. his
answer. For then thus he should speak: not only for resemblance, but (without
any also) for opinion. If he did mean so, we say on the contrary, not only
for opinion, but also for resemblance. So far as I can understand the word
merely for, it notes not more, then is implied in Tertullians therefore it
deserves. A deserving cause is merely a cause, or else malefactors are not
punished merely for their evil deserts. In the former testimony, out of
Tertullian, page 484. the Rej. translated meras utilitates, any commodious use.
If mere commodities, be all one with any commodities, then merely for
resemblance is any thing at all for resemblance: and so the Def. denies
Tertullian to have condemned those Ceremonies he speaks against, any thing at
all for resemblance with Idolatry; which yet Tertullian does as plainly
speak, as ever he spoke any thing at all.

B. Jewel (said the Replier) does urge these Testimonies of Tertullian,
merely in regard of resemblance: of others it is not needful to speak. The
Rej. answers 1. that Iuel does not urge these Testimonies of Tertullian. But
it is to be seen in his Def. Apol. par. 3. cap. 5. div. 1. how he cites
Tertullian de Coron. mil. and de Idol. with which the Rejoinder will not deny,
this (de Orat) to consent. 2. He cites them (adds the Rej.) not for
unlawfulness, but for inconveniency of resembling Idolaters. Concerning this
distinction, enough has been said in the first part. Yet this here is worthy
of observation; that both the Def. and Rej. in the first section of this fourth
chapter, confessed, that human Ceremonies abused to Idolatry, are therefore
unlawful, except they be of convenient necessity, as the Rejoinder speaks,
page 406. What reason then had Iuel, or has the Rejoinder in his name, to
confess such Ceremonies inconvenient, and yet make them lawful? But that Iuel
understood Tertullian, to speak against such Ceremonies, as unlawful, it
appears out of these his words: Tertullian disputes sharply therein, that a
Christian may not wear a lawrell-crowne, and that for no other cause, but
because the Gentiles did so. Acriter in eam partem disputat Tertullianus, non
licere homini Christiano, ceronam lauram gestare, idqu^ non aliunde, nisi ob id
modo, quia idem facere solebant Ethni^^.
I have only the latin edition at hand; and therefore quote it. But either
the interpreter failed much, or else Iuel expressly ^pake there of unlawfulness
(non licere) and not of other inconveniencie. The Rejoinder his next answer
depends only on that which was formerly confuted, namely, that merely is
only.

The Replier added, that it does not appear out of Tertullian, that he
respected opinion of necessity and efficacy, in these Ceremonies. For which, he
is charged by the Rejoinder, with offense, against men, simple, and learned, as
also against God himself. And why all this? Because (forsooth) Tertullian
says, that such washings and cleansings, as many superstitiously affect,
against every prayer, are not true; but those which we have in Christ, and in
purification of the heart. But this is no sufficient ground for so deep an
accusation. For if now one should admonish a Non-resident, who sends a
reading Curate, to supply his place, in these words: This is not true
fulfilling of your Ministry; but those personal offices, which are in
Scripture enjoined; and the meaning of these words being questioned, one should
deny, that by them it was implied, that the said Non-resident held it necessary
for him, in conscience, to be absent, and send such a Curate for supply; would
any man accuse the denier of offending against God and man? It was further
observed by the Replier, that the washing condemned by Tertullian, had relation
to Christ's delivering by Pilat, after washing of his hands, and so like unto
our sign of the Cross, in regard of the original signification and use of
it. The Rejoynd. answers many words: but to the purpose (beside repetitions)
he says, that those washers did believe Pilat to have been cleansed by his
washing, and so themselves by theirs, from guilt of sin. And this he
gathers from Tertullians confutation: We adore Christ, and not deliver him:
we should abhor the example of him that did deliver him. But out of these
words no such collection can be made; any more then some like invention out of
these: we adore Christ, and not crucify him: we should abhor the example of
them that did crucify him, and left a Cross in the place, for a sign and
memorial that he was crucified. That washing was a sign immediately of Pilats
washing, and so of Christ's delivering: our Cross is immediately a sign of
Pilats Cross, and so of our Saviors crucifying. This is the likeness which
the Replier truly noted.

Concerning the Ceremony of Dossing cloakes, before prayer, the Defender put it
off to opinion of necessity; because Tertullian in condemning it, has these
words: si sic oporteret, i. e. if it must be. It was replied, that our Prelates
say also of our Ceremonies, sic oportet. i.e. It must be so, and yet disclaim
absolute necessity. But (answers the Rejoynd.) they held an internal simple
necessity of conscience; not external only for order sake, as our Prelates
do. Of this distinction, see the first part of this Suite. The collection of
this opinion, from Tertullians scoff; nisi si qui putant, except there be any
so foolish as to have such an opinion is so palpably vain, that any man may
see, he durst not impute that opinion unto those washers he spoke against; but
only shows, that from their practice, such a fond and absurd opinion, which
themselves would condemn, might perhaps by some be collected, Tertullian
spoke, as we now speak. If Crossing ought to be used in Baptism, the Apostles
in their doctrine concerning baptizing would have made some mention of it:
except perhaps some think, that they did not then know, or cared not to use,
the right or best way of signifying Christian valor, and constancy, in
fighting under Christ's banner.

In oppsition to that which was alleged for Tertullians respect unto opinion of
necessity, and efficacy, in condemning those Ceremonies, it was replied, that
he condemns them only (that is, if they had but this fault alone) that they
were empty observations, Vacua observationes, quibus vanitas merito exprobranda
est, siquidem sine ullius aut Dominici, aut Apostolici praecepta authoritate
fiunt. Mujusmodi enim, non religioni, sed superstitioni deputantur, affectata,
and co. acta, and curiosi potius quam rationalis officij, certevel (...)
coercenda, quod Gentilibus ad. ^quent.
and to be worthily upbraided with vanity, as being done without any warrant
from Christ or his Apostles. For such things serve not to religion, but to
superstition, and are affected, and forced, and rather overcurious, then any
thing rational at all, and even therefore to be restrained, they do so suit
the Gentiles. Here the Rejoinder after a little touch upon the particle only,
now expounded, answers, that this was because of a^ opinion of necessity,
which is properly superstition: because the same Tertullian (de Coron. mil.)
allows sundry huma^ signi^^cant Ceremonies, held as free, and used for
instruction. In which answer, the first part is manifestly false; if
Tertullians own words may be heard: those Ceremonies are supervacuous and
vain, which are us^d without any authority of Divine or Apostolical command,
and are to be accounted superstious: and even therefore to be repressed,
because they make us (in some sort) like the Gentiles. The second part, which
contains a reason, is void of all truth. For 1. Tertullian did not account
those Ceremonies human, but of Apostolical though unwritten tradition:
Traditio auctrix, consuetudo confirmatrix, and fides observatrix. 2. For
freedom, to allege this, is clean contrary to Tertullians intention: because
he went about to prove the necessity of absteyning from the Lawral-Croune, by
the necessity of observing these unwritten traditions. 3. For instruction, I
would be informed, what instruction there was, in Crossing, at every step,
Adomnem progressum, atque prometum, ad omnem aditum, and exitum, ad vestitum,
and calceatum, ad lavacra, ad mensas, ad lumina, ad subilia, and ad sedilia?
and goeing forward and at every turn, at clothing ones self, at washing, at
bed, at board etc. 4. D. Abbot (whose judgment of Tertullian, the Rejoinder
commends, page 485.) in that very place which he commends (Def. Perk. page
883.884. etc.) says plainly, that Tertullian defended those traditions against
the Church; that therein he contradicted himself; and that those traditions were
partly heathenish and haeretical devises. About Tertullian, nothing material
follows.

7. Melchiades decreed, that no Christian should fast on the Lords day, or
friday, because it was a known custom of Pagans, to fast on those days.

The Rejoinder 1. says one answer was, the incongruitie of fasting unto the
Lords day. But this not being fetched out of Melchiades, the Replier justly
passed by, and so will I, though enough may be said against it, as the Reader
may see in the Altar of Damascus, page 669. etc. 2. He tells us also of
another answer, by a distinction, betwixt a light Ceremony, and a sacred
solemnity. But this neither is in Melchiades, nor holds congruitie either
with Scripture, forbidding symbolizing with Idolaters in light Ceremonies; nor
with it self, the light Ceremony being sacred, and also a solemnity. 3. The
Rejoinder adds out of his own store, that the prohibition was only of open
and solemn fasting, not appointed by the Church. Which is as wreched an
evasion, as the former: because the quaestion is of open and solemn
Ceremonies; and Melchiades disalowed that any Church should appoint it, in
condemning the thing without any distinction, or limitation, for a reason, that
lays more fault upon the Churches, if they should appoint it, then upon
private persons, if they should observe it without appointment. For he groundeth
his condemnation upon 2. Cor. 6. What concord has Christ with Belial? What
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? May the Temple of God have
agreement with Idols, in Ceremonies, if the Church appoint so? 4. The Rejoinder
adds a note out of a later Council, being a Jury of twelve Bishops, wherein
other phrases are used. Much good might it do them that can make any thing of
it.

The passage being thus cleared, let us now come to that which the Replier
took for the Def. his only answer: Melchiades for bad fasting at the same
time with Pagans, because they lived in the same Country, at the same time,
and place. This (said the Replier) could not make the difference* because so
little a distance may be betwixt one Country, and another, that it can bring up
no difference of moment. The Rejoinder answers 1. that it was a reason of
inconvenience only. But Melchiades said out of 2. Cor. 6. that it was to make
the Temple of God agree with Idols. Is that only inconvenient, and not
unlawful? And if it were nothing but inconveniencie, was it not confessed, in
the beginning of this Chapter, that Ceremonies Idolatrously abused, if they be
not of convenient necessity, are unlawful? If this be so, then much more
unlawful are they, if they be inconvenient. He adds 2. that some place and
time may make a difference: which the Replier denied not; but only said, that
every distance of Country (such as is betwixt Dover and Calise, is not
sufficient.

8. Ambrose taught Monica, Augustines mother, to leave bringing of Wine and
Cakes to Church, because it had a show of conformity with the Gentiles
funeral-feasts. The Defender answered, that it was an act of sacrificing, etc.
as Bellarmine does, de Sanctor. Beat. lib. 1. cap. 14. Nay says the Rejoinder
Bellarmine neither so answered, nor had occasion so to answer. But if he had
considered, that the Defender makes this fact of Monicas, to be a sacrifice,
derived from the Collyridian haereticks; and that Bellarmine there answers to
the argument taken out of Epiphanius, against those Collyridians, as may appear
by comparison of cap. 11. in the end; and that in the objection, there is no
mention of sacrificing, but Bellarmin answers by covert of that term; he
would have forborne this censure.

It was also pronounced an incredible thing, that Augustines religious mother,
should then sacrifice to a creature, which the Papists now will nor profess to
do. To this the Rejoinder is, that the Defender never said Monica did
sacrifice. Consider therefore his words, reprinted by the Rejoinder page 501. The
act (objected) was sacrificing: You compare our Ceremonies, with Ceremonies of
sa^rif^cing. Did we object an act as comparative to our Ceremonies, any act,
beside that of Monica? Certainly no. If therefore the act objected and compared,
were a sacrifice, then Monicas act must needs in the Defender his account, be
sacrificing.

The other passages depend upon the difference now touched, until that answer
of the Replier comes in: Neither Ambrose, nor Augustine, nor Monica, his
mother, regarded any thing in condemning that act, but only, lest any occasion
should be given to intemperate ones of filling themselfs beyond measure; and
because these funeral rites as it were resembled the Superstition of the
Gentiles. Ne ulla oc^asio ingurgitandi se, daretur eb^iosis: and quia illa
quasi parentalia, superstitioni Gentilium ossont similuna.
The Rejoinder here 1. denies that Ambrose, Augustine, or Monica did condemn
this act. Which is very strange; seeing Ambrose did publick^y forbid it, by the
Rejoinder his confession; Monica hearing the reasons, was affected with them in
her conscience, to forbear it; and Augustine applandeth them both. Yet the
Rejoinder has r^asons for his denial, such as they be: 1. Augustine says his
Mothers intention was good. 2. It was usual in Africa. 3. He thought that his
Mother would not have been so taken-off from that custom by any beside
Ambrose. 4. Ambrose did only restrain Monicas private devotion, as having
publicly forbidden that manner, for a double inconveniencie, not for
unlawfulness.

Now the first of these reasons import, that Augustine condemned nothing that
was done of a good intention. The second implies, that he condemned nothing
that was usual in Africa. The third supposes, that Christians are not more
easily drawn from unlawful customs, by one man, then by another. The fourth
contradicts first it self, conjoyning the restrayning only of private
devotion, with public forbidding; and secondly, the Defender and Replier who
(in the beginning of this chapter) confess Ceremonies Idolatrously abused, to
become unlawful, except they be of convenient necessity; and so much more, if
they have a double inconveniency in them. The rest of this section does only
jarre upon the same strings.

9. To a grave sentence of August. (Hom. 6. de verb. Dom. in Matthew.) If you
ask how the Pagans may be won, enlightened, called* leave all their
solemnities, and forsake their toys. The Defendant answered, that those
solemnities and toys, are not to be used together with Pagans. The Rejoinder
adds, that Augustine means feasting with Idolaters, in the Temples of
Idols, which could not be used apart from Idola^ers. Suppose it were so: yet
the question remains, whether using such toys of theirs apart, as may be
used apart, make more for their conversion, or for their hardening, according
to Augustines judgment? But it is not so as the Rejoinder imagines. For 1.
Augustine spoke of them, which were present at feasts, made at the solemnity of
the Genius or Patron of Carthage, whom those Christians, he reprooveth, denied
to be an Idol. 2. All the Citizens of Carthage could not celebrate that feast
in one Temple. 3. It does not appear, that the Patron had any proper Temple.
4. The Citizens being parted into diverse places of feasting, why might not the
Christians that would keep that feast, have one place apart? 5. Suppose the
Christians had taken some part of the Banquet, or made one like it, and carried
it into their own Temple, to use it there, with another opinion then the
Heathen had; would Augustine have allowed it; 6. The case was at Carthage, as
it was in Popish times, with the Company of Smithes at London, who after some
worship done to their Patron, Dunstan, had a Feast in their Hall. Now if some
Protestants refusing to be at their worship in Dunstans Church should yet have
been at their Feast in the Hall. I would know, whether they had more
symbolized with Papists, in the worship of Dunstan, then our Conformists do in
the worship of the Cross?

That which is after added by the Rejoinder out of other places of Augustine,
concern not our present question: because there Augustine considers not any
relation unto idolatrous abuse. Neither by citing one general rule of
Augustines, did we bind our selves to follow all his counsels.

10. Concerning the Councels of Nice forbidding Easter to be kept on the same
day with the Jews Passover, the Rejoinder makes long work, to little
purpose. 1. He says (with the Defendant) that it was not for unlawfulness. 2.
He confirms that answer, by a story of the business, marking, that the
Council said about Easter, only, It seemed good to us. 3. He excepteth
against the words, as they are cited in the Abridgement. And so spends many
good words, and phrazes, not requiring any confutation. Now. 1. Concerning the
words, as they are found in constantines letters patents, they were cleared
before, cap. 3. sect. 6.2. The same, or like form of words, is used in the
same Council about things unlawful, though not so desperately evil, as
denying the Faith. 3. The succeeding practices, and censures, do show, that
unlawfullnesse was understood. For presently after, those which kept Easter
with the Jews, were accounted a sort of Heretics, styled Quartadecimani. And
what ruffeling, Augustine sent into England by Gregory, made against the
ancient Britons, for dissenting in that observance, after, and out of other
stories, Mr. Fox does at large relate. But for such matters, I leave them
(with the Replier) to those that are skillful in human traditions; not
regarding that judgment of the Rejoynders. If you be not skillful in human
traditions, you may hazard your selves and others: because I doubt not, but
skill in Gods word alone, is sufficient against all such hazard.

The reasons rendered by the Defendant, for the Nicene prohibition of keeping
Easter as the Jews, are three: 1. Hatred of the Jews. 2. Because of the Jews
insultations. 3. For uniformity. Of the last, it was Replied, that uniformity
might have been, if all could have been drawn to the same time with the
Jews. Which the Rejoinder confesses to be true, if they could have been
drawn thereto as well. Where 1. He takes it for granted, that all were well
drawn to the time determined; the contrary whereof appears, as in others, so
in our ancient Britons. 2. Well or ill, that is, easily or hardly, these make
no difference in uniformity, but only in the means of accomplishing the same.
The other two reasons are said by the Replier, to agree unto our Ceremonies;
because we are to hate the Idolatrous superstitions of the Papists, with a
perfect hatred; and the Papists insult over us, for borrowing our Ceremonies
from them. About this (because it could not be denied) the Rejoinder spends
many words and phrazes, partly Rhetorically good, and partly Morally not good;
which I leave as I found: because there is no doing with them, but in great
leisure, or in idle time.

In the conclusion, it was asked by the Replier, for what causes many other
Ceremonies of the Papists were abolished, if not for these two last named? or
if the same causes that abolished them, would notsweep away these, if it
pleased them who have the beezoms in their hand? About this the Rejoinder
first, refers the Reader to a preface set before the Service-booke, and I am
contented he should seek if he can find any such reasons there. Secondly, he
adds, that we which have not the bezome in our hands, should not shuffle
abroad the dust with our feet. No more do we (say I) but only keep it out
of our eyes, and throats, so well as we can, giving reasons, why the Sweepers
should not thrust it upon us, nor us for it out of the doors

11. About the Gangren forbidding fasting upon the Lord's Day, many words are
spent by the Rejoinder. The sum is, that such fasting is there spoken of, as
was performed out of an H^reticall opinion, either of necessity so to do, or
of contempt of the Lord's Day. But this cannot be prooved. For there being
diverse different editions of that Council, none of them mention opinion of
necessity: and in the ordinary greek copy, there is neither contempt, nor
contumacy, named, as Binius notes. Beside, opinions and contempts, as they are
inward, cannot be noted by the Church. If they were outward, in word; then not
so much the fasting upon opinion, as the opinion it self, was to be condemned.
If the act it self was taken for a manifestation of such an opinion, that is
it which we urge As for that accusation which is laid upon the Replier, for
relating the Defendant his answer, so as if he had referred the matter unto
contempt of Christian profession, that is remooved by the Defendant his own
words, related by the Rejoinder, page 521. Contempt, to wit, of the Christian
profession. See before, in Melchiades his decree.

12. The Council of Bracara, forbad abstinence from flesh, for avoiding of all
suspicion in consenting to the Priscillian Heretics. This (says the
Rejoinder) was in respect of inexpediency only. Let it be so: yet 1. They that
forbad it, held it not lawful to be commanded, as our Ceremonies are. 2.
Inexpediencie, or inconveniency of Ceremonies notoriously known to be
Idolatrously abused, makes them unlawful, by the Defendant and Rejoinder
their own confessions, in the first section of this chapter: where convenient
necessity is required, to make them lawful.

13. Thrice dipping in Baptism, was condemned, by a Council of Toledo. It was
added in the Abridgement, that Gregory alleged and approoved this decree: and
the Replier, named Leo in stead of Gregory. Here the Rejoinder catches hold
of the names of Gregory, and Leo, and finds matter for many words, in the
account of their lives, not agreeing to the fourth Council of Toledo, where
this was decreed. Now the Replier was (through haste) mistaken, as
understanding the first Council of that place, for the fourth: and the Authors
of the Abridgement, or their Scribes pen, misplaced the word alleges: because
the Council does allege Gregory, Te^^atur modus ille quom Gregorius primus
definivit. Tolet. 4 cap. 5.
and not Gregory the Council: Let that manner be held, which Gregory the first
defined. These are not straggling Soldiers, such as formerly were taken from
the Defendant as the Rejoinder spoke, but Soldiers boys, or Bedees, upon whom
little or nothing depends in the bartell. Let them therefore go; or by
exchange be dismissed. Gregory has the same sentence, lib. 1. Epist. 41. and
therefore approoved the decree of Toledo, before it was there decreed. For
real answer, it is rejoyned, 1. That all things forbidden, are not condemned
at unlawful. But yet (by his leave) whatsoever is forbidden lawfully, and
reasonably, is held unlawful upon some reason; and therefore so far
condemned for unlawful, as it is lawfully forbidden. Certainly, in Laws,
forbidding does as well imply some unlawful evil, as commanding does
necessary good. 2. The Rejoinder denies the Papist to make any superstitious
construction of our use of the Cross. But this is plain enough: and it
comes after to be handled, yet in this place it is enough, if they make a
superstitious construction of the Cross, which we make use of, though not of
our use, which the Rejoinder adds, that he might with some color accuse the
assertion of falsehood. More was not, nor needed be affirmed by the Replier, in
this point. 3. He pronounces it a male volent calumniation, that our own
Canons, and Canonical Imposters make a superstitious construction of it. But
this has been prooved before, especially in the second Argument, where it
has been convinced of will worship. 4. He forms a new proposition; and
thereupon girdeth at sitting in the Lord's Supper: which is not worth the
answering. All the rest of his words turn upon the loose hingel of
inconveniency without any unlawfulness, now often confuted. This therefore
shall suffize for this testimony; and so I end, the head of Fathers, and
Councels. For Leo's words, make not directlytothe purpose.

Concerning Protestant Divines.
This head was passed over by the Defendant, but the Rejoinder undertaketh to
clear it: wherein, either his skill, orhis confidence, must needs occasion
wondering.

1. The general Assembly of Scotland (anno. 1566.) writ thus to the Bishops of
England. If Surplice, Corner-Cap, and Tippet, have been badges of Idolaters,
in the very act of Idolatry, what have the Preachers of Christian liberty, and
the open Rebukers of superstition, to do with the dregs of the Romish Beast?
And in their Confession: We detest all the Ceremonies and false doctrine of the
Romish Antichrist, added to the ministration of the true Sacraments: we detest
all his vain Allegories, Rites, Signs, and Traditions, brought into the
Church without, or against the Word of God. To the former testimony, the
Rejoinder answers 1. That these words are not the definitive judgment of the
Assembly, but only spoken as the Plea of some tenderhearted men, which
suffered for refusal of those things. Now if this were so as the Rej. makes
it, yet this we may gather from thence; that the Plea of many godly ministers
of England, in those days, was, that our Ceremonies are unlawful. For so it
is there said: many thousands, both godly, and learned, have their consciences
continually stricken, with these sentenses: what has Christ to do with
Belial? what fellowship is there betwixt darkness and light? etc. in the
words formerly cited. What meant the Rejoinder then, to persuade his Readers,
in his Preface, and upon all occasions, that our Ceremonies were not by
Non-Conformists held unlawful, but only inconvenient, until of late? If
nothing else can, yet this his own (not confession, but) peremptory answer,
may so convince him, that he must acknowledge his accusing of us, as dissenting
therein from the first seekers of reformation, in the Ceremonies, and so the
occasion of his bitter writing, is a mere conceyt, built up by desire of
putting some color upon that, which, nakedly beheld, would be offensive.
Observe further, that a definitive judgment, is vainly here denied, where it
was never sought for. The Ministers of England did not send into Scotland, for
a definitive sentence, concerning the use or abuse of things in England.
Neither were they of Scotland so simple, as to take that authority of defining
upon them. But for their advizing judgment, is plain enough to all that read
their words with any indifferency. They were not ignorant of our English
question: there were among them, that had been at Frankford, as Mr. Knoxe, Mr.
Good Man, etc. They did not so far forget themselves, as to send allegations
in other men's names, into England, to be admitted there, which themselves did
not allow of. Beside, they directly call them unprofitable vain trifles. Yea
(says the Rejoinder) but they disclaim the very question; they supposed the
refusers of the Ceremonies, not to damn the consciences of the users: and call
them vain trifles in comparison of preaching the Gospel. They disclaim indeed
professed entering into the ground of that question, as mediators use to do,
but yet insinu^te their judgment of it. Ceremonies may be damned, though the
consciences of all that use them, be not condemned. Unprofitable vain trifles,
found not of compa^ison. Neither is there any thing in the letter, that gives
any inkling of such a limitation.

To the second testimony, taken out of the Scottish Confession, the Rejoinder
answers 1. that it respects all Ceremonies, as they were Antichrists,
formally, and not all materialy. After which manner, it is easy to answer any
^estimonie that ever was alleged. For in the Confession, there is no difference
made betwixt all, and some; neither can the Rejoinder give any apparent reason
of his formal interpretation; and it is well known, that the ^ery material
Popish Ceremonies were then detested by Mr. Knoxe, with those that agreed unto
his direction, as ^hey also have been, ever since the Reformation, abhor^ed
generally in Scotland, until of late, when that which one of them calls an
Altar of Damascus, came into that Country.

The Rejoinder his 2. answer is, that they of the Assembly professed, what
liked them best in Scotland; not what they thought others bound to do; as
appears by our late King James, the chief of them. But before this can
stand, it must be showed, in what Synod, we detest, is taken, for we like ^ot
so well in our Country; and then, how the after-interpretation of one, who was
then but fifteen years old, can over-sway the common interpretation of the
whole Church?

2. Oecolampadius requires a Minister of Scaphusium (Epist. 1. lib. 1. page
129.) utterly to cast off all the Ceremonies of the Papists, in celebration of
the Lords Supper, as those which cannot be continued, without nourishing of the
superstition and impiety, whereunto they served of old. The Rejoinder
answers 1. That this was not Oecolampadius his own advise, but that which
some others would have had him given. But he propounding it, and only excusing
himself modestly that he was slow in put on others so far (insinuating that
though he himself was so resolved, yet he durst not urge others thereto, and
therefore only requires convenience without offense, sufficiently testifies
his allowance of that advise. And who (think you) were the Authors of that
advise, but zuinglius etc* He 2. adds, out of diverse Epistles, that
Oecolampadius would not have all that country tie themselves in Ceremonies, to
Basil, Tigure, or Bern that he hold gold^^ silver, glass, or wooden vessels
in administration of the Sacrament, indifferent. As if any of us were of
another mind this is a mere color of something, where nothing is to be found.

In the third place, he shows, how Oecolampadius, allowed of the terms of
Sacrifice, Altar, and omitted no wonted Ceremonies, but only the latin
tongue, in reading the Epistle, and Gospel. But if the Rejoinder had
considered, that terms are no Ceremonies; and that Oecolampadiu^ allowed and
Practiced this last mentioned imperfect reformation, when he was (in
comparison) but a Novice in religon, before he came to Basil, he would not have
so exulted in this quotation, as he does: The Abridgers (says he) never (I
think) read Oecolampadius his Epistles. But he has no just reason to think,
but some of them had read those Epistles; unless he can show from whence else
they had this testimony. I have read them long since, and remember well, that
to be true which now I said. How it stood at Basil, with Popish Ceremonies,
when Oecolampadius was Minister there, it appears out of Zuinglius, his
Fellow-Minister (de Baptismo) in these words, worthy to be recited, though
somewhat too large for this place: Luben^ equidem Catabaptistu concedam and
fatebor, aliqui dutilitatis, ex contentione illa, quam ipsi de Baptism^
instituerunt, enatum esse. Hine enim factum est ut eae quae humanae rationis
stulta superstitio add^derat (qualia sunt exorcism, sputi sausque usus, and
alia hujus generis complura) in lucem protracta, ab omnibus pro vanis and
inutilibus habita fint -- Non infi^iamur illa a Majoribus nostris ad nos usque,
and nostra tempora manavisse. -- Interim tamen constat, hac divinitus institut
a non esse, sed ab hominibus olim addita, quae fortasse tune, pro temporum
ratione ferri poterant: eo quod, ut Israelitae olim sub^nd^ Aegypti desiderio
tact^, ad illius delicias respicsebant, fic qui nuper ad Christ^ pertes
concesserant, ad Gentilium religioxem non nihilo promptiores propensioresque
erant, quae Ceremonias ^^^usmodi plures continebat.
I will easily grant the Catabaptists, and confess, that the strife which they
made about Baptism, has not been altogether without benefit: For hence it
comes to pass, that those things which the foolish superstition of human
reason had added thereunto (as Exorcismes, Spittings, Salt, and such like more)
being brought into question, are now become vain and unprofitable in every
man's judgment. We deny not but we received those things from our Fathers. --
Howsoever it is evident they were not of God, but set up of man; which also it
may be, (consideration had to that time) might have been borne; because that
as the Israelites heretofore affected with a desire of Egypt, looked back to
the delicacies thereof, so they which lately are come over to Christ, were a
little propence and prone to Heathenish religion, which cont^ined many such
rites. And these, Has ergo Christiani homines in alium usum convertere
solebant, quo sacilius pristina illa superstitione liberarentur. Sed long
prestitisset* si omnia ^ medio sublata fu ssent and abolita, etc.
Christian m^n were wont to turn i^to other use, that they might in time the
bett^r be freed from that superstition. But how much better had it been, if
all and every of those things had been abolished at the first.

3. Concerning Calvin, I say, as the Rejoinder says, that which is alleged out
of him, has suffici^ntly been handled before. As for the new addition, which
the Rejoinder here brings, as making against us (that gold and silver, come
and wine, and useful meeting places, may be retained, after Idolatrous abuse
of t^em) he knows, and all the world knows, it makes nothing for such
Ceremonies as ours are; nor any thing against us, who continually profess the
same truth. Except he meant to abuse the Reader, I know not wherefore he
should bring in such impertinent allegations.

4. Mr. Bucer was alleged (in the Abridgement) as scarce esteeming them sincere
Christians, who can abide the Ceremonies of Antichrist, or such as have
affinity with his. The Rejoinder opposes other places, where he speake^h for a
toleration of some such Ceremonies. Neither of these allegations can be denied.
What then shall we say? Tanto studio propagandi Evangelij flagrat Bucerus, ut
qua praci pua sunt contentus impetrass^, interdum fit aequo lenior in cis
concedendis, quae in nutula quidem ipse putat sed habent etiam suum pendus.
surely 1. That Pucer though he was a reverend zealous man, yet he was a man;
and so showed himself sometime about Ceremonies. So Calvin observed, Epist.
13. Bucer was so zealous for the propag^tion of the Gospel, that contented with
the maine, he was sometime more remiss then was meet, in allowing petty
matters as he took them, but yet for all that, they had their weight. To the
same purpose he gently admonishes Bucer himself, even concerning the matters
of England, Epist. 39. This by name I commend to thee, Hoc tibi nominatim
commendo, ut te invidia liberes, qua te falso gravari apud multos non ignoras,
nam modijs consilijs vel authorem, vel approbatorem te simper inscribunt.
by all means to free thy self from envy, under which thou suffer (though
unjustly) among many, as thou thy self know. For they still tax you by
middle dealing, to be either Author or Abettour. And according to this
observation, we find, that Cassander, and Baldwine, writing against Calvin
himself, about Ceremonies, oppose unto him every where the name of Bucer. 2 It
is to be noted, that when Bucer looked simply to his Rule, he condemned all
ceremonious relics of Idolatry as much as any: but in some particular
perplexity, other impressions did sometime draw him to an unwilling toleration
of some such relics. But then he does it so fearfully, and with so many
cautions, that any may see, it was but a suspensive sentence of toleration,
extorted by a kind of necessity, not any allowance, out of constant
judgment. Thus Beza in his Answer to Baldwine, who alleged Bucers allowance
of our English Ceremonies, answers: Quod ad illam Anglicanam reformationem
attinet, quum dicis eam ex Buceri consilio ac voluntate fuisse institutam,
magnam optimo viro injuriam facis. Sunt qui fermento Antichristi conglu^inare
veliut Deum and Belial, etc.
As for that English reformation, which you ascribe to Bucer you do the good
man not a little wrong. To manifest this, he allegeth these words of Bucer:
There be who with the leaven of Antichrist, would join together God and Belial.

All these things considered, that which Bucer spoke against such Ceremonies,
is to be taken for his judgment: and when he occasionally varied therfrom,
that is to be imputed unto his good, but excessive affection.

5. The words cited out of Musculus (loc. com. de Trad. page 421.422.) are: It
is not fit, that those things which are rather superstitious, then religious,
or have so much as a show of superstition, should be retained in the Church.
God forbid, that I should mainteyne any traditions, Rites, or worships, which
are Popish. And I call them Popish, which either of their own nature or by
abuse, do serve unto Popish impiety, superstition, and blindness: all which I
am persuaded ought to be detested, as much as is possible. Now mark the
Rejoinder his answer: 1. He says, Musculus shows only what is meet, not
what is unlawful. This he gathers out of the first words: it is not fit. But
first, may things not meet, be appointed, and urged, as our Ceremonies are?
Secondly, Musculus speaks of such things as he holds unlawful to
mainetaine: God forbid that I should maintain them. 1. Would he then have
mainteyned our Ceremonies (as the Def. and Rej. do) sometime as lawful though
unm^et, and sometime as meet, and of convenient necessity? Thirdly, he
speaks of such things as are to be detested as much as is possible: are they
lawful? 2. The Rejoinder adds, that Musculus speaks of such human
traditions, as had been formerly under abuse, but were now reduced to another
use. In which words, (if they be right printed) he makes Musculus to speak
as directly against our Ceremonies, according to his own interpretation, as
the Abrigement does. If not be left out by the Printer, then he may be
convinced by those words of Musculus: so much as a show of superstition.

But (says he) our Ceremonies considered as Ceremonies, (otherwise then in
their materials) have no outward show of Popish superstition, which consists
only in the reason and intention of their use. As if either outward show, or
outward superstition, consisted only in inward intention! Such miserable
answers have at the least, an outward show of no sincere intention. His 3.
answer is, that Musculus speaks of such traditions as in their praesent, and
public professed use were Popish. He does not indeed exclude such out of his
censure: but if he spoke only of such, what need was there, that he should so
carefully interpret what he called Popish traditions? or what meant he in his
description of them, to leave out praesent public professed use, and use such
words, as every ordinary impartial Reader must needs take to be more general?

6. P. Martyr gives for a Rule, to the Ministers of Poland, that such order in
the administration of Sacraments, is to be kept, as differs most from the
toys and Ceremonies of Papists. It is an excellent Rule (says the Rejoinder)
but he said not, that human Ceremonies abused unto superstition, in Popery,
are now unlawful for us to use. As if he that says, we ought to keep that
order which differs most from Popish toys and Ceremonies, did not say, we
ought not to use Popish Ceremonies! He speaks (without quaestion) of an
internal oug^t, or sic oportet, which the Rejoinder (page 492.) confesses to
bind the conscience.

The same P. Martyr says: Certainly, if we did from the heart hate
superstition, we would do our endeavor, clean to put out and deface all the
footsteps, and monuments thereof. He spoke this (answers the Rejoinder) when
Missalattire, Altars, and Crucifixes, were as yet remaining. Now for Missal
attire, I know none then remaining, which remains not now. Altars also have
ever since remained in diverse Churches, and are now (for countenance of other
Ceremonies) coming up again where they were abolished, with an Idolatrous
addition of bowing unto them. Crucifixes will soon follow, and that by good
right, if the Defender and Rejo. their grounds be good. For the doctrine being
changed, and the materials only of Popish Crucifixes remaining, what can be
said, to make them simply unlawful? And for their conveniencie, who may
judge of that, but those that have authority of praescribing and imposing
matters of order and decency? But to let that pass, P. Martyr spoke of that
time, when he supposed the doctrine reformed; and manifestly rises in his
discourse, from those specials, to the general to all footsteps of
superstition, and not those only. But (says the Rejoinder) the same P. Martyr
professes, no separation would be made for such matters. He says so in deed
of the Surplice, page 1127. and so say we; especialy upon the same condition,
that we may be suffered to abrogate them for our own practice: Ferremus, nobis
gratulando quod eas abrogaverimus. To this the Rejoinder adds diverse
sentences of P. Martyrs, somewhat favoring a toleration (for a time) of our
Ceremonies, especialy in M. Hoopers case. To which I answer 1. that this was in
perplexity, caused by the mischief of our Ceremonies, which are therefore so
much the more to be hated, even that they have allways bred such trouble unto
good men, who should have troubles enough, De vestibus quas vocant sacras
fateor aliquid esse du^us, and quod meipsum nonnihil perturbet: ut merer illas
tam mordicus retineri.
though they were abolished. Quaestions of this kind, are to us somewhat
difficult. There is somewhat more hard I confess, of those garments they call
holy, and which somewhat troubles me, that I wo^d^r they are so strictly
retained. He himself refused to wear the Surplice, and that upon such ground as
may move us to refuse it, as he prof^sseth: When I was at Oxford, I would never
use those white ^arments in the Quire, though I were at that time a Canon. Ego
cum essem Oxonij, vestibus illis albis in Choro nunqua^ uti volui, qua^vis
essem Canonicus. Mei facti ratio mihi constabat. Quod vero me movit, and adhuc
movet and te sortasse movere poterit, nempe id non esse fac^endum quod ea
confirmet, quae conscientia mea non probes.
^ had a reason for it. But that which moved me then and ^^ill does moove,
and perhaps may justly moove you, is name^y; that, that is not to be d^n, which
shall confirm, what my ^onscience cannot allow of. 3. He tells us plainly,
that these Ceremonies are merae Papatus reliquiae, mere Popish relics
condemned by Bullinger, and that he was, upon hope of their abolishing, only
tardior ad suadendum, loath to persuade unto suffering of deprivation for him.
All these things are found in the places quoted by the Rejoinder. Let any
indifferent reader guess by them, what was P. Martyrs judgment, in his free,
and ^nperplexed thoughts? Certainly it was not that which ^he Defender and
Rejoinder have rep^aesented unto us ^or theirs; who accuse all those (beside
other faults, many, and great) of ^uperstition that refuse them as unlawful;
they being Rites both orderly and also decent.

7. Bezas words are: that the footsteps of Idolatry ought not to appear in
the Church, but to be utterly banish^d. The Rejoinder answers 1. that this
touches not our Ceremonies, in Bezas judgment, Epist. 12. It touched our
Ceremonies in the eight Epistle of Beza; but not in his twelf: what difference
was there betwixt these two Epistles? Only this: in the former, he writ to a
Bishop, and so shows him the foulness of our Ceremonies plainly; but in the
later, he speaks to poor Ministers, persecuted for those Ceremonies, whose
great affliction, with the Churches detriment, made him to conceal some part of
his judgment.

Yet in that twelf Ep. he insinuates the same judgment of our Ceremonies: Qui
cuperunt superstitiones co usque d^testart, ut etiam illarum vestigia ^^perint
execrars, quantopera offenduntur.
They which began to hate superstitions so far as to curse their footsteps; how
greatly are they offended?

There is yet fresh superstition of the sign of the Cross, mo^^ detestable.
They therefore have don wonderful well, who have once banished that rite out of
the Church, whereof for ou^ parts we see no good. Signs crucis est adhuc recens
superstitio manime execrabi^u. Rectitissime igitur fetisse arbitramur, gus
so^^el istum ^itum ex Ecclesis expularunt, cuius eti^^ non videmus quae sit
utilitas. Quoniam ex genius latione dum symbola accipintuur, orta est (...)
illa detestabilis, and adhue in multorum animis baerens, me vito sublata esse
vid tur.
Because by kneeling at receiving, it sprung that most abominable
Bread-worship, and still cleaving to the minds of many, is worthily abolished.

The Rejoinder notes 2. that in Bezas judgment, many things may and must be
tolerated, which are not rightly imposed. Which is true: but 1. let it be then
openly confessed by the Rejoinder, that our Ceremonies are not rightly imposed,
before he abuse this rule. 2. Let him tell us, if approving by subscription,
and use, be a mere toleration? 3. The same Beza tells us: Toleran^ quaedaem
putaemus quae omnino ferri non debent. con. Westph. We think somthings may be
tolerated, which altogether may not be born.

In the 3. place, it is added by the Rejoinder that Beza says of some, that
reteyne the Cross, they may use their own liberty. But in the next words he
adds: If they have any just Causes of reteining this sign in their Churches.
So that he limiteth that liberty unto such causes as he was not privy to; Nos
corte cur ^llud signum nullo modo tolerenous, and plurimas, and necessarias
causes hab^mus.
nay to such as they at Geneva, found to be clean contrary: As for us, we have
many necessary reasons why we do no way tolerat that sign. and their
causes, alleged in the 8. Epistle, were not peculiar to any time or place, but
perteyne as well to England, as to Geneva. So that this was but to stop a
Papists mouth, with using of gentle words, and suppositions concerning our
unwarrantable course. Of the surplice he speaks sometime more indifferently:
but in the same places, he will have it not subscribed to, not defended, or
rejoyned for, but by all means hastened out of the Church, as a ridiculous
stage play garment, or a Foolescoat.

8. Many other Divines were named, as Zanchius, Pezelius, Mollerus, Zegedinus,
Daneus, Machabeus, Zepperus, Wigandus, and Sadeel; but their words not cited,
except only Sadeels, for avoiding of unnecessarie tediousness, they all
speaking to the same purpose with the former. The Rejoinder has one general
answer for diverse of these; that they allowed some human Feasts, which have
been abused to Superstition. Now though this be no direct answer, and the
Authors may in part forget their own general rule, in some particular; yet
this may be further said; that they accounted not these Feast-days such kind
of Ceremonies, as we speak of. This appears in Zepper, who put them under
the head of Order, cap. 13. whereas he handles the Cross under the head of
Sacramental Ceremonies, cap. 10. In particular, 1. Daneus and Zegedinus (says
the Rejoinder) speak not to our purpose. Daneus I have not at hand: but
Zegedine in his tables of Baptism, calls them Popish additions, by which
Baptism is profaned. 2. Zanchies judgment has been showed. Namely that it
was contrary to all such Ceremonies.

And this does abundantly appear out of his Epist. to Q. Elizabeth, printed
before, in English. 3. Zepper allows the ancient use of the Surplice. If he
did, therein he should not have crossed his rule given, cap. 10. reg. 4. out of
the Scriptures, at least in his opinion, except he judged the Surplice before
that ancient use to have been notoriously abused unto Idolatry. But the truth
is, Zepper does but comparatively excuse a supposed ancient use of that
garment, which in ancient times was not known, but as a civil habit, usual in
hot countries. 4. Wigandus (says the Rejoinder) was Illyricus his associat in
the furious opposition of the Surplice. Whereas the truth is, Illyricus himself
did not furiously oppose, but use the Surplice, as Calvin testifies, Epist.
117.

5. Sadeels words are: We reject whatsoever remains in the Church of Rome,
which came either from Jews, or Pagans. The Rejoinder answers, that Sadeel
shows what Ceremonies the Refor. Churches of France did reject; but not what
were necessarily to be rejected of all Churches: He uses also the limitation
of Jewish and Paganish Ceremonies. But he clean mistaketh Sadeels meaning:
Jewish and Paganish, are no words of limitation, but of explication by way of
reason. Our use of his testimony is 1. thus: Whatsoever Ceremonies they of
France have rejected, are in Sadeels judgment Jewish or Heathenish, which can
have no lawful use in Gods worship. But the Churches of France have rejected
our Ceremonies in controversy. Ergo. 2. Thus: If Jewish and Heathenish
Ceremonies are to be rejected; then Popish also, they being in their nature, or
kind, Jewish, and having evermore been notoriously abused unto Popish
Idolatry.

9. M. Rogers, Martyr, in King Edwards days, would not consent to conformity
in Cap, and Tippet, unless the Papists might be constreyned to wear upon their
sleeves a Chalice and Host. True (answers the Rejoinder 1.) but other good
Martyrs did. Therefore (say I) not they, but M. Rogers was alleged. Yet beside
zealous Hooper, with whom after Ridly and others agreed, Heavenly M. Bradford
might have been added, who in his letters to Erkinald Rawlins, calls forked
caps, and tippers, Antichristian pelse and baggage. He 2. answers, that the
quaestion was for inconveniencie, not unlawfulness. But he knows well, that
M. Hooper, and so (in all likelihood) M. Rogers stood upon such inconveniencie,
as in their learning was unlawfulness.

His 3. and 4. answer is of different intentions, in the same materials. But
this was in King Edwards days, by all professed: and yet M. Rogers and such
could not see it sufficient. 5. M. Rogers would (says the Rejoinder) allow the
same things with some mark of difference. Not allow, but tolerate; not upon
every mark of difference, but such as he knew would never be consented unto;
that is, not at all.

10. Public injunctions were wont to forbid all Monuments of Superstition;
and the Canons 1571. did forbid the gray Amice, and all other garments defiled
with like superstition. Therefore (says the Rejoinder 1.) ^hey did not take our
Ceremonies for such Monuments. But that is nothing to the Proposition: Neither
yet makes it much to the Assumption of this Argument, what these or those did
then take our Ceremonies to be. What they are in deed, we shall see in the
Assumption. He 2. allegeth, that the Su^plice was none of the Missal garments,
as the Amice. But first Bellarmine, whom the Rejoinder made (of late) the
Canon of Missal garments, makes no more mention of the Amice, then of the
Surplice. Durandus, or G. Minatensis, Rational. lib. 3. cap. 1. says, In some
things about the Altar they must use the Surplice. Superpelliceo in quibuslibet
servitius Altaris uti debent.
Steven Mephem. cap Linteam. No clarck may be suffered about the Service of the
Altar, unless he have the Surplice on at Mass. Nullus Clericus permistatur in
of ficio Altaris, nisi indutus superpellecio, tempore quo Missarum solemnia
peraguntur.
3. The Rejoinder adds, that it is a strong imagination, to think that the
very Injunctions, and Canons of this Church, could prove her to judge her own
impositions unlawful. Which if he meant of formal particular judgment, it is
his own weak imagination; if of general and virtual judging, there is neither
strongnesse, nor strangeness in it: because this Church has no privilege that
way above other Churches, of which none were ever found nor can be, imposing
any thing unlawful, which did not profess that truth, who^e contents did
prove that unlawful imposition to be unlawful. D. Morton has plentifully
showed so much of the Popish Church, as the Rejoinder will not deny.

11. B. Jewel was cited, as approving Tertullians judgment concerning the
unlawfulness of Garlands, though not evil of themselves, because they had
appearance of evil. Well (says the Rejoinder) then they were not evil in
themselves, by abuse. That is, abuse did not make them evil, before they were
abused. which is true. But ^f B. Jewel allowed Tertullians judgment (as the
Rej. grants) by the abuse they became evil, and unlawful. Appearance of
that which is evil in it self, is evil in it self: but the abuse was evil
in it self, and the after use was an appearance of that abuse, in Jewels
judgment. Ergo. It was also alleged out of Jewels Ap. c. 2. div. 9. that the
Papists had so misused sundry Ceremonies, that we may not longer continue them
without great conscience. The Rejoinder answers, 1. That this was spoken of
other Ceremonies, not of those in quaestion. 2. That Jewel was a Bishop, and
used Episcopal garments. 3. That upon his deathbed, he professed, that he
would not grieve any of his brethren, who were of contrary opinion, concerning
the Ceremonies. Now 1. If other Ceremonies (among which yet holy Garments were
objected by Harding, in that place) may by abuse, become unlawful, what
privilege has the Cross, as much abused as any? 2. As Jewel was a Bishop of
England, so Cajetan was a Cardinal of Rome; and therefore as Cajetan condemned
many Romish superstitions, in so much as when he died, he refused to be buried
in a Church, as the story of his life, prefixed to his Commentaries on Job
testifies, so might B. Jewel condemn some superstitious Ceremonies in
England. As for his wearing of Episcopal Garments, let D. Fulke answer in his
Repeal of Heskins Parliament, page 412. Mr. Heskins girdeth at the proclaimer
(B Jewel) as ^earing Aarons garments for a Bishopric. But if the Popish
Priests had no more pleasure to say Mass in their vestiments, then the
Proclaimer to minister in Coapes, I think the common sort of Papists would
have less devotion to the Masses, the^ Gods people have to the Communion, when
it is ministered without any ceremonial attire. 3. Those words which the
Rejoinder allegeth out of his Godly speech, a little before his departure, make
much against the Rejoinder, because they show 1. That many then opposed our
Ceremonies as unlawful, which the Rejoinder denies. For how else could they
more dislike them then Bishop Jewel himself, who held them (by the Rejoinder
his confession) very inconvenient? 2. That B. Jewel would not grieve or
prejudice those that were so minded, which our Defendant and Rejoinder labor
to do with all the strength they have, and all the advantage they can catch
hold on. Jewel durst not have called them Superstition brethren, factious and
exorbitant men, etc. Moreover, two faults are committed by the Rejoinder, in
reciting those words of Jewel: one, that he leaves out the word padagogia,
wherein he accused our Ceremonies as belonging to the infancy of the Jewish
Church: and the other, that he took no knowledge of the following words,
wherein he accuses the Pope as the fountain of those evils, Istorum malorum
capi^s, qui contendi causas and occasiones subministravis and vel^t ossa
canibus objecit.
which gave cause and occasion of strife, and as it were thre^ bones to the
dogs. Where he makes our Ceremonies relics of Popery, and cause of
dissension. Add unto this, that in his Epistle to Q. Elizabeth, before the
Defense of his Apollogie, he prays to God, that she might live to abolish all
groves and high places, in England and it will appear how lawful our
Ceremonies were in the judgment of that good learned man, as well in his life
time, as at the hour of his death.

12. B. Pilkinton said, that it is our fault generally, that we differ no more
from the Papists, in all our ministry. True (answers the Rejoinder) but he
thought not ^hese things to be simply unlawful. As if B. Pilkington had
^earned, and taught a distribution of faults in religion, some unlawful, and
some lawful faults! It is a new distinction coined since his time.

13. B. Westphaling (with Augustine) peremptorily ^ffirmeth, that Jewish
Ceremonies cannot be used, no not with an intent differing from that of the
Jews, with out danger of damnation. We allow this (answers the Rejoinder)
because God has repealed them; and to use them ^ere to call the coming of
Christ into question. And is it so great a sin, to use Jewish Ceremonies,
without a ^ewish intent? How then durst the Defendant and Rej. page 285.
affirm, that to use some Jewish rite (even Circum^ision it self) without a
Jewish opinion, is not damnable? In one, or both of these places, they much
forgot themselves. And they that disallow of a Jewish Ceremony, used without a
Jewish opinion, how can they allow of a Popish Ceremony, in any use?

14. D. Bilson, allows in reformed Churches, that they can by no means
digest one dram of Popish Ceremonies. It was well spoken (answers the
Rejoinder) in defense of those Churches which had cast off all the Ceremonies
of the Papists, for the consequence sake; but prooveth not, that all Churches
are bound to do so; or that this Bishop thought so, who used and urged these
Ceremontes. Where he would persuade us 1. That our Church can (lawfully) do
that, which Reformed Churches cannot by any means do. 2. That whereas
Reformed Churches regard the evil consequence of such Ceremonies, ours need
not. 3. That Doctor Bilson Warden of Winchester, either did write otherwise
then he thought, or else changed his thoughts, when he was risen to be Bishop
of Winchester. The judgment of these conjectures I leave to the understanding
Reader. We urge only his plain words: V^leant quantum valere-pessint.

15. To Doctor Humphrey, the Rejoinder had nothing to oppose, but that
afterward he did wear the Surplice. Now the truth of this depends on the
Rej. his hearsay, so far as I know. Yet be it so: does not affliction, and
poverty, make many a wise man, turn a little aside out of his way? The
histories of all ages testify such infirmities to have been found in many
Godly and learned. And after-yeelding to the Surplice without giving any
public reason for it, does not argue that he did not formerly hold that (and
constantly the other) unlawful, upon those grounds which he has left in
print, unrecalled. I do not believe that there can be so much showed under D.
Humphres hand for ou^ Ceremonies, as his Epistle, represented in the form
Chapter, has against them.

16. Concerning Doctor Fulke, one sentence of his was alleged, that he which
disliketh our form of service, as not differing sufficiently from the Papists,
shows his zeal in detestation of Idolatry. This (says the Rejoinder) was a
charitable excuse of them. The urging then, defending and rejoyning, for our
Ceremonies in that manner as now is used, is an uncharitable accusation not
agreeable to the mind of Doctor Fulke. A second sentence of the same D. Fulke,
is: We abhor whatsoever has but a show of Popery. Therefore (concludes the
Rejoinder) he did not judge our Ceremonies to have any show of Popery: Nay
rather, therefore he abhorred our Ceremonies. For that of their Popish show, he
doubted not, ^it appears out of diverse passages, in his writings: as in his
Rejonder to Martial, art. 4. Mr. Calfhill answers well, that the Ceremony of
the Cross, once taken up of good intent, being grown into so horrible abuse,
is justly refused of us. And art. 5. Although the elder and better age used and
received the sign of the Cross tolerably, yet considering the shameful abuse
of it, it ought now, of right and conscience, to be condemned. Martial will
none of that: for (says he) things good in their own nature, must not be
taken away, or condemned, for the abuse. Very true; but who will grant him,
that the sign of the Cross is good of it self? It is as much as may be
borne, to grant it a thing indifferent. But (says the Rejoinder) our
Ceremonies Doctor Fulke has (of my knowledge) used and defended as lawful. Of
this knowledge, for his using and defending all our Ceremonies, his writings
do constrain me (at the least) to doubt. He was once so far of from using
all, that rather then he would use the Surplice, he went out of St. John's
College, in Cambridge, with his pupils, and hired chambers for himself, and
them, in the town: Mr. Travers is my author for this. If afterward he was
bowed something by the times, unto a little use of one Ceremony, that he might
in some manner, and measure, excuse: but if he had purposed to defend that, and
the other Ceremonies, some footsteps of that defense would be found in his
writings, as there are diverse of his opposing them. The known truth is, that
many good men through the iniquity of the times, have been brought to be
distressed, betwixt desire of liberty in the Ministry, and hatred of
superstition; so that they have said with the Apostle, I know not which to
choose; and so afterward, have given some place unto the later. To judge their
persons, it is far from us. We only make use of their free and undistressed
judgment.

17. Of D. Andrues, and Mr. Merbury, I have not to say: because their
Catechismes I never saw. D. Sutliffe, though he were a Deane (as the Rejoinder
notes) yet he writ in his latter time, as a Divine, not as a Cathedral man:
and so he was cited. His proposition is this: All Ceremonies taken from Jews
and Pagans are unlawful. We only add, that Ceremonies taken from Papists,
are subject to the like censure; because Popish superstition, or Idolatry, is
no more lawful then the other. Of Mr. Greenham, (beside that which has been
often confuted) the Rejoinder says only, that he did not persuade men against
the use of our Ceremonies; and that he was loath to be put unto the solution of
that objection: wear the Surplice or preach not. In which there is nothing
pertinent. For to give proportionable answers, I my self was present, when an
honest Conformist persuaded another not to conform: For (said he) though I
have not strength enough to stand out, yet I would not have you that have
strength, for to yield. If all should yield, the truth concerning these
matters would be buried, and more superstition is to be expected. This was more
then not to persuade unto Conformity. And as for the second, I think the
Defendant and Rej. would be loath to be put to the solution of this objection:
Confess the Ceremonies to be unlawful, or loose your livings, and liberties,
with disgrace. Thus (says the Rej.) I have broken through the army of
Protestants. That is, just so, as a naked body breaks through a thicket of
thorns, getting more gashes, then he made steps for his passage.

SECT. 21. Concerning the Assumption of this fourth Argument: namely, that our
Ceremonies are human devises, notoriously known to have been, and still to be
abused unto Idolatry and Superstition, by the Papists, and are of no
necessary use in the Church.
1. THat this was the Assumption, or second part of this Argument, no man can
doubt, that reads the Proposition, or former part, set down in the first
section of this Chapter, and understands the process of reason. The
Defendant therefore was blamed, for setting down the Assumption thus: Our
Ceremonies have been Idolatrously abused by Papists. The Rejoinder not willing
to forsake him in any failing, allegeth 1. That the Defendant took the
substance of the Assumption from the Abridgement, and others. Which might
indeed have occasioned him to add some thing unto the Abridgers assumption;
but in no wise to detract any thing from it: at least, not out of them and
others, to patch up a false sylogisme (the whole medium, or third argument,
which was used in the proposition, not being repeted in the Assumption) which
every pun^e in Logic can put off with a wet finger. He adds 2. That the
clause ( of no necessary use) is no part of the Argument, but an exception,
answered before. sect. 1. And yet see how he contradicts himself! The
Defendant answered it: but it was no part of their Argument. He answered it was
a part of the Assumption: If in their exception of things necessary, they mean
a convenient necessity, he denies their Assumption. page 406. Yet now he
denies that to be any part of the Assumption. The truth is, both the
Defendant and Rejoinder, were loath to meddle, (more then of necessity they
must) with the convenient necessity of our Ceremonies, least they should
evidently either wrong their consciences, or betray their cause. In the 3.
place, he denies him to have omitted these words ( human inventions, or
devises) saying, that the Replier has untruely added them: because neither
they, nor any like them, are in the Abridgement, page 26. or 27. But let him,
or any other, look once again upon the Abridgement, in those pages, and he
shall see upon the margent, these words: All the Ceremonies in question, are
human inventions, etc. After this, he accuses the Repl. for not observing
every word of the Abridgement, in repeating the Assumption: but he could show
no sens^ changed: let that therefore pass.

2. The Defender his answer to the foresaid Assumption, was by the Replier thus
collected: These Ceremonies are either generally, or individually, and
numerally the same, that have been abused to Idolatry. If generally, then it
hinders not, but they may still be lawfully used, though they have been so
abused: If individually, then it is not true, which is affirmed (in the
Assumption) neither does it follow from thence, that they must be abolished,
because they have been so abused, except they be the same formally, that is, in
intention and opinion of those that impose and practice them. For this he is
accused by the Rejoinder of doing no justice, but playing a theefes part, who
changes coats with an honest passenger. Now for this, to spare the labor of
writing out again many lines, I desire the Reader to look upon the Defender
his words as they are reprinted by the Rejoinder himself, page 561. and
compare them with the Replier his sum. If he can discern any difference, let
the Defender be the honest man, and the Replier, what it pleases the Rejoinder
to make him. No material difference is noted by the Rejoinder but only that
the Defender has not those words ( if generally, then it hinders not, but
they may still be lawful^y used, though they have been so abused) nor any thing
which will bear such a collection. To which I oppose those words of the Def. If
you take it in the generality, then cannot you justify any one of your
Ceremonies, belonging to Order and Decency. For they have been some way
abused. Was it not his meaning, to say, that as other Ceremonies of Order, so
these in quaestion, if they be only generally the same with those that have
been abused, may be justified, that is, lawfully used? Let the Defender hold
his own coat: then he cannot so easily escape, without being discerned, as
the Rejoinder by changing, would have him. Certainly the Replier did not the
evishly take his coat from him nor had he any cause to wish either it to
himself, or his to the Defender for any advantage that he might get by that
change.

3. Against the foresaid answer, it was opposed, that by this means, any kind
of Popish, Jewish, or Heathenish Ceremony, may come in, so there be new
particulars, and a new intention used. To which it is rejoyned, that though
they be not excluded, upon that sole point, of having been abused, yet they
may, upon other just exceptions, be shut out. But the Rejoinder should have
showed those just exceptions, which remain, after the particular matter, and
the evil intention be removed. For according to the Defender and Rejoinder
their grounds, I cannot guess, what they should be. The Rejoinder mentions
dumb, dark, numerous, burdensome, incorrigible, foolish, ridiculous
Ceremonies. But all these exceptions have been discussed before: where we have
showed that all these virtues are found in our Ceremonies, as well as in
Popish, beside numerousnesse, which in this place cannot be applied to the
purpose: because the inference was of any kind, not of any number. Dumbness
in deed is denied to be in ^ignificant Ceremonies: but what is there among the
Popish Ceremonies, which is not made by Durand of Mystical signification? It is
not dark, what men say our Cross does signify: but how ^t can lawfully
signify any such thing, is very dark, etc.

4. While the Replier was goeing on in confutation of the Defender his answer,
namely, that in Ceremonies ^bused to Idolatry, those are not forbidden, which
are gene^ally the same, but only the same individuals; the Rejoynd. ^inding
that undefensible, out of courtesy, as he says, set^eth up another answer,
which he calls a Fair Mark; ^amely, that sometime, when the particulars or
individuals, which have been prostituted to Idolatry, may not lawfully be
^sed; yet others of the like kind, may be lawfully used with ^awful
intentions. But this is little courtesy, or fair deal^ng, when the Repliers
arrow was shot, and stuck in ^he Defender his White, cliving the very Peg of
it; to set ^p another Mark, and then accuse the shooter, that his ^rrow does
not stick in this Mark, set up after the ^hotte was made. Beside, this
concerns not our As^umption, which should be the Rejoinder his Mark: because
there is nothing in it of human Ceremonies, not ne^essarie.

5. It was replied also, that by the Defender his rule by paritie of reason) it
might be gathered, that of Ce^emonies instituted by Christ, those only are
commanded, which he did sanctify in particular. No: (says ^he Rejoinder)
because in institution of the Sacraments, ^her was ordained a continuance in
the like kind. Do this. And was there not also, in the prohibition of
Ceremonies human, Idolatrously abused, ordained a continuance in the like
kind, in those words, Deuteronomy. 12. thou ^halt not do so to the Lord thy God?

6. From the same rule, the Replier said, it may be concluded, that no Popish
Ceremonies are Jewish, or Heathenish: because they are not the same
individually, or in particular. Not so neither (says the Rejoinder) because
they use Jewish Typicals; and others, as still in force by the Jews laws; and
Pagan Rites, with the like intention. But 1. The Papists do not use Jewish
Typicals, as types of Christ yet to come; and therefore according to the Def.
and Rej. their sentence, must be excused: because they hold Circumcision it
self lawful to Christians, page 285. 2. They do not hold any Ceremonial
Jewish laws to bind Christians. See Bellarmine, de justificatione, lib. 4.
cap. 6. It is neither good, nor safe, to accuse any beyond their deserts. 3.
Likeness of intention, betwixt Pagans and Papists, is such as admits much
dislikenesse. And such likeness there is betwixt our Ceremonies, and Popish.

7. It was inquired, whether the Scripture, forbidding conformity with Heathen
Idolaters, in shaving of heads, and cutting of beards, did mean the same heads
and beards only? No: (answers the Rejoinder) because the like in kind was
forbidden. And this is that which the Replier sought. For then by
proportionable equity, Ceremonies like in kind to Idolaters, are forbidden to
Christians, at this day, and not the same particulars only.

8. Because the Defendant objected, that all circumstances of Order and Decency
have been abused to Idolatry; the Rejoinder noted, that this is one advantage
he makes of leaving out of our Assumption, those limitations: Ceremonies
devised by man, of no necessary use: because Circumstances of Order, and
Decency, are necessary in their kind, and not mere devises of men;
Bellarmine himself being Judge, de effect. Sacram. lib. 2. cap. 29. Upon this
the Rejoinder having little reason to oppose thereto, after some repetition of
confuted shifts, comes on with a current of words, like a flood from the
hills, after a great rain, which carries much mud with it. For after some
rouling of Circumstances in their particulars, with adding of diverse, neither
mere circumstances, nor allowed by us, as he supposes (which make nothing to
the purpose) this muddy stuff is found in the valley: The matter comes to this
issue: you a^e the godly men; other reformed Churches are the Churches of
Christ, All other men are Carnal, Time-servers, Formalists, that have no
conscience, no syncerity, no godly wisdom, no zeal; you are the only men. I
cannot devise, what occasion he had of this extraordinary passion, but that he
was angry, to see he could not confront reason with reason. In his could blood,
I dare say, he will recall these words of distemper, which cannot be fastened
upon us, and therefore rebound upon him from whose violence they proceeded.

With more show of reason, he adds, that for necessity in the kind, a
Surplice in the kind of a garment; the Cross, in the kind of admonition to
profess the faith; and kneeling, in the kind of a reverent gesture, are as
necessary, as any circumstance of Order, and Decency. But this comparison has
been largely confuted in the first part of this Writing, in the head of
Ceremonies, etc. Here, it shall suffice to note, that time, place, and such
like circumstances, are so manifestly necessary in their kind, that the
particulars may be deduced from them, by particular considerations, without any
institution: but no man can deduce our Ceremonies from those kinds named. Man's
will is the only reason, of them; as Gods will is the only reason of
Ceremonies truly divine by institution. No man can conclude thus: we must
every where have some garment, and therefore in England, a Surplice. We must
always in Baptism, have some admonition to profess the faith; and therefore
in England a Cross. We must use reverent gestures in receiving the holy
Communion; and therefore in England we must kneel in the act of receiving. But
we may conclude thus: We must have a fit place to meet in; and this place is
generally fittest for our Congregation: therefore we must have this. We must
have a convenient time to meet in; and this hour is generally most convenient
for our Congregation: therefore this. The Monks may as well conclude: We must
have some garments: therefore we must in one order have black; in another,
white; in a third, black over white, or white over black; in a fourth, gray;
a fifth, party colored; in some, all woollen; in some, all linen; etc. ad
infinitum; as well (I say) every whit, as the Rejoinder can conclude from a
garment to a Surplice; from admonition, to the sign of a Cross; or from
reverence in a table gesture, to kneeling.

To Bellarmine, the Rejoinder answers, that he speaks of natural
Ceremonies. Which is true: but are not these contained under the generality of
the Defend^nt his words: there is no gesture, or circumstance of worship, which
has not been abused? And as for other circumstances, which are called civil,
many of them admit only of such variety, as nature does lead unto, by occasion
of this or that determination, common to religion with other affairs.

9. That our Ceremonies are not individually, or singularly the same which
Papists have solemnly abused, the Replier said, it is no marvel: because it
is impossible to carry the same particular sign of the Cross, from the Font,
to the Church door; or to keep it being so long as it is in making. That is
therefore no great mystery. The Rejoinder answers nothing to this, save only
that he descanteth upon the term mystery.

10. It was added (as an overplus, not for necessity of the Argument) that as
it seems, Papists do give divine honor unto the sign of the Cross, as it
is us^d among us: because they ascribe divine operation un^o it, as it was used
by Jews, Heathens, and Julian the Apostata. Bell, de effect. Sacram. lib. 2.
cap. 31. and they do not account us worse then them. The Rejoinder opposes 1.
That the Papists honor not the Lords Supper in our hands. The difference is,
that unto that Sacrament, they require a right-ordained Priest; but not so to
the Cross. 2. He answers, that they ascribe this divine operation unto it,
only when there is an intention of such an operation, in him that makes the
Cross. Be it so: the Patrones of our crossing, defend that use which the
Cross had among the Fathers, who allowed that intention, as Bellarmine (in the
place now cited) shows. And how shall the inward intention of them be
discerned?

This at the least seems to follow, that as for uncertainty of the Priests
intention, diverse Papists worship the Hoaste, only upon condition, if it be
changed into the body, by the Priests intention; so they must ascribe divine
honor unto our Crosses, upon the like condition of such an intention, as was
in the Fathers.

11. About material formal samenesse, the Replier refused to dispute: that
was (says the Rejoinder) because if he had, he must either have opposed all
learning and common sense, or else have yielded to the D^fendant, that change
of essential form makes the same material to become another thing; as in
the changing of water into wine. But 1. with consent of all common sense, we
may say, that our Cross differs not so from the Popish Cross as the wine
did from water, Ioh. 2. 2. It were no opposition to all learning (whatsoever
Aristole teaches) if one should say, that not the form only, but also the
matter was in a great part changed, when water was turned into wine. 3.
Opinion, and intention, is not the essential form of a ceremonial Cross.
For one and the same ceremonial Cross, is used by Papists, to diverse
intentions, as to represent a Mystery, to cure diseases, to drive away devils,
etc. Bellarmine in the forecited place. And opinion belongs to the efficient
or making cause, not to the form. 4. The very making of a Cross* in such a
manner, or with such circumstances, as put upon it a relation to religion,
makes both matter and form of that Ceremony: and so after idolatrously
abused, carries with it at least a show of an Idolatrous Ceremony. But this
show the Rej. refers unto the fifth chapter: and here opposes only, that
likeness and samenesse are not one. Which is true of individual or singular
samenesse, not otherwise: for those things are like which have one and the same
quality. But he himself will not say, that only the same individual or
particular Ceremonies, which Idolaters abuse, are forbidden to us. He has
hitherto in all this section declined the defense of that absurdity. This
quidity therefore is not to the purpose.

12. It was added by the Replier, that we have no intention, or opinion, in the
use of the Cross, but the Papists have the same (though they have others more)
and therefore there is some formal samenesse in their Cross and ours. To this
the Rejoynd. in many words, answers nothing, but that this reply stifles it
self: because, if we have not all the same opinions, which they have, then
they have not the same with us. But it does not follow of positive opinions,
concerning the Cross it self. For we may want some of their opinions, and yet
they have all that we have, the same. Does not he that knows most, of this
or that, know the same thing with him that knows little, though he knows
more?

13. Another odd reason was framed by the Repl. thus: If this does make a
Ceremony not the same, that men have not altogether the same opinion of it;
then among the Papists, there are as many kind of Ceremonies, Crosses,
Surplices, as there are diversities of opinions, about their nature and use;
which no man will say. Yes (says the the Rejoinder) I will say it of
Ceremonies: and he that shall deny this, must lay aside both learning, and
conscience, not knowing what to say. But he is too too confident, upon the
ground which he is driven to by force of a contrary wind. For without laying
aside of learning, and conscience, we may thus argue: If this be so, then all
human Ceremonies used among the Papists, and brought in (as hitherto all have
used to speak) by Popes, are not Popish. For they may be this or that
Hedge-Priests Ceremonies, who has added his opinion and institution unto them.
2. The Pope) by the same reason) cannot know, when his Ceremonies ar^ observed,
or omitted* because he cannot know all opinions and intentions of men. And the
like reason holding with us, our Church must inquire into the opinions and
intentions of men, before she can know, whether her Ceremonies be observed,
yea, or no. I leave it then to a Convocation-consultation, if it be not
necessary, that in the Bishops Articles, the Churchwardens should be asked,
upon that oath, which they usually take, and break, With what opinion, and
intention, their Minister does wear the Surplice, and use the Cross? For
otherwise, it cannot be known, whether he uses the Ceremonies of the Church
of England, or others of his own making? 3. When men have no opinion or
intention of such Ceremonies, but only that they are necessary to stand
betwixt them and deprivation, or excommunication, or other vexation (which is
the case of our best Conformers) then, though they use Cross, Surplice, etc.
they do not conform to the Ceremonies of our Church, but in hypocrisy, and
so with great sin.

Three wordy exceptions (he uses to call such things quarrels) the Rejoinder
here makes: one that the Replier put in not altogether the same opinion, for
not the same: an other, that he mentioned only opinion, whereas the Defender
joined to it, intention: the third, that Crosses and Surplices, are wrought
upon, as they are material. But the two later of these are now voided, by my
repe^ition of the reason: and the former is the Rejoinder his own
interpretation, page 575.576. namely, if our opinion be not altogether the
same, then it is not simply the same.

14. Instance was made (by the Replier) in the Altar erected by Vriah, 2. King.
16. which was idolatrous, like that of Damascus, though for another intention.

The Rejoinder answers 1. that this Altar was not formaly the same with that
of Damascus. But the formalitie of that Altar, containing all the
idolatrousnesse that was in it, or belonged unto it, and that Idolatry being
in part common to Vrias Altar, with that of Damaskus, it must needs be in that
part the same, though not altogether. Idolatry against the second
Commandment, has some formal community with that which is against the first.
He adds 2. that if Achaz had intention of offering to false Gods, then his
intention was the same with theirs at Damascus. But yet there would be found a
difference of intention in Achaz, in that he intended worship both to the true
God, and to those false; whereas they at Damascus were only for the false. And
Vrias intention might be (as it seems to have been) only to satisfy the
Kings mind, that he might keep his favor, upon which intentions, Courting
Praelats use to go very far.

15. In the last place, it was observed by the Replier, that this answer of the
Defender is the very same with that which Papists give unto our Divines, when
they are accused for using of Heathenish and Jewish Ceremonies. Licet in
externo symbolo sit aliqua similitudo, absolut^ ^amen maximum est discrimen:
nam a fine and intention sumunt externae actiones speciem suam.
Although in the outward sign there be some likeness, yet absolutely there is
great difference: for outward actions take their kind from the end and
intention of them. Bellarm. de effectu Sacr. l. 2. cap. 32.

The Rejoinder being angry, uses diverse sharp words, and after answers,
that this plea is unsufficie^^ for the Papists: because they retain Jewish
Ceremonies to the like Jewish ends; and Pagan Ceremonies to like superstitious
ends: but our intentions are no way like the Papists. Bellarmin says as much
for their Ceremonies in the place noted: The rites of the Gentiles were done
for the worship of Devils: but ours are for the worship of the true God:
therefore there is as much difference between ours and theirs, as between
Sacred, and Sacrilege; as b^twe^ne piety and impiety, as between God and
Satan. Jewish rites signified Christ to come ours are partly in memory of
things past, and partly to signif^^ the glory to come. Ritus Gentilium siebant
ad cuitum Daemoniorum: nostri sunt ad colendum verum Deum: ideo tantum interest
inter illos and nostros, quantu^ inter sacrum and sacrilegum: quantum inter
pietatem and impietatem, and quantum inter Deum and diabolum. Ritus Iudaiei
Christum venturum praenunciabant: vestri partim sunt in memoriam r^rum
praeteritorum, partim ad sig^ific^ dam gloriam suturam.
And yet our Divines cease not to accuse them of Jewish and Pagan Ceremonies.
In their judgment therefore, such differences cannot excuse ou^ Ceremonies from
being Popish.

SECT. 22. Concerning the Cross Popish and English.
IN this Section, there is nothing material, save only, that the Rejoinder
undertaketh to prove, that the Church of England has utterly and clean taken
away the Ceremony of the Cross, which was among the Papists abused: or, that
wheresoever, and howsoever the sign of the Cross was a Ceremony abused in
Popery, it is taken away in the Church of England.

But because in common understanding, this is to prove day, night, and night,
day, he requires two positions to be granted him (which before have been
confuted) 1. that nothing is a Ceremony properly so called, but in respect of,
and in the use of it, as a Ceremony. 2. That the sign of the Cross, though
it be but one kind of thing, yet is made so many several Ceremonies, as there
be several uses thereof. And these things being taken for granted, he gathers
a Catalogue of many Popish abuses, which (thorough Gods mercy) we are freed
from. Yet in his very first instance, he betrayeth his cause. For he makes it
a Popish Ceremony, to sign the breast with the forhead (and so the forehead)
in signification, that the mystery of the Cross is to be believed in the
heart, and confessed with the mouth. This Ceremony (says he) we have not. Yes
surely we have the very same formal opinion and intention, so far as
signification comes to. For not to be ashamed of confessing faith in Christ
crucified, etc. is nothing else but to believe with the heart, and confess
with the mouth, hand, and feet, the mystery of the Cross.

But it is not worth the while, for to consider the severals of this Catalogue.
This only I would know; if we have not taken the Ceremony of the Cross from
Papists, from whom we took it? The beginning of it was (so far as appears
by books) from the Valentinian haeretickes. The first honorable mention of
using it among Christians, is in Tertullian, when (by the Rejoinder his
sentence) he was infected with haeresie: and his use our Defender and Rejoinder
(I dare say) will not allow: at bordes, and beds, putting on apparel, and
shoes, etc. Tell us (I pray you) from what Author, or Age, this Ceremony of
the Cross was taken, which now is urged upon us? I have more then a doubt,
that such exception may be taken against that propagation, and such proofs for
the taking away utterly of the Cross, as you have brought for the abolishing
of the Papists Cross. If it be a new Ceremony, invented in England, just at
the time of Reformation, the Author of that invention should be made known:
and if he can approve his Ceremony, to be grounded rightly, his name may be
added in Polidor Virgil, de Inventoribus rerum.

SECT. 23. Concerning Scripture-proofes, for human Ceremonies Idolatrously
abused, and yet lawful to be used in Gods worship.
1. THe Replier his words are these: No example can the Defender find in all
the book of God, for lawful reserving of Idolatrous Ceremonies, but only two;
one of Gideon, Iud. 6.26. and another of Joshua, Josh. 6.19. These words the
Rejoinder accuses of dishonestie, not to be used against a Pagan. And why so?
1. Because the Defender undertook only to prove, that some Ceremonies, which
have been formerly abused, are not therefore necessarily to be abolished, if
they may be reduced to their indifferent use. Now by abused he meant
Idolatrously abused, or else he touched not this fourth Argument, whose
assumtion himself repeated thus: Our Ceremonies have been Idolatrously abused.
The Replier in stead of Idolatrously abused, put Idolatrous: because (as such)
they are Idolatrous. And that, which is not necessarily to be abolished, may be
retained: therefore the Replier (seeking brevitie of speech) used the word
retained. So does Beza adv. Harchium, de Coena, speak: Non desunt, qui
Pastores vellent in illis, si non origin, at c^rte usu Baaliticis v^stibus
apparere. So that in this, there was no unchristian dealing.

The Rejoinder his second reason for so deep a censure, is, that the Defendant
grounded not his proposition upon these two examples, but from the ^quity of
the prec^pt of God, unto these two men. The Defendant indeed said, that his
proof was by the general equity of Gods Law; and then brings these two
examples. Wherein he was spared, that nothing was opposed to his gathering of
generally equity of the Law, from two examples, which (according to his
interpretation) are manifestly beside, and in some sort, against the Law. But
if his proof was from the equity of two special precepts, those specials are
examples: and the Defendant his words are of one of Gideons acts: Which example
we have propounded, to prove, etc. And the Rejoinder himself, in this same
page, calls the other act of Gideon, an Instan^e, in the same sense: I
believe the Jews gathered their rule from this instance: and page 591. he
calls that which is alleged of Gideon, and the other of I^shua, two
instances. In all this charge therefore of un^hristian dealing, there is not
found any fault at all. But it is too common with the Rej. when he cannot
reasonably rejoyne, to break out into angry words.

2. Of Gideons example, the Defendant himself (said the Replier) confesses,
that it was by special command from God: and that it is not every way
imitable. The Rejoinder 1. affirms this to have been the Def. his objection,
rather then his confession. Be it so: His objection therefore answers it
self; and touches not our Argument, which did not conclude any thing
unlawful that is by God specially commanded, but only shows what is
ordinary unlawful by the general rule of his Word. He 2. tells us, that the
Jews hold it lawful to make use of the wood of a tree, under which an Idol
has been placed. And so do we hold it lawful to make use (for a fire in
cold weather) of the wood of an Idol; which is more, I believe (adds the
Rej.) they gathered the rule from this instance. If they did gather any
special rule of ordinary use from hence, it was when the Veil was over their
eyes. For there is a general rule, in the light of nature, to the contrary:
Qu^d ex concessione speciali factum est, non debet trahi in consequentiam. The
Def. therefore did not well to imitate them in his blind gathering. 3. He
cites out of P. Martyr, that God herein shows, that the usurpation of an
Idol, does not disposesse him of his Lordship over all things, but that they
may be turned to his service. But P. Martyr does manifest his meaning to be,
that such things may not so be turned to Gods service, without Gods special
appointment.

For (answering the general Law which makes to the contrary) he says: Leges
hu^^^modi nobis, no^ sibi ipsi Deus posuit Qan^obr^m, rebus dedir^tis Idolis ad
sua iosius holocausta uti po^est. Minime li^^isset, nisi D^minus pr^copisse^.
God made such Laws as these for us, and not for himself. Wherefore he could
use things dedicate to Idols, unto his own burnt offerings. So Pelicanus: It
was in no wise lawf^ll, unless God had enjoined it. 4. For that which was
mentioned of a not imitable example, that spoke the Defendant (says the
Rejoinder) only of Gideons sacrificing under an Oak. Which is true: but the
reason of this imitablenesse, is the same in both of Gideons acts: justly
therefore, both were taken as confessed not imitable.

3. Of Joshua 6.19. it was added by the Replier, that there is no mention made
of things, (much less Ceremonies) appropriated unto Idolatry; and that in
probability, the vessels there spoken of, were melted, and only the metal
brought into the Lords treasury. The Rej. opposes 1. That some of this
treasu^y (in all likelihood) was appropriated to Idols. Be it so: for that some
there was a double answer given, God special command; and that it was melted,
or passed through the fire. But here the Rej. answers 1. That it does not
appear, they were to be melted. As if the Defendant his Argument did prove
well his p^oposition (as he says it does) if confutation of it does not
appear in the text he allegeth! surely proofs should be fetched from that
which at least appears, and not from that whose contrary does not appear.
But it does appear, that this was the order appointed for such things, Numb.
31.22.23. and from thence Interpreters gather so much of these things, Joshua,
6. So Tostatus, They did melt all metals that could be melted, Omnia mesalla
liquifactibilia liquifiebant, conflabantur igne, and converteban. (...) in
massam.
they were melted by fire, and turned into the mass. 2. If this be granted
(says the Rejoinder) melting did not make them other things. Yes surely by the
Defend. his Learning brought to illuminate our judgments (as he speaks page
562. in this Rej.) be sound, namely, only form gives the being to every
thing, as natural; to natural; artificial, unto artificial; ceremonial,
unto Ceremonial. For by this reason, melting of the vessels, made them cease
to be the same things either artificial, or ceremonial. And hereby the Def.
his instance falls to the ground: as not prooving any Ceremonies abused unto
Idolatry, to have been by Joshua retained.

4. Out of the former premises, the Replier concluded that the Defendant had
wreched penury of Scripture proof^s, for retaining of human unnec^ssary
Ceremonies, notoriously known to have been, and be abused unto Idolatry. This
was his meaning, according to the state of the question. Here the Rejoinder
first opposes, that two instances from the holy Scripture, rightly taken, are
proof enough. Which is very true: but that same rightly taken, was here
wanting, as has been sufficiently declared.

In the second place, to supply the Defendant his penury, the Rejoinder
brings abundance of instances, out of his old store. 1. Kneeling, bowing,
prostrating, lifting up of the eyes, and of the hands, shouting, and dancing
for joy. But these we absolutely deny to be human inventions. The Rej. knew
this: and therefore by prevention, replieth: to say these are not human
inventions, because they partly spring out of natural light, is as much as to
say, they are not, because they are human inventions: for what are human
inventions, but such as spring out of natural light? What? the Cross, and
Surplice; the Cornerd-Cap, and tippet; the Bishops Rochet, and Coap; with a
thousand such like; which whoesoever will aequal, or (in regard of naturalnesse
and wilful invention) liken unto l^fting up of eyes and hands, etc. in
prayer, must for that time, lay aside right natural invention, and judgment. I
think it would trouble all the Graduates in England to find out that natural
light, from whence Bachelors of Art, Masters of Art, Bachelors and Doctors of
Divinity receyved their several kinds of Hoodes; even as much as to find out
light of nature, for all the several habits of Monks. But (says the
Rejoinder) all came from natural light, better or worse, more or less
agitated. Just as men's long hair, and women's short, which nature it self
teaches to be uncomely (according to the Apostles light) came from the light
of nature. It is natural to a child, for to suck the dugge; and after to put
the hand to the mouth; and after to creep or go: Is it like natural to sound
a certain distinct sound upon a Trumpet? to dance a certain Round, or
Galliard, after every Fidle? It is natural for a child to signify his
discerning of those that it is used to, by some such sound as Dad and Mam: but
not to make Verses in a certain number.

After these, the Rej. instanceth in sitting, or lying along, leaning on the
left side; covering of the head and face, in worship; dividing of a beast in
covenant-making; erecting of Altars upon hills; erecting of religious monuments;
Trophies of victory, in Temples; set days for solemn worship; wine and
victuals for mourners; Marriage feasts, etc. But in all these, he was so set
upon number, that he clean forgot weight, and pertinency to the question in
hand. For the question is of Scripture-proofes, for such Ceremonies, as man
has devised, without necessary use, in the worshop of God, notoriously known
to have been, and be abused unto Idolatry. For there is not one of these
instances, which does agree to this question. 1. It cannot be prooved out of
Scripture, that sitting, or lying, was a lawful religious Ceremony,
appropriated unto Gods worship. The Rej. his proofs are only from
superstitious Rabbines; who are no more witnesses of true lawful Ceremonies,
for the old Testament, then Papists are for the new. 2. As for vayling and
covering the head and face, in worship, I know not out of what place of
Scripture it can be prooved a religious Ceremony, except (perhaps) from 1. Corinthians. 11.4. Every man praying or prophesying, having his head covered
dishonors his head. He quoteth Jerome on Eze. 44. Where these words are
found: Non rasis capitibus, ficut sacerdotes cultoresqus Ifidis atqu^ Serapis
debemus esse. Iuxta Septuaginta Interpretes, discimus in tantum capillos
demittendos, ut operta sit cutis. Vel certe sacerdotes semper operire capita
sua debent, juxta illud Virgilianum: Purpureo velare comas adopertus amictu.
Sed hac violenta interpretatio est.
We must not have our heads shaved as the Priests and worshippers of Isis and
Serapis had. According to the seven^y Interpreters, we learn that our hair is
to be suffered to grow out so long, that the skin be covered, and appear not
naked. Or verily that the Priests must always cover their heads, according to
that of Virgil, Purpureo velare comas, etc.

But this is a violent interpretation. Will this help the Rejoinder? He
quoteth also P. Martyr, on 1. King. 19.13. where he says, that Moses and
Elias, not being able to endure the glory of Extraordinary apparitions, covered
their faces; adding, that some think they did it of modesty; which he does
not reject, will this help?

3. For dividing of beasts, in covenant-making, he brings Genesis 15. and Ier.
34. But in the first place, it is manifest, that God did immediately, and
extraordinarily appoint it; and that in such a manner, as can never be showed
in any idolatrous use among Heathens, much less before Abraham's time. In the
second, there seems only to be an allusion of phraze: because in all the
solemn Covenants which we read of in the History of the Jews, made, or
renewed, we never find any mention of this manner; though circumstances of
far less moment are recorded distinctly. But if it was a real act, it is
most likely, that the question then in hand, being about the freedom of
Abraham's Children, which belonged to that Covenant confirmed unto Abraham, Genesis
15. they were by the Prophet directed, to use the same kind of sacrifice.
Howsoever, it cannot be prooved a mere human Ceremony: nor yet a mere
Ceremony: because it was a sacrifice, as all grant. Beside, to ground so large
a conclusion upon one dark phraze, is fitter for the Patrons of Purgatory (who
allege therefore, trial by fire, and baptizing for the dead) then for the
Rejoinder.

6. Erecting of Altars, was not in use after the Law, by the Rej. his own
confession. Before, it was no more a human Ceremony, then sacrifizing was.

7. Of Monuments and s^t days of solemnity, enough has been said in the
third Argument. For Trophies, brought into Gods house, Colias sword is
produced: which was no Ceremony of worship. For then David would not have taken
it away, for civil use; as he did, 1. Sam. 21.

8. Mourning and Marriage feasts, have no show of religious Ceremonies. Iunius
in deed (in his notes on Deuteronomy. 26.14.) calls some cost about the dead,
religious but in his Analysis of the same place, he expounds himself, to
mean religiosum, humanum, aut superstitiosum. And religious is often used for
all offices of strict obligation.

Notwithstanding all this weakness, and wrinesse of these instances, the Rej.
does so triumph in them, that he doubts not to pronounce them enough to
confut^ four Arguments of the Abridgement. But such confutations are like his,
who said he would confute a great part of Bellarmine, with one word: Bellarmine
thou lie.

SECT. 24. Concerning ancient Fathers.
1. THe Replier begins thus: I had thought verily, that the Def. would have
brought some pregnant testimonies out of the Fathers, though he could find
none in the holy Scriptures. Then belike (says the Rej.) you knew that there
might pregnant testimonies be brought out of them. And so it is: Licuit quae
apud Gentes superstitioso cultu impid agerentur, eadem expiata sacto ritu, ad
pietatem transfer, ut majori Diaboli contumelia, quibus ipse col^ voluerit,
Christus ab omnibus honoraretur. Ea licentia, qua Deorum delubra in Ecclesias
Christianorum sun^ laudabiliter commutata, alij quoque ritus Gentilium a nobis,
benedictionibus expiati, divino sunt cultui consecrati.
though their doctrine, in general, were against such Ceremonies, yet from
their practice, so pregnant testimony may be brought for diverse superstitious
Ceremonies, that the Church rueth the pregnancy of them unto this day.
Baronius, ad an. 44. in the end, brings many examples; and from them
concludes: It was lawful to apply those things which the Gentiles had abused
in superstitious worship, and purged from uncleanness by holy worship unto
pious uses, that Christ to the greater dishonor of Satan, might be honored
with those things wherewith Satan himself sought to be worshipped. By the same
reason whereby the Temples of the Heathenish gods were laudably turned into the
Churches of Christians, other rites also of the Gentiles cleansed by our
prayers, are rightly turned to holy use. And ad an. 58. about the middle, he
has, upon the same examples, these words: What wonder is it, if holy Bishops
did consent, that those wonted customs of the Gentiles, from which it was
imposs^ble to draw them utterly, even after they were professed Christians,
should be changed into the worship of God? Venerable antiquity changed
superstition into religion, and brought to pass that what was spent upon
Idols, should be carefully converted into the worship of God. Quid mirum
fi^inolitas apud Gentiles consuctudines, a quibus not, quamvis Christiani
effecti essent, penitus divelli impossible videretur, easdem in Dei cultum
transferri, san^ct fimi Episcop^ concesserunt? Venetanda antiqui^as
superstitionem in religinem conversit, effecitque ut quod impendebatur Idolis,
provide in Dei cultum converteretur. Sylva quaedam Iudaicarum and Gentilium
Cer^moniarum paulatim agrum Domini occupavit.
From hence it came, as Polidore de Invent. in the preface, says, that A vast
forest of Jewish Ceremonies, did by little and little, invade and possess the
Lords field.

A true reason, and censure also of these practices, is given by Doctor Iackson
(Original of unbelief, Section, 4. chapter, 23.) in these words: To outstrip
our adversaries in their own policies, or to use means abused by others, to
a better end, is a resolution so plausible to worldly wisdom (which of all
other fruits of the flesh, i^ for the most part, the hardliest, and last
renounced) that almost no sect or profession in any age, but in the issue
mightily overreached or entangled themselves, by too much seeking to
circumvent or go beyond others.

A notable example we have of this policy, in Gregory's direction unto
Augustine the Monk, then in England, lib. 9. ep. 71. which was, that
sacrificing of Oxen with feasting, in the Idol Temples, should be turned into
slaying of Oxen for fasting about those Temples, made Christian by holy water.

2. In that which the Replier collected out of the Defender his allegations, it
is confessed, there is little or nothing to the purpose. The Rejoinder therefore,
accusing the Replier, for picking the Defender his purse, undertaketh to
restore it unto him again, by making this new collection: 1. If the celebritie
of the Feast of Easter was held by many to be lawfully kept on the same day
which the Jews superstitiously (as then) observed. 2. If they, avoiding Pagan
Fasts, and Feasts, did freely institute other. 3. If superstitious habits were
lawfully retained. 4. If Circumcision, after it became a mere human Ceremony,
was lawfully used: Then the anci^nt Fathers and Churches were of opinion, that
godly men may lawfully use some Human Ceremonies, abused by others. But this is
a mere empty purse (not worth the picking) which the Rejoinder sticks into
the Defender his pocket; as his own. For 1. It has not in it our quaestion,
of Ceremonies devised by man, not necessary, notoriously known to have been
abused unto Idolatry, or superstition. 2. In the first instance there is only
many noted, from whence cannot be concluded, in a kind of generality, the
Fathers and Churches opinion. 3. Easter was by them that kept it, not held as a
mere human invention, but as Apostolical tradition, as all know. 4. Easter was
not invented by men, but only by men superstitiously continued. 5. The second
Argument stifles it self. For if they so carefully avoided Pagan Fasts, and
Feasts, though they might have pleased many professed Christians, and drawn on
other by retayning of them, it seems, they held them unlawful, because of
the Idolatry wherewith they had been defiled. 6. We absolutely deny, with all
Divines, that Circumcision, after the Date of it, was fully expired, which was
in the Apostles time, was ever lawfully used as a religious Ceremony. 7.
Concerning Ceremonious habits, the Defender brings no proof at all. The
Rejoinder 1. allegeth Tertullian, de Corona mil. as allowing the use of a white
linen garment, he means for a Ceremony: whereas Tertullian only shows,
that our Savior did lawfully use a linen towell, in washing his Disciples
feet, Ioh. 13. notwithstanding linen garments had been abused to Idolatry.

In the 2. place, he refers us to B. Jewel his Defense, for our belly-full
of instances. And it is true, that godly learned man (par. 3. cap. 5. div. 1.)
allegeth diverse instances, and Authorities: neither would he have omitted that
of Tertullian, if he had esteemed it. But (because it is necessary) I will set
down the examination of them, which I find in certain papers of Mr. Brightman
(one Author of the Abrigement) neither ungodly, nor unlearned; whereby it shall
appear, that they do not so fill our Bellies, but that we can well digest them.

The learning of it, will answer for the length, to every studious Reader.

M. BRIGHTMANS ANSWER TO B. JEWELS ALLEGATIONS, FOR THE ANTIQVITIE OF DIstinct
Ceremonious apparel used by Ministers in their Ministration.
IVSTINE MARTYR preached the word of God in a Philosophers habit, which was his
ordinary garment, such as our students at University and Innes of Court wear,
no Surplice nor any such ministringe attire. But concerning the Bishops brouch,
which M. Jewel says John the Evangelist did wear, as if he had been a Bishop
of the Jews, I take it, it was no material brouch, but a figurative speech
only. For Polycrates describinge John first by the singular love our Lord bore
him, in whose bosom he leaned at his last supper, then of the great holiness
wherein this noble disciple excelled, he contented not himself to declare the
same properlye, but allegorically said of him, (...) [which was the Pr^ist that
carried the brouch,] not that he ever used any such thing, but that he
expressed by his holy conversation the force of that [Sanctitas Iehovae]
written in that golden plate, which the high Priest carried in his bonnet. For
shall we think John was a Priest, neither of Aarons family, nor of the tribe
of Levi? or were the holy things of the Temple not so much as to be seen by
the people of the Jews at Jerusalem, now exposed to the veiwe of the Gentiles
at Ephesus? Would the Jews have borne this prophaninge of their holiest
mystery, by a man of another tribe, among the heathen, and by a Christian?
Besides, the Apostles by common consent had decreed the legal cerem. should not
be used by the Christians. Act. 15. And Paul taught Circumcising to be fallinge
from the grace of Christ. Gal. 5.2, Would John then bring a Ceremony of the
Levitical Preisthoode into the Church? D. Fulke was not of that judgment that
the words in Eusebius are to be taken literaly, but by that figurative
allusion allreadie remembered; Rhem. test. Apoc. 1. sect. 7. This figurative
speech therefore should not have been turned into a material brouch, much less
into a long Priests garment, as the Rhemists do, who have battered out this
(...), and shaped it into (...). Apoc. 1.13. These words then make nothing for
any garment at all.

Augustines indifferency what apparel be worn, is only of that in common
life, not in Ecclesiastical and administringe function. Nihil sano pertinet ad
istam Civitatem quo habitu v^l more vivendi, (si non est contra divi^ia
praecepta, istam sidera qua pervenitur ad Deum) quisque sectetur. Vnde ipsos
quoque Philosophe^s quando Christiani fiunt, non habitum vel consuetudinem
vi^tus, quae nihil impedit Religionem, sed falsa dogmat^ mutare compellit.
Truly it nothing perteines to that city, what habit or fashion any one
follows, so it be not against the word, and that faith whereby we come to
God. Whence it never Compelled the very Philosophers when they became
Christians to change their garments or manner of diet, but only to lay aside
their false opinions. De civit. lib. 19. c. 19. As for proper administering
apparel he speaks not one word of it, neither do I find there was any in
his time.

I had not Hilary to consider his words, but the spoils of the Gentiles in
persons, places, learning and such other things, may be many ways divided to
the ornament of the Church, without borrowing any Ceremony from them, to be
used in the service of God. For this is not to spoil them as the Israelites
did the Egyptians, who had the word of God for their warrant, but as Achan did
Jericho, fu^l dearly to his cost, and of the whole host of Israel. Josh. 7.

Hierom has the words you cite, lib. 1. adv. Pelag. page 416. much urged by
Bellarmine and the Papists for their apparel, and no less vehemently pr^ssed
by our men, for ours, but duly considered, without ca^se. The Candida vestis
Hierome speaks of, was no peculiar garment of the Ministers, but the ordinary
cl^thing of the common people, Eumque cum esset reus, noque barbor^ desi ^sse
radi, noque non candida vesto uti, neque fuisse solito cultu reorum. primo in
vesto candida visi sunt,] [vesta sordida sumpea, principum domos circum ire,
etc.] Live. decad 5. lib. 5. page 254. [candidati, coronatique] Sueton. Aug. c.
99. [visa quondam pro conci^^^ pullatorum turba.] [N^ quis pullatorum media
cavea sedaret.] Sueton. Aug. c. 40.44.
in former time generally used by all, and daily, but afterward only by
those of the better sort, and upon Festival days. So Aulius Gellius writes
of Africanus: That when he was guilty, neither was his beard shaven, nor his
white garment off, nor was he of the common attire of the guilty. The
Ambassadors of Rhodes coming to Rome, were first seen in white, but finding
things contrary to their expectation, they were forced presently with a viler
garment to compass the houses of Princes. Live. decad. ^. lib. 5. page 254.
Yea, the very mariners and passengers in a ship of Egypt, seeing Augustus to
pass by, showed themselves in white, and crowned. The same Augustus was angry
when he saw a company in mourning, and thereupon made a law, That none should
sit among the mourners. From thence grew a difference among the Citizens, not
heard of in former ages, whereby some were called Candidate, some Pullati:
Candidati, not such as sued for offices, as in times past, but the Citizers of
better rank: Pullati, the lowest of the people, and the vulgar multitude: Si
famulum tuum liberate mutavetii, and vestis albae nitore, and aurei annuli
honor, and Patroni nomine, ac tribu mensaque honoratur. de resut. carnis.
Aderant quidem impij candidis and magnificu vestibus celebrantes festum sui
intoritus, solus autem Indes atris indutus vestibus.

Vnde adjungis gloriam vestium and ornamentorum Deo esse contrariam.

Quae sunt rogo inimicitiae contra Deum, si tunicam habuero mundiorem?

Cavete Clerici cavete Monechi, Viduae, and Virgins: periclitamini nisi
surdidas vos atque pannosas vu^gus aspexerit. Tac^o de hom^nibus saculi, quibus
aperte bellum indicitur, and inimicitiae contra Deum, si prec^o^^ atque
nitentibus utantur ex^^ijs.


both, from the color of their garments which they used. Tertullian says of
the manumitted servants (who upon their first infranchising appeared in their
gowns, that is, the common vesture of the Citizens) If thy servant be free and
honored with the brightness of the white garment, and the grace of the gold
ring, and the name of a Patron, and with the tribe and table. Yea the Papists
themselves (as Baronius) allege to this purpose [Simeon Metaphrastes] in the
acts of [Indes and Domna,] where it is said of the multitude, Some wicked ones
were present in white and magnificent garments, celebrating the feast of their
own ruin, but Indes only was in black. And of Honofrius [qui alba induit
vestimenta] least he should be discovered to be a Christian put on white. For
the devoater Christians began to take themselves to darker colors, as more
modest and decent, especially after the Monks once began to grow in credit.
2. It is plain out of Hierome himself, that [Candida vestis] was no garment
belonging to the Minister a^one in divine service, but an honest, decent* and
cleanly vesture, opposed to a foul, sluttish, and ragged habit. For the
Pelagians condemned glorious garments, as he there says, Whence you add, the
show of garments, and ornaments is contrary to God. In confutation whereof he
demands, But wherein is that against God, if I have a cleaner garment? And
then presently after the words you cite* Look to it O Clarks, take heed O
Monks, Widows, and Virgins: you are in danger, unless the people see you in
foul apparel. I say nothing of Secular, against whom war is proclaimed,
and enmity against God, if they use fine apparel. By which it is evident, he
defended comely, honest a^tire, such as was common to Monks, Widows, Virgins,
[and homines saeculi] not proper to any office of the Minister. So in Eccl.
9.8. expounding what [Candida vestimenta] be, he says, Cave ne quando pollutu
vestibus induatis, populus quippe peccator in vestibus suscis luxisse
describitur, Tu autem induere lucem, and non maledictionem, etc.
Beware thou put not on at any time polluted garments, because sinners have
mourned in obscure garments, but put thou on the light, and not cursing. If
[Candida vestimenta] should be only Ministers apparel, then Solomon's
exhortation is only to Ministers, and they are the men he wills to be merry,
and always to have on their Surplices, not only in their Ministereall duty.
In his precepts to Nepotian he advises, Vestes pullat aque devita ut candidas:
Ornatus, ut sordes pari modo fugiendae sunt: quia alterum delicias, alterum
gloriam redolet.
Avoid sad garments as well as white, Ornaments, as well as Spots, one
savoureth of delights, the other of too much glory. Would he have willed him to
avoid white garments in common life, (for make it a Ministerial garment, and
then you have Hieroms counsel against it) had they not been usual? In divine
service therefore, the Ministers used the white garment of the people, but in
ordinary life, Hierome thought a meaner clothing fitting, and so some devoter,
as Nepotian, and such like practiced, though others differed nothing in their
attire from the Laity. 3. There was no set Ministering garment in Hieromes time,
and therefore [Candida vestis] was no such. For Coelestinus, who was not Bishop
till after Hieroms death, writes thus to the French Bishops concerning
apparel in divine service, among whom this superstition began to spring,
Discernendi ^ plebe vel cateris sumus doctrina, non vest, conversatione, non
habitu, mentis puritate non cultu. Nam si studere incipi amus novitati,
traditum nobis a Patribus ordinem calcabimus, ut lo^um supervacuis
superstitionibus faciamus. Ru^es ergo Fidelium mentes ad talia non debemus
inducere Decendi enim potius sunt quam illudendi. N^c imponandum est little
oculu, s^d mentibus insundendo praecepta sunt.
We are to be distinguished from the common sort by doctrine and not by
garment, by conversation, and not habit; by the purity of mind, not by
apparel. For if we study innovation, we tread that which our Fathers
delivered us under foot, to make way for idle ^uperstitions. Wherefore, the
weak minds of the Faithful must not be led to such things, they mst rather
be instructed then played withal. We must not blind their eyes, but help
their minds with wholesome precepts.

I know Marianus Victorius, in that Nepotian when he died, be queathed his
garment to Hierome, which he had used in the ministry of Christ, Hierom, ad
Heliod. de morte Nepotian. As also out of that forementioned place against the
Pelagians, thinks he has found their Albe, Pl^net, Camissa, Casula, and I
know not what. But N^potians garment was no other then what ^ath been showed,
only as he was a man hum^le* and of modest, and meanest attire in ordinary
life, so in matters of his Ministry, he was fine, neat, and magn^ficent;
[Solicitus si niteret Altar, si parietes absque inligine, si pavimenta tersa,
etc.] and t^erefore no doubt in that action arraying himself without any note
of p^ide after the best mann^r of the people, he might well b^queathe that
garment to Hierome, who had i^ been never so mean would have esteemed it for
the donours sak^. But observe, Nepotians ministering garment was non^ of the
Church goods, but provided at his own cost. It is objected also that
Stephanus ^ishop of Rome in Cyprians time, ordained peculiar ministering
garments, as it is recorded by Polyd. de Invent. lib. 6. c. 12. and by Issidor.
writing de Stephano. Unto which you may add Gratian if you will, de consecrat.
did. 1. Vestimenta Ecclesiae. But though Stephanus flourished before
Antichrist was hatched, yet he is too young to be a lawful Author of any such
garments.

Besides who sees not, by that alleged out of Caelestine 160. years at least
after Stephen, that decree of Stephen to be a mere forgerie? was it a Novel^ie
to bring in any such apparel in Caelestines time, and yet had prescription of
such antiquity? But the [Century writers] have discovered the forgerie by many
arguments, that I mervaile any man of learning should seek any strength from
such a rotten foundation.

Hierome is also alleged in Ezech. 44. Per qua discinius, non quotidianu and
quibustibet, and usu v^ta communis, poliutu vestibus nos ingredi debere
insancta sanctorum, sed nounda conscie^tia and mundis vestibus tener^ Domini
Sacram^nta.
By which we learn to enter the holy of holyes, not with commune and defiled
garments, but to hold the Sacraments in a clean Conscience and garments
unpolluted.

Where first he interprets the garments to be a clean conscience. And
secondly that he requires for the outward garments, is only they be clean
without any note of difference between the Ministers garment and the peoples.

So a little after, Divine Religion has one habit in the Ministry, and
another for ordinary use. Religio divine^, alterum habitum habet in Ministorio
terum in usu veraque communs.


To admit these words spoken not of the Priests in the Temple, but of
Christian Ministers, this [alter habitus] was a better garment for the time of
public duty, as Nepotian had, not any d^fferinge attire from that of the
assembly. Thus much for Hi^rome. Hac est dignitas vo^tra, ha^ stabilitas, hac
corona non quia tunicam indut^ candidissim^m per Ecclesiam ambulasis.


Chrysostom when he says, [This is your dignity, stability* crown, not that
you walk through the Church in a white coat. Hom. 83. in Mat. necessarily
requires the same interpretation. For this most white coat was no other then
the better sort of people did usually wear, as well in other Countries, as at
Rome, as has been showed by the Ambassadors of Rhodes, and the shipmen of
Egypt. Only the Bishops in humili^ie thought it too sumptuous for daily use,
and reserved it for the time of their public function.

And therefore Sisninius a Novatian Bishop; livinge in Constantinople at the
same time with Chrysostom, and clothinge himself not only in his Ministry,
but for his ordinary raiment, in white, was demanded by one, (...) etc. where
it is to be observed, Socrat. lib. 6.23.
It was an unwonted garment in ordinary use for a Bishop, no^ for other men:
and unwonted in ordinary use, not in divine use, in which the Bishop was
allowed without any grudge, such dignity of apparall as was then received by
men of best place.

That of Chrysostom hom. 6. ad popul. Antioch. is [palea.] I have troubled you
with many words, but the truth is so overswayed with prejudice, that to my
poor power I would disburden it a little if I can.

SECT. 25.26.27.28. Concerning the Defender his Reasons.
1. THe Def. his first reason (by the Rejoinder his interpretation) is, that by
our assertion, the Church shall loose a part of her Christian liberty: because
if she may not use human Ceremonies a^used unto Idolatry and superstition, she
may use none at all. Now 1. The Replier granted the conclusion, being
understood of human significant Ceremonies. And thereto the Rej. opposes
nothing, but that there is the same reason of all other Ceremonies; and that
one Did^clave does not grant this of sitting at the Lords Supper, though he
confess it to be a human significant Ceremony. But both these answers are
void of truth. For Circumstances of Order and Decency* which are sometime
called Ceremonies, and here understood, are neither mere human institutions,
nor unnecessarie (which is part of the quaestion) but commanded of God, as
often has been showed. Neither does Didoclave any where confess Sitting at
the Lords Supper, to be a human Ceremony. 2. It seems very strange to me,
that appointing and using of human significant unnecessarie Ceremonies,
notoriously known to have been, and be abused unto Idolatry, should be
fetched from Christian Liberty.

I have considered what is spoken of Christian liberty, in the Scripture, and
what I could find written of it by Divines: and therout observed much against
these Ceremonies (as is alleged in the sixth general Argument, which the
Rejoinder was not hasty to come unto, in eight or nine years) but nothing
either for their imposing, or their using.

The Rejoinder means by the Church (in England) the Convocation house; and by
Christian liberty, their licentiousness, in Abridging Gods people of that
liberty which Christ has left unto them. So that, as in some parts of
Germany, and Polonia, the Noble men stand mightily for the Liberty of their
Country; And yet when the course of things is well weighed, that liberty is
only license for them to oppress the common people, or Boores; whom they
keep under as slaves, or little better; whose goods they take from them upon
every slight praetence; whose lives (in some places) can scarce satisfy them
for the life of a stagge, if they shoot one, spoiling their corn, even so,
this Christian liberty is only for our Convocation-house to oppress the
Congregations of Christ, as they do.

2. The Defender his second reason, was such, as the Repl. could find no
conclusion in, but that somethings abused, may afterward be rightly used: which
he granted. The Rejoinder adds, that his reason did conclude this of some
human Ceremonies, from the Law of shadows. He said in deed, among other
instances, that a Man or Woman, legally unclean, might he legally cleansed or
purged. And can he conclude from Men and Women, to human unnecessarie
Ceremonies? He may as well conclude, that because in a fretting leprosy, the
leprous man's head may not be cut off, nor his body burned; therefore his
infected garments were not to be burnt, nor the hair of his head and beard
cut off.

The Replier also granted that Surplices might be turned into under garments
for poor people; and wooden Crosses given them for firing.

The Rejoinder answers 1. that this is no use of Ceremonies, as Ceremonies.
As if he himself did allway speak formally!

The sentence immediately goeing before, was of things abused: And so this
addition was of those things which are made Ceremonies. Yet if that be true,
which the Rejoinder affirmed page 570. that a Surplice, as a Ceremony, is in
the kind of a Garment, then it must needs follow, that this Ceremony may be
given to the poor for a garment.

And if he fly to Use as necessary to make a Ceremony, as he does in his
Definition of a Ceremony, it may be as well quaestioned, whether a Shirt be a
garment out of use when it is off a man's body? For a garment is a Ceremony,
by the Rejoinder his Definition. And so it may be quaestioned, whether any
Shirt, or other Garment was made, or washed, when no man had it on? His 2.
answer, that M. Parker calls them Devils, and jarring on the same stringe,
would fright men from burning of Idols, as he did in Germany, who when men
were burning of wooden Idols, bored a hole in one, into which he stopped some
gunpouder; so that the Idol being in the stove to burn, the gun-pouder brake
the stove together with the windows of the room, in pieces; and that was
imputed by some to the Idol, or Saint, and by others, to the Devil. But (says
the Rejoinder) from hence it follows, that th^re is a change of Law: because
the Jews might not convert the matter of Idols to their private use. And so
much we grant; urging only the aequitie of those Laws. Then (adds he) the
Abrigement has abused the World, in alleging those Laws, as binding Christians
now, as much as they did the Jews. But with this outcry no man will be
troubled, that notes how they are to be understood only according to their
quaestion, of human unnecessarie Ceremonies, as they are such. For the Second
Commandment does bind us as much as it did the Jews; and so the aequitie of
particular Laws, as they illustrate the contents of that Commandment, bind
us as much, though not in every other particular to so much, as they did the
Jews. The sum is; those laws bind us as much from all religious use of
human unnecessarie Ceremonies, used or abused in Idolatry, as they did the
Jews.

3. In the 27. Sect. the Replier could find no show of reason, beside mere
affirmations. The Rejoinder finds this Argument: If two other ways of
reforming Ceremonies, beside Abolition, may be used; then abolition is not the
only way. But two other ways, (namely changing or correcting) may be used.
Ergo.

To this show of reason, the answer is easy: 1. If those two other ways be
understood as partial and insufficient, then the Proposition is false: if as
sufficient by themselves, without abolition, then I deny absolutely the
Assumtion, as being a mere affirmation of that which is in quaestion, according
to the Repliers observation.

2. Either this is understood of all Ceremonies abused, or only of some? If of
all, our Reformation is to be blamed, which has used abolition without any
necessity. If of some only, the Defender ought to have told us, which they
are, or by what mark we may know them? And omitting this, he says neither
Argumentation, nor certain affirmation in this Section.

4. The last Reason is, because Popery and Popish Rites are not to be esteemed
of aequal abomination with Paganism, and Paganish Rites. The Rejoinder
brings it to this: that the Idolatry of Papists, and Pagans, considered in
themselves are not like. The Replier answered, that though this were true every
way (as it is not) yet in this they may agree, that both alike are to be
detested and abandoned. You speak monsters (answers the Rejoinder) because,
if they be not alike detestable, they are not alike to be detested: and
Abandoning has no degrees. But 1. The substance of this assertion was wont to
be accounted no Monster. For D. Fulke (Rejoinder to Bristow, page 288.) makes
open profession of it, not only in his own name, but of other Divines: This
we say; that Popish Images, although they be not the same that were the Images
of the Heathen, yet they are as abominable Idols, as theirs; and the worshipping
of them, as much to be abhorred of all true Christians, as the worshipping of
the Images of the Gentiles.

2. When the Replier spoke of like detestation, he did not mean to aequal the
balance unto a hair, or hal^e an Ace; but according to usual speech. Herbs
hot in the fourth degree, are said to be alike hot, though there may be found
some difference. Wilful disobedience is said to be as the sin of
Witchcraft; and stubbernesse as Idolatry, 1. Sam. 15.

Yet there may some difference of degree be found betwixt these sins.
Monsters therefore here was too excessive a word.

3. Abandoning I take to be all one with putting or casting away: and one thing
may be cast into the bottom of a ponde, when another is cast into the bottom
of the Sea. It has therefore degrees.

To the Repliers assertion, that we are by the Scriptures warned to fly as
well, and as far, from Popish, as from Paganish Idolatry, the Rejoinder
(with some litigation about Rev. 18.) consents: but adds that it is not
necessary to fly from every human (he should have added unnecessarie)
Ceremony, which either Papists or Pagans have Idolatrously abused. Now this is
the maine quaestion of this wholle chapter: and therefore not here to be
discussed. Only this: the Defender in this Section, founding himself upon a
disparitie betwixt Popish and Paganish Idolatry, seems to grant, that if
they were aequal, then we were to fly from the Ceremonies abused in Popish
Idolatry: and this grant the Rejoinder does not well to recall.

The Replier not being willing to spend time about the comparison betwixt
Popish, and Paganish Idolatry, referred the Defendant to the Abridgement, and
Mr. Parker. Hereupon the Rejoinder takes upon him to answer what is found in
them, about this comparison. In which discourse, because many things before
answered are repeated, to ease my self, and the Reader, of tedious labor, I
will only note the maine grounds of his answers, pertaining directly to that
comparison, and then set down some plain testimonies of our divines about it;
because he partly denies, and partly shifteth off Mr. Parkers quotations. His
principal ground of answer is, that the Papists do not sin against the
first Commandment, in worshipping a false God; but against the second only,
in worshipping the true God, in a fa^se manner. This he produces (page 618,)
as Doctor Ames his judgment: Gentes in Idolis creaturas celeb^nts, ^^dem se^e
modo, que Pontifici. S^c enim respondent, apud Aug in Psalm. 9^. Non colimus
lapidem, non mala Daemonia: Angelos quos dicitis i^sos and nos c^limus,
Virtutes Dei magni. Ministeria Dei magni. Et Maximus Madan^ensis; apud cunde^
Aug Ep. 43. Ecquidem unum esse Deum quis tam dement, tam mente captus, ut neget
esse certissimum? Hu^us nos virtutes, ^er mundanum opus diffusas, multis
vocabulu invocamus.
this he repeateth, page 624. and 630. But this is not so. For the wiser of the
Heathen, knew well, that there was bat one true God, Creator of all things, and
the ruder of the Papists, worship Creatures, more devoutly as divine objects,
then those Heathen were wont to do.

The case is plain, and plentifully confirmed by our Divines, in every dispute
against Popish Idolatry. Doctor Ames has not one word to the contrary: but
this he has for it, Bellar. Encrv. ^om. 2.238. The Gentiles worshipped the
creatures in Idols, after the same manner almost that the Papists do. For so
they answer upon August. in Psa^m. 96. We do not worship a stone nor dev^ls:
whom ye call Angels do we worship, the V^rtues of the great God, and his
Ministeries. And Maximus Madaurensis, in the same Aug. 43. ep. Certainly, who
is mad, or void of sense, that ^e will once doubt, whether there be more Gods
then one. Now we invocate the virtues of this one God, under many names,
diffused through the frame of the whole world.

Another ground of the Rejoynders is, that the Popish Idolatry may be, in some
respect as great a sin, but not simply so great Idolatry. page 622. etc. To
which I answer briefly, that there are such sins accompanying Popish
Idolatry, as make it as detestable, as if it were one simply. As for example;
the worst of the Heathens Idolatry was, that they sacrificed men unto their
Idols: and the Papists burning of so many godly Martyrs, for the maintenance
and promoting of their Idolatry, may be equalled thereto, in horror of sin.

The third ground which the Rejoinder builds on, is, that Achabs Baal was
worse then Aarons or Ieroboams calves, etc. page 629. About this, Calvin shall
answer, Hom. 1. de Fug. Idol. Quaemvis istis concedam, dissimilem diversamque
esse rationam Idololatria Papistarum, atque ejus qua apud veteres Gentiles
viguii, negare tamen non poterunt, Deum non minus severe prohibuisse cul^um in
Bethel impi^ constitutum, quam altas superstitiones omnes, quae caeteris in
locis institutae celebrataeque fuerunt. Ego vero statuo atque ass^mo, eos omnes
qui Deum ve^e metuunt, ac pie colu^t, eo majore at que aoerbiore odio debere
and prosequi and detestari Missam, quo apertius violat and prosanat sanctam
institutionem Jesus Christi, quam si non tam opposita contrariaque ei extitisset.
Although I yield, that the Idolatry of the Gentiles of old, and of the
Papists now, do differ, yet they cannot deny, that God did as severely forbid
that wicked worship of Bethel, as all other superstitions which were set up in
other places. But I say, that all they who truly fear and worship God, ought
with so much the more detestation, and bitter hatred be against the Mass (by
how much the more grossly it violates, and prophaneth the holy institution of
Christ) then if it had not been so Diademiterly contrary to it. Calvin seems
here to utter greater Monsters, then those were which the Replier even now was
accused for.

Unto Calvin I will add the sentences of some others, about the question:
because Mr. Parkers marginall quotations are not so easily found. Beza, Epist.
1. The Papists have turned one Sacrament into that horrible Idolatry which is
not heard of among the Gentiles, A^terum Sacramentum ^ontifi^aj^n horrend^m
ilam Idolomaniam, qua ne fando quidem inter Gentes auditur, transformarunt, and
ex mensa Domini mensam Damontorum conflarunt. Idem Beza, adv. Baldwin. fol. 4
ante finem. Quum ab Artolat indicessero, nulla est, sub Coelo, talis magiae and
Idolomaniae species, qualis est illa Crucis signatio and adoratio. Id^m Beza,
de Notu Ecclesiae, ciroa med^um: Non est ulla execrabilior, in orb terrarum,
Idolomavia, quam quae fuit, and est, in Crucis adoratione. Idem Beza, adv.
Ha^chiam: Coenae Domini mutata est (a Pontificijs) in (...), quo nunquam ullum
execrabilius, neque extitit, neque poterit postea excogetari page 4 ante finem.
and of ^he ta^le of the Lo^d have made it the Table of Devils. When I leave
Bread-worship, there is no such kind of Magical Idolatry under the Sun as
that of the Cr^sse. Again, there is no greater Idolatry in the world, then
that which was, and is committ^d in the wo^ship of the Cross. The Lords Supper
is changed of the Papists into that ab^mination, the like whereto there never
was, nor can ever be devised for execrablenesse.

Blessed Bradford, in his ep. to the Lady Vane, has these words sealed with
his blood: There was never thing upon the ^arth, so great, and so much an
adversary to Gods true service, to Christ's Death, Passion, Priesthood,
Sacrifice, and Kingdom; to the Ministry of Gods Word and Sacraments; to the
Church of God; to Repentance, Faith, Adoratio Papistarum, nixa fundamento
commentitia transubstantiationis, est Idololatria omnium qu^ unquam fuerunt
crassissima. Ora pro nobis sanctissima Dei Mappa. Quales obsecio, idololatriae
sunt istae Number quid simile apud Ethnicos exiflit?
and all true godliness of life, as the Mass. Doctor Whitakers, de Sacram.
page 582. Popish adoration built on the fiction of transubstantiation, is the
foulest of all Idolatry. These testimonies concern the Mass, and the Cross.
It were easy to add others, conc^rning diverse particulars: as Sadeel, ad.
Mon. Bur* Ar. 58. Pray for us most holy table-cloth or handkercheife of God
What Idolatry is this? was there ev^r the like among the Gentiles? But for
particulars, I refer the studious Reader, unto our Divines: and among them, in
this point, I rekon Doctor Iackson, in his Original of Unbelief, Sect. 4.
Cap. 22. etc. where the title is, Of the Identity, or Equivalency of
Superstition, in Rome Heathen, and Rome Christian, and cap. 38. he brings
pregnant Instances, as among other, of Vrbanus, the Patron of pleasant
Companions; Gutmanus, the Warden of pudding-makers; and of S. Christopher, and
S. George, men of the Painters or Heralds making; and yet adored as Gods. Nay
allows of Sr. David Linsey, denying any difference to be betwixt Heathenish
and Romish Idolatry. I will only add the words of Hospinian, de Orig. Templ.
page 84. Quod extenuant superstitiones Papisticas, prae Gentium Idosolatria, in
eo puoriliter, ne quid gravius dicam, agunt. Annon little Idolomania, a Papistis
mutatinomin, (...) est revocata?
That some go about to lessen the Idols of Papists in comparison of that which
was among the Heathens, is (that I say no more) most childishly done. Is not
their Idolatry plainly recalled, the names only changed?

Yet it shall not be a miss, to give some reason of that which our Divines
say. And this (for the present) is at hand: The Heathen gods (take them at the
worst) were works of cunning Artificers, made of silver, gold, or some
precious thing curiously wrought, sumptuously adorned, representing a Majesty.
But the Papists Massegod is made by every sacrificing Idiot, of a bready
substance, by uttering of a word, without form or beauty. The Heathen knew,
their Idols were not Gods: and the greatest estimation they had of them, was, a
certain Divinity might lodge in them. The Papists believe their bread (or
Host of starch) is very God, not by accidental residence of some Divinity in
it, but as Christ himself is God. The Heathen seat their Idols in Temples, and
consecrated places, to be adored. The Papists having lifted up their god, and
adored him, devour him. Will any man spoil (much less eat, hark said one,
how his bones cracked, when he swallowed him down) his god? says the Prophet,
Mal. 3.8. Upon such considerations Coster, a Jesuit, (Enchirid. cap. 8.)
confesses, that if the substance of bread remain in the Sacrament, then the
Idolatry of Papists is more intolerable, then the Egyptians was in worshipping
of an Ox, or a Crocodile.

This may suffize for the 28. Section: but that the Rej. will needs have us
take notice of some sharp phrazes, and sentences he passes upon us. To pass
by therefore his prescribing of Hellebore, for Mr. Parker (which in us he would
call skurrility, if it were spoken of a Prelate, though in all intellectuals,
and morals, much inferior to M. Parker) to omit (I say) this, and such like
single reproaches, he gathers a bundle together, page 628.

The first is, that we have wrought the faithful Servants of Christ, out of
the love and estimation of many. By Faithful servants of Christ, he must needs
mean Conformists, as they are Conformists; and that Generally: for if he
except any kind of them, they will cast upon him that imputation, which he
lays upon us: you say unto other men; stand a loofe off; we are more holy, or
more faithful then you, etc. Now 1. let any man consider, if it be any
faithfulness to Christ, to observe and urge those religious Ceremonies, which
he never commanded, but rather forbidden, as has been prooved? 2. Those which
are in other things faithful, we go not about to work out of the love and
estimation of others, but them out of the love and estimation of unfaithful
conformity. May not a man speak against Non residency, if some honest man be
come to it? But it becomes not the Rej. to speak of bringing Christ's
servants out of love and estimation with many; while he writes in defense of
those courses, which have brought thousands of them out of house and home, into
so extreme misery, as our Prelates could possibly bring any, and more then
they bring the servants of Antichrist into.

The second is, that we have brought the public prayers into contempt. Because
(forsooth) we would have public prayers free from those contemptible fashions
which are taken out of the Mass book.

Thirdly, we have brought the preaching of the Gospel, by any conformed
Ministers into disgrace. As if we did not rejoice in the preaching of the
Gospel, even by Friar Paul, or Fulgentius etc. at Venice!

Fourthly, we have brought the Sacrament to be of less esteem then the
gesture. Which is the proper fault of our Prelates, and those who deny the
Sacrament to all that cannot bring their consciences to kneeling, though Christ
has invited them to his Table.

Fifthly, we question, whether it be lawful for one to marry with one that
conformeth to the Laws. Now of this question I never heard any news, before
the Rej. proclaimed it. It may be, that some, observing how diverse godly women,
having given themselves in marriage to some Ministers, upon a great aestimation
of that calling, without making just difference of the persons, have warned
others to use more discretion. But this I am sure of, that all Subscribers, do
testify under their hands; that all who refuse to conform, may lawfully have
their Baines and Marriages forbidden: because it is provided in the
Service-booke, that none shall marry, except they communicate, whereto is
annexed kneeling, and that none shall either communicate, or marry, except
first they be Bishoped, or Confirmed.

Sixthly, we quaestion whether it be lawful to hear a conformable Minister, if
another may be heard; or safe to rely upon their Ministry? which quaestions
he seems to invent, and teach, rather then receive from us; except, he
means by relying, taking all for good that they say, or do.

Seventhly, we have appropriated the surnames of Christians, the title of
Sincere, the very name of the Church, the Brethren, the Godly, unto our selves.

From all which slanders we are so free, that I doubt not to say (according to
my conscience) that among those which live under the tyranny of the Pope, and
do not utterly separate from him, through ignorance, there be many Christians,
Sincere according to their knowledge, belonging to the true Catholic Church,
and so to be accounted our Godly Brethren. But on the contrary part, Our
Prelates, appropriating unto themselves the name of the Church of England,
really proclaim us (by their extreme hostile courses) to be far from the
account of their Christian Brethren. If some time some of us, call those among
the godly that consent with us, the Brethren, the Godly, etc. the Rejoinder
should not have excepted against it, at least in this roll of accusations, in
the first front whereof, he styleth and surnameth Conformists, the Faithful
Servants of Christ.

SECT. 29.30. Concerning our Confessions, and Practices.
IN the 29. Section, only Calvin, Martyr, and Zepperus, are brought in as
witnessing something against us. But their judgments have been so declared
before, that it would be a tedious repetition, to insist on them again.

In the 30. or last Section, a contradiction being soughtfor in vain, betwixt
our conclusi^ns, and our confessions and practices, the Replier thought it
sufficient to dispatch all briefly, in a few questions, to which the Rejoinder
answers; but so, as he brings little or nothing that requires a new
confutation.

The first question was about Temples, Bells, Tablecloths (objected by the
Defendant) whether they have such Idolatry put upon them by Papists, as the
Cross has? The Rejoinder answers 1. that if they have as much as the
Surplice, that will serve the turn. It would indeed, in part; though nor in
whole. But that cannot be prooved. His second answer is, that such a Cross as
ours is, was never abused at all in Popery. Which is a Metaphisicall conceit,
sufficiently before confuted. His third is, that Temples and Bells, were as
well abused. But the question was of such Idolatry. His fourth is, that the
white linen Altar cloth was as much abused as the Surplice.

But the quaestion was of the Cross. And 2. The Papists Altar-cloath,
differs much from the Table-cloath which we allow of.

2. The second was, if the Defender his own heart did not tell him, that there
is a civil use of the things forenamed; which cannot be imagined of the
Cross? The Rejoinder grants a civil use of Bells; th^ugh not of Churches, or
Communion table-cloathes: Adding, that there may be a civil use of some Crosses,
though not of Transient Grosses (such as ours) and also of Wafers. But he
attended neither to those words of the Replier: If his own heart do not tell
him; nor to those: such things. For his bringing-in first of terms, which
involve the use together with the things, and that use also immedia^, which is
but mediat, in Churches, and Communion table clothes; with his contrary
changing of such Crosses as ours, into some Crosses, and Wafer-Gods into
Waf^r-seales for letters, declare both. Concerning the difference, enough has
been said in the first part of this Fresh-suit, in the head of Ceremonies.

3. The third was, what Superstition was in the mere signification, given by
Durandus unto Bells, and Bell-ropes, which is not to be found in our Cross and
Surplice? The Rejoinder here answers nothing; but only notes many more
superstitious significations to have been then conceited, of diverse things,
and also of Bells, then we have in our Ceremonies. But the quaestion was only
of the weight, not the number of superstitious significations.

4. The 4. was, whether the Pagans use of Bay Leaves (objected by the Defender)
about 1000. years past, does cast such a reflection upon our civil use of
Bayleaves, as Popish Superstition does upon our Ceremonies? The Rejoinder his
answer consists only in words; save that he aequalleth the Countries (of
Papists) to those of ancient unknowen Heathens; the time (before or after
Baptism) unto a 1000. years distance; the place (crown of the head and
forehead) unto farre-removed and unknowen Lands. Here again he neglected
that item of the Repliers: If his own heart does not tell him?

5. The fifth was, what sense the Defender had, to find fault with us, for not
altering the situation of Churches? Nay (says the Rejoinder) what face have
you, to say, that he did find fault with you, for not doing it? Surely the
plain country face, of taking the Defend. his words, as they stand in your
Rejoinder, page 645. Nor do you alter the Situation of your Churches, and
Chauncels toward the East.

6. The 6. was, if it be all one, to call a Ship, by the name of Castor and
Pollux (Act. 28.11.) and to use a religious Ceremony, in Gods worship, taken
from those Idols? No, says the Rejoinder. Which is enough to show the vanity
of the Defender in comparing the names of Wensday, Thursday, Friday, unto
Ceremonies taken from Popery.

7. The 7. was, whether it be one thing, to change Coapes into Cushions, and
to use a Masse-vestiment, in Gods worship? The Rejoinder says nothing worth
the repeating.

8. The last quaestion was, if it be not a kind of slander, to say, that the
Church of Geneva imposes a round Wafer-cake, like the Papists, to be used in
the Lords Supper. And if it be not a wide leap, to bring in the practice of
Geneva, for an instance of the Nonconformists practice, in England? The
Rejoinder answers 1. Yes, it is a slander to impute unto Geneva a round
Wafer-cake, like the Papists: but adds, that the Defender did not so. If he
does not, what mean those words of his: allbeit the Church of Geneva is not
ignorant, what the round Wafer among the Papists did signify? Or what
consequence made the Defender from Genevas Wafer-cake, to Ceremonies abused
unto Idolatry, if the Geneva Wafer-cake be not like unto the Papists?

In the second place, the Rejoinder confesses, that the bread used at Geneva,
is a large square Cake, which is broken in sundry parcels, unto the
Communicants: and yet he adds, that it is a Wafer-Cake, as thin, as thin may
be. Where it is something, that he confesses their bread not to be like the
Papists, neither in extensive quantity, nor yet in Form and Figure. But yet I
am persuaded, he wrongeth that Church, in making their Cakes as thin as the
Papists Host. For the Papists Host is a starchie or scummie crust, distinct
from cibarius panis, bread fitting for food, by our Divines censure of it: And
it is not credible, that the Church of Geneva should reteyne such a gross
corruption. But (says the Rejoinder) you allow their Ceremony of Wafer-bread.
Nothing less. We never read, nor heard from them, that they made any Wafer
fashion a Religious significant Ceremony. This Wafer was first baked in
England. And if they did, they are old enough, let them answer for themselves.

But (adds he) even unleavened bread has been abused. Neither allow we of
any Ceremonious leaving out of leaven: nor can it be proved of the Geneva
Church. As for that which was added by the Replier, of custom heerin
praevayling against Farells, Calvin's, and Virets advise; it is confessed by the
Rejoinder that these Divines had brought-in a custom of using common bread;
but after some knaves working upon the relics of the former custom, brought
in unleavened bread: which is enough for to confirm that which the Replier
spoke (as the Rejoinder says) at random.

To the second part of the quaestion: whether it be nor a wide leap, to bring
in the Practice of Geneva, for an Instance of the Non-Conformists practice in
England? The Rejoinder answers, that it is an abuse, unruly lightness,
eagerness after squibs, and scorns, which wrought the Replier out of his
geares: All this it pleases him to lay upon this one phrase ( a wide leap) a
little after he had commended Hellebore unto M. Parker, with many such Drugges
unto others. And what is the cause? Forsooth, because this Geneva Wafer-cake
was given as an instance of our Confessions, and not of our Practice. But this
is as wide, as if it had been confessed to belong to our Practice. For no such
Confession of ours can be showed. It had been fitting to object nothing unto us
as Confessed, but that which we have either in practice, or in writing allowed.
Neither in deed was it the Defender his meaning to make all the rest of his
instances our Practices, and this only our Confession: but he stumbled upon
this in the end, as a thing that must have some place among his objections;
because it had been objected by others: and the Rejoinder having begun his
book with the accusation of Scurrilitie, finding him to be taken, had no other
way, but with this show of a distinction, to vente some salt phrases, like unto
that, Vt ultima primis consentirent. 1. e. That both ends might agree.

A POSTSCRIPT.
SOme Reader may inquire whence came this new writing about Ceremonies? And he
may please to be informed, that after the Abrigement was printed, a great
silence followed in England, about these matters (as if enough had been said on
both sides) until D. Morton, then B. of Chester, not thinking it honest, to
silence Ministers, for Ceremonies, before some answer was given unto their
reasons they stood upon) undertook with great confidence to give a full Answer
to all which was objected.

This answer being printed, was diverse years neglected, as containing little or
nothing that had not formerly been confuted.

But afterward (when silence was interpreted in such sense, as if it had been a
yielding cons^nt) it was by some thought fitting, that a brief Reply should be
opposed.

This the Bishop thought not worthy of his own Rejoinder; but was contented to
put it off unto D. Burges, as a friend to him, engaged in the cause, and
wanting neither will, nor wit, nor words, nor credit.

And he went about it, with all his might. But finding more rubbes in the way,
then he had thought of, after he had spent about nine years, in Rejoyning to
that which was written in some four we^kes, by Special Command (procured he
knows by whom) was compelled to thrust forth his imperfect wo^ke, full of
such passionate stuff, as (it may be) upon more deliberation, he himself would
have recalled.

Upon these outcries, it was necessary to speakagaine for a good cause, lest
diffamation should praevayl against it.

But what good (will some say) can be exspected from this writing, when the
cause appears d^sperat^^ Surely little or none for the public: Because in our
Bishops courses, Will, and Power, have jus^led out Reason.

But yet Gods word is not bound. And if we must needs be oppressed by them, is
it not worth a little ink and paper, to demonstrate, that it is in a good cause?

By this means, our consciences are justified; our afflictions made more
tolerable; our oppressors though more angered, yet must of necessity be less
insulting; and our names shall suffer less, though our bodies and outward
estate endure more: and Posterity shall not say, that (for our own ease) we
betrayed the cause, by leaving it more praejudiced to them, then we receyved it
from our Forefathers.

FINIS.
AN ADDITION Of the two last reasons of the former reply, unto which, no answer
has, as yet, been rejoyned.

THE REPLYER Being not only willing, but desirous, (for the manifestation of
the truth) that the Reioyner, should try his strength to the utmost.

CHAP. V.
Sect. I. ad X.
THe Authors of the Abridgment framed a strong Argument against our Ceremonies
from the rules of Ceremonies prescribed in the Word, P. 43. etc. with this
Argument when the Defendant was not able to grappell, as it stood in the parts
combined, he thought good to sever some parcels of it, and try what he could
say to them apart. Thus out of this one Argument he has taken that which he
calls our first: and out of the same he has made up this fifth: and yet he
has quite le^t out a great part of the sinews wherewith that one reason is
knit together in the Abridgement.

The argument is taken from the scandal or offense which the imposing and
using of these ceremonies do bring unto diverse sorts of men.

The Defendant here makes great flourishing in nine whole Sections, defining,
deviding, and subdividing a scandal, as if he would make all clear before
him: but at the end of all this preparation, he makes no application of these
Rules unto the matter in hand at all: but only, tells his Reader, Page 154.
That these divisions and subdivisions will expedite all difficulties, so that
out of them he may collect the true and false sense of Scriptures alleged. It
were sufficient therefore either to deny this power to be in his divisions: or
else to set down as many other subdivisions of scandal (which were easy to
do) and then tell him that these will expedite the controversy, and that from
them he may collect the errors of his answer. But I will notwithstanding
briefly show my opinion concerning some of these d^ctates.

The definition which he only allows of as accurate is* that a s^andall is a
wilful offense against Christians, in provoking of them unto any damnable
error or sin, by any sensi^le external means: Sect. 1. Wherein
notwithstanding many faults may be found. For 1. every scandal is not wilful,
except the word be taken more largely then use of speech will allow. 2. Every
scandal is not against Christians. 3. A scandal is not only by provoking to
sin, but also in hindering from good. 4. What does he mean to put in the word
damnable? the occasioning of any sin, suffices to make up a scandal.

Among his subdivisions, the first thing I except against is, Section 5. where
he distinguishes so betwixt persons and causes, either determined or
undetermined, that in matters determined by the Church (as he teaches)
obedience is to be given without respect of scandal: and only in matters
undetermined there is a charitab^e consideration to be had of other men's
consciences. This is a new and a tickle point of Divinity, touching the
tenderest part of our spirits, even our consciences, and other men's also. It
ought therefore either not to have been propounded, or else to be well
confirmed either with testimonies, or with reasons drawn out of Scripture. But
alas the Def. thrusts it upon us without any such warrant. The peace of the
Church (says he) is to be preferred before the grievance, i. e. scandal of
any sort of men. As if the peace of the Church did not more consist in avoiding
of scandalls, then in observing of human Ceremonies: it is not the peace of
God which is broken by a charitable care of avoiding offenses, but by rushing
into them.

A scandal in the nature of it is spiritual murder. Now suppose a Superior
should command a thing in it self indifferent, whereupon murder were like to
follow, as to run a horse, or a cart, in a certain way, at a certain time,
when it may be unwitting to the commander, little children were playing in the
way, would any man's conscience serve him to do it?

Avoiding of scandal is a maine duty of charity. May Superiors at their
pleasure appoint how far I shall show my charity toward my brothers soul?
Then surely an infe^iour earthly court may cross the determinations of the
high Court of Heaven.

The superiors have no power given them for destruction, but only for
aedification. If therefore they command scandalls, they go beyond their
commission: neither are we tied therein to do as they bid, but as they should
bid.

If determination by superiors were sufficient to take away the sin of a
scandal. Then they do very ill that they do not (so far as is possible)
determine all things indifferent, that so no danger may be left in giving of
offense by the use of them. Then the Church of Rome is to be praised in that
she has determined of so many indifferents; then Paul with the other Apostles
might have spared a great deal of labor in admonishing the Churches how they
should avoid offenses about some indifferent things. A far shorter way had
been either to determine the matter finally, or else to have given order that
the Churches should among themselves determine it at home.

But say that the Archbishop of Corinth (for now I suppose such a one) had
called his Convocation, and with consent of his Clergy had determined that men
might, and for testifying of liberty should, at a certain time eat of such and
such meats which men formerly doubted of: would not yet the Apostle have given
the same direction he did? would not good Christians still have had care of
their brothers consciences? Can the determination of a superior be a
sufficient plea at the bar of Gods judgment seat, for a man that by virtue
or force thereof alone, has done any action that his conscience tells him
will scandalize his brother?

Lastly, I would feign know whether those superiors do not give a great
scandal, which take upon them determinately to impose unnecessary rites which
they know many good men will be scandalized by?

The second notorious flaw which I find in the Defendant his subdivisions, is
sect. 9. where he grants that much indulgence indeed is to be used in things
indifferent toward weak persons, whose infirmity proceeds only from simple
ignorance: but that only till such time as the doctrine concerning such things
have been sufficiently declared: because a scandal does always presuppose a
mere weakness for want of due means of knowledge. For 1. Paul had
sufficiently declared that it was lawful for him to take wages, yet he would
not, 1. Cor. 9. he had given sufficient reasons for the lawfulness of eating
all kind of meats, yet he abstained, and so counseled others, for fear of
scandal, Romans 14. 1. Cor. 9.2. There can be no certain set time for all sorts
of men when they are sufficiently taught. 3. Who is this Def. that he dare
judge so many of his fellow servants, that in such indifferencies as our
ceremonies are held to be, they take offense not upon weakness, but upon
presumption? 4. What authority have our Prelates to obtrude unnecessary
Ceremonies upon the Church, which must be declared before they can be used? Is
it fit that the people should be troubled with the declaration of men's
inventions, when they are hardly brought to hear willingly the maine things of
the Gospel? 5. Is it not more agreeable to the wisdom of God, Exo. 21.33. to
fill up the pit, then to set one by for to warn the passengers they fall not
into it? 6. There was never yet sufficient declaration of this doctrine of
Ceremonies throughout England. In many places there is no preaching at all.
Many preach so, that they declare nothing almost to the people but their own
folly. Many are ashamed, or at least unwilling to declare unto the people men's
devices. Many declare them so corruptly that the scandal thereby is not
removed but increased. And among those that go about with some good mind to
declare this kind of doctrine, there is almost as great variety of declarations
as there is of declarers: while some will have them significant some not: some
say they are good and profitable to edification, and others condemning them as
altogether unfitt, declare them to be tolerable for avoiding of a greater
mischief: Some will have them only civil, and others Ecclesiastical: some
excuse all but the cross, and some extol the cross above all. Are not such
declarations (think you) likely to inform well the consciences of poor men
who doubt more whom they should take for a good D^clarer, then they did at the
first of the things themselves?

SECT. X.
AMong the instances of scandal arising from the Ceremonies, that which in the
Abridgement has the third place is set first by the Def. viz. that the
superstitious Papist will be hardened in the liking of his abominable Religion,
from which he sees we borrow our ceremonies, and increase in his hope of the
full restoring of it again. To this the Def. answers, that our rites are not
the ceremonies of Papists, because they are purged from superstition. But 1.
that they are not purged from all superstition has sufficiently been declared
before. 2. This plea of transubstantiating of Ceremonies by the breath of our
Convocation, is a mere shift, contrary not only to the language of all our
Divines, and to that which every man's senses do tell him, but also to the
public profession of the Church of England, in the preface to our
service book, as it is cited by him, page 127. For there we are told, 1. that
an abatement is made of the exc^sse of Popish Ceremonies: All therefore are not
abolished, but some remain. And which be they, if these in quaestion be not?
2. That some of the old Ceremonies do remain. What sense can be given of
these words, if our Ceremonies be not the same with those which were of old
among the Papists? if it were meant of old ceremonies not used among the
Papists, then they do not remain, nor are retained, but restored. 3. That
none are devised anew: therefore they must needs be taken from the Papists, or
from the Fathers: but of the Fathers surplice or kneeling at the communion, no
instance can be given: and as for the cross, the Def. himself will not
defend, I think, all that use which the Fathers putt it to. 3. The Papists
own words do sufficiently manifest how they are hardened by the imposition
and use of our ceremonies. For as it is showed in the Abridgement p. 25. they
seek to justifye their superstition by this, that we have borrowed our
ceremonies from them. And some of them thence conclude (as there is showed)
that our Governors like well of their superstition Beside Gretser, a
principal Jesuit says, that in these ceremonies our Ministers are as Apes of
Popish Priests, Apol. pro Gregor. 7. page 8. and in his defense, tom. 2. lib.
4. cap. 16. says, that our Convocation house in imposing these Ceremonies, do
cross the judgment of our best Divines. Lastly, the respect of that Popish
superstition wherewith our people were then generally infected, was the chief,
if not the only cause why these ceremonies were retained by our first
Reformers. See more of this in M. Parker, p. 2. c. 6. sect. 10.

SECT. XI.
THe second inst^nce is, that the profane will draw many argum^nt^ hence to
b^^sse himself in his contempt of all Rel^g^on. The Defen. a^keth, from
whence? I answer, from hence: 1. that Religious rites are invented by men, and
a^pointed to be used in Gods wo^ship, even after the same manner that Gods
Ordinances are, or at least were of old: 2. That trifles are urged, to the
increasing of contention: 3. that many place such holiness in these things which
they know to be men's devises: 4. that other cer^monies are cried down, as if
they were against Religion, which yet are every way as good as these: 5. that
religious men are more molested for th^se toys, then they are for their
profaneness.

SECT. XII.
THe third instance of scandal is in weak brethren, who will be drawn to
yield unto the ceremonies against their consciences, or else doubtingly: and
some also will grow to dislike some Ministers for these things, and so be
hindered from profiting by their ministry. To this the Def. answers in many
words: but the sum of all he says is, that these are not weak brethren,
because they have been diligently catechized by Non-conformists. But 1. the
Corinthians no doubt were diligently catechized: and yet there were many weak
among them. 2. The Def. I hope takes order (or else he may be ashamed) that
all his Diocese be diligently catechized; yet I think he will not say but
there are many weak souls in that circuit: 3. The Catechisers he speaks of
have had enough to do, to teach the people the maine points of Religion, as
for instructing them concerning the lawfulness of human ceremonies, they
left that to those that impose them, or to their servants: 4. After long
teaching and sufficient knowledge, there may be still a weakness in regard of
some things, through many circumstances required unto strength, beside bare
knowledge. Lastly, we confess, that (upon supposition that the Def. his
doctrine be found in these points) we are yet weak in these points, as we are
also in some other, wherein our adversaries are so strong, that they can bear
many Churches and such like things, upon their shoulders, without feeling any
burden of them, which we cannot. See M. Park. cap. 6. sect. 18.

SECT. XIII.
THe fourth instance is thus set down in the Abridgement, page 50. As there
is danger in the use of these ceremonies in all Congregations, so especially if
they shall be broug^t back again unto those, where they have been long out
of use, In this case Calvin, Brentius, Bucer, Hemingius, Beza, Grinaeus and
other great Divines esteem them wicked and unlawful.

To all this the Def. gives no answer: but only takes occasion to make a
frothy comparison betwixt the laws and power of particular Congregations, and
the whole Convocation house. Which because it neither pertains to the present
purpose, nor contains any thing of moment, I leave as I found: though it may
be easily proved, that many particular Congregations can tell better what is
fitting for their edification in some things, then all our National
Convocation. Nay, I dare boldly say, there is no Town of note in all England,
but twelve men may be chosen out of, which would find out Canons more to the
edification of all the Congregations in England, then those are, which B.
Bancro^t with his Clergy, concluded.

SECT. XIIII.
A Fifth instance, or rather an enlargement of the former is, in respect of the
Ministers who have formerly refused the ceremonies, for whereas the Minister is
bound to lead his people forward unto perfection, and to provide by all good
means, that his ministry be not despised: by this means he shall draw them
back again unto the liking of superstition: or at least not to dislike it so
much as they have done, and give them evident occasion to b^ame his Ministry,
and to call in quaestion the truth of all his doctrine.

Here the Defen. comes upon them with open mouth, avouching peremptorily,
that this is a false, presumptuous, irreligious, partial, and pernicious
pretense: and all this he will prove. If he can, we shall the easilyer bear
these great words. But why is it false? forsooth, because most of the
Non-conformists have once subscribed: the contradicting of which subscription
is no less a matter of discredit then returning unto conformity. What kind of
proof is this? because they were subject to another discredit, therefore this
is no discredit. Beside it does not appear, nor is likely that most of these
Ministers did ever absolutely subscribe: neither is it likely; because it is
well known how easy and how ordinary it was in Queen Elizabeth's days, to
enter into the Ministry without passing under that gallows. If the most had,
yet how would this prove it a false pretense in the rest? If all had done so,
yet this was no act of their Ministry, nor known it may be to their people,
and therefore the crossing of it did not so directly tend to the discrediting of
their Ministry, as the crossing of their public doctrine. Lastly, that which
is done before a man be settled in the Ministry at one time, without any great
deliberation, is not of such note as that which a man has long professed and
persuaded by reasons taken from the word of God. By all this it appears, that
this first accusation of Ialshood was rather an adventure as the Def. himself
calls it, then a grounded assertion.

He did but adventure neither to call the same plea pr^sumptuous. For he can
find no other reason to bear up this charge withal then, that they seem to
arrogate to themselves a pre^ogative proper to the Apostles. How can this be I
wonder, seeing they follow herein the direction of the Apostle himself, Tit.
2.15. Let no man despise thee. What this prerogative is, he does not plainly
tell us: but compriseth it in two places of Scripture, 1. Cor. 15. Gal. 2.18.
the first whereof is nothing at all to the purpose. For the Apostle does not
say as the Def. makes him, If we be found false witnesses, then is your faith
in vain: but if Christ be not risen; then are we false witnesses, and your
faith is vain: Which also any preacher of the Gospel may say without falsehood
or presumption to his people. The second place, If I bui^d again that which I
have destroyed, I make my self a prevaricator, is applyable to any Minister
that has taught the truth against Popish superstition. This very doctrine M.
Perkins gathers out of the words. Proculcavimus sup^rstitionem Papisticam
etc. I hope the Def. does not think he may build up any superstition, and not
be accounted therefore a prevaricator: if he do; or though he do not, let him
consider where the presumption lies.

But why irreligious? because it is persisting in an error, for the
preservation of their own credit. But 1. who taught the Def. to make that
which is in quaestion the ground of an accusation in dispute. First, let him
prove that it is an error, before he take it so for granted, that upon that
ground he will challenge men's reasons as irreligious. 2. It is not their
credit, but the credit of their Ministry which they speak of. 3. Is it such
an irreligious thing, to desire that certain ceremonies may not be imposed
upon them, lest their Ministry be by that means prejudiced?

Why partial? because men should rather yield to confo^mitie for the credit of
the Church: i. e. for the credit of the Convocation house. Alas, the credit
which a great part of that generation does seek for, is that they may rejoice
in our flesh. But suppose they meant sincerely: would the Def, have men
discredit and prejudice their Ministry, to bring some credit unto other men's
decrees? Or does the forbearing of some ceremonies bring such discredit to the
Authorizers of them? surely then they are more for the honor of mortal men,
then for the honor of God. For Gods honor and worship is no ways prejud^ced
by their absence.

The last charge is pernicious. And here many words are used to give
countenance unto that one. The maine ground is, Woe to me if I preach not the
Gospel; and Simon love thou me? then feed my sheep. Whereupon he gathers,
that it is a pernicious thing for a Minister to putt himself unto silence. But
1. what is this to the quaestion of di^crediting ones Ministry? 2. Although we
were most worthy to have these remembrances out of Scripture rubbed upon us yet
the Prelates are altogether unworthy and unfitt to do it. Let any man conceive
with himself B. Bancroft, or any other in the end of the Convocation, after
all the Canons were concluded, coming forth as Prolocutor, and speaking thus
to the Ministers assembled together before him. Men and brethren, the reverend
fathers of this Convocation, as they always meditate on the law of God, and
every part of it, both day and night: so especially do they lay to heart those
passages of holy Writ which properly concern their office: as woe unto me if I
preach not the Gospel: and Simon love thou me? feed my sheep. Out of th^se
considerations, being carried with a fervent zeal both of preaching themselves
in their several places, and also of procuring more faithful Preachers, and
more fruitful preaching throughout the land, they have ^ver and above the
institutions of Christ, appointed certain ceremonies strictly to be observed
of every Minister: so that whosoever shall hereafter upon any pretense refuse
to observe the same, they shall be esteemed factious, sc^ismaticall,
disorderly, exo^bitant men, and for that cause by their or^inary suspended and
deprived. Now for the prevent^ng of such a mischief^ your tender mother would
have you to understand by my mouth, that if any man be thrust out of the
Ministry for not yeeld^ng to these c^nstitutions, howsoev^r they may seem
un^o him such as the Church cannot lawfully appo^nt, nor he observe, yet is he
author of his own silencing: and therefore you must all be exhorted to
consider w^ll of those parcels of Scripture which have so much prevailed with
your careful mother. Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel: Simon love thou
me? feed my sheep.

Would not he that heard such a speech as this from a Prelate be forced to call
for a basin? and after he had recovered himself he might well give answer in
these words. I hear the word of a deceitful tongue. Behold thou art called a
Bishop and gl^riest in that title: thou perswadest t^y self, thou art a chief
guide and father of the Church, thou therefore that teach another, teach
thou not thy self? Thou that say it is a woeful thing not to preach the
Gospel, do thou neither preach Christ faithfully, nor suffer those that
would? Dare thou by thine own authori^y, and for t^ine own pleasure, hinder
so many able men from preaching? thou that professest the flock must be fed,
do thou thrust o^t feeders, and keep in starvers? Therefore thou art
inexcusable, O Prelat, whosoever thou art, that condemnest another for that
whereof thou art both beginning and ending.

Thirdly, the Apostles woe, 1. Cor. 9. belongs to negligent, slothful, and
careless ministers properly, such as our Prelates know where to find enough,
who yet neither feel nor fear that woe from the Bishops which many faithful
preachers are wrapped-in from time to time.

Fourthly, the Apostle does not pronounce any woe for not preaching, where
imprisonment does hinder. Now he whose conscience is against the ceremonies,
or doubts of them, is spiritually imprisoned, so that he cannot by using of
them, make his way to the pulpit.

Fifthly, it is a mere jest, though a bitter one, to say, that we leave our
ministeries: when we do all that our consciences will suffer us to do, for
the holding of our places: and when we have done all that, depart against our
wills with sorrow. Non discedit a statione, qui cedit invitus. See M. Parker,
p. 1. c. 4. s. 14.

But the Defendant undertaketh to prove, that the cause of silencing is not in
the Bishops that suspend and deprive us, but in our selves. He is as it
seems, a great adventurer: For he comes forth upon this piece of service
with flying colors: Know you well what you s^y (says he) when you lay the
cause of your silencing upon the Bishops? Yes surely, very well. For a cause is
that which brings force or virtue to the being of another thing.

Now the first virtue (or rather vice) which tends to silencing of Ministers
in this case, is in the Bishops canons: they therefore are the first cause. The
second virtue is in the Bishops and their officers, which are executioners of
those unconscionable canons: they therefore are the secondarie cause.
Nonconformity has no virtue in it of it own nature, nor by Gods ordinance,
to bring forth such an effect as the silencing of Gods Ministers is: though it
be made an occasion by the perverseness of our Prelates. I know well what I
say: and will make it good against the Defendants vain pretenses. The case
stands thus (says he) Titus (it had been more proper to say Diotrephes) the
Bishop does deprive Titius a factious and schismatic minister, that he may
place Sempronius a peaceable and discreet man, in his stead. In this
proceeding, the intendement of Titus is not absolutely to deprive Titius, as he
is a Minister, but as he was factious: yet so only respectively, that Titius
being deprived, he may constitute Sempronius: for the charge of a Bishop is not
determinate to appoint precisely this min^ster: but indefinite, to ordain a
minister, so that the course of Gods plow is still preserved and continued. But
as for Titius, who will rather be silenced then conform, it is evident, that
the cause of his silencing being his own refractarinesse, which is only
personal and proper to himself, and yet has no faculty in himself to
appoint or admit of a successor: he may be said to have properly caused his own
suspension and deprivation.

This case needs no long demurring on: for there is not one sentence in all
the length of it, which does not smell, without any uncasing, 1. are all those
factious and schismatic men, that refuse to conform? was Hooper such a kind
of man? was Peter Martyr, and M. Perkins such, when one at Oxford, and the
other at Cambridge, refused to wear the Surplice? was Mr. Goodman, Mr.
Deering, Mr. More, Mr. Rogers, and such like heavenly men, the lights and glory
of our churches, were all these factious and schismatic? In the presence of
God it is well known they were not. But our Prelates have this prerogative,
they may dubb whom they please factious and schismatic, and after that,
there is no redemption, they must be such, be they otherwise never so full of
all grace.

2. Are all peaceable discreet men, which are placed in the deprived ministers
stead? For the best of them, they are still as great eye-sores to our Bishops
almost as the other: because they reprove a great deal of Episcopal
darkness, by their practices. For the rest, the congregations over whom they
are set, cannot find it, the voice of all the country is otherwise for many
of them; yet according to the Prelates measure, who meat (as it seems) the
virtues and vices of a minister by certain ceremonies of their own imposing,
it cannot be denied, but the most of them are very peaceable and discreet: Even
so as many of the Bishops themselves were known to be before they were Bishops,
and show themselves to be still: for, Episcopatus plures accepit, quam fecit
bonos.

3. What sense can this have, The Bishop depriveth Titius respectively, that he
may constitute Sempronius? Does he know beforehand whom he shall constitute?
then there is gross legerdemaine, betwixt him, and that Sempronius. For with
what conscience can one seek and the other assign the place of him that is in
possession? This is but some time in those benefices which are fatter, and
whose patrons are more foolish. Ordinarily. the vilest minister that is to be
found, may succeed in the place of him that is deprived, for ought the Bishop
knows, or for ought he can do, except he will endure a quare impedit, which
in case of moral unworthiness, has scarce been ever heard of.

4. The charge which he says our Bishops have of appointing Ministers, I
wonder from whence they have it, or by what conveyance. They say that they
themselves are the proper pastors of all the parishes in their Diocese. It is
well, if they have an ubiquitary faculty, and will, to perform the office of
pastors to so great a people: but who made them such? Christ and his Apostles
never knew of ordinary pastors, having charge of so many Churches. But suppose
they did, by whom does Christ call one of our Bishops? By the Kings
congedelier, the Chapiters nominall election, or by the Archbishops
consecration? There is none of these that can bear the trial of Scripture,
nor of the Primitive Churches example?

5. Is the Bishops power of appointing a minister no ways determinate to this
or that minister? then it seems his mere will determines of the particular
person, without any just reason. For if there be certain causes or reasons
which the Bishop is bound to follow in designing of this or that minister,
rather then another, then is the Bishop determinate. The Council of Nice it
self determined the authority even of Patriarchs in this case: viz. that the
Elders should first nominate fit men (...): secondly, that the people should
elect or choose out of that number, per (...): and thirdly, that the Bishop
should confirm the elected (...). Socrat. l. x. p. 177. What exorbitant power
is this then which our Bishops do now-a-dayes challenge unto themselves? All
Classical Divines do consent to that which Iunius sets down, Conc. 5. l.
2. c. 6. n. 73. that no Bishop can send or appoint a Minister, sine certa ac
justa ecclesiae postulatione, without the certain forechoyce of the Church: Id
enim esset obtrudere, non mittere, for that were to obtrude him, not to send
him.

6. How is the course of Gods plow preserved, when for the most part the
succeeding Minister is thrust upon the people against their wills, and so
pernicious contentions arise, of which the Bishop is cause procreant and
conservant, by depriving the people of their minister, and obtruding his own
minister upon them, and upholding him in all those courses whereby he grieveth
the poor people.

7. As the Minister has no faculty in himself to appoint a successor, so has
not the Bishop neither of himself, and by himself.

Thus much for the Defendant his case. Whereas he adds, that Beza and Mr.
Cartwright determined with him in case of the Surplice. I answer 1. they did
not so for the cross. 2. they did not so for subscription to either. 3. they
did not so but by way of toleration, requiring also that men did speak against
the imposing of the Surplice. 4. Beza was not thoroughly acquainted with the
state of our Church. Mr. Cartwright (as I have been certainly informed by his
own son) recalled that passage of his book, and desired that his revoking
of it might be made known.

I thought good, overseeing the Press, to confirm the Authors report, by a
more particular relation which I have received from a person of good credit,
set down in writ as follows.
MR. Cartwright being beyond the seas, in printing the rest of his 2. Reply,
werein that indulgence is, sent to the Ministers of England who sought
reformation with him, for their opinion of the use of the Surplice in case of
deprivation: 22. of whom met therabout: of whom 19 jointly agreed that it was
simply unlawful in any case, but the other three said otherwise; wherefore it
was agreed by all, that each part should write their opinion, and their reasons
to him, which they did: but the letter of the nineteen miscarried, and that of
the other three was delivered, which he taking as the letter of the whole,
supposed their joint consent had been, that the loss of the ministry altered
the case of the unlawfulness, and so that they were all against him; whereupon
be mistrusting his own judgment, and being much perplexed thereabout,
suffered himself to be swayed unto what is there written: but afterward
understanding the right, he was much more perplexed; yea (as he said) more
then ever he was, in that to the great prejudice of the truth, he had suffered
his conscience to be so defiled* which was forbidden, 1. Cor. 8.7. which he
bartily sorrowed to many, professing that if he again put penn to paper about
that subject, he would clear the cause, and blame himself, praying them to
signify the same freely in the mean time, the which they did, so that it ever
since has been current among all his friends, and constantly affirmed by them
to all on due occasions, and particularly affirmed to M. Sprint by a Gentleman
in the presence of one Nobleman, two Gentlemen, 27. Ministers, and many
professors, in his course, in the scanning his book then about to be printed
diverse years before it was printed, sundry also of those ministers avouched
the same, some on their own knowledge, others upon undoubted testimony, which
yet is ready to be avouched in due case of need, and should now be expressed,
were not the naming of the avouchers dangerous unto them, and so not to be done
without their knowledge, which now cannot be.

For the point it self, when a man does but stand in doubt betwixt using the
ceremonies, and suffering of d^privation, it must needs be more safe, patiently
to suffer himself to be thrust from his minist^ry, then to retain it and
offend his conscience by using the Ceremonies. For to be restrained by
authori^y from his lawful function, because he will not yield to the doing of
that which to him is sin, is no more sin in the sufferer, then to surcease
his public preaching whilst he is held in prison, where he wants occasion.
Thus the use of that is avoided, which he disalloweth, and the blame of leaving
his standing, is theirs who cast him from thence, and not his. So no sin is
committed either in the use of that he disalloweth, or in susteining
deprivation. But to hold his place, and to practice against conscience, is to
commit one great sin at the least.

Thus having examined the Defend. his adventurous charges of false,
presumptuous, irreligious, partial, and pernicious, I find them all to be
but rash words of distemper.

SECT. XV.
IN the last place, the Defendant brings forth to answer the words of the
Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evil. But as this
argument is not found at all in that page of the Abridgment which he cites, so
in the words or sense which he sets down, I dare say it is not used either
of them, or any other against the ceremonies. Yet let us hear his answer. The
Apostle speaks (says he) of the opinions of private men. But 1. what warrant
has he to restrain a general praecept, when the universalitie of it agrees
wit^ the law? Abstain from all appearance, says the Apostle: i. e. says the
Def. from some private opinions. 2. Why must appearance of evil be needs
understood of opinions only? two or three interpreters indeed do understand it
of doctrine most properly: but the most otherwise; and the word translated
appearance, signifying rather an object of seeing then of hearing, leads us
rather to the eye, as in actions, gesturs, garments, then to the ear in
doctrines. 3. For that which he adds of private men's opinions, there is no
circumstance of the text, nor any reason or authority that does warrant such a
gloss.

SECT. XVII.
AMong his accusations wherein he charge us with manifold scandalls, the
first is, that some weak ones by occasion of these differences, stand amazed,
and so become more remiss in profession or religion. Where 1. it is to be
observed, that when we spoke of weake-ones sect. 12. it was putt off with this
pretense, that they were such as we had catechized. Now then, who are these
weak-ones? I hope the Bishops provide that people of their Diocesses are well
catechized: whence then is this weakness. 2. Differences in matters of
circumstance are not wont to breed scandal, until some authority injoyne
uniformity, as we may see in the primitive Churches. 3. If differences be the
occasion of this scandal, surely those that differ from us, may as well be
accused therefore, as we that differ from them, especially when we urge nothing
of ours upon them, but they impose their own devices upon us, and so are
causes of the differences. 4. The amazement which some have, wondering what will
be the event of differences, is no damnable error, which by the Def. is
required to a scandal, sect. 1. And if they grow remiss in religion upon it,
that is their sin. I am sure zeal against superstition, and for pure and
undefiled worship, has no fitness in it to work remissness in religion: but
urging of human devices in Gods worship, tends directly thither.

SECT. XVIII.
THe second charge of scandal, is in respect of the Separatists. Where 1. I
ask, if Gaius had made a separation from the Church wherein Diotrephes lived,
whether the Apostle John had been cause of that scandal, because he condemned
his abuse of excommunication, Ioh. 3.9.10. 2. If any separate from churches
where Images are retained, who is the cause, they that dislike of Images, or
they that retain them? 3. The dislike of Ceremonies is not the chief cause
for which separation is made: but the intolerable abuses which are in
Ecclesiastical Courts, by which it comes to pass, that many poor men being
troubled at the first for a small thing, afterward are driven to fly the
country: and flying with a hatred of such courses, are ready to receive that
impression which is most opposite unto them. The thing it self is plain enough
to all indifferent men, that Ecclesiastical corruptions urged and obtruded,
are the proper occasion of separation.

SECT. XIX. XX.
IN the next place the Papists are alleged as persons offended by
Nonconformity, because they a^e utterly unperswadeable to ent^r into a Church
where all ancient rites are professedly rejected. But 1. the refusing of
conformity by the Ministers, do not, I hope, make these ancient rites (much
less all) to be professedly rejected by our Church, For then we may plead the
profession of our mother as well as the Defendant: which he I am sure will not
grant. 2. This assertion which is given as a reason, is evidently false. For in
Scotland, France, the Low countries, and such like Churches, where none of
these ceremonies are retained, the power of Gods word (which does not depend on
human Ceremonies (is as effectual to the conversion of Papists, as in
England. 3. How does this agree with that which the Defendant has so often
told us, that our ceremonies are not the same with the Papists Ceremonies: and
that the Papists have no great conceit of our ceremonies, cap. 2. sect. 11. 4.
If our contentions about these things be a scandal to the Papist, let them
look to it that cast these apples of contention into the Church, under the
pretense of peace and uniformity. 5. One minister without conformity, as old M.
Mids^y of Ratsdell, who was after silenced for his labor, has converted more
Papists then any (I might say then all) of the Bishops in England, with all his
Ceremonial observations. 6. It is well known that there are far more
Papists and Popishly affected in those places where ceremonies are most
observed, then where they have been difused. 7. It is answered in the
Abridgement, page 47.48. that ceremonies are not for the aedification of the
Papists, but for the hardening of them. And that Papists are not so much to be
respected as brethren. To the latter of which words, the Defendant replyeth
with a descant upon the term brethren, sect. 20. but says nothing at all to
the purpose. 8. What manner of converts they are usually who are addicted to
human ceremonies, we may see in the Archbishop of Spalato, and such others.

SECT. XXI.
THe greatest scandal of all (says the Defend.) is against the Church. Now
this Non-conformists are made guilty of two ways: 1. comparatively in this
section, and then absolutely in the next. The comparative accusation is, that
we for avoiding of offense toward our brethren, grievously offend our mother,
in that wherein we owe obedience unto her. Where 1. the quaestion is taken for
granted, for we deny that we owe obedience in the ceremonies to any man or
society of men. 2. If our mother be somewhat angry, that is not presently a
scandal by his definition, sect. 1. but when she is provoked to a mortal
error. Now what mortal error do we provoke the Church to? Our desire and
scope is, that the Ceremonies should be either wholly removed, or else left
free to use or disuse: this is no mortal error, I hope. The event by accident
is the silencing, depriving excluding, and molesting of us for Nonconformity:
This indeed is a great error and sin of the Prelates: but as was formerly
showed, the beginning of it is in their irregular Canons, and the ending of it,
in the cruel executions. 3. By applying our selves to the will of the Prelates
in these Ceremonies, we should, though not anger, yet greatly ^candalize them,
by confirming them in a sin of making their own will a rule to the Churches,
even in mystical ceremonies of superstitious worship, contrary to their and
our daily prayer, Thy will be done. 4. The convocation does not carry herself
like a mother toward us: neither do we acknowledge any such honor to belong
unto it. As for the faithful congregations of England, the greatest part of
them would willingly be rid of these burdens.

The rest of this Section is nothing pertinent: yet two things may be noted in
it. 1. An error that the number of Jewish Proselites was great, and the
converted Gentiles few, Act. 15. 2. A gross assertion, that after the doctrine
of Indifferency in eating of meats, was made public by the Church, then to
have sought by abstaining to avoid the offense of some, had been to the
prejudice of Christian liberty, and to the scandal of the Church.

The other accusation of contempt, is only objected Sect. 2^. and varnished
over with a few glosing words Sect. 23. and therefore may well be answered
with contempt. But he that will see a full refutation of this, let him read
Mr. Parker chap. 5. sect. 11.12. I am weary of wrestling with the wind: yet
one unworthy and unchristian taunt I cannot pass by, that he upbraid^th the
Ministers with, living upon voluntary contribu^ion, and fear of offending
their maintainers. For 1. when as he confesses, he has no windows to look
into men's consciences by, what rule of religion will permit him to cast upon
his brethren such a suspicion contrary to their profession, of practicing and
speaking against their consciences for gaining of a poor contribution? Is
there not far more cause to think, that great livings, and worldly honors
(one of the choicest darts that Satan has in his quiver, and therefore tried
against our Savior himself when all other failed, Mat. 4.8, 9.) is it not
more likely I say that these promotions bear more sway in the minds of our
great Prelates, then a poor supply of necessaries with others? 2. Neither all,
nor the most part of them against whom he w^iteth did live upon contributions.
Though they need not have been ashamed thereof if they had: seeing not only
the primitive Pastors did so, but even in our time, Mr. Perkins and other such
lights of our Church, have with that kind of life done more good then all our
Cathedral men with their great revenues. 3. Who are the cause that many are
forced to live upon contribution? have not the Loiterers of Cathedral Churches
engrossed a great part of that maintenance whereby laboring Preachers should
be maintained? Do not our Pluralists and Non-residents carry away the fa^ of
the greatest livings, and leave scarce a Serving-mans wages to their Curats; so
that either they must be supplied by contributio^, or else by begging? Nay, do
not the people in diverse places take it for a great courtesy at the
Non-residents hands, if he will take his Tithes and suffer them to procure and
maintain to themselves an honest minister in his place? have not our
honorable Parliament offered to provide some competent maintenance for the
Ministers, if the Clergy would forbear their sinful excesses? 4. Why should
the Ministers depend so much upon contribution, if they had such accommodative
consciences, as this Def. surmiseth of them? Some of them with serving the
time, and the addition of Simony, might come to be Bishops: and the rest might
be preferred by their means to some certain incomings.

CHAP. VI.
Sect. III.
NOw we are come to the sixth and last general Argument, viz. that the
imposition of these ceremonies is opposite unto Christian liberty. Here the
Def. observes first, that the state of this quaestion is about liberty from
the necessary observation of such things as are in their own nature
indifferent. This (says he) the Objector implies. But I answer, the Objector
does not imply it: he speaks of ceremonies lawfully appointed by man, that
these are to be used as things indifferent. Neither if one private Obj. had
granted it, ought it therefore to be set, down as the received state of the
quaestion, seeing the Abridgment, which in the defense is chiefly opposed, does
every where deny the cerem. to be in their own nature indifferent. But let
that pass and examine his resolution. There be two kinds of necessities
incident unto human precepts and ordinances, in the case of indifferency:
one is necessity of obedience to the commandment, which cannot properly
prejudice Christian liberty: the other is doctrinall necessity: when any of
those properties which are essential unto divine ordinances are attributed
unto a human constitution: as 1. immediate^y to bind the conscience: 2. to
be a necessary means to salvation: 3. to hold it altogether unalterable by the
authority of man: this is a presumption and prevarication, not only against
Chris^ian liberty, but also against the soveraigntie of God himself. But 1.
what means this new distinction betwixt necessity doctrinall and
obedientiall? doct^inall before page 3. was opposed unto ceremonial: now unto
obedientiall: both without logic, or sound reason. 2. He should have told us
what kind of necessity obedientiall he means: for Bellar. de pont. romans l.
4. c. 17. uses the same pretense of obedience, and alleges the same places
of Scripture for it: and yet is confuted by Iunius, Whitakers, and our Divines.
3. If there be doctrinall necessity, in all those human constitutions, which
have properties attributed unto them essential unto divine ordinances, then
our ceremonies in controversy not only have such a mystical signification
attributed unto them as is proper unto Divine Ordinances; but also that they
are imposed as parts of Gods worship. 4. For the three properties, which the
Def. mentions, they are such as Papists in imposing of their ceremonies
(which yet by the judgment of all our Divines deprive men of Christian
liberty) do disclaim. As for immediate binding of men's consciences; no
learned Papist uses such a phrase. Azorius a Jesuit instit. mor. part 1. lib.
5. cap. 6. says expressly, that human laws do not bind, direct, proxime,
and perse: directly, immediately, and of themselves. Bellarmine also, de Romans
pont. l. 4. cap. 20. ad arg. 9. says as much: Leges humanae non obligant sub
poena mortis, nisi quatenus violatione legis humanae offenditur Deus, i. e.
they do not immediately bind men's consciences. For necessity to salvation,
the same Bellarmine de verb. non script. c. 11. says plainly, That those
things which are simply necessary unto salvation are set down in Scripture;
and that the rest are not simply necessary. And it is plain enough that they
do not hold them altogether unalterable by that authority which brought them
in: for beside, that no reasonable man can deny so manifest a truth, they have
altered many ancient Rites, as all the learned know. So that the Defendant his
distinction is proved nothing else but a confusion, common to him with the
Papists, to our ceremonies and theirs.

SECT. IV. V.
IN the 4. Section, the Def. objecteth to himself under the name of the
Abridgement, the words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7.35. This I speak to your
profit, not that I might cast a snare upon you, showing that the imposition of
necessity upon things indifferent, is a very snare of men's consciences. Now
though these words are not in the Abridgement, yet because as D. Whitakers
says, de pont. cap. 4. qu. 7. aureus hic locus est, nostrae libertatis vindex:
This is a golden charter of liberty: therefore it is worthy of due
consideration. The sum of the Def. his answer is, that to impose a neceessity
where God has left a liberty, is indeed a snare: but this necess^ty is not
taugh^ in our Church. I answer it is taught in our church (now a days) that
ecclesiastical canons do bind men's consciences. It is taught in our church
that ma^s will is a sufficient reason for these Canons about Cer. It is taught
in our church, that Sacraments may not be administered, or God publicly served
without these cerem: that Ministers called and allowed of God, for these
ceremonies must be silenced; that they are to be excommunicated ipso facto, and
accursed which oppose themselves unto them. It is taught also, that though a
man doubts in his conscience of the lawfulness of them, though evident
scandal will follow upon the using of them, yet they may not be omitted. If
this be not necessity enough to ensnare a man's conscience, I know not what then
is.

In the fifth Section two places are objected out of the Abridgement, viz. Gal.
5.1. Col. 2.20. and one of them after a fashion answered. The first answer is,
that the Apostle there speaks only of Jewish rites, which is Bellarmines
answer just, de eff. sacr. c. 32. loquitur Paulus de servitute Iudaica, qua
servierant illi sub antiqua lege. The second answer is, that the Apostles
meaning was of such an observation of these ceremonies as had an opinion of
necessity, overthrowing the new Testament, and establishing the old. So
Bellarmin. ibid. Illi cum circumcidi vellent, excidebant a gratia Christi, and
simul obligabant fe ad omnem legem servandam: quod prorsus erat redire ad
statum veteris testam^nti. We on the other side with Danaeus against tha^ place
of Bell. say, generale est Pauli dictum and praeceptum: the words are general,
belonging to all parts of Christian liberty, though principally there applied to
one.

Now the servitude from which Christ has made us free is not only in those
things which the Def. speaks of, but also as Iun. cont. 3. l. 4. c. 17. n. 19
and 21. shows in subjection of our consciences unto elements of man's
appointing, Gal 4.10. and unto the will of men, 1. Cor. 7.23. which place Beza
well notes, is to be understood of superstitions which some do foolishly call
indifferent things. It is not only therefore a freedom from Jewish Ceremonies,
but also and even therefore as D. Whitakers gathers from all human
ceremonies that bind or press our consciences, Whit. de romans pont. q. 7. c.
3. ad 5. But it is in vain for me to allege our Divines in this quaestion:
the Abridgement alleges diverse, whom the Def. would not vouchsafe an answer.

One thing here the Def. notes, that in the Abridgment mystical and carnal
are unsoundly confounded. But I say, this is unsoundly collected: for these two
are joined together there only in respect of Jewish worship, and that which
imitate^h it: And therefore it is to no end to instance in the Sacraments
instituted by Christ, of clear signification, and accompanied with the promise
and lively working of the Spirit. The same poor instance has Bellarmine de
cult. l. 3. c. 7. for significant ceremonies.

But it savoureth of the flesh (says the Def.) to call our ceremonies carnal.
Why so I pray? the Jewish ceremonies deserved that name, you your self say,
even when they were in force: and surely ours devised by man, abused by
idolaters, without necessary use, destitute of all promise and spirit, are
far more worthy to be called carnal, then Gods own Ordinances. Those were
only carnal because in comparison they were external, heavy, dull things:
but ours are more heavy and dull, and beside they are sinfully carnal, as
has been proved.

But what sou^dnesse does this savor of, that the Def. says generally of the
Jewish Ceremonies, they signified first and primarily outward and carnal
promises, shadowing heavenly things only under a second veil? I will not
exagitat this assertion, because it is in the by.

SECT. VI.
HEre an objection is fained out of the Abridgment page 34. I say fained,
because there is none such found in the place quoted. That which is there
spoken concerning other Popish ceremonies, is a sixth proof of the second
Argument, distinct from the fifth, whereto that of Christian liberty does belong.
That also is handled by the Def. c. 3. l. 7. and there maintained against him.
So that this might well be omitted. Yet because there is some force in the
consequence, let us hear his Defense. The objection which he frames is this:
If these Ceremonies do not take away our Christian liberty, and in snare the
consciences of men, by their imposition: how shall not the Popish Ceremonies be
excusable, and free from accusation in this behalf? His answer is, that Popish
Ceremonies do infringe Christian liberty, both in regard of their nature, and
also in regard of their number. And of both these M. Calvin gives witness. I
answer 1. for the nature, it has been showed before, that a multitute of
Popish Ceremonies have no other nature and necessity allowed unto them by the
learned Papists, then ours have by the Defendant himself. See for this
Bellarmine de effect. sacr. c. 30. That which Mr. Calvin says of this point is
true, notwithstanding in regard of the conceit which is commonly among the
simple Papists, fostered by unlearned Monks, Friars, and other Priests, for
filthy lucre sake. 2. The comparisons which Mr. Calvin use, viz. That it is
held among the Papists a greater wickedness to omit auricular Confession,
then to live impiously: eat flesh on fasting days, then to live in
fornication; to work on Saints holy days, then to act mischief, etc. These
he gathers principally from that practice of the Papists, whereby they punish
more severely the breach of their Ceremonies then of Gods Law. Now this is not
only practiced by our Prelates, but also maintained by this Defendant, chap.
2. sect. 12. with such fair pretense, as the Papists may well use for the
Defense of their practice. 3. As for the multitude of Ceremonies among the
Papists, that makes their bondage greater then ours; but does it make ours
none at all? Besides, when a few mystical human Ceremonies are admitted, the
gate is set open for a multitude: even until the Convocation will say there be
too many. For Bellarmine himself will grant that Ceremonies are not to be
multiplied over much. Fatemur Ceremonias non esse nimis multiplicandas. de
effsacr. c. 30. but what is too much, that must be left to to the judgment of
the Church or Convocation, says he, and the Defendant both.

SECT. VII. VIII. IX. X.
IN all these Sections, the Def. goes about to teach us the doctrine which
concerns binding of men's consci^nces. In the first his conclusion is good and
sound, God therefore and not man does properly and directly bind the conscience
of man. It is sufficient therefore to note that it is an improper phrase to say
that men's laws do bind men's consciences, in respect that God commands to
obey the just laws of men: for so, as Gerson observes, the Physicians
praescripts should also bind a ^ick man's conscience, in respect of Gods will,
whereby a sick man is tied to follow the good and wholesome counsel of his
Physician.

In the 8. Section two of our Divines are brought-in to prove that men are
bound in conscience to observe the just laws of Magistrates, which none of us
ever doubted of.

The 9. Section is spent in proving, that Ecclesiastical laws have as great
force in respect of conscience as politic. Which if it be granted, yet
nothing can from thence be concluded for the advantage of ceremonies unlawfully
imposed. But 1. it is diligently to be observed, that the Church has no
commission for to make any laws properly so called: as I have formerly showed
in cap. 1. sect. 16.2. The common received opinion of all our Divines is
contrary to that which the Defendant here says: as may be seen in Bellarmine
de Pont. Romans l. 4. c. 15. and Iunius, Whitakers, with the rest, who writing
against B^llarmine do not deny but defend that which he says, Lutherani and
Calvinistae omnes docent. 3. The interrogatories which the Defendant ministers
unto us in this case does not prove his Assertion. For the Church is a Society,
but not complete, if it be considered as not comprehending Christ the Head and
only Law maker of it. Breach of peace is not a sin against an
Ecclesiastical, but a divine law. Obedience is to be yielded unto lawful
Ecclesiastical Governors, when they bring the charge of Christ whose
Ministers they are. See Dr. Whitakers de Pont. Romans cont. 4. q. 7. c. 2. ad 12.
The Kings stamp, but with an act of Parliament makes a law in England. As for
Apostolical constitution (to which our canons are as like as Apples are to
Oisters) the same answer which Doctor Whithakers, cont. 4. q. 7. c. 2. ad 5.
with other of our Divines gives to Bellarmine, may serve for our Defendant.

In the 10. Sect. he sets down nothing but that which he knows we all
grant.

SECT. XI.
AGainst the Accusation of contempt, there was (as it seems) alleged by M.
Nic. that by the same reason that Nonconformity is contempt; bowling, disusing
of capps, and such habites prescribed should be contempt. Here the Defendant
first brings diverse interpretation out of the Casualists: and then takes one
for granted without rendering of any reason, that he may by it excuse bowling
and disuse of cappes. But what if we take hold of another interpretation,
esteeming the obligation by the intent of the Lawmakers, which was against
Popish Recusancie of our Communion-booke, and not against refusal of some few
ceremonies contained therein? I speak now of the Statute Law, not of lawless
canons. Or what if we should stand upon that interpretation, which fetches
the obligation from the weight of the matter imposed, which in our ceremonies
is very little? Some of these I am ^ure the Bishops must fly, if they will
defend their disuse of the Crosiers slaffe, which they are bound by our laws
as well to use, as the Ministers are surplusses.

But all this is needless, because there can be no contempt in a conscionable
forbearance of unlawful impositions; such as the ceremonies are sufficiently
proved to be.

SECT. XII.
HEre certain Divines are brought in witnessing, 1. that superstitions do
dep^ive men of Christian liberty: which we deny not, but take their testimonies
as making against our ceremonies: because as I have formerly showed some of
these superstitious opinions are inseparable from the imposing and using of
them. 2. That Christian liberty does not consist in the use or disuse of things
indifferent: which we also willingly grant. But I would have the Defendant
remember, that all freedom is not in the mind and conscience. For where the
mind is free, the body may be bound; else Christians should not taste so much
of this worlds misery as they do. Now Christ has left unto us not only an
inward liberty of mind and conscience, but also an outward freedom of our
bodies and outward man, from such bodily rites in his worship as have not his
stamp upon them, and his Spirit and blessing promised unto them. Of this the
Defendant says nothing at all.

Sect. XIII. XIIII.
COncerning the profession of our Church so often brought in, enough has been
said before, now it suffices to answer, that no profession whatsoever can make
human significant Ceremonies in Gods worship agree with Christian liberty.

As for superstition, which the Defendant does now the second time most
ridiculously object, I have answered in the beginning of this Confutation. Now
only I note: 1. how loosely he describes that superstition which he calls
affirmative: as if no man could use any thing superstitiously, except he did
hold, that without it the faith of Christianity, or the true worship of God
could not possible consist. Never was there such a description given by any man
that considered what he said.

2. How manfully he concludes our negative superstition, upon this ground,
that Christ has left these ceremonies free, which is the maine quaestion
betwixt him and us.

3. How he mis-reporteth our opinion, in saying absolutely that we hold a
Surplice to have unholinesse and pollu^ion in it: whereas we hold that it is
only made more unfitt for Gods service then it was before through idolatrous
abuse: but yet unto other uses it may be applied.

4. That in stead of Scripture, he brings forth the universal practice of
men in the Church: which yet has been formerly also refuted.

5. That he can find no Divine that calls opposing of Ceremonies
superstition, but only M. Calvin in one place speaking rhetorically, as he
uses to do, and not intending any definition or distributio^ of that vice.

6. How he corrupts P. Martyrs words, to have some color for a new
accusation. P. Martyr taking there upon him the person of an adversary unto
Hoopers opinion (with whom notwithstanding afterward he consented, and recalled
the counsel which then he gave, as appears page 1125.) says that if we
should refuse all things that the Papists used, we should bring the church into
servitude: which assertion is most true, because the Papists abused many
necessary things, even Christ's own Ordinances, the observing of which is
liberty. Now the Def. would have that precisely understood, and that in the
rigor of every word concerning the Surplice.

I have here subjoyned apart an Epistle of Zanchius, who otherways was
somewhat favorable to Bishops: wherein the Reader may see his judgment
concerning superstitious garments.

To the most renowned Queen ELYZABETH, Defendresse of the Christian Religion,
and most mighty Queen of England, France and Ireland, H. Zanchius sends
greeting.
MOST gracious and most Christian Queen, we have not without great grief
understood, that the fire of contention about certain garments, which we
thought had been quenched long agone, is now again to the incredible offense
of the godly, as it were raised from hell, and kindled a fresh in your
Majesty's Kingdom, and that the occasion of this fire is, because your most
gracious Majesty being persuaded by some, otherwise great men, and carried with
a zeal (but certainly not according to knowledge) to retain unity in religion,
has now more then ever before resolved and decreed, yea does will and command
that all Zanchius it is like was misinformed, for Bishops have bin the chief
devisers and advisers.
Bishops and Ministers of the Churches shall in divine service putt on the
white and linen garments which the Popish Priests use now in Popery; yea that
it is to be feared, least this fire be so kindled, and cast its flame so far
and wide, that all the Churches of that most large and mighty kingdom, to the
perpetual disgrace of your most renowned Majesty, be set on a flaming fire:
seeing the most part of the Bishops, men greatly renowned for all kind of
learning and godliness, had rather leave their office and place in the Church,
then against their own conscience, admit of such garments, or at the least
signs of Idolatry and Popish superstition, and so defile themselves wi^h them,
and give offense to the weak by their example. Now what other thing will this
be, then by retaining of these garments, to destroy the whole body of the
Church? For without doubt that is Satan's intent, by casting a seed of
dissentions amongst the Bishops. And that he aimed at the infancy of the
Church, by stirring up discord between the East and West Churches, about the
Passover and other Ceremonies of that kind. Therefore Irenaeus Bishop of Lions,
had just cause in his Epistle sent out of France to Rome, sharply to reprove
Victor the Pope of Rome, because he out of a kind of zeal, but not according
to knowledge, was minded to excommunicate all the Churches of Asia, because
they celebrated not the Passover just at the same time, as they at Rome did.
For this was nothing but by an unseasonable desire to retain the same
Ceremonies in all Churches to rent and tear a pieces the unity of the
Churches. I therefore so soon as I heard that so great a ruin hanged over the
Church of Christ in that kingdom, presently, in respect of that duty which I
owe to the Church of Christ, to your gracious Majesty, and to that whole
kingdom, intended to write thither, and to try by my uttermost endevor whether
so great a mischief might possibly be withstood: some that fear Christ, and
wish well to your Majesty, exhorting me to the performance of this duty. But
when I had scarcely begun to think of this course, behold our most illustrious
Prince commanded me to do it, which command of his did not only spur me on,
who of mine own accord was already running, but laid a necessity of writing
upon me. Wherefore this my boldness will seem the less strange unto your
gracious Majesty, seeing my writing proceeds not so much from mine own will
and counsel of friends, as from the commandment of my most Noble Prince, who
is one of your gracious Majesty's special friends. Now I thought I should do
a matter very worth the pains taking, if first I should humbly admonish your
most famous Majesty what your duty is in this cause: and secondly, if as your
humble suppliant I should beseech you for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, to
perform the same. I beseech your gracious Majesty to take this my writing in
good part, for it proceeds from a Christian love toward the Church, and from
an especial reverend respect that I bear to your most gracious Majesty. The
Lord knows all things. Now to the matter in hand.

Whereas the Apostle writing to Timothy, commands that prayers be made for
Kings, and all other that be in authority, and says, that the end wherefore
they be ordained, is, that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life in all (that
is, perfect) godliness and honesty, he teaches plainly enough what is the
duty of Godly Kings and Princes, namely, that they take care, and bring to
pass, that first and above all things, true religion, and the true worship of
God, where it is banished, be restored, and being restored, be kept pure: all
things which smell of impiety being far removed. Secondly, that men may live
honestly and holily, all kinds of uncleanness being abandoned. Lastly, that
public peace and holy friendship be maintained among the subjects, all
occasions of contentions being, as much as possible may be, taken out of the
way.

As the Apostle teaches manifestly, as we have seen, so all learned men who
be of sound judgment concerning the Magistrates office, do with one consent
affirm, that these be the three chief parts of the office of the Prince, and
of every godly Magistrate. Which thing being so, I see not how your gracious
Majesty can with good conscience, propound again the garments in question,
and other things of that kind, smelling as yet of Popish superstition, and
once banished out of the Churches, to the consciences of the Bishops Paul's
Bishops he means, or else as I said before, he is misinformed.
to be taken on again, and so propound them that you should compel them by
your commandment to receive them again. For first, this is quite contrary to
the first and chief part of the Princes office. For if the Magistrate ought to
have a chief care, that the worship of God be kept pure and without mixture;
and if for this cause all things are to be abandoned which may any way either
by themselves, or by accident defile this worship: and therefore all things are
to be called back as much as may be, to the rule of God, and to the former and
Apostolical, and so the more pure and simple form of religion: Finally, if as
the Apostle commands, we be to abstain, not only from all evil, but also
from all appearance of evil; to what end, I beseech you most renowned and most
godly Queen, should those things be brought again into the Church of God, by
the Princes commandment, which be contrary to the purity of the Apostolical
worship, which smell of Popish superstition, which be neither availeable to
the aedification of the godly, nor to order, nor for ornament, except that
which is whoorish: which lastly, can bring no profit, but on the contrary, many
evils to the Church? It is out of all doubt, that by this law concerning
apparel, all godly men will be offended, but the wicked will laugh in their
sleeve, and hereby be putt in hope to get many more things: as for those of the
middle sort, that is, such as be newly converted and turned from ungodlines to
godliness, and be not as yet well grounded, they will be in great danger, and if
we speak according to man's judgment, they will rather look back to the old
superstition, to which by nature we are inclined, then fix and fasten their
eyes upon true religion. And therefore this is a decree which will bring no
avancement at all to godliness, but may much further ungodliness. For though
these garments be not evil and unclean of and by themselves, that is, of
their own nature, yet because of the former and late abuse, they are not
altogether free from uncleanness. Certainly it cannot be denied, but that they
will at the least, give occasions of many evils and very grievous
superstitions. Now the very occasions also of evils are to be shunned. To what
end then should these be thrust upon the Church, from whom no profit can be
hoped, very much evil may come? for this is to tempt God. Your famous Majesty
may well remember, that not without cause it was written; He that touches
pitch, shall be defiled with it: that the Apostle had reason to command, that
we should purge out the old leaven, that a little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump. And that Hosea did not foolishly reprove the Jews, because they
translated and brought a young graffe (of superstitions) out of Israel into
their own garden, that is, the true Church. We ought, most religious Queen,
to have nothing at all to do with the Papists in matter of religion, save in
those things which they have common with the Apostles. Why, I beseech you, were
some kings, otherwise godly, reproved and blamed in the Scriptures, that they
had not taken away Churches or Temples for divine service in the mountains,
which were built by holy Fathers ere the building of the Temple, in which the
Lord was wont to be worshipped? Surely, because the Temple being now builded
and ordained for divine service, God would not have any footsteps of any other
chapel at all to be extant. Therefore also when once the kingdom of Christ
was manifested, the Ceremonies and garments of Aaron ought not any more to take
place. For this cause the Apostles were upon good ground careful* that after
Christ's ascension, they should so be taken away, that no relickes of them
remained. And if they took them away holily, unholily have the Papists called
them back again. Now whether is the better to ^ollow the godly simplicity of
the Apostles, or the ungodly pomp of the Papists, who is ignorant? This
recalling of such Popish garments, your gracious Majesty may believe me, will
be a greater evil, then peradventure it may be seen, even to very wise men at
the first blush: For me thinks I see and hear the Monks crying out with very
loud voices in the Pulpits, both confirming their followers in their ungodly
religion, by the example of your gracious Majesty, and also saying, What? does
not even the Queen of England also, a most learned and a most prudent
Princess, begin by little and little to come back to the religion of the
holy church of Rome, the most holy and sacred vestments of the Clergy men
being taken on again? we are to be in good hope that the day will come,
wherein she will at length, though now they be thought to be dead, recall also
all the other Rites and Sacraments of the holy Church of Rome. These and such
like words, no doubt, most prudent Queen, the Monks and Jesuits will use in
the Pulpits. For they take all occasions to confirm their superstitions.
Therefore to recall these stinking garments, and other rubbish of the Popish
Church into the Church of Christ at this time, what is it but to give the
Papists an occasion, and the best that may be, to confirm and harden
themselves and theirs in their superstitions, and also to help them in this
business? But let us hear what the Prophet said to Iehosaphat King of Judah,
when he helped Ahab; Dare thou help the wicked, and love those who hate the
Lord? For this thing the wrath of the Lord is upon thee. And what other thing
will this be, then even to call back the weak from the study of pure
Religion, and to give them a privy warning to look back, and return into
Aegipt? It is an easy matter for us weak men, who of our own nature are prone
to superstition, to slide back to impiety. Therefore occasions of sliding
back to ungodliness, ought to be taken away, and at no hand to be given. And
what else, I pray you, meant God in forbidding to plpw with an Ox, and an
Ass, to sow the same field with diverse kinds of seeds, and to wear a garment
woven of linen and woollen together? It is an odious and detestable thing with
God, that the same field of the Lord should be tilled by ungodly and godly
Bishops together; If in the same Church Popish Doctrine be taught with the
Doctrine of the Gospel: Finally, if Sacraments, Ceremonies, and Rites, partly
Apostolic, and partly Popish, be used, and the Church be clothed with them
as with a garment of linsey-wolsey. For what agreement has light with
darkness? And therefore those things which be not of God, but from them who
have defiled Gods worship, are utterly to be cast away, which the Lord himself
commanded to be done, when he charged utterly to destroy all things which
appertained to those who should give us counsel to follow strange Gods, and to
burn their garments, and all their stuff with fire in the midst of the
street, to show our detestatio^ of such Seducers, and that they might be an
execrable thing to the Lord. And who knows not that these garments are a part
of the household stuff of that Romish Seducer? There shall cleave nothing of
the execrable thing, says he, to thy hand, that the Lord may turn from the
fierceness of his wrath, and multiply thee, as he has sworn to thy Fathers,
etc. Wherefore to bring these garments, seeing they be household stuff of
Antichrist, into the Church of Christ, what is it else then to provoke God to
anger, and to kindle his fury against us? Certain it is, that he who is a true
friend of Christ, will never seek to have the ornaments of Antichrist in his
own house, and much less will he suffer them in the Temple of Christ. For who
can endure the arms of his enemy in his own house, and specially in the
chiefest room of the same? And if God will have a thing destroyed and
abolished, who are we that we dare build it up again. But it is Gods will that
after the death of Christ all garments of Aaron and Levi should be abolished:
and he has plainly enough manifested every where, that in these our days he
would have all ungodly and vain cerem., pompes, deceits, and paintings of the
Papists driven away by the shining brightness of the Gospel: because these
things have no power in them to kindle and increase godliness, but greatly
avail to the quenching of the same. Neither verily can I see to what other end
these garments tend, then in very deed (that I may now come unto the second
head) to defile and disgrace the fair face; nay, the whole body of the Church
of England reformed according to the Untrue, o^ misinformed.
Gospel; as if the chaste and honest daughter of a King should be attired with
those very garments wherewith some famous and notable whore used to be
adorned, and when she were so clothed, were commanded to go abroad in the
streets. Now who can allow or judge this to be tolerable. Wherefore though for
no other, yet for this very cause, such garments ought not to be thrust upon
the Church of Christ, because that harlot of Rome has abused, and does still
at this day abuse them (though in their own nature they be not evil) to
evil, and to cover her fornications, or rather to entice men to commit
fornication. For all these pompes, and Popish ceremonies are nothing else but
whoorish paintings invented and devised for this end, that men might thereby be
allured to spiritual fornication. Is it not therefore a filthy and dishonest
thing, to have these in the Church of Christ? If the brazen serpent, which had
been ordained of God, and that for the wholesome use of the Israelites, was
taken away by godly King Ezekias, because the Israelites had abused it contrary
to the word of God: and if Ezekias be highly commended for this so doing,
because he had turned that Serpent into ashes, and commanded them to be cast
into the running water, that there might never be any print or sign of it
extant any more; how much more then are these unclean garments to be banished
out of the Church of God, seeing the Apostles never used them, but the whore
of Rome has used them in her Idolatrous worship, and to seduce men? For it is
a very dishonest thing, that such things as are of themselves indifferent, and
have been long used to the dispight and dishonor of God, should be retained
in the Church of God, to the hazard of the salvation of godly men. And much
less that kind of garments, which is nothing but an invention of men, or
rather of the Devil himself, devised to seduce the simple ones: We all know
what praise those commonwealths deserve, which make good laws that the
subjects shall not wear outlandish and strange apparel, nor bring it into
the Commonwealths, because it is a corruption of good and honest manners, and
of the Commonwealths themselves.

How then can that counsel which is given to your Majesty, be commended, to
wit, that garments unknown to the Christian world in that time of the
Apostles, and Apostolical men, should be brought into the Church of Christ.
And if an outlandish kind of attire be not tolerated in well-governed
Commonwealths, how much less are Idolatrous, and heathenish garments to be
borne with in the Church, where God is to be worshipped in spirit and truth,
and where he would have few and very simple Ceremonies? Also if God established
by his Law, that a woman may not putt on a man's apparel, nor a man a woman's,
the one being so well of it self dishonest, and contrary to nature as the
other: Why then should godly Bishops, Still misinformed.
and the servants of Christ be clothed, or rather shamed and deformed with the
garments of godless Priests, and slaves of Antichrist? Why should we not
rather, as we be of a diverse religion from them, so also be discerned from
them, at least in the performance of such duties as belong unto Gods worship,
by outward signs, such as garments be? Verily this was Gods will, and he
required of his people, that it should be discerned from the profane Gentiles,
as by other things, so also by a diverse sort of apparel, and so should
profess by this public sign, that it would have nothing to do with the
Gentiles.

And why should not we do the same? Are we not the people of God? abides not
the equity of the same commandment? And if the word honest be derived of
honor, what honor will it be for the church of Christ to have Bishops attired
and disguised with Popish visors in the administration of the Gospel and
Sacraments, so as they shall rather be derided then be reverenced any whit by
the people? And what commendation shall it be for your gracious Majesty in true
Churches, and among true believers, that you permit such trifles to be called
back into your Church? Therefore it stands not with honesty, that holy Still
misinformed.
Bishops be compelled to receive such visors, neither is it indeed a matter
worthy of honor and praise, neither deserves it the name of virtue. For if
your Majesty should command that all English men* leaving that ancient and very
grave and comely attire, should wear Turkey coats, or a soldiers weed, as it
is called: who would ever approve this decree as honest? And it is much less
praiseworthy, if godly Bishops be enjoined, laying aside, or at least changing
the honest and ancient apparel, which the Apostles wore, to wit, that common
and grave habit, to put on the ridiculous and execrable or accursed garment of
godless Mass-priests.

Now concerning the third part of the Princes duty, there is nothing fitter to
trouble the public peace of the Church then this counsel. For every novelty,
especially in religion, either by it self, if it be evil, disturbs and
troubles a good peace, or if it be good, gives occasion of trouble by accident,
by causing contention between evil and good men. But as in things which be
good of themselves, of which nature the reformation of the Churches according
to the will of God is, we are not to care for the troubling of that ungodly
peace, that is of the world (for Christ came not by his Gospel to keep such a
peace, but rather to take it away, and to send a sword) so assuredly, by the
urging of things indifferent, to trouble the peace of Churches, and to cause
strife between good men and bad, yea between godly men themselves, is so
wicked, that it can by no means be defended, so that Ireneus had just cause to
reprove Victor Bishop of Rome, for this cause, as has been said before. For it
must needs be, that at such times the Churches be rent in pieces, then which
thing, what is more hurtful? Many exemples in the histories of the Church
prove this which I say. How many and how great troubles arose in the Primitive
Church, between those who beside the Gospel urged also circumcision and the
law, and between those who upon good ground rejected them? And how great
evils would this dissension have brought to the Church of Christ, had not the
Apostles betime withstood them by that council gathered together at Jerusalem,
by a lawful examination and discussing of the cause by manifest testimonies of
the Scriptures, and by sound reasons? If your gracious Majesty (as you ought)
desire both to be and to seem Apostolic, then imitate the Apostles in this
matter. Neither lay and impose this yoke upon the necks of Christ's Disciples
your self, nor suffer it to be imposed by others. But if you see that the
Bishops disagree about this matter among themselves, assemble a Synod, and
cause this controversy to be examined by the Scriptures. And then look what
shall be proved by plain testimonies, and strong reasons, propound that to be
observed by all., and command by your decree, that that be observed, and so
take disagreement out of the Church. For your gracious Majesty ought to be very
careful, that there be no innovation in religion, but according to the word of
God. By this means shall a true peace, concord and unity of the Churches be
preserved. But if the proceeding be otherwise, what other thing will it be,
then to take away unity, and to trouble the Christian peace? And this I may not
pass over with silence, that by this novelty of the business, not only the
public peace shall be troubled in that kingdom, but also many elsewhere out
of that kingdom will have occasion given them to raise new contentions in
Churches, and that to the great hinderance of godliness, and the more slow
proceeding of the Gospel. For all men know, that the most part of all the
Churches, who have fallen from the Bishop of Rome, for the Gospels sake, do
not only want, but also abhor those garments, and that there be some
Churches, though few in comparison of the former, which do as yet retain
those garments invented in Popery, as they very stiffly retain some other
things also, because the reformers of those Churches, otherwise worthy men, and
very faithful servants of Christ, durst not at the first (neither judged they
it expedient) utterly abolish all Popish things. But as the common manner is,
every man likes his own best. Now I call those things a man's own, not so much
which every man has inv^nted, as those beside, which every man chooses to
himself, receives, retains, and pursues, though they be invented to his
hand by others. But if there be also annexed the examples of other men, they be
more and more hardened in them, and are not only hardened, but also do their
uttermost endeavor by word and writing, to draw all the rest to be of their
mind? Therefore we easily see what the issue will be, if your gracious Majesty
admit of that counsel which some do give you, to take on apparel, and other
more Popish things besides. For some men, who be not well occupied, being
stirred up by the example of your Majesty, will write books and disperse them
throughout all Germany, of these things which they call indifferent, to wit,
that it is lawful to admit of them, nay that they be altogether to be
retained, that Papists may be the less estranged and alienated from us, and so
we may come the nearer to concord and agreement. As if forsooth the Papists,
though we for peace sake admitted of all those things, would ever amend their
Doctrine, and banish out of their churches, or at any hand lay down their false
and godless decrees, manifest and abominable superstitions and idolatries:
and there will be some who will answer such books once dispersed. So of this
English fire there will rise a a new burning flame in Germany and France, on
which hot coals the Papists as so many Smiths a forging, will sprinkle cold
water to make the flame the more vehement. And is not this a goodly benefit?
Who therefore does not see that this counsel tends to the troubling of all
Churches.

To conclude, that golden saying of a certain learned man is very true and
certain, and approved by long experience, that indifferent things, that is,
the question about indifferent things, is that golden apple of contention. So
much shall suffice to have spoken of the troubling of public peace; what
should I say of the consciences of private believers? It is manifest, that they
are greatly troubled with this commandment, to put on these linen garments.
For they do so greatly complain, that their lamenting voices and groans do
reach unto, and are heard in Germany. Now how grievous and distasteful an
offense it is to trouble the consciences of the godly, the holy Scripture
shows: partly when it commands that we make not the holy Spirit sad,
neither offend the weak ones; partly when it threatens griveous punishments
against those who fear not to do these things: partly also when it propounds
the examples of the Saints, and specially of Paul, who speaks thus: If meat
offend my brother, I Will eat no flesh while the world stands, that I may not
offend my brother. For in those words he gives a general rule, by his
example, taken out of the doctrine of Christ, to wit, that no indifferent thing
is to be admitted and yielded unto, much less to be urged upon others, and
least of all to be commended by decree: if in the admitting, urging, and
commanding of it, the minds of good men, and consciences of the faithful be
offended; for a tender conscience, which fears God, is a thing most precious
and acceptable to God. How therefore can that counsel be approved, which would
have a law established and proclaimed by the Princes command for the use of
garments to be used by Ministers in the ministry. For (to speak many things in
few words) if such garments be to be propounded to the faithful, they are to
be propounded either as indifferent, or as necessary: if the later, we do
ungodlily, because we make those things necessary, which Christ would have to
be free: If the former, then are they to be left free to the Churches. But by
commanding and compelling, we make things that be free and indifferent, to be
necessary, and so fall into the same trespass. Moreover, either they be
ordained of God by Moses, or they be delivered by Christ God manifested in the
flesh, or they be ordained by the holy Ghost working and speaking in the
Apostles, or they are of men, either godly or wicked. Those Ceremonies and
Leviticall garments, which were ordained of God by Moses, ought all of them to
have an end after the death of Christ, as the Scriptures show plainly,
especially the Epistles of Paul to the Coloss. and Hebr. therefore they cannot
be revoked and called back without the transgression of Gods will. It cannot be
said that Christ taught them, because there is no word extant to that end, but
rather he taught plainly oftentimes, that all Moses his Ceremonies were ended.
And the same I affirm concerning the Apostles. It remains therefore that they
be said to be of men. If they be from godly men, then were they ordained of
them, either to edification, or for order and comelines. But they avail not to
edification, that is, to further comelines, but rather tend to the overthrow of
it, as we saw before; neither for any good order, but rather they tend to
disorder, for there is a confusion of godly and wicked Bishops, whereas it is
meet and equal, that one of them be discerned from another, even by their
garments also. Neither do they make Christ's spouse comely, as we showed a
little before. Therefore we ought not to yield unto them. And such things as
have been invented by men, void of Gods Spirit, do nothing appertain to us.
Lastly, the Apostles used not these garments. For we have no authenticke
testimony. Now the church is to be fashioned after the rule of that
Apostolical Church in Ceremonies and garments, as well as in Doctrine. What
do we then with these garments in the Church? By whose authority can they be
approved? What profit or wholesome use can the Christian people have by them?
But on the contrary we have showed that godliness is weakened by them, the
pure worship of God is violated, Popish supersti^ion is by little and little
called back, the godly be offended, the wicked be confirmed and hardened in
their ungodlinesses; the weak in faith are brought into hazard of their
salvation; there are occasions of many evils given; Monks and other Popish
preachers are hereby helped to confirm their followers in their superstition;
the wrath of God is provoked against us; those things which God would have to
be destroyed, are hereby builded again by us; the whole face of the Church is
defiled and disgraced: there is a foul sin committed against honest and good
laws forbidding the putting on of strange and outlandish garments: and so the
whole Church is dishonored, Besides the public peace of the Church, yea of
many churches is troubled: one Bishop is set against another, the consciences
of the godly are troubled, and the minds of good men are offended, Gods spirit
is made sad in them, and this apple of contention is cast, as it were, upon the
table of the Gods.

Now seeing the matter stands thus, most gracious Queen, not only I, but all
my fellow-ministers, and all the godly prostrate before you, entreat your
Majesty, and for Jesus Christ's sake, whom we are persuaded you love from your
heart, we humbly beseech your Majesty not to embrace that counsel aforesaid,
neither to give ear to such counselors. For these counsels (most godly
Queen) are not for the good of that your church and kingdom, nor for the
honor of your Majesty, seeing they neither serve to the increase of godliness,
nor to the retaining of the honesty of the Church, neither to the preservation
of public peace, but rather very greatly weaken all these good things, In
making 3 sorts o^ officers afterward Bishops, Seniors, or Elders and Deacons,
he m^st take the word Bi^hop in the scri^tu^^ (...), as (...).
which your Princely Majesty ought chiefly to stand for. Let your Majesty
rather bend all your thoughts, authority and power hereunto, that first and
above all you may have Bishops, who be truly godly, and well exercised in the
holy Scriptures, as by the blessing of God you have very many, and that you
make much of, and give ear to them. Secondly, that you be careful that with
all diligence they may discarge their office, watching over the flock, teach
sound doctrine, confute heresies, drive away Wolves, keep every man in his
own calling, and exhort and stir up every man to lead a life beseeming a
Christian. The Elders also and Deacons, are to be admonished, that every one be
diligent in his own office, and if need be, they are to be compelled by your
gracious Majesty's authority, that neither the former by their sleeping and
winking at the misdemeanors of the flock, suffer the reins to be loosed to all
licentiousnes, and to the lusts of the flesh; neither that the later, by reason
of their immoderate care for their own private businesses, neglect the poor
people of the Church, and omit such other things as belong to their office. For
these three sorts of men be the very sinews of the Church, upon whom the
salvation or destruction of the Church does chiefly depend. Furthermore, your
gracious Majesty ought to use great care and diligence, that the Universities,
and in them good and godly teachers, be well looked to, cherished, liberally
maintained and preserved, for these are as the mothers, and nurses of the
Churches, in which and by which those are to be fashioned, borne, brought up
and adorned, who being fit, may be called from time to time to rule and govern
the Churches. Last of all, such things as cannot be corrected and amended by
the word and discipline of the Church, as it is necessary, that according to
Gods word they be cut off and taken away by the sword of the Magistrate, so
your gracious Majesty is to take care of them: as adulteries, blasphemies, and
other capital crimes of that sort. For God has given the Magistrate the sword
for this end, that ungodly seducers, filthy knaves, and unquiet men being
restained, the rest may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. This is the matter (most gracious Queen) whereon you are to spend
your thoughts, hereabout are your counsels to be occupied, here is all your
strength to be showed, namely, that (to end in a word) we all denying
ungodlines and worldly lusts, may live soberly, justly, and godlily in this
present world. For this is the true and fairest garment of all other. For which
every man ought to take care, to wit, that having put off the old man with his
works, we put on the new man, that is, our Lord Jesus Christ, neither are
there any other true ornaments which become Christian Bishops, besides those
which the Apostle has laid down in his writings to Tim. and Tit. A Bishop
must be unreproveable, the husband of one wife, watching, sober, modest,
harborous, apt to teach, not given to wine, no stryker, nor given to filthy
lucre, but gentle, no fighter, not covetous, one that can rule his house
honestly, having children under obedience in all honesty, not f^oward, not
angry, righteous, holy, etc. For garments and ornaments of Aarons high Priest,
were types of these true ornaments; those were the shadows, these be the body.
Wherefore let those be gone, and let these abide still. And then at lenght
shall we have the whole Church, and so the Bishops rightly and truly
apparrelled.

Once again I humbly beseech your gracious Majesty, that thinking no more of
those outward garments, you will mind and consider how these true and
spiritual ornaments may be retained, put upon, and kept in the Churches. And
as I said in the beginning, that according to your gracious Majesty's clemency,
you will be pleased to pardon my boldness in writing. Our Lord Jesus Christ
long preserve your gracious Majesty safe and sound to us, and to the whole
Church. From Heydelberg. 10. September. 1571.

FINIS.

