THE Famous, pleasant, and variable History, of Palladine of England.

Discoursing of honorable Adventures, of Knightly deeds of Arms and
Chivalry: enterlaced likewise with the love of sundry noble personages, as
time and affection limited their desires.

Herein is no offense offered to the wise by wanton speeches, or encouragement
to the loose by lascivious matter.

Translated out of French by A. M. one of the messengers of her Majesty's
Chamber.

Patere aut abstine.

AT LONDON, Printed by Edward Allde for John Perin, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Angel, And are there to be sold. 1588.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Robert Deuorax, Earl of Essex, and Ewe: Viscount of
Hereford and Bourchier: Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourchier and Louayne:
Master of the Queens Majesty's Horse: A. M. wishes increase of all
happiness.
AMong those (right Honorable) that offered incense in the Temple of Jupiter,
in plates of Gold according to the custom, a simple Heardsman religiously
affected, brought his offering on a broken potsheard: for which he being
reproved by Jupiters Priest, boldly returned this answer. The Gods that
dispose all, know all, rich men are discerned by their great gifts, and poor
men by their simple, yet happily their zeal is not alike: for rather had I be
thought unmannerly by this homely present, then undutiful by want of better
ability.

In like manner, right noble Lord, among those ripe and curious wits, that
offer to your learned view matter of value, squared and leueld by deep
knowledge and experience: a simple zealous man, more devoted in affection to
your honors welfare, then able to express the same as other can, presents this
rude and vnpullished piece of work, not handled with art, because I want it,
nor glozed with borrowed phrases, because I am loath to become indebted: but
equal with the poor Heardsmans potsheard, and with him choosing rather to be
thought homely, then undutiful, knowing that the Eagles eyes of Jupiter, can
search into the substance of the one and other.

This work of Palladine, with all his imperfections, I humbly commit to your
honorable protection: knowing, that in respect of your own love to Chivalry,
you will think well of him, and because he is an English man, in the better
sort favor him. For my self, as I never knew honor partial in opinion, but
with upright judgment to balance each man's deserving: so in this assurance,
with reverence, I end, as forward as any in affection to your Honor.

A. Monday.

To the corteous and freendly Readers.
MY promise was, that by Easter Term this work should be published, and
according to my promise, here do I send it: not doubting but you will so
favorably censure thereon, as my pains, and the pleasure of the History
deserves. If you happen to find any mislike in the translation, or that it is
not so current English as fine ears hunt after: let this serve as a sufficient
excuse for me, that in translating, men are bound to their Writers words, and
such as roue at random, may set down what they please.

And this I am to entreat on the Printers behalf, and mine own, whereas in
diverse places there are faults escaped, as words very much mistaken, many
left out, and others common: that you will freendly let pass such
ouer-sightes, and at the next Impression they shall be amended; for I being
often absent, and the Printer careful to end his work by appointed time, have
been the cause of all these escapes. Thus committing my Book and my self to
your favorable judgment, I cease. From my house without Cripple-gate this
23. of April.

Yours to be commanded, Anthony Monday.

THE Famous, pleasant, and variable History of Palladine. Discoursing of
Knightly and worthy deeds of Arms: and unfolding the love of many great
Princes and Lords, but especially of PALLADINE, Soon to the King Milanor of
England, and the fair Selerina, sister to the King of Portugal, etc.
CHAP. I.
* Of the birth of Prince PALLADINE, and the strange adventure that happened on
the day of his birth, in the City of London, before the Palace of King
Milanor.

AT what time the puissant and spacious Empire of Greece and most fertile Asia,
was held in subjection by the great Turk, and the Roman Monarchy was
commanded by the wise Emperor Justinian, Governor of both high and nether
Allmayne: reigned in great Brittayne, now called England, a King named Milanor,
who from his youth was so well instructed in good letters, and the Sciences
liberal, as among the most learned Doctors he was reckned peerless, before
he came to the age of eighteen years. During this time of his education, his
Governors to make him perfect in all things beseeming so great a Prince, caused
him to practice the managing of great Horses, to use the Tilt and Tourney,
with all other-feates of agilitie incident to Arms: wherein right soon he
grew so prompt and excellent, as all the Lords and Subjects of his Realm were
not only abashed at his forwardnes, but thought themselves especially blessed,
to live under the regiment of so brave a King. Nor was this joy alone to them,
but many other nations and foreign Princes did participate therein,
especially the Kings of Scotts and Norgalles his neighbors, who hearing of
the great bounty, prowess, magnanimity, and other lawdable virtues in this
King, determined to be friends to him and his, holding this opinion, that
being confederate with England in love, no other King or Prince durst molest
them with wars. Upon this consideration, they sent their Ambassadors to his
Majesty, to promise and swear peace, amity, and inviolable concord, with
obeisance, and acknowledging him their Superior, where they were received
honorably, and with content, a matter greatly auailing them afterward, as you
shall perceive by the following discourse of our History.

The King of Portugal understanding the manifold virtues, and power of King
Milanor, as also that so many Kings and Princes desired his freendly alliance,
prevailed so well by his sundry Embassades, as the King of England married with
his Sister named Selerina, fair in perfections, young and gracious among all
the Ladies in her time, and to continue holy love between this King and
Queen, soon after she was conceived with a goodly Son, at whose birth
happened such a marvelous adventure, as no registered memory records the like.

At what time the Queen was in travail, suddenly was the City of London
covered with a dark and fearful Cloud, the heavens delivering such thunder
and lightning, the earth likewise shaking and trembling so straungely, as the
Citizens expected death every moment, imagining the end of the world was come
upon them. For the space of two hours this wonderful tempest endured, until
the Queen was delivered of her burden, when the Cloud began to vanish away,
and the heavens looked fair and cheerful as before. After this despairing
Storm, the people who with fear and terror of the thunder, had hid themselves
in vaultes and caves, amazed and fearful, began to show themselves: but when
the Gentlemen in the Kings Palace came to open the windows, they beheld in
the great waste place before the Court, three Statues of Copper, each one about
eight foot in height, and by each of them stood a Collomne of black Marble,
on the foremost whereof, hanged a Sheeld of fine and pure Steel, right
curiously engraven and pollished, and enriched with many precious stones and
iewelles: in brief, such was the workmanship and devise thereof, as neither
sword, lance, or bullet from an Harquebuzo, could any way pierce or enter it.
Above this Sheeld on the same pillar, was engraven these verses in fair green
letters, whereto the Statue pointed with one of his fingers.

Pallas the wise Goddess, whose skill thus framed me,
Ordaind I must be given, unto the chief in chivalry.
The second Statue showed on his Pillar, the God of love Cupid, being framed of
massy Oriental Pearl, holding a golden bow in his hand, and his arrows in
a Quiver of gold by his side, under his feet on the Pillar was engraven these
verses in Roman letters.

No one so stout or affable, can take me from this place,
Except in loyalty of love, all other he surpass.
The third Statue, made in form of a goodly beawtifull woman, showed on the
Collomne standing by her, the Image of the Goddess Venus, in white Alablaster,
having on her head a Crown of Gold, embellished with many Rubies, Diamonds,
Emeraulds, and other precious Stones of great value. This Image of Venus held
in her left hand a flaming strebrand, and pointed with her right hand to the
Crown. Under her feet hung a Table, wherein was written two French verses,
thus Englished.

This Crown is for the Lady framd.
That chief in beauty shall be namd.
The two first Statues seemed like two fierce and strong Savage men, each of
them having a great fauchion hanging in Skarffes by their sides, and in such
sort were they charmed, as whosoever made offer to take the Crown, or touch
the God of Love, was immediately assailed by one of the men, who would not give
over till he had vanquished him. Many Knights of England, and other Countries,
adventured their fortunes at these Statues, but were still repulsed, until the
Knight came that conquered these monstrous men, as hereafter in the History
shall be declared.

In like manner, at the Image of Venus, the Ladies proffered to take away her
Crown, but the Statue standing by, repelled them continually, so that they
which once had assayed, durst meddle no more: wherefore, the Crown remained
unconquered, until the Lady came that surpassed all other in beawty, to whom
the honor of the Crown was vowed.

After they had long beheld and considered this adventure so admirable, and
unable to conjecture the meaning thereof, diverse went to advertise the King of
this accident, who was no less abashed heereat then the other were, especially
the Queen, whose fear was not a little, hearing the terrible thunder and
tempest that happened, by which occasion she had more speedy deliverance then
was expected, and with greater ease, then commonly women have: yet was the
child in such goodly shape, resembling his Father, as the Mother was highly
pleased therewith, hoping this Infant would remain an inviolable league of
love between the King and her, and the rather, the intelligence of this new
spectacle animated her therewith.

The King giving little credit to this strange report, went in person with all
the Princes and Lords of his Court to behold the same, and seeing that it was
true indeed, confessing likewise the thing in strangeness to surpass the
memory of all former adventures: he sent immediately for the most skillful
Philosophers in his Realm, who having learnedly considered thereof, assured the
King, that at the instant appearing of those rare spectacles, a Child should be
borne, that in bounty, prowess and loyalty, should exceed all the Knights
in the world: for whose renown, a wise Nigromancer had appointed that
occasion, that each curious eye might discern his rare virtues, among all that
should adventure for the Sheeld and Trophe of Cupid. Nor can we judge my Lord,
said these wise men, that the same is reserved for any other, then your newborn Son, at whose hour of birth, the Statues appeared, or (at least) some
other that shall issue from him: for our judgment in his Astracisme does
persuade us, that he shall be valiant and renowned in feats of Arms, and in
loyalty was never man found his second.

As for the Image of Venus, that bears the rich Crown, we guess (my Lord) it
is meant to some Daughter you shall have hereafter, who in beauty and
gracious nature, shall exceed all of her time. If it like your Majesty, to
make experience of what we have said, you must send for all the fairest Ladies
in your Realm, and permit them to try their virtue, in taking the Crown from
the head of the Image, in which attempt, you shall receive occasion of
exceeding pleasure: for the brazen statue which you behold standing by it, will
repulse the Ladies in such sort, as they shall repent their bold adventure.

The King very joyful to hear these news, said: By the faith of a Prince, I
will cause proof to be made hereof within these few days, and first, the
Ladies of our City of London shall begin, if they can not speed in their
attempt, the Ladies through our Realm shall be advertised thereof, as also
they of Scotland and Norgalles, which have commendation beyond other Nations
for beauty. In the mean while I will go confer with the Queen heereon, who
(as I think) will not be a little glad, to hear that such good fortune is
reserved for our young Son. As he was about to depart thence, he beheld the
inscriptions engraven on the Pillars, which causing to be read, and
understanding the effect of them all three: In sooth (quoth he) I will for the
love of Pallas, who framed this fair Sheeld, that my Son at his Christening
shall be named Palladine, which came so to pass, as you shall read hereafter.

CHAP. II.
How the King Milanor recounted the marvel of the three Statues to the
Queen, and of the great Triumphs was made at the Baptizing of the young Prince,
who was named Palladine.

THE King having advisedly considered this strange accident, and understood to
what end it was appointed, went very joyfully to the Queens Chamber, and there
to her rehearsed what the wise men had said, which news were so welcome to
her, as nothing could be more. I know behooves us Madame (quoth he) to
forethinke on the Baptizing of our Son, who shall be his Sureties in that
holy Sacrament, to which I can request no fitter persons, then our freendly,
breethren and neighbors, the Kings of Scotland and Norgalles, so please you
Madame to join with me in opinion. The Queen was so well contented with this
motion, as Ambassadors were immediately dispatched, who so well executed the
trust committed to their charge, as the Kings reputed themselves highly honored
by this request, and all things are now preparing for the Baptism of this
noble young Prince. At the arrival of these two Kings, great joys and triumphs
were made by the Citizens of London, and as concerning their entertainment at
the Court, you must think it was according to their high estates, withal,
that Englishmen are not to learn to welcome Strangers.

When the day was come that the young Prince should be Christened, as the King
his Father had requested, he was named Palladine: and afterward, to honor the
tune and the royal company, there wanted no worthy devises, with exquisite
Chivalry performed both at the Tilt and Tourney, wherein the King of Scots
bare great estimation, being a young Prince, aged six and twenty years, and
one, that in Knightly exercises carried especial account. Yet was not this joy
alone in the Court, but in London likewise the Citizens showed the like, where
the Conduits ran diverse sorts of Wines, the Streets were stored with Tables
before the doors, and all kind of good cheer placed thereon, with such
ringing of Belles, and making Bone-fiers, as never was the like seen before
that time. It were too long a matter to rehearse, what brave Theaters were
erected, and therein presented most excellent Comedies, with Maskes, Mommeries,
and all kind of delightful inventions, during the time of this Feast, which
continued fifteen days together. It shall suffice me to tell ye, how the
King Milanor hearing that the Kings of Scotland and Norgalles would now return
home again, was desirous to have the adventure tried of the three Statues
before they went, and therefore caused to be proclaimed by sound of Trompet,
through all the streets in London, that all Knights and Gentlemen should on
the morrow come to the Palace, to adventure their fortune for the rich Sheeld,
and the God Cupid, so that if any one could take them from the Statues, with
right good will they should enjoy them. The like protestation was made of the
Image of Venus, and the rich Crown, which was destenied to the most
accomplished Lady in beauty, the fame whereof, called fair beauties darlings
to the Court on heaps, each one thinking to bear away the Crown, by the
benefit of her amiable looks. Wherefore, the place and hour being appointed,
God knows how they labored to augment their natural beauty by arteficiall
means, as ointments, distilled waters, perfumes, and other like extraordinary
matters, which many Gentlewomen (who have any natural imperfection) at this
day use to make them seem more amiable.

But now is the day come to make trial of the adventure, when the King
Milanor, with the Kings of Scotland and Norgalles, and all the Ladies of the
Court, went to the void place before the Palace, and there on a fair
Skaffolde covered with rich Tapistrie, sat down to take view of the valiant
Knights, who durst presume to take the Sheeld from the Pillar. No sooner were
they placed as beseemed their estates, but twelve English Knights, esteemed of
greatest courage and valor in the Country, presented themselves (well armed)
to try their fortune.

After they had done reverence to the Kings and Estates present, he that
imagined himself of highest resolution among them, stepped up on four of the
stairs before the Pillar, thinking to reach the Sheeld that hung thereon, but
the enchaunted Image drawing his fauchion, with such furious strokes repulsed
him down again, as he durst not presume to meddle any more, to the no little
marvel of the King and his company, who were not wont to behold such uncouth
spectacles.

Next, came a gallant young Knight, well provided with a Roman Target, and a
short arming Sword, and with marvelous valor, he ran up the steps before
the Collomne, and attained to the highest step of all, but he went down again
sooner then he expected, for the Image threw him so violently back again, as
he tumbled headlong down the stairs to the ground. Like fortune fell to the
rest of the twelve, some showing greater magnanimity in fight then other did,
yet their foil was alike, and this Sheeld of honor could not be won by any
of them.

Then came the Queen to the Skaffold, where the Kings sat, and understanding
how the Knights had sped in this first Adventure, she said. Strange is it (my
good Lords) that no one of our Knights can prevail, let the Gentlemen prove
the adventure of the second Statue, whereon the God of love shows himself,
which must be conquered by none (as I hear) but by the most loyal Knight in
the world, by this mean shall we know them that have best deserved toward
their Ladies, and who exceeds all other in constancy, Madame, answered the
King Milanor, we think your council very necessary, for long will this
Sheeld hang here, if no other Knights then of our Realm come to try their
fortune: such therefore as hold best opinion of their own loialtie, make
trial of your virtue at the God of Love, and free liberty we grant to all
strange Knights, as to them of our Realm, which our Heralds shall signify
for their better assurance.

CHAP. III.
How many Knights and Gentlemen of England, Scotland, and Norgalles,
adventured to win the Image of Cupid, destenied to the most loyal, and how
they were all repulsed: and the Ladies likewise in their trial for the rich
Crown.

WHen the Herald had publicly delivered his charge, the King commanded all
the Knights to unarm themselves, for loyalty (quoth he) is not to be
discovered by arms, but by the hidden virtue and thought, consisting in the
heart of a man. My Lord, said the Queen, had you not assured me to whom this
adventure is reserved, I would have entreated your Majesty to make the first
trial. Then Madame, quoth the King, you have some suspicion of my loyalty.
Not so my Lord, said she, for nothing is less in my thought, and so certain
persuasion do I hold thereof, as I fear not that all present should behold
your virtue, to the greater enlarging of your honor and mine own.

While these speeches passed, a young English Gentleman came to mount the steps,
that environed the Collomne whereon the God of Love stood, but as he lifted
his foot to the nethermost step, the Statue tumbled him back, with his heels
upward, so that every one laughed heartily thereat. In sooth my friend, said the
King, very little loyalty remains in you, whom love cannot abide the sight
of, if your Lady be in this company, good occasion has she to get her a better
servant.

Then came another, who had many times inuocated on the name and favor of his
Mistress, and he without any impeachment mounted on the third step, making an
offer to attain the fourth, but the Statue thrust him down again, whereby he
might perceive his own insufficiency, Believe me, quoth the Queen, he has
done much better than the other, and the Lady he loves, is greatly beholding
to him, for justly may he be accounted loyal, in that the Image suffered him
to ascend so high.

Then one of the King of Norgalles Knights came to try his fortune, whom the
Statue repulsed with such shame, as all the day after he would not be seen, I
promise ye Gentleman, said the King his master, you might have spared the
labor in coming so far, to return home with so foul a rebuke, and little
need had ye to show us your great inconstancy, brother quoth the King of
Scots, be not offended with him, for well he knows, that his Mistress is not
in this company. You say true brother, answered the King of Norgalles, but if
I knew her, I would advertise her of his exceeding virtue.

Here commes another of my Knights to make a better proof, and yet perhaps,
will amend his fellows dishonor. The Knight attained the highest step, without
any disturbance, and as he lifted his hand to take the Image of Cupid, the
Statue took him by the arm, and set him on the ground again, I see then,
said the King of Norgalles, each one must here be judged according to the
greatness and defect of his loyalty.

Afterward came a little Scottishman, as thick as tall, his beard growing
scattering like bristles, his nose flat to his face, two teeth standing before
gagd out of his mouth, a man in every part very much misshapen, and serving as a
Iester to make the King laugh, he had married a woman as handsome as himself,
yet was he jealous of her out of all measure. This proper Squire seeing so many
repulsed by the Statue, by breach of their loyalty to their Wives and Ladies,
considered with himself, that he had never violated the bonds of marriage, but
evermore kept his faith to his wife, therefore he would hazard his good hap,
not doubting but to carry the Image of Cupid with him into Scotland. Having
demanded leave of the King his Master, with a little cudgel in his hand, he
came to the Collomne, and went up to the very highest step, the Statue not
offering any sign of resistance: but as this deformed fellow would have
embraced the Image of Cupid, the Statue snatched the cudgel out of his hand,
and so rapt him therewith about the shoulders, as he was constrained to hye him
down again, the Kings and all present merrily laughing at this jest. Alas
poor fool, said the King of Scots, how durst thou presume to show thy self
in this action? Why my Lord, answered the Queen, your little man is yet found
the most loyal, and no Gentleman this day has witnessed the like. Believe me
Madame, answered the King of Scots, it is against his will that he is so
loyal, for being so evil favored and deformed, how can he find any woman to
offend with him. Come hither little fellow said the King Milanor, you have
been beaten with your own cudgel, because ye came no better provided: but
that the honor of the day may remain to you, I will that at this present no
further trial shall be made, enough has been done my men, let now the
Ladies by their beauty adventure for the rich Crown of Venus, and let it
suffice that a little fellow has strained all our Knights. The Queen in
person began the enterprise, but rejected as unworthy of the fatal Crown, and
after her followed the Ladies of the Court, whose fortunes were like or worsse
in effect, to their no little disgrace in their own conceits, who prized
their beauties at the highest rate. The London Danies had likewise their time
of proof, yet could their dainty faces carry no pawn in this attempt, for
the Crown was reserved for the only Lady, who might not be paragonned by any
other whatsoever.

CHAP. IIII.
How after all the Triumphs were ended, performed at the Baptism of the young
Prince Palladine, and the adventures thus left of the three Statues, the Kings
of Scotland and Norgalles took their leave of the King Milanor and the Queen,
and returned from England into their own Countries.

BY this time were all the Princes and Ladies thoroughly satisfied with the
pastimes, wherefore with sound of Trompets, Clarions and Cornets, they returned
to the Palace, where was prepared for them a most royal banquet: and because
the Kings of Scotland and Norgalles were to depart on the morrow, the Citizens
of London in honor of their Prince, came with diverse stately Maskes to the
Palace, where they behaved themselves to their credit, and the Kings good
liking.

Afterward entered the hall twelve Gentlemen of the Court, in complete Armor,
with blunt Foyles and Targets, when dividing themselves six against six,
having for their bar two Pykes, which were held overthwart by two of the
Kings Guard, they laid on each other such eager strokes, as their swords flew
in pieces, and their Armor was battered in many places. Then they withdrew
themselves, giving place to twelve other, who Combatted with the Pyke, arming
Sword and Battle-Axe, and thus was the night consumed in such disports, to
delight the Kings of Scotland and Norgalles, who in the morning took their
leave of the King and Queen, and were conducted on their journey by many
English Lords. The King Milanor and his Queen being not a little contented,
that the Princes had done them such honor in their Realm, but greatest of all
was their comfort in their Son Palladine, who in prowess and loyalty should
surpass all other of his time, and was carefully nourished by a virtuous
Gentlewoman, wife to an aged Squire, named Romandrin of Gaul, with whom he
remained, till he came to the age of five years.

About this time the Queen travailed again, and was delivered of two goodly
Daughters being Twins, the one whereof was named Marcelina, and the other
Floraea: these sweet babes were tenderly regarded in the Court, and there will
we leave them with the Queen their Mother, remembering young Palladine, who is
in the custody of grave and learned tutors, enstructed in the Languages, as
also Greek and Latin, wherein he profited so well, as at ten years he
could speak them as perfect as his English tongue. Heerewithall he practiced
Knightly Chivalry, to manadge great Horses, and all Gentlemanlike exercises,
searching the bowelles of the cheifest Historians, from them to learn the
practices and sleights of Millitarie profession. And when the time would not
serve him to Hawke and Hunt, he would keep himself from idleness with his
Lute, Bandora and Uirginalles, with diverse other sweet Instruments, wherein he
took delight, and grew very excellent.

This young Prince thus given to all honest and virtuous quallities, began to
have some feeling of his high and magnanimous spirit, so that to experiment and
try his own strength, he would cope with diverse young Lords and Gentlemen of
his age, to run in the Listes, to break Lances, to Combat with the Mace,
the Arming-sword, and all other weapons, both on horssebacke, and on foot. In
all which exercises, he found not his equal, which made him desirous of the
order of Knighthood, to the end he might seek after strange Adventures, as the
King his Father had done in his youthful time. Thus continued he six or
seven months in this desire, not daring to aquaint the King his Father
therewith, least he should refuse his request in respect of his young years,
but the destenies, who foresawe the marvelous deeds of Arms he should
accomplish, and the strange encha^^^ments that should be finished by him,
would not suffer (...) remain long slothful in his Fathers Court among (...)
Ladies and beautiful creatures, but bringing his (...) to perfection, found
the mean that he should be Knig^^^d by the King his Father, as hereafter you
shall read^ more at large.

CHAP. V.
How the Duke Temoreo of Millaine, sent his Son Manteleo into England, to be
made Knight with the Prince Palladine, and how Manteleo became enamoured of the
Princess Marcelina.

DUring this time, the Duke of Millaine had a Son named Ma^^eleo, a young
Prince, and of virtuous nature, bravely disposed to Knightly resolutions, and
being aged about eighteen years. He having oftentimes heard the famous
report, every where bruted of the Prince Palladine of England, and what a
strange adventure happened at his birth, which could not as yet be ended by
any, was very desirous to go see him, that he might be aquainted with the
Prince so renowned. And one day finding the Duke his Father walking in his
Garden, he came and kneeled before him, desiring license for three or four
months, to travail into England, that he might be aquainted with the Prince
Palladine, of so especial report, as also the wise and debonaire King Milanor
his Father, with whom (quoth he) all Kings and Princes lovers of virtue, have
evermore desired freendly alliance. Witness heerof is the King of Portugal,
the Kings of Scots and Norgalles, and diverse other Princes strangers: by his
hand my Lord, so it stand with your liking, would I receive my order of
Knighthood, which he I hope will not deny me, in respect of his own gracious
humanity, and the consideration he will have of your person, when he shall
understand that I am your Son.

The Duke hearing his Son in these terms, was well pleased to behold him of
so good a mind, and contented likewise to grant what he demanded, saying. In
sooth my Son, seeing France and England are now in peace together, the less
do I doubt of thy going thither, and boldly may thou assure him, that he has
a perpetual friend of me, determine then to depart when thou will, forthwith
shall I give order for thy provision in travail: but return not till thou
have tried the adventure so renowned, which happened before the Kings Palace on
the day of his Sons birth, and if thy good fortune may bring it to an end,
well may thou entreat the King for thy Order, in that thou shall well
deserve thy Knighthood, seeing so many have failed in trial thereof. Manteleo
having humbly thanked the Duke his Father, for granting him the thing he only
desired, said. I promise you my Lord, that I will not return thence without
proof of my fortune, albeit I were sure to be repulsed more sharply then any
has been heretofore: yet since the adventure is so ordained, let me dye ere
I be dishonored with fear or dismaying. Hereupon, the Duke called the master
of his Horse, to whom he gave charge to provide his Sons estate toward
England, and that all things might be ready for his departure within three
days following: which was accordingly performed, and so the Prince Manteleo
with his train set forward from Millaine, in the week next after Pentecost,
making such expedition in travail, as having passed the fairest Cities in
France, which he was desirous to see, he came to Bullin, where he took
shipping, and with a merry gale of wind, in less then eighteen hours, he
landed in England.

The King Milanor advertised of his arrival, was greatly contented therewith,
commanding in all the Towns where-through he should pass, that he should be
received and entreated honorably. And when he drew near London, the Governors
were charged to meet him on the way, the Prince Palladine likewise to welcome
him at the City gates, and the King with his Queen and Ladies, remained at
the Palace to entertain him. Every thing thus performed in greatest
majesty, the Prince of Millaine was received with general joy of the
Citizens, and the Prince Palladine accompanied with many great Lords of
England, to whom Manteleo behaved himself with honorable modesty, as well he
could his Courtship in those affairs, and riding along with the English
Prince, he entered into these speeches.

The fame of so many lawdable virtues, accompanied with heroical prowess and
magnanimity, which amply are discerned in your daily cogitations, has
earnestly provoked me (good Prince) to be aquainted with you, for which only
occasion, I left my native Country, to see this Realm, every where named
happy, by the honorable regiment of the King your Father, whose virtues you
imitate so effectually, as you remain a wonder to them that never saw you. And
long may good success attend your daily actions, heaven making me so
fortunate, to win acceptance in your eyes, in that I have devoted my self to
esteem of you above all other.

Sir Manteleo, answered the Prince Palladine, as I know my self far
unworthy these titles of praise, so am I persuaded, that your speeches proceed
of good affection toward me, flying reports are oftentimes found untrue: yet
do not I mislike your opinion of me, which has sorted out the mean to see and
know you in this Country, as our honorable and well wishing friend. Of the
King my Father have I heard of your parents, and good acquaintance has he had
with the Duke your Father, when as a Knight errant he sought after adventures:
assure your self therefore right welcome hither, and gladly shall I accept of
you as my friend and companion. Thus beguiled they the time, til they came to
the Palace, where the Prince of Millaine stayed to behold the Statues, reading
the devises he had so long desired to see, whereat, not able to marvel
sufficiently, they went on into the great Hall, where the King embraced him
very lovingly, the Princes and Lords likewise present, entertained him with
exceeding kindness and humanity, in that they had heard the King many times
report, the worthy chivalry of the Duke of Millaine his Father.

After the King had welcomed this stranger with manyfold courtesies, and had
understood the cause of his coming to his Court, he sent him with the Prince
Palladine to salute the Queen and her Daughters. But love, whose puissance as
yet he had never felt, finding time and opportunity so convenient, when
Manteleo had done his reverence to the Queen, coming to the Princesses that
attended on her, having kissed the first, named Marcelina: he found his senses
so strangely inueigled, as he stood silent before her a pretty while, being
not able to deliver one word, so was he ravished with contemplation of her
beauty. Which the Princess well noting, and imagining this passion to
proceed by bashfulnesse, or fear, which oftentimes preuents young Gentlemen
when they enter the presence of great Ladies, she took the Prince by the hand,
and thus began.

My Lord, you are so welcome, as your own heart can wish, great has been your
pain and travail, coming so far to see this Court, no sufficient
recompense can the King our Father make ye, nor we poor Ladies, for this
exceeding kindness. These words forcing Manteleo to recover his spirits,
caused him return this answer.

In coming hither (sweet Madame) have I sustained no pain or travail, but
rather comfort, pleasure, and pastime. For long since is it, that I desired to
offer my service to the King your Father, as well for the rare virtues which
makes him far renowned, as also to renew the ancient amity, that ye and
the Duke my Father have had together, when they as Knights errant trauayled
strange Countries. Another and chief cause, was to see my Lord your Brother,
whose second in prowess is not to be found: and you likewise fair Ladies,
whom heaven has not only enriched with especial virtues, but also with rare
and most perfect beauty. And though my Stars allotted me no greater good
hereby, then to behold the surpassing work of nature in you both, yet would I
repute my travail more largely requited, then were I created Emperor of the
world, adjoining here to, if any service remained in me that might be to your
liking.

During these speeches, he threw many piercing looks on the Princess
Marcelina, and she returned the like on him, thinking she had never seen a
more comely Knight in all perfections, her Brother Palladine excepted,
gathering by his looks and yielding countenance, that she had won some
earnest in his love: with which imagination, her heart was highly contented, and
to continue him in this good affection, she thus replied.

Not a little do I think my self beholding to you, my good Lord, noting your
forward zeal to the King my Fathers service: loath am I to press ye with such
regard toward me, in that my deseruings are altogether too simple, let my good
will then excuse my want, assuring your self of a maidens prayers wheresoever
you go.

As Manteleo would have answered, the Prince Palladine came, and thus brake
off their talk. I beseech ye my Lord and companion, to withdraw your self
into your Chamber, there to repose your self after your journey, for of
necessity you must be sore wearied, having spent so little time between
Millaine and England.

Manteleo departed to his Chamber with Palladine, and in two lodgings joining
together lay these new friends. There did the Millayne Prince cloth himself
in brave and sumptuous garments, not forgetting the gra^ious speeches of fair
Marcelina. who likewise so soon as he departed, could not keep in her own
opinions, but with her Sister fell in commendation of Manteleo: settling the
love of him so near her heart, as she resolved never to have any other
Husband, so pleased the King and Queen to give their consent. Continuing in
this determination, thence forward her extreme desires made her pensive and
solitary, yet would she not impart her disease to any one, because she would
first make trial of the Princes constancy, least his love might be impeached
with dissembling ^alliaunce.

But now is the hour of Supper come, when the amorous Prince Manteleo was
placed at the table, right over against his beloved Marcelina, neither of them
being offended at this good hap, but using the same as an especial benefit,
with secret glaunces to court each other. Which the Princess Floraea
dilligently marked, and seeing her Sister so often to change her couller,
coupling therewith many bitten in sighs, she tofore having never showed the
like: became jealous of the matter, thinking the Prince should as soon affect
her as her Sister, yet made she no outward show of this conceit. But when the
Tables were withdrawn, and each one preparing themselves to dance, Manteleo
took his Lady Marcelina, without making any offer to Floraea, wherewith she
became so mal content as to despite them, she would every day after sit so
near them, as they could not speak one word to each other, but she might
easily understand what they said.

The Prince well noting how he was crossed, would the oftener entertain
Marcelina to Dance, taking the benefit at the end of each Measure, which gave
them liberty to confer together, no one in those excused times being able to
impeach them, whereat Floraea greatly repined, seeing them talk with such
affectionate protestations.

The Pastimes ended, the King and Queen went to their lodgings, Manteleo
humbly giving them the good night, not forgetting the Saint he served in
desires, and afterward the Prince Palladine accompanied him to his Chamber,
where after many other speeches between them, they concluded on the morrow to
request their Knighthood of the King. So Palladine left Manteleo for that
night, whose mind was busied with his Ladies favorable words, not doubting but
to show himself so forward in Arms, as the Princess should receive good
occasion to affect him, and grant him the honor he earnestly desired. In this
good hope he laid him down to rest, the Princess Marcelina nothing inferior
to him in amorous opinions, and that night her brother Palladine had told her,
that Manteleo and he would entreat their Order of the King, wherewith she was
not alittle contented, determining thence forward, to entertain the Prince of
Millaine as her Knight.

CHAP. VI.
How the Princes Palladine and Manteleo, with many other great Lords, were
Knighted by the King Milanor: and of an adventure that happened in the Court,
which Palladine and Manteleo ended.

Fair Aurora chasing away the clowdie night, the Prince Palladine, accompanied
with many Gentlemen, came to bid Manteleo good morrow. Why? my Lord and
companion, quoth he, it seems you have forgotten what we determined
yesternight. Pardon me good Prince, answered Manteleo, my memory is not so
short: but so sweetly have I slept this night, as hindered me from rising
sooner. Then went they to salute the King, and entreated his Highness to
grant them their Knighthood. When his Majesty perceiving their forwardness,
and noting the earnest desire of Manteleo, thus answered.

Loath am I to deny your request, albeit as yet you are ouer-yong, but the good
opinion I have of your prowess, and fortunate success that may befall ye
hereafter: does supply your want of years, wherefore, this night perform
the holy watch, and to morrow will I give ye your Order. The two Princes humbly
thanking his Majesty, went to give order for their Armor and furniture, and
at night they entered the Chapel, where spending the time in the accustomed
religious exercise, they expect the hour of their long desired honor.

In the morning, the King with his Nobility entered the Chapel, and as he was
busied in the Ceremonies used in such affairs, there entered two Damsels very
bravely apparelled, each of them having a goodly Sword in her hand, and with
them was an armed Knight: then one of the Damsels coming before the King,
upon her knee delivered these speeches.

Mighty and renowned King, excelling in virtue all Princes living, understand,
that this Knight my Brother, is enchaunted by a wicked Sorcerer, for not
granting to accomplish his carnal desire, so that since the time of his
refusal, he has not conuersed with any woman in the world, not with his own
Wife here present, but hates all Women to the death, to the no little grief
of me and my fair Sister, seeing her self so despised of her husband, without
giving any occasion of offense. Any many Countries have we travailed, to find
the man or woman that can end this enchauntment, yet hitherto have we lost all
our labor. But true it is, that as we passed through the lesser Aegipt, we
happened to meet with an ancient Lady, who gave us these two Swords, which
(as she said) cannot be drawn by any, but by two Knights, the most valiant
and loyal of their tune. These worthy men shall vncharme this Knight, and to
them belong these Swords, being the best that ever were framed, and their names
that shall draw these Swords out of their scabbards, are engraven on the
weapons, yet not to be seen till they be drawn. Wherefore right mighty King,
we humbly entreat, that this sad adventure may be tried by your Knights, for
very often have we heard, that this Court is stored with men of greatest virtue.

If the King and all present, were amazed at the coming of the Damsels and
the Knight, much more were they by hearing the reason of the enchantment.

In sooth, said that Queen, I cannot but pity the poor Gentleman, that for
the careful regard of his loyalty, he should receive so great discourtesie.
Doubtless, quoth the King, he was a cruel villain that enchaunted him on
this occasion, and were he here, either would I cause him to end the
enchauntment himself, or recompense him with his just deserts. As for you Lady
that are Sister to this Knight, right gladly do I grant what you have
requested, and never could you have come in better time, for the greatest part
of the Knights in our Realm are here at our Court, besides, diverse other am
I presently to endue with the Order, which being done, they shall all try
their fortune in this adventure. Heerevpon, the new Knights were immediately
dubbed, and each after other labored to pull forth the enchaunted Swords,
which they could not stir the length of half a foot, except Orliman of
Flaunders, and Durandell of Cieue, who drew them wel-neere to the midst.

The new Knights Palladine and Manteleo, seeing no one could altogether
vnsheath them, took the Swords to try what they were able to do, and they
drew them forth so easily as they had been their own weapons, each one
rejoicing the adventure was ended, especially Marcelina, who by this first
proof perceived, what Knightly bounty and loyalty remained in her friend.
The Damsels being glad of this good hap, the Knights Sister thus spoke to the
King.

Yet is not this all Sir, so it may stand with your liking^ my brother must dub
these Knights with these Swords, and they are to grant him one request, which
he shall afterward demand of them. For that I am content, said the King, but
let us see whose names are engraven on the Swords. Palladine showed his to the
King, and thereon was engraven in great Roman Lett^^ these words, Palladine of
Aquilea, whereat he was ^^th joyful and amazed, that the Surname of Aquilea
was given to Palladine. For Aquilia was a Realm under the government of the
Pagans, and Palladine was a Christian, nor could he tell what to imagine
hereof, but desired Manteleo to show his Sword* whereon was engraven in the
like Characters, Manteleo the Millaynois, which made him equal with his
companion in gladness, but most of all fair Marcelina, in whose breast loves
fire more and more enkindled.

The strange Knight feeling himself released from enchauntment, took the
Swords, and therewith gave the Order to the two Princes, afterward thus
speaking to them. Will ye (my Lords) grant me now one boon? That shall we
Sir, quoth they, the King has already promised, we must not then deny it. My
request is, said the Knight, that you would depart hence with me within these
three days, and accompany me to the place whither I shall conduct ye.
Hereof will we not fail, answered Palladine, so please ye to set forward to
morrow. Not so, quoth the King, you must foreth^ke in what equipage you are to
depart hence, as also what company you must have with ye: beside, I will that
the Knight and the Ladies rest themselves awhile in our Court.

If Palladine was joyful to follow adventures, you must think Manteleo was as
sorry, seeing he must so soon forsake his Marcelina, who having likewise heard
what was concluded, showed by the change of her vermilion color to pale and
wan, how greatly this separation displeased her, devising by what means she
might hinder this voyage.

Manteleo beholding the tears in his Ladies eyes, imagined the cause, and
thereby her earnest affection toward him, which touched him inwardly with such
assaults, as feeling a sudden weakness to surprise him, he was forced to
lean on his Squires shoulder, whereat the King maruailing, said. How now Sir
Manteleo? are you not well? In sooth my Lord, quoth he, never was I in so
strange an alteration before. I perceive said the King the cause hereof,
these Ladies adventure has kept you too long fasting, high time is it that you
had some refection. The Prince was contented to allow this fit excuse, least
otherwise his secret love should be disclosed. Let us to meat then, said the
King, for long fasting is hurtful, and mine own stomach tells me that it is
dinner time.

CHAP. VII.
Of the feast was made, after the two Princes Palladine and Manteleo were
Knighted, and how they (...) the adventure of the Statues, which they could fi^^

SO departed the King from the Chapel, and in the great Hall the Tables were
covered for dinner, where wanted no store of choice and dainty delicates,
exceeding the rather at this time, for the honor of the new made Knights. The
Prince Manteleo sat in his wonted place before Marcelina, but unhappy was it
for her, that her Sister Floraea sat so near her, who still remained
suspicious of their silence, by which occasion, these tormented lovers durst
not speak to each other, but all dinner time with humble and affectionate
regards, they delivered the secret messages of their hearts. When the Tables
were withdrawn, some falling to dancing, and others to devise with their
Ladies: by good hap, one of the new Knights, being one of the cheifest Lords
in the Court, entreated the Princess Floraea to dance, mean while the
Millanois had leisure to court his mistress.

Well my good Lord, quoth she, is there no remedy but we must loose your
company within these three days? believe me, little did I think you would
have left us so soon. Assure your self Madame, said the Prince, there is
nothing can be more displeasant to me, but in respect, I cannot with honesty,
and without great impeach to mine honor, gainsay the matter so absolutely
promised, let me entreat ye not to misdeeme of any thing. And here I vow by
the religious faith I owe to your excellency, that hither will I return
again so soon as I can possible. Beside, if the Knight whom we must
accompany, shall offer to stray far from this Realm, some sufficient excuse
will I find to forsake his company. Mean while, let me entreat ye to
afford me thus much favor, to accept me as your Knight and servant: and if as
yet I have delivered no desert, whereby I might attain to such a tipe of
happiness, I hope such shall be my behavior hereafter, as you shall have no
cause to repent your gift.

Ah my Lord, quoth she, such sovereignty have you gained over my thoughts, as
nothing can I refuse, what you with honor request: I accept you then as my
Knight (with which words she took a rich Diamond from her finger) in sign
whereof, take this jewel, and wear it for my sake wheresoever you come
hereafter. He taking the ring with exceeding reverence, thus answered.

Sweet Madame, most humbly do I thank ye for this favor, which I will keep
as mine own life. And needless is it for you to give me any thing, whereby I
might the better remember ye, for so lively is your divine figure imprinted in
my heart, that no fortune, how good or bad so ever can have power to blemish or
deface. As she was about to answer, the King started from his chair, and
coming to the Prince Manteleo, said, Better leisure to dance shall we have
after supper, let us now go see our young Knights in the Listes, to try if
since their order was given, their strength is impaired or increased.

Then ceased the instruments and the dancing, the Knights going all to arm
themselves, each one very joyful of this occasion, but especially the Prince
Manteleo, for the great desire he had to be seen in the Ioust, yet remembering
the adventure of the Statues, fame would he try his fortune there ere he
entered the Listes, and moving the King thereof, his Majesty liked it very
well, who with the Queen, and all the Courtly assistants, came to their wonted
Scaffold, when the Prince Palladine was the first that adventured for the
Sheeld, saying. I have heard that such as labored to win this Sheeld, have
been very sharply repulsed by this Statue, but I think it was through want
of demanding license to take it, therefore will I reason with the keeper
thereof, to know if this Sheeld be destenied to me. So advancing himself to
the Statue, armed at all points very bravely, he thus spoke. Suffer me (fair
Image) to take this Sheeld down without the Combat, or if I may not have it
otherwise, determine to defend thy self. The Statue made in resemblance of a
sauadge man, thus replied. I will not Combat with one so young, and a Knight so
unexperienced as thou art, therefore I council thee to go make proof of thy
bounty else where, then will I deal with thee in Combat, otherwise, never
think to win this Sheeld. I see well said Palladine to Manteleo, that the end
hereof is not reserved for me. Try (my Lord) if your fortune be any better
then mine. Heerevpon, Manteleo mounted the steps, thinking to go take down the
Sheeld, but the Statue thrust his hand before it, saying. Nor is it (as yet)
for thee, that thou should attempt to take this Sheeld, it behoues thee to
be much more exercised in arms, and therefore content thy self. Good reason
have I to think, said Manteleo, that I have not as yet merited so high a
guerdon, by reason of my insufficiency in martial affairs, therefore I will
presume no further: but in the adventure of Cupid* predestined to the most
loyal, after you Sir Palladine will I hazard my self.

By my faith, quoth the Prince, I will not meddle with him, for (as yet) I have
nothing to do with the God of Love, nor know I what puissance he has over
human creatures, therefore will I stand forth of his reach. The like may I
say, quoth Manteleo, yet will I attempt to win his portrait: so giving a
piercing glaunce on the Princess Marcelina, he drew his Sword, and with
resolved assurance approached the Statue, who presently snatching his fauchion
from his side, resisted him in such sort, as between them was a long and
doubtful Combat, to the great admiration of the King and all present. Yet
maugre the peasant strokes of the brazen Image, he attained to the highest step
of all, each one then thinking that Cupid was his own: but so weighty were
the cruel charges of the Statue, as he was enforced to fall down backward in
a swoune, to the great grief of the King, Queen, and Palladine, but cheefely
of Marcelina, who seeing his Armor broken in so many places, and the blood (as
she thought) to issue from him so abundantly, persuaded her self that he had
yielded up his ghost. Ah gentle Prince, quoth she to her self, if thou be
dead, I am the only cause thereof, for well I know, that for my love thou
did enterprise this adventure, too dear have thou bought thy coming into
England and the earnest affection thou did bear to me.

While Marcelina continued these regrets, the Prince Palladine with other
Knights recovered Manteleo, and vnarming him, perceived he was not wounded at
all, but weary and ouer-trauailed, with so long resisting the cruel blows of
the Image, whereon could none of the Princes strokes be discerned, though the
clanching of his weapon made a wonderful noise. Manteleo finding himself
fresh and lusty, would have returned again to the Statue, but the King stayed
him with these words.

Me thinks (my Lord) you have done enough already, let others now have time
for their trial. At which speeches, the other Knights followed as their
turns came, each one being as roughly handled as the Prince Manteleo: who
grieved that he had not ended the adventure, thinking that Marcelina would
withdraw her affection, reputing him unworthy her love, that could deliver no
better proof of his loyalty. And in truth at the first she was jealous
thereof, but in the end she persuaded her self, that such a hidden virtue could
not be discerned in a man, until he received the sweetes of love by his Lady,
which opinion made her zeal more vehement to the Prince.

The King seeing the day was very far spent, referred the rest of the sports
till the morrow, when Manteleo had good hope to recover his honor in the Ioust,
to the especial good liking of his Lady and mistress. So the King with his
Lords returned to the Palace, and the Knights having unarmed themselves, came
into the Chamber of Presence, where the Prince devising with his fair
Goddess, with many persuasions excused his bad success, which she could not
but take in good part, considering that entire love couers all occasions of
dislike.

CHAP. VIII.
How Manteleo wun the honor of the Tournament, and vanquished two strange
Knights.

NOw is the day come, when the young Knights should show themselves in open
feeld, except the Prince Manteleo, who excused himself by riding on hunting,
and therefore borrowing his friend Palladines hounds, left the Court, causing
his horse and armor to be secretly conuaide to a keepers Lodge, which was a
mile and more from the City, because he would not have any one know what he
intended. Mean while the Ioustes began, the King maruelling at the absence of
Manteleo, especially Palladin and fair Marcelina, who missing her friend at
dinner, imagined he was gone without bidding her adieu, and the occasion
thereof to be, because he had failed in the adventure of Cupid.

The Champions coming into the feeld, the foremost were Mustiell of Rostock,
and Brunifort his brother, on the other side came Durandell of Cleue, and
Orliman of Flaunders, with all their company in seemly equipage. When the
Heralds had commanded the Knights to their deuoire, Mustiell and Durandell
gave the spurs to their horses, and after they had broken three Lances* a
piece with brave chivalry, at the fourth encounter they met together so
furiously, as they were both cast forth of their saddles to the ground. Next
followed Brunifort and Orliman, who dismounted each other at the first attaint,
but Brunifort recovered his horse again quickly, when Sedonis Son to the
Duke of Suffolk bad him play, yet accompanied Orliman in his misfortune.
Hereupon, Grinday, son to the Duke of Orton, revenged his fellows wrong*
and such valor they showed on either side, as the honor of the day was given
to them, the King with all his Nobles being ready to depart: when suddenly
entered the Lystes two strange Knights in white Armor, resembling each other,
the one bearing in his Sheeld three Griffons Sable volant, in a feeld Argent,
the other, three Griffons Argent in a Sable feeld.

After these Knights had shown many carires, and brave voltages with their
horses before the Ladies, one of them encountered Brunifort with such courage,
as he was thrown to the ground with his heels upward: the like success had
Mustiell, Orliman, and the rest, to the no little admiration of the King and
all the Ladies, and great vexation of Palladine, who would not Ioust, because
his companion Manteleo was not there.

As the King was about to depart, giving the prize to these two strange
Knights, there entered the Lystes another Champion in white Armor, bearing in
his Sheeld a Heart Guelles, bound with a golden chain, and without making any
reverence, or showing any brauadoes with his horse, he met one of the strange
Knights so roughly, as he was sent to measure his length on the ground. The
other strange Knight, to revenge his fellows injury, came courageously
against this new-come Knight, and after the breach of two or three Lances, was
sent to keep his friend company, whereat not alittle enraged, he drew his
Sword, and coming to the Knight, said. I confess Sir, that thou have the
maistrie over me at the Lance, let me now try my fortune better or worsse in
Combat. Whereto the other willingly consented, but the King intercepted them,
saying. Not so Gentlemen, I will not that any Combat shall now be fought, in
respect the Ioust was ordained for pleasure, and to exercise our Knights to
delight their Ladies: enough therefore is done for this day, let anger cease
between ye, and freendly embrace each other, letting me understand: of whence
you are, that I may do you the honor you have deserved. With right good will
my Lord, answered the vanquished Knight, my companion and I are friends with
this Knight, who deserves great estimation for his worthy prowess. As for our
names, and of whence we are, I am called Landashnes, Son to the King of
Norgalles: and my friend is named Simprinell, Son to the King of Scots.

When the King Milanor, and the Prince Palladine had knowledge of the Knights,
they came from the Scaffold, and embraced them with exceeding courtesy: but
when they knew the Conqueror to be Manteleo, I leave their marvelous joy to
your imaginations. Is it true my Lord? quoth the King, have you stolen such an
occasion to express your valor? Your Majesty knows, answered Manteleo,
that I am but newly Knighted, and therefore but little experienced in Arms,
nor durst I discover my self before your Highness, least my fortune should
have proved as contrary as it did yesterday, which you must imagine I took
discontentedly. You need not fear hereafter, said the King, to show your
self in cheifest places of Chivalry, in that a beginning so good and
fortunate, must needs in continuance be as prosperous. Hereupon, the three
Knights very lovingly embraced each other, swearing a perpetual league of
amity between them, which they religiously held irreuocable, as in the
discourse of our history you may behold.

Manteleo having saluted the Queen and her Ladies, Palladine came to welcome
his friend, rebuking him for not acquainting him with his intent: which he
excused as he did to the King, having more mind to regard his sweet Mistress,
then to be entertained with all these ceremonies. And you must think her joys
were beyond common conceit, seeing her Knight returned whom she feared was
lost: nor was she so suspicious at his repulse against the God of love, as she
was now ^^alous of his honorable success.

These bien venues and embracings passed over, the King and all of them
returned to the Palace, where the two new-come princes had their lodgings
appointed, Palladine and Manteleo keeping them company, recounting the
adventure of the two Damsels and the enchaunted Knight, with whom on the
morrow they were to depart. Therefore they spent that night in dancing and
courtlye disports, the Princes of Norgalles and Scots devising with the Ladies,
wherewith the Court of England was plentifully stored, and whom they commended
to excel all other nations in beawtie.

CHAP. IX.
How the Princes Palladine, and Manteleo, departed from London, with the Knight
that was enchaunted and the two Damsels, and what happened to them by the way.

ON the morrow early in the morning, Palladine and Manteleo armed themselves,
and with the Knight that was enchaunted and the two Damsels, they came and
took their leave of the King and Queen: afterward they went to the young
Princesses chamber, when Marcelina perceiving her Knight would needs be gone,
brake forth into fears and sad regrets. What mean ye Sister, quoth
Palladine is our departure displeasing to you: Not so good brother, answered
she, but I doubt least your return should be hindered by any misfortune, for
you are as yet but young, and little acquainted with the contrary nature of
strange Countries. I confess that Sister, quoth Palladine but every one must
have a learning, beside, you know ou^ promise to this Knight constrayneth us
heereto, nor would I for all the world break my word: as for our return,
persuade yourselfe it will be sooner then you imagine. I assure ye thereof
Madame, said the Knight that was enchaunted, for I will not lead them far
from this Realm, nor into any place of danger. Manteleo had his heart so
scaled up with grief, beholding his mistress to shed so many tears, as he
was not able to speak one word, whereby Palladine presently gathered
suspicion, that secret love between them had caused this change, wherefore,
bidding his Sisters adieu, he departed the chamber with the Knight and the
Damsels, leaving Manteleo to say what further he would, but grief brake him
off with these speeches. You know Madame what I have promised, with which
words, the tears trickling down his cheeks, he kissed her, and the Princess
Floraea likewise, and so went to seek Palladine, whom he found ready mounted
with their Squires at the Court gate.

So departed these two companions in arms with their train, with resolution
before their return, to make the world aquainted with their bounty and
prowess: cheefely Manteleo for the love of his Marcelina, who presently after
her Lords departure, withdrew her self alone into her Cabinet, and continuing
her tears, breathed forth these sad laments.

Ah love, who ever thought thy strength to be of such puissance, so violent
has thine entrance been into my heart, as impossible is it for me to live
long, unless my loyal friend give me remedy, for none but he can give me
remedy. Alas, why is it not permitted us to travail strange Countries as
well as men: had fortune so favored our sex, thou should not (sweet
friend) be long without me, but miserable is our condition to be thus
subjected. Many other amorous complaints made the sorrowful Marcelina, whom we
will now leave, and return to the Princes, being scant a mile on their way:
when Palladine entreated the Knight that was enchaunted, to tell him whether
they should travail, of whence he was, how, and wherefore he had been
enchaunted.

My Lord, answered the Knight, right gladly would I satisfy your demand, but
hardly can I recount my infortunes without extreme grief, so greatly does the
very remembrance thereof displease me: therefore I pray ye be contented that
my Sister be the reporter hereof, for well can she reveal every accident.
Trust me, said Palladine, and well it likes me to hear her speak: so riding
along, and the Damsel between them, she began her discourse in this manner.

Seeing it pleases you to understand the fortunes of this Knight, willingly
will I discover them unto you, being far otherwise then I rehearsed in the
presence of the King, on the day when you received your Knighthood: but the
cause why I so disguised the truth, was through fear least his Majesty would
have hindered your going with us. Understand then, that this Knight my Brother,
this Lady my Cousin, and my self, were all three borne in the Realm of
Hungaria, at what time it was under the government of the great Turk. My
Brother was there married to one of the most beautiful Ladies in the Country,
and dwelt in a small Uillage on the frontiers of the Realm, where a Gentleman
(much about your years) fell in aquaintance with him, the continuance whereof
bred such amity between them, as my Brother entreated him to lodge in his
house, and two of his nearest kinsemen with him. But in an unhappy hour
chanced this freendship, for this Gentleman too discourteous for this great
kindness, seeing my Brothers wife so perfect in beauty, became enamoured of
her in such sort, as he only desired the knowledge of her, forgetting the
honor and regard of his freendly host. Yet could not entreaties, sollicitings,
gifts and fair prou^ses, obtain that of her he thirsted after, wherefore
despairing of his success, he went to a Sorcerer, who gave him a drugge of
such force, as should deprive my Sister of her speech, by means whereof, he
might ravish her, or carry her whether him pleased, she being not able to
defend her self, or call for any aid. This Gentleman having enstructed his
two kinsemen in the matter, came one night into my Sisters chamber, and being
assured that my Brother and his servants slept soundly, took her thence
against her will, afterward giving her to his friends, who carried her thence
into a Ship was ready to set Sail. In short time they had gotten whether they
would, landing at a strong Castle belonging to this Gentleman, where, though
he had her in his custody, yet could he obtain nothing but refusalls, and
sharp disdaynes, yet in time he imagined to make her more tractable. My
Brother in the morning seeing his wife and guests thus gone, suspected the ill
that happened, for diverse that met them toward the Sea, came and told him what
they saw, whereupon, he took this injury so grievously, as he was even at
the point to despair. A^ ^^^lo^all Traitor (quoth he) is this the recompense
for my good will to thee? for the honor and good entertainment thou have had
in my house, do thou reward me with this villainy? Come my friends, let us
follow them, and either by fire, water, or weapons, destroy the adulterer, that
has thus robbed me of my only delight. May it be (sweet wife) that this
happened with thy consent? could thou serve him so ye loved thee as his life?
no, well may I be assured of thy loyalty. An Aunt of ours, who sometime was
wife to a sage Nigromancer, seeing my Brother wel-neer beside himself, such
was his grief for the loss of his wife, took pity on him, and to prevent
the ill which she foresawe was like to ensue, she wrote a letter to a wise
matrone in the Realm of Aquilea, commanding us to carry it to her, and that
my Brother should travail thither with us, which we did, finding the good old
Lady where the Letter directed us, which was in a little Desert of mountains,
having no other habitation then in the caves* which seemed old and greatly
ruinated, in the midst whereof was a fountain, ouershadowed with the boughs
of a great Elm tree. So soon as she beheld us, she demanded for the Letter
we brought, which when she had read, she commanded us to rest our selves by
the fountain, while she went into her Cave for the two Swords you now enjoy,
and returning, she bathed them in the fountain, mumbling certain speeches
softly to her self, and coming to us, said. See here Ladies two Swords,
which can be drawn out of their sheathes by none, except the two best Knights
in the world, by whose assistance this Gentleman shall recover his loss, and
be revenged on the Traitor that thus wronged him. Take these Swords with ye,
and search the Courts of Kings and most renowned Princes, to find those gentle
Knights excelling in virtues, and them twain that can draw forth these
Swords, shall you conduct to the place where the Lady abides, for whom this
noble Gentleman is so tormented, to whom (for her sake that sent ye) will I
presently give such a remedy, as shall diminish part of the grief he
endures. So giving us the two Swords, with a little white wand she smote three
blows on the Elm tree, from whence flew forth a Bird crying very pitifully:
then with the wand she troubled the water in the fountain, using certain
private speeches again, and taking a little of the water in her hand, she
dreined it on my brothers head, saying. Now go and commend me to your Aunt, and
to the two Knights that shall draw the Swords, to whom I will that thou give
the order of Knighthood, to the end their virtue, courage, and magnanimity
may be increased. So left we the old Lady, and ever since followed her
commandment, making a bootelesse search in many places, till we found you to
whom the adventure was destemed. And thus (my Lords) have you heard the entire
discourse of my Brothers misfortune. Now as concerning what remains, we must
conduct ye into Hungaria, to the Castle where my fair Sister is enclosed, and
where the villain abides that stole her from my Brother. Yet is her honor
preserved from any attaint, for as the Traitor one day would have ravished her,
mine Aunt (of whom I spoke) by adventure came thither, and having thrown the
paillard out of the chamber by the shoulders, enchaunted the same in such sort,
as none may enter therein but my Brother, nor can he come there but by your
aid. A deed of such honor and charity I hope you will not refuse, in
revenging our wrong on that maleuolent villain, which shall be easy for you
to do, as the aforesaid wise prophetess declared to us. The Princes having
heard this monstrous treason, thus answered. We will assist ye fair Lady to
our uttermost, nor shall ye need to whet us on with persuasions, for we are
bound by duty to revenge actions so soul and enorme. For this kind replye,
she gave them many thanks, spending the time in these and like conferences, and
two days rode they without any adventure worthy the rehearsal.

CHAP. X.
How Palladine and Manteleo met four Knights, with whom they Combatted, and
the issue thereof.

THE third day, as the Princes with their company issued forth of a thick
wood, they met four Knights, of whom (after ^ourteous salutations) Palladine
demanded whether they travailed. Directly toward London, answered one of
them, where the King abides as we understand. And the cause of our journey
thither, is to try an adventure of two Swords, which not long since were
carried thither, unable to be drawn by any, but by two of the best Knights in
the world.

If you go for no other occasion, answered Palladine, well may ye spare that
labor, for two young Knights ended the adventure two days since and more.

Two young Knights? quoth another of them, of what Country I pray ye? The one,
said Palladine, is an Englishman, and the other an Italian, borne in Millayne.
By my faith, quoth the Knight in a great laughter, belike then the enchauntment
was no hard matter to finish, nor was any hidden virtue to be discernd therein,
when an Italian and an Englishman could bring it to end. Uery few good
Knights are found among the Italians, in whom is more ostentation and
brauadoes, then matter of moment and effect: and in Englishmen is much less,
being reputed in all Countries for men of little estimation.

The two young Princes hearing their Countries so dispraised, began to grow in
maruailous choler, especially Mante^eo, who bending the brows, and enflamed
with unquenchable anger, thus answered. Of whence are you Sir, that can so
well collaude the Knights of England and Italy? What mooues you to use such
speeches, being in the Kingdom you discommend? Trust me, if you have any wit,
you make no show thereof in your words. Be not angry, answered the Knight, I
see by your couller that you sweat in your Armor: but if ye continue this
mood. you have met with Spaniards that will walk ye a little. And here have
you met an Englishman and an Italian said Manteleo, even they that ended the
adventure of the enchaunted Swords, who presently will teach ye to temper your
tongue.

With these words, he went to his Squire for his Lance, placing it to
encounter him that gave the speeches, but Palladine called to him, saying:
Forbear my Lord, and let me deals with him, for I ought to begin first,
because the offense was first made to me. Beside, they are in my Country, it
belongs then to me to correct their folly, making by proof what an
Englishman is able to do. If you see me stand in need of your help, do as
you shall find occasion, otherwise, let me alone with these lusty Spaniards.
Palladine without any further speeches, with a brave carire encountered the
prating companion, who, though he brake his Lance with good courage on the
Prince, was thrown with such violence from his horse, as he lay not able to
stir hand or foot. Which when the other three beheld, they ran altogether
against the Prince, who gave the foremost such a freendly welcome, as falling
on his head to the ground, brake his neck with the weight of his own body.
The other twain (at this encounter) had broken their Lances on Palladine, and
now drew their Swords, thinking to revenge their fellows ill fortune* but
greatly did they find themselves deceived, for the Prince seeing he had no
more to deal withal thou these two, redoubled so many fierce strokes upon
them, as the one fell out of his Saddle deprived of his senses, and the other
to save his life, would have fled away: the Prince disappointing him of that
benefit, by hamstringing his horse, caused him to fall to the earth, when
snatching off his Helmet, with his Sword would have smitten his head from his
shoulders. Alas Sir Knight, cried the vanquished Spanyard, save my life, I
yield my self to thy mercy: what I have done against thee, was in revenge of
my Brother whom thou first dismounted* accurssed be the hour that he spoke so
indiscreetly, this is not the first time I have endangered my life, only to
sustain his fond and ouerfoolish quarrels. Mercy I grant thee, answered
Palladine so thou promise and swear to fulfill one thing, which is, that so
soon as thy wounds are healed, thou shall go to the King of Englands Court,
there submitting thy self to his will and mercy. And thou shall say to him,
that the two Knights which departed thence with two Ladies, and if Knight who
was there delivered from enchauntment, in reverent wise salute his Majesty,
having sent thee to be disposed at his pleasure. Moreover, thou shall not fail
to tell him the cause, why we sent thee in this sort to his highness. The like
declaration shall thou make before the Queen, and her two Daughters Marcelina,
and Florea. All this will I gladly accomplish answered the Spanyard, but as for
my Brother, and the other Knights, I think they will never pass further, for
by ought I can perceive, there is no sign of life left in them. They have no
more, answered Manteleo, then they worthily deserved, ought they to misprise
or detract strange Knights, cheefely such as are of one nation? yet let us see
in what estate they are. So coming to the Knight that was first dismounted,
and finding him dead, by reason of the abundance of blood he had lost, as also
because his Helmet hindered him from the air: Unhappy man, said his Brother,
oftentimes have I told thee, that thy pride and ouer-weening would one day
cause thy death. Be thou warned hereby, said the enchaunted Knight, and learn
another time to use more courtesy to Knights, how young or old soever they be:
for thou and thy companions did imagine, that be^cause these two young Princes
were no further entered i^ years, that therefore they were unprovided of
courag^^ and virtue, but by outward behavior never judge o^ men hereafter.
Too well do I perceive your words ar^ true, but I beseech ye look if my
Cosins have accompanied my Brother in death, or no. Palladine finding them to
be alive, offered with his Sword to have smitten off their heads. Uillaines
(quoth he) you are but dead men* if you will redeem your lives, you shall
promise me to go ^ubmit your selves to the King of Englands mercy, recounting
to him wherefore, how, and by whom you have been vanquished. Sir, answered
one of them, there is nothing that we will not gladly promise and perform,
for the ^aunsome of our (...), and (...) I swear to ye, that I will not fail
(...) you have commanded. You must avouch the like quoth the Prince to the
other Knight, whereupon, he that was so sore hurt with his fall from his
horse, could make no answer but by signs, so that with many sad
countenances he showed his consenting. Now may ye depart when ye please, said
Palladine, and say, that Englishmen are better Knights then Spaniards. So
having buried the Knight that was slain, they departed, not a little glad they
were so well escaped, but they took small care of perfourming their promise,
as you shall perceive by the sequel of our history.

CHAP. XI.
How Palladine and Manteleo with their company, arrived in the Realm of
Hungaria, where the Gentleman remained that stole the Lady from the enchaunted
Knight, and what fortuned to them by the way.

AFter the Princes had left the Spanyardes, they rode on their journey, and
coming to the port of Gorforte, they took Shipping when the Seas were still
and calm, expecting a wind to pass into Holland, which fitting their
expectations, crossing through Zeland, they came to Triell, where Palladine
furnished himself with new Armor, because his other was greatly battered in
Iousting with the Knights.

Having contented themselves with the sight of Holl^nd, they passed the Rheme,
and entered Almayne, where arriving on the frontires of Bohemia, they beheld a
Lion coming toward them, carrying a young Infant (wrapped in swaddling clothes)
in his mouth, and a young woman running after the beast, with very pitiful
cries and acclamations. Behold (quoth Palladine) how a sauadge beast has
gotten a young Infant, let us alight, to see if we can force him forgo his
pray. The poor woman seeing how ready they were to help her, cried aloude to
them, that they should get between the Lion and his Cave, least (entering with
the child) there should remain no hope of recovery.

When the Lion saw he could not enter his den, he let fall the Infant, and
furiously assailed the Prince Manteleo, who gave the beast such a wound on the
head, as made him cry and rore very dreadfully. At which noise, a Lioness came
forth of the Cave from her young ones, and she likewise ran on the noble
Manteleo, but Palladine and his Squires so valiantly assisted him, as the
beasts were in short time overcome and slain. Then came the poor woman and
took up her child, which when she beheld had escaped all danger, on her knees
she humbly thanked the Princes for their good assistance. One of the Damsels
taking the child in her arms, and seeing it both beautiful and comely, said
to the mother. Great had been the loss good woman, that these cruel beasts
should have devoured so sweet an Infant: but why were you so negligent to
endaunger it so much?

Madame, answered the poor woman, not by my fault did this inconvenience
happen, for I earning my living by daily labor, by binding faggots which my
husband cuts in the wood, left my child with one of my neighbors in keeping.
How she suffered this mishap, I know not, but as I returned from the wood, and
meeting the Lion with my child, which full well I knew by the swaddling
clothes, I made what haste I could after the beast, hoping by some means to
recover my child, which now (I thank God and you) I have done. Nor is this the
first time we have been thus served: for in this little Uillage, being but
ten or twelve households in number, three children have been lost within
these six months, the parents still thinking some Boores or peasants had
stolen them, but now in good time have we found the Thief. And seeing these
Gentlemen have slain the Lion and Lioness, it may be they have some young ones
in this Cave, which I gladly would have destroyed likewise, so shall we be in
no further danger hereafter. That will I soon try, said Palladine: go to
your house, and fetch me some fire, and withal, bring some sheaues of
thrasshed corn, for Lions cannot abide the sight of fire, and by this mean
shall we see what is in the dark Cave.

Right soon did the woman accomplish her charge, bringing straw and fire with
her, and six or seven sturdy fellows, with staves, flayles, and pikeforkes:
when Palladine having set the straw on fire, with the country peasants entered
the Cave, where he found three young Lionesses like little dogs, and the clothes
of diverse children devoured by the beasts. To behold this strange sight, he
called the two Damsels, and the poor woman into the Cave, saying: These
beasts should have dined with your child to day, but God has appointed his
end in better sort, and because you shall remain in no further dread of these
young ones, were I not so far from England, I would send them to the King, who
I am sure would accept them for our sakes. My Lord, quoth one of the poor
countrymen, I will undertake to fulfill your mind in this, and will carry them
to England if you please to command me: full well do I know how to use them,
for my Father nourished one like to these a long time, and when it grew great,
he gave it to our King, who sent it as an especial present to the King of
France. In sooth, quoth the Prince, if thou will perform what thou have
promised, I will give thee money to defray thy charges, and theirs likewise
whom thou will take with thee. Letters will I also send by thee, to
safe conduct thee on the way, and that thou may be welcome into England*
whence thou can not return without sufficient recompense. Of that my Lord I
have no doubt, answered the poor man, for oftentimes have I heard reported,
that the King ^ilanor of England* is one of the most virtuous Princes on the
earth: and though I receyu^d no other benefit by him, I would account my
labor well bestowed, only to see a King accounted so famous. Beside, such
great good have you done us, in killing these ravenous and dangerous beasts,
as in sign of our willing minds, to make you further recompense if we were
able, if the journey were ten times further, you should command us. So
coming forth of the Cave, the poor men provided Panniars to carry the young
beasts: in mean while, the Prince wrote to the King his Father, describing
what had befallen them in their journey, and what valor Manteleo had shown in
killing the Lions: not forgetting his salutations to the Princess Marcelina,
with all the other Ladies of the Court. Having sealed his Letters, he gave them
to the countreyman, and money sufficient to bear his charges, who taking his
leave of the Princes, in few days after set on his journey toward England.

Palladine and Manteleo mounting on horsseback, with their company took the
way to Hungaria, which at length they reached, lodging in a little Uillage,
about a mile distant from the Castle where the Gentleman abode, who detaned
the wife to the Knight that had been enchaunted. There the Princes concluded
to rest themselves that night, and on the morrow, the Knights Sister should
go to accuse the Gentleman of Treason, and to know of him whether he would
maintain his cause man to man in Combat, or two against two, or three to
three if he durst so accept it. Upon this determination they supped merrily
together, Manteleo still remembering his fair Marcelina, and Palladine his
intended action of honor. So betaking themselves to rest, Palladine dreamed,
that he beheld a goodly Lady before him, who using certain speeches to him
softly, laid her hand very kindly on his head, and so departing the chamber
again, made such a noise, as he awaked therewith. Long he studied what this
Lady should be, but could not guess on any thing directly, wherefore he
concealed his dream to himself, albeit not long after he compassed his
desire, as you shall at large behold hereafter.

CHAP. XII.
How the Princes Palladine, Manteleo, and the enchaunted Knight, fought the
Combat with the Gentleman of the Castle and his two Brethren, and the
success thereof.

MAny were the several apparitions that these Princes had in their sleep this
night, the one, of his love in the Court of England, and the other of the Lady
that thus had solicited him, wherein the enchaunted Knight had likewise a
share, remembering the wrong done unto his wife, by the Traitor whom he had so
freendly used in his house, the conceit of which ungrateful act, presented
him with many strange cogitations.

Early in the morning they all arose, and the Knights Sister, accompanied
with one of the Prince Palladines Squires, rode to the Castle where the
Gentleman dwelt, to deliver the message before determined. And finding him,
sitting at the Castle gate, with two or three of his servant that attended
on him: without using any courtesy or salutation, but with a stearne and
angry countenance, thus spoke.

Well know thou, villayne as thou art, that violently thou did carry away
my Brothers wife, who lodged and entertained thee freendly in his house,
wherefore I say to thee, that thou art the most vile and abject creature
living, having committed the greatest treason and disloyalty, that ever was
heard of a man toward his friend. A Knight will I bring, that to thy ^eard
shall testify what I have said, by aduenturing his person in Combat against
thee: or if thou think it convenient, two against two, or three to three, so
many will I bring hither before two hours are expired. The Gentleman abashed
to hear a woman speak so bravely, she being accompanied but with one Squire,
thus replied. I believe (Damsel) it is not long since ye came from Paradise,
for you are yet marvelous glorious, but I hope ere night to quallify your
pride, and him or them that dare bid me the Combat. And where thou chargest me
with detaining a Lady, who (as thou say) is thy Brothers wife, here will I
keep her still, and hence shall she not go, till I have had my pleasure on
her. But to spend no time in prattling with a foolish woman, go fetch the three
Knghtes thou threatnest me withal, and they shall find here throe other,
whereof my self will be one, say, we grant them the Combat, and bid them
look they come well provided, for all their wit and strength I think will
scant help them.

The Damsel and the Squire returned with this answer to the Princes, who
having heard the Gentleman's mishap, presently mounted on horssebacke, and rode
toward the Castle.

In this time, the Gentleman went into the Castle to his Brethren, and
advertised them of the Damsels challenge, whereupon, they immediately armed
themselves, the Gentleman causing twenty of his servants to be secretly
ambushed, to succor him if his enemies were the stronger, and if they could
not take them prisoners, then to murder them without any redemption.

By this time are the Princes and the enchaunted Knight come to the Castle,
where they found the three Brethren staying their coming, and without any
further speeches, they prepared to the carire, when Palladine would have
encountered the Gentleman of the Castle, but the enchaunted Knight entreated
him to the contrary, saying. Let me try my fortune with him, good Sir Knight,
for he it is that has iniu^ied me, and now shall I be sufficiently avenged on
him. Palladine was well contented it should be so, and while the Knight gave
his horse the spurs to meet the Gentleman, he and Manteleo found his
Brethren play: so that after they had bravely broken their Lances, and fought
a long and dangerous Combat with the Sword, the Gentleman was thrown down
sore wounded, and his Brethren were both flame outright. Now (though too late)
rushed forth the ambushed servants, and they being twenty in number, set with
such violence on the Princes and their Squires, as their ho^sses were slain
under them, and themselves in very great danger of death, but that Lydiseo the
Prince of Hungaria* suddenly arrived there, for that day had he been on
hunting, and because the bordering Turks did oftentimes injury the King his
Father, he seldom rode without armed Knights in his company. When he beheld
so many against so few, he commanded his Knights to assist the weaker side,
so that the greater part of them were slain, and the rest thinking to save
their lives, fled into the Castle, yet were they so narrowly pursued, as they
could not draw the bridge, but were all taken, and reserved in prison for a
further punishment.

The two Damsels glad of this happy victory* humbled themselves before the
Prince Lydi^eo, thanking him for this gracious assistance: the like did
Palladine* and Manteleo, confessing their lives preserved only by his means.
Afterward, he requested to know the cause of their fight, which the Knights
Sister effectually discoursed, whereupon, they went to ^^^he the Lady that was
imprisoned, whom they could not tell where to find, tell a poor old Gardener
came unto them, saying, that the key of the dungion where the remained, his
master always kept at a string fastened about his neck, not trusting an^one to
see her but himself* Lydiseo coomming to the Gentleman, found that he had some
life left in him, wherefore taking the key from about his neck, and causing
his men to bring him into the Castle, that further justice might be showen on
him for his offense, by the old Gardener they were brought to the Ladies
dungion, where they found her so spent with grief, and her far face so
martired with great effuse of tears, as would have moved a stony heart to
pity her. How joyful the Knight was to see his Lady, how glad she likewise
was to behold her husband, I leave to the opinion of long absent true lovers:
yet this was her cheifest comfort, that her husband enjoyed her again, free
from any spot of dishonor, and though she had endured long misery, yet could
not the villayne abuse her chastity. Lydiseo sent the traiterous Gentleman to
the King his Father, and with him other of the cheifest offenders, with Letters
describing their notorious villainie, whereupon, they were drawn in pieces by
wild horses, as such a notorious offense full well deserved.

CHAP. XIII.
How the wise Orbiconte appeared to Pa^ladine in his sleep: and what talk she
had with him.

LYdiseo the Prince of Hungaria, having heard by the enchaunted Knight and the
Ladies, the noble virtues of Palladine and Manteleo, remained still in the
Castle with them, using them with very kind and princely courtesy, being
sorry for certain dangerous wounds they had received in fight, which he
caused to be tended with careful diligence.

The enchaunted Knight likewise told his Lady, the success of his journey into
England, how he received the Swords of the wise Sorceresse, and how the two
Princes (by drawing them) ended his enchauntment: they having at his request
travailed so far, only for her deliverance from the cruel Gentleman. Now
thankful she showed her self for their honorable pains, her great care in
curing their wounds, and ready service to supply all wants, declared the
virtues of so good a mind. Needless were it to tell ye, how Lydiseo procured
from the King his Father many presents of good will to the Princes, and daily
accompanied them with his own person, as the men in whom he most of all
delighted: I shall therefore reveal what happened to Palladine, while he
attended the cure of his wounds in this Castle.

As one night the Prince lay soundly sleeping in his bed, the Lady that before
had appeared to him, presented her self now to him again, speaking to him in
this manner. Know Sir Palladine, that I am a Pagan, named the wise Orbiconte*
who through the assertion thy virtues cause me bear thee, am come to advertise
thee, that I framed those two Swords, which the Knight enchaunted brought to
thee and Manteleo, that you twain might help him to recover his lost Lady.
And because I have foreseen by my magique and hidden knowledge, that by thee I
shall one day attain to high estate of honor: I will not conceal from thee,
that the destenies have reserved only to thee, the atchiuement of many great
and brave enterprises, as also the finishing of rare adventures and
enchauntments, wherein thou shall endure much pain and travail.

Beside, I am to let thee understand, that fortune has sorted thee out a Lady,
who at this day is esteemed peerless in beauty, whom to find, thou shall
travail many strange regions, with labor that will be long and troublesome:
yet shall thou still be protected by me, and comforted by the great fame thou
shall hear of her beauty, surpassing all the Princesses in the world. Begin
the search of her so soon as thou can possible, and think not my speeches
frivolous, for thou shall find them undoubtedly true. So vanished away the
wise Orbiconte, leaving the Prince in marvelous doubts, what this Pagan woman
might be, that seemed to bear him so great affection. In the end, such
deliberate advise he took of her words, persuading himself of their truth and
certainty, as he concluded to seek the Lady, the only Phenir among the
fairest in beauty. Of her immediately he became amorous, determining to depart
from the Prince Manteleo, because he would have no competitour in his love.

But before we pass any further, and to bewray the cause of this advertisement
by the wise Orbiconte, you must note, that she was Sister to the King of
Aquilea* having been espoused to a Duke, one of the greatest Lords in that
Realm, by whom she had three fair Daughters. All her life time she spent in
the superstitious sciences of Nigromancie and Ge^mancie, and casting the
revolution of her daughters nativity, she found by her art: that (...) the
Prince Palladine might be brought into that Country, each of her daughters
should have a Son by him that should in chivalry surpass all the Knights of
their time; the one of them being destenied to be an Emperor, and the other
two to be Kings of wonderful possessions.

Now to compass the mean, whereby Palladine might be brought to this far
distant Country, you must likewise note, that the King of Aquilea, brother to
Orbiconte, had the fairest daughter that ever was seen: by which occasion,
this enchauntresse appeared to the Prince, inciting him to follow the search of
the fairest Lady in the world, promising him to enjoy this rare virgin named.
Nonpareha. And when he should be thus brought into that Country, she devised
to exercise her art in such sort, as he should have the honor of her
daughters, to the end she might expect the fortune of the children, who were
appointed to so high dignities. Resolved on this intent, she betook her self
to dwell among the mountains, where she framed the two enchaunted Swords, as
the first motion to draw Palladine toward Aquilea, where at the time appointed
he shall arrive.

But now he is with the Prince Lydiseo at the Castle, where he and Manteleo
having their wounds healed, the enchaunted Knight (with his Lady and Sister)
returned to their own home: the vision of wise Orbiconte calls Palladine
thence, and feign would Manteleo return toward England, because he lived by
the only remembrance of his mistress Marcelina, so coming to Lydiseo,
Palladine thus began.

Worthy Prince, your care for our health has exceeded our deserts, yet we
remain with humble duty to make requital: having accomplished our promise to
the enchaunted Knight, who with his Lady and friends are safely where they
would be, we crave license for our departure to our Countries, where our
parents expect our coming continually.

Many gracious speeches were uttered by the Prince, and many liberal and
bountiful promises, only to cause them go with him to the King his Fathers
Court: but all was to no purpose, they promised to visit the King at more
convenient leisure, because very urgent occasions did now hasten their
departure.

When Lydiseo saw he could not persuade them, he gave to each of them a very
sumptuous armor, and four of the best horses in his stable, with diverse
other gifts of inestimable value: so after many courtesies and kind
embracings, Palladine and Manteleo set forward on their journey, and Lydiseo
having seized the Castle to the King his Fathers use, on the next day
following rode to the Court, where he acquainted the King with all that had
happened.

The Princes having ridden most part of the day, came at length to a fair
fountain, standing in a fresh cool shadow of trees, where they alighted,
minding to dine with such provision as their Squires had brought with them.
Afterward, they lay down in the shade to sleep a-little, which Manteleo and
the Squires did very soundly: but Palladine not able to forget the words of the
wise Orbiconte, arose, and being loath to trouble them that slept, took his
helmet and his sword, intending to walk among the trees till they awaked. He
had not gone from his company the space of half a bow shoot, but he espied a
goodly plain, in the midst whereof stood a fair pauillion, with two or
three bundles of Lances erected at the entrance. Maruailing what the meaning
hereof might be, he kept himself still hid among the trees, to see if any one
would come in or out of the Tent. At length, he beheld come riding on the
plain, two Knights with a Damsel that bare a goodly Sheeld, which with the
beam^s of the Sun, dazeled the eyes of the beholders. These two Knights and
the Damsel would have passed the Tent, but he espied one came suddenly
forth, and stayed them, saying. You may not pass by (Gentlemen) so easily, you
are well armed for the trial of the Lance: you must therefore make some
proof in this place of your chivalry, else must you leave your Armor and
Horses behind ye. And first of all, you Damsel must deliver me the Sheeld
you carry, for it likes me well, and I shall best deserve it. I may not do so,
answered the Damsel, because you are not the man it is sent unto, and for
whom it was purposely made. Whether I be he or no, quoth the Knight of the
Tent, have it I will: with which words he offered to take it violently from
her, but the two Knights stayed him with these speeches.

Sir Knight, we neither refuse the Ioust or Combat with thee, but in presuming
to take the Sheeld perforce from the Damsel, we judge it rather the behavior
of a sheefe and robber, then sitting with the credit of a Gentleman, or one
that by bravery of mind, desires to try the courage of Knights errant. Are
you offended, quoth the Knight of the Tent, at any thing I have said or done?
believe me, I will have the Sheeld, and cause you to repent your audacious
folly. Come forth, queth he to his Knights in the Tent, and teach these lustic
companions a little better duty. Presently issued forth two Knights on
horssebacke, and coutching their Lances, they ^ncountred them that defended
the Damsel, who threw them from their Sadles with such violence, as they lay
not able to stir any limme. Two more came forth of the Tent, and followed
their companions in fortune, whereat the Knight was so angry, as he mounted on
horssebacke himself, calling sire more forth to take part with him. S^e my
friends quoth he, four of our men are slain, or in great danger, let us
altogether run on these villains that so used them, for man to man I see they
are strongest, such therefore as love me, follow me. So by their furious
assault, the two Knights were dismounted, and by the tune the other had
finished their course, they drew their Swords, and buckling on their Sheelds,
came with resolute courage to meet their enemies. Right sorrowful was the
Damsel to see the Knights that defended her cause, in such danger: but
Palladine beholding the valor of the twain, and the cowardly villaime of the
other, came forth of the wood, and taking part with them so much wronged, in
short time laid four of them breathless on the ground. The other three would
gladly have given oversight, but Palladine and the Damsels Knights laid on
such load, as two more were sent to accompany their fellows, the third (to
save his life) yielded to their mercy.

CHAP. XIIII.
How Manteleo sound Palladine, with the two Knights, and the Damsel, that
brought the Sheeld from the wife Orbiconte.

IN the time of this sharp skirmish, the Prince Manteleo awaked, and missing
his companion Palladine, called the Squires, who were no less amazed at the
absence of their master, but seeing his horse and Lance there, they imagined
he could not be strayed very far. As they walked into the wood to seek him,
they heard the clanching of weapons, and entering on the plain, they espied
Palladine with the two Knights and the Damsel, and a man kneeling on his
knees before him, craving pardon for his life.

Manteleo being glad he had found his friend, came to him with merry and
cheerful countenance: when the two Knights seeing his face, immediately knew
him, and casting down their helmets, came and embraced him, saying: How highly
are we beholding to the virtuous Prince Palladine, without whose assistance our
lives had perished? Palladine knowing them to be Durandell of Cleue, and
Orliman of Flaunders, of whose chivalry he had heard mickle commendation,
embraced them with marvelous affection, the like did Manteleo, and no small
gratulations were entercoursed between these four Princes.

When the Damsel heard the name of Palladine, she alighted from her Palfray,
and with humble seuerence on her knee, thus spoke to him.

Happy and successful Knight, whose virtues are renowined through the wide
world, the wise Orbiconte has sent you this Sheeld, commending her self
dutifully to your good grace, entreating you to forsake your company awhile,
and with me to go visit her that honors you.

Palladine hearing her speak of the wise Orbiconte, who had so often appeared
to him in visions, was as joyful, as Manteleo and the other were sorrowful,
to leave the company of him they loved so well: but he having taken the
Sheeld, returned this answer to the Damsel.

Fair friend, I thank your mistress and you likewise, promising to go with
ye whether you please, though leth I am to forgo the company of these gentle
Princes: but seeing it likes the Lady Orbiconte it should be so, I obey her
command right willingly, hoping to see my good friends again ere it be long.

As Palladine thus spoke, his couller altered very pale and wanne, whereby the
Damsel judged that he was wounded, wherefore she said: I perceive (my Lord)
you are scant well, let us enter this Tent I pray ye, where you shall be
unarmed, and these Knights likewise, that I may see what wounds you have
received: for my Lady Orbicon^e gave me at my departure from her, a bore of
most precious and arteficiall ointment, so that let your wounds be how
dangerous soever, in four and twenty hours I will awarrant they shall be
perfectly healed. Upon this advise they entered the Tent, where when they were
unarmed, the Damsel very cunningly dressed their wounds, finding these of
Orliman and Durandell to be most doubtful, yet her comfortable speeches made
them expect speedy recovery. Afterward, they sat down to refresh
themselves, with such viands as they found there ready in the Tent: and
Palladine calling for the prisoner, said: Knight, if thou desire the safety of
thine own life, tell me without fabling, what the Knight was that first
proffered to take the Sheeld from the Damsel: and upon what occasion you kept
the passage here, to forbid the course of Knights errant. Nor will I Sir
(quoth the Knight) hide bne jot of the truth from you.

Know then, that he which would have taken the Sheeld from the Damsel, was
brother to a Gentleman, who not long since (by the Kings commandment) was put
to a most shameful death, for that unjustly he detayned a Knights wife: to
whose Castle, came two strange Knights, and by the aid of Lydiseo, Prince of
Hungaria, they took the Gentleman sore wounded, who was afterward executed,
slew many of his servants, as also his two brethren, delivering the Lady to her
husband again, who now live in quiet in their own Castle.

This Knight that strove for the Sheeld, was likewise brother to that
Gentleman, who hearing the misfortune of his brethren, vowed to take vengeance
on those two Knights, by whose means, he was now left freendlesse in the
world. Upon this determination, here caused he his pauillion to be erected,
sending his espials abroad, to allure all Knights by this passage, hoping at
length to find those twain, which I think he imagined to be they that
conducted the Damsel: because he commanded us all to assail them, but
whether they be the same or no, he is now greatly deceived of his hope, and
thus have you heard the very truth of our being here. Thanks be to heaven,
said the Prince Palladine that kept us out of this danger, for if we had passed
this way, we had either been slain or taken by these vi^e minded men. But my
hazard was greatest, quoth the Damsel, had I not met with these two noble
Knights, who (in my defense) thrust their own lived into question. Damsel
answered Durandell of Cleue. we have done no more then our duty, and what all
true Knights are sworn unto.

After they had stayed so long as them pleased, they rode to a Town not far
distant thence, leaving the Knight to provide burial for his companions, and
help for such as yet remained alive, swearing him, never after to be seen in
any such bad action. At this Town, they abode two or three days, to furnish
themselves of what they wanted, as also to repair their Armor, which was much
bruised. At length, the Damsel took Palladine aside framing her speeches to
him in this manner. My Lord, seeing you find your self in good estate of
health, let me entreat ye to bid your friends adieu, that carely in the
morning we may depart to the place whether my Lady commanded me to conduct ye,
because you must be assistant to such a one, as shall hereafter do very much
for you. Damsel quoth Palladine, presently shall you see me bid them
farewell, for great is my affection toward your mistress service, seeing she
favors the man so much she never saw. Then turning to the three Princes, he
said. My noble companions, you know my promise to this Damsel, to follow her
whither she shall guide me: now is she importunate for my departure, wherefore
let me entreat ye not to be offended, if early in the morning I take my
leave, assuring you, that never shall I forget your manifold courtesies. And
let my solemn promise persuade ye, that these earnest affairs once
dispatched, to you will I presently shape my course, mean while, command me
as your freendly servant.

My Lord, answered Manteleo, albeit this separation is grievous to us, yet
seeing it a cause concerning your honor, and may advantage some distressed
person, keep your promise, right patiently shall we bear your absence, hoping
to see you shortly in England at the King your Fathers Court, for thither shall
we presently direct our journey. Palladine having entreated them, to do his
humble duty to the King his Father, to the Queen likewise, and his two
Sisters, embraced them all three right lovingly, each one with tears showing
their grief of departure. Like courteous farewell took they of the Damsel,
who gave them many thanks for their freendly succor, and so each one entering
their chamber for that night, Lycelio the Squire to Palladine, prepared all
things ready for his master, who determined to be on horssebacke by break of
day.

CHAP. XV.
How Palladine went with the Damsel that came from the wise Orbiconte, and
Manteleo, Durandell and Orliman trauayled toward England, and were separated
from each other by a strange adventure.

EArly in the morning, Palladine, Lycelio, and the Damsel set forward on
their journey, directing their course to the Realm of Ireland, leaving the
three Princes soundly sleeping, who the same day rod^ toward England, without
finding any adventure on land or Sea worthy the rehearsal. After they had
refreshed themselves three or four days at Dover* a Town that stands on the
Sea coast of England, they concluded to ride to London, where they heard the
King as then kept his Court. When they had ridden eight or ten miles, they saw
coming forth of a Forest two poor men, all besmeared with blood, and very
sore wounded, whereupon, they imagined that some thieves had thus used them,
and therefore rode toward them to understand the cause. Good Gentleman, cried
one of them so wounded, for Gods sake help us. Of whence are ye? said the
Prince Manteleo. We are Sir, quoth the poor man, of Bohemia, travailing from
the King of Englands Court home again: and to his Majesty were we sent with
three young Lions, which two Knights (travailing through our Country) gave us
charge to carry thither. And as we came through this wood, three thieves
suddenly set upon us, who wounded us as you see, took the money from us we
received of the King, and have slain two of our compa^ions.

Manteleo remembering the poor men, how Palladine and he had sent them with the
Lions: was marvelous sorry to see them so misused, demanding if the thieves
were on horssebacke or on ^oote. The poor men answered, that they were on
foot, and could not (as yet) be gone very far. Without any further
speeches, Manteleo and his Squire galloped one way, and Durandell with Orliman
an other way, hoping to compass the thieves, that they should not escape. One
of them M^nteleo espied running, with the Sword still in his hand all bloody:
Stay villain, quoth (...), for thou can not escape so easily. The thief
seeing he could not save his life by flight, got him to a tree, which he could
not climb so soon, but the Prince gave him a quittance for his life. As he
fell down to the ground, the bag of money tumbled out of his bosom, when the
Squire alighting, and giving it to his master, returned to the place where he
left the poor men, saying. Hold here my friends your money again, and fear
not him that took it from ye, for I have made him sure for following ye any
further: if the Knights that were with me find his fellows, I doubt not but
they will serve them as I have done. Many thanks did they return the Prince
for this great gentleness, bringing him to their other companions. The one of
them having some life left in him, had settled himself against a tree, being
the man that undertook the carriage of the Lions. By many signs he showed that
he knew the Prince, as also how graciously the King had used him: but no hope
of life was left in him, for his inward bleeding presently strangled him. The
Prince willed the poor men go to the next town, where their wounds ought be
bound up, and they might provide burial for the other two: mean while, he
with his Squire rode to seek Durandell and Orliman, who having at length
slain the other two thieves, had strayed so far in such unfrequented ways,
as they knew not how to return to find Manteleo, but took their journey
straight to L^ndon, where they were in good hope to meet with him.

The King Milanor hearing of their arrival, entertained them very honorably,
the like did the Queen and her daughters, to whom they rehearsed the Knightly
deeds of Palladine and Manteleo* the manner how they were separated, and how
the thieves had used the poor men of Boh^m^^: yet the Prince Manteleo, (as
they thought) would not be long thence, because they parted so lately with him.
Glad was the King of their tidings, especially Marcelin^, whose life was
prolonged by the only hope of her love.

As for Manteleo, after he had long sought for Durandell and Orliman, yet
neither could find them, or hear any tidings of them: he returned to the
town whither he sent the poor men, and there took order for the healing of
their wounds.

On the morrow as he rode toward London* he espied four Knights Combatting
against two, whereupon, he went to help the two Knights, and in the end,
compelled the four to yield. The two Knights were the Princes of Norgailes
and (...) to wit, Landastines and Simprinell, the quarrel growing through
chollerick speeches, and by the means of Manteleo pacified, each shaking hands
together as lovers and friends. Greatly meruailed Manteleo to meet Landastines
and Simprinell there, considering at his departure he left them at the Court,
highly favored of the King and his Nobillitie: but thus it fell out.

After that Palladine and Manteleo were departed with the enchaunted Knight,
the Prince Landastines favored of the King Milanor, began to affect the
Princess Florea: who seeing her Sister provided of a lover, thought she would
not lead Apes in Hell, and therefore entertained Landastines as her Knight and
servant. He glorying in his honorable conquest, and by sollemne vows assured
her of his permanent constancy, craved license of his fair mistress, with
Simprinell t^ go view the pleasures of Eng^^^^* the goodly Cities and well
fortetied Castles, promising to return within a month again. And as they
were iournying back to the Court, Manteleo found them as you have heard, and
now they all three are gone to (...) where, to make any ceremonious discourse
of their entertainment, would hinder ye from matter of greater moment, and too
long shall Palladine be left unheard of. Let it then suffice ye, the King is
sorry his Son is not returned, yet persuaded by Manteleo of his speedy
presence: joining withal, that a King whose life was spent in affairs of
highest consequence, would be desirous that his Son should imitate his
virtues. As for Marcelina and Florea, such as have felt the weight of
affection, and know that absent lovers make a heaven of their meeting: such I
think will here allow, that friends so entirely combined together, would
hardly now fall out with one another. If then their silent passionate desires,
sorted out time and place convenient, where gracious love might favor their
endeavors, and quench the fury of so violent impressions: leave them contented
with their fortunate success, Manteleo with his mistress Marcelina, and
Landastines with his fair Goddess Florea, because we must now return to the
chief person in our History, and to the Damsel of the wise Orbiconte.

CHAP. XVI.
How the Prince Palladine was conducted to the Realm of Dace, by the Damsel
of Orbiconte, that brought him the Sheeld: and how he reskewed a Knight that
was carried to prison.

YOU remember, that the Damosel sent from the wise Orbiconte, caused Palladine
to leave Manteleo, Durandell of Cleue and Orliman of Flaunders, and having
travailed long in her company, at length they entered the Realm of Dace,
beguiling the time with many discourses, as concerning her mistress,
where-among, he requested to know whom he should succo^^. My Lord, quoth she,
I hope this day your self shall see the man, a Knight of high and especial
desert, who will not forget your honorable pains, in delivering him from
cruel death, or perpetual imprisonment.

As they thus devised together, the Damsel alighting from her Palfrey,
hearing the voice of men and neighing of horses, she desired the Prince to
shroud himself in secret, least he should be espied by any in the Castle. At
length, they saw four Knights and their Squires before the Castle, and in
the midst of them a man, having his arms pinniond behind him, and his legs
bound under his horse belly. Behold Sir, said the Damsel, this is the man,
of whom I told ye, being detained prisoner by these four Knights, now try
your fortune in reskewing him: for if they get him once within the Castle, he
shall be put to a most cruel death. Palladine immediately mounted on
Horssebacke, and drawing his Sword, without using any speeches to the Knights,
gave one of them such a stroke on the head, as he cle^t his scull to the very
teeth. The other three set on him all at once, and two of them he tumbled
headlong from their horses: the third would have fled into the Castle, but
the Prince gave him such a wound between the head and the shoulders, as he
fell down dead to the ground. In this while, the Damsel and Lycelio unbound
the Knight, who taking a Sword and Sheeld belonging to one of the slain, came
to assist Palladine, least any other should come forth of the Castle to
resist him.

When the Porter saw the Prince enter the Castle, and with him the Knight,
whom his masters Sons were sent to kill, or bring thither prisoner, he
ran up the stairs into the Hall, crying: murder, murder, to arms
Gentlemen, for we are all betrayed.

At this fearful cry, the Lord of the Castle being an ancient man, went to
the window over the gate, and seeing his Son and servants lying on the
ground, either slain, or in no better case: he fell in a swoune, and had not
one of his Gentlemen been by to help him, he never had recovered life again.
But being come to himself, he with seven more were presently armed, and
understanding by the Porter, that but three men kept the Castle gate, he with
his people came down into the Court, and like a Lion enraged, smote at
Palladine, saying: Uillaine, well may thou curse thy coming hither to
murder my Sons, both thou and the Traitor in thy company shall dearly abide
it. Uery sharply did they beset the Prince, his Squire Lycelio and the Knight:
yet in the end, they vanquished all but two, who submitted themselves and
called for mercy: for which good fortune, the Knight humbly thanked Palladine*
who calling the Damsel into the Castle, because fear made her tarry still
without, made fast the gate, and went up into a fair chamber, where they were
unarmed, and their wounds bound up. And while provision was making for their
Supper, the Prince ^ntreated the Knight to te^^ ^he occasion why he was brought
thither so bound and misused.

Worthy Sir, answered the Knight, a true discourse shall I make of all my
trouble, and thus it is.

The Lord of this place, the ancient man whom you first overcame in the
Court, had three Sons, one whereof I found about a month since in a little
Warren near to my house, which is distant hence not past a mile: and thither
had he allured a young maiden, the daughter to a poor tenant of mine, where
villainously he sought to dishonor her. My self (by good hap) walking that
way, beheld the poor virgin before him on her knees, he having his Sword
drawn in his hand, threatening therewith to cut her throat, if she would not
accomplish his unlawful desire.

When I saw this uncouth spectacle, and that the poor maiden was out of
breath, with struggling and striving to defend her chastity, I came to him, and
freendly entreated him to forbear that bad mind: but he immediately, without
using any words better or worsse, left the maiden, and with his Sword began to
assail me, where doubtless I had been murdered, had I not been provided
for mine own defense: yet did I make such good shift with him, as he was feign
to submit himself to my mercy, which I was contented to grant him, upon
promise, that he would never offer the like vile attempt, not fitting the name
of a Gentleman, who rather ought to defend the chastity of virgins. But the
forsworn wretch kept not his promise with me, for so soon as I had left him,
he ran after the poor maiden again, who thought to save her self by flight
to her Fathers house, and in despite that he was vanquished by me, or what
else I know not, he stabd her to the heart with his dagger. I hearing her
pitiful cry when the wound was given, ran after the murderer, who turned
again valiantly to resist me: but I handled him in such sort, as he
accompanied the poor maiden in death. A Lackey that attended on this
lubricious villayne, seeing his master had given his last farewell to the
world immediately carried the news to the Lord his Father, and his other two
Brethren, whom you slew without the gate. The Brethren made sollemne promise to
their Father, that they would take the most cruel vengeance on me as could be
devised, awayting opportunity to execute their bloody intents: and this day
as I was walking in my garden, having no other defense then as you see me in my
doublet, they laid violent hands on me, binding me on the horse as you found
me, and but for you, God knows how they meant to have used me.

Sir Knight, quoth Palladine, thank God for your deliverance, and next to him
the wise Lady Orbiconte, who sent this Damsel to conduct me hither for your
succor.

Ah my good Lord, answered the Knight, often have I heard of that worthy
woman, who (as I understand) is Sister to the King of Aquilea, a maruailous
lover of Knights virtuous and valiant: I promise ye right soon will I go give
her thanks for this exceeding favor.

Palladine hearing him speak of Aquilea, remembered the letters engraven on his
Sword, for which cause, he determined to travail thither, to find the wise
Orbiconte, that she might show him the Lady, whereof in his sleep she did
advertise him. Upon this resolution, they sat down to meat, and after the
Tables were withdrawn, the Damsel thus spoke.

Sir Knight, you have accomplished the promise you made me, for which I thank
ye, and will make report thereof to my Lady and mistress, to whom I must with
all diligence return, being assured of this Knights safety: wherefore I
humbly take my leave, because I mean to be gone very early in the morning.
Palladine sorry she would be gone so soon, said: If it like ye fair Damsel,
I will conduct ye on your way for your Ladies sake, who bears me such
affection without any desert. My Lord, quoth she, I heartily thank ye, but my
Lady commanded me to return alone, assuring me to escape on the way without
any disturbance: and albeit she had not so charged me, yet should ye not by my
means travail so soon, for your wounds are yet not to dally withal, but I
will leave an unguent with your Squire, that shall right soon recover them
from danger. Seeing then (said Palladine) that my company is needless, let me
entreat ye to commend me to your mistress, to whom (while I live) I shall
remain an affectionate servant and Knight. And to the end you may remember me:
and in requital of the good Sheeld you brought me, wear this chain of gold
for my sake, and forget not my humble duty to the Lady Orbiconte. The Damsel
receiving the chain, took her leave of him and the Knight, and on the morrow
rode toward Aquilea, leaving Palladine with the Knight, who brought the Prince
to his own Castle, showing him ^h^ place where the incontinent villain
murdered the young virgin.

CHAP. XVII.
How the Prince Palladine travailing toward Aquilea, was advertised of the
beauty of Brisalda, Duchess of Bulgaria, for whose love, Dardalon the proud
mayntayned Ioustes against all comers: and of the cruel Combat between him
and Palladine.

PAlladine remained with the Knight till his wounds were healed, being
entertained meruaylous nobly, and setting on his journey toward Aquilea: on the
frontiers of Dace, he met an armed Knight, with a Squire bearing his Helmet and
Lance, whom after he had saluted, he requested to know whether he travailed.
I go Sir (answered the Knight) to Bulgaria, to make proof of my fortune
against a strong and puissant champion, who maintains the Ioust against all
that come: for the love of the Duchess Brisalda, esteemed the fair^st
Princess in the world, being yet scant seventeen years of age. I like well
his attempt, said Palladine, whatsoever he be: but know ye not how he is
called? Dardalon the proud, men name him (quoth the Knight) and fitly does that
surname agree with him, for he is one of the most vaineglorious men that ever
was heard of, beside, exceeding in cruelty to Knights that deal with him,
for if he vanquish any one, he never pardons him, no, though he yield himself
to his mercy. Believe me, said Palladine, small commendation gets he thereby,
being rather esteemed a coward, then valiant: for he uses such cruelty, to
terrify those as shall afterward deal with him. But the enterprises of
Tourneys for the love of Ladies, should not extend to such extremity, but
rather for honor and fame only: yea, though to a mortal enemy, mercy should
be given him when he yields himself. The brute beasts show greater
humanity, as we may read in examples, of Lions, Bears, Dogs, and diverse
other, who cease from rage and fury on a yielding pray. It is necessary
then, answered the Knight, that such men should have such measure served them,
and no greater mercy ought they to have, then themselves tofore have showed to
other: as for my self, if fortune favor me against him, he shall find as
little pity as he has given. By my Sword (quoth the Prince) I so desire to
see that cruel Knight, as I will bear ye company, so you please to accept
thereof: for perhaps the great villain is some Devil, and then it is
necessary he should be well coniured. Great honor and pleasure, quoth the
Knight, shall you herein do me, for I desire nothing more then company. So
leaving the marches of Dace, they took Shipping on Danubium, and coasting
Valachia, entered Bulgaria, landing at the City of Varr^, where Dardalon kept
his Iousts and Triumphs. But the Duchess Brisalda took small pleasure in his
labors, for as he was a man of huge and monstrous stature, so was he misshapen,
and of ougly countenance, yet by his prowess he imagined to gain her love:
wherein he was greatly deceived, albeit the fear of his mighty kindred,
cheefely of a Giant that was his Cousin, made the poor Lady give him good
looks, because by rigor he held the whole country in awe.

Palladine and the Knight being come on shore, went presently to the place
where the Ioustes were kept (...) they entered the throng, they saw that
Dardalon had even then overcome a Knight, who kneeling on his knees, cried: I
confess my self vanquished, I yield, I yield. But Dardalon feigning he heard
him not, nor the Princess who called to save his life, because the Knight was
near allied to her: smote his head from his shoulders, showing it in great
bravery to the Duchess.

Palladine seeing the monstrous cruelty of this huge villain, could stay no
longer, but stepping to him, said. Dardalon, I never saw thee before this
instant, when I beheld thee to show horrible cruelty, putting the Knight to
death that yielded himself vanquished: had it been but for the Ladies sake.
(...) called to thee to save his life, me thinks of duty thou should have
spared him, and were it not I see thee wounded, thou should perceive I dare
justify my words. Dardalon beholding Palladine without his helmet, and so young
in years, scoffingly thus answered. Alas good Gentleman, did thou never see
me before? I think thou will say thou see me too soon: as for any wound I
have, it cannot hinder me from correcting such a saucy companion. Without any
more words they mounted on horssebacke, and Dardalon taking a very strong
Lance, thought to give the Prince an unhappy welcome: but he sat more sure
then he expected, and but that himself caught hold by his horse main, he had
been sent to fetch an errand on the ground. A long and dangerous Combat was
fought between them, the Prince many times in danger, but worthily escaping,
and in the end so wearied his monstrous enemy, as he got him down upon his
back. Then taking off his helmet, looked to the Duchess Brisalda, if she
would have his life preserved, but seeing that neither she or any of the Ladies
made sign for it, he took off his head, to the great joy of all the standers
by: except such as were allied to Dardalon, who presently drew their weapons to
revenge his death, but other Knights stepped in to assist the Prince, so that
not one of them escaped alive, yet Palladine and his company received no wounds
of danger. The Duchess noting the valiant prowess of a Knight so young and
lovely, would feign know of whence he was, wherefore causing the Ioustes to
end for that day, she sent to entreat him come lodge in her Palace, where her
Chirurgions should have care of his wounds. Which courteous offer the Prince
accepted, not so much for the danger of his hurts, as for his desire to be
favored of the Duchess, whom he imagined* the fairest that ever he saw.
Then was he conducted by two Gentlemen into one of the seemeliest Chambers in
the Palace, where he was unarmed, and his wounds visited by the Chirurgions
attending on the Duchess, who sent him a fair night mantle of blew Satin,
embroidered with gold, and furred with Martins, for which, most humbly he
thanked her, carrying good opinion to enjoy her love, so he could compass the
mean to speak with her. For he imagined this to be the Lady, or whom the
wise Orbiconte had foretold him, and for whose love he should pass many
dangers, as now he had done against the proud Dardalon?

CHAP. XVIII.
How the Duchess Brisalda came to see Palladine, what speeches they had
together: and how he slew the Gian^ Brandidoll, Cousin to Dardalon the proud.

BRisalda the young beautiful Duchess, to whom the inueigling God had given a
lively attaint of love to the Prince Palladine, determined to go see him in his
chamber, to understand of his health, and in such sort to persuade him, as he
should still remain in her Court. So clothing her self in most sumptuous
garments, and being attended on by her waiting Ladies, she went to the Princes
lodging: and after two or three gracious courtesies passed between them, she
said, Sir Knight, right welcome are ye to our Court, command me, or any thing
else here to your liking: for so much do I account my self indebted to you,
having slain the cruel and proud Dardalon, as while I live, I shall never
return sufficient recompense. The Prince falling on his knee, and killing her
fair white hand, thus answered. If I have done any thing (Madame) that
contents you, I am very glad thereof, thanking the God of heaven that favored
me in the attempt, and if in ought else I can do ye any service, till the
latest hour of death will I willingly employ my self. Brisalda, who was (as
it were) ravished with contemplating his beauty, took him by the hand, and
causing him to arise, said: With all my heart (gentle Sir) I thank ye, and
accept your offer so freendly made: for I greatly doubt ere long I shall need
your assistance, against the Giant Brandidoll* Cousin to him whom you have
slain, for no sooner shall he hear of his death, but hither will he come, and
accuse me as author thereof, because Dardalon being enamoured of me, ordained
this Tourney, thinking to espouse me either by love or force. In this did
Brandidoll promise his aid, and diverse other of their faction as bad as they,
many of them being now slain, which so contents me, as nothing can do more.
And were I as well rid of cruel Brandidoll, henceforth should I live in
peace, without fear or suspicion of any one: for when the mighty enemies are
quailed, the meaner dare not presume to stir.

Madame, quoth Palladine, persuade your self in this, that in respect of your
innocence, God will not suffer you to take any wrong, but that your enemies
shall work their own confusion. Longer they would have continued in talk,
but that the Gentleman Ussher gave warning of dinner: wherefore the Duchess
went and sat down at the Table, Palladine sitting just opposite to her, who
took so great pleasure in hearing him speak, as she had no mind to eat or
drink. All which Palladine heedfully noted, and God knows how well it liked
him, for if the one were passionate in love, you may think ye other was in the
same predicament. Oftentimes would they throw such wounding looks on each
other, as neither had power to speak a word: but to cover this alteration, the
Prince feigned to listen to the consort of music, which played all dinner
time marvelous sweetly. The Tables withdrawn, she took him by the hand, and
caused him to sit down in a chair by her, while many young Lords and Ladies
daunced after that Country manner. You may not dance Sir, quoth she, because
our Chirurgions do think it hurtful for your wounds: beside, rest is very
needful for you, in respect of the rough combat you had with Dardalon, whom
to your great honor you worthily conquered. For any thing I have done, sweet
Madame (quoth he) let the credit thereof remain to your self: and think me
as ready to do you service, as he that is most forward among your servants,
of which number I desire ye to accept me as one. Uns^emely were it good Knight,
quoth she, to account of you as my servant, but if you please to stay in this
Cuntry, you shall perceive by my endeavors hereafter, that I both honor and
reverence such men as you are. As she would have proceeded further, her
Gouernesse came, and said, it was time she should resort to her Chamber:
whereupon they parted, not without sufficient shows on either side, that
between them was a sympathy of affection. What several afflictions they
endured in absence, let them imagine, who have no comfort but in the presence
of their favorite. As for the Duchess, she on the morrow sent the Prince a
rich Diamond by one of her Ladies, with this message, yt it was her determined
jewel to the best combatant, and therefore his due, as having deserved it
beyond all other. Palladine received it very thankefully, returning this
answer by the Lady, that in requital of that gentle gift, he would that day
enter the Listes, and against all comers maintain the beauty of the
Duchess. As for his wounds, Lycelio had anointed them with the precious
unguent, which the Damsel brought from the wise Orbiconte, so that they were
very soundly healed. For joy of this answer, the Duchess caused a goodly
Scaffold to be erected, whereon, she and her Ladies would stand to see the
Iousts: and at each end of the Listes, were sumptuous Trophies curiously
placed, decked with diverse impreses and mots of love, in artificial Tables
hanging thereon.

While Palladine and the other Lords were arming th^^selues, he was advertised
of an other Knight new entered the feeld, who was the Prince Al^ian of I^ela^^,
a young, brave and gallant Knight at arms, one that was highly affected to the
Duchess Brisalda.

So soon as he was entered the Listes, he was encountered by a Moore Knight
unknown, who was dismounted at the first course: the like success had eight
or ten more, which Palladine perceiving, he gave his horse the spurs against
this lusty champion, lifting him half a foot in height from his Saddle. And
as they were taking new Lances for the second race, there entered a mighty
man, armed cap a pe, who furiously said, Where is the villain that slew my
Cousin Dardalon? by the great God, this day will I give his flesh to the dogs,
and hers likewise that was the cause ther^of, pointing to the young Duchess
Brisalda. And because he had heard that a young Knight did his kinseman to
death, he ran in a rage on the Prince Alfian of Ireland, giving him such a
stroke on the head with his great Semitarie, as the gentle Alfian fell beside
his horse.

Palladine thinking this to be Brandidoll, and seeing him ready to smite off
the Princes head, ran to him, saying: It is with me that thou must deal, I
slew thy Cousin Dardalon, as his villainie and cruelty well deserved.
Brandidoll without making any answer, left the Prince of Ireland, and joined
with Palladine, when continued between them a long and terrible combat. Each
one verily expected Palladines death, such was the great odds between him and
his enemy: but so happily it fell out in the end, that Brandidoll by treading
on the trunchion of a Lance, fell down backward, when the Prince taking his
advantage, got sure hold of him, and smote off his head. For joy of this
victory, the Trompets cheerfully sounded, and the Duchess discending from
the Scaffold, commanded the Ioustes to cease for that day, and coming to the
Prince, gave him many thanks, in that he had delivered her from two such cruel
enemies, who sought the subversion and spoil of her honor. With marvelous
signs of joy they returned to the Palace, where Palladine was immediately
brought to his chamber, and such wounds as he had received in fight, were
dilligently regarded by the Duchess Chirurgions. Each day would she duly come
to see him, and understanding that he was Son to the King of England,
practiced how to unite her self with him in marriage. And as an earnest of her
perfect love, she permitted him to gather that dainty flower, which many had
with long pursuit labored for: he not refusing so brave a conquest, because
he verily persuaded himself, that Brisald^ was the Lady, of whom the wise
Orbiconte had told him: wherefore during the space of six weeks, he continued
there in this heaven of delight, till fortune, jealous of so mutual agreement,
separated them, as you shall presently hear.

CHAP. XIX.
How a strange adventure happened in the City of Varne, by the ending whereof,
the Prince Palladine determined to depart from the Duchess Brisalda.

Here must I entreat ye to remember the Princes of Norgalles and Scots,
Landastines and Simprinell, whom we left in the King of Englands Court,
Landastines being enamoured on the Princess Florea, Sister to Palladine, as
Manteleo was of his fair Marcelina. Simprinell loath to part them that agreed
so well, left his companion in England, travailing to the King of Norgalles
Court, where he certified his Majesty of the good estate of his Son
Landastines. Which news were so welcome to the King, as he entreated
Simprinell to abide in his Court, that he might show him the pleasures of his
Realm: whereto the young Prince right willingly condiscended, as one desirous
to behold novelties. But rather the cheifest cause was, his affection to the
fair Princess Belanicia, daughter to the King of Norgalles, with whose
beawtie he was meruailously enthralled, and not daring to acquaint her with his
love, he fell into a dangerous sickness, to the great greef of the King, who
loved him as he had been his own Son. In the end, the Physicians having
declared to Simprinell, how perilous his case stood by concealing his grief,
made him thus resolved, that before he died, he would make known to the
Princess Belanicia (who oftentimes came her self to visit him, and sent him
many comfortable meats in his sickness) the original cause of his
extremity. And one time among other, the Lady that was most usually sent by
the Princess, and in whom she reposed greatest confidence, desired him to
bewray from whence his sickness grew, promising withal, that she would labor
to her uttermost, to procure his health. The young Prince very modest and
bashful, taking the Lady by the hand, thus answered.

Fair friend, I thank ye for your ready good will in seeking my help, which
is a matter not impossible to be done: but as for the cause of my languishing
disease, I will not acquaint ye therewith, unless ye swear to keep the same
secret, not revealing it to any one but such as I shall name. Assure your self
thereof, said the Lady, by the faith of a virgin. Know then sweet Lady, quoth
Simprinell, that my extreme sickness happened by no other cause, then the
love and affection I bear to your mistress: and fear to offend her or the
King, has by silence of my love brought me to this danger. Why my Lord? quoth
she, you that are of so high and honorable descent, can ye offend my Lady by
loving her? or you that are as good as she, do not deserve love for love? she
is the child of a King, and so are you, beside, she is humble and gracious as
any Princess living, then fear not to let her know your danger. Alas
Madame, quoth he, never shall I dare to speak to her: but may it please you to
solicit my cause, yet with careful heed of her dislike, I shall confess my
life preserved by you. And so much will I do for ye my Lord, quoth she,
without giving her any occasion of offense: but rather shall I do it in such
sort, as by a speedy answer you shall perceive her mind. Go then good madame,
said the Prince, and boldly may ye assure her, that my life or death is in her
hand. So went the Lady to her mistress, to whom she imparted what you have
heard, wherewith she was so well pleased, as she presently sent to him again
this answer, that she entertained his love with the like, and that as he
would witness his affection toward her, he should practice what speed he
could devise for his health.

These words breathed such life into the Prince, as within few days he was
perfectly recovered, when after many amorous parlees with Belanicia, she to
make a trial how his love was grounded, having heard report of the fair
Duchess Brisalda: desired him to travel to Varne in Bulgaria, carrying with
him her lively counterfeit, and there to maintain against all Knights
whatsoever, that she was fairer then the Duchess Brisalda, on which condition,
she would accept him as her Knight and loyal servant.

Simprinell glad to be so commanded, the next day he departed with his four
Squires, and coming to Varne, where the Duchess remained, heard what brave
employment was there in Chivalry: wherefore coming to the accustomed place of
the Tourney, on a fair Pillar he placed his Ladies picture, saying, he would
maintain against all comers, that his mistress exceeded the Duchess
Brisalda in beauty. The Knights attendant on the Duchess, were amazed
heereat, preparing themselves to defend her cause: but Simprinell willed them
first to bring the Duchess counterfeit, and it to be placed by his Ladies, and
the conqueror should carry them both with him. Right soon was the Duchess
figure set on the Pillar, and Simprinell this first day dismounted twelve
Knights: Palladine being ridden abroad on hunting, which made Brisalda
despair of her fortune, fearing the strange champion would depart unconquered.

This days good success, emboldened Simprinell to try the second, when
Palladine entering the Listes among the other Knights, whom one by one he saw
bravely unhorsed, he came to Simprinell with these speeches.

In sooth (Sir Knight) I commend your enterprise, being a cause that makes
many forward in Arms: but as for the Lady, whom you extol beyond my Lady the
Duchess here present, I say and will auerre the contrary, against you and all
other till the hour of death. If affection has blinded your eyes, I soon
shall alter that opinion, when your own self shall confess, that your Lady
is no way to be compared with mine.

I imagine by your words Sir, answered Simprinell* that you will defend your
mistress by the tongue only: but let us go to the matter roundly, for you are
not yet so good an Orator, as to persuade me from a resolved assurance.

You think then, quoth Palladine, that I think to escape the Combat by my
words. Not so, for you shall see me effectually defend the honor of her beauty
who is my mistress. So giving the spurs to their horses, they encountered
with such violence, as Palladine lost his stirrops, but Simprinell was cast
forth of his saddle to the great joy of the Duchess and her friends, that his
presumptuous arrogancy was so worthily checked.

Afterward they fell to the Combat with the Sword, and long they fought
without any advantage, till Palladine by tripping his enemy, got him down,
and himself upon him, when holding his Sword over him, he said: Now must thou
confess the Duchess Brisalda, to be a Lady far excelling thine in beauty,
elfe art thou not like to see her again^. Seeing fortune has thrown me into
this extremity, said Simprinell, I confess my self vanquished: but to say
that my mistress is inferior to thine, I will not though I die therefore, nor
am I otherwise bound by my own conditions, then to leave her portrait to the
will of the conqueror. The Judges of the feeld gave sentence accordingly,
whereupon Palladine left Simprinell, and went to place the Duchess counterfeit
above Belanicia, albeit he perceived her figure much more beautiful: by which
conceit he gathered, that this was she of whom the wise Orbiconte told him,
wherefore he only minded Belanicia, purposing right soon to forsake the
Duchess.

As he was vnarming in his chamber, he began to think how he might leave
Brisalda, and what excuse would serve for his departure: yet when he considered
his good entertainment, and what especial favor he had received at her
hands, he altered his mind, reputing the words of Orbiconte for mere illusions.

And as he continued in this deep musing, he thought he heard one whisper in
his ear, saying: It is not here Palladine that thou must abide, wherefore
follow the good fortune that is promised thee. Heerevpon he concluded, what
ever happened, he would depart on the morrow, and thereof that night he meant
to advertise the Duchess, to whom he went right soon afterward.

CHAP. XX.
How Palladine advertised the Duchess of his departure, and how travailing to
the Realm of Norgalles, he had a dangerous Combat with Simprinell, whom he
knew afterward.

SUch were yt troublesome thoughts of Palladine, in hastening his departure
toward Belanicia, as without any longer stay he came to the Duchess, who
seeing him look so sad, desired to know the cause thereof. In sooth Madame,
quoth he, I can not forget the strange Knight that I Iousted withal this day:
right sorry I am that I demanded not his name: for I imagine I have sometime
seen him in England. If that be all, said the Duchess, we will send for the
Knight hither: but her sending was in vain, for he departed immediately after
the Combat. When Palladine saw no excuses would serve, but she would needs
press him with earnest request of his penstuenesse, he said.

Let it not dislike ye good Madame, if I have intended any thing for your honor
and mine own, but rather conceive thereof as it deserves. Full well you know
fair mistress, that hardly can we continue our love together, enjoying the
benefit yt good hap affoords us, without jealous suspicion of your Lords and
Ladies: and affection makes amorous friends oftentimes forgetful of
themselves, so that being subject to the judgment of many, they shall hardly
escape without scandalous and peremptory speeches. And nothing (sweet Madame)
is more hurtful to our honors, especially yours, in respect of your greatness
and authority: to prevent which danger, and that hereafter we may stand out
of the reach of wounding toongs, I mean to travail to England to the King my
Father, whom I will acquaint with the intended marriage between us, and his
good will obtained, right soon shall I return to have it accomplished. In the
mean while, you may confer thereon with the Lords of your Council, who (I
think) will not dislike thereof, when they understand my birth and parentage,
so shall our credits be safely defended, and what has past already, be
sufficiently recompensed.

When Brisalda heard these speeches, her heart was so swollen with grief, as
she was not able to make any answer: whereat he could not but marvel,
considering his words tended to great reason: yet with such zealous persuasions
he still labored her, making faithful promise of his speedy return, as in
the end he obtained her consent, albeit God knows very unwillingly. Giving
her then an amorous conge, he took two bracelets from his arms, very richly
embellished with pearl and stone, and presented them to the Duchess, saying.
On the same day I came to your Court, sweet Madame, you gave me a jewel,
which I will keep for your sake while I live: that you may likewise remember
me, I beseech ye to wear these bracelets, which were given me by my mother on
the day I was Knighted. Alas my Lord, quoth she, I doubt you have left me such
a remembrance, as except you speedily return again, will bear me company to
my latest home. Yet will I keep one of the bracelets for your sake, and when
you come again, I will have the other. So putting the bracelet on her arm,
she vowed never to take it off, until she saw her Knight returned. With many
kind embracings, and devout kisses, he returned to his lodging, and the
Duchess to her chamber, where calling her trusty maiden to her, who was a
captive Moore, and one not a little in her favor, being acquainted with all
that had passed between the Prince and her, with many bitter sighs and
tears, she tells the Moore the sum of her grief. The Moore persuaded her,
that the Prince herein had done advisedly, for safety of both their honors,
if their love (as greatly she doubted) had sorted to effect: for secrecy must
be the mean to cover such matters, which she would so substancially bring to
pass, as none but themselves should be acquainted therewith. With much adoo
the Duchess was pacified, and on the morrow when Palladine departed, she sent
him a pursse of gold to spend in his travail, causing her Lords to accompany
him two or three miles on his way: and so (though loath) these lovers are
separated, the Duchess abiding ^olitarie in her Palace, and Palladine (having
bidden the Lords adieu) is iourneying in haste toward Norgalles.

He had not ridden half part of the day, but a Knight with three Squires
gallopped after him, crying: Stay Sir Knight, for here commes one that must
speak with thee. Palladine presently turning his horse, took his Lance from
his Squire, thus aunswering.

What is he that would speak with me? let him keep out at the length of my
Lance, till I have better knowledge of him, why he should come to seek me in
such haste. Because thou would so feign know me, answered the Knight, thou
shall understand, that I am the man thou did vanquish yesterday, more by
fortune then prowess: therefore I would now try again, how well I can
revenge my former foil. So fetching their carire, they encountered together so
bravely, as they were both dismounted, and while their Squires labored to
catch their horses that ran about the feeld, they fell to the combat with the
Sword, and wounded each other very dangerously, till in the end Palladine got
the advantage: and as he made proffer to smite off his enemies head, he knew
him to be Simprinell, Son to the King of Scots. Soon was all the former
unkindness pacified, and each embraced other very lovingly, reproouing
themselves of great wrong to freendship, yet excusing the same by ignorance.
When their Squires saw how they were wounded, one of them thus spoke. In this
wood (my Lords) is a fair Abbey, and there remains one very skillful in
Chirurgerie: so please ye to go thither, the Abbot will entertain ye gently,
because he is brother to a worthy Gentleman, who spent his time as a Knight
errant, and for his sake he loves all strange Knights whatsoever.

They not misliking this council, went presently to the Abbey, where the Abbot
welcomed them as beseemed their estates: and while their Supper was providing,
the skillful man having visited their wounds, they walked into the fair
Orchards and Gardens, recounting to each other their several fortunes, since
they were together in the Court of England. Simprinell discoursed his love to
Belanicia of Norgalles, and the cause of his coming to the City of Varne:
which when Palladine heard, he determined not only to forget his affection to
Belanicia, but also to assist his friend to his uttermost in obtaining her
love, saying.

My noble friend, I know what manner of disease love is, if one have not
received the sweetes thereof, albeit, when I saw you in England, I had no
knowledge at all therein: wherefore, if I shall accompany you to Norgalles,
such good speeches will I use of you to your Lady, as she shall not be offended
for not bringing her portrait again, or that of the Duchess which she sent ye
for.

Simprinell thanked the Prince for his offer, but he was far otherwise
addicted, saying: he had promised his Lady a further journey for her love,
wherein he would not have any company.

With this answer was Palladine well contented, directing his course another
way: so having stayed two days at the Abbey, and either of them being able to
bear Armor, he left Simprinell there, and courteously taking his leave of the
Abbot, set on whither fate and fortune would guide him.

And after he had ridden five or six days, he met a horsseman, with whom,
falling in talk, he understood, that the great Prince Caesar of Room, had at
Paris enterprised a noble Tournament, for the love of the fair Rosamonde of
France, a Princess esteemed incomparable in beauty. And I (quoth the
Courrier) am sent to the King of Norgalles Court, who has a fair Daughter
named Belanicia, before whom, I must reveal my message, and declare the
Prince Caesar's challenge, in presence of all the Kings Knights. Afterward, I
must travail to Bulgaria, and in the Court of the Duchess Brisalda, a Lady
likewise renowned for her beauty, I must make known of this famous Tournament.

Palladine glad to hear the Duchess so commended, and that now he had the
means to see the Princess Belanicia, accompanied the messenger to Norgalles,
and by the way, meeting Belanicia riding in her Litter abroad for her
recreation, with diverse Knights that attended on her, Palladine was provoked
to Ioust with them, by a contemptuous challenge of one of her Knights. But
such was their ill luck, as all her champions were dismounted, till her
brother Landastines took the cause in hand, having left the English Court to
come see the King his father: and after they had broken many Lances, not being
able to prevail against each other, they ended the sport, and Landastines
knowing Palladine, took him with him to the Court, where he was welcomed
honorably by the King, as also the fair Belanicia his daughter.

CHAP. XXI.
How Simprinell being healed of his wounds, returned to Varne, where he
vanquished the Prince Alfian of Ireland, and brought away the portrait of
Brisalda.

WHen Simprinell felt himself well recovered, and remembered, how he had not
only failed in winning the portrait of the Duchess, but in the attempt had
lost ye figure of his mistress Belanicia: he determined not to go to
Norgalles, unless he could accomplish his Lady? commandment. Wherefore
taking his leave of the Abbot, he rode back again to Varne, and coming to
the place of triumphs, found the Duchess with her Ladies placed on the
Scaffolds, and the Prince Alfian of Ireland the Champion for Brisalda, who
prevailed woorthely against all that encountered with him. Simprinell looking on
his Ladies picture, and seeing it embased under the Duchess, had such a
violent impression struck him to the heart, as he intended to recover her
honor again, or else to leave his life in the feeld. And in this resolution he
encountered the Irish Prince, passing two or three courses bravely, the shiuers
of their Lances flying up into the air: but at the third attaint, he met
Alfian so roughly, as both horse and man were sent to the ground.

When Alfian had recovered his feet, he drew his Sword, and coming to
Simprinell* who by this time was alighted, and prepared for him: when they
began a fierce and cruel combat, whereof Simprinell in the end had the honor.
Then coming to the Duchess, with courteous reverence he demanded of her, if
she would permit him to carry thence the portraites: whereto she made no
answer, but in a great anger strong from the Scaffold, because her champion
had defended her cause no better. Hereupon, the Judges as the equity of the
case required, delivered the portraites to Simprinell, which he giueing to his
Squires, mounted on horssebacke, returning presently back to the Abbey, not
alittle glad of his high good fortune. At the Abbey he stayed three or four
days, to heal such wounds as he took in the last combat, and afterward
departed toward Norgalles, where he arrived without any adventure by the way to
hinder him. If he were welcome to the Lords and Ladies, I refer to your
opinions, and how the Princess Belanicia liked thereof, when she saw her
Knight returned with the Duchess counterfeit, let Ladies desirous of especial
account, imagine her content: but in requital of his great pains, so
confidently did she love him afterward, as by imparting the same to her brother
Landastines, who highly favored his friend. Simprinell: the King was made
acquainted therewith, and Ambassadors sent to the King of Scots, such good
liking thereof being found between them both, as the marriage was consumated,
and long love requited with desired recompense.

Afterward, Simprinell imparted to Landastines, how at first he was foiled by
the Prince Palladine, and in his absence had won his Ladies credit again:
which Landastines took so unkindly, as they concluded to travail to Paris,
whither the English Prince was gone before, to reconcile this wrong to former
amity. And thither are ridden Landastines and Simprinell, to the great grief
of the King and Queen, but cheefely of Belanicia, so soon to forgo her Lord
and husband.

Palladine entised with the report of this brave Tournament, held at Paris by
the Prince Caesar for fair Rosamonde of France, would needs be seen in
those worthy exploites: and landing at Callis (loath to be known in England,
least the King his Father should hinder his intended journey,) he met with the
Duke of Gaul, accompanied with twenty Knights bravely mounted, he likewise
riding to the Prince Caesar's Tourney, by the commandment of the fair Agricia
of Naples, whom he honored as his Lady and mistress.

After they had saluted each other, Palladine presently knew the Duke,
remembering he had seen him in his Fathers Court: yet would not he make any
show thereof, because he was so slenderly accompanied, having no one with him
but his Squire Lycelio, and therefore was content to be esteemed but as a poor
Knight errant.

The Duke merrily demanded of Palladine, whether he travailed, and about what
affairs.

My Lord, quoth the Prince, my journey is to Paris, and no other business have I
there, then to make one in the famous Tournament, ordained by the Prince Caesar
of Room for love of the fair Rosamonde of France.

But will you, quoth the Duke, adventure your self against a Prince so
magnanimous? In sooth (answered Palladine) I will try my fortune both against
him and other, if I may.

Alas, said the Duke scoffingly, your courage exceedes your ability, if you
desire the combat, as you profess: I would advise ye not to meddle with
Caesar, for if ye do, you will hardly deal with any other afterward. Let that
fall out, quoth Palladine, as my fatal Stars have appointed: if I be
vanquished, I must put it up with patience: for I am as all men are, subject to
fortune.

You are then, said the Duke, the Knight of fortune, and she your mistress:
yet can I scant think it, unless that is she which is painted in your Sheeld.

Palladine seeing the Duke so scorn him, angerly answered.

In truth my Lord, your lips hang in your light, in taking the God of love to
be fortune.

I see I am deceived, quoth the Duke, for Cupid has made you a loving Knight:
by the faith I bear to Chivalry, me thinks amorous conceits do ill agree
with so young a countenance. I scant think, said Palladine, that your elder
countenance can disgrace mine so young. Be not angry Gentleman, quoth the Duke,
the tune is dangerous for diseases: and if you chase your self too much, you
may chance to be beguiled of all your wit. If I happen hereafter, said
Palladine* either to borrow some wit of you, or to lend you more then you seem
to have, think a young man as able as he that looks more ancient: and for
your scoffing floutes, the next time I meet with ye, you and I will try who
is the better man. So taking a Scarffe from about his arm, he threw it to the
Duke, saying: In witness of my words, there is my gadge, which I will fetch
again before I will forfeit it, and pay you usury enough for your taunting
speeches. With which words he galloped an other way, the Duke in great laughter
bidding him adieu: but Palladine rode on very patiently, minding to be
revenged on the Duke when he came to Paris. But it fell out contrary to his
expectation, for the Duke, and all his Knights riding toward Paris* were taken
by two cruel Outlawes, that kept a strong Castle, they being named
Brulanfutior, and Frucidant, who likewise kept the Prince Jews of France
prisoner, because Brulanfurior sought to marie with his Sister Rosamonde: and
being denied, as unworthy so fair a Princess, he and his Brother left the
Court, alluring with them the young Prince Jews* and there led a most hateful
and despised life, emprisoning all the Knights they could get, and stealing
all necessaries from the poor countrymen.

By this Castle Palladine chanced to ride, when he saw the servants to these
cruel men, take violently a great heard of Sheep from two poor Shepherds,
which he got them again by killing the thieves: and afterward understanding
the thraldom of Prince Jews, disguised in Shepherds habits, he and Lycelio
entered the Castle, where by policy they slew Brulanfurior and Frucidant,
with all the villains that attended on them. Then searching the Prisons, they
found the Prince Jews, the Dukes of Sauoy, Gaul, and Guienne, the County of
Champaigne, and many other great Lords prisoners there: to whom he gave
liberty, and so the Duke of Gaul confessing his former folly, was freendly
pardoned by the Prince Palladine, and there stayed three or four days in
company with the Princes, while Lycelio anointed his wounds with the
precious unguent, so that they were sound and perfectly healed.

CHAP. XXII.
How the Princes Palladine, and Jews of France, arrived at Paris, and of the
noble deeds of arms, accomplished by the Prince Caesar in the Ioustes, which
he maintained for the love of fair Rosamonde of France.

QUietly remained the Princes in the Castle of Brulanfurior and beguiling the
time with repetition of many Knightly adventures, till feeling themselves in
good plight to travail, and knowing the day was now at hand, when ye Prince
Caesar would begin his enterprise for fair Rosamonde: when Jews committing
the Castle to the custody of a trusty Gentleman, and what prisoners
remained, to stay the censure of the King his Father, with Palladine he set
forward to Paris.

Loath was the English Prince to be known (as yet) to the King of France
until he had tried his fortune against Caesar of Room: wherefore he entreated
Prince Jews and the rest to conceal his name: and for I would not be known
(quoth Palladine) by my Sheeld, I beseech ye good friend Jews to lend me
yours, which I will employ with such chivalry, as you shall not be dishonored
thereby. Prince Jews granted Palladines request, and coming to Lo^^re where
the King then lay, no little joy was made for the return of the young Prince.
And when the King demanded for the Knight that slew Brulanfurior and
Frucidant, the Prince answered that he was gone to Paris* but would not be
known till he had Io^sted with the Prince Caesar.

On the morrow the Tournament began, and the Knights entering the Lystes, the
King and all the estates placed to regard the sports: Prince Caesar very
bravely came forth of his Tent, and the first that made offer to run with
him, was the Duke of Gaul, who bare in his Sheeld for his devise, a Knight
fighting with a Lion. Whereby was figured, the noble assistance he gave to his
Lady Agricia, who had been devoured by a Lion had not he defended her:
whereupon, she entertained him as her Knightly servant, commanding him to
travail to Paris, and to maintain her beauty against Prince Caesar of Room,
as far excelling fair Rosamonde of France. For this cause he entered the
Listes, and coming to Caesar, thus spoke. Hither am I come Sir Knight, to
justify that my mistress fair Agricia of Naples, exceeds Rosamonde in all
perfections of beauty. And I, quoth Caesar will maintain the contrary, that
the Lady thou have named, deserves not to be equalled with my divine Goddess.
So coutching their Lances, they met together with exquisite chivalry, and at
the second encounter, the Duke of Gaul was vnhorssed: when being carried into
his Tent by his Squires, very sore hurt and bruised with his fall, he entered
into many dolorous complaints, because he had so lost the honor of his
mistress.

Landastines of Norgalles, and Simprinell of Scotland, being come thither to
find the Prince Palladine, determined to make proof of their valor against
Caesar, but they accompanied the Duke of Gaul in misfortune, and so did diverse
other Knights after them.

Then entered the Listes two brave gallants, the one in azured Armor thick set
with Stars of gold, and in his Sheeld, a Lady reskewed from a Giant: the
other bare for his devise, Fame triumphant in a silver feeld.

The Knight in azure Armor, made sign to Caesar, that he would first
adventure for his Lady: yet such was his ill hap in the end, as both horse and
man were thrown to the ground. When the Knight of Fame saw his friend
dismounted, he came to Caesar with these speeches.

Sir Knight, I confess as well as thou do, that my Lady Rosamonde excels
all other in beauty: but this will I make good on thy body, that I am more
worthy to be her servant then thou art. It should seem then, answered
Caesar, that I deserve not to be so accounted: this controversy shall the
strength of my Lance presently discide, and thou or I will be her only
servant. Hereupon, they encountered very valiantly, breaking many Lances, yet
neither able to move the other, whereat, they both grew angry, desiring the
King to let them have stronger Lances, or else to permit them the Combat with
the Sword: but the King would not suffer them to meddle with Swords, commanding
each of them a very strong Lance, at which charge, the Prince Caesar was
bravely dismounted, and the Knight of Fame had almost borne him company. A
great murmuring presently grew among the people, some auouching, that because
the strange Knight so hardly recovered himself, therefore Prince Caesar should
not be held as vanquished, but that they should prove their fortune once more.
But the Judges gave verdict to the contrary, attributing the conquest to the
Knight of Fame: which when Caesar heard, he went to the King, to entreat his
Majesty for the Combat with its Sword: but he denied it him, saying, that the
Ioustes being enterprised for love, ought not to be ended in hatred.

At these words, Prince Caesar went to his Lady Rosamonde, who gave him many
thanks for his honorable pains: and though his success happened so ill in the
end, yet would not she withdraw her love.

But now commes Palladine into the feeld, being sorry he had not the conquest
of Caesar, yet determining to end his choler on the Knight of fame, to whom
he approached, saying: It greeues me Sir Knight that I Iousted not with noble
Caesar, for if I had, little praise could thou have gotten to day. Your
reason? answered the Knight of fame. Because I had won ye honor (quod
Palladine) which thou vsurpest, and yet remains in doubt among a number, which
if thou dare say thou have deserved, I will avouch the contrary: beside, yt
it appertains not to thee, to be servant to the fair Lady Rosamonde nor to
the very meanest among her Ladies: for (as I understand) she is provided of one
beyond thee many degrees. Good Sir, answered the Knight of fame, you are very
bold and brave in speeches: What moves ye so much to abase me, seeing you
know not of whence or what I am? nor have thou seen any matter in me
deserving these words. But I perceive the cause hereof grows, by the desire
thou have to deal with me, wherein thou shall have thy desire, either at the
Lance or Sword, so pleases the King to grant us that liberty. Then turning
to his Majesty, the Knight of Fame entreated the combat, with the Sword, if
they could not finish their quarrel at the Lance. Loath was the King to suffer
such danger, but the Judges, with many Lords and Barons there present, noting
the earnest desire of the Knight, and that they were both strangers, persuaded
his highness, intending to cause them give over, if in fight either of them
should be in peril of life.

When they had thus obtained what they would, they gave their horses the
spurs, and with a very rough encounter, they were both dismounted, whereat
Palladine very angry, drew his Sword, and marching against the Knight of
Fame, such a cruel combat continued between them, as never had the like
been seen in France. The King beholding their Armor broken, and the ground
coulored with their scarlet blood, sent his Son the Prince Jews to entreat
them give over: which they immediately did, the Knight of Fame being not a
little glad thereof, because he was brought into very great debilitie, only
by the exceeding abundant loss of his blood. Jews bringing them before the
King his Father, caused them both to be graciously entertained, and taking
Palladine by the hand, said. See here my Lord the man that slew Brulanfurior
and his brother, who delivered me from imprisonment, and many Knights that
were held captive in the Castle.

The King not alittle joyful of these news, arose and embraced Palladine,
saying.

Worthy Knight, I am more indebted to you then any man else in the world, for
you alone have done that to me, which neither with strength or policy I was
able to compass. I enjoy my Son again by your means, and my people are
delivered from those merciless villains, whom neither law nor love could
bridle: let me understand of whence you are, that I may know the man to whom
I am so highly beholding.

My Lord, answered the Prince, my name is Palladine, Son to the King Milanor
of England, your loving brother and vowed friend.

At these words, the King was much more glad then before, and casting his arms
about his neck, with inward conceit of joy, the tears trickled down his
face: then came the Queen and fair Rosamonde her daughter, who welcomed the
Prince with maruailous courtesy, the like did Landastines, Simprinell and
Lydiseo of Hungaria, who was the man that came with the Knight of Fame, and at
report of these Triumphs travailed into France.

As for the Knight of Fame himself, he was called Don Robert, the Prince of
Freeze, a stout, courageous and hardy champion, greatly devoted to the love of
fair Rosamonde. The King presently departed to his Palace, there to honor
these brave Knights as they worthily deserved: but Caesar of Room^ highly
thanked Palladine for revenging his foil on the Knight of Fame, swearing to
him an inviolable league of amity, which grew to such effect, as you shall
hereafter behold.

CHAP. XXIII.
How the Princes Don Robert of Freeze, and Lydiseo of Hungaria, being healed of
their wounds, departed from Paris: and of a letter which the wise Orbiconte
sent to Palladine, who was passionate for the love of fair Rosamonde of
France.

DOn Robert of Freeze, having kept his chamber certain days, by reason of the
dangerous wounds he had received, and Palladine likewise in the selfsame
estate, yet carefully attended on by the Kings Chirurgions, a greater corsey
happened to them both, then either their wounds or doubt of health. For Don
Robert seeing he was not regarded of the fair Princess Rosamonde, whom he
loved as dearly as his own life, thought to have committed violence on
himself, but that by good advise he was better persuaded, and being out of
hope to compass his desire, when he was somewhat recovered, he and Lydiseo of
Hungaria took their leave of the King, shaping their course through Piccardie
toward Bullin, where they embarked themselves, and sailed into England, for
that they were desirous to see the good King Mil^nor, to whom they brought
letters from his Son Palladine. Landastines likewise as not unmindful of his
Florea, sent the message of his heart under seal by Lydiseo, excusing his
absence which should not be long, and hoping to bring her brother home with
him. As for Palladine, he became so affected to the Princess Rosamonde, whom
he imagined to be the Lady foretold by the wise Orbiconte: as he wasted and
consumed in pensive thoughts, practicing how to obtain her love, albeit he
adventured the hard stratagemes of death. Oftentimes would he privately
confer with her, and she would answer him with such rare modesty, as
increased his torments above the compass of reason. Nor was she forgetful of
his dangerous pains, in deliverance of her brother Jews from imprisonment,
joining therewithal the common benefit, by the death of Brulanfurior and his
brother Frucidant: but as for the privilege of her love, the Prince Caesar of
Roeme was Lord thereof, and her settled affection impossible to be removed. All
which he perceived by such manifest signs, as made him were frantike in silent
cogitations: sometime thinking to forestall his friend, by making the first
request of her in marriage: then again intending the death of Caesar, rather
then to miss of the fair Rosamonde. And though the Roman Prince loved him
dearly, yet the fury of blind love made Palladine so impatient, as he minded
nothing but Caesar's death, which with a sharp Lance in the Ioust he imagined
might easily be done, or with an infected cup of poison given him in his
chamber.

But the wise Orbiconte still directing Palladines course, and knowing by her
art his secret intent, only by being deceived in his own opinion: would
separate Palladine from Caesar, by calling him to his destenyed Country,
whereof we spoke in the beginning of our History, and thus it happened.

The Prince being in his Chamber with Landastines, Simprinell, and his Squire
Lycelio, imagining how to finish his determination: on a sudden there entered a
little deformed Dwarffe, who saluting Palladine, gave him a Letter, saying.

My Lord, the wise Orbiconte has sent ye this Letter, the contents whereof,
she commands you to fulfill, otherwise, great harm will happen to you. He had
no sooner spoken these words, but immediately he vanished away. How now? quoth
Landastines, whether is the little Jack an Apes gone? oftentimes have I seen
the crafty deceits of Iugglers, but never saw I such a trick before: I hold
my life the Devil fetched him away. This strange accident made Palladine
remember the voice that whispered in his ear at Varne, when he determined to
depart from the Duchess Brisalda: and desirous to know the news from
Orbiconte, he feigned that he would lie down upon his bed, wherefore
Landastines and Simprinell withdrew themselves, when he opening the Letter,
read as follows.

The Letter from Orbiconte the wise, to Palladine the Prince of England.
Having certain knowledge (virtuous Prince) of the extreme love thou bear
to the beawtifull Rosamonde, and the doubtful estate whereinto her amiable
looks has brought thee: I am to advertise thee, in respect of the love I
bear thee, as also the good support I shall one day receive by thee, that the
Prince Caesar of Room is appointed for her, and no other then he shall she
have in marriage. Therefore withdraw thy earnest desire, and the execution of
that thou have determined: which is, to demand her for thy wife, and to
prevent the life of Caesar, whom she entirely loves and honoreth in heart:
assuring thee, that another is reserved for thee, who excels in beawtie the
fair Rosamonde, and all the other Ladies of Christendom: whose lively
portraite thou shall see to morrow, brought to the place where thou art by a
Knight, whom thou shall vanquish in Combat, and by that mean recover her
picture. Then taking leave of the Court, thou shall travail to seek her in
her Country, which shall be named to thee by the Knight: and never fear any
dangers in thy journey, for thou shall be favored by fortune and me, who have
foreseen all these things that shall happen.

Thy good friend, Orbiconte the wise, and Prophetess.

Palladine having read this Letter, was meruailously perplexed in his spirit,
doubting whether he might credit the advertisement of Orbiconte, or execute his
intent touching fair Rosamonde: whom he reputed so accomplished with all
perfections of beawtie, as he judged it impossible to find her second in the
whole world. Beside, he was thoroughly inueigled with her love, as he despaired
how he could divert his fancy: on the other side he was as greatly displeased,
to understand that she would love none but Caesar, and that to him she only
was vowed. In these diverse opinions he spent the whole night, yet in the end
considering by the Letter of Orbiconte, that what he had pretended was known
to her, he concluded to credit her message, and especially if the Knight came
accordingly on the morrow, with the portrait of her he desired so much to see,
upon this determination he slept till morning.

CHAP. XXIIII.
How a Pagan Prince came to the Court of France, bringing with him the
portraite of the Princess Nonparelia: and of the Combat between him and
Palladine, who having won the portraite, departed from the Court.

THE next morning, the King and all his Barons being in the great in the great
Hall, Palladine, Landastines and Simprinell likewise in company, there entered
a Squire, attired after the Morisco manner, who making great reverence, thus
began.

Mighty and redoubted King, I am sent from the Prince Zarcanell of Chipre, who
yet abides without the City, to crave license of your Majesty, that he may
report before you and your Lords, an enterprise which he has determined to
execute before you.

Squire, answered the King, say to thy master, that he shall be welcome, and
boldly let him enter our City: for we grant him free access to our presence,
to open any thing he has intended.

The Squire returned presently to his Lord, who understanding the Kings
gracious answer, commanded his servants to go to the plain before the Court,
and there with all speed to set up his Tent: in mean while, himself
accompanied with three Gentlemen, came before the King, and having humbly
saluted his Majesty, before all the Princes and Lords thus spoke.

Gracious Prince, I am persuaded that your highness well does know, what
authority love has over human creatures, and how unable they are to resist
his power: therefore I beseech ye not to think it strange, if I declare what
love has enforced me to do.

So it is, that having heard the beawtie of fair Nonparelia, so highly
renowned above all Ladies in the world: as one covetous to see a thing so
excellent, I travailed to Aquilea, and there sound by proof, that fame had
rather spared then spoken what she might, there I became immediately enthralled
with her love, and by gracious behauiours toward her prevailed so far, as
she accepted me to be her Knight: with this charge and condition, that I should
carry her divine figure into the Courts of all Christian Princes, where Ladies
or Damsels were famous for beawtie, and against all comers to maintain my
mistress rare pre-eminence. If froward fortune gave me the overthrow, then
must I leave to the conqueror my Ladies counterfeit: but if my luckye Stars
granted me the victory, I am to carry with me the vanquished Ladies
portraite. And having heard (my good Lord) that your daughter Rosamonde is
named among the fairest in Christendom, I directed my journey hither: and may
it like you to deliver her counterfeit on the aforenamed conditions, I am
ready to do my deuoire in the open feeld before your Palace gate, where I
have caused my Tent to be erected. Right well am I contented, said the King,
and immediately will I come thither with my daughter, whose portrait shall be
there openly presented, and if any one will combat for her, there shall she be
to regard her fortune. Palladine standing by, coniectured this to be the
Knight, whereof the wise Orbiconte made mention in her Letter: wherefore he
first auaunced himself, earnestly entreating the King, that he might defend
his daughter Rosamonds beawtie. Whereto the King presently granted, scant to
the good liking of Caesar, who still bare his arm in a Scarffe: and began
iealously to suspect Palladine, minding to revenge him as occasion served. Upon
this agreement, Zarcanell departed to his Tent, where being well armed, and
bravely mounted, expected his adversary, who not long after came with the
King, the Prince Jews, and many noble Lords in gallant equipage. The Queen,
her daughter Rosamonde, and all the Ladies of the Court, came with great speed
to their Scaffold, to behold the portrait of the Lady so highly commended,
which hung on a Lance at the entrance of his Tent: and both the Champions
being ready for the Ioust, Zarcanell coming to Palladine, thus spoke.

Sir Knight, as the huge world can not endure two Suns, so may not my eyes
abide these two figures, presenting the rarest beawtie in the world, the one of
them being a Pagan, and the other a Christian. But this contention between us
shall be soon ended, without any fatal hazard of the weapon, if thou will
confess before this assembly, that the incomparable beawtie of my Lady,
resembles the clear Sun shining in the day time, and thine the Moon that
lighteneth the night.

Sir, Sir, answered Palladine, we come not hither to argue on the Sun or
Moon, but at the point of the Lance, and edge of the Sword, to try between
us the honor of the feeld, whereof if I be master, I will be your Sun, and
you my Moon if you go to the ground. Without any further speeches they
encountered together, their Lances being broken with such fury, as the English
Prince was set on the crupper of his horse, but Zarcanell nothing moved or
shaken. In three or four courses more, Palladine could never fasten his Lance
on his enemy, yet Zarcanell still brake on him, for he was so nimble, and
ran so close to his horse, as each one woondered at his fine chivalry.
Without doubt my Lord, quoth the County of Champaigne to the King, never did I
see a brauer horsseman, he has the raines of his Courser at commandment,
that can govern him in such sort without any attaint. But Palladine angry at
his hard fortune, met Zarcanell so right at the sixth course, as breaking the
girts of his saddle, his horse ran away, and left him behind him. Yet did
he quickly recover himself, and drawing his Sword, came valiantly against
Palladine, showing as fine sleights, and agilitie in the Combat, as he did
before on horssebacke with his Lance. In the end, it was his fortune to be
overcome, when under the Sword of Palladine he entered into these complaints.

Unhappie that I am, of force I see I must yield my self, and not my body
only, but my life also, having lost the only maintenance thereof, the
gracious favor and regard of my mistress. Ah incomparable misery, fortune
that ever esteemed of me hitherto, has in a moment utterly rejected me:
therefore good Sir Knight, rid me of this pain, and with one stroke end my
misery and life together, for greater good you never did to man.

Palladine seeing him in such despair, so pitied his case, as suffering him to
arise, he thus comforted him.

My friend, you ought not in this sort to offend your self, considering these
are but the tricks of fortune, whereto all men are daily subject, and no more
has happened to you then might have done to me. If the Lady for whom you
undertook this voyage, loved you well, she cannot but augment it, knowing with
valor you defended her cause. In sooth my Lord, answered Zarcanell, rather had
I die a thousand deaths, then return to my Lady, having not won the
portraite of fair Rosamonde: for her self protested, that never would she
love me except I brought it. And here I vow to you, that I will return to
mine own Country, so soon as I have recovered my wounds: leaving you not
only the portraite you have won, but those likewise that I conquered in
Norgalles, and elsewhere, discharging my self of loves service, seeing he
rewards his faithful servant no better. Therein use your pleasure, quoth
Palladine, but first go with me, that your wounds may be searched to prevent
further inconvenience. So going to the King, he desired that his Chirurgions
might attend on the Knight: for I assure your Majesty, quoth he, never met I
with any man of higher desert. Whereto the King willingly granted, causing
Zarcanell to be conducted to the Court, and to be lodged in one of the fairest
chambers, where he was dilligently attended, as in ten days he was perfectly
recovered. When thanking the King for his noble entertainment, and taking
leave of his Majesty, the Prince Jews, Palladine, and the rest, he departed
toward his own Country, not alittle agreeued (as you may think) for his
misfortune.

As for Palladine, he remembering the letter sent him by the wise Orbiconte, and
having imprinted in his heart the Lady Nonparelia, whose counterfeit he kept
with choice regard, determined to take his farewell of the King, and journey
with all speed toward Aquilea. Wherefore in the evening, the King walking in
his Garden after supper, he told his Majesty, that he was desirous to travail
to the King his Father in England, and therefore that it would please him to
license his departure. The King (though loath) consented thereto, being sorry to
forgo the valiant Palladine, who was so great a grace to his Court. Having
then taken his leave of the King, and of all the noble Princes and Ladies; he
departed on the morrow from Paris, accompanied with Landastines and Simprinell,
taking his way toward Millayne, in hope to find his friend Manteleo there, but
he was as then newly gone toward Normandy, to pacify a controversy between
his Father and the Duke, who was a man well provided with money and munition,
for he kept diverse Rouers and Pirates on the Seas, that daily brought him great
store of good booties.

CHAP. XXV.
How Palladine met with his friend Manteleo, whom he had almost slain in
fight, but that a Damsel discovered his name. And how Palladine slew the
Pirate Dormidon.

Upon the fourth day, after Palladine and his friends departed from Paris,
riding through a Forest, they met a Knight and a Damsel, and with them a
Squire grievously weeping: the Squire joyful to meet these Knights, came to
Palladine with these speeches. Help Gentlemen, for Gods sake help me, to be
revenged on this Traitor, who has slain my master by the procurement of
this Damsel. Palladine moved with the Squires tears, rode to the Knight, and
thus spoke.

Knight, or paillard rather, what has moved thee to misuse passengers, and to
bathe thy hands in innocent blood? Knight if thou will, quoth he with the
Damsel, but paillard, reserve for thy self: as for him that I have slain,
he was the cause of his own death, because I found him ready to have
dishonored this Damsel. It is best for thee to excuse thy deed, said
Palladine, in respect here is none that can contrary thee: but I rather
think the shame is thine, then his that is dead, as his Squire has protested
to me. Think what thou will, quoth the Knight, but the Squire lies falsely, and
I ought to be better believed then he, if thou did me the right belonging to
Arms: but credit as thou find occasion, I have no leisure to stand chatting
with thee. And because thou art so lusty, answered Palladine, thou shall a
little tarry my pleasure. So couching their Lances, they met so roughly
together, as they were both cast forth of their saddles: afterward, they
continued a cruel Combat with the Sword, till Landastines and Simprinell
stepping to the Damsel* demanded of her what the Knight was, Alas Gentlemen*
quoth she, his name is Manteleo the Prince of M^^^^yne, whom I see very
hardly requited, for delivering me from the villain that would have forced me.
Land^stines presently stopping between them, said: Give over Sir Palladine,
for you fight against your dear friend Manteleo. At these words, the Princes
threw down their weapons, and with all the ceremonious courtesies incident to
freendship, they lovingly embraced each other: whereat, the Damsel greatly
meruailed, and the Squire who was the cause of their fight, whereupon, doubting
a further danger toward him, because his master was slain in so bad a cause,
so fast as he could took himself to flight.

After the manifold kind excuses, which freendly enemies use together, they
rode with the Damsel to her Castle, where their wounds being visited, they
afterward iournyed to Millayne: Palladine being honorably welcomed by the
Duke, and especially favored for his love to his Son Manteleo. And having
feasted there certain days, the Duke recounted to Palladine his present
affairs with the Duke of Normandy, who after many dishonorable actions, was
by his power slain in a battle: whereupon, the Normans were content to endure
his sovereignty over them, and for that cause had they sent their Ambassadors.
In the end, by the worthy advise of Palladine, the Duke took the government
upon him, sending his Son Manteleo to receive the possession thereof. Now
thought Palladine he stayed too long, remembering the letter from the wise
Orbiconte, therefore would he presently depart toward Aquilea, to the great
grief of the Duke and his friend Manteleo, being loath to forgo, the English
Prince so soon. Landastines and Simprinell, understanding that Palladine would
travail alone, albeit more willingly they would have borne him company, rode
back to Norgalles again, Simprinell confessing how he had won the portraite
of Brisalda, whereof Palladine made little or no account at all, because he had
now almost forgotten her. Manteleo likewise went to Normandy, where he was
received as their Lord and Governor, and having established all matters
concerning the common wealth, he crossed the Seas into England, to visit his best
beloved Lady Marcelina, whom he had chosen above all other in the world.

Palladine thus departing from his friends, having none in his company but his
Squire Lycelio, and the Shepherd Liboran, by whose means he entered the
Castle of Brulanfurior, and therefore gave him the name of Liboran the well
advised: took Shipping, and coasting by Lystria, at length they came into
Albania, where suddenly they met with a Turkish Pirate, named Dormidon, who
thinking to seize on this christian booty, assailed them, yet in the end was
overcome himself, and he with the most part of his men thrown into the Sea.

After this sharp encounter on the Sea, Palladine was desirous to take landing
at the nearest Island, least they should be surprised by any more Pirates: and
because he thought each day a year, till he might see the sweet Goddess,
promised him by Orbiconte, he determined not to rest himself in any place,
until he had found what he so earnestly desired, charging his Squires thence
forward, to call him The Knight without rest, and under this name hereafter he
trauaileth.

The Pilote did as he was commanded, striking presently to the nearest Island,
which seemed to them very beawtifull and delectable: but they were no sooner
come on land, and their horses brought on shore, which immediately offered to
feed on the goodly green grass, but a mighty flame of fire issued forth of
the ground, and continued before them to hinder their passage any further. What
means this? said the Knight without rest to the Pilote, what may this Isle be
named? are we in Scicilia, where many affirm there is a Mountain, that
vomiteth fire and flame forth in great abundance? No my Lord, answered the
Pilote, we are very far from thence: Scicilie whereof you speak, is in the
Mediterranean Sea, and we are in the Sea Adriatique, a great distance from
Aquilea: and as my own knowledge serves me, I think this soil is named The
Isle of Fire, where has been heard and seen matters of great marvel. And
trust me, said the Knight without rest, I never saw the like before: I pray ye
therefore stay for me in this place, while I go to see the wonders of this
Island: and if I return not when two days are expired, set Sail and depart
whether ye please. Not so my Lord, answered the Pilote, I will not weigh
Anchor, till I see ye, or hear from ye: in mean while we will expect a lucky
gale of wind, that may send us merrily to Aquilea.

CHAP. XXVI.
What strange and fearful visions, the Knight without rest saw in the Isle
of Fire: and how he returned in exceeding grief, because he could not finish
the enchauntments.

Resolved thus to see this strange Island, the Knight without rest mounteth on
horssebacke, leaving Liboran in the Ship, and taking his Squire Lycelio with
him. Many Cities, Castles, and Fortresses he seemed to see in the fire, yet
nothing did so much amaze him, as the voice and dollorous cries he heard in
the midst of the flame. Ah love, said one, why do thou still hold me in
this miserable pain? does my offense committed against thy Majesty, deserve
so grievous punishment as this? how ill advised then was I, to set so light by
thy religious laws and sovereign authority? Pardon, oh pardon him tha^
^epenteth, and cease thy just indignation against them, who while they live,
will continue thy faithful subjects: else grant them death, which they would
endure with willing minds. Such was the complaint of this sorrowful creature,
which moved the Knight without rest to such pity, as the tears trickled down
his cheeks with remembrance of the words: and then he called to mind his
great discourtesie to the Duchess Brisalda, whom he had left without intent
to see again, by yielding to the aduertisements of the wise Orbiconte, and so
was his mind carried away with the conceit of this adventure, as he stood a
good while silent, not able to speak one word: which when Lycelio perceived,
he said: Let us return again (my Lord) from hence, for we are not able to
pass any further, by reason of the flame that still increases as you see.
Lycelio, answered the Knight without rest, if thou do fear or doubt any
thing, I pray thee go back again to the Ship, and leave me to consider
better on these meruailes. I will not leave my Lord, quoth Lycelio, rather will
I die first: but if you think to go any further, you must do it on foot,
for your horse can not endure the fire. On foot will I go then, answered
the Knight without rest: for I neither see or feel any thing as yet, that
should hinder me from passing further. With these words he alighted, giving
Lycelio his horse to lead: but he was no sooner dismounted, and had drawn
his Sword, and put on his Sheeld, but he heard another voice thus complaining.
Alas, comes he now that shall deliver me from this torment? or to give me the
death I have long desired? ah death, death, how sweet would thy stroke be now
to me? why do thou defer to exercise thy office on me? I freely yield thee
my life, and thou refusest or scornest to take it* Then heard he another voice
alittle further from him, saying. How does my misery exceed all that ever
lived? being desirous of death to live in rest, and yet by no means I can
attain it.

The Knight without rest greatly moved at these speeches, thrust his Sheeld
before him; and would enter the flame, but he had so many strokes with
halbards, and other weapons, and yet not able to see who smote him, as hardly
could he pass any further. But having long time fought with these shadows, at
length he came to a Rock of white Marble, where he was suddenly smitten down,
and the fire seeming to vanish away, such a darkness covered him, as he could
see neither heaven or earth, but had innumerable strange visions presented him.

First he saw a huge multitude of Harpies flying about him, making offer to
seize upon him with their tallants. Then he beheld as many Serpents, houering
with their wings over him, casting flame and fire out at their mouths: yet
could not these, and many other apparitions cause him to dismay, but trusting
only in the God of his strength, they vanished away, and he falling in a
sleep, the wise Orbiconte presented her self to him, saying: Knight without
rest, of whom the heavens have care,
Abide not in this place so sad and full of woe:
But follow thy intent which does more good prepare,
And shall on thee thine own desires bestow.
Another man must these adventures end,
So fortune wills, to whom I thee commend.
This said, she presently departed, leaving the Knight to finish his dream,
whereat he meruailed when he awaked, to see himself alone in that place, not
knowing which way to return to his company: and as he considered on the words
of the wise Orbiconte, he arose, and looking on the Rock, beheld in the
midst thereof a Statue of black Marble, holding between his arms a Table,
whereon these words were written in letters of gold. When the invincible
Dragon shall be chased into this place by the fair Serpent, he shall give end
to these enchauntments by passing the flame: and those two ^^all lovers, for
whom the King Brandaliseo made these charms, shall be then discovered.
Having read this prophecy, long time he was thinking on the meaning thereof,
yet could he not by any means compass it: but true it is, that he doubted
(according to the words of the wise Orbiconte) that the ending of this
adventure was destenied to another, and not to him, yet if he could he would
have passed further, to see if there had been any more such matters of regard:
but as he made offer to go, the fire and flame appeared as it did before, and
many voices breathed forth bitter complaints. How happy is the man, quoth he,
whose high good fortune shall finish these enchauntments, and thereby deliver
the miserable souls, whose cries are able to rent a heart of Adamant. When he
perceived he might not pass further, but that he was resisted by the flame and
diverse that smote him: he returned to the place where he left Lycelio, and
mounting on horssebacke, came back to the Ship. Then recounted he to the
Pilote, what he had heard and seen in the Isle, and how it grieved him, that
he could not end the enchauntments, only to release the poor souls that
cried to him. So setting Sail, they coasted along Dalmatia* which then was
under the Turks government, and so rode merrily toward Aquilea, being then
likewise in the Turks obeisance, but now subject to the Venetians.

CHAP. XXVII.
How the Knight without rest arrived in Aquilea, where he was delivered from
danger by a Knight named Broantine, who brought him into the favor of the
Governor of Enna. And of an adventure that happened at dinner time, which
Broantine and Liboran the well advised brought to end.

AFter long and dangerous sailing on the Sea, at length they are come to the
Realm of Aquilea, where the Knight without rest landing with his company,
left the Pilote, directing their journey up into the country. By the way, the
Knight without rest slew a hidious Serpent, preserving the life of a young
Damos^ll ready to be devoured: and coming to the City of Enna, took up his
lodging where he might most conveniently. The name of a Christian being highly
hated among the men of this country, the Knight without rest was careful to
keep himself unknown, being able to speak the language and Lycelio
likewise: but Lyboran to preserve his life, counterfeited himself to be dum,
accounting any shift good to escape danger.

The Governor understanding that strangers were entered the City, sent one of
his Captains named Broantine, to enquire of whence and what they were.
Broantine coming to their lodging, immediately knew the Knight without rest,
being the Knight that accompanied him into Bulgaria* when Dardalon defended the
Iousts for the Duchess Brisalda, and brought him to the City of Varne, as you
heard before. Sir Palladine, quoth Broantine, you are heartily welcome hither:
what cause has drawn you into this far Country? long it is since I was
last in your company. The Knight without rest amazed at this acquaintance,
especially in a heathen country, where he never was before, answered. Good
Sir, I must desire ye to pardon me, for I do not remember that ever I saw ye
till now: and it may be you take me for some other body. No my Lord, said
Broantine, I know ye well enough, for I travailed in your company to the
Court of the Duchess Brisalda* at what time you slew the proud and cruel
Dardalon. I thank ye gentle Sir, quoth the Knight without rest, for your
freendly remembrance: but may I request the cause of your being in this
Country? In sooth Sir, answered Broantine, such enemies I have in the Realms
of Dace and Bulgaria* for the death of a Knight whom I unhappily slew, as I am
constrained to absent my self from thence, yet do I hope in time to conquer my
troubles, and to return home again in safety. May I then, quoth the Knight
without rest, desire this favor at your hands, to enstruct me how I shall
govern my self among these people, for I would not willingly be known that I
am a Christian, in respect of the danger may happen to me thereby: and
therefore have I changed my name, calling my self the Knight without rest,
having determined to rest in no place, till I have found one I earnestly seek
for. Refer your self to me, said Broantine, you shall not be known, but
both you and they that came with ye, shall be courteously entreated, and the
rather, because you can speak this country language. I understand it in
deed, said the Knight without rest, and speak it indifferently, as my Squire
can do also: but this Gentleman (meaning Liboran) is ignorant therein, and
therefore counterfeiteth himself dumb, that he might not be known, nor we by
him. A good devise, answered Broantine: stay here (if you please) till I
return, I will go make report of you to the Governor, and by my speeches you
shall be freendly welcomed. So went Broantine to the Governor, to whom he
said, that the Knight without rest was of his acquaintance, a man valiant,
hardy, and courageous, professing the same law that he did. The Governor
thinking Broantine was a Pagan, and the Knight without rest in like manner, was
glad of his arrival, and hoping to have his assistance in the wars, which
the King had with the King of Panonia, sent Broantine to him again, entreating
him to dine with him the next day. According to the Governors request the next
day, the knight without rest came to the Palace, where he was entertained
very honorably, the Governor using these words to him.

Sir Knight, our Captain Broantine has made such report of your forwardnes in
Arms, as while I live you must account me your friend: and I will let the King
understand of your being here, that he may accept of you as men of virtue
deserve. My Lord, answered the knight without rest, I beseech ye thus to
advertise his Majesty, that there is no Gentleman more ready to his service,
then I will be, and happy do I account my self, if I can do any thing
worthy his good liking. In this wars against the King of Panonia will I show
my self, and this Gentleman (pointing to Liboran) who long since lost his
speech, by a catharre that bred within his throat: yet is not his virtue or
prowess any thing diminished, for good experience have I had of his noble
chivalry. Liboran gathering by countenance of the knight without rest (...)
the used these words on his behalf: with reverence to (...) Governor, gave a
sign with his head and hands, that he was likewise willing to make one in the
Kings service, which he courteously accepting, embraced them both, being sorry
that Liboran had such an imperfection, so that long after he was called the
dumb Knight. The Governor walking with them in the great Hall, declared the
whole cause of the war, between the King his master, and the King of
Panonia, and how within two or three days he meant to bid him battle.

As for the matter of their discord, it grew by this occasion: that the King of
Aquilea refused to give his daughter Nonparelia in marriage to the King of
Panonia, nor the young Princess her self could not be persuaded to like of
him, by reason of the many bad qualities he was endued withal, as also he was
a man very much defourmed. In deed my Lord, answered the knight without rest,
I have oftentimes heard, that the Princess Nonparelia is the flower of the
world for beawtie, an ill match were it then, that so sweet a Lady should have
a husband so hard favored. And the only cause of my coming into this
Country, was to defend her honor in this enterprised war, as the Lady beyond
all other in rare perfections. Soon after they sat down to dinner, where
wanted no store of costly delicates: and the Tables were no sooner withdrawn,
but there entered the Hall a comely aged Lady, her face all besprent with
tears, and her sorrowful looks bewraying the anguish of her spirit. A good
while she stood viewing all the Lords, not speaking one word, till the
Governor moved with pity, thus spoke. Fair Lady, full well does your
countenance bewray, that something has happened scant to your liking: boldly
deliver the cause of your sadness, and may I in any thing give you redress, be
you assured I will perform it.

Alas my Lord, quoth she, my case requires present assistance, for my husband
coming with his Son to this City, only to aid the King in his wars,
four Knights set upon them in the Forest near at hand, and binding them both
hands and feet, have forcibly carried them away, threatening in most cruel sort
to murder them, for some private displeasure conceived against them. The
knight without rest presently offered himself, desiring the Governor that he
might redress the Ladies wrong: and having obtained leave for his departure,
with Liboran, Lycelio, and Captain Broantine, went immediately to horssebacke.
So riding with the Lady, at length they ouertooke the four Knights, who with
great cudgels cruelly did beat the Ladies Husband and Son: whereat, the
knight without rest highly offended, gave yt spurs to his horse to encounter
with them. But Liboran by signs, and Broantine by entreaties, persuaded him to
suffer them deal with the four Knights, which they did very valiantly, and
killing them all four, delivered the Knight and his Son safely to the Lady.
Afterward they rode to the Knights Castle, where their wounds received in
fight being searched and bound up, they were esteemed as their virtues
deserved, the good Lady using all the means she could devise, to express her
thankefulnes for this noble courtesy. But the knight without rest still minded
Nonparelia, thinking each hour a year, till he might see her: and therefore
practiced as much as in him lay, the speedy recovery of Broantine, and
Liboran, that he might set forward to the mistress of his thoughts.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How the Knight without rest was conducted by Broantine, to the Palla^e of the
wise Orbiconte: and of the good entertainment she made him.

NOW have our Knights well rested themselves at the Castle, and being now
ready to depart, while Liboran and Lycelio prepared every thing ready: the
Knight without rest, and Broantine, walked together in the Garden, where among
many other matters, the Prince (perceiving the faithful affection of
Broantine) bewraied his love to him, which was the only cause of his travail
to Aquilea. And as for the Princess Nonparelia, quoth he, the renown of her
exceeding beawtie and virtue has so conquered me, as I have resolved never to
love any other: and might I purchase the favor of her and the King her Father,
I ^^all repute my self the happiest man that ever lived. But true it is, and
which greeueth me not alittle, she differs from me in religion, yet time that
prevails against all things, may wiling her to become a Christian. In sooth
my Lord, answered Broantine, the Princess Nonparelia is the most accomplished
Lady living, both in beawtie, good grace, and all virtuous qualities: and well
may you persuade your self to obtain her love, in that you are stored with
those perfections, that may provoke Ladies to love a man. For if question
should be made as concerning your estate, you are the child of a King as well
as she, not inferior to him in riches and renown. If the case be alleged of
your virtue, prowess, and magnanimity: my self will not be judge herein,
but innumerable that have made experience thereof. The Knight without rest
hearing the words of Broantine, brake him off in this manner. Leave these
praises (good Sir) to God, to whom they only pertain, and from whom comes
all the good we enjoy: let us imagine, by what mean she may have knowledge of
me, without prejudicial danger of whence and what I am. My Lord, quoth
Broantine, I shall have good access to the King, when I shall present you to
his Majesty: and then may you both see and speak to the Princess, for she is
very gracious and affable, what other stead I can stand ye in, until the hour
of death, you shall command me. For this gentleness, answered the Knight
without rest, I shall hereafter be careful to make some part of recompense,
and to begin our freendship, as also to prevent the name of ingratitude: I give
you the County of Orthon, which is my patrimony, and which you shall freely
enjoy, if you like to go with me into England. I thank ye my Lord, quoth
Broantine, for your liberal offer, let us follow our intent to the King and
madame Nonparelia* whom we shall find at the Court with his Majesty: where he
expects the succor from Illiria, which doubtless will be here within
eighteen days, for then must the battle be fought at Baldina. And as we
travail thither, I will show ye one of the chief singularities in this
Country, which is the Palace of madame Orbiconte the wise, the most excellent
and sumptuous spectacle that ever was seen. I pray thee good friend, said the
Knight without rest, let us depart and stay no longer, for such report have I
heard of that good Lady, as loath would I be to return and not to see her,
having so fit opportunity to do it: for since I came into this Country, I
understand that she is allied to the King, being his Sister, albeit base borne.
Without any more speeches, they went forth of the Garden, and taking their
leave of the Knight and the Lady, mounted on horssebacke, directing their
course toward Baldina: and after certain days travail, they came to the
Palace of the wise Orbiconte, the building whereof was so rare and stately, as
in all the world the like might not be found. Long stood the knight without
rest to behold this wonder, which Orbiconte her self well perceived standing
in her window, wherefore she sent one to open the gate, and they entering,
began to admire much more then they had done: seeing the great Court paued with
Jasper and Porphire, and in the midst thereof a gorgeous Statue, being the
Goddess Venus curiously carved in Alablaster, and from her two dugs spouted
exceeding clear water, which fell into a huge great Basen of silver.

By her stood her Son Cupid, with an arrowe drawn in his bow, as being
ready to shoot: but so arteficially framed after the life, as never was a
more choice piece of workmanship seen.

From thence they walked into marvelous goodly Galleries, which were painted
round about with Poetical Histories: as the contention between the three
Goddesses, Pallas, Juno, and Venus, the judgment of Paris, the strange
alteration of many metamorphosed lovers, and the banquet of the Gods, where
angry Tisiphone showed her self.

On the other side were the labors of Hercules, the destruction of famous
Troy, and the voyage of the Argonantes.

There likewise was lively portraied the triumph of Venus, drawn in her
Chariot by two Turtle Doves, the love of her Son Cupid and fair Psyches, the
battles of many Roman Emperors, and their several triumphs in Room: so
lively figured to the eye, as if the persons had been there in action.

While they thus stood to behold these devises, the wise Orbiconte caused her
three Daughters to attire themselves in most sumptuous ornaments, and afterward
came down with them into the Gallery: which when the knight without rest
perceived, he came and saluted her with great reverence, and after many
sollemne and kind courtesies to the ancient Lady, as also her daughters, the
wise Orbiconte thus spoke.

Sir Palladine, right welcome are ye to this place: for long it is since I
desired to see you here, that I might entertain you as your virtues deserve.

Madame, answered the Knight without rest, unseemly is it that you should so
much abase your self, as to regard me that am but a poor Knight errant.

Not so my Lord, quoth she, conceal not your self, for well I know of whence
and what you are: welcome are ye to my Palace, where it shall be needless for
ye to fear any thing, though you are so far from your own Country, for
here you may assure your self of safety. So entering into the great Hall,
which was hanged round about with rich Tapistrie, wherein, the History of
great Mahomet was curiously wrought: she welcomed them all again, Broantine,
Lycelio and Lyboran, who still counterfeited himself to be dumb, to whom she
said. My friend, speak your language and fear not, for in this place you are
in no danger. I know that thou art Liboran the well advised, who with the aid
of Captain Broantine, delivered a Knight and his Son from death, therefore
seek not to hide thy self from me.

When Liboran heard what she said, he imagined she was some Diuineresse, or one
that had a familiar spirit, who acquainted her with matters of secrecy:
wherefore in the French tongue he replied, thanking her for (...) exceeding
courtesy, and offering her his uttermost service. For which, she was not
forgetful to thank him, causing certain of Gentlemen to conduct them to
fair Chambers ready prepared for them: and in the Chamber appointed for the
Knight without rest, was ingeniously wrought in Tapistrie of cloth of gold, the
adultery of Venus with God Mars, and how lame Vulcane came and found them,
with diverse other lascivious Histories, to provoke the Prince to carnal
delight.

After the Knight without rest was unarmed, he came and walked with the wise
Orbiconte in her Garden, wherein were many beawtifull fountains, and great
abundance of wholesome herbs, wherewith she made precious unguents, which she
sent to Knights errant, especially such as defended the honor of Ladies. She
walked with them likewise into her Park, and showed them what brave game she
had there provided, with all other devises incident to delight, only to allure
the Knight without rest to stay there, till she had performed her intent for
her Daughters, which within few days after she cunningly compassed in this
manner.

The wise Orbiconte calling her Daughters to her, the first whereof being named
Iunona the second Palladia, and the third Veneria: gave them especial charge,
to use themselves in such sort to the Knight without rest, that he might enter
into that familiar acquaintance with them, as each thing might sort according
to her determination.

And one night while the Knights and her Daughters were dancing, she walked
into her Garden, having in her hand a little Book of parchment, covered over
with black velvet: there framed she such spelles and charms, and with secret
muttering to her self, sent such a coniuration abroad, as nothing should
prevent what she had concluded. Now do the Knights repair to their chambers,
thinking to rest themselves as they did the nights before, and so in deed did
Broantine, Liboran, and Licelio, for their chambers were so charmed, as they
could not awake till the next day was very far spent: but as for the Knight
without rest, while he soundly slept, and thought no harm, Iunona in her night
mant^e came to visit him, and so well (it seemed) they agreed together, as the
English Prince had the honor of her virginity. Palladia and Veneria follo^ed
their Sister in fortune, the issue whereof was such, as when time came of
natures appointment, they were delivered of three goodly Sons, named
Clariseo, Clarisa^do, and Clarisano. These three children were carefully
nourished, and in their life time performed Knightly deeds of arms, whereof
we will speak hereafter as occasion serves.

By this time had the Knight without rest remained here seven days, when
Orbiconte knowing by her art, that the King her Brother would bid his enemy
battle within four days, she came to the Prince in this manner.

Sir Palladine, seeing your affection is so forward, that you will assist my
Brother in this war against the King of Panonia, it is now high time to
think on your departure, for I can assure ye, that within four days the
fight will begin. Nor can I entertain any doubt or sorrow for the matter,
because I have already foreseen, that our enemy will sustain great
detriment, loss and destruction only by your noble and worthy behavior,
prepare ye therefore to set forward to morrow.

Madame, answered the Knight without rest, if it like you we will depart
presently, the sooner shall we come to our iourneyes end. Not so, quoth she,
you shall be ruled by my direction, for you have time enough to travail
thither. So taking him and his friends into her Cabinet, she gave the Prince a
marvelous costly green Armor, to Broantine she gave one of Azure couller,
with a Sheeld, wherein was portrayed, how he delivered the Knight and his Son
from death: and to Liboran she gave a carnation Armor, figuring in his Sheeld,
the Shepherds life he led by the Castle of Brulanfurior. As for you Sir
Palladine, quoth she, I will not give you any Sheeld, because, that you have
already is better then any one here, yea, beyond all other in the world,
except one that is at London before your Fathers Palace, which is reserved for
one as yet unborn, whose Father and Mother I know not, or the place from
whence he is descended. After many other familiar speeches, the knight without
rest thus spoke to the wise Orbiconte.

Madame, because I am loath to trouble your rest in the morning, I and my
friends will now take our leave of you, requesting you to dispose of me at your
pleasure, in that I have dedicated my life to your service.

Sir Palladine, answered Orbiconte, I know that my long desires are now
sufficiently acquitted, and your ready good will I have tried and found: depart
in the morning what time you please, and still will I advertise ye as
concerning my affairs, ayding you to my power in all places where you shall
come, especially to obtain your destenied honor. Thus went the Knight without
rest and his friends to their chambers, where passing the night in some
sleeps, they arose early in the morning, and mounting on horssebacke, they
rode away merrily. But the Knight without rest remembered, how this night he had
not been visited with his accustomed dreams, nor could he forget the words of
the wise Orbiconte at his departure, when she said, that her long desires were
sufficiently acquitted, whereby he began to suspect, that she by enchantment had
caused him company with her Daughters, but not knowing certainly what to
think, he removed his thoughts to matter of more value.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the cruel battle between the Kings of Aquilea and Panonia, wherein, the
Knight without rest, Broantine, and Liboran, showed worthy and knightly deeds
of Arms. And what gracious entertaynement the King of Aquilea, his Daughter
Nonparelia, and the Princes her Brethren made them afterward.

THE day being come, that she encamped powers of Aquilea and Panoma should
meet: Akniden, and Zorian, Sons to the King of Aquilea, accompanied with the
Dukes of Sclauonia and Liburnia, raunge their forces in order of battle, the
King their Father being not able to be present, because he lay sick in the
City of Aquilea, where he was carefully attended by the Queen, and her fair
Daughter.

It was then concluded, that the Prince Almiden should lead the auantgard, the
Duke of Sclauonia, and the Prince Zorian the maine battle, and the Duke of
Liburnia the ariergard: then were a legion of Dalmatians and Albanoyses
appointed for the wings, being expert warriors with their Darts above all
other nations.

On the other side, the King of Panonia, his Son, the Princes of Misia and
Dace, with the Duke of Dardania their confederate, having passed the Albane
Mountains, were encamped within a league of Baldina. And of this Army, the
King himself was the leader, having in his company a Giant named Muzimalde,
the mightiest man in stature that ever was seen, who bare a huge mace of
steel twelve foot in length, being answerable in weight to the greatness
thereof.

The Princes of Misia and Dace had charge of the maine battle, and the Duke of
Dardani^ the ariergard, with two thousand Thracians ordained in the wings,
which were newly come to give them succor.

Thus do these Armies with fury encounter together, and great hauock is made
on either side, especially the Aquileans were in greatest ieoperdie.

But now the Knight without rest, Broantine, Liboran, and certain Gentlemen
appointed by the wise Orbiconte to accompany them, arrive in the feeld, and
seeing that side go to wrack, for whose assistance they travailed thither:
like Lions and no men they thrust among the thickest, where breaking the array
of their enemies, no one durst stand before them, but paid his life for ransom
of his boldness. At length, the Knight without rest encountered the huge
Muzimalde, and though the weighty strokes of his mace did often put the Prince
in danger, yet by policy and fine chivalry, in the end he got the better of
the Giant, sending his soul to the Devil whom he resembled.

The Panomans at this fight were greatly dishartened, finding themselves unable
to hold out any longer: so the Dukes of Sclauonia and Liburnia took many noble
prisoners, among whom were the Princes of Dace and Dardania, the Duke of Misia
being slain by the hand of the Prince Almiden, and the rest of the Panonians
with shame driven to ^light.

When the honor of the day was thus fallen to the Aquileans, the two Princes
Almiden and Zorian, sent for the knight without rest and his companions: whom
after they had embraced, they desired to go with them to the King their
Father, who should remunerate the great pains they had taken. And that his
Majesty might understand their good success, a Courrier was sent before in
all haste, and being brought into the Kings chamber, where the Queen and
Nonparelia were present, he delivered his letters, wherein the Princes had not
spared to report the worthy deeds of the knight without rest, and theirs
likewise that came in his company, so that the King demanded of whence and
what the Knight was, who in his cause had behaved himself so bravely, whereto
the messenger thus answered.

My Lord, it is as yet unknown of whence he is, yet this I can assure ye, that
he is one of the most goodly Gentlemen that ever I saw. And in the Army it is
reported, that had not he come when he did, and your Captain Broantine with
other in their company, your Majesty had lost the day: for our auantgaid
being broken, the Giant Muzimalde laid on such load, as horse and man he
struck to the ground. But at the arrival of this Knight, even as some God had
taken humane shape upon him, our courage increased, the huge Giant by his hand
was slain, and all the rest stood amazed, as doubting to fight, or turn their
backs.

When the King of Panonia (who was in person in the battle) saw the only man
he trusted in thus confounded, with his Son, and five hundred men, he set
furiously upon us, meaning to revenge the Giants death if he could: but this
heat lasted not long, for our men seeing the incredible magnanimity of this
Knight and his companions, followed him with such alacrity of courage, as the
King and all his men were driven on a heap, and had not a sudden wind and
extreme storm fallen among us, the King and his Son had been slain or
taken. But the weather beating upon our faces, we could not discern which way
they fled, till we espied them on the tops of the Mountains: whereupon this
Knight and his companions made after them, killing many of them among the
hills* and brought back with them fifteen prisoners. For conclusion, I
think our great Prophet sent this Knight, by whom, the Princes your Sons
and all our lives are saved.

The good King was so glad of these tidings, as he took ^ rich chain from his
arm, and gave it the messenger, earnestly desiring to see the Knight without
rest, that he might account of him as his virtues deserved: and forthwith he
commanded through his Realm, a general rejoicing should be made for this
happy victory, with bonfires, ringing of belles, and such like signs of
gladness.

The Princess Nonparelia, hearing the messenger so highly extol the knight
without rest, became immediately amorous of him: longing for the return of her
Brethren, that she might see the image of her desire.

On the morrow, the King commanded all his Estates, to go meet his Sons,
and the Knight without rest, charging them to honor him, as they would do him
self: which they fulfilled effectually, as in the Chapter following you shall
behold.

CHAP. XXX.
How the Aquilean Princes, and the Knight without rest arrived at the Court,
and their gracious entertainment by the King, Queen, and fair Nonparelia.

GReat haste made the Princes of Aquilea to the Court, that they might present
the Knight without rest, to the King their Father, and when they drew near
the City, such a multitude of people met the^ on the way, to see the Knight so
highly renowned, as they could not ride on for the prease and throng. At the
City gates, they were welcomed with many learned Orations, all the streets
being hanged with costly Tapistry, as it had been to entertain the greatest
Monarch in the world. And the good old King, very weak and crazie by reason of
his late sickness, came in person to the Palace gate, accompanied with all
the Princes and Lords of his Court, when his two Sons having humbly kissed
his hand, the Knight without rest would have done the like, but the King would
not permit him, wherefore he embraced him in his arms, as though he had been
as great a state as himself.

Gentle Knight, quoth he, welcome and frollick in our Court, for such report
have I heard of your virtue and prowess, as never was I more desirous of any
thing, then to see that worthy man, who with honorable pains labored in my
service, hazarding your life and person, for him that never deserved such
favor and freendship.

My Lord, answered the Knight without rest, this gracious kindness exceeds
all report, in deigning to accept of me so honorably, I being but a poor and
simple Knight errant, ready to pass straights of death in your service. Ah my
Son, said the King, death have thou already adventured for me, for which I
cannot return sufficient recompense: yet if I cannot requite you effectually,
my good will shall not want wheresoever you be, in mean time, ask what you
will, and be assured to speed. So taking him by the one hand, and his Son
Almiden by the other, he went up into the great Hall, where the Queen, the
Princess, and all the Courtly Ladies, being choisely tricked in their brauest
accoustrements, welcomed them with marvelous kindness, especially
Nonparelia, who shined like the morning Star among the other virgins, her
courtesies to the Prince exceeded all comparison.

These Courtly ceremonies ouerpassed, the Knights were conducted to their
chambers, to refresh themselves, and change their habites, while the royal
supper was preparing. Now was the Knight without rest thoroughly set to work,
with consideration of the Princess supernatural beauty, and longer would he
have continued in this rauishing study: but that the Prince Zorian came to
advertise him, that the King stayed only his coming. So walked they together
into the great Hall, where the King caused the Knight without rest to sit next
him at the table, and the Princess Nonparelia right over against him: a thing
to her no little contentation, that she might behold the worthy personage, who
had gained the only privilege of her heart. All supper time, these two lovers
fed on no other viands, then the one regarding the other with piercing looks:
for their amorous affections so ouermaisterd their senses, as they forgot to
receive any sustenance. The supper ended, the Lords and Ladies of the Court
fell to dancing: mean while, the Princess Nonparelia having noted the
gracious behavior of the Knight without rest, took the hardines upon her to
come near him, and having with great modesty saluted him, thus spoke.

As I understand Sir Knight, the King my Father and all his are highly
beholding to you, in respect of your honorable pains in the late battle
against our enemies.

Alas Madame, quoth he, if I had not as then been present, yet doubtless you
had been assured of victory, little then is the glory that I have deserved.

Herein you must pardon me Sir, answered the Princess, for I have heard
credibly reported, that but for you we had lost the day: yet let me entreat so
much favor, as to tell me of whence you are, and what might be the occasion of
this great kindness, that for my fathers sake you should so gladly thrust your
life into danger.

Madame, quoth he, so long since did your divine name overcome me, and such is
your present authority over me, as death shall not make me conceal or
disguise the truth to you. Know then sweet Lady, and hold it for certain,
that nothing procured me to assist the King your Father in his late wars, but
only your love, beauty, and good grace: all which I have heard so generally
commended, as now I confess report has not feigned.

In sooth my Lord, quoth she, such virtues as you speak of, are hard to be
sound in me, but let it be as you please to allege, yet no one is so much
bound to thank you as my self: for if the King my Father had lost the honor
of the battle, too late had it been for me to renew the peace, falling into
the subjection of the very worst man in the world, to whom my self denied
the request of marriage, and here hence grew the war between my Father and
the King of Panonia.

So much good Madame, quoth he, did I hear before, by the Governor of Enna,
and the wise Lady Orbiconte, who entreated me and my company very honorably
at her Palace, and if in this action I have done you any service, I account my
labor well bestowed, and repute my self beyond all other in fortune: having
disappointed a Prince so contrary to the virtues and perfections, wherewith
your gracious nature is accompanied, for a man of so bad conditions, ought to
have sorted out one like to himself.

In deed my Lord, quoth she, you have said the truth, notwithstanding, his
evil disposed and deformed body made me not refuse him, but his great defect
of virtue and honesty: for the gifts of the mind are to be preferred before
those of nature, yet was he acquainted neither with the one or other. Longer
would they have continued in talk, but that the King commanded to cease the
dancing, because the Knights should go rest themselves in their chambers,
wherefore the Princess (breathing a vehement sigh from her inward soul) gave
the courteous good night to the Knight without rest, who having devoutly kissed
her fair white hand, followed the King to his lodging, and there committing
his highness to the favor of the night, was by the two Princes brought to his
chamber, they both loving him as he had been their brother, especially Zorian
the youngest, who determined to accompany him when he left the Court, and to
seek adventures with him as a Knight errant.

As each one thus departed to his lodging, the Princess called Broantine to
her, and enquired of him what and of whence the knight without rest was.

Madame, quoth Broantine, at this time I can hardly satisfy you, yet thus much
I dare assure ye, as I understood by the wise Lady Orbiconte, that he is
descended of royal lineage, and one that I am especially bound to, having
received unspeakable favors at his hands.

In sooth, said the Princess, he may well be said to proceed of royal
parentage, in that his ordinary behavior declares no less: but do you know
the cause of his coming into this Country, so slenderly accompanied, and why
he entered a quarrel nothing concerning himself?

The cause (as I have heard) good Madame, quoth Broantine, was the renown of a
Ladies beauty, famed through the world to excel the fairest.

At these words, the Princess began bashfully to blush, seeing these speeches
agreed with those the Prince himself spoke, which increased the amorous fire
already kindled in her heart: and that did Broantine very well perceive, yet
he dissembled as though he knew nothing. So departed the Princess to her
chamber, and Broantine went presently to the knight without rest, to whom, he
revealed his talk with Nonparelia, aduising him to follow a matter so well
begun, for there was hope of good success to be expected. The Prince embracing
Broantine, gave him thanks for his freendly tidings: and the next day happened
a notable occasion, both to the honor of the knight without rest and to assure
him of the Princess. For Sulbern cousin to the Giant Muzimalde came and
challenged the Combat, against him that slew his kinseman: which the knight
without rest accepting, in open feeld overcame his proud enemy, and thereby
won the especial good liking of the King and the whole Court. Yet was not
this Combat sought without great danger, in respect Sulbern was a man in
stature equal to Muzimalde, and two such monstrous adversaries, would put an
approved champion to his trial: but though the Knight without rest was very
sore wounded, and many times brought in hazard of his life, yet at length he
bare away the honor of the feeld, and the head of his enemy as a present to
his mistress. Now does Venus lighten all her Lamps, and the religious lovers
approach her altars, offering up the incense of semblable affections: she
triumphing in the love of so brave a Knight, and he gloryi^g in the only Dame
for beauty, the success whereof hereafter ensues.

CHAP. XXXI.
How the Princess Nonparelia came to visit the Knight without rest, what talk
they had together. And how the wise Orbiconte came to the Court, who healed the
Princes wounds he received in the Combat.

Very dangerous were the wounds of the knight without rest and therefore he
was constrained to keep his chamber eight days together, in which time, the
Princess Nonparelia sent often to understand of his health, and went her self
(as opportunity served) to see how he did. But that which most of all grieved
these two lovers, was, that they could not confer together so secretly as
they would: for she never went to him without company of her Ladies, whom she
was loath to acquaint with her amorous desires. At length, as one desirous to be
resolved of his affection toward her, one day she withdrew her self into her
chamber, feigning to repose her self there all the after noone, having but two
of her waiting Gentlewomen with her, the rest were sporting in the Garden and
Orchard: and from her chamber she could go to the Princes lodging, through the
great Galleries unseen of any, wherefore, accompanied with her two Damsels,
she came to the knight without rest, finding no body with him but Liboran, who
generally through the Court was reputed dumb, he seeing the Princess,
presently gave place, walking to the window with the two Gentlewomen, where
with signs and gestures he devised with them, they taking great pleasure to
behold him, pitying his imperfection, because he was of stature comely, and
gentle in conditions.

While they thus beguiled the time with Liboran, their mistress seeing she
might safely confer with the knight without rest, sat down in a chair by
his bed side, and taking his hand to feel his pulses, giving a great sigh,
thus spoke.

Alas my Lord, pity it is that honorable kindness should be so hardly requited,
and though your coming hither has benefited the King and us all, yet may you
curse our acquaintance, being bought at a price so dear and dangerous.

Not so good Madame, answered the knight without rest, I rather think the
heavens specially favored me, in directing my travail to this happy
country: were it only but to see you sweet Lady, that mine eyes might behold
the rare perfections, wherewith mine ears could never be glutted.

You speak your pleasure of me my Lord, answered the Princess, but were I
endued with those titles which you give me, yet are they far inferior to
your noble deserts. But leave this talk my Lord, and tell me how ye fare? and
how you feel your wounds recovered? for nothing do I more desire, then to see
you well and free from danger. Alas Madame, quoth he, the wounds I received in
the combat against Sulberne, are nothing in respect of that I took when I
saw you first.

The Princess well understanding his meaning, yet feigning the contrary, thus
replied.

Why do you not then acquaint the Kings Chirurgions therewith, who are reputed
the most skillful in all this Country? tell them your pain, and fear not,
for all diseases are easily healed when they be soon taken in hand, and not
suffered to enter the body too far* Or if you will not declare it to them,
thinking (perhaps) they can give you no remedy, boldly may you reveal it to
me, as to the most secret friend you have in the world. And this I dare assure
ye, that if your grief may be cured by humane capacity, my Aunt the wise
Orbiconte can do it effectually: and for her will I presently send a
messenger, who will not fail to make all possible speed hither.

The knight without rest well noting ye Princess words, was so ravished in
conceit, as he was not able to make any answer: but delivering many a bitter
sigh from the bottom of his heart, he lay as one confounded in a trance. Why
my Lord? quoth she, what think you on? dare you not discover your disease to
me? if you distrust me, I will bind my self to you by a sollenme oath, never
to reveal it to any living creature: but will keep it as secret as your dumb
freende that cannot speak, nor shall the riches of the world make me break
my promise.

The Knight without rest would yet make no answer, but still sighing, with
wonderful affection beheld the Princess: who now changing her color, and
with the tears trikling down her cheeks, continued her speeches thus.
Believe me my Lord, me thinks (under correction) you do me wrong, in fearing
to bewraye your grief to me, I beseech ye (if you bear me any good will at
all) not to make your harm incurable by defaulte of vtteraunce to your
freende, and consider that silence is the Nursse of many malladies: where
contrariwise, disclosing the same in time, the danger is with ease prevented.
The words of the Princess, delivered with such zealous protestations, and
with so many gracious offers: caused the Knight without rest (setting all
doubtful fears aside) thus to answer. Madame seeing you have coniured me in
such sort, and have sollemnelye promised withal, to conceal the grief that
torments me, and cannot be seen: I will make known my harm unto you. And as
he would have proceeded, a Gentleman entered the Chamber, to advertise the
Princess that the wise Orbiconte was newly arrived, and that she came to visit
the Knight without rest. As the Princess was going to welcome her Aunt, she
met her at the Chamber door, and coming in again with her, after she had
humblye saluted her, she brought her to the Beds side, the Knight without rest
being not a little glad to see her, in consideration of the promise she made
him at her Pallaice. Courage my Son quoth Orbiconte, for ere three days be
past, I will make your wounds whole and sound, especially that which touches
your heart. It is not to be asked, whether these words pleased him or no, and
she looking on his wounds, anointed them with a precious ointement, which
healed them in such sort, as in four and twentye hours the skarres could
hardly be seen: then merilye to her Niece she thus spoke. Do not you hate
this Knight, fair Niece, that has kept you from marying with the King of
Panopia? Believe me good Aunt, answered the Princess, I am more beholding to
this Knight then to any man else living, for he has saved my life and honor:
and may I any way recompense his gentleness, he shall perceive that I will not
be ungrateful. But while the King my Father labors to requite his pains,
let him be persuaded of my good will toward him.

Madame quoth the Prince, so you continue me in your good grace, I think my
self better recompensed, if I have deserved any recompense at all: then were I
presentlye created Emperor of the world. To break off their conference, a
Squire came, who said that the Tables were covered for Supper, wherefore
Orbiconte and the Princess took their leave, and went into the great hall,
where the King and the Queen stayed their coming, who welcomed their Sister
with marvelous kindenes, spending the time of Supper with repetition of many
matters. The Tables were no sooner with-drawen, but Orbiconte taking her Niece
aside to one of the windows, began with her in this manner.

Since my coming hither fair Niece, I have perceived that some thing
torments ye exceedingly: reveal the occasion thereof to me, and if I may
stand ye in any steed for your help, be well assured I will do it right
willingly. The Princess at these words was so astonyed, as she was not able
to shape any answer: but shaking like a leaf on the tree, her color went
and came very strangelye, such was her fear that her love should be
discovered. And having stayed in this quandarie a good while, at last she
persuaded her self, that her Aunt by her secret knowledge understood her
grief, wherefore with the tears in her eyes, she thus replied.

Let me entreat you good Aunt, to suffer me endure my mishap in silence,
without constraining me to tell ye, from whence my great alteration proceeds:
it is virtue in a maiden to suffer patiently, and shame to bewraye her own
thoughts, though every hour adds a world of misery, and burdeneth her
mind with more then common cares. Yet this I would have ye to think, that my
extremities (as yet) have not stretched so far, but to make me skillful in
judging of a passion: from which heretofore I have defended my self
indifferently, accounting it an offense to modesty, to hear so much as speech
thereof. Orbiconte desirous rather to increase her passion then any way to
diminishe it, thus recomforted her.

You do well (good Niece) in respect of your calling, to conceal the
torments you endure, and which my art acquainted me withal ere I came
hither, for it is a sign of special government, to be careful of disclosing
such a secret, as carries greatest regard among all women. But if you are so
lively touched with love, as your gentle heart may be empaired thereby, by means
of the worthy Knight without rest, who has done more for you, then all your
Fathers subjects could without him: you must understand, that this is a
disease common to every one nor are you alone, or the first that has felt the
fury of this passion, but many noble Ladies (bashefull and right modestlye
governed) have felt the power of the God of Love, who rules and commands
when and where him pleases. For this cause expect the good hour, and before
your infirmity ranckle too far, give order and remedy thereto in the best
sort you can. I think it not amiss, that you make some experience of Loves
authority, but you have let him enter too far within your heart that even
your very soul is penitrated therewith: the best and most auayling counsel I
can give ye, is to practice some chaste and honest mean, whereby to enjoy the
sum of your desire, and so shall you prevent infamy and dishonor, which
every creature ought carefully to avoid.

Alas Madame, quoth the Princess, I know no mean more honest then the marriage
of him and I together, but how can that be compassed? or what honor is it to
me to move any speech thereof? he is a stranger, unknown to me of whence or
what he is, I am not acquainted with so much as his name. Assure your self
fair Niece asnwered Orbiconte, that he is Son to a most virtuous King, as
greatly renowned as any one in the world: and further I will tell ye as
concerning him, so you will promise and swear to me to keep it secret, for
otherwise you shall put him in great danger of his life.

Ah good Aunt, quoth Nonparelia, rather let me dye ten thousand deaths, then
be the cause of any displeasure to him: therefore acquainte me with his estate,
and I will be directed by you in all my after opinions. But by reason that the
King arose and went to his Chamber, their talk drake off, the Queen and her
daughter conducting Orbiconte to her lodging: so remained the Princess (...)
all that night, and earnestly longing for the morning, that she might end the
talk between her Aunt and her, for further knowledge of the Knight without
rest: who likewise was no less forward in desire, because after Supper he had
not seen the Princess and Orbiconte.

CHAP. XXXII.
How the wise Orbiconte told the Princess Nonparelie* what and who the Knight
without rest was: and how by her means, promise of marriage passed between them,

ORbiconte being in her Chamber, was both pleased and somewhat offended:
pleased, in that she had so sounded the thoughts of her Niece: and offended,
because she had not concluded her tale, concerning the knight without rest. But
no sooner was morning come, when the princess sent many times to know if her
Aunt were stirring, and so soon as she was assured thereof: she went to her
Chamber, where having given her the good morrow, she said: Madame, I have not
forgotten the promise you made me yesternight. Neither have I good Niece
answered Orbiconte, therefore presently will I be as good as my word. So
walking with her into the Warderobe, and being none but them selves together,
she began her discourse as follows.

Fair Niece, under assurance of the promise you made me yester night, I give
you to understand, that the Knight without rest is a Christian, Son to the
King of England, and his right name is Palladine, given him in honor of the
wise Goddess Pallas. And I having foreseen ere the time of his birth, that he
should be the most virtuous and valiant Prince of his time, and the Children
engendered by him, should very far excel all other whatsoever: I then made
choice of him to be your Husband, seeing your Mother likewise at that time
great with Child, and she delivered of you six months after his birthe. That
mine intent might sort to effect, and to make you the only happy Lady of the
world, by enjoying a Husband the paragon among all Princes: I solicited him by
dreams and nightly visions, yea, by letters and messages in such sort, as by
my means he travailed hither, desirous to see that rare beautye, wherewith I
renowned you beyond all other Ladies. And had it not been for my dilligent
admonition, he had ere this time been married to fair Rosamonde of France:
where record remains of his famous chivalry, as it does in many other
places of the world. But needelesse is it to use many words in this matter,
you know that I desire nothing more then your advancement, and no man in the
world is more accomplished with all perfections, either in riches, virtue,
brave mind, and all other good qualities: so that if my judgment fail me
not, I think him equal to you every way, and more worthy to enjoy you then
any other. If you be deceived Madame, said the Princess, much more must I be
then, for me thinks it is impossible to find his second: so would you have
said, had you but seen his valiant combat with the Giant Sulberne. If then
quoth Orbiconte, you know so well what he is, he loving you as his own life,
and you him in like sort: I would advise ye, with all speed to consumate the
marriage between ye, albeit unknown to the King and Queen, and let me deal
for their good will afterward. Alas Madame, quoth the Princess, herein would
I willingly obey ye: but that in religion we are too far a sunder. For that
take you no care said Orbiconte, in that before it be long, all your Fathers
Kingdoms shall be converted to Christianity: therefore boldelye make promise
to the Knight, that you will be baptized so soon as you come into England, he
having first sollemnely sworn to marry with you, as well I know he has no
other intent. Heerewith shall his parents be well pleased, and yours hereafter
likewise: for then and not before they shall understand, that this is for your
eternal honor and profit. Nonparelia, who desired nothing more then the
conquest of his love (and withal, the sweet benefit ensuing thereby) whom
she had made Lord and master of her heart, thus answered.

I know Madame, that my honorable preferment is the full of your intent, and
that you will sheeld me from any blemish or reproach: I therefore commit all to
your discretion, and will obey whatsoever you command me. This night then,
said Orbiconte, shall you be assured of your lovely Knight, and holy vows of
marriage shall be passed between you: afterward, agree as you can your selves,
for I will accomplish what I have promised. So went they both to the Princes
chamber, where they found him walking with Captain Broantine, one that knew
the deapth of his desire, yet ignorant what Orbiconte and the Princess had
concluded. Many devout courtesies passed between them, and Orbiconte taking
the Prince aside, thus spoke to him. You remember (my Lord) your vow, when you
called your self the Knight without rest, that you would never entertain
quiet of mind, till you had found your only beloved in the world, to whom
you were destenied before your birth: now be of good cheer, for this night
shall you be resolved of the Lady, who being free in affection from all other,
does honor you with the unspotted love of a virgin, esteeming of you as her
Lord and husband. No marvel if these news were welcome to the Knight without
rest* who giving credit to the words of Orbiconte, sealed many a sweet kiss
on the dainty lips of Nonparelia, as pledges of a full contract in the sight
of heaven, not to be recalled but by death only. Short tale to make, Orbiconte
that night brought them together, and joined their hands with sollemne and
sacred vows, he to carry her with him into England, and she there to receive
the faith of a Christian. And thus will we leave them in their amorous
purposes, each comforting other with the arguments of love: and now let us
return to the Princes and Knights, whom we left in France, England, and
elsewhere.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How the Prince Don Robert of Freeze, surnamed the Knight of Fame, having taken
his leave of the King Milanor of England, and Lydiseo, the Prince of Hungaria:
found a Knight wounded to the death, and what happened to him afterward.

YOU remember how the Knight of Fame, being vanquished, and sore wounded by the
Prince Palladine, at ye Iousts which Caesar maintained for love of the fair
Rosamond* departed with Lydiseo of Hungaria, and crossed the Sea into England,
where they were graciously entertained by the King Milanor, to whom Lydiseo
presented Letters from the Prince his Son, and an other from Landastines to
his Daughter Floraea.

These two Princes having soiourned awhile in the Court of England, took leave
of the King and the Ladies, and afterward sundered themselves in travail,
Lydiseo iorneying toward Hungaria to see the King his Father, who (as he
understood) was fallen into a very dangerous disease. And the Knight of Fame,
coasting through a part of Brittayne and Normandy, went to Bordeaux, and from
thence into Spain: as much to expel the mellancholly, which the remembrance
of fair Rosamonde charged his thoughts withal, as also to make proof of his
valor against the Knights of Spain, who accounted themselves the most
valiant in Europe.

Being thus landed in Spain, he travailed through diverse Forests, till night
ouertaking him, he was constrained to alight, while his Squire cut down
certain boughs of trees, for his master to rest himself upon. After they
had laid themselves down as willing to sleep, not far from them they heard
the voice of a man, breathing forth many bitter and dollorous complaints, and
as it seemed to them, he was nigh his end, for his words faultred in the
utterance, as wanting ability to deliver them, whereupon the Knight of Fame
awaking his Squire, said: do thou not hear one complain very grievously? I
do my Lord, answered the Squire, and belike he is in some great danger. I pray
thee then, quoth Don Robert* let us go a little nearer, that we may understand
what he says. So claspping on their Helmets and Sheelds, they walked soft in
to the place where they heard the voice, when they alight hear him continue
his complaints in this manner.

Unhappie that I am, must I needs die by the traitorous hand of him whom I
trusted as mine own self? Ah wretch, why did thou not tell me thy cruel
pretense? it might ^e, I would have found means to have satisfied th^e: of if
thou had yielded me better reason, I might have desisted from my pursuit.
Pansnite? alas Madame, all the torments in the world, shall not withdraw me
from your gracious love, nor death it self, which I feel has a^endicentred
me. O monstrous treason, oh false dissembling and traitorous C^stillian Prince.
What say I? Prince? if thou be a Prince, thou art one of the very worst that
ever lived.

Ah my Lord* quoth the Squire to this wounded Knight, you may well believe and
hold for certain, as I have said to you many times, that love can abide no
companion: so by the often coming and going of this traitor to Madame
Minoretta, he could not but seek to deceive ye, and to frustrate the hope you
had in her: all which you must now endure with patience, seeing we are all
subject to fortunes changes.

If fortune then reward me with death, quoth the Knight, justly may I accuse
her of treason, as one that procures all the mischiefs in the world. Ah
traiteresse and wreakefull Lady, why did thou not suffer me to enjoy that
honor, which her divine nature and beauty had grounded in my heart, and
whereto I was sollemnely vowed and dedicated: Alas, I feel my strength more
and more to forsake me. Ah Minoretta, Minoretta, what will thou say when thou
hear of my misfortune? I fear thy love is rated at the price of thy life.
Heerewith his speech failed him, and breathing forth a vehement sigh, he
yielded up the ghost. O my God, said his Squire, what shall I now do? Where
shall I bestow the dead body of my master? if I return to the Court of the
King his brother, he will suspect that I have murdered him. Ah sweet Lady
Minoretta, what heart breaking will this be to you, understanding the death of
my Lord, and the occasion thereof. The Knight of Fame hearing the sorrowful
words of the Squire, and fearing he would depart and leave his master: came
with his Squire from behind the tree where they were hid, and seeing the
woeful man holding his dead master in his arms, thus spoke to him. Tell me
good friend, how did this mishap befall thy master? The Squire was so amazed,
when by the light of the Moon he beheld the Knight of Fame, and his Squire
with him, both their swords being drawn: as he was not able to return any
answer, whereby Don Robert perceived, that the sudden sight of him affrighted
the Squire, wherefore he thus spoke to him again. Why do thou not speak to
us, my friend? doubtest thou that we come to do thee any displeasure? persuade
thy self, that we will assist thee to our uttermost, and therefore fear not
to bewray thy mishap. The Squire thoroughly resolved by these courteous
speeches, casting forth many bitter sighs into the air, and trembling as the
burden of his grief gave cause, thus answered. Alas my Lord, right gladly
shall I reveal to you, the great misfortune now happened to my Lord, who (as
you saw) gave up his ghost between mine arms, the occasion whereof grew in
this manner.

My noble master while he lived, was bastard brother to the King of Scicilie,
yet as dearly beloved of his Majesty, as if he had been his lawful
legitimate brother, such was his virtuous and valiant behavior: and for the
King would assure my Lord of his entire good will and affection, he gave him
the Signorie of Siracusa, with all the titles and benefits belonging thereto.
But my worthy Lord and master, who was named Don Frionell, having about six
months since heard commended, the excellent beauty of Minoretta, Daughter to
the King of Portugal: became so enamoured of her, as to compass the means
that he might see her, he craved leave of the King his brother to travail into
France, as a Knight errant, seeking after adventures. Having obtained license
for his departure, in stead of going to France, he took the way toward
Portugal, where being arrived, so well he made known his prowess at the Tilt
and Tourney, which daily he maintained in honor of the Princess, as the King
entertaining him into especial favor: all the Lords and Knights of Portugal
did the like, so that being well esteemed and honored of every one, cheefely of
the Queen and her Ladies, so well he could his Courtship to the Princess
Minoretta, that she accepted him as her Knight, and favored him above all
other that made love to her.

In this time came to the Court Don Galitreo of Castile, who no sooner saw the
fair Princess, but presently he was so esprized with her love, as he was
ready to die at her foot, and therefore diverse times made offer of his
service to her: but she made no account thereof, declaring by her gesture and
countenance, that my master was the only man in her thoughts. Galitreo from
this time forward, conceived mortal hatred against my master, yet (...) his
villainie with such coullers, as though he ha^ been one of his dearest
friends. So that my master being one day commanded by his Lady Minoretta to
go assist a distressed Lady, whom a cruel Gentleman too much wronged: the
traitor received opportunity to set his mischief abroche, for he being
present when my master took his charge, gave no show of contra^ie meaning,
but no sooner had my Lord restored the wronged Lady, albeit with danger of his
person, by reason of certain wounds he received in fight, and returning to the
Princess again: but this day as we came into this Forest, where I unarmed my
Lord to dee^se his wounds, the traitor Galitreo, accompanied with four more,
disguised and well armed, awaiting cowardly to take my Lord at this advantage,
came to him with these wor^s* Know thou me ^rionel? if thou will save thy
life, thou must here sollemnely swear to me, never to serve the Princess
Minoretta longer, or hereafter to come in any place where she is. My master
knowing the traitor well enough by his speeches, yet meruailing to meet him
in this place, because at his departure he left him in Portug^^:
notwithstanding he was sore wounded and unarmed, boldly thus answered. Rather
let me loose my life, quoth he, and endure a thousand deaths if it were
possible* then I will forgo the service of my mistress: but while I can lift
my Sword, will I maintain her as the only Goddess of my heart. By God, quoth
Galitreo, but I will make thee sure thou shall not: ^o drawing his Cou^tiare,
and my master being thus naked as you see, because I was attending his wounds,
he never left striking at him, till he saw him fall, when both he and his
companions gallopped away so fast as they could. Trust one, answered the Knight
of Fame, thou have told me the most monstrous ^^te that ever I heard of: but
thou seeing thy master so misused, why did not thou help to defend him?
Alas my Lord, quoth the Squire, there wanted no good will in me, but they that
accompanied this traitor, held me with such violence as I could not stir.

The Knight of Fame beholding the cruel wounds Don Frionell had received, and
what a goodly personage he had been in his life time, sighing, said. Oh God,
what two dangerous enemies are love and jealousy? in the world there can not
be any woorsse, whereby men may fall into so great hazard.

Well my friend, quoth he to the Squire, here must we rest our selves for
this night, because we know not whether else to go, and to morrow shall we
provide for thy masters body, whose death I purpose to revenge, if I may
find the man that so bloodely murdered him. Assure your self my Lord, said
the Squire, that he is in Portugal with the Princess, because for her love
he slew my master, who reputed him one of his dearest friends. There never
were so great friends, quoth Don Robert, whom love and jealousy could not
move to discord, and so for that night they lay down and slept.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
How the Knight of Fame, having taken order for the burial of Don Frionell,
travailed into Portugal, where he fought the combat with Don Galitreo of
Castile, and what was the issue thereof.

Clear Phoebus arising from the foulded arms of fair Thetis, the knight of
Fame awaked, and not able to sleep any longer, by reason of his troubled
thoughts, leaving the Squires who as yet had not stirre^ he walked down to a
River side, where he met an aged Hernut with an earthen Pitcher in his hand
full of water, and having saluted the old Father, demanded of him, if any
Town or Uillage were near at hand, or any religious Church or Chapel, where
a Knight might be buried, whom he had found slain in that Forest. In sooth
my Lord, answered the Hermit, he is not the first that has been murdered in
this place, for I have enterred fifteen or sixteen in my little Chapel,
which is kept with holy and religious devotion: where if you please, the
Knight you speak of may be buried, and I will help to carry him thither, for
no other place is near at hand by two good leagues and more. Good Father then,
said the Knight of Fame, your gentle offer shall be accepted, the body is not
far hence, and little labor shall you take: for his Squire and mine shall
lay him on a horse, and so convey him to your Chapel without trouble. So
went he with the Hermit to the dead body, and awaking the Squires, conuaied it
to the Hermits Chapel in manner aforesaid: where the funeral ceremonies
finished, the Knight of Fame rewarded the old Hermit, and afterward mounted on
horseback all three, riding straight to Tolledo, and passing the ^^ood Dori^,
entered the Realm of Portugal, where they understood that Galitreo was as then
at the Court. Don Robert sends his Squire to the King, to request safe
conduct for arrival at the Palace, which being obtained, in presence of his
Majesty he thus began.

Hither am I come worthy Prince, to let you know, that in your Court abides
the most traitorous and disloyal Knight, as ever was heard of, and who (not
four days since) has done such a deed in Spain, as no one bearing Arms
would have committed the like. By treason and villainie has he murdered one of
the most valiant Knights in Europe as I understand, for never did I know the
man (...) see him, till he was dead: he being named Don Frionell of Scicilie,
who left your Court by commandment of Madame Minoretta, upon an occasion best
known to her self. Full well did I know the man, answered the King, but name
him to me, who slew Frionell in such sort as thou say, to the end I may
cause him come and defend his cause: and if he did it in manner as thou have
declared, or else can bring any proof thereof, never shall he enter the
combat with thee, but justice shall be inflicted on him as so foul an offense
deserves. As for me my Lord, answered the Knight of Fame, I can make no other
proof thereof, then by this Squire that served Don Frionell, in whose arms I
saw the Knight breathe his last, and dying confessed, that the Castill^^n
Prince slew him by treason: wherefore my Lord send for him, and if he deny
it, here am I ready to avouch it, and by my Sword will make him confess it.

The King hearing him name the Prince of Castile, was greatly astonished heereat,
for he knew not that he was absent from his Court so lately, and the Queen
with her Ladies being present, were no less abashed: but above all, the
Princess Minoretta, who hearing the death of her valiant Knight, whom she in
love had made cheifest account of, immediately such sorrow struck to her heart,
as her speech failing her, and a cold chilling blood passing the condu^ts of
her veins, she leaned on the lap of her Gouernesse, where falling in a dead
trance, all the Ladies had much adoo to get life in her again. But she being
recovered, and each one placed as they were before, Galitreo was sent for, to
whom the King thus spoke.

Believe me Galitreo, I always conceived well of you till now, persuading my
self of your truth and discretion, that nothing in the world could move ye so
much as to think a bad thought, much less to commit any act of treason. But
what I say, this Knight avouches, that in Spain you have done a deed of
high dishonor, where you being armed and well accompanied, outragiously set
upon the noble Lord Don Frionell, he being naked and without defense, then and
there you cruelly murdered him, yea, for a cause of no weight as I understand:
what answer make ye to this accusation? If Galitreo were then doubtfully
surprised, I refer to the judgment of like bad minded men: but having beheld
the stearne countenance of the Knight of Fame, with counterfeit reverence thus
replied.

My Lord, not only now, but at all times, calumnia-tours, and false accusers
are easily found, the greater part of the ancient Roman Histories are stored
with examples thereof: but in the end, such bastard brood of detractours, have
felt the desert of their lavish toongs, and innocence has vaunted with
triumph. This speak I in respect of this paillard, who (under your Majesty's
correction has falsely lied, and as a leaser is to be esteemed. For the
worthy Lord Don Frionell, was one of the dearest friends I had in the world:
beside, I dare gadge my life, that this false wretch knows me not, or ever saw
me before this instant. I believe well, quoth the Squire to Don Frionell, that
this Knight had no knowledge of you till now: but I am assured that he has
spoken truth, and so my master himself confessed at his latest gasp, that
because Madame Minoretta favored him, and despised you, therefore you wrought
his death in that cruel manner. The Knight of Fame perceiving, that Galitreo
had no great mind to the combat, interrupted the Squire, and thus spoke to the
King. I see well my Lord, that Don Galitreo despairing of his cause, desires to
trifle the time with many circumstances, in that he thinks me unable to
auerre mine accusation, because I want further testimony, how he and his
accomplices masked and disguised, did the shameful deed of death and murder:
may it therefore like your Majesty to grant us the combat, and in fight will
I make manifest his treason. Presumptuous as thou art, quoth Galitreo, do
thou think I fear to meet thee in plain combat? no, so please my Lord the
King, I accept thy challenge, and having given thee the due belonging to a
false varlet, will follow the quest of my dear friend Don Frionell. Him may
thou dead, quoth the Knight of Fame, soon enough to thy shame, not far from
the place where thou did murder him, in a little Hermitage in the same
Forest, where I caused him to be interred, as his Squire and mine own are
able to testify. Hereupon, the King called two ancient Knights, who having
heard the difference between the Knight of Fame and Galitreo, he demanded
their advise in this doubtful matter. They thought it expedient, that the
combat should be granted them, to end the controversy of further proof:
because Frionell might be slain by the accuser and his Squire, as by Galitreo
that stood accused. Wherefore the King granted them the combat at the Lance
and Sword, as is common among all Knights, appointing the Marquess of
Villereal, and the County of Marialne, Judges of the feeld. All this while,
the Princess Minoretta continued her pensive mones, praying for the prosperous
success of the newcome Knight, and the confusion of the traitor Galitreo. On
the morrow, was this doubtful combat tried, being fought on either side with
such exceeding valor, as they both fell down foot to foot, that each one
reputed them both for dead: but when the Knight of Fames helmet was opened, and
he had received the fresh air, he came to himself again, albeit Galitreo was
slain outright, and therefore condemned as foiled in fight.

The King glad of this happy victory, intr^ated the Knight of Fame as he had
been his own Son, causing his Chiru^gions to take care of his wounds, and
during the time of his abode there for his health, the continual good
countenance showed by the Princess Minoretta made him live in hope to obtain:
but he was prevented by the King of Navarre, who sending his Ambassadors to
demand the Princess in marriage, had his request granted by the King.

The Knight of Fame seeing himself so unfortunate in obtaining a wife, so
soon as his wounds were thoroughly cured, took his leave of the King and
departed, with intent after he had seen his own country, to travail into
England again, to be revenged on Palladine, for the foil he sustained at the
Ioustes at Paris, so mounting on horseback, he took his way directly toward
Freezeland. And not able to continue there any long time, because his conceived
hate was such toward the English Prince, he travailed thorough Scotland* who
meeting suddenly with Simprinell, and not knowing him, a quarrel arose
between them, the Knight of Fame discommending Palladine, and vowing revenge
on all those that durst take his part, which Simprinell undertaking, they fell
from words to strokes, and such was the good fortune of Don Robert* as having
the better of Simprinell* he departed, leaving him there very sore wounded.

Man^eleo the Prince of Millayne, whom long since we left in his journey
toward Normandy, desirous to see his sweet mistress Marcelina, by good hap
found Simprinell thus dangerously wounded, and having understood the whole
sum of his misaduenture, promised to follow the Knight who had thus wronged
him, and to revenge his cause though it cost him his life.

Now must I give you to understand, that Manteleo and the Knight of Fame were
very near allied, the Father to Temoreo the Duke of Millayne, being brother
to Don Roberts mother: yet this kindred being forgotten between them, or at
least their angry displeasure prevailing above the remembrance thereof, caused
them (meeting together) to put each others life in very great danger. And being
afterward brought by their Squires to a Gentleman's Castle near at hand, where
Simprinell likewise lay for the recovery of his wounds, they had knowledge of
each other, when sorrowing their meeting was in such unhappy sort, with
freendly greetings, they excused all that had passed, riding with Simprinell to
the King his Fathers Court, where they were entertained as beseemed their
honorable calling.

CHAP. XXXV.
How the great Turk sent his Ambassadors to the King of Aquilea, to request
his Daughter Nonparelia in marriage: and what sorrow it was to her, and the
Knight without rest, when they heard the King give his consent.

ALL this while remained Palladine with his fair Nonparelia, in the greatest
pleasure and delight that could be imagined, till fortune, envious of their
success, sought to cross them with her wunted frowardness: which Orbiconte
by her knowledge well perceiving, and that now if she laid not to her helping
hand, all the promised good hap would be squandered for ever, to terrefie the
two lovers alittle, she came and brake it to them in this manner.

It is a common saying, my good friends, that dangers foretold, hurt the less
when they come to pass, hereby am I to advertise ye, that such a matter will
shortly happen, as can not but be to your great disliking: yet be of good
cheer, and endure it with resolved patience, for I will prevent the effectual
working thereof. But to hold ye in no longer suspense, know, that this night
past I made a figure, to understand thereby, if your marriage were to be
hindered by any contrary accident: and I find, that a mighty Lord, even he
that commands over all these countries, will shortly send to request my
Niece in marriage, whereto the King her Father will gladly give consent.

At these words the Princess fell in a swoune, and the Knight without rest was
marvelous impacient: but Orbiconte having recovered her, in this sort began to
persuade her. Why? fair Niece, do you despair or doubt, that I can not
hinder the marriage between you and the great Turk? know you not, that I have
done things of greater value then that? I never thought you had such diff^dence
in me. Who brought Sir Palladine into this country but I? and who gave you the
honor of his love, but I? and if I have been able to do all this, think ye I
can not wade through matter of less moment? Quiet your self, and fear not,
but I will compass your marriage to your own content, without displeasing my
Lord the great Turk, or the King your Father, notwithstanding his promise.

Alas my good Aunt, said the Princess, it is not for my Fathers ease, to
purchase himself so great an enemy as is the great Turk, who in three days
is able to ruinate our whole country: and having so bad a neighbor as is the
King of Panoma, who doubtless would gladly with the great Lord, in revenge of
the late foil he sustained, I see no way to prevent fatal danger.

Why Madame? quoth the Knight without rest, victory consists not in strength
or multitude, but in the policy of the Captains, and discretion of the
Soldiers to pursue an enterprise, as many examples are left among Romans,
Carthaginians, Athenians, and infinite other, where a small power has
prevailed against the greater, only by the wise foresight of their leaders,
and withal, having truth and justice on their side. Let us, said the
Princess, not stand upon policy, or the truth of our cause, we can not be
more subtle or hardy then they are: and as for our right in the matter, what
reason shall my Father have to deny so great a Lord? great I may boldly say,
because in all the world he has not his second, both in riches, puissance, or
any thing whatsoever. Alas good Niece, said Orbiconte merrily, stand not on
these doubtful terms, for the case shall never be adventured so far: cast
all your care on me, as yet (I think) I never failed ye. So parted they to
their chambers, where the Princess remained in a hell of grief, such was her
entire affection to the Prince of England. And he likewise could resolve on
nothing, for now he thought to request the Princess in marriage, before the
coming of the Ambassadors, persuading himself that the King would not deny
him: then again he dispaired of the matter, reputing himself unlikely to
enjoy her, by reason of their contrariety in faith and religion, the King
being an earnest maintainer of the Pagan law. Nor would this imagination
serve, wherefore he intended to steal her thence secretly, and to carry her
with him into England, while Orbiconte labored at home to appease the trouble
that might follow. In the end, he reposed himself on the faithful promise of
Orbiconte, and desired his Lady to do the like, because he had found her so
just in all his former fortunes. But now are the Ambassadors come to the
Court, where being entertained with great pomp and royalty, he that was
appointed chief in the embassade, thus delivered his message to the King.

King of Aquilea, the high and mighty Lord my master being advertised of the
rare virtues wherewith thy Daughter is endued, has sent me to entreat thee,
that thou would bestow her on him in marriage: and in so doing, he vows
himself thy friend, and a continual enemy to thy ill willers.

Heerewith he delivered the Letters of credit, signed with the hand and scale
of the great Turk: whereat the King no less joyful then amazed, that his
Daughter should arise to so high fortune, without craving any advise in the
cause, thus answered. I thank my gracious Lord with all my heart, that he will
so honor me with request of my Daughter in marriage: and her do I freely give
him, with all that is mine at his disposing.

Then did the Ambassador present the King, six goodly Coursers of Turkey,
sent him from his Lord and master, and to the Princess he gave a sumptuous
Carbanet, garnished with Carbuncles, Oriental Pearls, and stones of
inestimable value, which she received with good countenance, albeit God knows
with a heavy heart, in which grief, the Knight without rest bare her company,
yet durst not outward show thereof. This costly Jewel the Queen immediately
fastened about her Daughters neck, being commended for the rarest that ever was
seen: afterward the King walked with the Ambassadors, doing them all the
honor he could any way devise.

While all the Court were busied, Orbiconte came with Nonparelia to Palladines
chamber, and there concluded, that he should on the morrow take his leave of
the King, framing his journey directly toward England, where the Princess and
she would in short time meet him: willing them to make no show of sorrow at
their departure, least suspicion might prevent what she had intended, but to
resolve them assuredly, that all her promises should sort to effect. The
Knight without rest did as he was advised, and albeit it was long ere the King
would give consent, because he loved him very dearly: yet at length (with
much adoo) he prevailed, the Prince Zorian obtaining leave of his Father to
accompany him in travail, because his Majesty thought he could never have a
brauer companion. Many rich gifts the King bestowed on the Knight without
rest, especially one of the Coursers sent him from the great Turk, and other
things needful to be used in travail, and thus he prepared him self toward
his journey, reposing his confidence in the wise Orbiconte, that she would
bring his Lady safely into England.

CHAP, XXXVI.
How the knight without rest and the Prince Zorian, departed from Aquilea
toward England, and how the Knight without rest by the way, discovered him
self to the Prince Zorian: who when he came into England, was baptized, and
betrothed to the fair Graciana, daughter to the Earl of Flaunders, and the
like was Mantelio and Land^stines to their Ladies.

Every thing being in redines for our Knights travail, after all the
ceremonious conges at the parting of friends, the knight without rest, Zorian,
Broantine, Lyboran and Lycelio, all brauelye mounted in seemly equipage: they
leave the Court of Aquilea, and toward England journey with all convenient
speed, the Knight without rest being especially induced to this haste, because
he expected the promise of Orbiconte, soon after would follow him with the
fair Nonparelia. Many worthy adventures they had by the way, as defending
chaste Damoselles from forced violence, and helping distressed Ladies to their
suborned right: which growing to more tediousnes the^ delightful matter, I
have thought good to abridge, as loathe to speak of any thing but what is
worth the hearing.

When our Knights were entered the Realm of Almaigne, and the English Prince
had made good trial of Zorians love to him: one night as they lay in Bed
together, he entered into these speeches. My Lord Zorian, the freendship
solemnly sworn between us, and the proof of your ready good will in all my
actions: will not let me hide one thing f^^^ you, which till this present I
have kept with great secrecy, both from the knowledge of the King your Father
and you, only by the persuasion of the Lady Orbiconte your Aunt, to whom I am
more beholding then any other living creature. For in my journey toward
Aquilea, oftentimes did she preserve me from the danger of death, and by her
means I left the Court of the King of England my Father, by her promise that I
should enjoy your fair Sister in marriage, in recompense of some service I
should do to the King your Father: and this by her secret knowledge she
likewise told me, that all your Fathers dominions shall be shortly converted
to the Christian faith, which I profess, and will do till death. Then he
recounted, how Orbiconte sent him the Sheeld he bare, and showed the Sword
whereon the name of Aquilea was engraven, being brought to him by the enchaunted
knight and two Damosells. He likewise declared how he changed his name because
he would not be known, and that Liboran only counterfeited dumbnes, being not
able to learn the Aquilian language: all the rest of his travails at full he
opened, his right name and whether he now iournied.

In sooth my Lord Palladine, answered Zorian, such resolute opinion of your
virtues have I imprinted in my heart, as though you be contrary to me in love
and profession, yet shall not my good will slack, or I forgo your company:
but I would the time were come, wherein my Fathers kingdom shall embrace
Christianity, which I already begin to like so well, believing that your God
is of greater power then ours, as all our successful deeds of arms bear
witness: that I ere long will become a Christian. Yet one thing cheeflye does
displease me, that my Sister is promised in marriage to my Lord the great Turk,
which will be the occasion that my Aunte Orbiconte cannot keep her word with
you.

My Lord and companion said Palladine, that I have your good liking in this
cause, in sooth it does not a little content me: but as for your Sister, there
is nothing yet done but may easily be altered. Madame Orbiconte has promised
to content the great Turk and your Father, and in few days will safelye
arrive with your Sister in England. I would we might find them there quoth
Zorian at our coming, you may be assured I would not hinder your marriage, but
assist it to the uttermost of my power: for more account do I make of your
love and freendship, then all the wealthy possessions af my Lord ye great Turk.
And one thing will I entreat ye faithfully to prom^ me, that the next day after
our arrival at your Fathers Court you will take such order as I may be
baptized in the faith of a Christian, for I feel my conscience that way
earnestly addicted.

Palladine not a little joyful of this request, promised to perform what he
had desired: so sleep causing them to break off talk, the next morning they
were earlye on Horse back, and passing the Rheme, they entered Lorrayne.
Afterward traversing the Ardeines, Luxenbourge and Liege, they came into
Brabant, and from thence (after many adventures ended) they crossed through
Flaunders, taking shipping at Callis, and in short time landed at Dover in
England, where they stayed two or three days to refresh them selves. Then
coming to London to the Court, God knows what joy was there made for their
arrival, the King to see his Son returned. Manteleo and Landastines their
long absent friend, and the Citizens their young Prince whom they feared was
lost: let all their joy be compared together, and think of what efficacy so
great a matter is, because pen and paper cannot disclose it. Palladine not
unmindful of his passed promise, acquainted the King his Father with the
state of Zorian, how graciouslye him self was entertained in the Court of
Aquilea, and how the Princes Sister was coming after with her Aunt, a Lady of
incomparable virtues and graces, and her noble brother renouncing his
paganism, desired to be received into the fellowship of Christians, not being
able to enjoy peace in conscience, till he were delivered of his unbelief.

The King exceeding glad of these good news, caused such royal preparation to
be made against the next day, as at a matter of such solemnity is required:
there was Zorian and his Squire christened, the King, the Queen, and the Earl
of Fl^unders witnesses to the Prince, and Palladine, Manteleo and Marcelina to
the Squire Ligasto. Returning from the Church to the Palace, there was
ordained a sumptuous feast, and Zorian well regarding the Ladies of England,
among them all liked Graciana, daughter to the Earl of Flaunders: being then
suddenly so enchaunted with her, as he secretly vowed never to love any other
while he lived. Palladine perceiving his amorous glaunces on Graciana, and
noting the many alterations of his countenance: immediately knew what disease
he was troubled withal, which he desirous to ^^ttigate, and to pleasure the
Prince Zorian to his vttermoste, the tables being withdrawn, he took Graciana
by the hand, and bringing her to Zorian thus spoke.

My Lord and noble companion, for my sake love this beautiful Lady, she is
named Graciana: and I hope you shall find her nature answerable to her name,
to wit, gracious, virtuous and honest.

I promise ye my Lord, quoth Zorian, you have done me the greatest pleasure in
the World, bringing to me a Lady so woorthily accomplished, that I might learn
to imitate her virtues: which have pierced my heart in such sort, as would she
accept me to be her Knight and servant never should any other Lady have the
honor of my love, I perceive well then said Palladine, that you are touched to
the quick, do you twain devise together, and in mean while, I will go
talk with the County her Father. So taking the Earl of Flaunders aside, he
rehearsed to him the manifold virtues of the Prince Zorian, and how entirely
he loved his Daughter, thinking it a great preferment to her, if she joined
with him in marriage. Like speeches hid he use to the Queen his Mother, who was
Cousin german to the Carle of Flaunders, and between them both handled the
matter so effectuallye: as within two days Zorian and Eraciana were affianced
together, their marriage being deferred, because of Ambassadors were gone to
Norgalles and Millaine, to conclude the marriages between Landastines,
Manteleo, Marcelina and Florea, and the Princes Fathers consent obtained, all
these marriages should be sollemnelye performed together: But twenty days
being now past, and Palladine hearing no tidinges of Nonparelia, he began to
wax melanchollye, half distrusting the promise of Orbiconte: yet did not this
pensiuenes continue long, for she arrived soon after as you shall presently
perceive.

CHAP. XXXVII.
How the Princess Nonparelia was delivered to the great Turks Ambassadors,
and how by the sorceries of the wise Orbiconte, the Ships were scattered, and
what persuasions she used to the Mari^^ers, who were very loathe to sail into
England.

WIthin three days after the departure of Palladine and Zorian from Aquilea,
Nonparelia was honorably delivered to the great Turks Ambassadors, and with
marvelous royaltye conuaied on Ship boorde, accompanied with her Aunt
Orbiconte, and a seemelye train of Ladies beside. The Ankers weyed and the
sails hoysed, they launche into the deep, the Princess still fearful to
loose the true owner of her love yet comforted by her Aunt, that in few days
they would see England.

Being entered the Mediterranean Sea* Orbiconte saw it was time to set her
practice abroche, and seeing the Pilots and Mariners were all at rest, with a
Book in her hand she came up on the deck: where brething her charms into the
air, and filling the sails with her unhallowed spelles, the winds began to
blow terribly, and the Seas were troubled with wonderful roughnes, that the
Mariners awaked with the horror of the storm, awaiting every hour their utter
destruction. In this tempest the ships were separated so far a sunder, as the
Turks dispaired of ever meeting again, so that the vessel wherein ye
Princess and Orbiconte were, by day was on the borders of Scicilie* and very
near to the Labean promontarie, albeit the Pilot could not tell in what
Cuntrie they were. Then Orbiconte calling the Governors of the Ship to her,
and the Gentlemen appointed to attend on the Princess in the presence of her
Niece thus spoke to them.

You have seen my good friends in what extreme danger we have been this
night past, and I think there is no one among ye, but is persuaded that our
Gods have especially preserved us, yea, by wonderful miracle from shipwreck,
wherewith every minute of an hour we were threatened. In like sort you may
imagine that not without some secret and hidden cause we are cast into these
parts, and scattered from the Ships of my Lords Ambassadors: heerby do our
Gods euidentlye manifest, that men, how strong or puissant so ever they be,
cannot bring to end any intended enterprise, unless it be ordered by their
favor and direction, and heerehence arises the the common proverb: That men
purpose, and the Gods dispose. It is well known to you, that the King my
brother has granted in marriage my Niece Nonparelia to our Lord the great
Turk: but our Gods (from whose sight nothing can be shadowed) knowing what
before was accorded, and concluded between her and the Knight without rest,
whom you have seen in my brothers Court, he being the Son of a mighty and
puissant King: have apparently revealed, that their faithful promise to each
other must not be falsefied, promise (I say) of marriage between them, whereof
my self am a sworn witness. In vain is it then for you thus to allege,
that the Knight without rest is a Christian, and my Niece a Pagan: but let it
suffice ye, that our Gods will have it so, as you in short time shall see
further experience.

Do you therefore direct your compass to the coaste of Spain, that from
thence we may sail into England, the seat and Kingdom of the Knight without
rest, after the deceasse of his Father who is yet living. Fear not any
inconvenience that may ensue hereby, for I will be your safe protection, and
no woorsse shall fall to you heerby then to my Niece and my ^es^e, and of her
have I greater care then were she my own Daughter.

Heerewith she paused, expecting what answer they would return: but
discerning by their countenances, that they liked not her speeches, as also
they were loath to come among the Christians their enemies, without a better
warrantise of their safety, she began again in this manner.

Why my friends? are you so fearful as you show your selves? do you think
any harm shall happen to you in my company? am not I and my Niece sufficient
for your assurance? what other safe conduct would ye have? we go into the land
of our kindred and friends, to confirm a perpetual peace and concord, with
one of the most virtuous Princes in the world. My Nephewe the Prince Zorian,
who departed (you know) with that gentle Knight: there is he lovingly
entertained and favored, by him whom the Gods preordained to be my Nieces
husband. Sail we on then merilye, and fear not the displeasure of the King my
brother: for well am I assured, that they will not dislike this marriage. And
were I not fullye persuaded of what I have said, that the end of our
enterprise shall sort to a general benefit, yea to a full resolved joy and
content on all sides: I would not have adventured thus far, being as careful
of your good as mine own life.

These speches so thoroughly animated the Mariners and Gentlemen, as they
promised to fulfill what she gave them in charge, being certain that Orbiconte
told them nothing, but what she had foreseen by her wonderful knowledge: and
therefore passing by Hercules pillars, they entered the Ocian, directing their
compass toward great Britain. By ye way, they were set upon by three pirates,
who seeking to take the spoil of the Ship, stew many Gentlemen and Mariners,
and when they were brought to the very hardest exigent, that they thought
verily to be taken by the Pirates: three English ships came to their rescue,
wherein the high Admiral of England was, who had been in Portugal with the
King, to advertise him of the marriage of his two Nieces, to the Princes
Manteleo and Landastines. The Ships of England encountered the Pirates, and after
long fight took them: then coming to know of whence the Ship was that had
been so distressed, the man that was sent to demand the question, was
Captain Broantine, who accompanied the Admiral in this voyage. Joyful was
Orbiconte when she beheld Broantine, and coming on board the Admiral, to
whom Broantine revealed of whence they were, and that Palladine long expected
their arrival in England: it is not to be asked how courteously he entertained
them, vowing to take sharp revenge on the Pirates for their villainous
dealing. Broantine declared to Nonparelia, the health of Palladine and her
brother Zorian, how he was Christened, and affianced to the fair Graciana of
Flaunders: which news pleased her not a little, as also this happy and
fortunate deliverance, which she verily thought hardly to escape with life. The
Admiral made them the best cheer he could on Ship board, and afterward
committed them to the charge of Broantine, to see them safely conducted into
England: himself taking order for the Pirates Ships, which after he had
ransacked as he pleased, he followed withal, as wind and weather gave him
leave.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
How the Princess Nonparelia, and Orbiconte arrived in England, where they
were royally entertained by the King and his Princess: And how Palladine
bewrayed what had passed between him and his Lady, wherewith the King and
Queen were well contented.

Having sailed with a good and prosperous wind, at length the Ships came on
the cape of Cornwall, and from thence to the Isle Benedict* where coasting as
occasion served, leaving the cape of Pinda, they took harborow in the I Will of
Wight: from whence Broantine senta Brigandine before, to advertise Palladine
how near his Lady was, the wise Orbiconte writing to him in this manner.

The Letter from the wise Orbiconte, to Palladine Prince of England.
THese are to advertise ye, Lord Palladine, that by the assistance of the
highest God, my Niece Nonparelia and I are safely arrived in the Isle of Saint
Helena, from whence, we will shortly set forward, according to the promise I
made at your departure from Aquilea, having done my uttermost in your cause
for my Niece, who (as you know) has refused the great Emperor of Turkey,
making choice of you above all other, in respect of your faithful vow to her,
made in my chamber at her Fathers Palace, which I hope you will not now
forget, considering what has been done at your earnest instance. Therefore
(if as yet you have not done it) make the King your Father, and the Queen,
acquainted therewith, and that so soon as possible you can: because I would
see your marriage perfected before my return to Aquilea, that I may credibly
assure the King my Brother, what high good fortune is befallen his Daughter, as
also the continual honor promised you by the destemes, and not to you alone,
but to your issue hereafter likewise. Thus awaiting opportunity, to acquaint
you at large with our navigations, and what dangers we have escaped on the Sea,
as your Admiral and Broan^ine can testify, who delivered us from
bloodthirstie Pirates: I cease, presenting hearty good will to you from my
Niece and my self.

From the Isle of Saint Helena. By your affectionate friend. Orbicon^e.

Such were the contents of the Letter, sent from the wise Orbiconte to the
Prince Palladine, which was presented him by one of Broantines Gentlemen, as he
was walking in the Garden with the King and Queen, conferring on the
preparation for the triumphs, at the marriage of Marcelina and Florea. No sooner
had he read the name of Orbiconte* and from whence the Letter was directed, but
he began to change his countenance meruailously, which the King perceiving,
said. What news has Broan^ine sent ye, that makes your rouller alter in such
sort? the Letter doubtless is the cause thereof. In truth, said the Queen, I
see the Letter imports great matter, let us understand what is contained
therein. Palladine not daring to deny this commandment, causing the
Gentleman that brought the Letter to withdraw himself, thus answered. My
gracious Lord and Father, this Lette^ delivers none but good news: the Sister
to the King of Aquilea, and fair Nonparelia his Daughter, are come to visit
your Majesty. Right welcome are they, said the King, and I will do them all
the honor I may: but what may be the cause of this kindness, seeing our Realm
is so far from Aquil^a Then Palladine declared the whole discourse of his
voyage, how by the advice of the wise Orbiconte, he had promised the Princess
Nonparelia (after she had received her Christendom) to take her in marriage, in
that she was accomplished with as rare perfections of beawtie and virtue, as
any Princess in the world beside. You place that foremost, quoth the King,
which you love best, preferring corporal beawtie before virtue: but herein
you are to be pardoned, for love and affection so alter the senses, as makes
men put one word in another place. I spoke of that first my Lord, quoth
Palladine, which I first saw in so fair a creature, namely a choice grace of
corporal beawtie: and having afterward by frequenting her company, gathered
sufficient knowledge of her inward endowments, I placed them as they came to my
acquaintance. And such is my hope, good Father, that your self will judge no
less then I do, when you have seen her. For the rest, Madame Orbiconte her
Aunt shall resolve ye, giving you to understand matters of weight, and such as
you will think your self happy to know: this being the mean to bring to
the Christian faith, the great and mighty Kingdom of Aquilea. Thou tellest me
wenders my Son, quoth the King, but why did thou not sooner acquaint me
heerewith? Because I feared, answered Palladine, that misfortune on the Sea
might alter my intent, or the promise of Orbiconte, might be prevented by some
other sinister mean. Well my Son, quoth the King, I pray that thy desires
may have a fortunate end, and such things as thou speak of may come to
pass* mean while, let us provide to receive these two Princes, and make them
such entertainment as their calling deserves. Forthwith he commanded, that
the Palace should be adorned with most sumptuous Tapistrie, and calling for
the Uiceadmirall, willed him to prepare certain Ships, that might go meet the
Ladies as they came, wherein Palladine, Zorian, Manteleo, Landastines, and many
other great Lords were embarked. And being come to the I Will of Tennet, they
espied the Ships sailing amain toward them, and entering among them, Palladine
seeing Orbiconte aloft on the deck, knew well where the Princess Nonparelia
was: wherefore going aboard that Ship, catching Orbiconte in his arms, he thus
spoke. Welcome good Lady into this Country, this day do you give me life, and
the only comfort I desire in this world: for had not your assurance at my
departure from Aquilea persuaded me, I had ere this been consorted with the
dead. As he was thus embracing Orbiconte, the Princess Nonparelia came forth
of her Cabin, and with a sweet smiling countenance came to him, saying. Have
you not done yet my Lord? I am not content that you give all the welcome to
mine Aunt, and allow me no portion thereof, I think I have deserved some part.
At these words, he suddenly leaving Orbiconte, embraced his mistress with such
zealous affection, as neither of them were able to speak one word: in which
time Zorian and the other Princes, had leisure to welcome the wise Orbiconte.
During this time of greeting and salutation, they sailed on with so good a
wind, as in short time they entered the Port of London, where this honorable
company were received with great magnificence, the Citizens conducting them
thorough the streets with such pomp and sumptuous devises, as never was the
like seen in London before. The King and Queen for the greater honor of their
Son, came to the Court gate to welcome the Princess, at whose rare beawtie
as they did not a little wonder, so there wanted no kind of courtesy, whereby
their good will might at large be expressed. So walking on into the great Hall,
there began again new shows of entertainment, whereby both Orbiconte and her
Niece perceived, that the Court of England was incomparable for gracious
behavior. While the King and Queen were conferring with Orbiconte, Palladine
took his Lady aside to the window, where she at large declared to him, the
dangers sustained in their voyage, and their good deliverance by the Admiral
of England and Broantine. Heerof sweet Lady, quoth Palladine, your Aunt
already has advertised me, and I know assuredly, that you have escaped
greater peril then you can report to me, all for my love, wherein I am
religiously bound to you while I live: yet heerewithall consider, that you have
endured all this for your faithful friend and husband, who now bids you
welcome as his loyal and espoused wife. Alas, my Lord, quoth the Princess,
you well know that I have no other intent, and the sooner our nuptials are
solemnized, the better shall I be quieted, least any dishonor should overtake
me, in respect of what has passed between us heretofore. Madame, answered
Palladine, this ^ace concerns me as near as your self, and to prevent such
danger, we must herein be advertised by your Aunt Orbiconte, the rest shall be
accomplished with all possible speed. In all this time, Orbiconte had so
prevailed with the King and Queen, declaring that this marriage was forepointed
in their infancy, and should by her means be ^at^fied by the King of Aquilea
her Brother, as they both promised, that so soon as the King of Portugal^ was
arrived, who was sent for to the marriage of his two Nieces, the wedding should
be sollemnized at that instant likewise. Until which time, the Princess
should be enstructed in the Christian faith, and be made partaker of that holy
Sacrament, which is the badge and cognizance of all Christians, so should her
obscure thoughts be clearly illuminated, and the marriage would be more
acceptable in the sight of God. The Kings devise was generally well liked, and
the Princess her self willing to understand the rules, which were so far
different from her Pagan profession: in which exercise she had her whole study
and delight, till the time came that she should be Baptized.

CHAP. XXXIX.
How the Princess Nonparelia and all her Ladies, were with great pomp and
solemnity Baptized, and all the honorable marriages afterward finished.

BY paineful diligence of diverse learned Divines, the Princess was won to
receive the faith of a Christian, and all her Ladies likewise that came with
her from Aquilea: so they being all attired in white garments, were conducted
to the Cathedral Church in London, with such royal pomp and magnificence, as
every eye was set to wonder. Such was her stately majesty in going* and her
sweet looks so effectual in piercing, as the most deuoutest mind was half
ravished, yea double charged with the baptism of these twelve Aquileans.
Manteleo, Landastines and the Queen were her sureties at the Font, and diverse
honorable persons for the Ladies, who changed none of their names at Palladines
request. They were no sooner returned to the Palace, ^ut news was brought,
that Don Roderigo the King of Portugal, was come to London: which tidings
pleased the King to well, especially all the lovers, whose marriages stayed
only for his coming, as I think the riches of the whole world could not more
content them* Roderigo thus arrived, is saluted by the people, embraced by the
King his Brother, welcomed by Palladine and the other Princes, kissed so
courteously by Nonparelia* his two Nieces, and Graciana, Daughter to the Earl
of Flaunders, as he imagined himself in the like place, as heretofore was
feigned on the Isle of Aualon, and the Kingdom of Feria. On the morrow was the
sollemnitie of the espousalles, and because the Kings, Princes, and great Lords
there arrived, strove who should give place to each other: it was in the end
concluded, that each Bridegroom should lead his Bride himself, therefore
they went to the Church in this manner. Nonparelia was lead by the Prince of
England, Marcelina by Manteleo, Florea by Landastines, Graciana by Zorian,
Doronea, Daughter to the Duke of Rostock, by Broantine, Erinnea, Duchess of
Rimandria, by Liboran. Here do I omit the description of their sumptuous
ornaments, chains, and iewelles, because you are able to conceive, that such
persons at such a time, want nothing that may set forth themselves to the
uttermost. The feasts at Dinner and Supper ended, the Maskes, Mommeries, and
other pastimes given over: Hymen entered among them, whose Comedy was so
brief, as he used but one act and two persons in the scene, and that without
any auditors present, but those whom the play and parts concerned. But
clear Dyan arising, gave favor to some, and offense to other, so for that
time the pastime ceased, because the Lords and Ladies came to give them the
good morrow, especially to Nonparelia, who in time they hoped to see Queen of
England. She having with modest and amiable gestures thanked them, demanded of
Marcelina and Florea her Sisters, how they fared, and how her Brother Zorian
did with his fair Princess of Flaunders: they all replying, that love that
night rewarded their long travails, and Venus courteously favored her Sons
proceedings. But leave we this to such as have made experience thereof, and now
let us come to a matter long time kept in silence.

CHAP. XL.
What end the adventure of the Statues had, namely, that of the Goddess
Cytherea and her Son Cupid: and the brave Tournament after the proof
thereof, in honor of the marriage of Palladine and Nonparelia.

IN honor of this great sollemnitie, the Princes had concluded on a Tournament
at Arms: which to behold, the Ladies of the Court put themselves in comely
equipage, when Palladine before them used these speeches. Fair Ladies, you
know how long I have been desirous of this day, to make proof how the
adventure of Loves Images might be brought to end, namely by one of the race of
the King my Father. And albeit I am not that happy Knight to whom it is
destenied, and whom the heavens will regard with such favor, as in beawtie
and firm affection to God beyond all other: yet will not I fail to hazard my
trial, being thus far assured, that in matters appertaining to a noble
mind, no one has beheld me inferior to any. And if my virtues are not came
to perfection, it will be some grief to me: because the ability of a man
shall be prized according to his success in this trial. But to the end these
Images newly called to remembrance, may breed no obscure and difficult
understanding, you must h^ere note, that in the great waste place before the
Court at London, at the top of a great pa^^e of stairs stood these Statues:
the one representing Venus, holding in her hand a lighted Torche, not to be
extinguished but by the conqueror of double passions: and the other was her
Son Cupid, with an arrowe drawn in his lo^^, as ready to shoot, which
likewise could not be discharged, but by her that was as much overcome, as
victorious in amorous affections.

Now although these Statues were made of Marble, yet were they so excellently
carved, and approaching so near to the life: as Venus (being attired in habit
after the English manner) was able to entise the thoughts of a very stayed
person.

Yet rests one matter to declare, namely, that the man not deserving the name
of a lover, might not present himself before these Images: for the sight of
such men was so offensive to them, as they would disdain to look upon them,
and exalt themselves up into the air, because such unworthy people should
not touch them.

Return we now to Prince Palladine again, he who by general opinion had not
his second in England, and by his new entrance into the fellowship of the
married, carried this estimation in his own conceit: that he should bear away
this long desired honor, in trial whereof so many had failed heretofore. Yet
herein his high opinion was beguiled, for he must yield and give place to
those whom the fates had especially appointed, to wit, his own Son, the
Prince Florano of England, and the faithful Lady Pamphilia of Greece, his
wife, as in their history at large it is discoursed. For this cause, that the
cheifest honor might remain to him beyond all the other, he caused Broantine
and Liboran to begin the trial first, then the Prince Zorian followed: yet all
of them so slenderly favored, as they could not attain to any show of
possibility. Which when Landastines and Manteleo beheld, the desire of glory
they had before, made them now of so high and resolute courage, as impacient of
delay, they would not tarry for each other, attempting their fortune together:
but this unkindly heat caught such a sudden cooling, as their timeritie grew
insupportable, whereby the Images turned their backs to them. Then they heereat
offended, said: that the virtue of love (in this trial) had not his due,
therefore they ought not to be any way dishabled. As for this p^ece of
Witchcraft, quoth they, here beawtie is preferred before loyalty: therefore
it must consequently follow, that he and she who should despoile these Images,
must be the most fair and loyal of all lovers. So such as had not exquisite
beawtie, and loyalty to be termed incomparable: were repulsed thence with
such discontent, as the open foil was more grievous then death to them.
Palladine heereat thoroughly moved, yet more rejoicing at another fault, then
distrusting his own sufficiency: advanced himself, and proffering his own
hand to the Torche, and the other to the Bow, the Images (making obeisance,
and showing amiable countenance to him) mounted up on high from him, which
caused such a laughter among the Ladies, as if they had seen a spectacle of
greatest meriment. Erinnea Duchess of Rimandria, and wife to Liboran, with
Doronea wife to Broantine, newly created Duke of Bastanella, in their trial,
the Images turned their backs to them: Graciana, Marcelina, and Florea had but
little more credit, saving that the Images moved not from them.

But now came Nonparelia to her turn, and her behavior procured a general
contentment: for Venus let her touch the Torche, and set the Crown on her
shoulder, but took it back again immediately: thereby prefiguring, that she
being, had now lost her liberty.

When they saw the adventure could not be ended, the Ladies betook them to
their Scaffoldes, and the Knights entered the Lystes, to make better proof of
their fortune by Chivalry. Landastines, accompanied with Broantine, Mushell of
Rostock. Brunifort his Brother, and Orliman of Flaunders, with an hundred
Knights more first entered the feeld.

On the other side came the Prince Zorian with Liboran* Durandell of Cleue,
Grind^y of Orton, and Sedonis of Suffolk, with an hundred brave and courageous
Knights: who at the sound of the Trompets, encountered each other with
marvelous valor. Landastines and Zorian Iousted together, being of such
equal strength and hardy courage, as the victory could be gained on neither
side: to cut off which controversy, a new assay^and entered the Lystes, bearing
in his Sheeld a golden Phoenix, and upon his Armor a coat of Crimosin Uelnet,
whereon, these two letters SS were very thick imbroidered in Gold and Pearl,
the sight of this Gallant gave cause of admiration, and matter of value was
expected to come from him.

CHAP. XLI.
Who was the new Knight of the Phoenix, and of a Letter the Prince Palladine
received, concerning his first love.

REason requires, that this new assaylant should be known, and the cause of
his coming, least otherwise you should misconceiue of the matter, and so be
deprived of the delight promised thereby. Know you then, that the Knight of the
Phoenix was the Prince Caesar, Son to Othon the Emperor of Room then
reigning, and husband to the fair Rosamond of France, who hearing of the
honorable Triumph at the marriage of the Prince Palladine, and the adventure of
the Statues before the Court at London: travailed thither, to win the conquest
of the one, and credit of the other, that at his return to his best beloved,
he might obtain the greater grace and favor.

Caesar being thus entered the Lystes, and noting the brave chivalry shown by
the Princes, stood still a good while, till he saw both the sides make offer
of departure. But fearing to be reproved for his long stay, as though by
cowardice he durst not try his fortune, he first encountered one of the Prince
Zorians Knights, and threw him to the ground with his heels upward. Seven or
eight more of them he served in the like sort, till Landastines would needs
deal with this Champion: but Caesar met him with such violence, as both horse
and man was sent to the ground.

The Prince of Norgalles desirous to revenge this shame, called for a fresh
Horse and a Lance: and calling his enemy to Ioust again, as he made proffer
to begin his carire, the Prince Caesar thus spoke to him.

Good Sir be not offended with him, who has saluted you with a courtesy
common among Knights errant: but enduring the same with patience, give the
like to such as hazard them selves against you.

I feel no taste of courtesy, quoth Landastines, in such greetings, and thou
may happen to confess the same with him thou next assaylest, notwithstanding
all thy bravery in speeches. By proof, said Caesar, I shall be made perfect,
a fierce assaylant shall be assured of a brave defendour. So breaking off this
contention, he gave the spurs to his horse against Zorian, giving him such a
vough charge at the encounter, as he was cast quite out of his saddle.

At this sight were Palladine and Manteleo greatly displeased, whom the King
(for the earnest love he bare them) would not permit to bear Arms in this
Tourney, but caused them to accompany their Ladies on the Scaffold, and to
give judgment who best deserved: they (as I said) moved with the behavior of
the Knight of the Phoenix, came to the King with great reverence, Palladine
delivering these speeches.

My Lord, the reverence and duty that children owe to their Parents, has made
us remain idle among these Ladies, during the honest exercise of our friends
and companions, esteeming to contradict your command, were an offense more
then presumptuous. But now are our desires so stirred and provoked, as we can
no longer contain our selves in slothfulnes, but are enforced humbly to
entreat, that your highness would give us leave to Arm our selves, only to
teach this newcome Gallant, who thinks already he has made a conquest, that
in England are Knights, sprung from the race of the cheifest of the round
Table, who are not to be feared with seeing three or four men vnhorssed.

My Son, quoth the King, my command was to no other end, then to withhold ye
from the thing you have now desired, because assayed new Combats without
Arms, you should not be endaungered by two trials together, considering how
the one may be a hinderance to the other: and so doubtless would it come to
pass at this instant, were I not fully persuaded, that honor never breaks
company with true love, but more and more aduanceth his titles, to the great
encouragement of all noble minds. Therefore my Sons, do what you please, I
will not hinder ye: go in Gods name, and return with the full of my desire.

Having thus obtained what they would, they departed to their lodgings,
returning soon armed and well mounted, and passing by the Scaffolds, Palladine
entreated his Nonparelia, to give him one of her Bracelets, wherewith he might
enter the Ioust under her favor. In which time, Manteleo went to try his
fortune with the Son of Othon, and many Lances were broken between them,
yet neither able to dismount the other. Wherewith Manteleo being angry, and
seeking pol^icie to prevail against his foe: Lord Caesar lifting up the beuer
of his helmet, imagining by the rich arms of Manteleo, that he was the Prince
of England* with courteous reverence to him, thus spoke.

Sir Palladine, perceiving that you know me not, nor the cause of my coming
into this Country, and seeing you would proceed to the Combat: the love I
bear ye, constrains me willingly to discover my self, beside, very loath am
I to loose the credit I have won already, and so provoke you to displeasure
against me. I am your friend Caesar, Son to the Emperor, as ready to be
commanded by you, as any other of your Knights in England Of this peace was
Manteleo not a little glad, yet bravely dissembling the matter, he thus
answered.

Lord Caesar, I am not the man you take me for, but in respect of this
exceeding gentleness, and the reverent duty I owe beside: I will proceed no
further, but here give over all cause of quarrel. And that your desire may be
the more satisfied, I will bring ye to the man you imagined me to be, and
likewise you shall know, with whom you have now twice dealt without
advantage. My name is Manteleo, Son to the Duke of Millayne, and Brother by
marriage to the Prince Palladine of England. But the accustomed humors among
new married folks, had charmed Palladine in such sort, as he saw not when
Manteleo thus ventured before him: yet afterward, seeing two enemies so
lovingly embrace, he meruailed who the Knight of the Phoenix should be, at
length these two pacefyed came toward the Prince, and in offering to salute
him, this cause of stay hindered them.

While Palladine was fastening his Ladies Bracelet about his arm, a Squire
came before him, who on his knees presented him a Letter, saying. Worthy Lord
my Lady and Mistress the Duchess of the rich Isles, whom you very well
know, commending her self to your good grace, has sent you this Letter:
desiring as the latest good you will do her, to answer the same with all
convenient speed.

This message, cheefely the very last words, amazed the Prince, and being
assailed with diverse imaginations, he brake open the Seal, and opening the
Letter, read there these lines following.

The Letter from Brisalda, Duchess of the rich Islands, to Palladine the
Prince of England.
AT what time (my Lord) I was so happy, as to see you here in the rich
Islands, I thought assuredly my good hap had taken such effect, as death it
self could no way bring to end. Not so much i^ knowing my self to be your
beloved, as to remember that my first friend was the Son of a King, whose
good parts I engraued so lively in my heart, as none but he was made Lord
thereof: reserving to my self this only regard, that love had made me no more
yours, then duty had confirmed you mine. Considering heerewithall, that as a
gadge of my good will, you being surprised with some part of my graces, and
passionate beyond measure (as your self said) if my liking did not consort
with yours: I gave you that remedy for your sickness, which a Lady of such
calling as I am, would not have bestowed on the greatest Pritice in the world.
Notwithstanding, our desires had then such a Simpathie of affection, as in all
matters we were alike, having each others honor in equal commendation, our
nobility, parentage, and what else beside, combined together in a rich procall
knot. But so it is come to posse, that of our first sight, affection, and
familiarity, such a testimony remains, as may not be forgotten: for since
your unkind departure, leaving me in a laborinth of endless greef, I am
delivered of a Son begotten by you, whom I have named Union, now aged twenty
months, who bearing the perfect image of his Fathers graces, is the only
comfort his sorrowful mother has. And herein you may believe me, that an
hundred times he has preserved my life, having so weighty a burden at my
heart, as is the small account you have made of me since your departure, and the
wrong you do me in racing me forth of your remembrance, not vouchsasing
once to acquaint me with the cause thereof. Herein is my hap so hard and
regretable, as death were more welcome to me then life: to assuage which
insupportable burden, I have no comfort but your little Son, whom hourly I
hold in mine arms, meruailing so sweet a babe should have so sour a Father.
Yet being thus cast off and disdained, the sorrow can not be so irksome to
me, as the blame would to you, were your discourtesie openly known: but such
is my love to you, that my nature vanquished, none but your self shall know
how you have wronged me, nor further revenge will I seek, then with mine own
death to bury your shame. What would your new love Nonparelia say, if she knew
my bed abused by her husband, and she wife to him, who by flesh and blood is
married to me? she being the second, might well think the first to be hardly
entreated. But let not any doubt hereof offend you, for from her will I safely
conceal it: not in respect of any love to her, but by remaining evermore.

Your faithful and immooueable friend* Brisalda, Duchess of the rich Islands.

After he had read the Letter, he was strooken into such ^umpe, and oppressed
with such remorse of conscience, as scantly could he endure from falling beside
his horse: the best mean to prevent the same, was the arrival of Caesar and
Manteleo, which made him quickly change his countenance, when the Emperors
Son thus spoke to him.

Sir Palladine the courtesy showen me by the Prince of Millayne your Brother,
has delivered me from great trouble, enforcing me to forbear arms, to
entertain him in stead of your self. The happy Bridegroo^e are you to fair
Nonparelia, whose praises soar above the Eagle in height: nor can I forget
your famous chivalry, performed in defense of her portrait, when you
conquered in France the proud Zarcanell, her unworthy servant that brought
her figure thither.

I can not deny my Lord, answered Palladine, but the representation of my
Ladies beawtie, has made me conqueror in diverse slender enterprises, won
from such as had no ability to keep them, wherein if I have deserved any
report, as friends are easily entreated to commend one another: far
inferior are they to the fair Rosamonde, and those adventures that noble
Caesar has accomplished for her.

I see well my Lord, quoth Caesar, that you will bind me to you in such sort,
as I shall have no mean to compass ye least part of gratification: but let us
end this needless talk, and go see the rare creature, whose virtues has
allured hither so many brave Gallants. So walked they to the Palace, where the
King entertained Caesar very royally, and all the Ladies with exceeding
courtesy, Landastines and Zorian doing the like, nothing ashamed that the
Emperors Son had the honor of the Tourney.

CHAP. XLII.
What answer Palladine sent to the Duchess Brisalda, and how Caesar returned
to his fair Rosamonde, Landastines, and Manteleo likewise into their
countries: and of the birth of Florano the Prince of England, Son to
Palladine and Nonparelia.

CAesar being thus welcomed in the Court of England, both by the Lords and
Ladies, especially Nonparelia: Palladine feigning to go unarm himself, took
the messenger from the Duchess Brisalda with him, saying. My friend, you must
needs have a little patience, and according to your Ladies request, presently
you shall have a brief answer from me. Then calling for meke and paper, he
went alone into the Warderobe, because he would not be suspected by any, and
answered the Letter in this sort.

The Letter from Palladine, to the Duchess Brisalda.
MAdame, matters having so strangely passed hitherto, yet without any cause of
offense, you have had some occasion to complain, being ignorant of my
hinderance in travail: but when you shall understand, who has been the cause
of all the honors obtained by Palladine, you will alter your conceit of
displeasure toward me. I desire ye to comfort your self, with the sight of our
little Son Union: of whose welfare I am no less glad, then were I Lord of
all the Orcedes. Your bed has not been abused, having thereby gained so fair
a flower, and well may you thus vaunt of your Palladine, that he is vowed to
his Sons good fortune, maugre the cruelty of the greatest Tirant in the
world. And albeit I have espoused Nonparelia, she must remain as my wife,
without diminishing any part of the good will, wherein I am indebted to
Brisalda of the rich Islands.

Your friend for ever, Palladine.

Having sealed this Letter with his Seal of Arms, and bound about it a little
golden Chain, whereat he fastened a costly Diamond: he delivered it to the
messenger, saying. My friend, deliver this from me to thy noble mistress, with
my continual duty to her good grace, desiring her to keep this Jewel for my
sake, in that it is the cheifest I make account of. As for your pains, this
Chain of gold from mine own neck I give ye, and let it serne as part of a
recompense toward your travail. Thus is the messenger returned to the
Duchess, who having read the Letter from Palladine, qualified her sorrowe^ by
good persuasions, and afterward married with the Prince Alf^an of Ireland. Now
comes Palladine into the great Hall, and there renewed his former
communication with Caesar, and the evening being spent in Maskes and brave
devises, only to honor the Emperors Son, at length they all betake
themselves to their Chambers.

On the morrow, Caesar came to the Ladies, desiring them to s^e him try his
fortune at the Statues, which he persuading himself able to finish, was
disappointed with a shameful repulse, the grief whereof so offended him, as
that day he secretly departed from the Court, net bidding the King or any one
adieu. The day following, as Palladine was walking in the Garden with the King,
he entered into these speeches.

My gracious Lord and Father, having granted me to marry with the Lady, whose
virtuous qualities deserved a much better husband, I greatly doubt, least the
King her Father, being ignorant of our former contract, will find himself so
agreeued heereat, that he will seek revenge as Kings are wont to do, which in
plainer terms, is by the Sword. To prevent the danger imminent in this case,
our friend Lydiseo being now King of Hungaria, through whose Dominions he must
needs pass: I think it not amiss to advertise him hereof, that he may
there offer resistance, while we provide here our men and munition in
readiness. Heereto may my Brethren of Norgalles and Millayne be auailing
likewise, wherefore with their Wives they intend to return home into their
countries, and they being our faithful allied friends, will there likewise
have their subjects in readiness, to give us succor if need shall require.

My Son, answered the King, seeing the marriage is accomplished, it is too
late to be blamed, or now to use speeches in this behalf, which are but
frivolous and unprofitable. I pray thee therefore, reserve to thy children (if
thou happen to have any) a future peace, without any cause of war or
mol^station: and well have thou advised us, as concerning our beloved Brother
the King of Hungaria, to whom within these ten days, I will send mine*
Ambassador. Mean while, our Sons of Norgalles, and Millayne, shall have all
things ready to depart when they please, as loath to hinder their good
determination, or any thing that may be for thy quiet and surety. Many other
matters were that day dispatched in Council, all of as great importance as
this, which I will pass over with silence, because the secrets of Kings are
not to be made common.

The Ambassador for Hungaria being dispatched, conduded Manteleo and his Lady
to Millayne, where he left this married couple so combred with provision for
war, (...) they not forgetting any part of their amorous desires, are ten
months were past, Marcelina was delivered of a goodly Son, named Hector of
Millayne, imitating his Father in deeds of chivalry, yet being the first of
that name that ever wan honor in the feeld.

If Manteleo was welcomed with great joy by his Father and his Subjects,
Landastines was not inferior to him when he entered Norgalles, where the old
King Harfron his Father woorthely entertained him, being so glad of his good
fortune, as having embraced and kissed the Princess Floraea, the tears
tricled down his white beard with inward conceit of joy. Ah my Son, quoth
he, how much are we bound to thank the God of heaven, for this especial sign
of his grace and favor? how am I and mine likewise continually to rejoice,
that our tribute to the Crown of England is thus freely forgiven us? in happy
hour was this marriage concluded, that not only brings a continual league
of peace, but disburdeneth us of a payment troublesome to our whole country.
Now dare no enemy vex us with war, seeing we have the King of England our
friend: wherefore my Son, for bringing this comfort to thy Fathers heart,
whose age makes him now unfit to govern any longer: here I deliver the Crown
into thy hands, not doubting but thou will rule as thy Father has done before
thee. Landastines being thus honored, and put into ye full possession of the
Crown of Norgalles, soon after made the King his Father a Graundsire, by the
birth of Don Celidon his Son, to the no little joy of all his Subjects. The
like good hap had the Prince Palladine, to honor the aged King Milanor withal:
Nonparelia being delivered of the young Prince Flerano at whose birth were many
good fortunes prognosticated, for which, the Citizens of London in sign of
their rejoicing, caused bonefires to be made in the streets, and the Belles
were rung day and night during the space of a sennighte.

All things being come to so good effect, and the married Lovers in their own
Countries, the wise Orbico^te would now likewise take her leave: for a mighty
Griffon as red as blood, came flying from the air into the Palace, which she
laying hold upon, came before the King Milanor and the Queen, and to Palladine
framed her sp^eches in this manner.

My noble nephewe, I beseech ye as you love your honor and renown, and are
desirous to make it immortal, that you will cause your young Son to be
carefully nourished: assuring you, that his deeds shall be correspondent to
his name, floorishing above all the Knights of his time, he being the only
flower that ever grew in England. And not only shall he be famous for deeds
of Arms and Chivalry, but virtue and loyalty he shall have in such
commendation, as no Lady in the world shall be found worthy of his love, but
Pamphilia Daughter to the Emperor of Greece, as yet unborn. Florano shall
love loyally this Lady. In his love he shall be so secret, sure, and well
advised, and she like to him in all these gifts. a^ through the world they may
not be equalled. To him and her, are the adventures of the Statues reserved,
let none therefore seek before that time to obtain them. And now will I to
Aquilea, to confirm your peace with the King my Brother, and lay down order
for his revolt to Christianity. Her speeches thus ended, and freendly
embracings passed on all sides: she cast her self on the Griffons back, and
mounting into the air, left England, and is gone toward Aquilea. With this
marvelous accident we mean to pause, and here conclude our long labor,
according to the appointment of Polismar and Palnocid, ancient
Historiographers of worthy memory, who first delivered this History in the
British tongue.

FINIS.
To the Gentlemen Readers.
Here did Claudius Colet of Champaigne, who wrote this Work in the French
tongue, make a full conclusion of the History: and I having no further scope,
but bound to follow the direction of mine Author, here do I likewise knit up
the famous discourse of Prince Palladine. What errors have past in my simple
translation, I must commit to the freendly judgment of such, as know that the
wisest may step awry, and he was never yet heard of that pleased ^uery humor.
My good will is greater then my ability, and when a man does bestow his
endeavor, only to delight and not d^splease: it is courtesy to entertain
such a ones labors freendly, considering the recompense is small for a tedious
travail. The history of Palmendos and Primaleon, promised in my two parts of
Palmerin d' Oliua, as leisure will permit shall be perfected: in mean while
(for Countries sake) bid Palladine welcome, which the French have published in
the honor of England.

Honos alit Arts.
Your well wishing friend Anthony Monday.

Diverse foul faults are escaped in the imprinting, in some places words
mistaken, as rich procall for riciprocall in Brisaldaes Letter to Palladine,
and diverse other by mishar left out, and partly by want of my attendance to
read the proves, being called away by matters of greater importance, and
whereto I am bound by duty of mine office: therefore as you happen to find
them, and are able to conceive what in truth they should be, let me entreat
you freendly to correct them, because I am loath to trouble you with a gathered
Errata.


