A SECOND MANVDVCTION, For Mr. ROBINSON.

Or a confirmation of the former, in an answer to his manumission.

ANNO DOMINI. M. D C. XV.

A Second Manuduction For Mr. ROBINSON, Or a confirmation of the former, in an
answer to his manumission.
IT is not much to be merveiled at, Sec. 1.
if one assay praevaileth not with him for public communion, who was so
hardly drawn unto private, by many and long strivings. We may rather hope,
that in time, he will be brought, to see reason for that as well as for this.
The success being left unto God: I thinck it a Christian part, to stretch out
a little and strengthen that hand which before was lent him for a manuduction.
First then must be marked, how far M. R. is come already: and then the points
that he stays at, with the grounds of that his stay. He grants; Manumis p.
3.
If a man (remaining a member in some parish of England) intending the
ministry, and competently qualified thereto, having approbation of godly and
learned men, shall, without any further calling, for a time, perform the
actions of prayer and prophefijing, by leave in a public assembly there, that
it is lavvfull to communicate with him in that work. And moreover, that if
the same man shall continue in that course for some years, not having any
further vvarant, but the seal which God sets to his labor in the fruight
of it, and the consent of those people which repair unto him for instruction;
it is lavvfull, still to have communion with him. All this he acknowledges
(though not in so plain a manner as ingenuous dealing requires) in calling of
it private.

This grant of M. R. is of no small moment in the consequence of it. For by
virtue thereof, those of his mind, may be present at many sermons in England
upon occasion, not only to the spiritual comfort and aedification of their
souls, but also to the avoiding of much danger and damage in their outward
estate. For of this kind are a multitude of religious exercises ordinarily
performed by students in the colleges of both the universities, who are wont
in their college chapels to make trial of their gifts though they be not
ordained ministers; and not only there, but in such assemblies of the country
as they have opportunity. Some also have been known to continue long, even for
20 years together, in preaching by no other warrant then this: as by name, M.
Flood of Northampton, and M. Marburie. By the same reason it will follow also
(as by and by we shall see) that communion may be had in the like actions of
those which have further authority: for this communion is of public nature
and a church action, and so for substance, of one reason with the other.

That this does follow upon the former grant, if so be that such exercises of
religion be public actions, M. R. does well understand: and therefore to
avoid that which he is loath to acknowledge, he denies such actions to be of
public nature. To this purpose he insinuates 2 reasons. 1. Because a private
action may be performed in a public place, as a public may in a private: and
2 because no action is public, that is not performed by public calling or
authority. The former of which I willingly grant: and therefore made no such
mention of the place, as if it were of it self sufficient to make these
exercises public. The second I do flatly deny until I see that reason which
(as he says without any further proof) does of it self teach it. For this
purpose he wills the reader to see Mr. Perkins in treatise of christian
equity; where nothing is to be found that perteyneth unto this purpose. For
there Mr. P. speaks only of such public actions, as are usually called
actions of law, wherein public justice is quaestioned, the mitigation whereof
perteyneth unto that christian equity which there is handled: such as
execution of penal statutes, suing of bonds, taking forfeitures and fines
are. If he would know Mr. Perkins his judgment about this point, let him see
to the purpose his treatise of divine or religious worship (the thing that now
is in hand) where he shall find this description, church service is that which
is performed publicly in the congregation of the people of God. But leaving
his testimony, let us search a little after that reason which Master Robinson
tells us will teach us what actions are public. Public is as much as
peoplelick because that which is not restreined unto one or a few, Publicus
quasi populicus.
but extended as commune to a people either civil or ecclesiastical, that is
peoplelick or public. Thus some actions done first in private, and after
extending to the knowledge of the people, become thereby public scandals,
though the actors of them have no public calling or authority for doing of
them. Much more, are those actions to be esteemed public, which are performed
in a public place, extending to the praesent knowledge or use of the people,
and so intended, whether they be good or evil in which respect no man ca^
deny the prophecies of Zedekiach and other his fellows 2 Cro^. 18. to have
bee^ as public as that of Michaia, though he only and not they had lawful
calling or authority for that action. Those exercises of religion which are
ordinarily used in the seperat assemblies, called prophecijngs, wherein prayers
are offered up in the name of all the people, and the word interpreted unto
all, they are I think esteemed public by them selves: sure I am they are so,
however they be esteemed: yet the actors in those businesses have no special
set calling or authority for that they do. In the time of Wickliffe, when
many that receyved light of truth from him did upon al occasions publish the
same unto others either in churches or churchyards, or else in markets, faires,
and such like open assemblies, though they did it without license of the
ordinaries, or other sufficient authority of that kind, yet they are said to
preach publicly. It is the phraze of king Richards letters against them, as is
to be seen in M. fox, p. 406. Like phraze is used in like case, by all that
write or speak thereof. So that both by reason and custom, and all good rule
of speech, it is manifest, that these exercises of religion which M. R.
grants lawful are public actions: and so, that not only private, but also
public communion is by his own confession, lawful in the parish assemblies
of England.

S. 2.
THus far then we have Mr. R. consenting. Now at the third dema^d, he makes
a stand: but with such oppositio^ as will not stand. The demand was of the same
man, who formerly did lawfully preach in a public assembly, if he should
obtain a license from the L. Bishop of the diocese, without any unlawful
condition for to continue in that his course, whether that leave or license
given does pollute the actions, seeing a man may ask leave of the great Turk,
to preach the gospel within his dominions? His answer is, that the very
obteyning and receyving of such a license is unlawful: because it is a real
acknowledgement, that such a Bishop has a lavvfull power to grant it. Which
is neither so nor so: for. 1. The asking and receyving of leave or license
(which are both one) does not allways implie an acknowledgement of his lawful
authority from whom it is sought. If any man of violence shall usurp a power
to him self, of permitting or hindering the lawful and good offices that
pertain unto honest men, so that without his license a man could not buy or
sell, or teach any science or trade of life; if an honest man whom these
duties concern, should in that case take a license from that usurper (though
he were no better then a strong theif) no reasonable man will say, that in so
doing he did acknowledge such usurped power lawful. The rulers of Jewish
synagoges had no lawful power over the Apostles of Christ in any part of their
ministry, neither would Paul ever acknowledge so much: yet he and Barnabas
accepted of such license or leave from them sometime as they did usually grant
unto those that acknowledged them selves lawfully subject to their authority.
See an example act. 13.15. Mr. R. him self has granted in the first demand
that a man may preach by leave in a parochial assembly: which leave must be
given by the parochial minister and churchwardens, whose authority he
holds one with the Bishops. If therefore leave or license (whether in word or
writing, that is all one) may be lawfully taken from them, without
acknowledging any authority lawful which is unlawful, why not from the
Bishop? 2. There is some authority in the Bishops derived from the king which
may be acknowledged lawful. Such is this of giving license, liberty and
civil authority for men to do good. The civil magistrate may do it him
self; or appoint others to do it 2 chro. 17.7. The abuse of this authority
does not make it unlawful.

But John Claydon (says Mr. R.) a martyr of Christ was otherwise minded,
when he witnessed, that the Bishops license to preach the word of God was
the true character of the beast. Which testimony is found in deed in the book
of martyrs, p. 588. But 1. It is not John Cleydons, but found in a book whereof
he was the owner but not the author: for he could neither write nor read. 2.
Whosoever was the author, the meaning was, that in regard of the conditions
required by those Bishops, and the persons that usually obtained their
approbation, licenses might be held as a note of one that followed the beast
of Rome: though those conditions being removed, there was no such wickedness
in the bare license. This meaning may be gathered out of the answer of William
Thorp, who may probably be judged the author of that treatise wherein this
testimony was found. For concerning the Bishops license, he rendereth a just
reason why the godly preachers in those days did not seek them p. 492. In this
his speech to the archbishop. Sir, as touching your letters of license, or
other Bishops, which ye say we should have to witness that we were
able to be sent for to preach: we know well, that neither you sir, nor any
other Bishop of this land, will grant to us any such letters of license, but
if we should oblige us to you, and to other Bishops by unlawful oaths, not
to pass the bounds and terms which ye sir with other Bishops vvil limit to
us. And since in this matter your terms be some too large and some too
strait: we dare not oblige us thus to be bound to you for to keep the
terms which you will limit, as you do to friars and such other preachers.

3. If one good martyr out of zeal had given that testimony in such a sense as
Mr. R. will have it understood in, yet the general consent of almost (if not
absolutely) all the other martyrs being otherwise, as is well known to such as
have read their stories, this one of it self could work no great praejudice.

This for the answer directly applied unto the demand. Unto the comparative
reason annexed, that a man may ask leave of the great Turk to preach the
gospel within his dominions, he opposes 2 things. 1. A difference betwixt
leave and license, that to ask leave is to desire one not to hinder him: but to
obtain a license of the Bishop, is to obtain public authority of the
public officer, and according to the public laws of the church, to
exercise a public ministry. 2. That the great Turk is a lavvfull civil
magistrate with whose civil authority it is lavvfull to partake: But so is
not the Bishop a lavvfull ecclesiastical officer, with whose spiritual
jurisdiction gods servants may communicate. In all which there is not one sound
sentence. For 1. What difference soever he may imagine betwixt leave and
license, my meaning was, that it was lawful to obtain a license of the Turk
for to preach the gospel in his Dominions.

2. Leave from one that is in authority, so as he that has it shall be hindered
of none subject unto that authority, is a license with authority. So that the
difference betwixt leave and license, insinuated by him must consist only in
the great sound of the word public so often repeated in vain, public
authority, public officer, public laws, public ministry: Which how
idle it is, has formerly been showed. 3. He that has a Bishops license and
orders too, has no such authority actual conferred upon him thereby, but that
he may be hindered many ways, even by those that are subject unto the Bishop,
from ever exercising that whereto he has license so that in this respect, there
seems not so much as full and perfect leave to be contained in a Bishops
license. 4. That the Turk is a lawful magistrate, it would trouble Mr. R. to
prove. 5. The Bishop has some jurisdiction exercised about spiritual causes,
which may lawfully be communicated with. 6. And lastly, though all this were
so as Mr. R. says, that it were unlawful for to seek or take such a license
of a Bishop, yet it does not follow, but it might be lawful to communicate
with him that has taken it: especially seeing it was lawful before, and the
man does and has all good that he did or had before, only with this
difference, that he does that with license of the Bishop which he did before
with his connivence. So that this demand remains unanswered: which was not
made of the getting of license, but of communicating with him that had gotten
one.

Which communion can be no more unlawful, then that which scholars have with
a schoolmaister, who has taken a Bishops license (according as many are urged
to do) from the same Bishop: or that which subjects have had with their
lawful king sometime when he was crowned or set up by the Pope.

THe 4. Demand was concerning a man that has taken that form of admission
which is called orders of the diocessan, Sec. 3.
not knowing any evil in it, whether such a fault, if it be a fault, does
pollute that communion with him which otherwise is lawful? that it does not
Mr. R. seems to witness in his former treatise p. 15. For this he refers
the reader unto that answer which he gave to the former demand: and so do I to
the refutatio^ of it. Whereas he adds, that his testimony is misaplied,
because his meaning was, that a human infirmity about an external ordinance
does not hinder from communion in actions performed merely by personal
grace; I answer, that it is possible for a man which has such orders, to
perform the actions of prayer and preaching even in a public place, merely by
virtue of the personal grace and gifts which God has endued him with all.
Especially this man of whom here we speak, who yet has no special state or
reference by office unto those that communicate with him in the word and
prayer. The reason therefore is one and the same, in this case, and that which
Mr. R. speaks of.

THe fifth quaestion was of a man that being desired, and so chosen by some
assembly wherein there are many fearing God apparently, he takes a pastoral
charge of them, Sec. 4.
having the Bishops and patrons admission, but chiefly grounding his calling
upon the peoples choice, and that he do nothing but the same he did before,
besides the administration of the sacraments to such as are in charity and
discretion to be esteemed worthy, what hinders from communion here? To this
a four fould answer is given in show, though none in deed. 1. He denies an
assembly gathered and consisting of many fearing God, and many without the
fear of God, to be a lavvfull church assembly, having right in communion to
call and enjoy a Pastor. But the question was made of an assembly wherein are
many fearing God apparently, without his supply of many not fearing God,
though with them there may be mingled some which give not such apparent evidence
of Gods grace to be in them, but rather praesumptions of the contrary. Will
Mr. R, deny the title of a true church unto all assemblies that have some such
amongst them? then must he condemn most rashly not only a multitude of
praesent churches (Dutch and French) but those of Corinth, Galatia, Pergamus,
Thyatira, Sardis, and Laodicea also, of which the Apostles and Christ him self
gave other judgment. 2. He tells us, that none can truly take a pastoral
charge in the Parish assemblies: because he cannot govern or rule the flock.
But first, a man may truly take upon him that which he cannot fully and in
every part perform or fulfill, desiring and endeavoring so far as his
knowledge and ability extends. Otherwise, no high Priest in Israel from the
time of Solomon unto the time of Hezekia did truly take upon them the charge
of a high priest: because none did celebrat the passover which was a principal
sacrament, in such sort as was written. 2. Cron. 30.5.26. Nor keep the feast
of tabernacles in a far longer time. Nehem. 8.17. Nor did any king all that time
truly take upon him the charge or office of a king: because none did reform
things as he ought. If any difference be, their sin was greater, that might
have doe^ their duty and would not, then theirs that would and cannot.
Secondly, the mere want of performing one part of the charge, does not hinder
but that a man may well communicate in the other parts, which are well
undertaken and discharged also. 3. He adds, that the church of England
acknowledges no such calling as is chiefly grounded on the peoples choice.
Such private intendime^ts and underhand professions of particular persons in
secret, are cloaks of shame and craftiness, like unto disguised familisme. And
if any ministry be so grovnded, it is not the ministry of the church of
England. But what that church of England allows which he understands by
this title, it makes nothing to the quaestion. It is enough if such a calling
be in some assemblies of England. Yet for a minister to lay the chief ground
of his calling upon the peoples choice, so that he have withal those
formallities required, I know no law in England that does forbid or disallow
it. There is therefore no necessity for him that does so, to speak of it in
secret only: he may profess it in the pulpit, as many have been known to
do, and yet be a minister of a church established by the law of England.
Neither is that after consent by acceptance and submission which Mr. R.
speaks of so slight a matter for this purpose as he would make it. For as in
wedlock, the after consent of parents or parties does often make that a
lawful state of marriage which before and without that was none: and in
government, acceptance and submission does make him a king which before was a
tyrant, though in their nature these actions be rather consequences then
causes of that calling, so is it betwixt minister and people. All the wind that
he spends therefore in this answer, is but a venting of his praejudiciall
passions. The quaestion it self he secretly grants, in making a ministry
grounded on the peoples choice to be no ministry of the church of England:
insinuating thereby, that with such a ministry he cannot say but communion is
lawful. Now that there is such a ministry to be found in England, as it is
manifest in diverse places, so he him self does as much as witness it in the
next page, where he affirms that in sundry places the people are ready to
suffer persecution with their ministers. Page 7.
For if the lifting up of a hand in toke^ of consent be a choosing, a consent
declared by such fruights must needs implie no less.

4. He excepteth against baptizing of all infants borne in the Parish. But (to
abstain from by controversies) it shall suffice for that, that other churches
do extend the use of that sacrament to as great largenes as England does,
with whom not withstanding Mr. R. will not deny all communion public.

The 6 quaestion was of a deprived and silenced minister, why a man should not
hear him when he preaches? Mr. R. after a censorious note or two passed upon
such ministers, gives for answer, that such a man remaining still a minister
of the church of England, and preaching by that calling, cannot be
communicated with, without submission unto and upholding of the prelates
antichristian authority, which in that work he exercises. Which is a
conceyt past commune apprehension. That he which by the prelat, the prelates
cannons, and all that his authority can make, is forbidden to preach, often
times excommunicated also by him, and all this for witnessing against his
usurped authority, should in performing that duty, which also he did law fully
before he receyved any commission from any prelat, not only exercise the
prelates authority, but so exercise it, that no christian man may be present
thereat, without actual submission to antichristian power. I can say no more,
but let him that reads give judgment.

To the 7 and last demand, which was of one that thorough infirmity admits
of some corruptions in the exercise of his ministry, he answers nothing of
moment, but what was examined before, and therefore need not a several trial.

Sec. 5.
THus much for maintenance of the arguments implied in the foresaid quaeres.
Wherein also those bars are now removed which were by Mr. R. opposed before in
general, and now as we have seen, particularly applied. Yet further some what
to pursue the matter, it may be a defense of that which is said already. The
principal and in deed the only ground of opposition was laid by him in this,
that such a Parishionall minister is a branch of the prelacie, as receyving
power from it, by which it does administer. My answer was by denial, with
this distinction, that a parishionall minister as I formerly described had
power of right unto his ministry before ever he had to do with the prelat,
though a power of external legal ability, he may be said to receyve from
the prelat in part. When I said he had nothing to do with the prelat before he
had gotten right, my meaning was, that he had not to do about that pastoral
charge.

Yet we may suppose him also not to have proceeded by such degrees as were
formerly for argument sake set in rank, but first to have dealt with the
people or been dealt with by them, having never seen any prelat in all his
life, or as good as not seen him. To come then to the point, his answer is,
that no parish assemblies have power of right to choose their ministers.
Whereas on the contrary it is most evident that every congregation of
christians has right unto this thing from Christ him self so inseparably
annexed unto it, that no external oppression by others, or abuse of their own
ca^ possibly deprive them of this right, so long as they remain a christian
assembly or congregation. Suppose they be in external bondage, and that in
some sense spiritual, yet no matter of fact can take away right, while they
abide such as Christ has given that right unto.

The whole case may be cleared in this example, two single persons agree on
marriage betwixt themselves, with allowance of parents, and have by virtue of
that contract, mutual right one in other, yet the laws of the place where they
live having ordered that none shall be held for married persons without certain
forms which they appoint, they have not external legal power or liberty
one in the other, before such rites be performed. Even so stands the matter
betwixt minister and people in England, they agreeing or co^tracting betwixt
them selves have right one in other: but external legal power or liberty
they must receyve from others. Another example also I would have considered,
the emperor sometime was so subject unto the pope that he had not liberty of
imperial rule until he receyved his crown from Rome: yet was the emperor
then no proper part of the papacy, nor did he take his right from the pope,
neither did those that submitted unto him, therein communicate with the popes
authority. So is this in hand. If Mr. R. will shutt his eyes against the light
I cannot make him see the difference that is betwixt these two powers.

OVt of Mr. R. his own grounds there were certain assertions observed, Sec. 6.
which show that the power of preaching which ministers in England do exercise
professing that to be their main office, is not properly a part of the prelates
power. The first was, that the office of the prelates is founded on their
usurpation of the churches rights in calling of officers and censuring of
offenders: power therefore of preaching can be no part of it. To which first he
answers, that that which I admit in his affirmation has enough in it to
overthrow my consequence: for if it belong to the prelates to call ministers and
that in calling them they give the^ power and authority to preach, then it
follovveth undeniablie, that those ministers thus preaching, do therein
exercise the prelates power. And if unto this be added such an aestimation of
all the ecclesiastical state in England as he co^ceyteth, and would have
others to take for granted, then he says all will follow that he desires. Only
he disliketh, that diligent preaching should be accounted the ministers mayn
office: because that in abstracted notions, it is rather a work then an office,
and such a work as may be performed by Apostles, or others that are no
pastors, and therefore as he full wisely concludes, it cannot be the pastors
office maine or mean. Secondly he descants upon the word founded, affirming
that men may have power to do more then they very things upon which their
office is founded etc. But 1. A man may take an argument from that which he
does not with consent admit. And so did I in using his assertion concerning
the Bishops authority in calling of ministers: never granting (as former
passages do sufficiently witness) that all authority of calling them rests
in the prelat. 2. A man may be in some sort called by another to exercise some
power which is not his that so called him. As when a physician is called by the
civil magistrate or by a Bishop to exercise such art as he has, among the
people that are ruled by him. For no man I think will say that such a phxsitian
in giving of a potion does exercise a kingly or an episcopal power. So
likewise is the case of a schoolmaister set in place by a Bishops license and
authority: in teaching of grammar, he does not exercise the power of a
Bishop. 3. Though in strictnes of distinction, an office dissereth, from the
work of it, yet Mr. R. I hope will give us leave to follow in phraze of speech
the custom of speakers and writers, who do usually call that work men's
office whereto by office they are separated, Especially seeing the Apostle Paul
himself does call the office of a Bishop a work. 1. tim. 3.1. And the work
of ministry, a ministry. Romans 12.7. But it seems he does not esteem
preaching any proper work of a pastors office, because Apostles and others may
do it. As if the apostles and ordinary pastors had not one general office,
because they have not the same in special; or that one man may not be tied by
office unto a work which another also has liberty by oceasion to do without
such a special office. As if it were not a deacons office to distribute unto
the poor, because others may do so.

4. His strict acception of the work founded ca^ neither stand with his other
interpretation of the word office nor with that sentence whereto it belongs.
For a prelates office or state is in nature before that usurpation he speaks
of, and not founded upon it. Neither is the quaestion, whether prelates have
power to preach or no, nor yet whether that be in the strictest sense a
foundation of their office, but whether their office, does so conteyne that as
a part of it, as that, whosoever preaches with in their diocese, must needs
execute a part of their office or power?

A Second assertion whereof use was made in the manuduction was, Sec. 7.
preaching is no natural or necessary part of the parochial ministers
office. Concerning this sentence, Mr. R. complayneth first that it was by me
unjustly reproched, and secondly, that my inference upon it is of no force.
Reproach it I did not, but so reprove it as it was worthy: wondering much at the
shamelessnesse of it. Now I do much less merveyl at it then I did before:
seeing that which he here affirms of the parochial minister, he does as
boldly affirm of all ministers and true pastors, viz: preaching is not the
pastors office, either main or mean. I do rather merveyl, that he should cast
that upon parochial ministers for a crime, which he makes to be the case of
all true pastors. Yet for the reproof I used, it was deserved. I say, it was
an intemperat speech, proceeding from an impotent sickness of mind: that is,
an unreasodable assertion arising out of passion or perturbation. My reason
annexed was, because he can find marijng, churching, burijng among the natural
or necessary parts of this ministry, things not mentioned in the ordination:
but cannot find preaching any part, though it be expressly mentioned, and that
as a mayn part. Who does not see, that such partial dealing does proceed
from passion? the force of this argument thus couched in that comparison, Mr.
R. observing will take no knowledge of, but frames another, which he thought he
could answer: and simply proproundeth my reason to be, that preaching the word
is expressly mentioned in the ordination: and therefore a natural and necessary
part of the parochial ministers office. Though this I neither said nor meant,
yet if it be rightly understood, viz: that preaching of the word is mentioned
as the principal work to which he is ordained, the argument is good and sound:
and the objections which Mr. R. has brought against it, are but as the raising
of a little dust unto the clearenes of a shining light. It is mentioned also in
the ordination of a maspreist: But is not mentioned as the chief work whereunto
he is concecrated: sacrifizing for quick and dead is the maine. Yet according
to the intention of those which first framed that form of ordination, it is
manifestly the office of him that is so ordained, to preach the word of God. So
also is ministering the discipline of Christ as the Lord has commanded,
expressly mentioned. So is it also a part of his office, though he be not now
permitted to perform it, according as he should. The Bishop also expressly
bids his ordained one, receive the H. Ghost: does he therefore so receyve it?
most trifling. Is this the quaestion now, whether the ordained one receyveth
every thing that he is bidden receyve? or do those words any ways import an
office of such receyving? The greatest part of the ministers want ability of
preaching, therefore it cannot be a natural or necessary part of their office.
So did the greatest part of the priests and levites in the days of Jeremy, and
the other prophets: was it therefore no natural or necessary part of their
office? But the public laws do approve of their inabilitie to preach, by
appointing homilies to be read by them. It is a public slander to say so, when
as in the very preface to those homilies, the appointers of them do declare,
that their intent was not to approve such unsufficiencie, but to make some kind
of supply for that which was wanting in such men toward the performance of
their office, and that for a time only, while better provision might be made.
Whereby also it is manifest, that it is not law, but pretense and abuse of law
that continnueth such blots in so many assemblies.

This of the speech reproved: now for the inference deduced out of it. Which
was, that if preaching be no natural part of such a ministers office, then he
in preaching does not exercise any power receyved from the prelat: neither
does he that co^municates with him in that action of preaching, thereby
communicate with him in any corrupt office of prelacie, or preisthood receyved
from it. Whereunto Mr. R. answers, that though it be not a natural and
necessary part or work of his office, yet is it a casual and arbitrary part
or work, which when it is done, proceeds from the same power with those
that are natural, that is, from the authority of the prelate. But who does
not see how casual and arbitrarie the answers of this man are? Sometime
preaching is no office of the ministers, neither main nor mean, as we heard
before: sometime it is a part, but not natural or necessary. And where did he
learn (I wonder) to distinguish the parts of any thing into natural and
preternaturall, necessary and casual? that which is preter-naturall to a
wholl is no part of it, neither is there any part which is not in some degree
necessary. The duty of preaching may be a natural and necessary part of
the ministers office: though the work of it be not so necessarily urged, as the
office does require. That the work also is made no more necessary, it arises
not from the nature of the office, but from the corruption of the officers.

A Third assertion of Mr. R. applied unto the former purpose, was that the root
being plucked up, the branch cannot survive: Sec. 8.
for the prelacie being plucked up, the parochial ministry might stand still,
in all the substantial parts of it: as reason will teach any man that
considers without passion, and experience also shows in many parts of
Germany. Therefore the parochial ministry can be no proper branch of the
prelacie. For answer heerunto, first, he denies and merveyleth that I would
affirm, the same parochial office and power of ministry to remain in any
churches of Germany that was in use when prelates were there in time of
popery, which was mas-preisthood. But 1. It was not affirmed, that the
ministry there does remain the same with that which was there before: but
the same for substance with that which is England though we have prelates and
they have none. The truth of which is evident unto all that have any knowledge
of the state of those churches.

2. If the removing of the mass and the reference of preisthood unto it, does
necessarily infer a change of the ministerial function, (as this answer
imports) why then does Mr. R. so much forget himself, in affirming that the
office of a mass priest and of a parochial minister is one and the same?

And for the point: the reasons by Mr. R. alleged (to prove that the parochial
ministry cannot stand in all the substantial parts of it if the prelacie be
taken away) are so frivolous and void of substance, that if passion and
praejudice be taken away, they cannot possibly stand. 1. All the ministers are
made and appointed by the Bishops: if therefore the Bishops be taken away, how
can the ministers remain the same? take away the correlative and relation
cease.

True, the relation cease, But is that external relation unto an efficient
cause any part of the substance or essence of the ministry? I had thought
that the substance and essence of a thing had consisted in matter and form,
and not in such external relations. Marriages are also made (as Mr. R.
affirms) by Bishops authority: take away Bishops therefore and by this reason
the marriages shall not remain the same for substance which they are now.
Licenses for teaching school and in many places for practizing of physic are
given by the Bishops and their officers: take away the Bishops, and may not the
same schoolmasters and physicians yet still remayn (for substance) that were
before? Fie upon sophistry.

2. Take away the prelacie (says Mr. R.) and how can such a ministry
continue, vvherof one part (viz: ruling) shall be usurped by the prelat? As if
when once that power is taken from the minister, it now apperteyned to the
substance of his ministry, by whom it were usurped, whether he that possessed
it were a Bishop, or a high commissioner, or of some other place! that which is
without a thing may be changed without any substantial change of the thing it
self: else how can Mr. R. say that either the function of masspreists, or of
Popish Bishops do remain still in England as of old for substance, when there
is so great an alteration in that supreme power from whence of old they were
derived? The office of a king also, it remains the same for substance now,
that it was in time of popery, for the substantial parts of it: yet one part
thereof was in those times usurped and possessed by the pope, and is now
restored to the crown, viz: power over ecclesiastical persons, and in
ecclesiastical causes. It cannot therefore be denied, but by the same reason,
the parochial ministry should abide the same for substance that now it is,
though that part which is now usurped by Bishops should be restored again. So
that Bishops being removed, whether that power of ruling should be translated
unto some other officers, or settled in the ministers as it ought, Mr. R.
argument has by neither way any weight or force at all.

3. Take away (says he) the provinc: and diocesan churches and prelates, the
parochial churches and ministers, as parts of them, must fall also. As parts
of them in deed they must of necessity fall: that is, they must cease to be
parts of them: but it does not therefore follow, that any thing of their
internal substance should fall. The national church of England, and so the
provincial and diocesan did once stand members, or parts of the oecumenicall
papal church of Rome: now that is removed out of England, so far at least,
that this national church is not subject unto Rome, nor dependant on it, or
contained in it as a part in a wholl: yet Mr. R. will say that the same
diocesan provincial and national church remains (for substance) that was
before. Why does he not then see that parochial churches may remayn the same
for substance, though diocesses and provinces did follow the other?

4. He reckons up sundry corruptions, idol priests, cross and surplice
with such vanities, mixture of profane with the godly, and asks, if it be
possible that the prelacie being abolished such things should remain as now?
I answer 1. It is possible. There are more means of disorder and corruption
then one. Neither can any such necessary co^junction be showed betwixt the
prelacie and these abuses, but that it is possible to seperat one from the
other. Yet 2. If they should all be abolished with the prelacie, no reasonable
man will therefore say that the substance of parochial churches should be therein
changed. If praejudice could be set apart, the shallowness of this and the
former reasons could not be hid from the eyes of him that framed them.

TO a mayn objection by Mr. R. urged, viz: Sec. 9.
that all parochial ministers are subject unto the spiritual jurisdiction of
prelates, answer was given, first, that so are private christians subject unto
the same jurisdict^^, not only in their church actions which they perform
with others in public, but also for personal and private opinions and
behaviors: this subjection therefore does no more hinder communion with the
one then with the other, in things that are good. To which answer Mr. R.
replieth nothing: but refers unto his former book: where as good as nothing
is to be found. If there had been a fit answer to be given, we should
certainly either have had it repeated here (for of repetition Mr. R. is not so
nice) or at least the page quoted where we might have found it. But in deed it
is not possible, but if mere subjection to Bishops be in it self a sufficient
bar against public communion, it must also be held sufficient against such
private in and for which a man is also subject.

The second answer unto the forenamed objection was that the greatest part of
the prelates jurisdiction is from the king derived unto those that do exercise
the same, and therefore must of necessity be a civil power, such as the king
might as well perform by other civil officers, as it is in the high
commission. The laws of the land do so esteem it, etc. In this Mr. R.
insisteth much, as thinking no small advantage to be given him, and therefore
requires of the reader well to observe what here is said on both sides. In
which request I ioigne with him: so that it be marked withal, that I do not
undertake to justify the Bishops wholl state, much less their proceedings,
but only so far, that some subjection unto some of their authority is not
simply unlawful.

Mr. R. plea (after his praeamble) arises unto these 3 defenses. 1. The laws
do no where derive from the kings civil authority, the power of the
Bishops spiritual administratio^s, but do only make the king an establisher
and up holder civilly of this power. 2. Though the laws of the la^d did
esteem this jurisdiction civil, yet it does not follovv that therefore it is
such in deed: because they misesteeme diverse things. 3. That the prelates
jurisdiction is not civil, as appears plainly by 5 reasons of him alleged.
For the first of these, I appeal 1. To the oath of the clergy to the king,
established by a statut law in the reign of king Henry 8. exsta^t in Mr. Fox p.
961. Where the Bishop swears, that he knovvledgeth himself to hold his
Bishopric of the king only.

2. To the act that was then made for the supremacy, wherein all jurisdictions
belonging to the title of head of the church in England are give^ to the king,
as it is in the same book p. 963.3. I appeal to the 5. Book of Sr Edward Cooks
reports, where he shows out of the law that Bishops are the kings spiritual
judges, their laws his ecclesiastical laws, their jurisdiction so dependa^t
on him, that he may exempt any man from it, and grant the same also to whom he
will. For the which purpose, he that desires may find ple^tiful proofs in a
book entitled, an assertion for church policy. Now whereas M. R. aledgeth, that
the same jurisdiction ecclesiastical which had been in use in popery, and a
great part of the popish hierarchy was confirmed primo Elizabethae, he has
put another weapon in our hands for to wound his cause withal. For the very
title of that statute is, an act restoring to the crown the ancient
jurisdiction over the state ecclesiastical. And the whole house of commons have
so interpreted the meaning of that restoration which is therein made, that by
virtue thereof the king is enabled to give power and jurisdiction
ecclesiastical to any subject borne, so if it please him all causes may be
taken from Bishops and their officers, and given unto other men in every parish
of England. This interpretation is found in the bill of greivances presented to
the king by those of the lower house an. 1610. Printed in a book called a
record of some worthy proceedings etc.

That this or any other judgeme^t of the law is not infallible, I easily admit,
especially touching the quaestion of lawful or unlawful, good or evil, of
which kind those instances are which Mr. R. chooses in this place to appose.
But 1. Seeing that when we allege the parishes to be several churches, and to
be considered as they subsist in their several conditions, and the calling of
ministers in many assemblies to be grounded on the peoples choice etc. we hear
it still opposed with loud voice, the laws of the land allow no such things,
they acknovvledge no such matter etc. Was it not both fit and necessary then
to declare the judgment of law? or can he with honesty reject the sentence
of law so ligtly now, who a little before built all upon it. 2. The quaestion
is here of a matter of fact, and the positive not moral nature of it, whether
this authority comes from the king or no, not whether it be every way good
and laudable (as is the controversy about cross, syrplice and such like
abuses which he mentions) and in such a case if the the laws say yea, and
those that submit to them say also yea, Mr. R. must pardon us, if his no be
rejected, except his reasons be passing strong.

His first reason why this power is not civil is because it is not coactive or
bodily enforcing, but the Bishop after excomunication can go no further except
he procure a civil coactive process by writ out of another court. I answer
1. Though it had no bodily enforcing at all annexed unto it yet it might be a
civil power. Bodily enforcing is but a penal sanction which comes after the
authority or power civil, and may be separated from it 2. It is therefore
coactive or bodily enforcing, because it may directly require as due and by law
belonging unto it such coactive assistance by other officers as Mr. R. himself
speaks of. So many civil commissions and letters patent are granted to men
which have no authority seated in themselves for forcing of me^ unto
obedience, but have authority to charge the constable or justice that next is
to aid them in their affairs, which authority of theirs notwithstanding is
civil, and in that respect coactive.

A second reason is taken from the works of prelates jurisdiction, which are
for substance (says he) the making of ministers, and excommunicating of
offenders, with their contraries and appurtenances: which are not civil
works, neither can be performed by any civil magistrate. Where, if by can or
may he understands such right as men have for their deeds by the law or word
of God, then I willingly grant that no civil magistrate may by his civil
office perform those works of ordination excommunication etc. Neither can the
Bishop so perform them: heerin consists that presumptuous usurpatio^ whereof
they are guilty before God and man. But if he understands such right or power
as men have for their deeds by man's law, then I avouch out of the former
grounds and testimonies of law, that any other civil magistrate may receyve
authority of jurisdiction in those causes as well as prelates. Which experience
confirms de facto in the high commission, and some other courts. Whereby it is
manifest, that though these works in their nature be spiritual, yet (thorough
great abuse) they are performed by civil authority. Secondly I answer, that
these works of ordination and excommunication with their contraries and
appurtenances are not the substance or in effect the vvholl jurisdiction which
Bishops do exercise in their provinces and dioces, though Mr. R. affirm it
again and again. For 1. The principal jurisdiction which prelates have is
under the king to make certain rules canons or laws for ordering of certain
causes committed unto them 2. Those causes are for a great part of them merely
civil, such as by Gods law the civil magistrate has power to order. Of which
kind are the causes of matrimony, of wills or testaments and many
circumstances pertaining to the several churches within their precincts. 3. In
the very business of ordination and excommunication, it is of substance to see
that worthy men be admitted and unworthy excluded. The forms of ordination and
excommunication usurped by them, are corrupt appurtenances to those lawful
actions, and not the substance whereto all the rest apperteyne.

Neither does Mr. R. agree with himself in making all the substance of
spiritual government to consist in calling of ministers and exercising of
censures, or ordination and excommunication: seeing his opinion is that all
this may be done by the people, and yet in his former book (p. 26.) affirms
government not to belong to them, vvherin (says he) does the people govern as
many please to reproach us?

The third argument is taken from the form used in consecration of Bishops,
vvherin no mention is made of civil authority, but only of spiritual.
Whereunto I answer. 1. That their episcopal jurisdiction over a special
diocese or province is not expressed in that consecration: nor any thing of
substance which is not contained in a parochial ministers ordination. Which is
an argument that the Bishop receyveth not that jurisdiction from him by whose
hands he is consecrated, but from some other power, and that is from the king.
2. It is not necessary that words and forms of consecration should agree in
all points with the state of a Bishop. For a Bishop in that state and
proceeding which now is in use, is partly fish and partly flesh, or such a
compound as were the feet of Nebuchadnetsars image, Dan. 2.
that were part of iron and part of clay, which did not cleave one to the
other: for so is he, part of civil power which is of sound metal or iron,
and part of spiritual usurpation, like myrie clay.

The. 4. Argument is vaynly built upon a supposition which formerly was proved
false, viz: that all the civil jurisdiction which prelates have, consists in
their being privy councellers, high commissioners, or justices of the peace.
This therefore needs no further answer. Only let it be observed that Mr. R. in
defending of the separation, as well as I in opposing it, does justify some
part of the authority which Bishops exercise in England, Page 5.
professing communion with it and submission unto it. The only quaestion is,
how much of their authority is such. Let prejudicial insinuations and
groundless imputations therefore be laid aside, and that quaestion only
discussed.

The last argument is raised from a form of words used by the-Byshops, in that
they proceed in the name of God, and not in the kings name as all civil
proceedings do. Whereunto I answer. 1. That a sound and convincing argument
cannot be brought from words of form and office. If they should change their
style, and begin their actions in the king name, I doubt whether Mr. R. would
allow of that as any strong reason for their civil authority. 2. Many actions
are performed with the same words of form, as all wills or testaments etc:
which yet are no spiritual but civil deeds. So Henry the fourth king of
England began his claim to the crown. In the name of God, amen. I Henry of
Lanc. etc: as it is in Mr. Fox p. 474. Yet was not any other then a civil
claim. 3 I affirm thatit is an abuse against law, that Bishops in their acts
of jurisdiction do not use the kings name: and therefore howsoever that the
formal words be wanting, yet the thing it self is to be understood, viz: as Sr
Ed. Cook has written, that howsoever the form runs in the Bishops name,
yet the authority is no other but the kings.

This I will show by an instance most pregnant. Bishop Farrar in king Edwards
days, being troubled and vexed by evil Willershad (amongst other) these 2
articles objected against him as deserving deprivation 1. that he appointed his
Chancelour by his letters of commission, omitting the kings majesty's style and
authority etc. 5. Item he has commonly made his collations and iustitutions,
as he did his first commission, in his own name and authority without
expressing the kings supremacy. To the first, the Bishops answer was, that
what formalities soever be wanting in his commission, yet the kings majesty's
style and authority was fully set forth in the same commission. Neither did
the said chancelour offer to visit but in the kings name and authority, to the
said Bishop committed. To the fifth he says, that the said defenda^t made his
collations and institutions in his own name, not by his own a^uthoritie, nor
by any others* fave only the kings authority, according as he has declared
in his first article, expressing in them the kings supremacy with the Bishops
own name and seal of office, as he ought to do according to the provision of
the kings statute in such a case. See Mr. Fox p. 1405.1406. In which one plea,
we have the authority of statute, the sentence of lawyers and judges, with the
confession and practice of prelates themselves, for the kings name and
authority to give life unto their proceedings.

Here it must be observed, that this accusation and answer of B. Farrar was
grounded immediately on a statute made the first of Edward 6. wherein it was
enacted, that the Bishop, should make their process and writings in the kings
name, and that their seals should be the kings arms. Which act was but an
appendix declaring and adding form to that statute of supremacy made in Henry
8 his days, whereby ecclesiastical jurisdiction was annexed to the crown so
as all Bishops were to fech it from thence. Now though that act of king Edward
was repealed in Queere Mary's time, and not since revived, yet that does
declare the meaning of the former statute of Henry 8. to be such as has been
said: which statute is now in force. Howsoever, the Bishops have (undoubtedly)
the same kind of state which they had in the days of king Edw. If therefore they
were the^ civil officers, proceeding by the kings authority, they are also now
such, viz: of civil nature for their state, deriving their jurisdiction from
the king, though they proceed not in his name so formaly as in king Edwards
days they did, and now in reason they should.

THus much for that objection touching spiritual subjection. Sect. 10.
Concerning which, I found nothing further directly perteyning unto the
purpose, except one passage which I found p. 30. Where these words are, they
who thus disclaym in word the Bishops government, confess themselves therein
to be under no spiritual external government at all, and so be lavvles
persons and inordinate vvalkers etc. This because it sounded as a dangerous and
deep charge, ensuing upon that former defense which was made, that good
ministers are no branches of the prelacie nor necessarily dependent on them as
spiritual officers, I thought it needful to give answer unto it.

My answer therefore did consist in these 3 branches, 1. That there was no such
want of spiritual government in the ministers which govern themselves well,
as could be a just barrt against all communion with them: seeing private men
living in the same want, may well be communicated with. 2 That they are subject
unto some spiritual government. And 3. That for that want of government which
they are in, they are no more lawless walkers or inordinate walkers then Mr.
R. himself is, who is not subject to any other spiritual government then they
are except he will say that the people govern him, which he counts to be a
reproach. Now let us hear what reply he makes.

1. He pleads, that he did not infer this exception upon the former ground.
But let that passage of his book be wayed p. 29.30. And it will be found that
against his allegation of the parochial ministers being a branch of the
prelacie, this was one defense, that they are not subject to their government,
whereupon this inference follows, that then they are inordinate vvalkers and
lavvles persons. Which is the very same order of inference that I observed. 2.
He says it was not alleged to prove communion unlawful with them, but as
a reproof etc. But seeing the main reason was for unlawfulness of communion
because of their branching out of prelacie, and the allegation nothing but an
establishing of that reason by removal of one principal defense supposed to
be brought for it, it must of necessity tend unto the same end, of barring
from all communion. And in deed, if it were not a slander, it were none of the
weakest arguments which he has alleged.

3. He affirms the 1. and 2. Answer to be beside the purpose because they
speak only of personal, or civil, or else a more general kind of government
then he intended, who spoke only of outvvard guidance and ordering of the
church in her public affairs, in which respect he affirms all in the
parrish assemblies to be lavvlesse persons, if they be not under the prelates
jurisdiction spiritual. Whereto I answer 1. That such good government as he
grants these me^ personally, civilly, and generally to be ruled lawfully and
religiously by (for all this he denies not) is more then sufficient to remove
from them that imputation of lawless and inordinate walkers, which he without
law or limit had cast upon them. And for this purpose were those 1 and 2
answers opposed. Neither yet can it be with any truth affirmed, that in that
strict acception of government the former imputation does cleave unto all in
all assemblies. Are there none in any assemblies that are any way in any
measure guided and ordered by their ministers in public affairs? what not in
those prayers wherein they go before the people and direct them in their
supplicatio^s by a special gift of prayer? is there no guidance and ordering by
the preaching of the word? surely this accusation may in no sense be excused
from overlashing. Lastly it is alleged that this, not being subject to
government is misapplied by me unto ministers, when he spoke it of the people,
as is evide^t by his reply. Whereas indeed the contrary may better be gathered
out of the reply. For therein (p. 30.) he speaks first in general terms
excluding none: and after does take in the ministers in special, expressly
naming them no less the^ 6 times in that one side of a leaf. The truth is, he
finds himself touched, not with a touch of wit (as he terms it) but with a
glance of his own tongue: and therefore has now to help that, changed the term
of spiritual government into another of the power of Christ for the censures,
and because he does not acknowledge himself to be under any external
spiritual government, yet under the power of censures he is, therefore the want
of this in ministers and people he choseth now to impute for a lawless and
inordinate state p. 19 As if this power of censuring were such a thing as every
want thereof were a sufficient cause of so deep a censure: and this were not
rather an audacious and abusive strayning of the apostles phraze, applijng that
unto most godly men which he spoke of the scandalous. Or as if all power of
censuring in any degree, were wanting because the liberty of proceeding is in a
great part restreyned. But thus much for this objection: and so for the
justification of some public communion to be lawful in England.

THese things hitherto discussed were all that I could or can yet find in M.
R. book, Sect. 13.
directly concluding against al public communion. Yet because there be 2 other
objections, which by some might be thought to perteyne unto the same purpose,
viz: that all are urged to communion by penal statutes, and that a set form
of prayer is appointed, I added therefore concerning them, this answer
following. What fault soever may be found with them, they lie not so in the
way, as that they should hinder from all communion public, seeing there are
many exercises of religion, wherein none are present by constraint, and where
the service book does not so much as appear. As by name Mr. Perkins his
exercise was, where Mr. R. has often been, and at whose successors he has
once been since he professed separation, whereof I am persuaded also he does
not yet repent. Further to reason about them is beside the purpose of my
writing: and in deed needless, seeing the accuser has answered himself in the
one, p. 9. When he gra^teth that the reformed churches generally use a stint
form of prayer, with who^ yet he will not refuse al public communion, and make
like answer to the other, out of the laws of Geneva, where he shall find like
strictness to be used toward all the inhabitants of that city, though he has
unadvisedly denied it in his so large assertion of our assemblies difference
therein from all true churches in the world. This answer of mine I was forced to
repeat, that the reader may see how Mr. R. (being putt as it seems to hard
shifts) has miserably mangled the same without giving any answer directly to
the purpose.

1. He brings in my first answer thus, he neither purposes nor thinks it
needful to deal about these things, seeing there are many exercises of
religion where none are present by, constraynt etc. Was this my answer why
does he leave out that wherein the mayn quaestion consists, and whereupon all
that follows depends? viz: that those things do not hinder from al
communion public. For this that reason was brought which he mentions: and
not for that whereunto he pleases to apply it. Great distance there was in my
writing betwixt those words which he patcheth together.

Neither was it my saying, that I had no purpose to deal about those things at
all, but not further then I had answered before. this mangling and patching
confounds all.

2. He charge me with changing the state of the question after my evil
custom, which is not (says he) about men's being present by constreynt at the
exercises of religion, but of churches gathered by constreynt of all the profane
parishioners with the other handful. But what goodness is in this custom,
to pass by the wholl quaestion in hand, and then to move controversy about
other matters? the state of our quaestion thorougout this dispute, is, whether
all public communion in the parish assemblies of England be unlawful or no?
the objection in this place was that all are urged to communion by penal
statutes. For answer of which I said that there be many exercises of religion
public, where none are present by virtue of such constreynt, and therefore such
constreynt could not hinder from all communion, though it might from some.
Could any thing be more direct and press to the matter in hand? Take we in
also that which he says our quaestion is about; that churches are gathered by
constreynt of all the profane parshioners with the other handful, what
advantage has he by it? nothing at all, but only that his charirie and
moderation is thereby made known. For 1. There be many parrishes in England
which are but a handful in all, and diverse of them consisting only of a
family two or three, having none in them that are profane. Diverse also there
are more populous which have more then a handful of such in them as no holy
man having bridle of his tongue can call profane.

2. Though laws do urge unto such communion, yet it cannot be reaso^ably
gathered that al which practice accordingly are co^streyned unto it: except Mr.
R. will say that all men which live orderly with their wives and children and
absteyne from murder, treason, and such like offenses, do it by constreynt,
because laws do require and urge the same under great pains. 3. Though all
were gathered into churches by constreynt, yet that constreynt apperteyneth not
unto those exercises of religion, where none are present but of their voluntary
mind. He should have given a mad answer, that being desired to hear Mr.
Perkins, should have denied upon this ground, because that parish church where
he only taught (for a member of it a long time he was not) was gathered by
constreynt, when none came to hear him by any constreynt, and of that parrish
few or none to speak of were present. By all which we see, that this argument
though framed thus as Mr. R. would have it, concludes nothing against al
public communion in England.

3. For that which I by the way only remembered, that he himself was once at a
sermon in that assembly since he professed separation, as he had been at many
of Mr. Perkinses before, he answers* it was neither pertinently nor truly
objected: because at that time he disputed only for separation, but had not
professed it.

Practiced it in deed he had not in that settled manner which since he has: but
by report of some that had speech with him, he declared then to one of his
acquaintance, that he had been amongst some company of the separation before
his coming to Camb: and exercising amongst them had renounced his former
ministry. That is enough for the truth of what was affirmed. The pertinencie
of it consists in this, that he having so often and so lately been at that
exercise of Mr. Perkins and his successors cannot but know that there was no
co^streynt nor service book that had any place or part in it. It is pertinent
also by the way to know whether Mr. R. does repent him for hearing Mr.
Perkins? or whether he does reckon it among his offenses against God? The
historical narration which upon this occasion he interposeth, I pass over as
remote from the argument in hand.

4. He acknowledges that for the very use of a set form of prayer he will not
separate from a true church in things lawful* But many differences he finds
betwixt the set forms of other churches and that which is used in England,
even so many as make the service book a hateful Idol advanced above all that
is called God. The temper of which speech I leave to be considered of himself
and others. My argument is granted; viz: that a set form of prayer in it self
is not a sufficient cause of denijng all public communion. Let the manner of
imposing be as hateful as Mr. R. would make it: yet in those actions where it
is not used, nor yet imposed, as in that exercise of Mr. Perkins with other
like, that infection is conveyed by it I cannot possibly conceyve. I desire a
friend to hear with me a sermon preached by a godly man, where he shall neither
see nor hear any thing else beside the sermon, and such prayers as belong unto
it; will any sense allow him to answer, no I dare not, there is an idol imposed
under the name of service? Surely I should think he wanted sleep that would
speak so idly.

5. For the state of Geneva, whose laws do require church communion of all
the inhabitants of that city, he seeks as before to find some differences
betwixt that and England: but grants in the mean time, that if a state for
politic respects expel out of their territories such as will not ioign in
church communion, that kind of compulsion does not make their communion
unlawful. Mere injunction of law therefore though it be general for all does
not make all public communion unlawful. Especially in such actions where it
is manifest that none do communicate but voluntarily. This is all that I
mainteyned. Which being granted by Mr. R. with some other of my demands, and
the rest opposed with so slender defenses as we have now showed; I do not find
fault with the title of his writing as he does with mine, but acknowledge it
to be a true manumission that is a setting free or a free grant of what was by
me propounded: for other usual meaning of that title I do not understand.

NOw though I have not undertaken to give answer unto every thing that Mr. R.
may object against the state of our assemblies, Sec. 12.
and therefore might without praeiudice neglect that addition which he has
annexed unto his answer, yet least any should think some unanswerable reasons
to be contained in the same maintenance of his separation, I will briefly and
plainly declare what I think in all the particulars of it. He undertakes to set
down, what things are of absolute necessity for a true ordinary
church officer and minister of Christ, reducing the same unto 4 heads, a true
visible church, a fit person, a lawful office, and a right calling.

About the foremost of these, he moves 4 quaestions, 1. How the ministers of
England can be true ministers, not being made and ordained such in and to any
particular church? I ans: making and ordeyning are two things, he may be a
minister that is not formally ordained in the church. There is a making of
ministers in and to particular churches in England, when they are called in and
to such churches.

2. How many and which of the parrish churches consist of a people separated
out from the world? How many such there are in England, I cannot tell, because
I have no sufficient intelligence, whereby to inform my self therein. But diverse
assemblies there are, well known to such as are not wilfully ignorant, which
are so far at the least separated from the world as is of absolute necessity
to the being of a true church. Perfect separation is not of that nature. As for
the mixture in dioces etc. It is (as formerly has been showed) a civil
combination.

3. How the true form of a church can be found in any parrish church of the
land, which is not any particular act, disposition or relation, but (as he
conceaveth) a public orderly covenant and union of a particular assembly, by
which it has in it self entire right to Christ and to all the means of
enjoying him?

Wherein. 1. It is to be observed, that it is not a very easy thing to discern
of this form of a church: for this man that has labored so long about the
search of it, and that with more abilities and helps then ordinary christians
can atteyne unto, yet speaks something doubtfully or fearfully concerning the
matter, as I conceave it can be no other then this. Me think then that
charity should teach him and others more sparingly to censure and condemn
those assemblies which do not practice this form so orderly as they should:
seeing difficulty of discerning a duty does always lessen the fault of him
that omitteth it.

2. That which now he gives for his opinion concerning this form has a
manifest contradiction in it, and therefore cannot be right. He says that this
form is no particular act, disposition, or relation: and yet it is a public
orderly covenant and union. A covenant and union must be taken either for the
act of covenanting and uniting, and then it is an act; or for the state arising
from that act of obligation, which is nothing else but the relation those
persons obliged have one to another and so it is a relation, or else for the
thing to which they are obliged, or the sign thereof, and so it may be either
an act, or a disposition, or some other good. All these significations of the
word covenant I find in scripture and use of speech: any other beside these, I
do not understand. If Mr. R. had another meaning, he should have done well to
have expressed it better: the point especially being of such moment. The things
covenanted or the sign he cannot mean: for these are not constantly resydeing
in the whole and all the parts thereof, which is a condition of this form by
him required: some act or relation therefore he must needs understand,
gainsaying one part of the sentence by the other. 3. The truth is, this form
in strict and accurate meaning must needs be some relation by Mr. R. his own
reason. For nothing beside a relation can possibly resyde actually one and the
same and at all times in a whole company of men, and in all the parts of that
company.

4. Whereas he calls this form an orderly covenant, his words are doubtful
at the least. For there be many degrees of orderly proceeding in businesses
public as well as private: and every circumstance of order does not apperteyne
(as absolutely necessary) to the constituting form of a true church.

Now for the declaring of the truth concerning this matter, I propound to be
considered this brief demonstration. A visible church must not be considered as
a simple effect, arising of mere matter and form, as Mr. R does speak of it:
But as a whole or compound consisting of parts or members: so that the members
must conteyne in themselves all the essential both matter and form also,
which make the wholle by compacting or uniting themselves in one. Christian men
being the called of God, have in them both matter and form essential for
making of a visible church, else could they not give essence or being to the
church, for nothing can give that which it has not. Now these members
combining themselves into one body as they are such, do make or rather are
actually a true visible church, one integrall body not continued, but by
aggregation: which integral church as it is such, has for the constituting
form that relation which arises out of the combination of all the members:
and so differs not essentially from all the members compacted, but only in
reason. Further, this integral body for the well being of it in exercising those
operations which belong unto it and whereunto it serves, must become as we say
organicall, having members of diverse ranks, some as head, mouth and eyes, the
pastor, teachers, and elders, some as hands, the deacons and helpers: whereupon
arises another relation and form of accidental perfection, in state of
government: which is co^plete or incomplete, freely exercising the power
granted by Christ to his church, or else restreyned or defective therein. Out of
all this my answer is, that the essential form of a visible church is the
covenant of God, or true faith made visible by profession; the notes and marks
whereof are the word and sacraments rightly administered and receyved, with
fruights of obedience. The integral constituting form is that state, relation
or reference which a congregation of such professors have one to another by
virtue of their settled combination, the note or mark whereof is their usual
assembling into one place and watching one over another.

The organicall active form is that state of order wherein officers and people
stand one to the other, the note of which is direction and submission. Now to
the point, so many parrish assemblies of England as have any competent number
of good christians in them, united together for to worship God ordinarily in
one society, so many have essential and integrall form of a visible church:
and all they have entyre right to Christ and to all the means of enjoying him:
howsoever they are defective in the purity of their combinatio^, and in the
complete free exercising of their power.

The 4 and last quaestion propounded by Mr. R. concerning the church is, how
parrish assemblies being parts of diocesan false churches, can any more be
reputed true churches, then could a particular Jewish synagogue be so reputed,
which should have made it self an entyre and independe^t body in respect of
the national church and temple? To which I answer, that there is not the like
reason. For parrish assemblies are not spiritual parts of a diocesan
spiritual church: but entyre spiritual bodies though civilly combined into a
diocesan government. Neither is the principal worship performed at the
cathedral church as it was in the temple, but in the parrish assemblies
themselves.

In the second head, there is but one quaestio^ moved; that is, whether a man
fitted and inwardly called to the ministry being persuaded in his heart that
a lavvfvll outvvard calling, and without sin in the entrance and continuance
can not be had in the church of England, whether such a man be not bound in
conscience to seek out and procure another church etc. I ans. 1. That inward
calling is not ordinarily to be built upon, without some outward approbation
does confirm it. 2. A lawful outward calling is had and enjoyed in many
churches of England. 3. He that cannot enter in one place without sin, and yet
has his heart so fully set unto the ministry that he cannot have peace
without that function ought as I think to take any good occasion of removing
into some other place of more freedom.

To the demands in the 3 and 4 head, I have answered before, that preaching is
necessarily required by the nature of a ministers office in England; some ruling
is exercised by those that make conscience of their duty; and unto this
function men are not called merely by the prelat.

These 4 conditions therefore so far as they are of absolute necessity for a
true ordinary minister of Christ, are manifestly to be found in many assemblies
of England. Which also Mr. R. in a manner grants, in confessing that there
are to be found in the parochial ministry men apt to teach, unreproveable in
conversation, having an inward calling from God, that is, a holy disposition
and desire to administer the gospel of Christ to the glory of God and
furtherance of ma^s salvation. For this is the 2. condition which he
acknowledges to be found in the parochial ministry. And can any charitable
and aequall mind receyve into it self this thought, that so many me^ of so
good knowledge, and sincere conscience should be so far forsaken of God, all the
time of their life, and that one generation after another, as not only to
continue in Babylon as members of Antichrist but to bow down ordinarily and
give spiritual honor to so many hateful idols exalted above all that is
called God, as these men do telus of in the English assemblies? or if Mr. R.
did inwardly believe that they lived in such continual practice of idolatry
as he does in words accuse them of, would he account them unreproveable men in
their conversation, without any exception annexed? I say no more, but God grant
me that comfort which many of them have had in their unreproveablenes, and more
to Mr. R. then he can possibly find in such kind of reproving or rather
slandering of them. Amen.


