OF DEATH A TRVE DESCRIPTION: And against it A good Preparation: Together with
A sweet Consolation, for the suruiuing Mourners. By JAMES COLE Merchant.

Printed at London by A. M. 1629.

TO THE RIGHT Worthy his much respected friends, Mr. John Milleward Esquire,
one of the Captains of this famous City, Mr. John Awbrey, Mr. Edmond Page,
M^ William Gillie, Mr William Middelton, and Mr John Bludworth.
D. H. Merchant, wishes all happiness in soul and body in this world, and
ete^n^ll glory and bliss in the world to come.
EXcuse me I pray, (which am now the hand of my deceased friend) that I
commend these his Religious Instructions, unto your Patronages and
Embracements. The long time of your acquaintance, honest mutual traffic, and
former pious conversation, may justly challenge it, both of the Author, and my
self: Ye often have taken and built your credit on his word, in your bought
Wares, which the effect has confirmed to your profit. Once more believe him,
and buy these his Meditatio^s, on his word, the price is but your acceptance,
reading, and application. And if thus you will use, and try these his last
Marchandizes, they will prove unto you, of infinite worth, and price, for by
them you shall obtain that precious Pearl and hidden treasure, of which the
Gospel mentions. It was your charitable and Christian love, that accompanied
his mortal body to his last home, and it was his loving care, here to direct
those that followed him, and others to the grave, lest they should too long
make their aboade with the Gaderenian, among the tombs. The grave is but a
passage, not a dwelling place. It does but preserve the pledge of our bodies
until the day of resurrection. Therefore those that truly follow deceased
Christians, follow them not only unto the door of death, and entrance of the
grave, but through death unto life, through the grave unto heaven. And lest
death, the way to life, should seem too terrible, and rather affright from the
way, then inuit unto it. This our friend and charitable Author shows and
proves here, that in respect of the body, the soul, the world, the last
Judgment, it properly is not to be feared. And further to embolden the weak
faith of a trembling Christian, he vnmaskes and vnarmes death, he so
describes her, and prepares our bodies to embrace her, that death is no more
death, but victory: no more the object of fear, but desire. Wherefore having
thus far set in a word the description, of her description, before you, I
dare no longer detain you from the victory of her: If you please but to follow
either the prescription, or example of this our loving friend through death
unto life, through the grave unto heaven. J dare promise, that you will attain
my wish, all happiness here, and eternal glory hereafter. Jn confidence
whereof I rest,

London this 10. of June, 1629. Your well-wishing friend, DIERICK HOST.

In commendation of the Author and his Book.
NOthing more sure to us, then once pale death to see,
Why then are we so blind, not once to think thereon?
What more uncertain then when this our chance may be?
Why then go we on still, as if she should touch none?
In seasonable time, this Book^ is come to light,
To drive out of our hearts, deaths fear and anguish still,
It is a Christian part, t'instruct us in the right
How we may arm our selves against that feared ill.
For though at every one, grim death never leaves to aim,
Yet in this Treatise small, from her quite taken is,
Her sting. Which justly makes, to tremble without blame,
But to us that are Christ's, she brings eternal bliss.
O worthy Israelite, thou have spied out full well,
That this great Anakim, cannot hinder at all,
To win that Canaan of heaven, and there to dwell;
For JESUS CHRIST has wrought, that Giants great downfall.
How can we now reward thy love, O Author kind?
Who in thy life time, shun'dst men's praise, from laud did fly,
Thy pious, virtuous life, we will ever bear in mind,
Which now the Lord has crowned, with bliss eternally.
D. H. Of the zealous Author, his much respected Uncle, and his comfortable
Description.
SHall I rejoice because his Pen does teach
Us how die, and heavenly bliss to reach?
Or shall I mourn, because to be our guide,
His worthy self he has to us den^^d
Longer on earth? His words persuade belief,
Farther confirmance but augments our grief.
His Book suffu'd, that pointing Mercury,
He needed not to guide us, and to die.
His life we wanted more, that could us tell
That he that lived godly should die well.
Yet what it was I dare not well set down,
For fear his ashes modesty should frown.
But let them speak that comment on his name,
A man of pious, learned, upright fame:
Whose words and deeds did so concur in one
That what he said, it was true, it was sure, it was done;
Whose virtuous presence was so precious dear,
That most did wish he still might have been here.
But lo his liberal charity: If thus
His company was grateful unto us,
He shows us how we may enjoy it still,
And strives our wishes happier to fulfill
Then we conceive: He cannot descend again:
We must ascend, and there by him remain.
Thus while we enter his society,
Ours will be Saints and Angels company.
But lest we should unskillful Pilgrims stray,
Not knowing how to go, which is the way;
Lest that our eyes wax dimmed by sinful slime,
That we perceived not which way he did clime,
Behold in this good legacy of his
He shows us the true way, through death, to bliss.
Lest we should fear th'aff ighting face of death,
And quake to hear the farewell of our breath;
To his old Mate, he does unmask the fiend,
Shows her sting forcelesse, proves our foe our friend.
So that we bold may gaze her in the face,
And that we feared so much with joy embrace.
She is no evil thing, but natural,
According to Gods will common to all.
The body's but a sleep, it feels no pain,
The soul dies not, but mounts unto the train
Of heavenly Saints. Why should earths vanities
Detain us from these happy glorious skies?
Or fear of judgment? by it we receive
A joy which mortal mind cannot conceive.
Therefore when sickness pale does enter in
By Gods command, vsherd by inbred sin,
That messenger of death; thy house befit,
Thy body, soul, and all to welcome it.
Thy self strive well to arm, death to unarm,
By shunning sin with faith, and fear no harm.
Repent and pray, and to thy heavenly peace,
And certain comfort will thy faith increase.
So that death shall thy soul not terrify,
But be to thee a wished victory,
Which brings thee to a joyful Paradise,
Before the Lamb, above the starrie skies.
There is our Author now; and there does shine
Like a clear star, our once Marchant-diuine.
There he is in his reward. If we desire
To bear a p^rt in that celestial quire,
Let us these his directions embrace,
And follow thus through death his fore-runne trace.
Then shall our end be happy, for they will
Direct us through this dale to Sions bill.
Vt terror Mortis tibi sit victoria, larvam
Aspicias intus; Mo^s fera vita placens.
Abr. Bush. Art. Mag. A DESCRIPTION OF DEATH.
TO every thing there is a set time, Eccle. 3.1.
a time to be borne, and a time to die, says Solomon. And between the time
of birth and of death, there passed in the first ages six, eight, or perhaps
ten hundredth years. But since the time that man's sin drew the deluge over
the whole world, Man borne of a woman, has but a short time, says Job. Job
14.1.
Jacob said, that his days were an hundredth and thirty years, Genesis 47.9.
and that he had not attained to the days of his Fathers. But our days
(says Moses) coming after him, Psalm. 90.10.
are but threescore years and ten, and at the highest, fourscore. Yet not
one among fourscore times fourscore attain unto that age. 2 Samuel 12.18.
David's beloved child never saw the eight day; yea, the life of some is ended,
before they be borne. But how well so ever we are delivered out of our mothers
womb, yet having taken shipping in this world, we still sail toward our end.
And whether we be few or many days by the way, death is our last port, unto
it we are all bound, and at it must every one arrive. Now what man does ever
commit himself to Sea, and does not first furnish himself with necessary
provision, against all unexpected tempests? How much the more then ought we to
furnish our selves against the storms of death, which every one of us must
certainly look for? he that intends but a journey by land, enquires for the
most commodious way, And do we think to perform our journey, from Heaven to
earth without any trouble or forecast at all? This is a lamentable carelessness.

For whosoever does then first go about to prepare himself to dye well, when
he feels sickness upon him, or sees death before his eyes, is like to a
Soldier that begins then to forge his weapons, when he beholds his enemies
on the wall. We ought to spend the whole course of our life on the meditation
of death; for he certainly has lived well, who has learned well to dye.
Provident Joseph gathered in the seven years of plenty, that which fed him,
and those that were with him, in the seven years of famine. Genesis 41.43.
In like manner ought we in our youth and health to make provision of that
Spiritual food that may cherish us toward our end, when we may chance to
be weak both in body and in mind.

He that is Lord of life and death, open the eyes of our understandings, and
endue us with his Holy Spirit, that he may lighten and conduct our souls in
and through the darkness of death. He I say, that has by dying overcome
death, grant that we may know it thoroughly, to withstand it valiantly; and
hereafter (as Soldiers under his banner) happily vanquish it.

To treat hereof orderly; The original of Death.
we are first to know that God created not death: He created the first man
immortal in soul and body: Zanch de Var. qual. 4.1.
so that he might have lived eternally, had he but observed the will of his
Creator: Yet nevertheless, he also created him mortal, so that he might
dye, whenever he should transgress the law of his Creator. This appears
unto us by the words, wherein GOD threatens him on this manner, In the day
that thou eatest thereof, Genesis 2.17.
thou shall surely die, speaking of the forbidden tree of knowledge. Wherefore,
Jesus the son of Sirach says, that God himself made man from the beginning,
and left him in the hand of his own counsel. Eccl. 1^.14.17.
He set before him life and death (says he) and which he likes shall be
given him Now, when Adam (through the Serpents subtilty) slighted this divine
warning, he straightwayes became liable to death, both in respect of his body
which was dust, Genesis 3.19.
and shall return to dust again, as also of his soul; for through this sin
was he adjudged to condemnation. Romans 5.16.
And not he only, but also all his posterity, who all died in Adam, 1 Cor.
15.22.
as the Apostle teaches. So then this death (as we may say) was begot of the
devil, brought into the world by sin, borne in Paradise, the Midwife Eve,
the Nurse Adam. It has an abominable mother, that mainely does resist God: It
is lamentable of it self, in respect that it is the fruit of our
transgression. It is ignominious, because it is unto us as a brand of Gods
wrath. Yet is it not so abominable, as the mother of it, sin it self,
because it does execute Gods just judgment on us, slaying us three manner of
ways, whence it also may be termed threefold.

Death threefold.
First, it kills the body in separating the same from the spirit, which is
the life of it, for the body without the spirit is dead, says James. This
kind of death is common unto all men. It assailes us, out of our own nature,
or may be inflicted on us by others. And from this, shall all men be freed, at
the general resurrection.

Secondly, it slays the soul by withdrawing the same from God her Creator,
Psalm. 36.9.
who is the fountain of life, and from God her Redeemer, Pro. 3.22.
who is the life of our soul, and the word of life. This manner of death, is
also common unto all those that walk as yet in Vanity and Blindness of heart.
Ioh. 1.11.
It befalls us by means of our sins and trespasses. Ephesians. 4.17.
Ephesians. 2.1.
And from this in this present life, as many are freed, Col. 2.13.
as Christ has quickened together with him, and has forgiven them all their
trespasses, as the Apostle speaks. And this it is, that Saint John terms the
first resurrection.

Thirdly, it kills soul and body both together by excluding them both from the
bliss of eternal life. And of this kind of death, Christ says, If a man
keep my saying, Ioh. 8.31.
he shall never see death. Whereby the contrary is proved, to wit, that unto
them that do reject the word of God, this death shall befall, and will come
upon them by the just sentence, which at the last day God shall pronounce
against them. Nor shall any of those, whom it befalls, ever be released,
neither in this, nor in the world to come. These three sorts of dying, are all
comprehended by Christ in a speech of his, where he says, Fear not them which
kill the body, John 10.28.
but are not able to kill the soul, but fear him rather who is able to
destroy both soul and body in hell.

Death twofold.
This hell, Saint John in his Revelation, at the last sees thrown into a lake
of fire, Reu. 20.15.
and calls it the second death. And so he makes death but twofold: one
corporal in this world, the other spiritual in the other world, whose
division we also willingly embrace.

The death of the body.
That death then whereof we mean to treat, is the first or corporal death,
to wit, that which does separate the soul from the body, and is every where
usually known by the name of death. For whatsoever we speak or read of
dying, as well in the divine books of the Bible, as in humane Writers, it is
for the most part to be understood of this kind of death. This death is also
chiefly feared of men, and causes them to be troubled, makes them
fainthearted, and unconstant, and upon occasion of any evil rumor fearful.
Yea, that wise Naturalist Aristotle, was of opinion, Eth. 3.
that of all things there is nothing more terrible then death.

The advantage of them that do not fear death.
If then this death be the most terrible thing in the world, how happy is he
that is released from the fear of it? Yea verily, wherewith can the world make
him to tremble, that contemnes the very uttermost of her power? If he live in
a City infected with the plague, if he dwell in a Country flaming with war,
if he travel in danger of thieves, or if a tempest at sea overtake him, his
spirits are not daunted, nor his senses benumbed. He has the more rest, and
yet never the more danger. Yea, rather the less, because a man that is
affrighted by his very frights, may bring some sickness upon himself, and so
consequently death. But such a resolute man is certain, that come the worst,
nothing can be exacted of him, beyond his life, which he owes; and is willing
to surrender, where, and when it shall please God. If he be called of God to a
Soldier condition, he fights boldly for the defense of his Country. Yea
certainly, he that oft-times through a cowardly fear would loose the field,
by this his courageous resolution puts his enemy to flight. Thus is even
our life sometimes lengthened by this willingness to dye. Besides, if such a
one live by envious persons, or under tyrannizing Princes, he shall not need
to flatter, nor to feign against his conscience. He is not astonished, though
they threaten to slay his body: for he knows that it must dye whether they
threaten him or no. Yea, if they put him to death, he knows that they even
then bereave themselves of power to torment him any farther. And is not this a
great liberty, and worthy to be sought after? whereas on the contrary, how
miserable is that man, that is continually encumbred with fear, and that not
for some thing, that he may hope or chance to escape, but for that which
undoubtedly may, yea must sometime befall him. Truly such a one walks
throughout the course of his life in a continual flight, far worse then
death it self.

The division of the Treatise.
Well then, for the better ouercomming of this fear, we will assay for to
unmask death, and disrobe it of all terrible apparition, that so we may
behold it naked, and in his own nature. And first we shall endeavor by four
natural reasons, and then by four other observations, to demonstrate that it
has nothing in it self that should be terrible unto us. And secondly,
proceeding, we hope, likewise in a fourfold discourse manifestly to show,
that to those that know how to arm themselves against it, death is altogether
profitable, and consequently worthy to be desired.

This death then, 1 Reason.
though it be one of the twins which together by sin entered into the world,
Death is not bad.
Romans 5.12.
yet does it in no manner of ways resemble in iniquity the spiritual death
its sister. For though this death do utterly slay the body, and the other does
not kill the soul, but casts it into a miserable life, yet is it better to dye
by the first, then to live in the second. Yea, by means of this obtain we
this benefit and profit, that at the last it does free us from this toyle-some
life, to which God (since the fall of man) has here on earth condemned all
mankind. In the which, were it not that this death preuenteth it, we should
continually remain. For this cause then, as also for that God does send it, as
well to his children, whom he loves, as to his enemies, whom he hates, it
cannot in its own nature be evil. Howbeit, God does diversely address it unto
us. For the wicked he consumes in his wrath, Eccl. 45.19.
as unworthy of this temporal life: But the godly he takes away in his mercy
and peace: as esteeming them worthy of a better life. 2 Reg. 22.20.
And thus is death unto the Reprobates a passage unto eternal misery, but to
the Righteous, unto eternal life. Ioh. 5.24.
Even as a Master thrusts his disobedient servant out of doors to deliver him
unto the Iaylor, and lets forth his obedient, to set him at liberty for ever.
Yet is it one, and the same door that both pass through. Who then will term
this door, or this death evil? If death in it self be not evil, then from
it directly no evil can be expected. Let this then be the first reason,
wherefore we need not fear death.

But some may here object, that it is the occasion of this evil, that we by
means of it, loose this temporal life, which is sweet to every one. But in
sooth for us to pay that we owe, may not be termed any loss unto us. And who
knows not the condition of this life? All things which by birth have a
beginning, have an end by death. Whosoever therefore fears the end, must not
desire the beginning. Our life is like unto a candle, if we desire it to give
light in lightning, it must burn, and burning, draw, and come to an end. If
the Sun would not descend, it must not ascend. For the same course that
causes it to ascend, causes it to descend, even so does this life conduct us
to death. And who then can say this life is good, and death evil? Certainly
whatsoever is spoken against death, opposes life, which is the cause of death.
Epictetus his saying is good, Death (says he) is not frightfull, but the
fear of death, Ar. 2.^.
and to dye is not ill, but to dye shamefully.

Hence Socrates, 2 Reason. Death Natural.
when tidings was brought unto him, that the Governors of Athens had condemned
him to dye: And so has Nature them, A poph, Eras. 4.
said he, without any farther alteration. He knew well that it was no less
natural to dye, then to live. And this shall be the second reason wherefore
death is not to be feared. All flesh (we read in Ecclesiasticus) waxes old as
a garment, Eccl. 14.18.
for the decree from the beginning is, thou shall dye the death. As of the
green leaves, upon a thick tree, some fall, and some grow, so is the
generation of flesh and blood. One comes to an end, and another is borne.
Every work rotteth, and consumes away. Yea, to what end does the corn spring
up into ears, but to be reaped? And does not every low ebb make way to a
new flood? Does not every day by declining, give time unto the approaching
night? The same course of enterchange, is likewise among men, the precedent
gives place unto the future. The Elements and all things composed of them, are
subject unto mutation; yea, the heavens themselves shall be dissolved and
renewed. 2 Pet 3.12.
How then can a mortal body for ever remain? Being but a house of clay, that
is soon broke down. It comes up like a flower, and is soon cut down: Job
14.2.
Yea what is the life of this body? 1 Chronicles 29.15.
A shadow, a wind, Job 7 7.
a vapor that appears for a little, Ioh. 4.14.
and then vanishes away, says holy writ. As an arrowe once being shot,
continually flye^h to the place where it must be fixed: So man once being
borne, passes without intermission unto that end where he must rest.

Yea we our selves (if we observe it) are continually dying from the first day
of our birth. Our childhood dyed in us when we became youths. Our youthful
age when we grew to be men. The day present destroys the day past, and
every present hour, yea moment, slayes that that is newly past: yet does not
the absence of the time past hurt us, nor do we bewail it, though even now we
want time. Much less then (if death at this instant should hurry us away.)
Should the want of the present time then procure any loss to us, when as the
time of this world in no wise further can avail us. So that there is not any
natural reason why death should affright us. No reason I say, which is hence
also apparent, in that the antienter sort, do oftentimes more abhor death
then the younger, where as reason rather requires the contrary. This desire
therefore of delay in old men, springs only out of an habituated love of
these two friends, soul and body; the conjunction of the which, the longer it
lasts, the closer is their amity knit together, to wit, so long till they be
sufficiently informed, that their separation can be no loss unto them, and no
longer. Yea nature it self, directs all things to their end. The fairest
blosomes she causes freely to shed their pleasant leaves, that the following
cods may find place. These does she also cause to shrink together, and split,
that the seed may fall out of them, into the lap of the earth where it ought
to be. We our selves also have a continual natural longing toward our end,
and wish (though we do not observe it) that our days might hasten their
course. What is it else when as children long to be great? those of middle
growth to be married? the married to see their children come to age? yet is it
certain, that how much the more we obtain of th^se our wishes, we approach
the nearer to our end, and yet we wish for it. Yea farther, who knows not that
fire at the last shall bring this world to an end; yet is it so far from
terrifying us, that in sign of public and general joy, we are accustomed to
kindle extraordinary great bonfires.

We have also far more desire, to see men's decease then their birth. No body
r^nnes forth for pleasure, to see a woman in labor: you will say, the reason
is, because there is nothing therein but calamity and pain. And what is there
else, where two fighting, hurt one the other, and yet who desires not to be a
spectator? Or if any by the Magistrates command, must suffer a painful death,
what running is there to see it? And who among us would not take great delight
(if he could but securely behold it out of a window to see some-where a
battle fought in the field? The Roman Emperors who in foretimes, knew well
enough how to entice the people, and to get their favor, did on feastiuall
days present them with certain hundred paires of Fencers, which freely
sported, till that commonly, one of each couple covered his standing with his
dead body. And on this sport (for so they called it) did the people sit gazing
whole days, without show of weariness. Yea, it seems that the same was
first brought in by the Israelites, when Abner and Ioah caused their Soldiers
to sport together on this wis^. 2 Samuel 2.14.


Behold then how far man even beyond all decency, takes pleasure in seeing
the death of others, when he suffers himself to be led, by his natural
inclination. So that to dye, is not only natural, but it seems there is also
a secret desire to behold the Tragedy of it.

Thirdly, 3 Reason. Death vniuersa^l.
to whom can any thing seem terrible, that presents it self daily before his
eyes? What is more common among us, then Christnings and Burialls? Have ever
any been known of all that have been borne, not to have dyed? Old, young,
rich, poor, honest, dishonest, all ^read that path. Genesis 4.8.
Abel (it may be) was slain in his youth, Genesis ^.27.
and Methusalah lived welnigh a thousand years, yet he died also. Exodus 14.8.
The impious Egyptians were drowned in the red sea: Gods people perished in the
wilderness. Poor Lazarus died, Luke 16.22.
the rich man died also, says St. Luke. Yea, that mighty Ahasueros, Est. 1.1.
who reigned over a hundred and seven and twenty Provinces, that great
Alexander, the valiant Julius Caesar, who conquered the whole world, have all
bin conquered by this death.

All things that are created, as fire, air, water, earth, and all things
compounded and engendered of them, are able to inflict death on us. Anacreon the
Poet, was choked with a grape kernel, Pope Adrian the fourth with a fly.
Yea, in our selves does not the least disturbance of our blood, often end our
lives? Anger, heat, cold, a fright, do the same. I spare to speak of a
plague, which in the space of seven or eight months, has devoured in one
City of London, eight and thirty thousand. Or a siedge, which without and
within the Town of O oslend, has swept away more then a hundred thousand men,
in less then three years. This we see, and this we hear daily, and such like
accidents fill the greater part of leaves in all manner of Chronicles, and this
will be common as long as men shall inhabit the world. Have we not the^ great
reason so to accustom our selves to these common chances, that we may not be
affrighted by them? But what do I number men, we see whole Cities destroyed.
That mighty City of Troy now gives the Plowman leave to f^rrowe her. Holy
Jerusalem can hardly show one stone on the other. The Majesty of Rome must now
be guessed out of her Ruins. Genesis 19.23.
Yea, a fire kindled in Canaan, and burnt four Cities together, with all the
Inhabitants. Ann^ 14^1.
A flood drowned in Holland threescore and twelve Villages, with whole
households inhabi^ing the same. And shall we then for our selves be so grieved,
whereas each of us is but one silly man?

And yet above all, 4 Reason. Death is Gods will.
we have no reason to disturb our selves, in that which is Gods will and
pleasure. He has set a law to all his creatures, which they must obey. Psalm.
148.6.
Immediately after the Creation, he spoke to man, and said, Earth thou art, and
to earth thou shall return. Genesis 3.9.
Therefore well says Solomon, All living know that they shall dye. Eccl. 9.5.
When God only says, Return ye children of men: (sings Moses) they are
carried away as with a flood, Psalm. 90.3.5.
as a sleep, and as grass that is withered.

Fear not death (says the son of Sirach) for remember that this is the
sentence of the Lord over all flesh; Eccl. 41.5.
of them that go before thee, and of them that come after. And why art thou
against the pleasure of the most high? Let it suffice us to know, that it is
Gods commandment, and that he is always entirely good, 1 Samuel 15.22.
and that obedience to him is better then Sacrifice. This is the fourth reason,
why we ought not to shun death. Especially because though we never so much
shun it, yet cannot we escape it: but must some time or other (will we ^ill
we) fall into its claws. If there be then a necessity, what folly is it, to
wrestle against God and his ordinance? It must needs be easier quietly to
walk toward our end, then to suffer our selves to be dragged to it by force?
And although we see the years of ancient folks sometimes prolonged, and of
the younger sort shortened, or by misfortune (as it may seem) cut off; yet must
we not therefore wrangle with our Creator about it, as if it were contrary to
reason and nature. But say with Christ, when he thanked his father, that he
revealed to children, that which he kept secret from the wise and prudent
(which seems both to oppose nature and humane reason) Even so Father, because
it seemed good in thy sight. Luke 10.21.
That then which is pleasing unto him, who is only wise, and good, and our
father also must needs seem good unto us.

He that has brought us into this world, Self murder is unlawful.
not when it seemed good unto us, but when it pleased him, has also good
reason to take us from hence, when it shall be so pleasing unto him. We are all
his creatures, and belong unto him, and every one from him possesses his body,
as a needful and precious pledge of his love, committed on trust unto him for
a while. And although we must always be ready to restore the same, when the
owner shall please to demand it, yet in the mean while ought we not either
carelessly to loose, or unthankfully to cast away this creature of God. Although
the Stoical Philosophers do term a man's killing of himself, the opening of a
door, through which every one may freely out-runne the miseries of this life.
Lib. 3.
Yet did Aristotle better consider this matter, who shows that the murdering
of a man's self to eschew any calamity or sorrow, does not argue any valor,
but cowardice rather. If God by many trialls here, will have us trained to
fortitude; let us then not resemble peevish children, who as soon as they are
but chidden in their first School, run presently whining out of doors. We
must show our selves men, and as valiant Soldiers stand on our guard, in this
world against all dangers. As also continue constant in cold, heat, hunger,
thirst as long as it shall please our General to place us there. None of us
(says the Apostle) lives to himself, Romans 14.7.
therefore whether we live or dye, we are the Lords. If all of us then are the
Lords, it is a point of great injustice for any of us, according to our own
will, to kill himself. Which sin is therefore justly deemed the more
damnable, for that the man that murdereth himself, after the committing of the
sin, has not any time of repentance. It is our duty therefore wholly to refer
the length of our life, and did means of our death, to the will of God, that
so in both we may always with a good conscience say unto him, Math. 6.10.
Our Father, thy will be done.

Yet many do not shun death in respect of dying, but in respect of the
condition whereunto death brings them. Let us likewise therefore consider
this their future estate four manner of ways, and ponder each of them
severally.

1. Observation concerning the body.
First, some fear the future misery of their body, when it shall be separated
from the soul. We must to this purpose understand, that the dead in holy Writ,
are sometimes said to sleep, and sometimes to rest. The one seems to be in
respect of the body, the other of the soul. Job joins them together, when he
wishes that his mothers womb had bin his tomb, For now should I (says he)
have luine still, Job 3.13.
and been quiet, I should have slept, then should I have been at rest And very
fitly is the death of the body compared to sleep, for even as man, at every
finishing of the Suns compass is subject to this short sleep, even so, when
his life has compassed his course, the long sleep of death scases on him. And
as our bodies perceive no unquietness in the daily sleep, in like manner
shall they feel none, in this long and last sleep. Hence Cato said very well,
Did. Cat.
that sleep is the image of death. Apoph. Eras.
Diogenes learned of Homer, to call sleep and death brothers. If then they be
like the one to the other, we have no reason to shun the one more then the
other. And whosoever unwillingly does forgo this body may well be resembled
unto little children, that are very loath to be undressed, that they might be
had to bed by times; but being easily laid down, soon fall into a sweet
sleep. If sleep then be sweet to the body, while we sleep, and if a man
sle^ping counts no time, nor tells any hours, but those wherein he commit
himself to sleep, and those wherein her does awake, what need he to care how
much ^^n he spend in sleeping, whether they he shall sleep seven hours in
his b^d, or seven ages in his grave? And whilst he thus counes no time,
there remains for him between death and sleep no difference at all Wherefore
then should he abhor the one more then the other.

Now conc^rning the corruption of our body, it is an old saying, the corruption
of one thing, Aristotle.
is the generation of another. Our body is but changed again into the same
elements, whereof it was at first created by GOD, when by him a living breath
was blown into it. Which living soul keeps by force (as it were) these
elements together. But when the same by m^anes of the departure of the soul,
have reobteined their former freedom, then our body returns to dust whence it
was taken, Genesis 3.19.
according to Gods word and ordinance. So that whatsoever in our composition we
likewise had borrowed from the water, air, and fire, returns each to his own
element, where it is well at rest, and at home.

The Resurrection of the body.
But at the last day shall God cause the elements to surrender again the ma^ter
of our bodies, and then as many as lie in the earth and sleep; Dan. 12.6.
shall awake (says the Prophet) not only those that b^o predestined to
eternal life, but even those also which are ordained to eternal shame. And
although we cannot comprehend, how God shall find, distinguish, and reform
our bodies, yet need we not to doubt of his word. We see daily before our
eyes, many things come to pass, incredible, before they are expounded unto us.
Would it not seem impossible to any of us, to find a man in a wood, or way,
where no body ever had seen him walking. Yet put but on a Beagle, or
Blood-hound, and he by the sent only will follow, and find his Master.
Again, show the Copies of a hundred school boys, unto all the wisest
Philosophers in the world, it will be impossible for them to distinguish them.
Show them but unto their Schoolmasters, he at the first sight will know
every ones proper hand. In like manner, let a golden bowl be cast amongst a
hundred pound of melting brass, and (as it will be) equally disperced and
mingled with the same, will it not seem un o us (that have no insight in that
Art) impossible to recover the Cup again out of the whole mass. Give it but
an Alchymist, he will soon extract your gold; give that then to the Goldsmith,
and you shall have your Cup new cast, as it was before. If so be then that a
skillful man, yea a beast can bring things o pass in this world, which seem
impossible, to the greater and wiser sort of men, yea if we our selves can
transform the dust of the earth, (sand and ashes) into a goodly transparent
glassie body. We must needs expect more from God, with whom all things are
possible. Math. 19.26.
He that has created the earth of nothing, and us, of the earth, who meets
out heaven (as Esaias speaks) with his spanne, Esaias. 40.12.
within which our bodies remain, (whether they be in the earth, in the water,
or in the entrayles of beasts) will easily find, know, and re-establish all
that which he once made, and yet contains in the palm of his hand. Let us
then freely be confident, that the hour shall come, Job 5.29.
in the which all that are in the graves, shall come forth unto the
resurrection. And as death is termed a sleep, so is the resurrection, by the
forenamed Prophet, Dan. 12.2.
fitly called an awaking. Yet this resurrection will far surpass our daily
awaking out of sleep: for now we awake with a body that falls a sleep again:
but hereafter we shall rise with a body that never can dye any more; for then
(says St. Paul) the dead shall be raised incorruptible. 1 Cor. 15.51.
So that we may observe, that our bodies do profit by death: For first, we
obtain a long lasting ease; and secondly an everlasting life. Whence it
follows, that in regard of our bodies, we have no cause at all to shun
death.

2. Observation, concerning the soul.
Secondly, some fear that some damage may befall their soul by death, which
is altogether against reason. The soul is not composed of such matter, that is
subject unto the power of death. She is as a living spirit, by God breathed
into us. And as the brea^h which men blow out, though it be no essential part
of their lungs or members; yet notwithstanding, it retains a savor of that
breast that it came from: Even so does our soul retain that, from the image
of him, who infused it in the body, that it is thereby become an immortal
spirit.

For of the immortality of it never was there doubt made by any living, unless
by fools. By them (says the book of Wisdom) the souls seem to dye, Wisd.
3 2 4.
and their departure is taken for misery, but their hope it full of
immo^tality. Yea, the very souls of the un believers, are not subject to
mortality, as is manifested unto us, by the soul of the rich man in the
Gospel. Luke 16.23.
Eccl 12.7.
This body (says Solomon) shall return to the earth as it was, and the spirit
shall return to God, who gave it, to receive his sentence either of reward or
of punishment: For otherwise, if the reasonable soul perished with the body,
then should the most godly men (who commonly must refrain the pleasures of
this world, and suffer for Gods cause contempt at the hand of Reprobates) of
all men become the most miserable. 1 Cor. 15.19.
Which could neither agree with Gods Mercy toward the good, nor with his
Justice to the bad. The soul therefore is to expect hereafter a day of
account, wherein oppressors shall be reco^penced with tribulation, 2 These. 1.6.
and to them that are troubled, shall be a refreshing and rest. For indeed the
soul is the principal part of man, Deuteronomy. 10.12.
and therefore as well by Moses in the old Testament, 1 Pet. 3.20.
as by Peter in the new, it is taken for the whole man.

But being separated from this body, will it be able to do any thing? This we
may in some sort conceive in this life. The souls selfe-consisting.
For when a man's spirit is bus^ed in its own work, that is, in some kind of
meditation, we may presently perceive, that the less the bodily members, yea
his five senses are occupied, the more earnester he withdrawes himself to his
cogitations. Yea often he will shut his very eyes, that the receiving of their
objects may not disturb him. We read that Archimedes his mind was so busied
about humane Art, Val. Max. 8.7.
that the very City of Siraci^sa, where he then abode, was taken, and he
himself by the Enemy surprised, before he perceived the least rumor
thereof. And St. Paul, when the heavenly visions were revealed unto him, he
was so far from needing his bodily members thereunto, 2 Cor 12.2.
that he himself knew not whether he was in the body, or out of the body. And
long time before this, when God would teach Jacob, Genesis 18.10.
Abimelech, Solomon, Genesis 20.2.
Joseph, and others, 1 Reg 3.5.
some matters of great moment, Math. 2.13.
did he not first let their bodies fall a sleep? He knew well enough, that
thine best help would but have been a hinderance to spiritual matters. Does
not this show unto us, that the body is but to the soul as a clogge tied to
the leg. Seneca has well observed, how tedious this flesh is to our soul.
Sen.
Now (says he) does the belly ache, then the stomach, then the throat. Now to
there too much blood, anon, too little; And the soul is in this body, not as
at home in her own house, but as a trauailer in an Inn. The soul then is
created to a higher degree, to wit, to live at ease on high in her own proper
dwelling place.

Wherefore Maximus Tyrius says very well, Sermon. 23.
That which men call death, is the beginning of immortality, and the birth of a
future life: To wit, when their bodies at their appointed time fall away, and
the souls ascend to their proper place, and to their proper life: So that this
body is to the soul, as the egge-shell is to the bird, it must break through
it before it can fly into the open air. Yea Cyrus the great Monarch, could
say, that he always believed, Cic. desen.
That the soul being freed from the body, then became both purt and wise.

And although we seem unwilling to for sake this body, yet that must not breed
any ill suspicion in us. At our birth, we seemed likewise loath to re^^one out
of our mothers womb, where we were weld and warm. Yet now being borne, and
using all our members in the spations world, who of us would be willing to
creep into his mothers womb again? In like in ^nner, the soul once being
s^^d out of the cumbersome prison of the body, will not desire to return to
the same again. For God has so appointed three dwelling places for every one
of us, that a man by the two first, may in some sort conceive the third. For
as, while he is in his mothers womb, he has nothing near so much strength,
comeliness, pleasure, and time there to remain, as after his birth, he
enjoys on the face of the earth; so cannot he obtain or enjoy that here on
earth, that may in any wise be compared son glory, bliss, and continuance, to
that which he shall enjoy, when (borne again out of his own body) his soul
shall be fetled on high in the heavens.

That which the most ancient Philosopher Hermes Trismegistus well conceived,
Fr. Patr. Trismeg.
who dying, could speak thus: As yet have I lived here; as a stranger, and one
banished, now I return again in health, to my own Country: And when I
presently (being released from these fleshie bonds) shall depart from you; take
heed you do not mourn, as if I were dead: for I return to the best and
happiest City, whither all Citizens shall come by the means of death. God is
there alone the highest Prince, who will fill his Citizens with an infinite
delight; In respect whereof, this, that most account life, may rather be called
death then life. If a Heathen could speak thus, all Christians certainly must
needs (be void of understanding,) and even dead while they live, that call in
question the future life of the soul.

Yea, this happy estate of the soul, did so immeasurably possess, and
strangely transport Cleombrotus: Cicer. Tuse. 1.
after that he had read somewhat concerning the same in Plato, that to enjoy
the same, as soon as possible might be, he cast himself headlong into the
Sea. But zeal here conquered wisdom, and by misusing, good things brought
forth bad effects. Howbeit, by this example, well may we shame those, that
without reason, fear exceedingly the day of death; whereas the day of our
birth, is but the beginning of a temporal life; but our dying day, is the
beginning of an everlasting life: so that in respect of the soul, death ought
not to seem terrible unto us.

3. Observation concerning carthly pleasures.
Some also shun death, because she bereaues us of all our earthly pleasures.
They are unwilling to part with their honors, riches, delights, their
faithful wife, and dear friends, as fearing that the want of them will be
grievous unto them. But let us weigh this also in the balance of reason.

Whosoever does so esteem earthly pleasures, (which Solomon proclaimed to be
vanity of vanities) that he would rather choose to stay here, Eccl. 1.1.
and live in the same, then remove to enjoy the heavenly, may well be compared
to one, who, because sometimes he dreameth of pleasant things, would rather
sleep continually, then awake and enjoy real pleasures. For it is certain,
that as far as the real pleasures of this life, excel those that appear
unto us in our dreams; so much are the eternal future joys to be preferred,
before the temporal and present.

The wisest Astronomers persuade us, Some. Scip.
that if from the highest heaven, we should behold the Globe of the earth; it
would seem no greater unto us, then a star now does, and we should esteem
it, but as a point. And shall we in this point, yea in the very least corner of
this point, to wit, that which we inhabit, take such pleasure, and be so
fond of it, that for the love of it, we should forsake heaven, and the
pleasures thereof?

This world indeed was created for the use of man, but it is the proper
habitation of beasts. They have no other home, whether they live or dye, but
it. Whereas man is here (with Jacob) but as a Soiourner. Genesis 47.9.
Though he possessed here with David a whole Kingdom, yet with him should he
be termed but a stranger here. Psalm. 119.19.
Heaven is his Country, that is prepared for him, and the Angels to be their
eternal dwelling place. Phil. 3.10.
There is his conversation (says St. Paul.) Is it not then a direct
beastliness so to be enamoured on these terrestrial things, that for the love
of them we would rather remain in the habitation of bruit beasts, then remove
unto the habitations of Angels.

Axiochus (though he were an Heathen) could before his death be instructed by
Platoes reason, Ar. Plat.
that he did not depart out of this life unto a death, where he should be
deprived of all things, but toward that place where he should enjoy true
goods, and where he should have pleasures not mixed with this mortal body,
but pure, and such as justly deserve the name of Pleasures. And is it not
possible that this should be persuaded unto us, (who will bear the name of
true believers) to the end that we might long for it?

The forgetting of Pleasure.
But grant this earth to have as many pleasures as is possible, or as faithful
friends as we could wish. Yet shall we not miss, nor desire these things
when we are dead. Let us not think that our bodies can dye, and yet then live.
Being dead, we shall not have any members. nor eyes, nor smell, nor taste to
use these things, nor any mind to desire them. What discommodity then will it
be, to be without those things which we know not, need not, nor wish not for?
Our wife and children will then move us no more, then if we never had loved
them. Abraham himself once being dead, remembers us not, Esaias 63.1^.
and Israel knows us no more. We likewise do not know nor remember while we
sleep, our friends, nor our daily recreations; yet is there no body therefore
that shunnes his sleep, or flies from his bed. And wherefore then for that
respect, should we fear death, which bereaues us no more of all these things,
then our daily sleep is wont to do?

One Demetrius could boldly say, What desire thou, O Lord, Sen. de prou^d.
will thou have my children? beh^ld there they be: will thou have any part of
my body, take it freely; yet is it not much which I offer thee, for ere long I
shall be feign to forsake it all. This was marvelous well said of a Heathen.
But the rich and righteous Job, went farther a great deal: He showed in deed
what the other uttered in words. He could see his Oxen, his Camels, with all
his riches and estate, yea his fonnes also in diuets manners perish altogether,
and yet courageously say, The Lord has given, the Lord has taken, Job 1.21.
blessed be the name of the Lord. If then, these men could so freely forgo,
and miss their necessaries in this world, where they yet might have enjoyed
them: shall we take it grievously to be deprived of our pleasures, when we
shall be altogether unfit to use them?

Praiseworthy pleasure unnecessary.
But if any man be loath to dye, in regard of some commendable delight, that he
takes in the government of the Commonwealth, or in the orderly education of
his children, he must understand, that if GOD have called him to the same, he
also best knows how long he has need of him. And if it please him soon to
quit and release him of his good care, and to give him a penny, Math. 20.14.
as well as them that have borne the burden of the whole day, and the heat of
the Sun: what reason has he to complain? God can find others more fit, for
this his service, to whom we must give place. Elyas supposed he was left alone,
1 Reg. 19.18.
but God had left unto himself yet seven thousand in Israel, whose knees had
not bowed unto Baal.

Concerning our children, we must not think that their welfare totally depends
on the life of their parents. The parents bottle is soon empty, and Ismael
might have dyed even in his mothers presence, if GOD had not provided water for
him. It is he that opens his hand, Psalm. 145.15.
and satisfies the desire of every living thing. Parents are but the second
hand, whereby God distributeth his gifts to his children. They are the
lantern, through which his divine care shines to the children: take away the
lantern, and the light shines the clearer. When the Ostridge forgets her
eggs, Job 39.15.
the Lord does breed them. When the Raven forsakes her young ones, the Lord
feeds them. And when children loose their terrestiall father, then is it, that
he terms himself a Father of the fatherless. Psalm. 68.6.
Therefore Epictetus was bold to say, An. 3.24.
That among the sons of men there were no Orphans, but that all have a
father, who sufficiently prouides for them all continually. And in another
place. A^. 1.9.
If so be, that it be of force enough to make any body ^iue securely, and
without reproach, to be of Caesar's kindred. Will it not be sufficient, to free
us from all sorrow and fear: to have God for a Creator, for a Father, for a
Prouider? Let us put him in trust with our children; and if after our departure
we will do them good, let us live uprightly our selves, and then none shall
see our children beg their bread, Psalm. 37.25.
says David. Bring them unto Christ, Math. 19.14.
he will receive them, John 14.18.
and not leave them Orphans.

So that no delight, nor no good care of this temporal life, ought to make us
unwilling to dye, for in these respects no dying can make us to inherit sorrow.

4. Observation, concerning Judgment.
Lastly, there is another reason, wherefore the greater, yea the better part of
men do fear death, Heb. ^.27.
they know, that it is appointed for every one once to dye, and after this
comes Judgment, as it is written to the Hebrews.

And this Judgment is the thing that troubles them, not knowing whether
thereby they shall ascend to heaven, or descend to hell. Alas poor souls!
When as God by some natural disease, threatens them with death, then they
stand quaking: and if a Coronell does but promise a double pay, or a Captains
place; how many Soldiers altogether fearelesse, are ready (as we may see
daily) even to rush on death? Not that this rashness is wisdom, for Gods
Judgment deserves to be feared, yea there is nothing more terrible in heaven,
nor on earth then it is. For he thereby will separate the sheep from the
goats; preserving the sheep to all eternity, and rejecting the goats for
ever.

Death does not make the Judgment the heavier.
Yet notwithstanding, we must know, that our death need not to cause this
fear, for it neither blesses us, nor condemns us, but ever leaves us as it
finds us.

The Axe being put to the root of the tree, Math. 3.16.
does not by hewing alter any whit, the nature of the wood. 1 Reg. 5.6.
If it light on a thorne-bush, it hewes down thorns, fit to make fire
withal: If it light on a Cedar tree, it hewes down Cedar wood, fit for the
building of the Temple of the Lord. The Butcher in killing, does not change
goats into sheep, nor sheep into goats. In like manner, death neither makes
a man worse nor better, it neither hinders nor farthers him in regard of Gods
Judgment. It is but as a narrow gate (as is foretold) through the which, both
sheep and goats must pass.

Yet ought every man chiefly to fear his latter end: For which way the tree
falls, Eccl. 11.3.
there shall it lie: But we must withal understand, that it falls commonly
that way, that it used to lean. We ought then to take heed to this leaning,
as long as the tree continues standing, and to bend him that way that we
desire he should fall. For when the fall is approaching, whether it be by axe,
storm, or age, it comes commonly very suddenly. Even so it is with man: All
the days of his life he must strive, to lean that way, that he looks or
wishes to lie. For death (when it comes) strikes the blow in a moment. And man
commonly dies, as he has accustomed himself to live. And as he dies, so
shall he appear in Judgment.

Death indeed has a sting, to wit, sin, but it stings us not just at our
dying day, but rather through the whole course of our life. Therefore be not
deceived, the Apostle Paul forewarneth; Man shall reap, no^ as the sickle is,
which hastily or slowly cuts down, but as he has sowed, whether it be
corruption, Gal. 6.7.
or everlasting life. If so be then that any one fears that heavenly Judge, by
whom the dead are Judged according to their works; Apoc. 2^.1^.
what is this to death? To sow and to work, are properties of life, not of
death; and therefore ought every one to tremble at his life, not at his death.

Yet may some say it is natural (with Adam in Paradise) for a man to hide
himself so long as he can from Gods voice. It may be natural, but it is not
available. For first, we cannot by running so out-runne death, but that it
will ouer-take us. Secondly, though we could here on earth prolong our life
some forty or fifty years, yet it were but to small purpose. Though a man
live (says Syrachs son) a hundred years, Ecclus. 18.6.
it is but as a drop of water unto the sea, and a gravel stone in comparison
of the sand; so are a thousand years, to the day of eternity. Therefore Jacob
called his days of a hundred and thirty years, Genesis 47.
few and evil. Thirdly, the longer a worldling (who chiefly dreads death)
with vexation shunnes it, he does not only the longer live here in pain, but
the more also he increases the number of his sins, and consequently draws on
him the fearefuller Judgment. Yea, the burden of daily sins, does so
graciously ouer-load the consciences of godly men, that it even makes them
weary of this life, and causes them with St. Paul, to cry out, Miserable man
that I am, Romans 7.14.
who shall release me of this body of death?

But if any man shun death, and fears the Judgment, as desirous of further
time to amend his life hereafter, let such an one know, that he that deferres
his amendment, may as well grow worse, a^ better. The first world obtained of
God a hundred and twenty years toward their conversion, yet it nothing auayled
them, they were almost all drowned in the flood. Genesis 6.3.
Yea Enoch, in the mean while he walked before God, Genesis 5.24.
God took him, and he was seen no more (says Moses) lest that wickedness
should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul, says the book of
Wisdom.

So that the taking away of Enoch out of this world, was a more certain way
for him to avoid the fierceness of Gods Judgment, then if he had lived
longer in danger of being misled. Thus we see then that death cannot be any
hinderance unto us, at the day of Judgment, and that in that respect we have
no reason to fear it.

Seeing then that death is natural and general, Conclusion.
and according to the will of God, seeing that of its own nature, it can hurt
us neither in soul nor in body, nor will suffer us to long after terrestrial
things, nor shall be any hinderance unto us at the day of Judgment. We suppose
that it is hereby sufficiently demonstrated, that by nature it is not evil,
nor can any way prejudice us. Therefore ought we more to shun the fear of
death, then death it self. For (once more, and for the last, to use the words
of a Philosopher) commonly when we fear the death of the body, and by all
means shun the same, we neglect altogether the death of the soul. I
conclude therefore with the forenamed words of Christ our Savior, Fear not
those that kill the body.

How our time is ordained by God, and accomplished by man.
With which courageous speech, we would feign here conclude, but being that
death does assail us diverse manner of ways, and that it is a question ready
almost in every man's mouth, whether a man can shorten his life, or dye before
his time, we will touch this in a word or two, as an addition unto our former
discourse.

We say then with Job, Man has his appointed time, Job 14.5.
the number of his months is with God; He has set a limit, (that he must
attain) and that he must not pass. This divine decree, and immutable will, is
hid from men's eyes, yet remains constant, and comes to pass at his due time.
Sometimes publicly by the revealed hand of GOD. Whereby he prolonged Lots,
Genesis 16.19.
and his daughters lives, by withdrawing them out of the City, which he meant
to consume with fire. Sometimes by that which we call chance, though the hand
of God be in it too; For thus an arrowe shot at a uenture by a Syrian, 1 Reg.
22.34.
lighted between the joints of his harness, and shortened the life of that
King: Of whom GOD had foretold, that he should not return home alive.
Commonly through man's nature, that causes the weak in their youth to dye by
sickness, 2 Samuel 22.15.
and sustaines the life of the strong, till like a sheafe of corn they come
into the barn in their season. Job 5.26.
And likewise by diverse other means.

Sometimes God does effect his secret decree by a public prolonging, or else
a contracting of time. When he granted time to the corrupt men of the first
world (which he would bring to naught) of an hundred and twenty years: Genesis
6.3.
then this prolonging of time, brought them to the universal flood, as it was
before appointed by God. Again, if for the Elects sake the days shall be
shortened (as many do conceive) then shall this shortning bring the world to
the universal fire appointed by God. Math. 24.22.


And according to this reckoning of time, man himself may sometimes be the
means of prolonging his life. Does not God speak by Moses, and to Solomon
also: Deuteronomy. 5.23.
If you walk in my ways, so that you keep my commandment, 1 Reg 3.14.
I will give you long life. Yea, God puts the means of prolonging our life in
our own hands. This was apparent in the wilderness by the fiery Serpents,
whereas they were only saved and healed of their venomous bites, that beheld
the brazen Serpent. The King Ezekias likewise obtained by his prayers and
tears, Numb. 21.8.
that God added unto his days fifteen years. 2 Reg. 20.6.
Was not then his last day certainly preordained of God? Yea, but it was also
his immutable good pleasure, that the King should even thus entreat, and beg
of him these last fifteen years.

And now also whosoever he be, that through prayers and Physic, is released of
any sore disease, he ought not foolishly to boast, that he should have lived
out his time, that was appointed for him, though he had not used the means:
but he ought rather freely to acknowledge, that by these means his life has
been pr^serued.

Secondly, man is sometimes also occasion of the shortning his days. Hence it
is that the Kingly Prophet said, Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out
half their days. Psalm. 55.23.
And who will not say, Sam. 31.4.
that Saul and his Armor-bearer (who stabbed themselves) were an occasion of
shortning their own lives. As also that whosoever (after Moses had given
warning of it) should touch Mount Sinai, Exodus 19.4.
while the Lord was on it, should cast himself into the mouth of death? Even
as now, if any man of set purpose commits some heinous offense, liable to
punishment of death by the laws of the land, is it not his own fault that he
is bereaved of life? He can accuse no body for it, but himself. And therefore
the holy Scripture so often repeates it, His blood be upon his own head: 2 Samuel
1.16.
that is to say, the fault is his own, and it is good reason, he should
suffer for it.

Wherefore also God does not judge, or examine our works, whether they be good
or bad, by that his secret counsel which he has not revealed unto us. But
his Justice requires, that he should reward the well-doers, and punish the
offenders, according to that law, and that his good pleasure, which he has
revealed unto us all. He has manifestly commanded, Exodus 20.15.
Thou shall not kill. According to which law, he wills also, that who so slayes
a man, Deuteronomy. 27.24.25.
shall be put to death. And withal, he causes him to be accursed, that takes
reward to slay an innocent person. If God then cause the murderer to be
executed, as guilty of another man's death; who dares oppose and say, that Gods
decree of the dead man's time could suffer him to live no longer? Should we not
rather say, that he is pitifully deceased before his time? Not before that
time, which the omniscient GOD in his secret counsel, has appointed for every
one in particular, but before that time which he has ordained for humane
nature in general. Which time was before intimated unto us out of the
ninetieth Psalm. Hence that Jesus Syrachs son dares say, Ecclus. 50.24.
That envy and wrath shorten the life, and carfulness brings old age
before the time. Thus also was it told Job, that wicked men are cut down out
of time, Job 14.5.
though he himself was certain, that God had appointed man his bounds. But
it is not for us (says the Apostle) to know the times and seasons, Act. 1.7.
which the Father has put in his own power.

For indeed (to speak properly according to the nature of God) his de-vnitie
has no partition of times. We must behold one year after another, and when
we have attained to the second, the first is fled away from us. But all our
times, and all things that are done in every one of them, stand and abide
perpetually together in Gods sight. So that between his ordering, and our
accomplishing, there is (before him) no succession nor starting away of any
time. With him there is neither yesterday nor to morrow, but eternally, to day.
Yet will we not here deal further, with these mysteries, but learn of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 27.29.
That the things that are revealed, belong unto us and our children. And it is
fitting, that we submisly contain our time-accounts, within the limits of our
own apprehension.

Our Lord Jesus, when the Roman Governor told him, that he had power to
crucify him, and power to release him, Ioh. 19.11.
did not oppose him, but in his answer confessed, that this power was given him
from above.

All this then being pondered, we must judge according to Gods law, and freely
conclude, that a man may sometimes prolong or shorten his own, or another man's
life. And in that respect (following the phrase of Job, David, and the son of
Syrach) we may well say, that such a man is departed before his time.

If the our life and death be in our power, and if affections have thus their
free course: how is Gods decree then fulfilled at his appointed time? Surely
most precisely, and even by our own deeds, though oftentimes without our
knowledge, yea sometimes against our will. Whereupon the Evangelist says,
(after the rehearsal of the slaughter of the Infants at Bethleem) that then
was fulfilled that which was spoken by the Lord. Math. 2.17.
And as touching this matter, it is with us, even as with a stream that
retains his natural and free course, though by the Miller it be used to drive
his Mill, which he conveniently grindes his wheat by, which within doors he
has thereunto ordered. Yea, if any body should wickedly p^wre out a deal of
stinking water into this stream, or should altogether poison the same, this
offense deserves punishment, yet the natural descent of this durtie and
poisoned water, will grind the Millers corn, and not infect his meal with
any kind of pollution. Even so does God use and steer all our, both good and
bad actions to his preordained (though in respect of us concealed from us)
intents.

Gods providence does not excuse man's wickedness.
But does not this preordination of God then, patronize all man's misdeedes? God
forbid, Gods providence is no cloak for man's iniquity. If a Fencer should
find his skillful Scholar at his weapon, with some unskillful Clown, he
soon could perceive, that he would be the death of him. Yea, he sees the
stroke falling, as we may say, and therefore he sharply prohibits and
threatens his Scholar. Howbeit, the Scholar notwithstanding wa^ching for his
best opportunity, finds it, and gives the other his mortal wound. Shall this
make him guiltless to his Master, if he tell him, that this of necessity must
so chance, because he undoubtedly foresawe it? Yea moreover, if he vpbraide
his Master, that it was in his power to have laid him fast in fetters, and so
(if it had pleased him) to have hindered that murder, might not his Master
deservedly answer him thus? If thou had been a beast, I would have curbed
thy body with chains, but I would use thee like a man that ought to keep his
Spirit in orderly subjection, and to this intent have I used all manner of
convenient means with thee, as by entreaties, by laws, by threatenings. Have
thou neglected all those, and wilt ^hou not be ruled, unless thou be curbed as
a wild Bear? I will lay hands then on thee, and punish thee as a beast.
Should not this young Fencer be feign to confess, that he had deserved this
fierce usage? Indeed, much less can any man excuse his misdeeds, by laying
the fault on GODS providence or conuinencie.

Or say, that God out of our evil, can extract good, yet is man forbidden,
Romans 3.2.
to do evil that good may come thereof. For behold, though the envy of the
Pharisees, the betraying of Judas, and the injustice of Pilate were means of
bringing to pass (by the cruel death that they put Christ unto) man's
reconciliation in such a manner, and at such a time, Act. 4.28.
as Gods counsel had before determined it should be done. Yet does our
Savior nevertheless cry, Mar. 14.21.
Woe unto that man, by whom the Son of man is betrayed. He was not only
punished according to his deserts, but was also most miserably his own
executioner.

But was not this also Gods work? It was, and Amos asks the question, If
there shall be any evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6.
Yet this general working of God, neither makes God guilty, nor excuses man
of any evil. It is with God in some sort, as it is with a man, that thro^gh
the bellows blows the wind in the Organ pipes. He causes false strokes
(when a bungler is at the keys) as well to sound, as the musical, notes when
the skillful Organist plays. For without this wind can no bungler either
hear his own unskillfulness, or manifest it to others. Yet is not he that
blows in fault, the bungler unskillfully abuses the sound of a good Organ. In
like manner all the force, that our soul has to move it self or our members
to stir themselves, comes only from God. But the perverting of these, to the
plotting or acting of evil proceeds from our selves.

Again, Comfort out of Gods Providence.
is the knowledge then of Gods providence and predestination unprofitable unto
us? This is the only comfort of wise and godly men. For these do endeavor to
obey the revealed will of God, and with great content of mind commit the event
unto him, both of this life, and of all their actions in the same. Yea, they
proceed farther. If here they enjoy a happy life, or if they receive any kind
of benefit, or delight here on earth, they are the more thankful, because they
know it befalls them through the providence of the Almighty and rejoice in his
favor. If their life chance to be crossed or shortened any kind of way, though
they see it lights on them by the hatred of men. Yet the more willingly they
endure it, because they know it is the secret will of their God, and loving
Father, who is only good and perfectly wise. And it suffices them, that the
Lord harkeneth, Mal. 3.16.
and hears them. Hence also it comes to pass, that in all troubles of life
and death, in all blindness of mind, in all weakness of faith, in all
anguishes of spirit, they are wont to cast themselves submisly into the sweet
and fatherly arms of this divine providence, and so commit their ways unto
the Lord their God with a steadfast confidenc^, Psalm. 37.5.
that he will effect all things for their good.

THE SECOND PART CONCERNING DEATH.
WHich we intend now to produce, endeavors to show that Death is not only
not prejudicial, but even profitable unto Gods Elect; and that therefore it
ought to be welcome unto them. For unto them it is a passage to eternal
bliss. The which can only be taught and declared unto us, by the prescript of
Gods word, which now must be our only guide.

But seeing that sickness is commonly a forerunner of death, we will first
endeavor to show, how both before, and at the time of the approach thereof,
we ought to prepare our house, our body, and our soul. Secondly, we will
enquire how we may disarme Death of its sting, and so arm our selves, that it
shall not be able to hurt our souls. Thirdly, we shall seek to strengthen
the feeble in faith, and to comfort the troubled consciences in their assaults.
And lastly, we hope to make it manifest, that we ought to long for the end of
this life, by reason of sundry honors, and joys, that expect us after it.
Which four points, we purpose in order as they follow to discuss.

Sickness from God.
Whether then sickness do fasten on us, through an external bad air, or
some internal distemper of blood by the sword, or by the infection of other
men, or the sting or fury of wild beasts, by dead palsies, by miscarryings,
or unfortunate childe-birthes, or by any other means or mischance whatsoever,
we must understand that God makes these and all other, manifested means his
servants, to execute on us his secret will.

Sickness through sin.
The cause for which diseases are sent, is our sin, as it is set down at
large in the fif^ book of Moses, Deuteronomy. 28.
and is confirmed by St. Paul, where he says to the Corinthians, For this
cause, many are weak and sickly among you, 1 Cor. 11.29.
because they take the Lords supper unworthily. Yet is it not thus always. For
the blindness of that man that Christ gave sight unto, befell him not either
for his own, or his Parents sin, Ioh. 9.3.
but that the works of God should be made manifest in him: But generally, he
that sins before his Maker, must fall into the hands of the Physician (says
Ecclesiasticus. Ecclus. 3^*15.
)

But what ought we to do when sickness assaileth us? 1 Point. Preparation of
our house.
Yea, what ought we at all times to do, that Death may not be hurtful unto
us? We must prepare our selves well against the same. This did Ezechias the
King learn of that Prophet that said unto him, Es. 38.1.
Set thy house in order, for thou shall die, and not live. If so be that God
commanded him for to set his house in order, who had yet fifteen years to
live we can by no means procrastinate it without great danger, who each hour
may expect to hear with the rich man in the Gospel, Luke 12.20.
This night shall thy soul be required of thee.

Wherefore to conceive this aright, we must understand that this preparation is
threefold, to wit, of our household and earthly possessions, of our body, and
principally of our soul.

Touching our household or heirs, we are not only bound in duty to keep them
in good order, and peace while we live, but likewise so to forecast all
things, that we may leave peace with them after our departure. If any provide
not for those of his own house (says St. Paul) he is worse then an Infidel.
1. Tim. 5.8.


Therefore is every one of us bound at all times, but especially in the time of
sickness, to strive to end all quarrels, and suites with his adversaries, to
reveal all doubtful things, to his friends, and besides to make a plain and
lawful partition, of his goods by his last will. And he must not defer this,
till he wax old, Genesis 2^.1.
as Isaac did, who stayed till he was blind, and so, at the instant, could not
perceive the deceit of his wife. And much less till he be sick, or at deaths
door. For this last time will busy a sick man enough, in reconciling his
soul to God. He that first goes about to take leave of his friends, when the
ship is putting off, does oftentimes loose his vovage by it. And he that at
the last paspe is encombred with the world, stands in danger of forgetting
heaven. The woman that was careful for Sodom, when she could walk to the
place of her safety, Genesis 29.26.
remained standing by the way. And that Achitophel, 2 Samuel 17.23.
who set his house in order but just before the hour of his death, (as the
Scripture tells us) had no great leisure to think on God, appeared by his
wicked end, which is set down for our instruction and admonition.

Preparation of the body.
Touching our body, the care of the same is also committed unto us, yea
enjoined us. And leaprous Naaman teaches us, that he that is diligent in
enquiry, 1 Reg. 2.1.
may often find remedy for his disease. And in this respect Lazarus his sisters
are much to be commended, who presently sent to Christ to come and heal their
brothers corporal disease. Ioh. 11.3.
We also in our weak and languishing estate, ought to provide for our body
needful means, according as our weakness shall require, and our ability may
afford: For God has created many things to relieve our infirmity withal. This
St. Paul manifests unto us, 1 Timothy 5.23.
where he charges Timothy to use a little wine, for his stomachs sake. We must
also send for the Physician, Man. 2.17.
for the sick have need of him, as Christ witnesses. For God that inflicts
sickness often by external means, uses also to release us thereof by
external remedies. So Esaias commanded Plasters of figs to be made for King
Ezechias, Es. 38.21.
and laid upon the boil, that he might recover.

We ought then to take care of our sick members, and not to trouble or
ouer-loade our weak head too much with the molestations of trade, or worldly
affairs: Ecclus. 30.16.
For a sound body is better then much riches. Nor yet too too much to grieve
our languishing heart with discomfort, in regard of that our present
affliction, but we must do good to our selves, comfort our heart, and remove
sorrow far from us, Ecclus. 30.23.
and commend the event unto our heavenly Father.

The enduring of anguishes.
And although in the mean while our pains almost intollerably do grieve us,
yet we must know certainly that we receive them all from the hands of that
good God, who heretofore has afforded us many more joyful days of health,
and consequently we may therefore say with Job; Have we received good at the
hands of God, Job 2.10.
and shall we not receive evil. And yet this chastisement is not evil. No
chastening for the present seems to be joyous, Heb. 12.10.
but grievous. (We read to the Hebrews) Howbeit afterward, it yields the
peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby. For
whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, Heb. 12.6.
and scourges every son whom he receives.

If then we will assure our selves that we are Gods dear children, and
spiritual members of one head, that in this world with much anguish was
crucified; we must following the command and example of Christ, take up our
cross and follow him. Mar. 10.21.
He does not command us to assume that Cross which every one would choose
himself, but that which the divine Providence does make ours. And under the
same we must not heartlesly lie down, but courageously bear it, and not
bear it only, for this even the reprobates do against their wills, but take
it up as from Gods hand, and for his sake patiently endure it: But how far,
and how long must we do this? Christ commands us to follow him. Whither did he
bear his? unto his death. Even so far also must we bear ours, if it please
him so long to load us therewith. Yet by the way, let our soul cast her eye
on the Cross of Christ, and we shall behold one Simon a Cyrenean, Luke 23.26.
who carrying it a while, follows him. If so be then that our Savior (who was
God) was by a man refreshed in bearing his Cross, far more hope may we (that
are silly mortals) have, that we shall be eased in bearing our Cross. But
what was the use of this his Cross? On the same he gave up his soul into the
^ands of his heavenly Father, and finished the work of our reconciliation. And
St. Paul as a spiritual member of Christ his body, filled up in his sufferings
that which was behind of the afflictions of Christ: Col. 1.24.
So also must we hope and wish that our affliction may be unto us, as a
convenient means of presenting our bodies a living, Romans 12.1.
holy, and (through Christ) an acceptable sacrifice unto God: which we commonly
better perform in misery then in a pleasure. For in trouble do we seek God
(says Esaias. Esaias 26.16.
)

If therefore it please God for a long time to visit us with his common rods
of agues, lamenesse, the gowt, the stone, or other sore grieuances, let us not
be discomforted, much less be rebellious. Job 1.21.
Let us also with Job take heed we do not sin through impatience. Let us
be especially instructed by the blessed Thief, that could say in the midst of
his pain. Luke 23.4.
We receive the due reward of our deeds: and consider that our Savior has
suffered far greater torments in soul and body, though (as the same party
says) he himself had done nothing amiss. Hence we also in our anguish have
great reason to thank God, that it has pleased him to lay the heavy
punishments which we deserved on his Son, and by this his fatherly
chastisement to withdraw us from the world, and to call us home unto him.

Let us also freely hope, that he that has smitten us, will bind our sores up
again. Hos. 6.1.
Yea it may be that he comes now with stripes to heal us, if not the body,
yet the soul, which is more infected then the body, and requires more curing,
then our selves can conceive. Let Solomon teach us, that faithful are the
wounds of friends, Pro. 27.6.
but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful. Hence ought we more to rejoice in
this visitation of God, then if the devil came and fla^tered us with the whole
worlds prosperity. The apostle also terms that man blessed, Iam. 1.12.
that endures temptation: For (says he) when he is tried, he shall receive the
crown of life. Let this then move us to patience, and let it be our greatest
comfort in our sorest grief.

But (may some here say) though it be true indeed, The difference of the
wicked and the good in corrections.
that God chastens those children, whom he makes his own, yet it follows not
that therefore he makes all those his, whom he chasteneth, For we read, that
God does rebuke and destroy the heathens through many plagues. Psalm. 9.6.
How then shall I know whether this heavenly Shepherd strike at me with his
Crook, as at a straying Sheep, which he drives home to the Sheepe-fold, or
as at a Woolfe which he frights away.

This a man may perceive by himself, according as he receives and makes use
of the blow. Gods stroke is somewhat what like the Pills, which Physicians use
to prescribe. Unruly men turn and chewe them in their mouth, till the
bitterness of them does make them even to loath them, and at the last, with
great anguish (though no benefit) spe^ them out again. But the wiser sort
knowing that the Physician thereby does endeavor to recover their health,
swallowe them without tasting them, and let them work in their body.

Even so the Reprobates, consider in their diseases nothing, but the external
troubles, and only take care how they may be delivered from them. They are
always impatient, murmuring against God (if they look so high at least) or
against them only which God does use as instruments of their punishment.
Neither are they mollified hereby, that they may return unto their God. Though
you should bray a fool in a Mortar, Pro. 27.22.
yet will not his foolishness depart from him, says the wise King. And this
was apparen^ in the hard punished, yet still hard hearted Pharaoh. Ex^d. ^.32.
And Ahaz (says the Scripture) in his troubles trespassed yet more against the
Lord. 2 Chro. 28, 23.


But the children of God (on the contrary) receive the blow as from the hand
of their Father, and blame nothing more then their sins that deserve
punishments as the cause thereof. They know that God does all things for their
best, and so have their eyes fixed on the heavenly bliss promised to the
patient, that they thereby endure or swallow down their pains much the
easier. And therefore they rather turn themselves to their God; for the same
King says, When the wise is rebuked, he receives knowledge. Pro. 21.11.
He perceives that he must part from his misdeedes. Ion 2.2.
He cries unto the Lord with Jonah in his affliction. 2 Chro. 35.12.
He beseeches the Lord his God ( with Manasses) in his distress, and humbles
himself greatly, and his supplication is heard. I have sinned (says he) with
David, 2 Samuel 24.17.
in his pestilence, or in any other sickness. And with the same David he is
not ashamed afterward to confess, that before he was afflicted he went
astray, Psalm. 119 64.
but now he keeps GODS word.

To be short, the visitations of the Lord, be often one and the same, both to the
good and to the bad: but the event is clean contrary, and may well be
resembled unto the accursed water, which the Priest upon occasion of the
husbands jealousy, gave the women sometime to drink. This water was bitter in
the mouth unto all, but being taken (says the Scripture) the defiled did swell
of it, Number. 5.27.28.
but it could not hurt those that were clean. Yea, the chaste ones gave their
husbands occasion by this trial, to love them better then before. We read in
one selfsame Chapter, Act. 12.7. and 23
that the Angel of the Lord smote Peter, and the Angel of the Lord smote
Herod. But the one was thereby raised up, and delivered from death, and the
other gave up the ghost. Even so are the better sort by the hand of God raised
up out of the sleep of sin to be delivered from eternal death, and the
wicked are consumed by their endless grudgings, even till their dying day.

This is then the difference, Gods enemies endure the cross indeed, but reap
no benefit thereby, but pain and damage, whereas Gods friends take their
cross from him, and so bear it, that these bodily pains turn to their good.
Rom 8.28.


Now concerning the soul, though we speak of it last, Preparation of the
soul.
yet ought we in our sickness first to begin with it, following the example of
the aforementioned King. He in his weakness did not first consult with the
Physicians, but turned his face from the people to the wall, Esa. 38.2.
and there between God and himself began to pray, and to rip up his offenses,
and to bewail them. And after that he committed him to be cured. David also
first prays, Deliver me from my transgressions, Psalm. 39 8.11.
and afterward remove thy stroke away from me. This order does the son of
Syrach fitly set before us, in four parts. Pray unto the Lord. Cease to sin,
Ecclus. 38.9 12.
Make a fat offering, and then give place to the Physician. St. James the
Apostle says also, Iam. 5.16.
Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another that you may be
healed. We ought therefore in the first place, (yea before we can offer unto
God with a good conscience, the calves of our lips, (as Christ by St. Matthew
teaches us) to endeavor to be reconciled to our brother who has ought
against us. Math. 5.24.
And to be ready to forgive our neighbors all offenses committed against us.
Secondly, we must also openly confess our manifold transgressions, as
occasions of all sicknesses, and say with Paul, Romans 7.15.
What I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I. And with David, we
must pray unto God continually, Psalm. 38.
and promise with Ezechias uprightness of life. Esaias 38.10.
Concerning the sacrifice, David confirms it, saying, Blessed is he that
considers the poor, Psalm. 41.1.
the Lord will deliver him in the day of trouble. This must the soul ruminate,
when man is surprised with sickness. Moses knew well enough how much it
behooued well to prepare the soul against death, when he said, So teach us to
number our days, Psalm. 90.12.
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom: That he must dye, and that his
days were numerable, nature taught him, but considerately to meditate on
death, or day by day even numbering them; to prepare himself against the same,
that God must teach him, of whom he requested it by prayer.

Our Lord Jesus Christ knowing how needful this meditation would be unto us,
Necessity of speedy repentance.
and considering that many times we are so suddenly snatched out of this world,
that we have no time once to think on ought, cease not to admonish us, that
we should be continually busied hereabout. Teaching us sometime by
fore-warning us, as where he says, Be ye ready, Math. 24.44.
for in such an hour as you think not, the son of man comes. Sometimes by
way of instruction, Be ye your selves (says he) like unto them that wait
for their Lord, Luke 12.36.
that when he comes and knocks, ye may open unto him immediately. And
sometimes by similitudes, as that of the five foolish Virgins, Math. 25.10.
that never went about to fu^nish their Lamps with oil, before they heard
that the Bridegroom was coming. And finally, by fearful examples of the
days of Noah and Lot; In which (says the Scripture) men were so busied with
eating and drinking, Luke 17.26.28.
marrying of wives, buying and selling, planting and building, that they did
not think on their end, until that first the flood of water; and after that,
the fire rained down from heaven, and destroyed them all. Which admonitions,
though they have an eye to the sudden coming of the day of Judgment, yet
seeing that the temporal death brings us to that estate, wherein the Judge
at the last day shall find and confirm us; we are warned by Christ, to be so
well prepared against the assault of this death, that we through the same may
not pass into the second, and everlasting death.

But if so be that those which spent their time in buying and selling, and
other lawful affairs, were so consumed in GODS wrath: what may others expect,
that spend even their whole time in things utterly unlawful? If those missed
the right way, how shall these enter into that gate which leads unto eternal
life; which is so straight, Math. 7.13.
that few there be that find it. Or does a man in his extremity, think to
find some precious thing, which in his strong health he never looked after?
Does he think after his departure, Royally to be entertained by that King,
with whom in his life time he never sought to be acquainted? This is somewhat
too late, and chances very seldom. Let no man therefore continue in his
impiety, in hope to convert himself to God on his deathbed. This presumption
is the most dangerous poison that the devil can minister to any man. We must
learn out of the holy Scripture, that he that all his lifetime has been a
thorne-Bush or a Thistle, does not usually afterward bring forth Figs or
Grapes. And that the tree that brings not forth good fruits, Math. 7.16.19.
is hewn down, and cast into the fire.

Therefore let us with Jesus, Syrachs son, while we are yet young, ere ever
we go astray, Ecclus. 51.13.
desire wisdom openly in our prayers. Humble thy self (says he also) before
thou be sick, and in the time of sins show repentance. Let nothing hinder
thee to pay thy vows in due time, and defer not until death to be
justified. Before thou prayest, Ecclus. 18.21. etc.
prepare thy self, and be not as one that tempts the Lord.

For it will not avail a man afterward with Balaam, to wish to dye the death
of the Righteous; Number. 25.10.
who has not before with Jacob endeavored to lead the life of the righteous.
Therefore Isaiah warnes us, and says, Seek you the Lord while he may be
found. Isaiah 55.6.
For that words be but wind, is here a true proverb. Not every one (says the
Judge himself) that says unto me, Math. 7.21.
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that does the
will of my Father which is in heaven. Wherefore it seems we may (sooner in
Christian charity) fear the end of a careless man, that only calls and
prays to GOD at his last hour, then of a godly man, who in his extremity (by
reason of a burning Fever) dies in a raging frenzy.

But is there no hope then of a sinful man's repentance toward the last period
of his life? Yes certainly, and that out of the very words of the aforementioned
Judge. He does not shut out all those that have not done his Fathers will, as
if it were too late to do it at the last hour: but those only which do not
the will of the Father which is in heaven, pointing as with his gracious finger
to this, that it is never too late to do his Fathers will. And this is his
will, that the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts,
Isaiah. 55.7.
and that he return unto the Lord. That is, that by earnest repentance, he
continually strive to attain unto sincere conversion, which consists in an
unfeigned loathing of our deparau^d nature, and hatred of all our
transgressions, and evil lusts. And withal, an earnest longing to be by
Christ our only Savior received, sanctified, and justified. And lastly, to
have a constant purpose, to use all means throughout the whole course of our
life (though it yet should last-an hundred years) to observe all occasions for
keeping Gods commandments. And that not for fear of that punishment, which
shall befall all transgressors, but out of that mere love and affection,
which like good children we bear unto our heavenly Father. And then (says
the Prophet) Will God be merciful unto us, Ier. 1^.^.
for with him is much forgiveness.

We must then follow the example of the valiant Champions, and wrastlers in
old time, who for many days together before hand, caused their bodies to be
rubbed, anointed, and exercised, yea tied themselves to a certain strict
course of diet, and then they presented themselves (so prepared) in the famous
Olympian games, to fight or wrestle in open view for honor. In like manner
must we long before prepare our souls courageously to fight with Death at the
appointed time, that when it assail us, it may not hurt us.

2 Point. The arms or sting of death.
But how may we secure our selves against it? By two manner of means. We must
disarme it, and arm our selves. We must diligently enquire wherewithal it can
hurt us, and having found it out, seek to bereave it thereof.

The Philistims were subtle enough, to give Sampson no rest, till they had
understood wherein his great strength consisted. As soon as his Philistine
darling heard, that it consisted in his hair, she presently played the Barber,
and cut it off. Then was Sampson weak as another man, says the Scripture.
Judge. 16.17.
Now wherein the power of Death consists, the Apostle has showed to us, to
wit, in the sting, this is the dart wherewithal Death peirceth our souls. 1
Cor. 15.56.
And this sting (faith he) are our sins. Whosoever then will deal prudently
and prouidently, must endeavor to bereave Death of this sting. Not when it
comes to struggle with him, and when he lies on his deathbed, for then it
stingeth too deep. But he must do this before it comes to assail him.

The ancient Poets feigned, Faith in Christ.
that Pallas the Goddess of wisdom, bore a shield, that turned all those
that gazed on it into stone. But we know, that the holy Apostle Paul, who was
a servant of the Son of God (the true wisdom of his heavenly Father) has
showed us the true shield, Ephesians. 6.16.
wherewith we may be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked; to
wit, in trusting in Jesus Christ. This faith then is termed, and is really the
right shield, against, which the force of the hellish sting of death shall not
be able to prevail, though it assail us with as much fury as may be: For
(to commence at the beginning) when the first man through infidelity, did
transgress his Creators ordinance, he (with all his future Progeny) lost the
right of being termed the Son of God. And so cast himself, and us all (who
resemble him in daily disobedience) out of Gods mercy into his eternal wrath.
Wherein we should also have remained for ever, had not the divine wisdom
otherwise provided. This alone has devised a remedy, and has ordained that
the eternal Son of God (as the fittest person in Trinity) to restore man
unto his lost title of a Son) should assume humane nature. And this not only
that therein he might yield perfect obedience unto God, but for this end
chiefly, that he might suffer that wrath and punishment which man by sin had
deserved, and so satisfy Gods Justice for man's transgressions. All which in
due time being fulfilled, Ioh. 19 36.
so many are now still acquitted before God as come to believe in him. For he
that believes in him, is not condemned; Ioh. 3.18.
but he that believes not, is condemned already. This Son of God, as a Lamb
without blemish, and without spot has offered up his precious blood unto God
for us, 1 Pet. 1.19.
says St. Peter. And thereby takes he away the sin of the world, Ioh. 1.29.
says St. John, and consequently the sting of death; 2 Timothy 1.10.
Yea death it self is abolished by his appearanee, says St. Paul.

Whosoever then is thus armed with faith in his Savior Christ, how ca^ death
or its sting hurt him? He that believes on the Son, 1 Ioh 3.36.
has everlasting life, as St. John witnesses. Death indeed does retain its
force to kill our natural flesh with a dart, but this Shield or Buckler so
defends our soul, that this dart cannot touch it. Now what a comfort is this
for a dying man? that now we may freely use the words of the Apostle, O Death
where is thy sting? 1 Cor. 15.55.57
O Grave where is thy victory? But thanks be to God which gives us the
victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

But many a one finds himself 3 Point.
but faint in faith. Confirmation of weak faith.
How shall I know certainly, thinks he, whether I be one of those, which God
has called and chosen to enjoy his gracious promises, or of those tha^ have
nothing to do wi^h them? A man might indeed here answer, the Lord knows
his. 2 Timothy 2.29.
And he that (as St. Paul farther ^eacheth) does certainly feel the testimony
of the holy Ghost within him, Romans 8.15.
may undoubtedly assure himself of his salvation. This is certain, and he
that feels this, can have not better in^^ruction. Yet will we endeavor to set
these in the way to find true Christian comfort, who through weakness of
faith, do not feel such a testimony in their sickness.

First then the Savior of the world, gives us this certain token, He that
belceueth and is baptized, shall be saved: Mar. 16.^6.
but he that believes not, shall be damned. Whosoever therefore finds
himself to have been baptized in the name of God; and besides, has often
been present at public prayers, and preaching of the word of God, and been
invited to the holy Sacrament: may already hope, that he thereby is called to
the vni^ersall, or at l^a^t to the visible Church of Christ. And whosoever does
further perceive in his heart, that Gods spirit has called him to his Church,
and does believe that Christ his blood is sufficient for the wiping out of all
his sins, yea does conceiu^ that GOD himself does proffer him his
redemption, if only he can but embrace it with steadfast faith; the same
(though he cannot yet undoubtedly believe it) must know that God hereby sets
salvation before his eyes.

And if we have further found a continual inclination in our selves to hear
the word of God, to observe his commandments: and (as we said before) to a
true repentance of our negligence, we may safely believe, that we are in the
way which leads to Christ his sheepe-fold. For he says himself, My sheep
hear my voice, Ioh. 10.27.
and I know them, and they follow me. Yea, if we endeavor to employ our selves
in all good works, to be obedient to Christ, we have already some fruits of
faith. And if we have the fruits, we must also have the root, though yet
covered with earth, or with our earthly thoughts. For we must assure our
souls, that the good Lord will, 2 Chro. 30.19.
pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God. As King Hezekiah
prayed for those Israelites, that did eat the passover without due
purification, according to the Law. As also St. Paul comforts and encourages
the Corinthians, saying, If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted
according to that a man has, 2 Cor. 8.12.
and not according to that he has not.

Besides, if we feel in our conscience that God loves us, we may certainly
conclude out of St. John's words, that we are of those, unto whom God has sent
his Son to be a propitiation for our sins. 1 Ioh. 4.10.


And if besides we find that we love God, we may also (upon St. Paul's word)
expect the things which God has prepared for them that love him. 2. Cor. 2.9.
And what is this but a token of our faith? We may then, yea must still cry
out, and pray with the child's father in the Gospel: M^r. 9.24.
Lord I believe, help thou mine unbelief. Assuredly trusting, that as Jesus
restored that man's Child to his corporal health, he will also work upon our
soul that cure that shall be effectual, to procur the salvation of it.

And if ever we have felt in our prayers, (especially being at deaths door)
that the Spirit did bear witness with our spirit, Romans 8.16.
that we were the children of God. We may freely be confident, that this God
his mercy remains constant toward us. For he still continues the same
toward them that do not willingly for, sake him. Yea, though our very
conscience do witness against us, that with desire and greediness, we have
since that time committed many sins: yet is it no small comfort if she can
also witness unto us, that after the committing thereof, we have often cast
our selves down at Gods feet, with true sorrow and repetance. For this is
indeed the fault and condition of Gods children. Nor can this true repentance
proceed from any but from God, who is the fountain of all good. If then he
send us true repentance, he endeauours our Salvation; if he endeavor it, he
will perform it. God in his word bids us, Comfort the feeble minded, 1 These.
5.14.15
we may therefore well believe, that he himself will do it. Let us then (as
it follows there) pray without ceasing, 1 Pet. 1.13.
and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto us, at the
Revelation of Jesus Christ.

Comfort against the temptation of the devil.
But if any man there be that cannot perceive or feel in his soul a steadfast
hope, that his prayer is heard of GOD, but finds himself deprest by means of
his riotous and unruly life, he must not therefore give himself over to
despair. It is true indeed, that Satan our enemy, (who assaults even the
holiest minded men often in their extreamitie) has sufficient matter to torment
this miserable creature withal. But should thou mark iniquities, Psalm.
130.3.
O Lord; who shall stand? But there is forgiveness with thee. The Lordour God
is a merciful God. If we be sinners, Deuteronomy. 4.31.
we are those that Christ came to redeem. For he came not to call the
righteous, Math. 9.12. and 13.
but sinners to repentance, for (says he) the whole need not the Physician,
but they that are sick. Let us only earnestly run after him, Call on him by
faith, as did the sick, the blind, the lame (as St. Matthew has distinctly set
down) and we may yet be cured with them. Yea rather before them, for our
Savior came into the world to heal the sickness of the soul, and did but
heal their bodily diseases, thereby to move them, to give him leave to take
their souls in hand. And by these external things he would have us to feel
his infinite love. Salomons words indeed befit him well, who tells us that
Lone covers all sins. Pro. 10.12.
Sin indeed is so strong, that it did hinder man from entering into heaven,
into which as yet he never had set foot. But the love of God was of
farregreater might, that caused him to send his only begotten Son into the
world out of heaven, 1 Ioh. 4.9.
where he was in all glory, and that to this end, that even the feeblest might
live through him. This incomprehensible love St. Paul terms, the riches of
his grace. Ephesians. 1.7.
These riches then, and this infinite treasure of his love, is the true wedding
grament, Mat. 22.12.
that will hide all our sores at the wedding of the King, and will richly
adorn all wretched and forlorn souls, notwithstanding any estate of poverty
or misery, that their sin ha^h brought them to, if only they can sit it unto
themselves by faith.

Therefore, if the devil assail us, Iam. 4.7.
let us resist him (says the Apostle) and he will flee from us. If he do
object and testify against us, that we have not with Mary's zeal chosen the
better part. Let us constantly hope that nevertheless, Ioh. 11.5.
serving Christ with Marthas uprightness, we may notwithstanding be beloved
of him. If he shall suggest unto us, that we must not think to see that
unspeakable joy of the third heaven, which was showed Paul, to that Elect
vessel of God, Luke 23.46.
yet let us constantly trust, that we shall enjoy that bliss in Paradise,
which was granted to the Thief on the Cross. If he tempt us with the text of
Holy writ, that GOD does not hear the prayers of sinners: Mich. 3.4.
let us answer him with Holy writ again: Math. 4.10.
Depart from me Satan. God swears by himself, Ezech. 33.11.
that he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked man
turn from his way, and live: yea, there is more joy in heaven over one sinner
that repents, Luke 15.7.
then over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance. Therefore
let us turn our hearts to God, Romans 8.25.
hope for that we see not, and expect it with patience. Do we not hear from
Christ himself that Iamentable voice, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Luke 23.48.
Yet presently after that, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit.

We must also know that this our trembling for fear of Gods wrath, is a token
that we do not with worldlings carelessly neglect our sins, or seek to hide
them from Gods sight. But that we feel them with David, and do confess them
unto him, and therefore may hope with him, that the Lord forgiueth us our
transgressions. Psalm. 32.5.
We have with the Prodigal served the world and the devil: but now in our
poverty and agony we cry out with him: Father I have sinned against heaven
and in thy sight, Luke 15.20.21.
and am no more worthy to be called thy Son: wherefore we must expect that
our heavenly Father will be moved with compassion, and receive us with a kiss.
This straying Prodigal child, when he so spoke, knew not whether his Father
would receive him into favor again or not, yet he found good success with
it. Wherefore let us (for whose instruction and encouragement this is recorded)
assuredly hope, that if we do the like, God will likewise receive us. For to
have compassion on his children, is the true nature of a father, which that we
may assure our selves to find in God, our Lord Jesus Christ (to our great
comfort) puts this name in our mouth, in the very beginning of our prayers. Let
us then cry out without ceasing, Math. 6.9.
Our Father forgive us our trespasses: deliver us from evil, and we
doubtless in him shall find the right affection and effects of a Father.

Let us observe also the two Disciples, that had in a manner lost both faith
and hope, and (travailing toward Emaus) were troubled in their souls
concerning the death of Jesus Christ. who they had hoped (as they complained)
should have delivered Israel, Luke 24.21.
but now seemed to have lost that hope. And out of the abundance of their
heart, their mouth uttered these things unto a stranger in the field. Now what
befell them? Did the Lord reject them, because they told him this, even to his
face? No: he took pity rather on their infidelity, and was with them ere
they thought on him. And so let us hope beyond hope, that our Redeemer
mercifully now stands and beholds our perplexity, though we see him not. And
that he in due time, will very kindly and assuredly let us feel his compassion
and aid.

Yea if God sent the Prophet Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.7.
to that King that privately by adultery and murder, had sinned against him,
and if he prepared a crowing Cock, Math. 26.75.
for that Apostle that publicly had denied him, and beheld them both with the
eye of his compassion, before ever they thoroughly perceived their own sins, or
ever thought of repentance. O may not we then believe that he will have mercy
on us, who have our heart harder pressed down by our sins, then if a millstone
lay on it, and lie now sighing, to be releast? Yea, we must believe it, when
the Savior of the world himself says it. Behold, he is so merciful unto
those, whose hearts are sore oppressed with the burden of their sins, that he
does not stay till they find him. But he seeks them, and cries out himself
with a loud voice, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden.
Math. 11.28.
To what end? to oppress them, no certainly. I will give you rest, says he:
Let a man observe this well, and ruminate privately on it, and his heart shall
be forced, to power out secretly before the Lord either these or the like words.

A comfortable meditation.
O Lord Jesus, Almighty God the only Savior of the world, do thou call me?
will thou refresh me? Thou, thy self, in whose power only the saving and
condemning of my soul does consist? Do thou promise me this, who art truth
it self? and that because I find my self laden wi^h many sins? O Lord,
what, or whom need I then to fear? I come, I come, I am he whom thou call.
Behold, I come bur^hened and so ouer-laden wi^h all my sins, that I cannot
appear before thee standing upright, but fall down at thy foot. Thou only O
Lord refresh, refresh me: yea Lord, I am confident that thou will. Thy word is
thy deed: yea thou do it already, and I feel it. My soul is relieved and
refreshed with a rest, with a peace that surpasses all the worlds treasure.
And thy Spirit bears witness with my Spirit, Romans 8.16.
even in this my greatest affliction, that I am one of thy children. Therefore
do I most thankfully say; Blessed be thy name for ever and ever.

He that meditates hereon, 4 Point. A longing for death.
and (as he ought) comforts himself with the same, may not he freely say with
Simon, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace: Luke 2.29.
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation: May he not sing with David, Psalm. 27.
The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear, the Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? And so consequently proceed
to the end of that comfortable Psalm, applying the same to himself against
all his Spiritual temptations. May he not with St. Paul be assured, that
neither death, nor life, Romans 8.38.
nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate
him from the love of GOD, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Yea he will
rejoice, that he may follow his Lord, even at the heels passing through the
same door of death, which he went through before him. And will willingly,
setting light by this life, and all what so ever he has in the world, cry
out with Solomon, Eccles. 7.1.
the day of death is better then the day of birth, because it is a means to
bring him unto an inexpressible joy, which will then especially quicken his
heart, when he shall consider what entertainment he is then and there to
expect.

The place of the soul.
If now we enquire of the place of the blessed souls, we know that heaven is
made over to them by promise. Not the air that the clouds and fowls houer
in, Math. 5.3.4. and 26.26.
which sometimes is called heaven. This is too narrow and subject to daily
corruption: nor that heaven neither or firmament that the stars glister in,
though it be somewhat more spacious and more permanent. For even this also at
the last day shall be shaken, and the stars shall fall down. Math. 24.29.
It is a far other thing that God has provided for his Elect. It is the
third heaven which that chosen vessel Paul was caught up into. 2 Cor. 12.2.
It is the uppermost heaven compassing all the heavens, Ephesians. 4.10.
whither Christ is ascended, Ioh. 14.2.
where is room enough for many mansions. Ioh. 14.3.
This is steadfast and permanent unto all eternity. Wis. 3.1.
Hither Christ has promised to take all his members unto him, Luke 23.43.
that they may be where he is. There be the righteous souls in the hand of
God. There is the penitent Thief in Paradise. There is Lazarus in Abraham's
bosom. Luke 16.23.
There St. John saw them that were marked, Revel. 7.9.
before the Throne and before the Lamb. One only place, set forth by diverse
names. What a glorious comfort then is this for us, that our soul, as soon as
she forsakes this earth, shall be received into so stately an habitation?

Concerning a mid way mansion, or fiery prison, which some have endeavored to
settle, by the way, there to purge and purify the blessed souls, some
certain years before their ascension into heaven, we find nothing at all in
holy writ thereof set down, nor yet declared by the examples of any Saints
deceased. For even as in this life, there are but two kinds of conuersations
set before us, to walk in light or darkness, 1 Ioh. 1. (...).
but two ways through the narrow, or the wide gate, so we read in the future
life, but of two hands of God, Math. 7.13.
the right and the left, but of two kind of men comprehended under the name of
sheep and goats; Math. 25.32.
and by consequence then, but of two places heaven and hell. Therefore when we
are dying, let us fix firmly the eyes of says, on the blood of Jesus Christ,
1 Ioh. 1.7.
which (as his beloved Disciple speaks) cleanses us from all sins, and we
shall directly ascend to that heaven, Act. 7.56.
which the first Martyr Stephen, even when he was yet on earth, saw opened
unto him.

On what manner our souls get thither, we may observe by the forenamed
Lazarus, Luke 16.22.
who was carried thither by the ministry of Angels. Reu. 7.10.
To St. John it is also revealed what they do there, to wit, that they praise
God, he says farther, Reu. 14.13.
that they rest from their labors, that is as well from the pains and
diseases of the body, which sickness did here bring on them, and the troubles
wherewith the wicked did oppress them, as from the labor and continual
warfare, which they had against their own concupiscences. Concerning which,
the book of Wisdom says very well, Sap. 9.3.
that they are at peace. And principally at continual peace with God, and
exempted from that trouble of mind, whereby they feared to fall into Gods
wrath. And are not infinitely said to rest under an Altar, in respect of Christ
his only sacrifice, Reu. 6.9.
whereby our souls are reconciled unto God.

Ornaments of heaven.
As for the glory of this heavenly place, no man can conceive it. Yet whosoever
does but observe how glorious, how comely God has created this world, which is
but a temporal habitation as well of the wicked as of the good, and what
diversity of delights he has prepared for all kind of men in the same, he may
in some sort guess, how lovely, how comely, how full of pleasure that place
must needs be, which he has prepared to be an habitation for his children,
whom he has elected to eternal bliss, before the foundation of the world.
Saint John when he feign would reveal some part thereof unto us, writes that
he saw a City, Reu. 21.
A holy Jerusalem of pure gold, whose walls were of Jasper stone, and her
foundations of most precious stone, things that we here chiefly esteem of,
and yet not to be gotten in such quantity, that thereof we may build the
least part of a City. And yet all this is nothing in respect of the
incomprehensible excellency of this heavenly mansion.

Divine Paul had a taste of this heavenly joy, but he could not find any
terms wherewith to express the same. But could only say, 1 Cor. 2.9.
Eye has not seen, ear has not heard, neither have there entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him. And to
receive and enjoy this glory, there is no other way, but by death. Death only
fetches us, and brings us thither.

Now as a young Prince living some-where in banishment, would exceedingly
rejoice to see a messenger, sent by the King his father to fetch him home, and
to set him on his Throne. Even so ought a child of God, to rejoice when God
sends unto him his Messenger Death, to fetch him unto his eternal kingdom.
Yea, so much the more then such a Prince, by how much the more the Kingdom of
heaven does excel all the Kingdoms of the world: For it is better to be one
day in the Palace of heaven (says David) then elsewhere a thousand. Psalm
84.11.


Privilege of the life to come.
For what have we on the face of the earth, that should make us desire to stay
here? If we give over this life, which is but temporal, and full of misery
and trouble, we obtain a life on high, where there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, nor crying, Reu. 21.4.
neither shall there be any more pain. If here we depart from our earthly
parents, we are entertained there of our heavenly Father. Math. 5.45.
If here we leave our chiefest friends and kindred, we meet there with our
brethren in Christ, clothed in long white garments. Reu. 7.9.
If here we loose our Gardens and fair Palaces, we find our selves there
in Paradise, where the tree of life is continually growing. If here we remove
out of a famous City, we become there Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem.
Heb. 12.22.
Or if here we forgo our Princely honors, there we are named children of the
most high. Luke 6.35.
Yea, if here we forsake even an earthly Kingdom, we possess there a heavenly
Kingdom, Luke 1.33.
whereof there shall be no end.

The seeing of God.
When further we proceed and consider, that we are promised there to see God,
and that we shall see him as he is, Math. 5.8.
how can we but hope to see the holy Trinity with full satisfaction? 1 Ioh. 3
2.
We shall see him in whose presence is the fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.11.
and who shall say then unto us, Enter into thy masters joy, Math. 25.21.
O what an inexpressible joy will this be? What can our minds imagine, or
hearts wish more!

If the Queen of Seba cried out, that those men were happy which stood before
Solomon to hear his wisdom; 1 Reg. 10.8.
how happy will those be, that shall stand before Jesus, who is the wisdom of
his heavenly Father? And if John the Baptist leaped for very joy at the
presence of Christ, Luke 1.44.
while he was yet in his mothers womb: And Simeon was satisfied when he had
but seen the child in the Temple, Luke 2.30.
what joy and satiety will those receive, that shall see him sit at the right
hand of his Father, in eternal glory?

The three Apostles of our Lord, when they had but a very small resemblance
thereof in that short transfiguration of Christ, how soon did they forget and
set light by the world, with all her appurtenances, and cried out, Master it is
good for us to be here, Luke 9.33.
and let us here build us tabernacles: What do those Apostles now feel? Or
what do they say now, with all those that perfectly behold his glory, and
dwell in it?

The honor of our souls.
When we farther yet consider, that we our selves shall obtain there the
Crown of glory, 1 Pet. 5.4.
that fades not away, as Peter speaks: And that Gods children (being by
Christ justified shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their
Father, Math. ^3.43.
and be as the Angels of God in heaven; Math. 22.^0.
yea, are there to reign for ever and ever: Reu. 22.5.
What heart, what soul can choose, but long exceedingly to forgo this world,
and to attain to the presence of God? David cries out, As the Heart pants
after the water brooks, Psalm. 42.1.
so pants my soul after thee, O God. My soul thirsts for God, for the
living God, when shall I come and appear before God? Now that which he longed
for, every true believer, after this life once ended, shall for ever enjoy.

The meeting of the body and s^ule together.
But whosoever farther will cast his eyes, on the general resurrection of the
dead may find yet farther matter of joy and comfort. Every one may in some
sort conceive, how unspeakably these two old friends soul and body will
rejoice, when (after many ages) they shall meet again, and perceive that each
of them is in a happy estate. 1 Cor. 15.45.
But chiefly, when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this
mortal shall have put on immortality, and be partaker with the soul of
heavenly delight. Yea the Lord Jesus, shall change our vile body, that it may
be fashioned like unto his glorious body. Phil. 3.21.
What is there in heaven, or in earth more excellent? or what can be imagined
that deserves rather to be desired?

Yea, with our corporal eyes, we shall behold Christ. This it was, even this
(I say) was it wherewith Job comforted himself in his long continued misery,
and which did relieve him in his greatest agony. I know, (says he) that my
Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon earth: and
though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see
God, Job 19.26.
who^ I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold and not another.

Stephen the Martyr had assurance hereof in this life, for he being full of
the holy Ghost (says the Scripture) looked up steadfastly into heaven, Acts
7.55.
and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God.

With this first Martyr of Christ, let us then continually cast our hearts and
eyes of faith toward heaven, and fix them wholly on Christ, crying out with
him, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Yea, when we can neither cry, nor speak
any more, Let us all with Hanna, 1 Samuel 1.15.
power out our souls before him, And the Spirit will make intercession for us,
Romans 8.26.
with groaning which cannot be uttered, and we doubtless with the aforesaid
Stephen shall see heaven open, and when our time comes with him, dye in the
Lord.

Yet if it shall please God, after all our good preparation, An appendix.
to lift us, (as he did the forementioned Ezechias) from our b^d again, and
to restore us to health, let us take good heed that we do not neglect
likewise with the same King, Es. 38.20.
to sing songs in the house of the Lord all the days of our life, that is,
evermore to be thankful unto him, to serve him, and to praise him. So the
diseased person whom Jesus had healed at Jerusalem, was presently found in the
Temple. Ioh. 5.14.
The Prophet David teaches us in his hundred and sixteenth Psalm, that being
released, we should call upon him as long as we live, walk before him, Psalm.
116.
and pay our vows unto him in the presence of all his people* which Psalm
throughout ought then to be our meditation, and our practice. For we do
neglect this, and forgetting God and all godliness, return again to our
evil ways, we must expect some greater punishment. This the Lord
demonstrates unto us in his words to the forenamed diseased person. To whom
(because we should not think it sufficient sometimes to appear in the
Temple) he said, Sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee. That is, worse
then the sickness of eight and thirty years continuance, which he had
endured before. Behold how sorely he is threatened, that after his release,
ungratefully rushes again into his former sin. God grant us a better heart.

Final conclusion.
To conclude all that has been said, as we in the first part have showed,
that the death of the body is not hurtful to man, and in that respect ought
not to be fearful: so we suppose, that in this second part we have declared
by what means we may make the same to be very profitable unto us, and have
showed in the first place, how that we must settle our house by a decent
ordering of our goods, that we ought to inure our body to a patient suffering
of pain, and that we must prepare our souls, by a timely preparation to meet
death courageously. After that, we have taught how we ought to disarme it, and
so to strengthen our selves (through Christian faith) that its sting may not
prick our soul, and bring it to the second death. And withal, we have
endeavored to establish the wavering soul in this faith, and to relieve the
troubled consciences with comfortable speeches, and examples that may instruct
them. And lastly, we have made it apparent, that death opens a door for our
soul, to a life truly happy, which she shall receive with all advantage,
honor, and perfect joy from her Savior in heaven, and shall possess unto all
eternity. Wherefore we justly conclude, that all Christian souls have great
reason, to wax weary of this temporal, troublesome, and sinful life, and
earnestly to say with the holy Apostle, We desire rather to remove out of the
body, Romans 5.^.
and be with Christ. Let us then lift up our souls to him, and heartily
entreat him, that he would come quickly: Yea Lord Jesus come. The grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be with us all, Reu. 22.20.
Amen.

A SHORT PRAYER CONCEIVED BY THE Author, for his Servant that lay a dying. An.
1623.
O Almighty God and most merciful Father, that have created, and by thy
wisdom do preserve and govern all things, we poor sinners prostrate our
selves at thy feet, to power out our Prayers for a sick creature, whom it
has pleased thee to cast into the snares of death. But in doing thus our own
unworthiness, represents it self to our eyes. What are we, that we should
dare to entreat for one, who in thy sight, (it may be) is holier and better
then we our selves are, and we consequently have more need, that some other
should pray for us. Notwithstanding, O wise and most merciful Lord, seeing
that thou have commanded us for to pray one for an other, sanctify (we pray
thee) our heart, and guide our tongue, that our weak prayers may be acceptable
unto thee. Whereby we desire of thee, that thou would favorably behold,
this our brother lying in great distress. Do not behold in him that
corruption, which as well by original sin, as by daily transgression he is
fallen into. But (O Lord) regard him as thy creature, and as the work of thine
own hands. Cast not thine eyes on his own deformity, but on the work of thy
mercy, whereby thou have renewed thine image in him. Forgive us, forgive him
all his sins and transgressions, for his names sake, whom thou have
mercifully appointed to be a ransom for us; before the foundation of the
world, and revealed in due time, to wit, Jesus Christ, who descended from
heaven to take on him man's nature, and in the same to suffer for us, and by
suffering to save those, that believe in him. Grant him, O Father, and grant
each of us, to be of that little flock, which through his merrits is elected
to salvation. Strengthen him in faith, that he, as a member of Christ may
assure himself that he is partaker of all his merits. We entreat thee for our
selves: we entreat thee for him as our brother in Christ, and especial for
him, as one to whom our lone is confirmed by a long continuance of dwelling and
living together. O Lord, we pray for him as for our own soul. Be merciful
unto him. Let him taste of thy meekness. Let him feel in his soul, that thou
have quitted him of all his sins, and turned thy wrath from him. Strengthen
him in body strengthen him in soul. Show thy power in this wealie flesh of
his. Touch his tongue, that he may call on thee, and declare his good hope,
even in this his greatest frailty. Or at the least, O God, so infuse thy divine
light into his Spirit, that it may drive away all dazeling and darkness from
him. Turn away from him all distrust, and distress of mind. O Lord be
merciful unto him: And by this example teach us wisdom, that we in our
greatest prosperity, may fly all vain arrogancy, beholding here what a
tender worm man is, when thou do but visit him with sickness. But at this
present, O Father, comfort him that feels this by experience. Strengthen him,
and mercifully receive him into thy protection. Shield him from the arrows of
that wicked one, that still is wandering about, but chiefly assaulting us in
our greatest extremity. Set him free, O Lord, and if it seem good unto thee,
restore unto him his former health. If not, send thine Angels unto him, that
they in due time may bring his soul into thy bosom. Let him with Stephen, if
not with bodily eyes, yet with the eyes of faith, see his Savior standing in
heaven, even ready to receive his soul. This we desire, this we beg of thee,
O Lord, for thy Son, our Saviors sake, even in that prayer which he has
endited for us, and begun with that comfortable word Our Father.

Our Father that art in heaven, hear us whom thou have vouchsafed to name thy
children. Hallowed, among us, be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done
on earth as it is in heaven, even in this our weakest brother. Give us this day
our daily bread, not that of our body only, but the Spiritual and necessary
food also of our souls. Forgive him, and forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us. Lead us not into temptation: take
compassion on our weakness, that hardly can resist any thing. But deliver us
all from evil. For thine only, O Father, is the Kingdom, the power, and the
glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

A Consolation or Remedy against the Mourning that may befall us by the
decease of our friends.
IT is a commendable custom, that after any burial, the nearest friends
return to the Funeral house, to comfort those that survive. We in like
manner (having given some admonitions, to the departing, would feign here
minister some comfort to the living. Not that we can imitate those provident
comforters, who (like Spiritual Physicians) first diligently feel the pulse
of their Patient, and as by it they discern and find the disease, prescribe
accordingly some remedies: for we know no man's disease in particular. But we
will only endeavor (as faithful Apothecaries) to prepare some good matter;
out of the which, the afflicted may choose what they suppose most needful for
themselves.

Lamentation over the dead.
First then I say, that it is neither unseemly, nor ungodly, to be sorrowful
at any ones departure, and to lament for the same. We have the examples of our
Forefathers. Genesis 23.2.
Abraham mourned for Sarah, and wept for her. Jacob put on sackcloath, Genesis
37.35.
and mourned for his son many days, when he supposed his Joseph had been
dead. 2 Samuel 2.32.
King David and all the people wept at the Grave of Abner. Yea, Israel penned
mournful Ditties, 2 Chro. 35.25.
at the death of their Kings, And among the first Christians, the devout men
made great lamentation for the death of Stephen. Acts 1.2.
Even the Son of God (whether the death of Lazarus moved him, Ioh. 11.35.
or rather his sisters sorrows) wept with the weeping. Romans 2.15.
We read likewise, Number. 20.29.
that the lamenting for Moses and Aaron, lasted each of them thirty days.
Deuteronomy. 34.8.
On the embalming of Jacob, they beslowed forty days. Genesis 50.3.
Yea, the Egyptians mourned threescore and ten days. And very fitly does a
man take the time of certain day^s, to ease his heart of the burden of
grief, it surchargeth it by lamenting and weeping. For this disease having so
passed the worst, is then the easier to be cured. The sorrowful finding
himself wearied out, by ouerlong mourning, gives way the more willingly to
comfort. Which indeed ought not in due time be neglected, but willingly
accepted. For, though the first gr^efe be not condemnable, yet is the
continuance thereof hurtful. For of heaviness comes death, Ecclus 38.18.
and the heaviness of the heart breaks strength, says Jesus Syrachs son.

Remedies against sorrow.
The Remedies to be used against this, are either external, or internal. The
external are fourfold. To wit, a new joy, as Isaac (after the death of his
mo^her) conceived at the first approaching of his bride Rebecca. Genesis 24.64.
Or otherwise greater unexpected sorrows, as when a woman does lament the
decease of a child, and presently after is bereaved of her dearly beloved
husband. Where neither of these two fall out, there at last is all sorrow by
time it self at length consumed, or at the last undoubtedly by death, which is
a sure Physician for all diseases. But these things are not within our power or
reach.

And therefore the internal remedies are most profitable for us, which are
twofold: to wit, humane reason, and the word of God. The one teaches us, not
to be amazed at the loss of any kind of thing, which we knew could be taken
from us at any time. The other witnesses unto us, that we say daily, and ought
to say contentedly, Our Father thy will be done. Math. 6.10.


This will of our heavenly Father, (if so be we be his children) must be the
guide and governor of all our affections. We must consider, that whatsoever
pleases him, is best for his childrens welfare. He has appointed for each one
his Mare in wedlock, his loving Parents, his dear children, his comfortable
friends, his trusty servants, and has linked them in love together. But when?
when he knew that it was needful for them. For how long time? for so long as
it was convenient for them both. And he that has created all, continues Lord
of all: He gives not his right to man, even in the smallest creature: He
does but lend us one to another. Whenever therefore he shall demand his
own, whether it be wife, child, or friend, we ought (as to the owner)
willingly to surrender it unto him again.

And if we have on them so set our affection (which ought to be limited by Gods
appoin^ed time) as to things perpetually to continue, we ought to lament, not
any man's departure, but our own misreckoning. Do we not know that Gods
verdict, Dust thou art, Genesis 3.19.
and unto dust thou shall return, must stand firm, and be made good upon Adam
and all his posterity?

If any body should take great delight in the green boughs, and flourishing
fruit of his Orchard, would we not esteem him a very simple and silly person,
if he should vex, and pine away for grief, when the Winters frost came and
destroyed them? How then can he be deemed very wise, that troubles himself
when he sees this earthly flesh, which (as the Prophet cries out) is all but
grass, Esaias 40.6.
to wither away. This is the only difference, of the Winters frost the certain
time is known, where of Deaths approach the certainty is well known, but
not the time. When it pleases GOD but to call, and say, Return, Psalm. 90.3.
we must on, and finish our course in this world.

We then that hear and see this, and also know, that (although the body
wither) yet the soul of the faithful enters into eternal bliss, ought to
take heed we sorrow not, 1 These. 4.13.
even as others do, which have no hope.

But considering that we have (beside this wo^ted sorrow) many other particular
occasions also of grief and sorrow, and that every one does judge his own the
greatest, we will in brief touch some of them, and endeavor withal to find
out some special remedies for them.

Especial occasions of sorrow.
The occasion then of our mourning is twofold, to wit, either in respect of
the deceased, or in respect of our selves.

In respect of the deceased we sorrow for three reasons: either because he
dyed in his childhood, or because he was taken away, and brought unto his end
by some mischance, or thirdly, because we fear he dyed in his sins.

That which respects our selves, has also three reasons. To wit, either
because his company was dear unto us: Or because his help was very necessary
unto us: Or lastly, because we had not sufficiently reconciled our selves unto
him.

First, 1 Occasion.
we bewail our children, as fruits not yet ripe, too soon plucked from the
tree, as though this did not agree with Gods ordinance. Yet we know that our
Gardners do not set all plants, to the intent they should all bring their
fruits to maturitie, neither is it fitting they should so do. They let the
Mustard and the Fennel stalk produce and nourish their seed to ripeness.
But they do not suffer the Rose-bush, nor Gillyflower stocks, nor many more,
to bring their fruit or seed to maturity, but gather their flowers, as soon
as they be blown. A child likewise does marvel to see the Father gather
Walnuts or Figs, before they be grown to their full bigne^^e. But the
Comfit-maker or Apothecarie that comfites them, knows that they serve b^tter
for his use, then if they were bigger or riper. We ought then willingly to
yield to the Creator of all things, the like freedom and choice. He knows
whom he has ordained to old age, and whom not. He knows what fruit would
sooner rot, then ripen, if he should not pluck it off betimes, that is, who
rather with the multitude, would enter at the wide gate, Math. 7.13.
then with the small company at the straight. Yea, we must think that many in
their thought, Wisd. 4.11.
are speedily taken away, lest that wickedness should alter their
understanding: Or deceit beguile their soul. And who should grudge then that
they escape such, either danger, or sorrow? If the Savior of the world says,
Mark. 10.13.
Suffer little children to come unto me, shall we desire to delay them, and
stay them here certain years, Luke 15.18.
to try their Oxen, and view the Land which they should possess? No certainly,
though h^re they were even borne to a Kingdom; for, all the pleasures and
honors thereof, the wisest of Kings has termed, but Vanity of vanities. Eccl.
1.2.


Therefore as those of the vulgar sort rejoice, when their children (after long
service) are advanced unto some preferment in the Princes Court; Even so may
we, with more reason, r^ioyce, that our heavenly King has esteemed ours worthy
to take them unto him, even before they have done him any service at all.
Therefore let us cast off our mourning with David, saying (according to his
Prophecy) I shall go to him, 2 Samuel 12.23.
but he shall not come to me.

But my honest brother (may some one say) is carelessly neglected, or pitifully
murdered. Let those bewail this, that were the occasion thereof. But as for
him, seeing that the divine Providence has a hand therein, he suffers thereby
no harm. He is got whether he intended, and that not through many by-lanes,
but even the very nearest way.

If two Seafaring men, 2 Occasion.
should aim at one Port, and the one by reason of a Calm, should lie
lingering by the way, and the other by a Storm should be violently caught,
and so cast into the Haven. Do you think, that this man would wish himself
again with the other in the Calm? The Storm may be somewhat troublesome
unto him; yet now he rejoices, that by means thereof, he is attained unto his
wished Port. And the like must we think concerning our brother, who we suppose
is bereaved of life by some mischance. Especially considering that these
unexpected judgments of God, may not be esteemed any sign of Gods especial
wrath: for those upon whom the Tower of Silao fell, Luke 13.4.
were not sinners above other men.

Yea whosoever dies in the Lord, Genesis 8.4. Acts 7.10.
though he were murdered with Abel in a by-way: or stoned with Stephen in the
open streets, the holy Ghost terms him blessed. Reu. 14.13.
So that this sorrow also must be removed, and receive comfort.

3 Occasion.
Whosoever (thirdly) does bewail his neighbor, that is drowned in his
drunkenness, or in any other sin, and so died in Gods indignation, has
indeed no small reason so to do. But whether it be convenient for one in
such case, to ouerloade his soul with continual mourning, Ecclus 38.22.
that does no way help the deceased, but hurt himself, that is duly to be
considered. And he that considers it well, shall find but small reason so to
do. For if so be the par^y were wholly given over to wickedness, it may be God
has snatched him away, 2 Pet. 2.6
for our example, and for his best advantage; Math. 23.32.
because he should not fill full the measure of his wicked predecessors, and
so increase Gods wrath against him. The best then that we can do for him, is,
that we endeavor to appease by all manner of means, all those which he may
have wronged, to the end that at the least we may lessen the number of those
that may accuse him before God, as much as lies in us.

But let us also look to our selves, that we do not step too far, speaking
of him, as if he were certainly now cast off from God. Math. 4.
Judge not (says the Judge himself) lest ye be judged. Between the Bridge
and flood (says St. Augustine) may he repent that intends to drown himself.
Christian love must cause us to hope, that even before his last gasp, at
least, he cries out, Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. Luke
23.45.
And thus hoping there shall be no just occasion of a continual lamentation.

An other (it may be) will incessantly bewail his betrothed bedfellow, 4
Occasion.
and suppose he does it with great reason. For whereas many are sorrowful for
the death of some friends, or neighbors, he bewailes (may he say) the bone of
his bone, and flesh of his flesh. Genesis 2.23.
Whose decease as he principally feels himself, so he may principally, and
that with good reason lament it.

This conjunction of the body in married persons, is indeed certainly such; for
man and wife according to Gods word, are one flesh, Genesis 2.24.
to wit, so long as both parties remain alive: But if the husband or wife be
dead (the Apostle says) the suruiuer is free to be married to another. Romans
7.3.
And then this band or first connection is loosed.

The husband may moreover allege out of holy writ, that his wife was the only
Lamb, 2 Samuel 12.3.
which lay in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter. And that he for that
reason (according to duty) loved her as his own body, Ephesians. 5.28.
and hence also is the more urged to bewail her.

We cannot indeed but confess, that a good wife is a pleasure and delight
unto us in this life, but she is not only granted us to this intent by God,
but rather, to be a helper unto us, Genesis 2 18.
in all accidents and necessities of our age. And we are commanded to dwell
with her according to knowledge, 1 Pet. 3.7.
as being heirs together of the grace of life. But if so be that it shall
please God (as one of his sheep) to call her unto him, Ioh. 10.27.
and to lead her unto eternal life some while before us; we ought willingly
for Gods sake, to be bereaved of that comfortable delight, which this Lamb
did bring unto us, Ioh. 10.14.
knowing that she is gone to that good Shepherd, to whom we were bound in holy
wisdom to direct her.

We are also bound in duty to love her, as a kind mother her only daughter,
whose affection is so exceeding, that God makes it a question, whether it be
possible that a woman can forget her child? Es. 49.15.
It is really her own flesh and blood. And notwithstanding, (though she
dearly love it) if some good match be offered, though it were in a foreign
Country, howsoever out of a motherly affection she may seek some delay, and
desire that the damsel may remain with her yet some ten days, yet after
mature consideration, the answer is commonly, Genesis 24.50.55.
this thing comes from the Lord, take her and go. For she supposes that
she shall bestow her on a good husband. If so be then that a weak woman,
can let her living daughter (that yet is and remains flesh of her flesh)
depart from her because she is desired of some earthly Bridegroom, with more
reason ought a man of spirit willingly to forgo his deceased wife, (that now
is no more called his flesh) when her heavenly Bridegroom has taken her unto
him.

Let us then leave off mourning, and bear our solitariness patiently. Which
if it seem hard unto us, and that we love our wife as our self, Ephesians. 5.33.
then must it be more acceptable unto us, that this estate of widdowhood, is
of the twain rather befalne us (who by nature are the stronger, and may seek
more pastime abroad, then if the said condition had lighted on our wife, on
whom it would lie more heavy, because that decency constraines her to sit
lamenting within doors.

But be it man or woman, Let every one in this estate say with Job, God has
given, and God has taken, Job 1.21.
blessed be the name of the Lord. Trusting that we shall find the comfort
that we miss of our bedfellow in GOD who has taken him, or her from us.

5 Occasion.
Besides my love (may a widow say) I complain of want: For I with my children
cannot be without the help of my deceased husband. This indeed is a bitter
sorrow, and therefore God himself seems to have compassion on her, who
commends her diverse times unto us in his word. Yet not that then he first
begins to take care of her, for it is he alone that has maintained her, and
her husband, throughout the whole course of their lives. And her husbands death
has not shortened his mercy, Psalm. 118.1. and ^36.1.
for it endures for ever.

Yea, it may be he thus will demonstrate unto us, that he is cursed that
trusts in man, Ier. 17.5.
by this means to draw our hearts wholly to himself. This we learn in
Joseph, when he was forsaken, yea banished from all his kindred and friends:
for then, even then came he to be exalted and provided for abundantly with all
things. And how chanced this? The holy Scripture diverse times repeates the
reason. For the Lord was with Joseph, Genesis 39.2.21.
says it. Let then the sorrowful widows so behave themselves, as those
that trust, and surely believe that God is with them, and they shall by diverse
signs really perceive Gods care over both themselves and their children, Psalm.
34.10.
for they that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing, says David.

Though the earthly father of her children be dead, their heavenly Father lives
yet, Heb. 12.9.
who has called himself. Psalm. 68.6.
A Father of the fatherless, and a Judge of the Widows cause. And did not
he provide for that poor widow of Sarepta, 1 Reg. 17.14.
abundance of sustenance, even when the richer sort were feeling witnesses of
scarsitie? Did not he marry a poor Ruth unto a rich and famous Boos, Ruth.
4.10.
and a wise Abigail to King David? 1 Samuel 25.41.
To what end has the holy Ghost left us these, and the like examples in holy
writ? Certainly, for to teach all sorrowful Widows and Orphans, that God
can want no means to assist them, and that they might (laying their mourning
aside) wholly and steadfastly comfort themselves in his fatherly and provident
care. Trust in GOD (says David) and he will bring it to pass. Psalm. 39.5.


Lastly, some man may find himself troubled in conscience, 6 Occasion.
by occasion of the death of some party, because he has not reconciled
himself with him. This indeed is a pitiful and a heavy burden, in that
therein we have to deal with God, for neglecting that which he earnestly
commands. And yet is it not so heavy, but that it may be lightened.

For though we had confessed our fault to the deceased; the most that we could
have obtained from him was, that he had forgiven us our offense with all his
heart. Now this indeed had been good for himself: For by forgiving us, he
should have received forgiveness of his heavenly Father. Math. 6.14.
But do we think he could absolutely have forgiven us? No: it is GOD
himself only that can remit unto us all our transgressions, I, even I, Is.
43.25.
am he that blotteth out all your transgressions (says he by Isaiah) and to
seek to him it is never too late. We do not read that David made any moan,
because he had neglected to reconcile himself unto Vrias, though it is like
he did that too; but the principal thing he minded, was to call upon God; Wash
me, cleanse me, Psalm. 51.
against thee only have I sinned. Let us then confess our sins unto him,
and entreat forgiveness, and be reconciled unto him, and so take away the
occasion of this our heaviness.

But we may yet come nearer home, and make satisfaction to his heirs, for that
wherein we have offended the deceased. Besides, if we have offended our
deceased Parents, in words, or deeds, we have a remedy at hand, to wit, that
(after the aforesaid reconciliation made with God) we do good to their
children. That is, that we behave our selves so religiously, that our Parents
may have brought forth in this world heirs of the Kingdom of heaven. And
this is it, that would not only please God, and our Parents best (if yet they
were alive) but that which is also most profitable for our selves. Wherewith
also we end.

Common comforts.
Yet ere we leave, we would entreat every one in general, that (though it
seem harsh unto them, to be without the lovely fellowship of their friends)
they would willingly submit themselves to Gods will and ordinance. We must say
with Ely, It is the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.18.
let him do what pleases him. And if we will be his servants, whatsoever he
does, we must like. Again, we must neither expect nor desire to have all
things here on earth, according to our own mind. If this should be granted
unto us, these earthly things would cause us to neglect the heavenly. Our
heavenly Father warnes us by adversity, that we should not fasten our minds
on earthly matters. If he did not visit us in this manner, we should (it may
be) grow unmindfull of him, who ought to be alone, and always our comfort,
delight, and refuge.

Let us then no longer lie weltring in sorrow, lest by ouerlong lamenting we
increase Gods wrath, and provoke him to correct us with a heavier cross. If a
Father should send one of his children into a far Country, to see, and learn
fashions, and the childs brother in the mean while, should never linne
complaining, that he had lost his play-fellow; would not this continual
whining at the last out-weary the Father? Surely when his words could not
herein prevail with him, he would at the last better instruct him with a rod,
and so make him to be quiet. Therefore let us also willingly yield our necks
unto the yoke of Gods will, and in patience possess our souls, Luk 21.19.
that our impatience draw not his wrath down upon us.

We must not (like children) still cry and whine, nor think that our love due
to the dead, requires it of us. They themselves would chide us, if our of
heaven they should behold our endless lamenting for them. True love should
give us occasion of joy: If ye loved me, Ioh. 14.28.
ye would rejoice (says Wisdom it self) because I said, I go unto the
Father.

We must then bannish our of our hearts by a manly, or rather a Christian
courage this discomfort, and manifest our strength by our patience. For as
Solomon says, He that rules his Spirit, Pro. 16.32.
is better then he that takes a City.

The holy Scipture that says, Let the dead bury the dead; Math. 8.22.
whose burial yet notwithstanding was necessary, with more reason ought to
persuade us, that we should let the dead bewail the dead, which is not
necessary at al.

But why do we still let our thoughts dwell in the grave, whither we have
willingly caused the bodies of our best friends to be carried, and there to be
left? Let us lift our heads higher. Let us erect our hearts toward heaven,
whither God has directed their souls. There the best part of them is yet
living. There their souls remain by the operations, whereof their bodies did
here delight us. There (I say) our friends yet live, This we may learn of
Job, to whom God afterward (as the holy Scripture witnesses) gave twice as
much as he had before: To wit, for seven thousand, Job 1.2. Job 42.12.
he gave him fourteen thousand sheep, and so forth. But in stead of ten
children, he gave him but ten again. How then were they doubled? his
liuelesse Cattle were stone dead. His deceased children were alive still in
heaven; and the ten more given him here, made them up twenty. Let us then
observe hence, that although our loving parents, husbands, wives, and children,
or friends, are departed out of this world, yet for all that, they be not
therefore dead, but alive, yea that they may still be called ours. And what
greater comfort or reason then can we have, to stay or stop our mourning, then
this?

Or if we cannot hail our senses out of the grave, let us at least behold and
consider their bodies there, with the eyes of the true Apostolic faith, and
we shall find them there, constantly expecting the resurrection of the body,
Sym. Apost.
and life everlasting. And this is that, which the Apostle on good ground
charges us, 2 These. 4.18.
to comfort one another withal.

Calling on God.
And to conclude, though we have set down much comfort, and diverse remedies
against sorrows, yet except the Lord build the house, Psalm. 127.1.
they labor in vain that build it. In vain do we take in hand to cure the
body: In vain do we instruct the spirit, unless God stretch forth his ayding
hand. All sorrowful hearts must then fall down before him, in whom is the
fullness of joy: Psalm. 16.11.
and call upon him continually to release them of their sorrow. He can soon
scatter (through the light of his spirit) all those thick clouds of misery,
which (often even against our own will) do compass us about. Let us take
heed only that, with Martha, we be not too much troubled, Luke 10.39.
and let us with Mary rather, set our selves at his feet, and willingly
embrace his comforts.

Or if we cannot wholly keep our selves from sorrowing, let us not weep over
the dead, but (with the daughters of Jerusalem) weep for our selves that yet
live. Luke 23.28.
Let us freely mourn for our common sins, that brought death into the world,
and strive to diminish them daily more and more by repentance: so shall this
religious sorrow be comfortable unto us, and procure us an eternal joy: Which
we entreat that Comforter to grant unto us, Ioh. 14.16.
which our Savior promised to send his Disciples. Amen.

A Prayer for the sick, written by Mr. I. KING, Minister of Gods word, in
London.
Eternal and omnipotent God, most kind and merciful Father, I thy poor
creature, dust and ashes, appear before thy high and divine Majesty, with a
hearty confession of my vileness, and manifold sins, wherewith in soul and
body I am defiled, and so wounded, that from the sole of my feere, to the top
of my head, there is nothing sound in me: For in my understanding is nothing
but blindness, in my will nothing but obstinacy against thy commandments: my
heart is a root of all iniquity, my external members are weapons of
unrighteousness, yea through my disobedience incredulity, and ingratitude, I
have so far turned aside from thee, and strayed from thy ways, that I am
become a slave to sin, and a child of wrath; whereby I have deserved, not
only temporal punishments, but even eternal death and damnation, if so be
thou should enter into just judgment with me. But seeing that thou, O
Father, of all comfort, do not reject those that come unto thee, with true
repentance of their manifold sins: but have promised to hear those that call
on thee with a broken heart and a dejected spirit: I now come unto thee in
confidence of thy bottomless mercy, which thou have shown, and offered unto
me in thy well-beloved Son my Savior Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent into to
this world, to be a ransom for all my sins. And entreat thee O faithful
God and Father, that thou mercifully wilt hear my prayer, which I offer unto
thee in his name, (being now visited with a heavy sickness.) Grant that I,
through this thy fatherly chastising, may so feel the greatness of my sins,
and heaviness of the same, that yet thereby I may not fall into despair; But
that rather through this thy fatherly correction, I may be moved to fly unto
thee, with whom is much forgiveness, that do not desire the death of a
finner, but that he repent and live. Thou, that strikest and woundest indeed
as a severe Judge, with the sword of thy law; but again as a spiritual
Surgeon, bindest up, and healest with the wholesome oil of thy holy
Gospel, that bring indeed thy children to the uttermost extremity, as if
it were to the torments of hell, but bring them out again: Cast all my
sins behind thy back, Drown them in the depth of the Sea, never to
remember them again. Nail them on the Cross of thy Son my Savior, wash
them in his blood: Cover them with his righteousness, that they never may
appear in account before thee. Grant me also that favor, that I heartily may
forgive my neigbour, that I may by a true love, witness that I am a true
Disciple of Christ, and borne of GOD. Let me feel, O merciful God and Father,
that this my weakness is no sign of thy wrath, my sins, but rather a
testimony of thy mercy, that thou correctest me as a Father, that I may not
run into perdition with the wicked world. Moderate, O Lord, my pains, and
mercifully release me out of the same, that I may have fresh matter to praise
and give thanks to thy holy name, and to walk before thee, in uprightness of
heart, in true holiness and righteousness all the days of my life. Grant
that my life may be nothing else, but a mortification of the old man, and
vivification of the new, that I daily considering, that man borne of a woman,
has but a short time to live, and besides is full of sorrow, that his life is
but a shaddowe, and his days be vanity, that he fades away as a flower in the
field, and continues not at any stay, may withdraw my heart and cogitations
from the vanity of this world. Grant, O Lord, that I may number my days, that
I may apply my heart unto wisdom, that I may mortify the lust and evil
concupiscences of the flesh, and may by little and little be renewed, and
become conformable to the image of thy Son. Separate, O Lord, my sins from
me, before they separate me from thee. Grant that this my life may be nothing
else but a longing for my Savior, that I beholding him with the eyes of faith,
may say with the ancient Simeon, Now let thou thy servant depart in peace,
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. Yet if it be thy good will, to try me
any longer with this thy fatherly rod: grant that I may submit my self, in all
obedience unto thy holy will, being confident, that thou that art faithful in
thy merciful promises, wilt lay no more on me, then thou know that my
weakness is able to bear. But if it be thy fatherly will, to call me away
out of this troublesome life: Grant me grace to be willing, and ready to
forsake this earthly Tabernacle; work in me a true faith, whereby I being
fastened unto Christ my head, as one of his members, I may be assured that as I
am partaker of his person, being flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, so
shall I also be partaker of all his benefits: so that I may say with St. Paul,
Christ has loved me, and has given himself for me. Arm me also with the
same faith, as with a strong shield against all temptations, that I may
courageously fight against the world, my own flesh, yea against the devil
himself, being assured, that there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ. And that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any creature
shall be able to separate me from the love of GOD in Jesus Christ my Lord, O
merciful God, in whose hand is life and death, assist me constantly in this
conflict. Though the flesh be weak, and could be content to say, Father if it
be possible let this cup pass away from me; Yet let the Spirit be willing and
say, not my will, but thy will be done Help me to conquer the terrors and
panges of death, which through Christ is become unto me a passage to eternal
life: say unto my soul, I am thy salvation, strengthen me in the steadfast
hope of the glorious resurrection, wherein my humbled body shall be made like
unto the glorified body of Christ. Turn my pains and anguish into that
eternal joy, that shall be in the blessed vision of thy face: receive my soul
unto thee, remove her out of this vale of misery, to the company of holy
Angels, and to the congregation of thy Elect. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. All
these necessaries that I stand in need of, I beg and entreat of thee O most
merciful God and Father, in the name of my only Savior, concluding my
petition with that absolute prayer that Jesus Christ himself has taught his
Disciples, and all the faithful, saying, Our Father which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name, thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in
heaven, etc.

FINIS.

