Penelopes Complaint: Or, A Mirror for wanton Minions.

Taken out of Homers Odissea, and written in English Verse, By Peter Colse.

Armat spina rosas, mella tegunt apes.

LONDON Printed by H. Iackson dwelling in Fleetstreet, and are to be sold at
his shop under Temple-barre gate. 1596.

To the virtuous and chaste Lady, the Lady Edith, wife to the right
worshipful Sir Rafe Horsey knight, increase of all honorable virtues.
PErusing (virtuous Lady) a Greek Author, entitled Odyssea (written by Homer
prince of Greek poets) noting therein, the chaste life of the Lady Penelope
(in the twenty years absence of her loving lord Ulysses) I counterfeited a
discourse, in English verses, terming it her Complaint: which treatise, coming
to the view, of certain my special friends, I was by them oftentimes encited
to publish it. At length weying with my self, the shipwreck that noble virtue
chastity is subject unto: and seeing an unknown Author, has of late
published a pamphlet called Auisa (ouerslipping so many praiseworthy matrons,
has registered the meanest: I have presumed under your Ladyships patronage, to
commit this my Penelopes complaint (though imperfectly portraied) to the
press: not doubting but the Etimologie of so rare a subject, enchased with the
Physiognomie of your excellent chastity: so worthy a conclusion cannot but be
a sufficient argument, both to abolish Venus Idolaters, and also to
counteruaile the checkes of Artizans ill willers, which carpe at al, but
correct nothing at al: measuring other men's labors, by their own idle humors.
Thus offering unto your Ladyship the firstlings of my scholars crop for a
satisfaction of my presumption, and hoping you will pardon my boldness, and
accept of this my proffered service, I commit you to the grace and tuition of
the Almighty.

Your Ladyships to command PETER COLSE.

In commendation of the right Worshipful sir Raufe Horsey knight.
S Sweet Muse strike up thy silver string,
I In shrill consort thy shake but strain,
R Reflecting peales let Cosmos ring,
R Resound Apolloes piercing vain:
A Arise and rowse thy self with speed,
V Use no delay but do the deed.
F Fear not, for Momus nor his mates
E Encounter dare with rare renown,
H Honor with Arms defends the states,
O Of those whom due desert does crown,
R Recount at large what trump of fame,
S Sounds in the praise of Horseu name.
E Engraude in golden letters write,
Y Your censure sage with due aduices
K Known truth ne snaky enuies spite,
N Nor wrath can touch in any wise,
I Into thy Poem though there pry,
G Gross Zo^us with squinted eye.
H Harsh, and too rude I must confess
T The Poem is to move delight:
Yet force of duty would no less.
But it present in open sight:
For what my wit cannot discharge,
My will surely supplies at large.
His valor daunts the valiantst heart,
His wisdom worthy worship winnes,
His perfect zeal by due desert
To highest point of honor climes:
His hand the sword most justly guides,
And therewith causes due decides.
His wit does Orphans wrong redress,
His hand relieues the needy heart,
His word the widows woe does ease,
He double does reward desert:
He naught attempts in any case
Whereby he may incur disgrace.
His chiefest care his countries love,
His chiefest love his countries care,
Whose care considered, well does prove
His love, the country cannot spare:
Whom countriemen do so adore,
That worship never man had more.
To Prince he true lieutenant is,
To common weal a faithful knight,
Her Grace his service cannot miss,
Nor common weal so wo^thy a wight:
Whom Jove to Prince and subjects joy
Preserve and keep from all annoy.
P. C.

Finis
An Encomion upon the right worshipful sir Rafe Horsey knight, and the Lady
Edith in Saphic verse.
IF merits may true, honor ^^taine (...),
Or fame advance worthy renowned offspring,
Les Muses sound forth triple tuned harp estrings,
unto their honor.
Whose lovely blood with favorable aspect
Nurture and good fortune enhanceth highly
Unto bright heavens generously springing,
theirs be the glory.
From far apart those lovely doves did ascend,
The One fro the east with Phoebus arose for our good,
The other of west where Coronaeus hardy
camped in old time.
Gentle their gentilitie knightly adorned,
Worthy their worships stately well adopted,
Humble their humanity highly graced
with lovely nature.
Whose divine deeds and tried hearts true meaning
Duly commented manifest sequences,
Happy doubtless, worthy no doubt the titles
of their aliance.
Whose honors unburied I will entombe,
For everlasting ages to look upon,
Clear of obscurenesse, free of enuies outrage
will I defend them.
Happy my Muses, but unhappy master,
That can advance encomions renowned
Of others, obscurely lying in hopes grave
buried himself.
Yet dying, and dead will I sing due trophies,
Then trium^hs shall stately records eternize,
My Muse shall ever erect monuments to their praise
unto the worlds end.
P. C.

FINIS.
In commendation of the virtuous, prudent, and chaste virgin, mistress Grace
Horsey, daughter to the right Worshipful, sir Raph Horsey knight, and the
Lady Edith.
G GLorious Nymph, Diana^s darling dear,
R Rose-garland dress of damask red and white,
A Adorn thou Vestaes shrine, her poesies wea^e,
C Conserude with sweet of honor, high delight.
E Enter the Lions cave he is thy friend,
Though Dragon swell saint George that thee defend.
H Hunt as Diana did, with Daphne fly,
O Outrunne Apollo, trust not to his rage,
R Repose n^ trust in Cupids deity,
S Say Frusira to his force, make him thy page.
E Enchase thou virtue with pearls of grace,
Y Yongsters may wonder at the enterlace.
What fair? wise? rich? with grace combind?
A joy to all that such a grace behold:
So rare a sympathy is hard to find,
A gift with fame worthy to be enrold.
Beauty and chastity two deadly foes,
Live reconciled in her lovely brows.
Fair: look on her there dwells beauties grace:
Wise: her wit the wisest does abash
Sweet: where is sweet but in her sweetest face:
Rich: to her store al treasure is but trash.
A Grace she is with such rare Graces dight,
Tongue, pen, nor art her grace can show aright.
P. C.

Finis.
Candido Lectori hexastichon.
EN tibi Penelope prudens, and (...),
cuius tot vates nomen vbique canunt.
Si cupis illius niucos cognoscere mores,
hunc paruum placido perlege front librum.
Nam de Penelope quae doctus dixit Homerus:
hic plano and pleno carmine (Lector) habes.
Ioannes Mayo.

Amico suo charissimo P.C. S.D.
QVid quarit titulos, quid dotes lactat Auisae.
Anne ea Penelope est aequiparanda tuae?
Penelope clara est, veneranda fidelis: Auisae
obscura, obscuro foemina nata loco.
Penelope satrapae est. coniux illustris: Auisae
coniux cauponis, filia pandochei.
Penelope casta est cum sponsus abesset: Auisae
casta suo sponso nocte dieque domi.
Penelopeia annos bis denos mansit: Auisae
tot (vix credo) dies intenter ata foret.
Penelopeia procos contum neglexite* Auisae
Vix septem pretium sustinuitque precem.
Penelope neuit, pensum confecit: Auisae
lassauit nunquam pendula tela manus.
Penelope Graijs, Latijs celebratur: Auisae
vnus homo lauds, nomen and acta canit.
Ergo Penelope vigeat, cantetur: Auisa
nullo Penelope est aequiualenda modo.
To the Readers.
Having taken upon me (Gentlemen) to pipe with Hiparchion, though my music be
not melodious enough to content the proud Thessalians, yet I doubt not but
poor shepherds will stir their stumps after my minstrelsie: If the stranes
be too harsh, to delight your stately ears (pardon me and accept my mind, and
not my music) I stretch my strings as I can, desiring rather to teach the
simple their uniform cinquepace, then effect Courtiers in their lofty
galliards, which alter every day with new devises. The cause I have contrived
so pithie a matter, in so plain a style, and short verse, is: for that a
vaineglorious Auisa (seeking by slander of her superiors, to eternize her
folly) is in the like verse, (by an unknown Author) described: I follow (I
say) the same style, and verse, as neither misliking the method, nor the
matter, had it been applied to some worthier subject. Thus hoping you will
courteously accept my Penelopes Complaint, I will shortly make you amends with
her Will, and Testament, in Pentameters, wherein I will stretch my wits to Ela,
to show my duty, and satisfy your desires: and so farewell.

Peter Colse.

Penelopes complaint.
Penelope complains of Ulysses departure.
YOu Nymphs that Alcidalions brooks,
And Paphos sportes are dispossessed:
Which want the Sun of lovely looks.
And are displaced of Cupids crest:
If you have tried, loves sweet aspect,
And do lament, your joys defect:
Surcease, your cases to complain,
Your losses leave so much to moan,
Alas my loves long lacking pain,
Is more then yours ten to one:
But if you needs will puling sit,
A pew-mate for you am I fit.
Let foolish Phillis cease to faint,
And for Demophoon leave to mourn:
Let Dido finish her complaint,
And faithless false Aeneas scorn:
For careless wights why do you care,
And causeless eke so woeful are?
Leave off (I say) those causeless cares,
Help me bewail my wretched woe:
What need you shed those ruthlesse tears?
Your passions but of pleasure grow,
Oh help me seely soul, relate
My toilesome lamentable state.
My love (alas) and I love sick,
Ten thousand leagues to wars is gone,
And me has left here widdow-like,
In shiuering bed to lie alone:
Oh now, unto my pain I prove,
A dririe loathsome thing is love.
Alack, how am I gallde with grief,
Since that no where I can behold,
Those lovely looks that of relief,
The locks and keys and al do hold:
Whose smiling cheeks and merry cheer,
To pleasure sweet the Porters were.
She shows how Ulysses fained himself mad at his departure, and how he was
bewraied by Palemedes.
Ulysses, my Ulysses dear,
Alack, alack, and well away,
My bedfellow, my friend and pheere,
Ulysses mine is wend away:
To siege of Troy, with heavy cheer,
Against his will, I dare to swear.
Half frantic he (unwilling wretch)
And mad almost, himself did feign,
He warily his wit did stretch,
New nuptial sport so vexed his brain.
Love tickled so his lovely breast,
That he (poor soul) could take no rest.
But often would stare as one amazde,
Or as the foul amids the fire:
Yea, grimly often on me he gazde,
His flesh so ^umde with loves desire:
Alack how often did he complain,
Loves parting was a pinching pain*
Woe worth the wretch, that did bewray,
My good Ulysses wary wit:
Foul fare Palemedes I say,
That so his poisoned venom spit.
But my Ulysses will ere long,
Revenge the villains spightful wrong.
Mean while (alas) poor worthles wight,
I want my hearts most chiefest treasure:
I lead my life in fancies spite,
And tarry ever Fortunes leisure.
I harping sit on Hopes sweet string,
Till Time Ulysses home does bring.
Adue my joy, adue my bliss,
My comfort, and my dear delight,
By day I shall his presence miss:
Much more, his absence in the night.
Of joy, of bliss, and sweet delight,
One man at once, depriude me quight.
She discommendeth her married estate, and shows the toil she indures.
AH, what a doting fool was I?
To marry such a manly mate,
Well taught (alas) now do I try,
Too merry was my maiden-state,
And Angel-like my virgins life,
But hellish-like, to be a wife.
With mangled mind, loves worthles ware,
(Poor wretch) I have too dearly bought:
Like seely b^rd, I saw the snare,
Yet foolishly my woe I wrought:
Woe to my self it was my desire,
To Iunoes hests thus to aspire.
But since I would the wanton play,
And enter into wedded state,
I wish (but all too late) I say,
That I had chose some meacocke mate,
As could have kept but dogs from door,
And not a knight that Arms had bore.
Well might I think, as now I find,
That long Ulysses could not stay
In Venus court, his martial mind
And courage stowt would it gainesay:
Had I at first had this forecast,
I need not thus repent at last.
Had nature me deformed fac'de,
Or had I not Ulysses seen,
Or had he never me embrac'de,
Or in his bed had I not been:
Then maiden-like had bin my care,
Not widdowlike, thus need I fare.
With distaffe thus I need not drudge,
Nor yet with wheel have worn my hand:
Nor want of sleep need I thus grudge,
Nor tired thus a-twisting stand,
Nor yet have busied thus my brain,
From hastic suitors to refrain.
She accuses Hellen of light consent.
OH for those routs of roisters rank,
Which do my silly soul assault,
And for this toil I well may thank,
Dame Hellen and her foolish fault:
Her light consent makes al men say,
The Grecian dames cannot say nay.
Had Hellen felt my loves long lack,
So many weary winters woe,
Or sunnie summers lustful wrack,
As I poor wretched woman do:
Then had there been some reason why,
Her loving pheere she should defy.
Or she such troops of wooers had,
Or half the courting I endure,
Of saucie suitors staring mad,
Her honors breach for to procure:
Some would have thought, love had her won,
Not lust, to go with Priams son.
To one man's suit she did consent,
And scarce entreated did she yield,
Vnaskd almost, to bed she went,
Without repulse, she fled the field.
O vile, unconstant, fickle dame,
Unworthy worthy women's name.
How will Sir Paris vaunt at Troy?
Of his success, how will he boast?
(Well let him heed amidst his joy,
Lest Menelaus mar his roast)
Both Troy, and Greece may well repent,
Thy peremptory light consent.
Fie, what were al your frumps forgot?
Where were your chaste and chary looks?
Were you so far with fancy shot,
To trust to beauties hidden hooks?
Where were your sharp conceited shifts,
Your witty, subtle, shrewish drifts?
She controlleth Hellen for her ill example.
HOw dare thou look the Greeks in fact,
When they at Troy shall with thee meet?
Alas, with what disguised grace,
Will thou thy wedded husband greet?
Alack, it would have burst my heart,
If I had played such a part.
Fie, Hellen fie: thou woman's foe,
Foul fare thy frenzy foolish fall:
Thy wantonness has wrought our woe,
Oh, this thy fault has shamde us al.
Thy folly does us crucify:
This foul defame can never die.
A thousand pretty damsels peart,
Have cause to curle this fact of thine!
A thousand thousand in their heart,
Will wish that Hellen had not been:
Thy giggish trick, thy queanish trade,
A thousand Bridewel birds has made.
Thy foul example works such force,
The brau'st thereby to lust are bent:
The rich as bad as poor, or worse,
To brothell houses do frequent.
False play (say they) is no offense,
For Hellen exercisde it once.
This made fair Ioane of Naples queen,
So wantonly to tread awry,
And Messaline for to be seen,
Those tricks in common stowes to try.
This damned deed that thou have done,
May infants curse that are unborn.
Thy toy is grown to such a trade,
That few or none will wiue and wed,
So common now the use is made,
That lust, not love, brings brides to bed.
For few will household charge endure:
That Palliardice do put in ure.
Against Paris and his treachery.
Alack how could Sir Paris fly,
His country and his own true love?
What heart had he, how durst he try,
From native soil thus to remove?
What had his love Oenone done?
That he so retchles from her run.
What fury forced his frantic head?
To Troy had Hellens beauty rung?
What, was he sure at first to speed?
That thither in such haste he flung?
Was he so resolute and rash,
No princely port could him abash?
What (Devil) set his ships on sail,
And hither sent the leachers band?
Could he unto no harbor hail,
But thus at Lacedemon land?
Was there no place for to arrive?
Must needs the wind him hither drive?
I would his mother had not known,
His father Priam, or that she,
So foul a firebrand had not borne,
As he to Troy is like to be:
Would she had dreamed of his death,
Or wisely she had stopped his breath.
I would that he had not been borne,
Or seas had sunk him down to hell,
Would tempests had his tackling torn,
Or he on craggie rocks had fell:
Would sea hagges had transformd his hue
Ere ever Hellen did him view.
I would (I wish with all my heart)
That Leacher he my ghest had been,
I would have better played my part,
Then did the brainsicke doting queen:
Had he but sought Ulysses place,
These fingers should have flead his face.
Then should sir Paris soon have felt,
The fury of my chaste desires,
Ulysses seen how I had dealt,
The dole that lawles love requires.
My good Ulysses had been sure,
How faithful always I endure,
My heart had not thus sacrifizde,
Nor yet such woeful incense sent:
Sorrow had me not thus surprizde,
Then had I lived at hearts content:
In corners dark I need not creep,
Lie down to wail, and rise to weep.
The world had not felt my outcries,
The air my sighs, the earth my tears,
My prayers had not pearst the skies,
Nor troubled so celestial ears:
But sighs and prayers are in vain,
My Lord since they bring not again.
Antinous interrupting her sighing, offers his suit.
FIe Lady fie: why sigh you so?
Be of good cheer, what need you fray
Those heart blood suckers wrecke your woe,
Those farfetcht sighs loves want bewray,
Heigh ho again: alas for woe,
To whom shall this sweet message go.
Extirpe the monster out of mind,
Those passions al tread under foot,
Since that Ulysses proves unkind,
From of your heart the traitor root:
Who would take care for such a knight,
That leaves his love in field to fight?
Let not loves want disturb your head,
For by the Stygian lake I swear:
I am a Lord, I will thee wed,
My faith and troth shall soon appear:
Else will I rest your secret friend,
Those louesicke motions to amend.
Her answer to her wooers.
MY Lord: for me take you no care,
My loves loss I my self will mourn:
I wonder you so witless are,
To try by force, the stream to turn:
What though my love does time prolong,
With shame shall I requite the wrong?
Shame follows sinnne, as beams the sun,
Amiss will out though closely done:
Folly diffame can never shun,
Reproach breaks out unthought upon
My countenance would me bewray,
If I amiss should do or say.
Shall I my souls shipwreck procure?
Shall hateful slander spot my name?
Shall fair speech me to lust allure?
With pleasure shall I purchase shame?
I Will rather pine in my complaint,
Then shame shall crown me Cupids saint.
I can but thanks afford for love,
Your good will for to gratify:
Your practice mean I not to prove,
Your secret friendship I defy,
Since (Lordings) you have misst your aim,
Leave off in time, those toys reclaim.
For why? it never shall be said,
Penelope did tread awry:
Not truly told, she false has playde,
Or spotted her pure chastity.
My lords, I loath your wanton lure,
Your faith shall not my fall procure.
Therefore my Lords and lovers al,
Let me this at your hands obtain:
(For fear of that which may befall)
That you my house a while refrain:
Until my towe be at an end,
Then I with speed will for you send.
She complains of her wooers misrule, and fears to write to Ulysses, for
putting him in a jealousy.
WHat shall I say? what shall I do?
How diversely am I perplexed?
With lusty gallants that me woo,
How am I silly woman vexed?
What shall I to those roisters say,
That shameless tempt me night and day?
From Samos suitors to me post,
And Zacinth cutters do me court:
Besides those of our Ithac coast,
Lads of Dulichium do resort.
What shall I do? what shall I say?
Those stately gamsters brook no nay.
My good Ulysses goods they waste,
And me poor wretch, do they torment:
Lord-like forsooth is their repast,
When he poor man is well content,
At siege of Troy, with soldiers fare,
Vnwitty of my woeful care.
If I should to Ulysses write,
And show him of their careless coil,
How earnestly they me incite,
My constant faith, and troth to foil:
I might breed Bees nests in his brain,
And put him in a ielous vain.
For he is wise, he will suspect,
My lightness breeds their fond desire,
Some cause he will think, does add effect.
No smoke appears without some fire:
So seldom is there fervent love,
But where some kindness does it move.
Then may he presently for spite
Acquaint him with some foreign fro:
My slut (says he) I will requite,
Since she at home does serve me so,
Since so unruly she does range,
Brow antlers with her I Will exchange,
She wishes Ulysses to beware of the cruel Trojans.
NO, no, my gem and sweetest joy,
Thou shall not need for me to care,
Thou business have enough at Troy,
Look wisely to thy own welfare,
For Troy yeeldes many a dogged lad,
Which makes me sighing sit thus sad.
Ah how does fear affright my heart?
I dread and yet I need not doubt,
Though froward fortune does him thwart,
He Is wary, valiant, yea and stout,
And bears the mind he will not stoop:
For proudest he in Trojan troop.
Yet (Heartagold) restrain thy heat,
Be not too forward on thy foes,
Ah (trueloue) let me thee entreat,
Be not the first at bloody blows:
Though of thy self no care thou make:
Yet (sweet) of me, some pity take.
Beware of hugy Hectors hand,
To swifty Dolon take good heed:
What needst thou fight, which may command,
Thy soldiers for to do the deed?
Let them God Mars his mercy try,
Stand back and come not thou too nie.
Give Menelaus leave to fight,
The cause is his, he had the wrong,
And Agamemnon worthy knight,
The quarrel does to them belong:
Let fiery A^ax fight his fill,
But (if thou love me) stand thou still.
Ah let thy consort Diomede,
And stout Achilles battle wage:
Let hardy Hercules at need,
His swelling fury there assuage:
From battle (sweet) do thou desist,
Love thou, and let them fight that list.
Her supplication to the Gods.
THou Jove, Lord of Olympus hie,
If thou will hear poor widows grief,
Look down with thy transplendant eye,
And yield us wretches due relief:
Our loves, our lives, and destiny,
Do on thy Princely power rely.
And thou Apollo, which in fight,
With Thunderclaps, did Cyclops quell:
In Greeks just quarrel show thy might,
Raze and confound those Trojans fell:
Which wrong us with their villainy,
And triumph in their tyranny.
And Juno: we do thee implore,
To tender our unworthy wrong:
To us, our wedded mates restore,
For we, (alas) have lackt them long:
With speed let them return again,
Lest we our bridal beds do stain.
She accuses Menelaus of folly, for making wars for Hellen.
WAs not Prince Menelaus mad,
For strumpet thus to levy arms?
This makes the wanton woman glad,
Yea: she will laugh at those alarmes:
For war's a play-game, they suppose,
That never tasted bloody blows.
Who would in wars his person trust,
Which safe in peace at pleasure swimmes?
For paltrie giglet so unjust,
What Prince would hazard life and lims?
At push of pike, as soon does light,
A wound on Prince, as worthles wight.
What if the Grecians have the foil?
(As wars event uncertain is)
How will she glory at thy spoil?
Thy bane will be to her a bliss:
Then shall we widows weary worn,
A fresh begin to wail and mourn.
Put case the Trojans have the worst,
(As we al wish for Hellens sake)
The silly people then accursed,
With outcries will the air shake:
Then shall they wretches dearly buy,
Their prinkox Paris treachery.
What ghastly groans, will dead men give?
How will the maimed howling lie?
How will the aged fathers grieve?
How will the silly infants cry?
And widows (in worst case of al)
How will they for their husbands call?
From fire and sword shall few be free,
With famine some shall hunger-starue:
The virgins they deflowered shall be,
(The Lord us from such state preserve)
It grieves my heart to show the pain,
They for a strumpet shall sustain.
She shows Ulysses worthiness.
Ulysses dear, the Gods thee shield,
And send thee home well to return,
For love to thee they all may yield,
Thy like in love was never borne:
So Angel-like did shine thy face,
It was a bliss thee to embrace.
Alack he was the worthiest,
The gentlest, and the meck'st of mind:
The truest, and the faithfullest,
That of a thousand I could find:
The wisest and the wariest,
And one I loved and liked best.
Ah, good Ulysses was my trust,
With him contented still I stood,
He has my love in clay and dust:
I Will die for him to do him good.
To him I gave my heart and hand:
Therefore both vow and gift shall stand.
She bewailes the want of Ulysses in the night.
Alack how loathsome is my bed?
How sore for sleep my eielids chim?
What fantasies possess my head?
How palsy-sicke is every lim?
Such shiuerring ague-fits me shake,
As make my very heart to quake.
Such ugly shapes does Morpheus show,
Such hips and hawes, and sudden care,
Does of those vain illusions grow,
Which dreaming represented are:
Sometimes I sigh, sometimes I start,
Such terror does torment my heart.
I want (poor wretch) in darkesome night,
The comfort of my dearest friend:
My sorrows leach, my hearts delight,
Whose very sight my grief would end:
Whom if I might but once embrace,
I sure should be in happy case.
She shows her defect of beauty.
Alas how tawnie am I turned?
How am I wretch transformd in hue?
How am I scorched, and sunburnd?
A ghastly creature for to view:
A mirror I, for beauty was,
But now a mouster, for disgrace.
My skin that clear as crystal was,
My cheeks that crimson silk did stain,
My eyes like bright transplendant glass,
My brows, fraught with each pretty vain:
My skin, my cheeks, my eyes and brows,
Are like to soot, in smoaky house.
Ah when to Troy my true-loue wend,
He left me shining maiden like,
But when that he does backward bend,
He sure shall find-me beldam-like:
But Jove I thank thy glorious grace,
For this my wrinkling sorrowed face.
Penelope warns her maids to beware of hot affection.
AH damsels dear, which see the care,
Of mistres yours Penelope:
And see how fowly I do fare,
Be ruld, and take this reed of me:
Have not too soon for wedded charge,
Lest that you wish you lived at large:
Of hot affection eke take heed,
For often I have heard it told,
That hasty liking has slow speed,
And love soon hot, is quickly cold:
And those that woo, ere wise they are,
Are won sometime, ere they beware.
The virgins state, I must confess,
Is too too tedious for to bear:
But widows state exceedes excess,
So fickle and so fraught with fear:
Wherefore see that you maids remain,
Of evils take the least of twain.
For if you (wantons) wedded were,
(As yet you far unworthy are,)
To one that with my wedded pheere,
Might every way for worth compare:
What pleasure of him can you take,
If he your company forsake.
Put case that you (my pretty ones)
Should match with such a brainsicke boy:
As would not stick to baste your bones,
What then? where were your bridal joy?
Then might you wish, but al in vain,
That you unwedded were again.
Thus if you wed a worthy knight,
Then of his death you still will doubt,
And if you have a wretched wight:
Then will you wish, his brains were out:
But either ill for to prevent,
I wish you unto none consent.
The speech of her wooers.
AH Princely nymph Penelope,
A goddess, were thou not to coy,
Pallas may not compare with thee,
Nor Venus with her blinded boy,
Mycene could not thy craft fulfill,
Nor had Al^mena half thy skill.
Say (sweet Icarius daughter dear)
Do thou no longer us delay,
Whom will thou take to wedded Pheere,
That all the rest may post away.
Either say yea, or else deny:
Thou must take one, or al defy.
No worthles wight shall with thee wed,
Though thou the worst amongst us choose,
Fear not: Ulysses he is dead:
Show reason if thou us refuse:
Say, if thou loathe our Parentage,
Or do dislike our personage.
Her answer to her suitors.
MY lovely youths, and Lordings all,
As I have said, so say I still:
I can but thank you great and small,
For this your kindness and good will.
It grieves me (Gallants) to the heart,
I cannot grant you your desert.
I love you all, I do protest,
As did Diana Phoebus fair,
Who of al woodmen, likde him best,
But when he loved, to loathe him swear:
So you as friends, I entertain,
But lovers, I you al disdain.
Yea though my love his bane has bought,
(As Gods forebode) yet must you stay,
Until my web be fully wrought,
For why the world shall never say:
That such a worthy knight as he,
without a shrowde should buried be.
The wooers advised Telemachus, Ulysses son, to put his mother out of door,
and inherit the land.
TElemachus, thou foolish lad,
A Lord thou were, if thou had wit:
Thou hear'st thy father he is dead,
And we thy friends al can prove it:
Wherefore it now does thee behoue,
That thou thy mother do remove.
Why do thou not thy birthright claim,
And turn the beldame out of door?
Thou see al we at her do aim,
To do us right, we thee implore:
If from thy house, thou her expel,
We would her wed, and al were well.
With scoffing cards she does us load,
And with fair speeches us delay:
And woodcocke-like leads us to road,
Yea like tame fools, she makes us stay:
Thou art the only cause of this,
Therefore amend that is amiss.
Telemachus answer to the wooers.
ANd is this all that you can say?
Is this the counsel that you use?
Do you your parents so obey?
Can you your mothers so abuse?
No force: my father shall not find,
His Telemac, so much unkind.
For let my father live or die,
If I my mother ill entreat:
Why then my Graundsire I carry,
With vengeance (surely) will me threat.
I fear if I should her offend,
The Lord short life would to me lend.
Your companies I well could spare:
Pardon me if I fret and fume,
I see right little do you care,
How you my fathers goods consume:
Except you better you behave,
Your absence shortly let me crave.
She debateth with her self of marriage.
NOw may I leave, now may I take,
Now may I love, now may I hate,
I now may choose, I may forsake,
Twixt yea, and nay, stands my estate:
Now may I marry, for my case,
Or else may tarry if I please.
My husband (hardly) is alive:
And though alive, yet ten to one,
If ever here he do arrive:
What fool so long would lie alone?
Who would a widow stay so long,
And nature of her right thus wrong?
Antinous my love does seek,
(A gallant Lordly minded lad)
And Eurymac (faced Angel-like)
To win my love would be right glad:
Since with such suitors I am sped,
Why should I not poor widow wed.
My father wills me for to wed,
And that shall stand for my excuse:
What though I foil my bridal bed*
Ulysses will me not refuse.
And when again he does return,
What care I though he do me scorn.
But deuilish wretch, how do I dote?
What hellish hag does me possess?
What? shall I sing Medeas note?
Know good, and follow nothing less:
Shall I that young a saint have seemd,
In age a devil right be deemd.
No, no, my constant chastity,
The world throughout about shall ring*
In praise of chaste Penelope,
From time, to time, shall al men sing:
My fame shall mount unto the sky,
When Hellens vile defamd shall die:
Her commendation of chastity.
O Chastity, the cheifest kay,
Of women's worthy treasury:
A virtue that is of virgins gay,
The pure and redoubted dowry.
A poesy springing fresh for aye,
A flower that never can decay.
Diana it did beautify,
And her among the gods enroll:
And Gammede her chastity,
Did to the heavens hie extol.
Zenobia with her maiden might,
Did ramping Lions put to flight*
When lawles love, to luckles end,
A thousand, thousand, daily brings,
Diana to the woods does wend,
And sweetly with her damsels sings,
Diana-like, I will disdain,
Both lovers joy, and lovers pain.
The complaint of her waiting women against the wooers.
Ah Madame, if you love your life,
Or do regard your chastity:
If you will be Ulysses wife,
Or tender your poor family:
Those helhounds al with speed expel,
Which of your house do make a hell.
Antinous he swears and stares,
By all the oaths he can devise,
If you come not, he unawares,
Will you salute in shameful wise.
Foul shame shall take them al and some.
Ere I again amongst them come.
For madame they have me defilde,
with cruel shameless villainy:
Alas I fear I am with child,
With trusting to their tyrany.
Oh would to God I buried were,
I am so tossed with doubtful fear.
They are so dronken al with wine,
They care not what they say or do:
(Saving your presence) where they dine,
They do discharge their stomachs too.
And all that ever they invent,
Is but to have us wretches shent.
One sings, Ulysses sure is dead,
Another says, he feeds the fish,
Another at him stakes his head,
Another does him evil wish.
Yea some your strangers ill entreat,
And others do your servants beat.
Yet all this will not them suffice,
Not al your cates, and costly cheer.
But they amidst they Gourmandice,
Your silver plate in pieces tear:
But when Ulysses comes, no doubt,
He will assuage this revel rout.
Her speech unto her son Telemachus.
TElemachus (my lovely son)
What shall we silly wretches do?
I see we shall be al undone,
Unless thou to thy father go.
Those Lordings that a wooing come,
Will eat us out of house and home.
Alas I cannot be so rude,
By cruel means their blood to spill:
Not yet by force them to extrude,
That proffer me so much good will:
Alas their love I must respect,
Though their conditions I reject.
Thou see, how wastful eke they are,
And in our house keep careless coil:
There Is neither of them al do care,
Nor what they spend, nor what they spoil.
Yea now with me they may not match,
Well's he my silly maids can catch.
The reply of her son Telemachus, then but a child.
PEace (mother) fie: what need you mourn?
My father will not you forsake:
Be of good cheer he will return,
No thought for him (good mother) take:
He will with us arrive ere long,
And will revenge our woeful wrong.
(Ah mother) would I were a man,
I would so plague these leachers vile,
Not one of them should escape me ^han,
They should not thus our house defile:
O how I would their carcas carue?
They should not you thus shrewdly serve.
These trencher flies me tempt each day,
To turn you (mother) out of door:
The land is mine (these liars say)
My father he is de^d of yore.
Yet mother, here you still shall rest,
Of women al I love you best.
Oh you may see (sweet mother dear)
How friendly minded they are bent:
And eke what loving hearts they bear,
By this their treacherous intent.
But I commanded them be gone,
How say you? was it not stoutly done?
Well, though my father he be slaiue,
(As Gods forbid it should be so)
And that he never come again,
Yet one day will I work their woe.
My dearest blood I sure will spend,
My fathers house for to defend.
Mean while (al heart) to Troy I Will trudge,
If you thereto will but consent,
To run or go I will not grudge,
Pray (mother) peace, lest they prevent
My going forth, when I come back,
I will not fear the proudest jack.
Her Epistle to Ulysses.
Ulysses (if thou be alive)
Peruse those lines I send to thee,
(Sweet) let me see thee here arrive,
It Is booteles for to write to me.
Not thy epistle be thou sure,
Thy present sight, my grief must cure.
Ah say (sweet heart) and trueloue mine,
How caust thou lingering stay so long?
Why came thou not home a this time?
How can thou offer me this wrong?
Say (sluggard) what does thee restrain,
That thou do not return again?
The Trojan war is at an end,
To sinders Troy is quite consumde,
The Argiues al do homeward bend,
With incense are the Altars fumde.
Some froe I fear me, holds thee back,
And that is the cause thou art so slack.
To Pylon have I often sent,
To foreign countries far and near:
My messenger to Sparta went,
But there no certain news could hear:
At Troy (they say) thou were not slain,
That makes me hope thou come again.
Ah good Ulysses hie thee home,
For I had suitors long ago:
If that thou say, thou will not come,
Then know I what I have to do:
I need not long a widow live,
A hundred gladly would me wiue.
For of Dulichium fifty two,
Most stately suitors secke my shame:
Of Zacinthe, twenty do me woo,
From Samos four and twenty came:
Besides twelve of our Ithac states,
On whom, Maedon the minstrell waits.
My father eke does me accuse,
And says, I do my wooers wrong:
And too too much my self abuse,
Since widdow-like I stay so long.
But let him daily me reprove,
From constant faith I will not move.
Yea, let him say, or do his worst,
I will be but Ulysses wife:
To him I gave my faith at first,
With him I Will end my love and life.
To him, ere I will fail my faith,
I sure will die a Martirs death.
As twenty winters there are gone,
So twenty more I mean to spend,
I will undo that I have done,
Ten thousand times before I end.
Yet shall I think each hour twain,
Until you do return again.
She accuses Antinous, that he goes about to kill her son.
ANtinous I have been told,
Thou were a youth that did excel,
(Ah true I prove the proverb old)
Report untruth does often tell.
They say, thy like not Ithac had,
I think it has not one so bad.
How dare thou me the mother court,
And go about my child to kill:
Thou swear'st and star'st thou mean no hurt,
Yet do devise his blood to spill.
But you can wake, although you wink,
And say right well, though ill you think.
But take thou heed, and warning good,
And warning give to all the rest:
Beware of spilling princely blood,
For unrevenged it will not rest.
Wherefore see that his life you save,
If favor you of me will have.
The reply of Eurymachus, in the behalf of the wooers.
ASsure your self (my dearling sweet)
There Is no man here, that will or shall,
Him hurt, I Will die first at his feet,
Before mishap shall him befall.
Be bold, whilst me alive you see,
From sword I sure will set him free.
For thine, and for Ulysses sake,
Telemachus I will preserve,
(Who on his knee would often me take)
And roast meat often to me carue:
I Will sheath my sword within his skin,
That first to touch him dares begin.
Am I not here* what needs thou dread?
Thou may command me heart and hand,
I Will him defend alive or dead,
My word and deed, shall f^rmely stand.
Wherefore (sweet heart) be of good cheer,
And cast away this foolish fear.
She bewaileth the sending of her son Telemachus to his father.
ALas, what have I (fondling) done?
How have I on adventure sent,
Telemachus my only son?
Ah: for his sake shall I be shent.
If by this means he do miscarrie:
Then of my life shall I be weary.
What will the common people say?
(As they are prone to speak the worst)
She, she, her son has sent away,
(See who would fickle women trust,)
That she may with her wooers wed,
And so defile his fathers bed.
What dangers dire shall he endure?
Rocks renting dread, and tempests doubt,
Of measure hard he shall be sure,
If prouling Pirates pry him out:
Or if Antinous descry,
His skill in swimming shall he try.
Alas: if my sweet Temelac,
(Whom for to shield the Gods I pray)
On wastfull seas should go to wrack,
What will my good Ulysses say:
My life alas I soon should lack,
As herbs to pot he would me hacke.
But if it be my destiny:
I still will wail with woeful heart,
Til time does end this Tragedy,
Or chance does cure my careful smart.
And I my self, my self will hate,
Til death does e^s^ my doleful state.
But see, he comes right welcome home,
(Sweet Telemac my pretty boy)
What? is thy father with thee come?
Tell true, what lives my lovely joy?
Ah say the truth, and do not feign,
Will my Ulysses come again?
Telemachus shows his fathers coming: and how he means to be revenged of his
Riuals, and shows some of his fathers acts.
MY father (as you say) does live,
Lo here, a letter he has sent,
And shortly here he will arrive,
For to return is his intent.
But privily he will you greet,
That with those Riuals he may meet.
He swears he will torment them all,
Not one of them shall escape alive,
He Will kill and slay, both geat and small:
As dogs from door he will them drive.
He swears he will see their eyes al out,
Ere he will feed so soul a rout.
Eurymachus he will take down,
And eke Antinous swelling pride,
He Will coxe them all, I hold a crown,
For that they do him thus deride,
He Will teach them better use their terms,
He Will learn them scoff a man at arms.
Though that those lads have long him loathed,
If he in sight should but appear,
They al would wish they were vncloathd,
So that they lighter legged were.
They Will rather wish for feet that day,
Then either gold or rich array.
For he at hazard more has been,
Then taking down such trencher-knights,
His prowes at siege of Troy was seen,
He has subdued worthier wights.
Yea (mother) he has been at hell,
Where the Prince Pluto dire does dwell.
He thrust out Polyphemus eye,
For that he did his fellows eat,
And he escaped Circes sorcerie:
He feared not God Neptunes threat.
When three days shiples he did sail,
His hardy heart did never fail.
Penelope reads Ulysses letter.
THy letter when I ouer-looke,
( Penelope my sweetest saint)
I note the care that thou have took,
And pity take of thy complaint.
Lo: to release thee of thy doom,
(Sweet heart) at once I write and come.
Thy faithful hand I quickly found,
The pledge and token of my troth,
Whereby to me thou first were bound,
And I to thee, by solemn oath.
So welcome thereof was the sight,
My heavy heart it made full light.
I would to God my sluggardise,
Which thou so highly do accuse:
The Greeks at Trojan enterprise,
Had holden for a just excuse:
Then had I not endured the toil,
I now sustain in foreign soil.
Then had I stayed still with thee,
When I my self did frantic feign:
It grieved me (trust me) to agree,
The wars so soon should part us twain.
I would, nor could, as thou may see,
So lightly leave thy company.
No Trojan trull does me retain,
For Troy to cinders quite is rasde,
Priam, and Paris, both are slain,
And all the country quite defasde.
Sarpedon slain, and Hector stout,
And Mars so hurt, his guts came out.
I scotfree escaped, and Rhesus slain,
His palfreys led I to my tent:
I feared not the Thracian train,
But boldly I amidst them went:
And those that Diomedes slew,
Still by the heels I from him threw.
Thou needst not doubt, my life or love,
The one the Trojans could not spill,
Nor the other Mermaids could remove:
To thee it rests constant still.
No comfort have I on the sea,
But love, to make me think on thee.
Parthenope did often assay,
Me to her love for to allure,
Yet could she not me so betray,
My toil I stoutly did endure:
And when she saw I would not stay,
She drowned her self in surging sea.
Nor yet Calypso with her skill,
When in O^ygean Isle I staid,
Could with her druggs win my good will:
Though often so shamefully she assaid.
Though me immortal she would make,
Yet could I not thee so forsake.
And where thou say, thou suitors have,
It is a credit I confess,
If they our substance do not wast,
Nor thee of honor dispossess:
Beware lest thou amidst thy wine,
Do grant them that is none of thine.
If to the hundred thou have had,
A thousand suitors more thou set,
Yet have I had a stir as bad,
With lasses, my true love to get.
Do Lords the court? a common case,
Vnaskt, brave Ladies me embrace.
But (wife) you scarcely did me please,
When Telemac my only son,
You set on mercy of the seas:
Confess a truth it was ill done.
That love ungrateful is ywis,
That to such danger, subject is.
But now his course is finished,
Our danger al is at an end,
My dolor eke diminished:
You after me no more shall send:
For suddenly you shall me see,
Before those Riuals look for me.
Mean while, suppress thy merry cheer,
Let not thy suitors know my mind,
Unto their costs I will appear:
The helhounds shall me feel and find.
Thy countenance see that thou keep,
When thou should laugh, see that thou weep.
I will not open wars proclaim,
Nor yet by force of arms there come,
Amidst their banquet will I aim,
To cut them off both al and some.
And when you see those Riuals slain,
Then say that I am come again.
The advice of Euryclea, nurse to Penelope.
OH daughter dear* my Iem and joy:
My comfort, and my only care,
Ah, Jove preserve thee from annoy,
And from those spoils that, threatened are
Be charie of thy chastity,
Which suitors seek so shamefully.
Thy waiting women they abuse,
Without remorse or conscience sting,
And of thy house they make a stews,
Thee to dishonor, for to bring.
Take heed in time I thee advise,
wit bought, is at too dear a prise.
These ^^stie Gallants swear and stare,
If thou to wed wilt not consent,
Thy house they will topsie turuy tear,
And eke thy heart in pieces rent.
To hide thy self I think it best,
And unto Love commit the rest.
Her reply to Euryclea.
WHat are they men, or are they not?
Or are they beasts, or are they worse?
Are laws of God, and men, forgot?
No care of God, nor yet his curse?
Or dread they not the day of doom?
That they so beastlike are become.
Shall men, that God himself has made?
And do his Image represent,
By their abominable trade:
To be the devils lims consent?
O most unworthy wretches vile,
That do their vessels so defile.
Fie: what can they not eat and drink?
But they must surfeit shamefully?
Can they not mischief mean or think?
But they must blab it by and by.
Can they not pretty damsels use?
But they their bodies must abuse.
Aurelianus here we lack,
Or Iulia with her sacred law:
Then should those gallants go to wrack,
Then better would they stand in awe:
For then the sword or else the tree,
From shameful force, should set us free.
O cursed times, O cruel facts,
O manners vile, for men unfit,
O dismal days, O heinous acts,
O helish hagges, of Plutoes pit.
O spightfull, cruel tyrany,
Enforcing endless misery.
My tongue does tremble for to tell,
The villainy that they invent,
My heart (alas) with grief does swell,
To see brave men so beastly bent,
From this their wicked treachery,
The Lord above deliver me.
She bewaileth Ulysses long tarrying.
HOw does Ulysses time detract?
How does he play the cosoning knight,
He writes Troy is already sacked,
Yet will he not appear in sight.
I fear me he has caught some dove,
And keeps her tame, with tills of love.
I would I wist he false did play,
Of spite I would revenged be:
But then what would the people say?
As is the he, so is the she:
No, no, the care I absent take,
His presence will the sweeter make.
Nor wealth, nor woe* nor enuies cross,
Nor grief, nor gain, nor fortunes fall:
Nor pain, nor pleasure, luck or loss,
Nor treasure, nor yet wretched thrall,
Shall make me my Ulysses loath.
Nor to him false my faith and troath.
The speech of her wooers chalenging her by promise.
COme on (sweet nymph) what answer now?
Your towe is twist, your web is wrought,
With speed perform your sacred vow:
Thy murmring mate his death has sought:
Harpyades have on him fed,
The citie-spoiler he is dead.
Thee for to wed is al our suit,
And now thy answer we expect:
Therefore say quick, be not so mute,
Which of our suits will thou accept?
If thou no ready answer make,
Thy house we never will forsake.
(Sweet Nymph) resolve us now with speed,
Think ere thou speak, deny not flat:
For we are they can do the deed:
Thou may refuse thou know not what:
Make ready Hymaeneus bed,
For why, we must and will thee wed.
Her answer to the wooers.
Sweet Lordings though my web be wrought,
And al my towe be ready spun,
Another doubt comes to my thought,
You know, what worth Ulysses won:
You know he was a worthy knight,
And got him honor for his might.
It me behoues to draw the latch,
And of my choice in time beware,
Lest I with such a milkesop match,
As may augment my wonted care.
Or you in fight for me contend,
And so the mighty Gods offend.
Lo Lordings, this is my decree,
He that Ulysses bow can bend,
That worthy wight shall wed with me:
Away with him I soon will wend.
Hold take in hand to bend the bow,
Your strength that quickly I may know.
Ulysses being come home, disguiseth himself, and soiourning with Penelope
amongst the wooers, makes this answer.
WHy then (fair queen) to win thy love,
I silly wretch will also try,
My shriueled sinews will I prove:
To win this worthy masterie.
Had I my youthful strength and skill,
I would the act right soon fulfill.
Eurymachus I thee beseech,
And eke Antinous I thee pray,
To give me leave my strength to stretch,
Which gods have almost taken away:
Necessity has pincht me too,
A cruel dart it is you know.
The bow resign into my hand,
I trial of my strength will make,
And if the same I cannot bend,
The prize you shall among you take.
But if the bow be by me bent,
To wed the Nymph is my intent.
The wooers scoffingly check Ulysses.
HOw dare thou Palmer thus to prate?
And with us yongsters thus compare?
Content thee with thine own estate:
Of Palmery go take thou care:
Although Ulysses bow thou bend,
With Baldpate shall she never wend,
But too much wine makes thee thus mad,
Which wiser men does brainsicke make,
And brag of that they never had,
If out of measure they it take:
Therefore leave off to make such strife,
For her thou shall not take to wife.
Leave off I say: thus to contend,
If thou will banquet here at rest,
We wey not who the bow does bend,
For that we hold but as a jest.
But if with us thou so contend,
Thou soon shall feel thy fatal end.
She checketh Antinous for abusing her ghests.
ANtinous leave off I say,
Our ghests thus evil to entreat,
Discurteous parts why do thou play?
My stranger thus why do thou threat?
Their neighbors al they will abuse,
That strangers practice to misuse.
This stranger is of stature tall,
And borne of worthy parentage:
The likeliest amongst you all,
If force consists in personage:
Pray give him leave his strength to try,
Why offer you this injury?
If that Apollo give him power,
For manly might the price to win,
Then will I wait on him each hour,
And costly webs array him in:
My only joy I will him make,
And him to husband will I take.
Telemachus wishes his mother to be silent.
FIe: fie: what need you thus to chaunt,
Silence does best become your sex,
It Is giglet-like, thus for to taunt,
What though those vilains do you vex:
Yet (mother) you must patience use,
And smother up this vile abuse.
Unto your maids your mind disclose,
And talk of that you have to do,
What need you counterchecke with those,
That nothing appertains you to:
The^'ll say you are already won,
Their company you cannot shun.
Sweet (mother) let me answer make,
That am a man, and know to speak:
My speech shall make them for to quake,
Against me dare they not to creake.
My father absent, I am king,
New dirges shall they shortly sing.
The death of her wooers represented unto her, in a dream of an Egle and a
flock of geese.
WHy do thou Morpheus me annoy*
What fantasies do thou intrude?
Why do thou me of sleeps sweet joy,
With vain illusions thus delude?
Those dreams iwis that I endure,
I doubt but little good procure.
Last night as I lay in my bed,
Strecht forth (alas) in slumbring wise,
Me thought a flock of geese I fed,
That al my corn could not suffice.
To give them food I did deny,
And yet not one away would fly.
They were a number numberles,
Whose gagling did me much offend:
I made them answer answereles,
And wished them to the fields to wend:
Yet would they not be answered so,
In rest for them I could not go.
At last as they were safe in mue,
A mighty Eagle with them met:
And them, both great and small he slew,
Not one of them could from him get.
No creature could the spoil prevent,
The Eagle was so fiercely bent.
At length when his bloud-thirstie bill,
Had thus upon these goselings praide,
(Me thought) the people for to kill,
This matchles Eagle al assaide.
They were so wroath they swear by gis,
They would dispoile both him and his.
Ah Cesta sweet, I thee implore,
My doubtful dream for to dissolve,
For that which Morpheus told of yore.
I often in my mind reuolue.
The resolution to me show,
And endless thanks I will thee owe.
She hearing Ulysses fighting with her wooers, unknown to her, she fears.
HOw does Ulysses me me deride?
How does he foolefaine me possess?
He promisde to return with speed,
But sure he thinks of nothing less.
My eyes with looking for him ache,
with trembling fear my heart does quake.
What horror does my heart oppress?
What hurly burly do I hear?
What sturdy tumults? (God me bless)
What Is he that plays the tyrant there?
Who Is he cries out, what is he is slain?
Go Girl and see, but hie again.
Hark, hark, at daggers point on life,
Those dronkards with each other fight:
Why does my son not stint the strife?
Ah how does fear my heart affright?
What is the cause of this their ruth?
Come quick (sweet wench) and tell the truth.
Her maid shows the slaughter of her wooers.
ALas, beblubred al with blood,
Antinous lies under board,
Yea Eurymac that was so proud,
Is slain with dint of sharped sword:
Pisanders brains are beaten out,
And Polybe slain that Champion stout.
Eurynomus, he waltring lies,
And eke Polidor worthy knight,
Amphimedon for mercy cries:
And Liodes is put to flight.
Ctesippus put to deadly pain,
And eke Eurydamantus slain.
Liocritus that Lordly lad,
And Demoptolemus is dead,
Euriades has sped as bad,
His brains are knocked out of his head:
I thought amidst their stately pride.
Some stagedie there would be plaide.
She hearing of the death of her wooers, fears lest Ulysses will slay her also.
Alack, and are those Lordings slain?
Why then my Lord Ulysses dear,
Ulysses mine, is come again,
How am I tossed twixt joy and fear?
Ah he, it is he has done this deed:
Yea, he this Stratageme has played,
It is Ulysses deals such blows,
What shall I silly woman do?
Ah see, how furiously he glowes,
I fear he will torment me too:
I will him try, with weeping eyes,
Him to withdraw from tyranies.
Fie: cannot twenty years suffice,
Thy wrathful venom for to spit,
But thou must thus in warlike wise,
Thy tyrany continue yet?
Though no wight can thy wrath appease,
Let me request thee to sureease.
Ulysses making himself known, comfort Penelope with these speeches.
Fear not my iem and hearts delight,
Penelope my spotles spouse,
Those lads no more shall work our spite,
They shall no more defile our house.
Ah I have seen thy constancy,
They virtues have reioyc'd mine eye.
But oh: what have I tyrant done,
(Oh miser borne to endless toil)
Now have I new my care begone,
By this my pittie-wanting spoil.
I merciles have many slain.
For blood shall I pay blood again,
O fury with repentance fraught,
(Ah enemy to perfect peace.)
Thou to confusion have me brought,
(Ah fury foe to humane ease.)
I that my foes have put to flight,
Against my friends am forced to fight.
Penelope fearing to entertain Ulysses, debateth as follows.
BVtah me wretch (borne but to woe)
What entertainment shall I give?
Him, for my Lord how shall I know?
It Is hard to know whom to believe.
Ah my Ulysses was too kind,
To bear such a bloud-thirstie mind,
But (doting dame) what can I tell,
May not God Mars his fury move?
May not Bellona make him fell?
Ah Mars makes Turtles Tigers prove:
And those are ordinary events,
To them that do frequent the tents.
But yet, Ulysses welcome home,
(If thou my Lord Ulysses be)
A thousand times to me welcome,
Thee safe I do rejoice to see.
Yet show (ah good Ulysses show)
Some token that I may thee know.
Ulysses shows by evident tokens, he is no cosening knight.
WHy then I am Laertes son,
And he that Gods, and men do hate,
Scomme of the world, by fates foredone,
Whose death my deeds do calculate,
Ah I am he, that for thy love,
A thousand perils daily prove.
Yea I am he, that fainde me mad,
Thee in my arms for to embrace,
And I am that unhappy swad,
That Palemedes did disgrace.
Yea I am he that for thy sake,
All dangers dare to undertake.
Yea I am he, whose damned hand,
Have slain a knot of noble blood:
And I am he, thou may command,
Alive or dead, to do thee good.
Yea I am he that maugre spite,
Will always rest thy constant knight.
L'enuoy.
Lo Ladies, Jove reserues a friend,
For those that tender chastity,
But Leachers brought to doleful end,
Amidst their chief security:
Penelope for bale had bliss,
When villanes vengeance could not miss.
Let Riuals lot learn Lordly youths,
To shun the snare of lewd desires,
Lest lawles love procure their ruthes,
With liueles lue that lust requires:
Lest whilst they recke not what they do,
Some good Ulysses wrecke their woe.

