A general Confession set forth for all Men and saruauntes to say every morning
before they go to their work or other business, also graces before dynner and
Supper

(.*.)



A Morning prayer
O Mercieful and most loving Father whose love is infinite, whose merci indureth
for ever, we sinful creatures, trusting in thine unspeakable goodness and love
toward us, do appear this morning before thy deuyne majesty, most lowlye
confessyng our manifold sins, and innumerable transgressyons of thy
commandments, and fatherly will. Against the only, against the (O Lord:
have we sinned, therefore we confess our sins, we knowledge our offenses, we
accuse our selves unto the O merciful lord, and will not hyde our
vnryghtousnes. We find in our selves nothing but ignorance of thy will
disobedience, mistruste, doutefulnes in thy goodness, and incredulitiy, hatred,
and contempt of al spirytuall things, selfeloue, confydence in our selves and
fervent lustyng after carnal things of this world. And this tree of our
corrupt nature, brings forth contynually in us none other fruit, but rotten,
and unsavory works of the flesh, in thoughts words and doings, unto
condempnacyon. Wherefore, we humbly beseech thy fatherlye goodness, even for
thy son Jesus Christ's sake, whom thou have set forth for a purchaser toward
us of mercy, through faith in his blood: to make our hertes clean, take
away our stonye hertes, and give unto us a true and a lively faith, which
shall work contynuallye by love, through Christ. Have mercy upon us, forgive
us our sins, for thy sons sake, certifye our Conscience of remission of the
same, by thy holy spirit, by whose operacion, so mortify in us our old man,
the whole body of sin, that we continualy, dying unto sin may walcke in
newness of life, to the glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
So be it.

Then say this. lxxxvi. Psalm followyng treatably.
Bow down thine ear (O Lord) and hear me, for I am pore and in misery.

O preserve my soul, for I am holy: my God save thy servant, that puts
his trust in the.

Be mercyful unto me (O Lord) for I will call daily upon the. Comfort the soul
of thy servant for unto the (O Lord) do I lift up my soul.

For thou Lord art good and gracious, and of great mercy unto al them that call
upon the.

Give ear Lord to my prayer, and ponder the voice of my humble desires.

In the time of my trouble I will call upon the, for thou hear me. Among the
Gods there is none like unto the (O Lord) there is not one that can do as thou
doste.

Al nations who^ thou haste made shall come and worship the, O Lord: and shall
glorify thy name.

For thou art great, and do wondrous things, you art God alone Teach me
thy way (O Lord) and I will walk in thy truth: O knit my heart unto the, that
it may fear thy name.

I will thank, ye O lord my God, with all my heart, and will praise thy name for
ever.

For great is thy mercy toward me, and thou haste delivered my soul from the
nethermooste hell.

O God, the proud are risen against me, and the congregacyons of naughty men
have sought after my soul, and have not set ye before their eyes.

But thou O lord God, art full of compassion, and mercy, long suffering,
plenteous in goodness and truth.

O turn the then unto me, and have mercy upon me: give thy strength unto the
servant, and help the son of thyn handmaid. Show some token upon me for
good, yt they which hate me may se it, and be ashamed, because thou Lord have
helped me, and co^mforted me.

Glory be to the father, to the son and the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Then say the Creed and the lords prayer. etc.
Lord show thy mercy upon us.

And grant us thy salvation.

O Lord save the King.

And mercifulli here us when we call upon the.

Indue thy mynysters with righteousness.

And make thy chosen people Ioiful:
O Lord save thy people
And bless thine enheritaunce.
Give peace in our time O Lord.
Because there is none other yt fights for us but only thou O God:
O God make clean our hearts within us
And take not thy holy spirit from us.
Let us pray.
O God which art author of peace and lover of concord, in knoledge of whom
stands our eternal life whose service is perfect fredome: defend us thy
humble servants in all assults of our enemies, that we suerly trusting in thy
defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries, tho row the might of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord our heaue^lye father almighty and everlasting God, which have safely
brought us to the beginning of this day: defend us in the same with thy
mighty power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, nether run
into any kind of danger, but that al our doings may be or dred by thy
governance, to do all ways that is ryghtuous in thy sight, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer for the Kings Majesty.
ALmyghtye God whose kingdom is everlasting and power infinite, have mercy upon
the whole congregation, and so rule the heart of thy chosen servant, Edward the
syxte, our king and governor that he (knowing whose minister he is may above
al things, seek thy honor and glory: and that we his subjects (duly
considering whose authoryty he has) may faithfully serve, honor, and humblye
obey him, in the, and for the, according to thy blessed word and ordinance:
Through Jesus Christ our Lord who with the, and the holy ghost, lives and
reigns ever one god, world without end. Amen.

Grace before Dynner.
Jesus Christ the son of God, that for our sakes dyddest dye and shed thy
most precious blood, for the forgeuenes of our sins, bless thou these our
meats and drinks, which we purpose at this time to receive in thy name, and
assyst us O Lord, with thy grace of thy holy spirit, to amend our lives, that
according to thy holy and pure Gospel, we may live to thy glory, and the
profit of our brethren. And when the days of this our pilgrimage shall be
ended, grant us to finish ye same in thy peace, that we may at the day of
judgment, have a joyful resurreccion into everlasting life: thorough thy most
precious death: which art the son of God and our everlasting savior. To
who^ with the father, and the holy ghost be all honor, glory, and praise for
ever and ever. Amen.

GOd preserve King Edward the.vi. God destroy all his enemies. God
preseruehys Systers, with all his most honorable Counselors God aid the
clargy with his spirit insettyng forth of his truth. God preserve al ye
Nobiliti of this relme and all the Commones of the same. God defend the
favorers of the Gospel. God change the hearts of our enemies, and send them
a better mind. The power of God destroy Antichriste, with al his wicked
kingdom. God send the gospel a joyful and a fre passage throughout the whole
world. God send unto al degrees such grace that they may walk worthily in
their vocacion and calling. Amen.

The peace of God, which passes al understanding, keep our her tes and minds
in the knoweledge and love of God, and of his son Jesus Christ our Lord. And
the blessing of God almighty, the father the son, and the holy ghost be
amongeste us, and remain with us always. Amen.

Grace after Dynner.
O Lord which art the creator of all creatures, and haste prepared for them to
do according to the nature of their creacion: we most hartelye thank the for
these thy creatures which at this time we received in thy name, besechinge the
(O father) that as our bodies are now by these thy gifts refreshed: so our
soul may also be noury shed with the fode of everlasting life, in thy most
holy testament, confirmed with the blood and death of Jesus Christ thy son
and our savior. To who^ with the eternal father, and the holy ghost, be al
honor, glory, and praise for ever andeuer, Amen.

God preserve King Edward. etc.

Grace before Supper.
BRrethren, in that we are now here gathered together in the name of the
Lord, to taste of these his gifts, which he has sent us, let us first give
him most hartye thanks, for these and all other his benefits, showed upon us,
calling for grace of his holy spirit, that we may daily grow into perfeccyon
of godliness, to ye glory of his most blessed name, and the comfort of all our
brethren, mindful of their necessitis, and to succoure and help them being
members of one body with us, having one head Jesus christ which gave him self
for us, a sacrifice of sweet sauoure unto God the father, for the remission of
our sins, through his most precious blood for ever and ever. To whom with
him, and the holy ghost be al honor, glory, and praise world without end. So
be it, God pre. etc

Grace after Supper.
We thancke the O heavenly father, which of thy aboundaunte goodness, haste
this day sent us our food in due season, to norysh these our mortal bodies,
with beseching also of thy infinite mercy, to pardon and forgive us all our
offenses, which we have committed against thy deuyne majesty, that we may
this night rest in the with a quiet conscience abiding thy holy hand in the
morening, to arise us up to do ye thing that shall be pleasant in thy sight to
thy glory, and our soul health grant this o father, for thy dearly beloved
sons sake Jesus Christ our everlasting savior. To who^ with the and the holy
ghost, be al honor, glory and praise, for ever and ever. Amen. God preserve.
etc.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgare beneth Saint
Martins.


