THE CONVERTS FIRST LOVE Discerned, Justified, Left, and Recovered.

Resolving THE TRVTH OF AN EFFECTVALL CONVERSION: AND Informing THE RIGHT WAY
TO PERSEVERANCE and PERFECTION.

By THOMAS COOPER.

(...).

LONDON, Printed by F. KINGSTON for WILLIAM WELEY, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the white Swanne. 1610.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and religious, Sir James Harington, Sir William
Dier, Sir William Fairut, Sir Edward Harington, Sir Thomas Fulgeam, Knights,
and their virtuous Ladies, grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father through
JESUS CHRIST the son of the Father, in truth and love.
RIght Worshipful, and dearly beloved in the Lord, whom I love also in the
truth; and not I only, but they that have known the truth, for the truths
sake which dwells in us, which is professed and maintained of you, and shall
abide with and preserve us for ever. Blessed be God, even the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has revealed his son unto you, and has given you a
large heart toward his Saints, that your delight is the Law of the Lord, and
your affections are to the excellent that are on earth, to consider wisely of
the cause of the afflicted, and to minister comfort to the distressed soul.
And blessed be the name of his Majesty for ever, who has respected the base
estate of his servant, and made me a witness both of your love unto his word,
and his afflicted members. In consideration whereof, as I can do no more then
testify my thankfulness unto our gracious God, for his mercies bestowed on
me, not only in delivering me from a most desperate sickness, but in casting
me graciously on such feeling members, who ministered so abundantly toward my
recovery: so I must do no less then to do my utmost endeavor, that the
memorial of the just may live for ever, and their righteousness may be had in
everlasting remembrance, to their more comfortable assurance that their reward
is with God; when all will worship and presumption of merit shall be
confounded: and to the provocation of the Saints in these days, wherein
charity is grown cold, that they be not weary of well-doing, as being assured
that in due time they shall reap, if they faint not. And the rather do I
find my self obliged at this time to this Christian duty, because the Lord
having enabled me in my great weakness to bestow a spiritual gift upon the
most of your worships, being graciously by Gods holy hand brought together to
such good ends: it pleased his good Majesty, so to affect your hearts with
that heavenly treasure, as not only to hearken with all reverence and attention
unto the wholesome word of life, but for the further establishing of your
judgments, and trial of your hearts thereby, that it might appear your holy
purpose was to cleave unto the Lord in the obedience of his word: our gracious
God, in the riches of his mercy, inclined some of your hearts (I doubt not,
for the behoof of all) to desire a brief of what had been publicly taught,
thereby to try the spirits with the men of Berea, and so to hold the truth in
constancy of well-doing. And could I do better then, according Act. 1. 7.
to my poor strength and memory, then to leave such general and short notes
with you, which might in some sort testify my desire to build you forward in
Christ Jesus, howsoever they could not satisfy your desires for the full
resolving of your consciences in so principal and profitable a point as is the
trial and recovery of our first love?

And ought I not then to endeavor the further kindling of such smoking flax,
such holy and gracious desires? May I not justly take occasion in paying a debt
unto you, to make the Church of God become my debtor for this pains, now
published for the general good, and so engage my self in a further and more
general debt; both of prayer, that the Lord would give a blessing to these
poor labors; and of further pains, as God shall minister health, occasion,
and liberty? And shall not the Saints also become debtors unto you, by whose
holy desires it is, that they now also have this glass, to discern aright
their estate in grace, to recover their decaies, and grow to perfection? And is
not the Lord indebted unto us all, to crown his own graces, and recompense
the faithful imploiment of his talents? And has not our glorious Matt. 25.
28. 29 2. Cor. 12. 8.
God thus brought light out of darkness? Will he not perfect his power in
weakness, and wisdom in humane infirmity? Shall not the dead men live? Esaias
26. Zach. 3.
Shall not they awake and sing, which have sat in the dust, yea in the shadow
of death, yea have been even swallowed up of the nethermost hell? Shall not
the brand be plucked out of the fire, and the prey out of the teeth? That the
glory may be unto our God, and not unto men. Behold (says Jacob) I had not
thought Esaias 49. Genes. 48. 11.
to have seen thy face; and yet the Lord has let me live to see thy seed.
This is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes. Accept therefore
(right worshipful) some fruit of your desires, and evidence of Gods power in
this weakness of his servant: which the more it appears, let our God the more
have the only glory both of your desires and my endeavors, in blessing both
with conscionable practice in this life, and crowning also both with competent
perfection and glory in the life to come. This is the fruit of our labors; and
for this, is, and shall be, the scope and sum of my prayers unto our God for
you, that according to his promise he would make you perfect in every good
work, to do his will on earth, that his will may be done on you for ever in
heaven; to reign with Jesus Christ in that glory, which never fades. And so I
humbly take my leave.

From my poor house at COVENTRY, this 10. of April, 1610. Your Worships most
bounden, for ever in Jesus Christ, THOMAS. COOPER.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, WISDOM TO DISCERN HIS Estate aright, and grace to
grow forward to perfection.
Beloved in the Lord Jesus, it is a most dangerous, and yet very easy and
plausible delusion, to conceit unto our selves an estate in grace, when as yet
we remain the bond-slaues of Satan. And it is a very difficult, and yet most
necessary trial, to discern our constant abiding and proceeding in this
estate of grace. For (to pass by those who make a mock of conversion, as
being a touch of novelty, a brand of inconstancy, and imputation of
hypocrisy) who is there almost that flatters not himself to be in the favor
of God, and so interessed in his grace? And has he not many such pretenses and
colors heereunto, which may so abuse his judgment, that he may think
himself to be somewhat, when he is nothing; Galat. 6. 3.
and so refusing to be found in Christ, by being lost and emptied in himself,
thereby become worse then nothing? Better never to have been borne, then so to
be deceived. Oh how the wisdom of the flesh proves here enmity against God!
Is not this the judgment upon the world, that they Romans 8. 7. John 9. 43.
Occasions to conceive a false conversion. 1. Complexion.
which see not, might see; and that they which see might be made blind?
Consider first, I pray you, how nature occasions this deceit. Is any disposed
less euilly by the benefit of his complexion? Is any constrained from some act
of evil by natures impotencie and deformity? 2. Natures impotencie.
Behold, even these to the natural man prove very dangerous stumbling
blocks, to rest in nature, as affoording some show of good, more then is in
others of an harder constitution, as breaking out less into gross evils, then
such, who by natures ability are more prone and provoked thereto. And is it
not esteemed a sufficient measure of goodness, to be less evil then others,
howsoever the desire and fountain of corruption be the same in all? Is not the
seeming good which by natures benefit shows forth in the world, accounted
current holiness, and thereby excludes the true power of well-doing?

Especially if to this show of natures righteousness Education 3. Education.
be adioined, whereby the mind being informed in knowledge, and restrained by
civility, natures evil is hereby more kept under, and it seeming good set
out more saleable and beauteous to the sinister judgment: howsoever now nature
has gained no other then a weapon of unrighteousness, to commit sin more
dangerously, by how much it is enabled to couch it more closely, and smooth it
more cunningly; yet this with the world passes for a current conversion,
especially if some such change now appear in the outward man, whereby we may
either differ from the rusticitie and gross abuses of our parents, or differ
from the barbarous and desperate sprouts of our childhood, and untamed youth.

And if now the Lord shall give the wicked their desire, in 4. Restraining
spirit.
affoording them so far the use of his spirit, as to restrain yet more
inward corruption by it power and terror, that so they may be fitter for such
outward prosperity as they have especially made choice of in this life, and so
renounced their interest in heaven, and withal may frame better to society,
both of the good, to whom now they shall do less hurt, as also of the evil,
whom by this means they may provoke to good; that so Gods government of the
world may be more beautiful and glorious, and his will more iustifiably
accomplished in the elect and reprobate. Is not this restraint apprehended, as
a great conquest over corruption; and so a conversion hence vainly concluded;
seeing the inward heart is no whit renewed, but only the corruption restrained
from the outward act? nay, is not corruption more enraged inwardly, the more it
is outwardly bridled and smothered? and so sin made out of measure sinful: as
being more inexcusable, Romans 7.
the more it is curbed: as breaking out more desperately, Note.
when the bridle is rejected: as ripening more dangerously, the more it boileth
within: and so sealing up vengeance more certainly, yea more fearfully hastening
it, as proceeding to despite the spirit of grace. Heb. 10. 27. 28.


And what though the Lord bestow on the wicked many 5. Spirit of illumination.
Matthew. 7.
excellent graces of his spirit, inabling them to teach others, to do wondrous
things, furthering them so far in the show of holiness, as that they shall
seem for a time to outstrip the sincere professor? May they not teach other,
and yet themselves be rejected? May they not do miracles, 1. Cor. 9. Job 10.
Gal. 6. 10. 2. Tim. 3.
and yet hear, I know you not? Shall not the candle of the hypocrite be put
out? Does not this fair show in the flesh deceive, and prove deceived?

What should I tell you of that change that is wrought by 6. Afflictions.
afflictions? Will not the wicked in their troubles seek the Lord diligently?
Must not the vilest forbear when they cannot otherwise choose? And is it any
masterie, not to revenge, when power is not in our hands? Will not the swine
that is now cleansed, return to the mire again? Is it charity, then to
forgive the world, when we see no time left for Psalm. 78. 2. Pet. 2.
execution of malice? Is it patience, to forbear when we can neither will nor
choose? Is it obedience, to tremble under the whip? to fear God only for his
justice, and not to love him for his mercy?

Oh but we are delivered out of trouble, and restored to 7. Prosperity.
great happiness. Behold, we are blessed on the earth: and are not we then
truly blessed? Is not this a mark of holiness, to be prosperous in the world?
Would God bless our labors, if we did not serve him? May not this change from
affliction to prosperity be a certain evidence of an inward change, from
worse to better, and so prove unto the flesh a conceit of conversion?

Surely, if the world be Judge, the case is quickly ruled. Who is the good
man, but the rich man? Either his riches shall be the cloak to hide his faults
by greatness, briberie, cunning packing, friendship, etc. or his evil by the
flattery of the world shall be accounted good: he will not do so for his
credit: he needs not steal, oppress: he has wherewithal: his covetousness
is thrift; his pride, cleanliness; his prodigality, bounty; his looseness,
liberty and prerogative. Has he not power of all in his hands? And may he
not do what he list? Is not his lust a law, his example a rule and warrant? He
fears no trouble; therefore he deserves none. Who can say, Black is his eye?
because, who dares say so? Nay, who will not say, black is white, if it may
please him? Thus prosperity makes a convert, if the world may give in evidence.

Especially if our fullness in the world be graced with some 3. Civil calling.
civil calling, whereby we are honored of the people, and taken up with
imploiments; is not idleness now much prevented, and so such sins as do
accompany the same? Does not credit now restrain, where conscience cannot? Is
there not now a cloak for sin, and countenance for iniquity? What defense
is fathered hence for neglect of spiritual duties? What opportunity offered,
to color oppression and deceit? What pretense for licentiousness, and excess
in the abuse of the creatures? What wrapping up of abuses, where there is
fellowship in evil? Is not here a glorious mask for sincerity and religion,
where outward honesty in a civil calling becomes a warrant of uprightness,
seeing our faith is showed by works? And what more obuious and commendable
then our civil imploiments, so beneficial to the Commonweal, so necessary
for our private, so succesfull in the issue, as who (in opinion) more blessed?
What is it, if not godliness, that is so plentifully recompensed in this life?
If now the wicked eat the labors of their hands, and drink their wine in
bowls, may they not sacrifice to their nets? May they not cry aim unto their
souls, Oh well is thee, and happy shall thou be? Thus civil imploiment with
worldlings is accounted religion: and to be morally just and true in contracts
and bargains, goes current with men for stanch and sound holiness.

But if we enter into Gods sanctuary, and by the rule of the word determine
hereof; is not the prosperity of the wicked Prou. 1. Psalm. 55. Ier. 48. 11.
their destruction, and not their conversion? Does not the old sent remain in
Moab, because he was not changed from vessel to vessel, but enioied constant
prosperity thereby, was settled on his l^es, and rooted more obstinately in
natures dregs, thereby exercised more greedily and desperately the lusts
thereof? Can the change of the outward estate Os. 4. 7. Psalm. 78. Os. 5.
change the inward man from worse to better? As they were increased, so, did
not Gods people rebel against him, who in their afflictions sought unto him
deceitfully? Is not here a change from better to worse? An hypocrite in
affliction, as being bridled and restrained, proves a desperate enemy, when
by prosperity he has power in his hands.

As for walking in a civil calling, howsoever this (being sanctified by the
spiritual) may be a means to lay up a 1. Tim. 4. 5.
good foundation against the day of Christ, 1. Tim. 6. 19. 20. yet to the
natural man there is not a more dangerous outward means to exclude grace,
then the greatest measure of honesty that is seen therein. For is it not the
grace of this calling to rest in it self for good success, without invocation
of Gods assistance, or reference to his blessing? Is not our pursuit hereof a
privilege to exempt from holy duties? We must live, and therefore we cannot be
bookish. We have no leisure to the Church, etc. Nay, is it not a price,
proposed to encourage diligence in these worldly businesses, even license to
profane the Sabbaths, to despise the word? etc. And what if men keep touch
and day in paiments and contracts? What if a little eie-seruice be used in the
outside of their wares? Is it for conscience to God, to whom they desire to
approve the truth of their hearts; or only a care for the maintenance of
trading, and mutual commerce, which without this outward equity must needs be
abolished? Who will trust, or shall be trusted, if word be not kept? But is it
kept any further, then may clear from touch of man's law? Is promise kept here
to our hindrance, so we may wind out by the arm of flesh? Is the substance of
our wares any thing less then answerable to the show? Is not God robbed of his
glory, while we sacrifice to our labor and wit? and Is not this great Babel,
which I have built for the honor of my name? etc.

Surely as these outward things are common to all, so no man knows love or
hatred, either by prosperity or adversity. Eccl. 9. 1.
Well may a good man (by right usage) make these good unto him; but these of
themselves may well make him worse: otherwise they have no power inwardly to
better him: Only it belongs unto God (through the ministry of his word) to
convert the soul, as tendering (to this end) unto us, not Psalm. 19.
corruptible things, as silver and gold, which make outwardly happy in this
life; but the precious blood of Christ, as a 1. Pet. 1. 18.
Lamb undefiled and without spot, whereby we are cleansed from all our
sins, and redeemed from our vain conversation, 1. Ioh. 1. 8.
received by the tradition of the fathers.

But hearken, I pray you, unto a further plea of the hypocrite: 8. Profession.
Practice. Matthew. 7.
Have we not heard thee teaching in our streets? Nay, Have we not taught in thy
name? Have we not Luke 8. Mark. 6. 25.
received the word with joy, and done many things accordingly? Can the best do
more? Do not we in many things offend all? Is not this a sufficient evidence
of an effectual conversion?

Surely where the grace of God, which brings salvation Tit. 2. 11.
to all men, has appeared effectually, there it teaches us, not only to
eschew all evil, in thought, word, and deed; but Matthew. 5.
on the contrary, to prosecute all good, both 1. inwardly in the Act. 15. 19.
heart and mind, as being purified by faith, whereby with constant purpose we
cleave unto God, and also 2. outwardly Act. 1^. 23.
in the word and conversation: Iam. 3. 1. Ephesians. 1. Romans 12. 1. 1. Cor. 6. yea
generally and universally, having respect to all Gods Commandments: Psalm. 119.
7. 8. and constantly also continuing and abounding, yea increasing in grace,
and finishing our course, that no man take away our Crown: Reu. 3. 1. Cor. 15.
58. Ephesians. 3. Col. 1. 2. Pet. 1. 8. 9. 2. Tim. 4. 3. Phil. 13.

And therefore seeing the word of God must be a savor of death unto death
unto some who are to be renounced, and 2. Cor. 2. 14. John 15. Psalm. 119.
Ezech. 33. 30. 31. Heb. 4. 2.
made inexcusable thereby; hence is it, that though they receive it 1. with
joy, as being ravished with the sweetness thereof; yet being not mixed with
faith, it becomes unprofitable, and so the joy of the hypocrite lasts but a
moment. And so it comes also to pass, that for carnal respects, as
vainglory, credit, satisfaction of others, whom they desire to be like, the
hypocrite also may do many things according to the letter of the word, though
not answerable to the power thereof; not from the purpose of his heart, renewed
by the holy Ghost; but executing therein the lust of his heart, as spiritual
pride, hypocrisy, etc. Neither shall he be able to continue in any substance
of well-doing, seeing howsoever for his credit and profit he must sometimes
show religious, yet by reason of difference of company, change of times and
occasions, he must even for the same ends of credit and profit, cast off his
visour of holiness, and so appear in his true likeness, to the satisfying of
such to whom nothing but gross and desperate wickedness will give any
contentment. Nay does not this necessity lie upon the hypocrite, that howsoever
for a time he must gloss and fawn upon the truth, while it is his pack-horse to
further him to promotion, riches, etc. yet when by plunging himself into
worldly courses, he must necessarily cross in his outward actions the power
of that truth, must he not now for his credit abase and vilify that truth
which before he so magnified? as being either too severe and precise, because
he cannot reach it: or being foolishness and madness; and therefore he is 1.
Cor. 1. 21.
now more wise, more sober, then to be guided by it: you must pardon his former
folly and giddiness: he will do no more so; he will be more wise, moderate,
etc. This is the issue of an hypocrites supposed conversion, answerable even
unto the measure thereof; which being not rooted in the heart, nor aiming at
Gods glory, no marvel if the glory of an hypocrite prove his confusion. And
is he not justly deceived in this fancy of regeneration? Is he not hereby
excluded from the power of conversion, because he rests in the shadow thereof?

But to admit a true conversion: Is the combat now at an end? or not rather
now begun? Is there any place here for idleness, security, remissness in our
calling? Surely though the foundation stands sure in respect of God, who
knows 2. Tim. 2 19.
who are his; yet it lies much in us, either to make sure 2. Pet. 1. 10.
and beautify the building, by being watchful and diligent in well-doing; or
else by our negligence and security to deface 2. Phil. 12. Psalm. 51. Psalm. 73.
Malach. 3.
and interrupt the same, yea many times, to our sense and feeling, even utterly
to overthrow the same. For proof hereof, peruse this treatise ensuing: let it
be, in Gods fear, a touchstone unto thee, to make trial of a sound
conversion: and take it as a preservative, to keep thee in the power of
godliness, that so thou may not leave thy first love. If by pride or security
thou have been left to thy self, and Revel. 2.
so have left thy former measure, view thy self diligently in this present
glass, and use it as a means for thy recovery and perseverance. Expect not
what may be said, seeing my health and study affoords only breuity: neither
misconstrue what may be well digested, lest thou be perverted by a stumbling
block. Though many are called, yet but few are chosen: and therefore if few
digest this pill: let them not condemn Matthew. 22. 14.
the physic, but their own ill-disposed hearts. Those that can get meat out
of the eater, and sweetness out of the strong, let them praise the glorious
Lord, who brings light 2. Cor. 4. 6. 7.
out of darkness; and not cease praying unto our gracious Father, that he
would turn our darkness into light, and Ioh. 12.
enable us to work while yet we have the light: that so we may approve our
selves the children of the light, and be prepared to that light which shall
never be changed into darkness. Even so be it. Come Lord Jesus: Come quickly.
()

In whom I rest thine unfeignedly, THOMAS COOPER.

DOCTRINES AND OBSERVAtions opened herein, are,
1 That the best have their infirmities. 2 The least evil in the Saints
causes the Lord to have a controversy with them. 3 Sin not to be
smoothered, but plainly reproved. 4 The godly must persevere in grace, and
grow to perfection. 5 Every true convert has a first love: where, of the
means and marks thereof. 6 The Convert may leave his first love: where, of
the means whereby it is cooled. 7 First love may seem to be lost, when it is
not, where diverse false imputations are removed. 8 The leaving of first love,
with the true marks and symptoms thereof. 9 First love how to be recovered,
and re-gained again, etc. 10 How far the Saints may recover their first
love. 11 The Saints cannot finally nor wholly lose their first love: but shall
in some measure recover it.
THE CONVERTS FIRST LOVE.
REVELAT. 2. 4. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee: because thou have
left thy first Love.
Our blessed Savior, having by the Ministry of his Apostles planted diverse
Churches in Asia: directs his servant John the Evangelist, to write unto each
of them, for their further strengthening in the faith. And, because Occasion
and coherence.
the Church of Ephesus, was both famous for the outward glory, and inward
graces thereof, as also in a sort the peculiar charge of the Apostle John,
therefore does he first Verse 1.
send greeting to that Church; giving very just and true testimony unto her of
the great graces of God bestowed upon her, and her profitable use of them, in
the second and third verses. And that she might not be overcome of spiritual
pride, to which in regard of such excellent graces she might be subject; yea,
was so tainted therewith, as that it wrought in her some security, and
thereupon remissness: he therefore gives her notice of this her decay and
cooling in the fourth verse: telling her that He had somewhat against her,
because she had left her first love; both, therein expressing the greatness of
her fall, by the excellency of the thing wherein she failed, namely, her first
love; as also, aggravating this her fall, by the just esteem thereof in the
judgment of her Savior Christ: namely, that it gave occasion for him, that
was her advocate, now to come against her, and to have a controversy with her,
as an enemy; and Ose 4. 1. Lament. 2.
thereby giving her to conceive in what a fearful case she stood, having him
now to be against her; who if he were Romans 8. 31.
on her side, she need not fear who were against her; who being against her,
all other things, though with her, must necessarily serve to her further
condemnation.

So that these words, do contain a description of some Sum and sense.
declination in this Church of Ephesus, with some arguments, to lay this her
estate more closely to her heart, that so she might by repentance recover her
self again.

Wherein first, that this Church of Ephesus, though otherwise endowed with
excellent graces, and having so prospered in the holy use of them, that she
receives a testimony from the truth himself, of such great faithfulness, as
to have endured patiently, and not fainted; is yet notwithstanding, charged by
the same Lord Jesus, to be defective, and to have some failings and
imperfections in her, we may learn here this lesson. That as the best Church,
so the best Christian has, and may have some infirmities 1. Doctrine. The best
have their infirmities.
and corruptions; as appears by these places: 1. Ioh. 1. 9. James 3. 2.
Chron. 8. 36. and by the examples of the best: David, 2. Sam. 12. commits
murder and adultery; Peter denies his master, Matthew. 27. Moses did not give
glory to God in believing his word; Noah was drunken, Solomon idolatrous, etc.
Numb. 20. Genesis 38. Genesis 9. Thus have the saints of God been subject to
infirmities, and that not before their conversion only, but even after also; as
the Apostle Paul in the name of all the rest, acknowledges for himself in the
seventh to the Romans 19, 20, 21, 22.

And surely, seeing the Lord Jesus has satisfied the Ephesians. 2. Col. 2. Romans 5.
1. John 1. 8. Ephesians. 5. 23.
wrath of his father for us, in fulfilling the law, and undergoing the
penalty thereof: and so continues daily our intercessor and suertie to answer
unto the justice of God for our offenses, and to obtain pardon for them: so
that there is no necessity that we should be freed quite from sin, and so
perfect, as to fulfill the law of God, seeing the Lord Jesus has performed this
already, and therefore for us to undertake the same, were to intrude into
Christ's office, and so to rob him of his glory. Therefore that some
infirmities Romans 6. 12. Romans 8. 1.
and corruptions do remain in us, seeing now the guilt and punishment, yea
the dominion and rage of sin is taken away by Christ. It is very convenient
and profitable, and that first:

1. That Gods free mercy, may be daily advanced in Reasons. Why infirmities
remain in the Saints. Ephesians. 5. 1. Ioh. 1. 8. Romans 4.
the pardoning of sin, Psalm. 51. 12, 13.

2. That the merit of Christ Jesus, may be glorified, in satisfying for sin,
John 9.

3. That our salvation may be better assured unto us, in the daily experience
of Gods love, in the forgiveness and healing of our particular corruptions, 2.
Pet. 1. 8.

4. That the graces of the spirit may be exercised in the daily resisting and
conquering of sin, Ephesians. 6. 11, 12, 13. 1. Pet. 4.

5. That the power of God may be perfited in weakness, 2. Corinthians. 12. 8, 9.
2. Cor. 4. 7, 8.

6. And the Lord only might have the glory of his works in us, Romans 4. 2.
Cor. 12.

7. That we may be daily humbled in the sense of our infirmities, and so
preventing pride and security, we may forget that which is behind, and hasten
to that which is before, Phil. 3. 13.

8. That we might be more compassionate toward our brethren, as being subject
to like temptations with them, Galath. 6. 1. Genes. 38. Judah.

9. That ye wicked may hereby take offense, who seeing the infirmities of the
Saints; and from thence, their chasticements: take hence occasion, to condemn
the generation of the just, and to ripen their sin by adding affliction to
affliction, Zach. 1. Psalm. 73. etc.

That Gods children might daily renounce their own righteousness, and fly
unto Christ, living the life of faith, and contenting themselves with the
sufficiency of Gods grace: 2. Cor. 12. Abac. 2.

And seeing, that as long as they live, they shall be subject to infirmities:
therefore also hereby are they weaned from the love of this life, and the
pleasures thereof, which are no better then fuel to their sin.

And also, provoked to hunger and sigh after their dissolution, that so they
may be delivered from this body of sin: Romans 7. 24.

And this serves first for reproof, and that first of the Uses. 1. Of
reproof: 1. of the Papist.
Papist, that boasts of merit and perfect obedience, not acknowledging that
to be sin which is, and counting that good which is evil, robbing thereby
Christ of his glory, and himself of the assurance of his salvation.

2. Of the profane Protestant, that flatters himself in 2. Profane
Protestant.
his sin, with this, That all have their faults, and the best has some
infirmities, and therefore he will live in his sin; he hopes to be saved as
well as others: what need we make so much ado?

3. The ignorant Protestant is here condemned; who 3. The ignorant Protestant.
though in general he confess that he is a sinner, yet denies that he
has in particular broken any of the commandments; he is no whore, no thief;
deceiving himself by the letter of the law, and in truth thereby denying that
he has any sin at all.

4. The carnal Protestant is here also convinced, and 4. The carnal
Protestant.
that in many respects:

1. In that he hates to be reproved; whereby he would be conceived righteous,
and without fault. 2. That he will not strive against his corruptions, because
he cannot wholly be rid of them: pleading it to be impossible, and so in vain
to be attempted. Whereas it is:
1. The commandment of God to strive against sin, Sin to be striuen
against, though we can not fully and wholly subdue it in this life.
though it still remain. 2. By striving we conquer some gross sins, as
swearing, whoring, etc. so that we never fall into them again. 3. We by this
spiritual fight do weaken and diminish the force of all sin, and so daily
get ground thereof. 4. We by taming of sin, make it serviceable unto us; by
outward corruptions, purging out secret abominations; so that all does turn to
our exceeding good. 5. And so continuing in this spiritual warfare to the end,
we fight the good fight of faith, and finish our course with joy: 1. Tim. 6.
2. Tim. 4.
5. The weak Protestant is reproved that esteems his 5. The weak Protestant.
case singular, when he is overtaken with any gross sin.

Secondly, this serves for instruction, and that many 2. Use, of instruction.
ways: as,

1. To teach us to rest wholly on Christ in the matter of 1. To rest only on
Christ.
our salvation, and to esteem all as dung in regard of him; to desire to be
found in him, not having our own righteousness, but the righteousness which
is of faith: Philip. 3. verse. 8. 9.

2. We may hence learn to be abased and truly humbled; 2. To be humbled with
inward corruptions.
not with our outward afflictions, which may breed worldly sorrow, but with our
inward corruptions, which may cause godly sorrow to repentance: 2. Corin. 2.
James 4. 8, 9.

3. And seeing the best has his infirmities, here is a notable means, to
teach the proudest to have compassion, to 3. To be compassionate to others.
put on meekness of spirit, and tenderness of heart; in relieuing and
raising up his afflicted brother, that so the communion of Saints may be
maintained by the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: Galath. 6.

4. Here is matter of trial in this state of infirmities, 4. To try our
estate in sanctification by infirmities.
which seems common to all; whether yet we are such as are renewed in Christ,
to whom our sin shall not be imputed: namely, If

1. We hate all sin indifferently with a perfect hatred. 2. Strive unfeignedly
against all sins. 3. Judge our selves daily for sins particular. 4.
Condemn secret corruptions. 5. Wholly rely on Christ for pardon for sins.
6. Hunger after death in regard of sin: Romans 7. 7. Endure reproof patiently,
and amend.
Thirdly, this serves for comfort, and that many ways. As,

1. In that God has left infirmities in us: therefore have 3. Use. Of comfort.
That we have right in Christ.
we hence assurance of our right in Christ, who came to save sinners, and
shall have experience of the power of Christ, in the daily subduing, and
mastering of our corruptions. And therefore

2. Let us not despair in our greatest tentations, seeing To prevent despair.
the greater misery the greater mercy. As it is God our father that has left
sin in us, yea in the dearest, to advance his free and constant love: so has
he given his Son to reveal this love unto us by the operation of the Spirit,
1. Ioh. 1. 8. Ephesians. 5. 19. 20. 21. Romans 5. 3. 4. Galat. 4. 6. 7.
shedding it abroad in our hearts, through the daily assurance of the pardon of
our sins, and continual enabling to conquer the same: Romans 5. 2, 3.

3. To this end let us not think our case singular, seeing Not to imagine our
case singular.
the best have not been exempted from infirmities, whereby Satan would drive us
to despair; but rather the greater our infirmities are, the greater experience
may we look for of the mercies of our God, who will lay no more upon us then
we shall be able to endure, 1. Cor. 10. 13: but will give an issue with the
temptation, that so we may be able to bear it.

4. Lastly, though we have infirmities; yet let this comfort us, that our God
will not let them fester in us, but by That infirmities shall not fester in us.
Job 33. 15. Act. 2. 36, 37, 38
the power of our conscience, or ministry of the word, by some outward
chastisement, etc. we shall know our iniquity; that so we may perform
seasonable repentance: and this is the next observation that follows in the
text, out of the practice of our Savior with his Church; who does not flatter
her in her sin, by concealing the same, (as a false Prophet would have winked
at it, and only stood upon commendation, yea happily ascribe that which was
not true) but deals faithfully with her. As he commends her for her good
parts: so he reproues her for that evil of her decay.

And this teaches us, that 2. Doctrine. Sin to be reproved. Leuit. 19. 17.


We must reprove our brother plainly for his sin: so do we testify, and
approve;

1. The faithfulness of our calling and duty unto God, Reasons.
in delivering the whole counsel of God, as well reproof for sin, as praise
for well doing. 2. Tim. 3. 16. 2. Tim. 4. 2.

2. Our love to our brother, both in preventing Gods judgments by our
reproves, or else sanctifying them unto a sinner. At least we justify God,
and make the sinner without excuse: Ezech. 33. and save our own souls. As
also hereby we provoke him to repentance, and so by renewed repentance to
perfection: Leuit. 19. 17.

And this 1. condemns the flatterer, that either will see Use. 1. Of reproof
to the flattering teacher.
no evil in his brother, but is still beating upon the good that is in him,
puffing him up, with conceit thereof; or if he see any evil, will not reprove
him plainly, but either excuse it or diminish it, or daube it up, hardening him
in his sin, etc. Ezech. 13.

2. They are here reproved, that justify the wicked and condemn the
righteous: Esaias 5. 21. whereas our Savior 2. Of the perverse and malicious
that calls darkness light, and light darkness. 3. Of the respecter of persons.
iustifies the good, and condemns the evil.

3. As also, they that stumble at strawes, and make molehils mountains;
omitting the sins of great ones, or the great sins of their brethren: for
favor and affection, but enforcing to the utmost every light escape in the
godly, or their enemies, putting more thereto, yea, taking occasion thereby to
disgrace their profession, etc.

Whereas our Savior Christ, here spares not the greatest and most famous
Church, and whatsoever is amiss in her, lets her know plainly of it.

The people also are here condemned, that hate those, that 2. Of the people. 2.
Tim. 4. Galat. 4.
reprove them, and rather heap unto themselves such teachers as will flatter
them in their sin, then intertaine those that deal faithfully in reproouing:
Amos 5. 11. Micah. 2.

Secondly, here is instruction, 1. to praise God for faithful 2. Use of
instruction. Hos. 6. 5. Esaias 58. 1. John 16. ^.
teaching, when God cuts down by his Prophets, and conuinceth the world of
sin. 2. And also to mourn where the church is pestered with flatterers, that
cry all is well, Peace peace; all the congregation is holy: Ier. 6. Numb. 16.
Ierem. 28. Ezech. 34. 13. 14.

We learn here by our Sauiors example how to reprove for sin: namely,

1. Plainly: Thou art the man, 2. Sam. 12. Sin how to be reproved.


2. Particularly: Letting him see his particular sin.

3. Powerfully: To humble him for his sin, by denouncing the wrath of God
against the same. I have somewhat against thee: that is, I have a controversy
with thee, I am angry, I will be avenged of thee for it.

4. Constantly and seasonably, not letting him lie in it, taking the fit time,
etc. as Abigail did, 1. Sam. 25.

5. Impartially and sincerely, not sparing the greatest nor dearest unto us; no
not the house of Judah, Esaias 58. 1. Amos 7. 8. 1. Sam. 12. 1. Sam. 2. 3.
no not the most excellent Church; not David, though a King; not our children,
not any.

Lastly, here is great comfort, that being reproved for sin, we are judged
in this life; and so by the grace of God 3. Use, of comfort.
being brought to repentance, we shall not be judged in the life to come: 1.
Cor. 11. 31. 32.

Thirdly, in that the holy Ghost testifies here that Christ does come against
his Church for this sin: here we learn, Doctrine. 3. The least sin in the
Saints is sufficient to make the Lord to come against them as an enemy.
That though God loves always the person of his children; yet he is
displeased with their sin: he will come against them for it, and chastise
them for the same: Psalm. 89. 2. Sam. 8. etc. Ezech. 18. And that because he is,

1. Righteous, and hates iniquity, Psalm. 5. 4. and therefore will not endure
it in his own.

2. He is merciful, and therefore will not suffer sin to dwell in his
children: but by his corrections will cleanse them: Esaias 1. 25. Esaias 27. Ierem.
19. Psalm. 89.

3. The sins of his children do more grieve him, and indeed are more
grievous: first, because

4. They have more grace to resist. Secondly, do give more offense to the
weak. Thirdly, open the mouth of the wicked more to blaspheme God and his
truth.

5. That the wicked may have their vengeance hereby sealed up, in that the Lord
spares not his own children: Prou. 11. 32.

6. That his children might not be condemned finally.

7. That he might weane them from the world, and provoke them to draw near
unto him in prayer, and so have further experience of his love in the issues
thereof.

8. Their sin is not theirs, but proceeds from Satan and the old man, which
he therefore remoueth by his chastisements, Romans 7.
that so he might manifest and confirm his love more and more to their persons
in fitting them to glory.

And this serves

1. To condemn the wicked that flatter themselves in Uses. 1. Of conuictio^ to
those that by reason of prospe^^^y flatter themselves in integrity.
their righteousness, because they prosper, and are not plagued like others,
nor afflicted as the sinners, seeing they are fatted up hereby to the day of
slaughter, and the elect by afflictions prepared to happiness: Ierem. 12. 3.
Act. 14. 23, 24. Job 21. Psalm. 17 14.

2. To reprove the sinners that provoke the Lord by their sin to become
their enemy, and then being afflicted, 2. Those that are impatient under the
rod deserving the same.
complain of wrong, and condemn the love and faithfulness of God, as if in
chastising them he hated them, seeing of very love and faithfulness he does
correct them: Psalm. 119. Psalm. 73. Job 6. 9.

3. To reprove the world that judge of men by these 3. Those that judge
peremptorily the estates of men by outward things. Use 2. Instruction how to
keep God our friend 2. To be patient under the rod. 3. To try our estate by
the use of ye cross.
outward things, seeing all things are alike unto all men: Eccl. 9. 1.

Secondly, here is instruction: 1. To teach us how to keep God to be our
friend: namely, by keeping our selves from sin, or else by renewed repentance,
daily renouncing, and reforming the sin.

2. To bear patiently the hand of God, seeing we have deserved hell; and this
affliction which is but for a moment, will procure unto us an inestimable weight
of glory: 2. Cor. 5. 16.

3. To try our estate under the rod, namely, if we feel the Lord to be
angry, and so fear and depart from evil: Prou. 14.

And thus does the holy Ghost amplify the sin of this Church, by signifying
that the Lord is angry with her for the same.

1. But let us consider what this sin is, namely, That she has left her
first love, a sin of omission, she has failed in that zeal, etc.

Quest. But how may she be said to have left her first How the saints though
leaving their first love, yet may be justified that they faint not.
love, seeing she has formerly the testimony that she endured patiently, and
did not faint?

Answ. She might fail in the measure of her love, though not in the substance
and truth thereof.

2. She might fail in the outward action, though not in the inward purpose.

3. She might not be so zealous as she was, and yet have so much zeal as not
to give over finally; for a time she might be cooled, but not quenched in her
zeal, etc.

Whence we learn, that though the Lord accept the purpose of the heart, and
will not quench the smoking Doctrine 4.
flax; yet would he have us grow in grace, and follow hard after the mark;
we must abound in grace, and be The elect must go forward and persevere in
grace.
plentiful in good works; we must thrive in well doing, expressing outwardly
when we inwardly desire, and subduing the whole man to the obedience of the
spirit: 1. Col. 1. Pet. 2. 1. 3. Ephesians. 1. Phil. 2. Pet. 1. 8. Psalm. 92. Job.
17. 9. 1. These. 5. perseuering with all patience and constancy unto the end,
Ephesians. 6. 13.

And that, because the Lord has commanded, 1. That Reasons.
we should be holy, as he is holy, 1. Pet. 1. 13. 14. etc.

2. Hereby we make sure our election, and attain to the certain knowledge
thereof, 2. Pet. 1. 10. Ioh. 7.

3. Hereby we make us meet for that glorious inheritance, 1. Col. 11. 12.

4. Hereby we provoke others to glorify God, Matthew. 5. 16, 17.

5. We daunt and confound the enemies of the Gospel, 1. Pet. 2.

6. And adorn and beautify our glorious profession, 1. Phil. 27.

And this serves,

To condemn, 1. all those that flatter their hearts Uses. 1. Of reproof to
those that deceive themselves with good intents and motions. Of such as go
backward. 3. As fear to to be noted of singularity.
with good intents, when they are utterly void of good fruits, Prou. 3. Esa.
29.

2. As also those, that upon presumption that they are better then others,
cease to better themselves, and so standing at a stay in religion, go backward
therein, 1. Cor. 4. Revel. 3.

3 And those likewise, that fear to abound in holiness, zeal, etc. lest they
be accounted singular noted men, precise, vainglorious, etc.

4. And these especially, that have not only slacked their zeal in religion,
but do justify this decay, as being 4. Such as justify decaies.
now more wise, sober, etc. in their profession, whereas before they were
fiery, rash, indiscreet, etc.

Secondly, here is instruction, and that first, we must labor Use 2. Of
instruction, how to increase. Means of apostasy. 1. Corrupt judgment.
to increase and grow constant in godliness, and that by these means:

1. By avoiding the means of Apostasy, which are,

1. Corruption of judgment, and that

1. We may be too holy:

2. That less will serve the turn, because many do less, and we hope are
saved, Acts 14.

3. That Gods mercy does more abound in our failings, Romans 6. 1.

4. That we need not to be so perfect, seeing Christ has finished all for us:
seeing Christ has therefore perfited all things that we might grow to
perfection, Hebr. 12. 1, 2. John 15.

2. Corrupt practice: 2. Corrupt practice.


1. When either we live by examples of the greatest: 2. By the letter of the
word of God, Matthew. 5. 3. Or by the stream of the time: 4. Or only by the
laws of men: 5. Or follow the most in religion: 6. Or grow spiritually proud
of our well doing: 7. Or grow secure and dead in the performance of holy
duties, performing them for custom, worldly, hypocritically, etc. 8. Or grow
inconstant in holy duties; intermitting the set times, of prayers, hearing the
word, etc. 9 Or grow negligent in converting others. 10. Or admit of human
inventions, with the worship of God. 11. Or prove unthankful unto God for his
particular mercies, 1. Romans 12. Or fall into gross sins, and lie in them
without repentance: Psalm. 51. 13. Or judge uncharitably of our brethren,
withdrawing our compassions from them.
Secondly, practice we these means to make us abound in Means whereby we may
attain constancy in weldoing.
good works, and grow constant therein.

1. Remember we the continual service of the Saints in heaven, they
inces^antly glorify God, and also continually: 1 Thessalonians 4. Revel. 4.

2. Consider we the power of Jesus Christ still remains to cover our
imperfections, and to strengthen us to perfection: Heb. 12. 1. 2.

3. Know we that the Comforter does abide with us, to lead us into all truth:
and so forward in all holiness: Ioh. 15. 16.

4. Consider we that the righteous can scarcely be saved, 1. Pet. 4. 15. and
what pains the best have taken toward heaven. 1. Peter 4. 15.


5. Remember we yt Jesus Christ has taken away all the rigor of weldoing, and
yet enables us by his spirit, to perfection, accepting our weakest endeavors, so
they be sound, and enabling of us to fulfill all his righteousness in due
season.

6. Retain we soundnes of judgment, concerning the power of godliness.

7. Do we all things from the ground of the heart, as in the sight of God: 1 Thessalonians. 1.

8. Cleave we still to the power of the word, and strive we to increase in
knowledge: 1. Phil. 1. Coll.

9. Practice we constantly the duties of piety and charity.

10. Watch we daily over our hearts, in a true searching and examining the
same. Psalm. 4. 5, 6.

11. See that we renew our repentance, as often as we sin.

12. Labor we the conversion of our brethren, and judge we charitably of them.

13. Walk we always in fear of our selves, and suspect we all our works yea
then most, when we enjoy greatest graces: Prou. 28. 13.

14. Remember we our ends, and uncertainty of our life, and the account we
must make: 2. Cor. 5. 10. 11.

15. And resign we our selves daily into the hands of our God, resting on his
providence: 1. Pet. 5. Matthew. 6.

16. Entertain we cheerfully the motions of the spirit, and put them in
practice diligently: Ephesians. 4.

Thus shall we grow constant in weldoing, and persevere unto the end. And,

3. For our comfort learn we, that our God, that commands perseverance, gives
grace to the same, and therefore we shall continue, and not finally decay: we
shall leave our first love, but not lose it altogether: 1. Philip. 6. John 13.
Luke 22. 33.

Wherein note, That every convert has a first love, that Doct. 5. Every true
convert has a first love. Romans 5. 3.
is, when God has revealed his love unto him in Christ, and by the spirit of
God, it is shed abroad in his heart, then is the heart of a sinner inflamed to
love God again, then is it enlarged with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1. Pet.
17. for so great salvation: then does it strive to express it thankfulness
unto God, for so great mercy: then is love as strong as death, much water
cannot quench it: Cant. 8.

And this is called, his first love: and it is discerned by these marks:

1. By his renouncing of all, in comparison of it, and parting First love
discerned by marks. Matthew. 13. Ioh. 6. Coloss. 3. 1.
with the dearest for the enjoying of it: so did the Apostles forsake all in
act: so must we forsake all in affection and in act too, so far as it may
hinder our enjoying of Christ: Zacheus, Luke 19. 6. 7.

2. When we endure any affliction for the Words sake, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9. 10, and
that with great joy in the holy Ghost: Heb. 10. Ephesians. 1.

3. When we reverence highly the Ministers of the Gospel, Galath. 3 4.
thinking nothing too dear for them. Act. 16.

4 When we clear our conscience of all sin, by which our sweet fellowship
with Christ may be hindered: so Zacheus, Luke 19, not being ashamed to confess
our particular sins, and renouncing them unfeignedly.

5 When for Christ's sake we love his poor members, and 1. Tim. 1. 15 16. 17.
impart of our worldly goods bountifully to their relief, Luke 19. Zacheus, 1.
Ioh. 2. Ioh. 13. Psalm. 16. 2.

6. When we continue in the powerful means of the divine worship: Act. 2.

7. When we consult not with flesh and blood, nor communicate with it, but do
utterly renounce the same in regard of heaven, Act. 9. Gal. 2. Matthew. 8 etc.

8. And being ravished with the sweetness of the love of Christ, we enlarge
our selves to declare the same to our brethren, laboring to bring them to
Christ, by plucking them out of the fire: Ioh 1. 18. Jude 22. Luke 22. 33.


This is our first love, these are the marks thereof, and by the same it is
graciously preserved, and increased.

1. Whereby all those sudden flashes, and fained and inconstant affections of
hypocrites are rejected: Hebrews Use. To condemn flashes and tastes.
6. 4. and,

2. We put to the trial, for the soundnes of our conversion, if we have found
such a love in our hearts: by To try our conversion.
such evident marks.

3. The world is here condemned, that boasts of the favor of God, when it
has no argument of it conversion by this love: nay, esteems it a wonder, and
madness to be To reprove the worlds deceit.
converted.

4. And the saints are comforted, that seeing their love unto God depends on
his love unchangeable to them: To comfort the Saints.
1. Ioh. 4. 1. Therefore as his is unchangeable, Ioh. 13. 1. so shall theirs
be; well they may leave it, but they shall never lose it. And yet it is a great
affliction that they leave their love: although of a certainty,

The Saints may leave their first love; so did David, Peter, Solomon, etc.
Psalm. 51. Galat. 2. 1. King. 11. And the reasons Doct. 6. The Elect may leave
their first love.
are,

Because as the fire is slacked by two means, either by withdrawing fuel from
it, or putting water, or ashes thereto:

So there are two means, whereby the love of the Saints And by what means.
does decay in them.

Either when they fail in such means as do nourish the same: or,

Do add such, as may corrupt, and cool, namely, when Means of leaving first
love.
either they,

1. Neglect the powerful ministry of the word, etc. 1. Withdrawing that
should nourish it.
1. These. 5. 19. 20. 2. The constant practice of private, and public prayer. 3.
Or the fellowship of the Saints, Heb. 10. 4. Or the motions of the spirit: 5.
Or neglect to examine their hearts daily. 6. Or fail in daily repentance, or,
7. Neglect to convert others:
Or else do add that which may corrupt:

1. As spiritual pride of Gods graces. 2. Carnal policy, subiecting religion
to the same. 2. Adding, what may cool and quench it.
3. Prosperity, and setting their hearts thereon through covetousness: Psalm.
119. Luke 18. 1. Tim. 6. 4. Abuse of Christian liberty, in the enjoying of
pleasures, etc. 1. Cor. 10. 1. Cor. 8. and use of things indifferent.
Concerning spiritual pride, as Conuerts are subject hereto, 1. Spiritual
pride, an occasion to leave our first love, and how.
in regard,

1. That now not being as others, yea, as themselves were, yea, being in some
measure made partakers of the divine nature, and advanced to the hope of so
glorious an inheritance; may they not hereby be enticed to justify themselves,
2. Pet. 1. 3.
and despise their brethren; to condemn, where they should endeavor to
convert? etc. Esaias 5. 6.

2. Even their desire to keep themselves in this estate, may be an occasion to
Satan to breed spiritual pride in them. As namely, that being now plucked out
of the common condemnation, and separated from the world and wicked ones, by
their effectual calling; may not the Saints upon pretense to keep themselves
unspotted and undefiled, grow to singularity, and so to separation, which are
very dangerous branches of spiritual pride?

3. The execution also of their callings is subject to much spiritual pride.

Either they may neglect altogether their civil callings as too base, and
derogatorie from the providence of God, and their Christian liberty, which is
a fruit of spiritual pride, seeing the Lord has imposed these callings to
humble them. Or else they may so carry themselves in their Ecccl. 1. 9.
Christian callings, as by their morositie, discontent, etc. they shall not
obscurely discover much spiritual pride.

4. The special providence of the Almighty, in leading them to perfection,
may also through the subtlety of Satan be an occasion of much spiritual
pride. And that,

1. Either in regard of such chastisements which the Lord exercises their
nature to cleanse the same, in the impatient bearing whereof, pride is
discovered.

2. Or else the prosperity of the wicked, may be an occasion of spiritual
pride, as being provoked by Satan to fret and repine thereat: Psalm. 37. 1.
Ierem. 12. Job 1.

3. Either they may be puffed up with those wonderful deliverances, which the
Lord in his mercy bestows on them in their conduction to glory: 2. Cor. 1.
verses 9, 10. 2. Cor. 12. 7.

4. Or else they may rejoice at the destruction of their enemies, and so be
tainted with spiritual pride: Job 31.

5. Either they may be hasty, in expecting the reward, and so for want of
patience, discover spiritual pride: Heb. 10.

6. Or else desire death, in regard of their continual troubles, and so
discover their pride, in not waiting the Lords leisure: Job 3. Jonas 4.

7. Either they may be crossed in their expectations, and so preferring their
credits before Gods glory, bewray their pride: Jonas 4. 1. 2.

8. Or else, beyond their hope and expectation, they may be endued with
extraordinary graces, and so are subject to be exalted above measure: 2. Cor.
12 7. 8.

Thus may the Saints be subject to spiritual pride, and so thereby give
occasion of the loss of their first love:

1. The Lord resisting the proud, and bringing low the mountains; emptying the
high minded, and giving grace to the humble: 1. Pet 5. 5. 2. Their pride making
them seem uncharitable, and so not using their talents, they are for a time
taken away. Matthew. 25.
3. The spirit hereby being grieved, cease to work in Ephesians. 4. 30.
them, nay happily leaves them to grievous buffetings.
Touching policy by it, I mean, that wisdom which ^. Policy, a means o^
cooling our first love.
civil government discovers in managing it affairs, for the adorning and
preserving thereof. This, howsoever it may be an handmaid to religion, yet
carries some sway in the manner thereof: as,

1. In ordering the time, and place, and outward decency Policy, how a friend
to religion.
for the divine worship. 2. In compelling the outward man, to the outward form
and means of religion. 3. As also, in executing the holy censures of the
Church, upon the refractarie and obstinate. 4. And in protecting the innocence
and vprightnes of the Saints, from the rage and wrongs of the wicked: and, 5.
Punishing the enemies of the Church.
Yet may it also prove an enemy to sincerity, and so be an occasion (if we
be guided thereby) to leave our first love, and that in these respects: As,

First, when it undertakes to judge and authorize the rule How an enemy, and
^o a means fleauing out first love.
of religion: namely the word of God.

2. When it adioynes to the same, the inventions of man, making it equal with
the word of truth.

3. When it stands more upon the form then the power of godliness.

4. When it excludes the substance of religion for the outward complement
thereof.

5. When it becomes a means to justify the wicked, The practice of pop^rie,
in maintaining their religion.
and condemn the righteous: Esaias 5. Matthew. 27.

6. When it presumes to limit sincerity to times, persons: and,

7. When it insulteth and lords it over the conscience, by inquisition into the
secrets of the heart, and violent forcing the same, contrary to the tenderness,
and true information thereof.

Thus may Policy be an enemy to religion, and so a means of the leaving of
our first love.

And so may also Prosperity:

1. If either having much, we set our hearts upon it: Prosperity an occasion
to cool our first love, and how.
Psalm. 62. 10. and so are withdrawn to execute the lusts of our hearts:

2. Or measure our estate in grace by our prosperity.

3. Or, are not willing to be abased, as we do abound.

4. Or grow secure, and uncharitable hereby, either despising our poor
brethren, or insulting over the^: 1. Pet. 5. much less being enlarged in
compassion of their affliction, or open handed to relieve them: or promise
constancy of this ticklish estate unto our selves. Psalm. 30. 6.


5. And so also by abuse of our Christian liberty we may leave our first
love; as hereafter shall more fully be declared.

Thus may we leave our first love; by these means may And so our abuse of
Christian liberty.
our zeal be cooled and abated.

And this serves,

1. For our trial whether ever we had any first love, or Uses. 1. Of trial.
no: namely, if we shall find that by these means we have been cooled
therein.

2. And so for our comfort and sound direction, that if 2. Of comfort.
we ever had this first love, we shall recover it again: and,

3. That we may know how to recover it, by using aright 3. Of instruction to
recover.
such means, as being abused, have been the occasion of this decay: the manner
whereof is laid down hereafter.

And this serves further,

1. For reproof of our times, who may be justly charged 4. Of reproof.
to have left our first love, by trying our selves by the former means,
whereby this first love is slaked.

2. And for our further instruction herein:

1. Know we, that we may be subject to a false imputation of leaving our first
love, in many respects.

As, 1. when upon the just consideration of the nature of The saints may be
unjustly charged to have left their first love, and how. Matthew. 2^. And that,
first in the true discerning and use of our christian liberty, whereby we
submit our selves to lawful authority. 2. In that we are endowed with
outward prosperity,
our Christian liberty, as being spiritual, we limit our zeal within the
bounds of our callings: so giving unto God the things that are his, that we
deny not also unto Caesar that which is his. This moderation, howsoever with
the Anabaptists it be traduced as luke warmness, and temporizing with the
world, to avoid affliction: yet indeed it is an holy rectifying and ordering of
our zeal by humility and wisdom, that so it may hold out, and be perfited
through patience, and that from the commandment of the Lord our God: Romans 13.

2. We may be falsely charged to have left our first love, when we are
outwardly increased with temporal blessings. As if because prosperity is apt
to cool, by making us secure, and forgetful of our God: therefore it must
needs follow, that wheresoever there is outward abundance, there is inward
leannes and barrenness: Psalm 106. 15. Which imputation is hereby proved to
be most unjust.

1. Both because the Saints of God have increased outwardly, and thriuen
inwardly too; as, Abraham, David, etc.

2. The virtue of that promise makes hereunto: That if all things (then surely
outward blessings) shall work together for the good of the elect, Romans 8. 29.
especially seeing the Lord gives grace to use these gifts aright.

1. And seeing godliness has the promise of this life 1. Tim. 4. 8. 2
as well as of a better; and the more ye Saints partake of the mercy of God, ye
more their thankfulness and obedience does increase; and being knit unto the
Lord with more bonds, 3 4 5 6 1. John 4. 20. Genesis 20. 7 8 9 2. Cor. 1. 7. 8. 10
seeing the more they receive, the more they fear themselves, and so by
imparting liberally unto others, do ease themselves of the burden; and
approve their love unto God, by their unfeigned love unto his Saints: as hereby
they are more deeply interessed in ye prayers of the Saints, so is heaven more
enlarged to the increase of their love. The Lord hears the prayers of the
poor, and inlargeth the hearts of his stewards, to love yt God more seruently,
that so inables the^ to comfort others. And so being faithful in a little, they
are still increased: until being full of grace and abounding in every good
work, they are made meet partakers See the daily sacrifice for the right use
of prosperity. 3. Spiritual wisdom in avoiding of troubles, an occasion to
charge us with loss of first love.
of that glorious inheritance: 1. Coll. 12. Matthew. 25. 1. Cor. 15.

And may not our spiritual wisdom in avoiding of unnecessary troubles,
expose us sometimes to this false imputation that we have left our first love?

1. Yea surely, if either by wise and modest answers we avoid troubles:

2. Or by concealing of that truth, which we are not bound in conscience to
discover, we so escape.

3. Or by avoiding the rage of our enemies, when our time is not yet come, we
are yet freed from troubles by removing from our habitations.

4. Or by changing our habits and features we so avoid the fury of the
adversary: if by any of these, through the blessing of God we escape such
troubles, which others, for want of this wisdom, are overtaken with;
presently we are charged with want of zeal; we are condemned to be luke
warm, to have left our first love: and, etc.

5. Especially if we use our goods, as a means to redeem the body from
trouble, oh this is censured as unlawful; and so avoiding troubles as by
unlawful means, we are challenged of cowardice, want of zeal, corruption,
etc.

An imputation: how unjust and uncharitable it is, may appear by these
circumstances:

1. Because we are not bound to give an account of our faith to every private
man, but only to the Magistrate, and And cleared from this imputation. Faith
how, and to whom to be given account of. 1. To the Magistrate and Minister, and
why.
whomsoever has lawful authority to require it at our hands, as the
Minister, and such as have charge over us. And that, because

Hereby they may have comfort in discharge of their duty, that they have not
labored in vain: or,

2. May be humbled in our want of profiting and growing in knowledge, and so
increase their pains and prayers for us.

3. They are in Gods stead, and in refusing to give an account unto the^, we
deny and renounce even God himself.

4. They may be provoked hereby, to perseverance and maintenance of the truth.

5. Though they must not be Lords over the conscience, to make, or alter the
truth, yet they are witnesses unto the conscience concerning the truth, yea
they are appro^ers and maintainers thereof, to the comfor^ of the believer and
furtherance of his faith. And therefore,

Though we give not account of our faith either

1. To the scorner, that hereby will take occasion to insult Faith to whom
(...) be given account of.
and blaspheme our God and his sacred truth.

2. Or to the open enemy, that as he has no calling to require, so we have
warrant to conceal it, as being bound to preserve life, and not to cast
pearls to swine.

3. Or to the ignorant, that desires not information thereby, lest we beat
the air, and run before we are called, expose our profession o contempt, etc.

4. Or to the private Christian, otherwise then in a case of necessity on our
parts, to remove a false imputation; and on his part, to guide him that is in
darkness, and desires our help.

Yet do we not herein betray our faith: but rather wisely maintain the
honor, and preserve the virtue thereof, both in defending the same from the
reproaches of the wicked, as also in reserving the use thereof to it fit season
and occasion, when our God shall be best glorified, our profession justified,
and brethren informed and confirmed thereby. And this is,

1. When we have an especial calling to witness a good profession, as being
inwardly furnished with gifts, and outwardly led forth by the Spirit, to
maintain the cause of Christ Jesus our Savior.

The one of these we shall discern:

1. By sound knowledge of ye cause in particular, which How to discern inward
sufficiency to make open pro^e^sion of faith in the time of trouble.
we are to make good by whatsoever sufferings, so that our judgments are
thoroughly informed, and so our consciences convinced with the truth, do find
rest and comfort therein: Ephesians. ^. Phil. 1.

2. By our ardent love unto that truth which we have apprehended, and hearty
desire that by any our never so great affliction, it may be glorified in the
hearts of the Saints.

3. By our especial apprehension of Gods singular mercy toward us, in
accounting us so worthy as to make profession of that truth. 1. Phil. 27.


4. Hence we even long and desire to taste of that cup which the profession of
that truth may cost us.

5. Yet so, as that our most ardent desires are subject to contrary buffetings
of fear of our own inabilitie in our John 19.
selves: and therefore,

6. Rather desiring the grace of the Spirit so to conduct us in the combat,
that Gods cause may be honored in our constancy therein; then we in any sort
magnified thereby, nay that we shall have in respect of the flesh, any good
issue out of them, howsoever we have many gracious promises, yea likelihoods
for the same.

7. And therefore simply submitting our selves to the will of our gracious
Father, rather to undergo any the most grievous extremity, then the least
disparagement may redound unto his glorious truth.

8. Finding in our selves a gracious contentment in our God, arising upon long
experience of the deceitfulness of the world, and faithfulness of our gracious
Father: and,

9. So discerning in our selves a readiness to death, as being prepared thereto
by daily mortification, and experience of our sweet society with our blessed
God:

10. As that withal we especially for this end desire life, even to witness
a good profession, and give glory unto our God, in auouching and sealing up
his eternal truth, with our momentanie sufferings. To this end,

11. Finding in our selves an ability of faith, relying rather on Gods promise
to guide us with his counsel, then our own experience, to wade through the
affliction.

Thus may we discern inward sufficiency to make profession of our faith.

And for outward calling, and leading forth by the Spirit thereunto, there are
these marks of it:

First, in respect of us: as that, How to discern an outward calling to make
public pro^ession o^ faith in troubles.


1. We have already published and declared that truth, and so now much more
(it being called in question) are to justify the same.

2. Are also provoked by our people, that have depended on us, to make good the
same for the establishing of their faith; lest our suppressing, or denial, may
shake, and make shipwreck thereof.

3. Are especially called thereto by the Magistrate, who may require a reason
thereof, and forced by the gainsayings of the enemy, to defend the same.

Secondly, in respect of the truth. And that,

1. When it is openly resisted and gainesaid of a perverse generation, not
only privately and indirectly: and when

2. By the suppressing thereof the glory of our God is necessarily impeached,
the power of religion undermined, etc. otherwise in matters

1. Of difference, which reach not thus far, we may be silent, respecting the
peace of the Church, and dealing rather Wherein we may be silent.
with our God in prayer for the reformation of such breaches, and by all
private and peaceable means, rather enduring an inconvenience or covering an
infirmity, then by any public opposition, making a rent and division in the
Church of God:

2. As also, if our persons rather in malice are aimed at, then the truth
oppugned, we may avoid the rage, by flying, concealing, etc.

3. At leastwise, though we be not altogether silent: yet so far we may
conceal the truth: 1. As it is not demanded: 2. And may satisfy the honest
purpose of the Questioner: 3. Yea, may happily, by stumbling of him, and
turning his edge upon another; so thereby divert his malice from our selves. So
did our Savior put the Pharisees and Sadduces together, and thereby escaped.
So did he for a time go aside, and walked no more openly, neither Ioh. 7.
committed himself unto them, because his time was not come.

Nay, may we not shape such an answer to our adversary, not only to
conceal part of truth, as Samuel did, 1. Sam 16. but even to give up the
wicked to their own counsels, that will not obey the truth; bidding them go
up and prosper, as Micha^^h did, 2. King. 22? yea in an holy dirision,
vpbraiding their carnal confidence: Rejoice oh young man, and take thy fill?
Eccl. 11. And seeing they will not be reclaimed, and hate to be reformed; may
not the prudent keep silence in such evil times? 2. Chron. 2. Amos 5. Or so
only speak, as to leave the incorrigible to their lusts, ceasing to rebuke a
scorner, that we may wisely Prou 9.
avoid his hatred, and so pronouncing the wrath of God against him, in yielding
him up to his own lusts; as that he may bless his soul in this fearful
liberty, and we by thi^ wisdom may maintain our holy liberty. Oh that we
were wise to consider of these things and to whom the arm of the Lord shall
reveal them. For the ways of the Lord are righteous, and the just shall walk
in them, but Ose 14.
the wicked shall fall therein.

As for the changing of our features and habits for a Names and habits when her
they may be changed, and how far.
time, to avoid unnecessary trouble herein, I take it, we may thus far be
justified. As though

1. Not to change our names. And that because they are of a divine institution,
as well as civil, imposed not only to make distinction of our persons from
others, but to be witnesses and pledges of our profession, and both memorials
of Gods former mercies toward us, as also evidences Names not to be changed.
of Gods everlasting covenant with us, to be our protector and preserver for
ever. And therefore not to be denied, if we be demanded the same, lest therein
we deny our faith: neither to be changed, because our profession must not be
changed. Especially seeing by denial, or changing, we shall not only not
advantage our selves to the thing we intend: namely, not to be known, seeing
by other marks of proportion, or complexion, we may be bewraied: but being
discovered, we shall hereby add unto our affliction, not only being justly
exempted out of Gods protection, by rejecting the badge thereof, our names, but
exposed also the rather to the rage of man, as being tainted hereby with
dissimulation, etc.

Add we hereunto, that not only we have not any president Abraham's name
changed and no warrant, because this was done by God, and the case different.
in the scripture for the like in this case, but also this changing of names is
practiced by such as, either in their judgments, or lives, or both, deny the
Lord that has bought them, namely, Jesuits, Seminaries, Thieves, Cosoners,
etc.

For our feature, so far as that may be altered by changing Feature.
the fashion of the hair, beard, etc. this being but civil, and differing
according to the diverse guise of each nation, so no painting or disfiguring,
abhorring to nature, or denied by civility, and religion, be added; I see not
but this liberty may be used, in a case of necessity, for the preservation of
life: so it stand with our callings, and tend to Gods glory.

The like we may determine concerning change of apparel, Apparel may be
changed.
as being a civil thing, and therefore both subject to a religious end, the
preservation of life with a good conscience, and also subject to change,
according to the diverse guise of nations, callings, condition, and occasion, of
prosperity, or adversity, keeping our selves within the bounds of our
Christian liberty, becoming all unto all; as, to win others, so to preserve
our selves for their good; as 1. Phil.
most desirous to be with Christ, which is the best of all, and yet ready to
follow the Lord in any good occasion, for the preservation of life to benefit
the Saints, and make sure our own election: provided that we, 1. keep our
selves within the compass of our religious and civil callings.

2. That we change not that which is usual to the other Deuteronomy. 22.
sex.

3. That we deny not our profession, if this means will not conceal us, being
demanded particularly.

4. That we simply intend, in our preservation, Gods glory, for the
benefitting of others.

A fourth occasion of this false imputation that we have A fourth occasion, is
the use of spiritual wisdom in reproving for sin.
left our first love, is our discretion in reproving for sin, when either we
cease to reprove scorners, although our souls do not cease to weep in secret
for the^, and our contrary conversation is a co^uiction of the^: or reprove
privately, and generally, if in public, making difference of persons in regard
of their calling and quality of their sin, saving some with fear, and yet
raising up others with the spirit of meeknes, Gal. 6. 1 etc.

1. Which imputation how unjust it is, may appear by the rules of the holy
Ghost: 1. Tim. 5. 1. Mat. 19. And also,

2. By the practice of the Saints: Nathan, 2. Sam. 12. Paul: Compare the
practice in reproouing the Church of Corinth, first epistle and 11. chap. and
the Church of Galat. 3. chap. but above all, the practice of our Savior is
peerless, in his different reproof of the Scribes and Pharisees: Mat. 23.
Luke 11. and of his Disciples, Mat. 8. Mat. 26. 27.

A fifth occasion of this unjust challenge that we may A fifth occasion, is
outward and inward afflictions.
lose our first love, is, when the hand of God lying heavily upon us in some
outward emptying, because our estate is decayed outwardly, therefore the world
concludes a decay within: especially, if we surcease in a measure such duties
of charity, wherein, before when our cup ouerflowed, we abounded, toward
others: which by this may appear to be most unrighteous; because it is the
purpose of the heart which God respects, which may be no less open to our 2.
Cor. 8. 12. 13.
brother, though our purse be straightened, yea being scanted of this outward
devotion, may be more enlarged in spiritual alms to procure mercy for the
soul, and contentment in all estates: Act. 3. 6.

A sixth occasion there is also of this false imputation, A sixth occasion*
(...) the honest provision for our families. 1. Tim. 5.
when we rectify our charity by wisdom to our selves, so distributing to
others as that we provide for our own, lest we be worse then infidels, and so
loving our neighbor as that we prove not cruel to our selves; so dividing to
others that we prefer the household of faith, Galat. 6. 10. both doing the
best good, and, as we may, continue and hold out longest therein. For which,
seeing we have the warrant of the holy Ghost, as we ought to avoid all
appearance of this evil by moderation, in our procuring and usage of these
things: so need we not fear hereby any cooling of our love. Only make we
this use of this unjust imputation, as to suspect our selves in regard of our
carnal love, and to try our abiding in the love of God, by such a love unto
our selves, as may provide for the flesh, to the humbling and mortifying of the
same, as may further our selves and others to those durable riches, which are
at the right hand of our God for evermore.

Lastly, we may be falsely charged to have left our first A seventh occasion
to this unjust challenge that we have lost our first love, is the use of our
christian liberty in things indifferent. Act. 10. Romans 14. 1. Cor. 3. 1. Tim.
4. Tit. 1. 15.
love:

When increasing in knowledge of our right in Jesus Christ, and from him in
these outward things we take liberty for the use of some things, (which
before we refrained, as being either not informed, or not thoroughly resolved
concerning them) either because they are indifferent, and so are all ours in
Christ, and being sanctified by the word and prayer may be lawfully used,
seeing to the pure all things are pure. Or else being simply good, are now of
conscience to be embraced, and cheerfully practiced, that they may further us
to the chiefest good. Which how false an imputation it is, seeing the rules of
the Word, and practice of the Saints have made good: 1. Cor. 9. Galat. 2. etc.
Therefore let us fear the cooling of our love, in the use of this liberty, so
that our consciences be persuaded and practice warranted by these rules:
namely, first,

1. That the means of our increase in knowledge be The right use of Christian
liberty in things indifferent. Phil. 1. 9.
the word of truth, not the authority of man.

2. That we be able to discern between things that differ: not stumbling at
evil things, under the pretense of indifferency; nor subiecting things simply
good, to the nature of things indifferent, making the necessary worship of
God, a matter of indifferency, as the preaching of the Gospel, catechizing,
fasting, etc. yea, thrusting out the substance of holiness for the complement
thereof. That as we despise not order, so it further true devotion: so we rest
not in the outside, and make an idol of bodily service: Romans 14. 1. Phil. 9. 10.

3. That in this liberty we offend not our Christian brother: neither the
Magistrate, by refusing what he lawfully imposes; nor the weak brother, by
not informing him in Romans 13.
the true use of these things; or using what may justly give occasion, either
of doubting in faith, or corruption in life: 1. Cor. 8. Romans 14.

4. That herein also we not only avoid what may hurt, but in all spiritual
wisdom do that which may further to the best good, even the salvation of the
soul: 1. Cor. 9.

5. And all this to the only praise of our glorious God, through Jesus Christ:
1. Cor. 10. 31.

Thus may we be falsely charged to have left our first love, and thus may we
be established against these false imputations.

But say, what others fasten upon me, that I fear in my 8. Whether want of
feeling of former comforts may be a just imputation that we have left ourfirst
love.
self. I feel not that joy and inward comfort I sometimes had: these
ouerflowings, and extraordinary sweetness, though I faint after them, and
refresh my soul with the meditation thereof, yet I find them not so abound
and run over, as in former times: may I not hereby conjecture that I have
lost my first love?

Surely the Lord give thee wisdom herein, that thou do not wrong thine
own heart, and prejudice the wisdom and mercy of thy God.

Remember that thou live by faith, and not by sense: 2. Cor. 3. 7. though
thou see no outward means, yet thy 1
faith will assure thee that God is able and will provide him a sacrifice,
Genes. 22. Yea though thou have no inward feeling Gods providence discovered
herein. Job 13. 15. 2
of comfort, yet shall thou trust in God, even though he kill thee. And this is
the victory of thy faith, even to believe above feeling: thus is thy faith
perfited, even laying hold on things not seen, when it is deprived of the
sense of things past, and present. And may not thy God Heb. 11. 1. 3
withdraw these comforts from thee, for the further trial of thy faith, and
love unto his Majesty; that though thou want that comfort which heretofore
thou have had, yet still thou can give glory unto thy God in believing his
word, and in large thy love unto his Majesty, even when he seems to have
forsaken thee? And can thou have a better Romans 4. 20. 4
trial of the power and pureness of thy faith, then above hope to believe under
hope in the promises of thy God, subiecting thy chiefest good unto the glory
of God? and through want of present sense being guided to forget what thou have
enjoyed, lest through spiritual pride thou might rest therein, and rob God
of his glory, thou do the rather make haste to that which is before, by the
power of thy faith seeing a far off, yea laying fast hold on eternal life by
renewing thy strength in Jesus Christ? And is 5
not the Lord herein wonderful, that by withdrawing sense of present joy, he
both purges us of such evils as may corrupt the same, namely, spiritual pride
and security, and also causes us hereby to lay faster hold on Jesus Christ,
who only must perfect the work that is begun in us? And 6
can thou express thy love in greater measure unto thy God, then to love him
then, when he seems to have forsaken thee? then to follow after him when he
seems to run from thee? does not this advance the sincerity of thy love?
does not this exceedingly approve thy conformity to thy Savior, that as he
was contented to be abased in himself, yea to become of no reputation, that
thou may be accepted; so thou art contented to be emptied, that God may be
glorified, thou can willingly want present comfort, that thy God may have
unfeigned worship, Romans 9.
when now, not so much for thine own sake, as for his glory, thou do
believe in him, when though he kill thee, Job 13. 15. 7
yet thou will trust in him? And can thou be a loser where the Lord is such a
gainer by thee? can thou leave thy love when the Lord does purpose to try
the soundnes of it; when the Lord provoke thee to live by faith; when by the
power of faith he will thus enable thee to lay hold of eternal life?

Surely as this is the life of faith to exceed present sense; so this want of
present comfort thus conceived, and applied, shall be both a means to enable
thee to make better Note^.
use of such joy, when the Lord shall again turn his countenance upon thee:
and in the mean time minister exceeding comfort unto thy soul, that thou
do constantly believe in, and unfeignedly love the Lord thy God. And
therefore doubt not herein of any decay of thy love Resolution herein.
unto thy God, because the Lord in his wisdom, for thy trial, withdrawes the
present pledges of his love from thee. For neither could thou endure at all,
in thy sense of this want of present comfort, if thy God did not secretly
uphold 8
thee with inward and unspeakable consolations. And in that thou discernest
want of joy, it is not so much because thou want that which thou have had,
as that by 9 Note.
faith thou apprehendest that unspeakable joy which thou have not: which that
it does euacuate and empty thee of sense of present comfort, it is no more
marvel, then that the glorious light of the Sun should obscure the light of
a candle, or that a drop should not be discerned being cast into the maine
Ocean.

Only for thy full satisfaction herein, examine thy heart in this case, by
these rules:

First, that thou have not given thy God just occasion to withdraw these
comforts from thee: either, Trial hereof.


1. By not prizing them bighly and inualuably:

2. Or by not being thoroughly humbled with the^: else,

3. Through beholding of the Sun when it shined thou wast dazzled, and puffed up
therewith.

4. And so did not employ them to the best use of thy Master, advancing his
glory, and to ye good of thy brother.

5. Either thou did measure the infinite love of thy God by them, and so
did ouerrate these comforts.

6. Or else thou did corrupt them by mingling them with the flesh, and making
them serve the lusts thereof.

7. Either thou conceiuedst basely of the means, that conuaied these comforts
unto thee, namely, the ministry of the word, dreaming of revelations and
extraordinary means.

8. Or else being ouerioyed with these comforts, thou becamest presumptuous and
idle, neglecting thy calling which God has appointed to humble thee, and
thereby to fit thee to greater comforts.

Secondly, examine thy affections in the want of these present comforts.

1. That thou esteem not thy case desperate for want of them. Neither, 2. Be
so contented with this dispensation of thy God, but that it rejoices thee
unfeignedly to remember what thou have felt, and 3. Thou do unfeignedly mourn
for the want of this gra^ious aspect, and withal 4. Do unfeignedly hunger
after the return, and increase thereof. And to this end 5. Do use
conscionably, and rejoice in, the means of the preaching of the Gospel, and
effectual prayer for the recovery of the same: Cant. 1 and 5. 6. Yea do
labor to confer with the Saints, and holy ones, making trial of their
feelings, and quickening thereby thy dulnes, by provoking their prayers, etc. 7.
And waitest patiently the leisure of thy God, for the return of comfort, as
may stand with his glory, resolving thy self, that his grace is sufficient
for thee.
Thus if thou art resolved in thy judgment, and art thus established in thy
affections,

The less thou feel the love of thy God, the more is the trial of thy love
toward him; and the more he tries thy love, the more is his love toward
thee, and therefore thy love to him must needs be enlarged: which thou do
express by thy says, in believing beyond thy feeling, and hereby giving
glory unto God, thou do grow in his favor; by the power whereof, thou art
increased in his obedience, and so followest hard after the mark, to obtain
that crown of glory.

If yet thou art doubtful of thy abiding in love: As thou may decay; so thou
art jealous of thy self herein:

I say unto thee, Blessed is the man that fears always.

And that thou may be resolved, whether thou art decayed Prou. 28. 13. How to
know whether we have left our first love.
or no, observe for thy trial these marks thereof: which are apparent
symptoms of the leaving of our first love.

1. Know thou that if thou have lost that peace of conscience, By these marks.
whereby thou wast wont to come with boldness into the presence of thy God, and
power out thy soul in strong cries and tears unto thy God, and so can not
pray with that evidence, as in former times, with that patience and constancy
ouercomming thy God.

2. If thou growest fearful of troubles, and use carnal policy to prevent
them.

3. If thou growest worldly, and covetous, withdrawing thy hand from the
necessities of thy brother, and neglecting the occasions of charity, etc.

4. If thou growest negligent in hearing of the word, contenting thy self
either with none, or an ineffectual Ministry.

5. If thou can dispense with thy self in vain sports and recreations,
gaming, vain talk, etc. whereof heretofore thou made some conscience,
wasting thy time and wit in them.

6. If thou can frame to all companies, and temporize with each, as presuming
upon thy protection, from thy Christian calling: Ephesians. 5. 1.

7. If thou art afraid of death, and neglectest the daily and constant
examination of thy ways, and holy duties in private, unto thy God.

8. If thou can so joy in these earthly things, as either not to feel a
lothsomnesse in them, or not to use them as sparks to increase the fire of thy
spiritual joy.

9. If thou measurest the happiness of the life to come by that sense, which
for the present thou have thereof; thou do not live by faith, and therefore
thou have left thy first love.

And for thy comfort observe herein an especial mercy of thy God, that there
will follow this loss of love:

1. Inward trouble of conscience, which will give thee Symptoms that follow
the leaving of our first love.
no rest till thou have resolved thy case with God, and recovered: Psalm. 6. 38,
etc.

2. Some outward sensible stripe either in thy goods, person, children; to open
thine eyes the better, and bring thee to repentance: Job 33. 15, 16.

3. Now the world will not fail to flatter thee, and as it were to own thee,
that so thou may suspect thy self the rather.

4. And yet that thou may discern the worlds love, thou shall not want some
mock and reproach, to cast the dirt of thy decay in thy face, that so thou
may be ashamed and confounded in this decay.

5. And happily thou may be given up to some gross sin, the more to
discredit thee with the world, that so thou may not be corrupted with the
flattery thereof.

And therefore thus thou may recover out of this decay:

1. Rest upon the promises of thy God, that thou shall How to recover first
love.
recover, and thy latter end shall be better then the beginning.

2. Meditate on the former experience of the joy of the spirit, that so thou
may press the Lord from his wonted mercies: Psalm. 77. 1. Sam. 17.

3. Consider the means that the Lord used to plant this joy and love in thy
heart, and by the same know, that he will renew this work, and therefore at no
hand be driven from the means: Cant. 1. Cant. 4. 5.

4. Resolve that thy former estate was better then now: Os. 2. 8. 9. and
therefore return to thy first love again, that so the Lord may renew and
increase thy love unto him.

5. Acquaint the experienced soldier with this thy estate, that so he may be a
means to quicken thee again.

6. Give we not over our pursuit of these comforts: spare we no pains: think
we all time too little: impose we extraordinary afflictions, as fasting, and
so groaning under the burden, and detesting our selves: give we the Lord no
rest, till he has returned to his rest, and recovered our decaies: Cantic. 5.

To this end use we the means before set down to recover from Apostasy.

And be we comforted, that we shall not lose, though we have left this love.

And this is the last lesson to be observed out of this Scripture: Namely*

That the Saints shall not lose, though they leave their Doct. 7. The Saints
shall not lose their first love. Reason 1. Ose. 2. 19. Esa 49. Esa. 27.
first love: Luke 11. Psalm. 92. 2. Tim. 4. 19.

1. Because the Lord has promised to continue his love toward them: Ioh. 13.
1. Ioh. 17.

2. Their afflictions do tend to their perseverance, as purging out their
sins: Esaias 1. 25.

3. Their sins turn to their continuance in grace: 1. as making them afraid of
sin: 2. and more expert to conquer the same: 3. more fit for grace, by making
them more humble, and hungry after it: 4. more merciful to others, and
therefore moving the Lord to have more compassion on them.

4. Their Savior lives and triumphs, to make them more then conquerours:
Romans 8. 36. 37. Ioh. 12. 32.

5. The spirit and word shall abide in them to hold them on in grace.

And therefore

1. This condemns the blasphemy of Papists, who teach that the Saints may
fall finally, and therein do impeach Use.
the power and faithfulness of God.

2. It checketh the insolency of the wicked that rejoice at the falls of the
Saints, and insult over them, seeing that though they fall, they shall rise
again: Mich. 7. 9.

3. As also it reprooueth the infidelity of the Saints, who doubt of their
recovery, and wrong the faithfulness of God, and power of their faith, grieve
the blessed spirit, and deny in a sort the merit of Christ.

4. Here is first for the world to justify Gods faithfulness, seeing he does
not forsake for ever; Lam. 3. 24. 25.

5. Here the Saints are lessoned, as to fear their falls, and not to sin
upon presumption of recovery; so not to distrust of Gods mercy in their
greatest failings, seeing the Lord is faithful, and they shall recover, though
not so forcible a measure as before they had, yet sufficient to the enjoying of
that happiness that the Lord Jesus has purchased for them. To this end, for
the further satisfying and comforting of the conscience, observe we these two
things:

First, that it is one thing to leave our first love, and to be lukewarm,
neither hot nor cold.

2. That there is great odds between leaving our first love, and losing it
altogether: we may leave, in regard of a former measure, and yet hold a true
grain which shall clear us of luke-warmnesse: and though we leave a measure,
yet we lose not all, because the least remaining will be a means to recover
again, if not so much as we have had, yet so much as shall serve both to keep
from final apostasy, and further to eternal glory.

6. And therefore here is matter of exceeding consolation to the elect of God,
not to trust their own unbelieving hearts, much less Satanslies; but to rest
on the faithfulness of God, not judging themselves by what they are in their
decay, but by what they were in their first love: and so pressing the Lord in
his faithfulness, and their former experience, they shall be vpheld in their
greatest failings, by a secret power; and in good time the Lord will appear
unto them to bring forth their righteousness as the light, and their weldoing
as the noone Psalm. 37. 5. Luke 12.
day, that so their latter end may be better then their beginning.

Glory be to the Lord Jesus.

