THE HVMBLE and unfeigned confession of the belefe of certain poor banished
men, grounded upon the holy Scriptures of God, and upon the Articles of that
undefiled and only undoubted true Christian faith, which the holy Catholic
(that is to say universal) Church of Christ professes.

Specially concerning, not only the word of God, and the ministerye of the
same: but also the Church and Sacraments thereof.

Which we send most humbly unto the Lords of England, and all the commons of
the same.

Romans x. To believe with the heart, justifies: and to confess with the mouth,
saves.

Lord increase our faith.

Grace and peace in our savior Jesus Christ be with you ever, strengthen and
preserve you in the stedfastnes of Christ's word, and bring to luckie and
blessed end that gracious work yt he has begun in you.
I Must needs with Saint Paul knowledge my self debtor to all yt call upon
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Roma. i.
but to non more the^ to you most dearly beloved both because of such loving
friendship as I have found in you, and most of al for the Christian love, that
some time being your Curate I found among you, and that I trust continues
among you still, not only toward me, but to all that love the Lord Jesus
Christ, wherefore now considering the time of trial to be come, Mat. xxiiii i.
Pet. iiii. ii. Tim. iii. i. John. ii.iii.iiii.
that both our Sau^or Christ, and al his holy Apostles warned us of, I have
thought it my part with this Epistle to co^sort you, not mistrusting, but you al
are strengthened and comforted daily with the comfort that is of God: and do
now earnestlye account with your selves the price of the buylding of your
tower, Luke. xiiii.
least if the foundation and beginning be laid and the work not finished,
your enemies begin to laugh you to skorne, and to sai: these men began to
build, but they were not able to finishe. I trust you are not builte upon the
slippery sands or grauels, Mat. vii.
where every wave that beats shall shake the foundation, and cause it to
fall, but you are built upon a sure ground, deep dug, i. Cor. ii.
and your foundation laid upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets,
Ephe. ii.
upon the corner stone Jesus Christ, in whom every buildinge knitt and coupled
together, grows unto an holy Temple for the Lord,

For all though the builders refuse and cast away as a thing of naught, Psa.
cxvii.
this stone Christ, which at this day they do, Mark. xii
puttinge out of the Temples Gods holy word in the mother tou^g, i. Pete. ii.
to set up a Latin unknown tongue, and in it to maintain their old Romyshe
beggary, Yet shall that stone be the principal corner stone, to you that believe
elect, and precious. And whosoever believes in him, shall not be ashamed. And
doubtless the unbelievers and unfaithful must needs fall and stomble upon this
stoone, Esa. xxviii.
be broused and utterly destroyed at the last, although for a time the Lord
uses the^ as the rod of his furye, Esaias. x.
to chasten our wa^ton and tomuch worldly vain living, which in a manner had
forgotten God, and mere to much cooled from that ardent love that Christ
willed to be among his. Wherefore our heavenly father does mercifully call us
again to suffer afflictions with his son Christ, and so to tri and examine our
faith, that it being found more precious the^ gold or silver, might be to the
praise and honor of his name

Let us therefore take this correction with all mekenes of heart and submission
under the hand of God, i. Pet. v.
that he may exalte us when it shall be his godly pleasure. We call him our
father, and our savior Christ has warranted us so to do, Math. vi. Luke. xi.
wherefore let us know him to be in deed a father, not only in king Edwardes
days, when we had al wealth and quiet with his holy word: but also now in
these perilous days, when the angels of the deep, hold and stop the winds
of Christ's Gospel, Apoc. vii.
that they should not blow upon the earth to make it fruitful, nor upon the
seas, to make them aboundaunte with fish for the Apostles to catch, nor upon
the trees, to make the^ bring forth their fruits in due season. I sa^ even now
the Lord is our father, and y^ he corrects us, it is of very love, and not of
cruelty, of mercy and pytie, i. Cor. xi.
and not of severe judgment. We are corrected says Saint Paul of the Lord,
that we should not be damned, with the world. Wherefore as obedient children,
we must submit our selves, and sai with David. O Lord thou art righteous, Psa.
cxviii
and righteous are thy judgments. It is good to me that thou have humbled me,
yt I may learn thy judgments. The law of thy mouth is more dearer to me,
the^ thou sands of gold and silver. I trust dear brethren, that you al do now
study how to stand steadfast in Gods word unto the end, that you may optaine
the promise as the Lord says. Thus says the first and the last, Apo. ii.
which was dead and lives, I know thy works and tribulation, and poverty,
but thou art rich, and I know the blasphemy of those, that call them selves
Jews, and are none: but are the sinagoge of Sathanas. The Lord calls the^
rich, Math. v. i. Tim. vi.
that habounde in the ritche spirit of God, and in all good works, that gods
spirit moved them unto, as steadfast faith, sure hope, ardent love and
charity, diligent, often, and fervent prayer, tamyng of the flesh with his
lusts and appetites, which you may read Galath. v. liberal alms to the poor
and nedie, especial to the houshoulde of faith, and al other good deeds
commanded of God. But the other although they bost never so much yt they ar
Jews, yt is, confessors of the Lords name, men of the church spirituality,
yea Gospellers if they will to, yet the Lord calls them blasphemers and of
the sinagoge of Satan.

Be not a bashed therefore with names, titles, or dignities, as Lord, Duke.
etc. or bishop, doctor. etc. for e^cept he bring the word of God, and Christ's
Communion with the maintenance of it, doubt not but by the fruits know him,
and give him his name that ye Lord gives him. A blasphemer, of the Sinagoge
of Sathanas. And though persecution com upon the, yet remember what he says
that is first, and last, when no tirau^t shall remain. Be not afraied of none of
those things that thou shall suffer. Behold the devil will cast some of you
into prison that you may be proved. You se dearly beloved, Job. i.ii.
that it is the devil that raises up these storms against us, but doubtless at
Gods permission and sufferaunce, Math. vii
yt we may be proved, whether we be Christians in deed as we confess in word.
Many of us thinks our selves strong, but tempcation declares, Mat. xxvi
that we are but weak, Even as Peter said. Lord I will go with the into
prison and death. But the knower and searcher of hertes said: Truly or the
cock crow, thou shall deny me. And so it came to pass. Nevertheless, after he
wa^ed strong and over came that infirmity and knew, yt to fall we have of our
selves, to stand we have only of God. So is tribulation profitable to the
strong and mighty, for it brings them to the crown of glory, it profits
the weak, for it, opens their mind and makes the^ to seek to the Physician
and curer of our souls, Psalm. v^
and to cry with David. O Lord heal my soul, for I have sinned against the.
Let us therefore labor to overcome our weakness, and to accomplish that the
Lord commands. i. Cor. iiii
Be faithful unto the death, and I will give the a crown of life. You se the
Lord requires faithfulness both in the stewardes that preach his word and
in the seru^intes that hear it. Death is the end of al flesh, as well of
Kings, and Queen's, Esaias. xl.
Dukes and bishops, as of poor men. For all flesh is grass, and all the glory
of flesh as the flower of grass. When the wind of the Lord goes over it,
it falls and fades: but the Lords word abides for ever, and those that
does the will of the Lord, abide also for ever. Happy are those to whom the
Lord gives that crown of life, and to loose it, is a greater loss, then
either Emperor, King, or Queen, or an Angel from heaven can either restore or
recompense. Stand therefore faithfullye to gods word, believe his promis. He that
has ears to hear, let him hear what the holy Ghost says to the churches. He
that overcomes shall not be hurt by the second death. The first death is of
the body as the Lord said to sinful Adam. Genes. iii.
Earth thou art, and into earth thou shall return again, But the second
death, is it that Christ admonished us to fly, saying: I sai to you my
friends, Luke. xii.
be not afraid of the^, which with body, and after that they have nothing more
that they can do. I will show you whom you ought to fear: Fear him, that after
he has slain the body, has power to cast into hell fire. Truly I say to you
fear him. Let not the fear of man so overcome v^, but that the fear of god
may always be ruler in our hearts, so shall we attain the croune of life
prepared for those that love the Lord and his word unfeignedly.

I have not written this, as to those that are ignorant of their duty, or
unable to stre^gthen both them selves and others, but as to my most dear
brethren in the Lord, trusting y^ Gods spirit that is among you, does daily
move your hearts now, to the highest perfeccion of godliness, even to deny your
lives for Christ's sake, and to take up your cross, and to follow him. Mat. xvi.
If any have in times past been negligent in the wai of godlynes: I prai,
beseech and exhort the same in the Lord Jesus, Esaias. lix.
to turn unto the Lord with his whole heart, Iosu. vii.
and not by his evil and wicked living provoke the Lords wrath any longer, nor
to bring plages upon the whole congregation for his wickedness. Brethren, ii.
Esdr. Three. i.
fall to prayer daily every man for him self and for his Christian brethren.
Fall to weeping with Nehemias and Ieremye, to see the wall of Jerusalem broken,
the city destroyed with sweard and fire, and the temple burned. Math. ix.
Fall to fasting, for now ye days are come that our sweet and dear Bridegroom
Christ is taken from us. I certeinli believe that our to to much negligence in
prayer, and our sloutheful and seldom coming to the holy Supper of the
Lord, Joel. ii.
are two of the great causes, why the Lord has thus plaged us. Let us
therefore earnestlye turn unto the Lord, that he may turn to us, Mat. vii.
call, that he may hear, ask, that he may give, seek, that we may find,
knock, Luke. xi.
that the Lord may open unto us. If ever we showed our selves true Christians,
Ephesians. iiii
let us now show it, in godliness of conversation, and lyuinge, in quietness,
Col. iii.iiii
in patie^t suffering, in meek bearing of wrongs, and doing of none to other,
in forgeueing our enemies, and praying for them, in feedyng the poor and needy
Saints of God, in pitying al men, and in praying for all men. And dearelye
beloved pray for us, that God of his mercy strengthen and comfort us in these
troubles, that he now lays upon us, and that the Lord leave us not to our
selu^s, but ^uer hold his handouer us, and keep us unto the end. For truly I
know without his grace and mercyful help, no man is able to withs^and Satha^s
vyolence, therefore for Christ's love pray for us, as we shall not fail daily
to do for you.

Here have I (gentle Reader) setforth the Confession and Faith of certain
learned men, that as they have written it in their exile for thy comfort: so
may thou give god the praise, and help to stop the mouths of such
blasphemers, as have nothing in their mouths, but Heretics Heretics. But I
dout not, that when thou have read it with judgment, and co^ferd it with their
doctrine, that they now preach to thee: thou shall se which sort ar the
Heretics. Thou may see that all their struglynge is to bring thee to
their stynckyng Romyshe puddels again. Thus I commend you all dearelye
beloved in the tender mercies of Jesus Christ, unto the tuitio^ of the living
god, which is the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, beseching him to send his
holy Ghost among you, and to bestow his rich grace and blessing upon you, that
you al may be constant and perfect in Gods ways, and immovable in Christ's
faith, constantlye per^euering unto the end. Amen. Grace be with you and peace
from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, who tread down Satan
under our fete shortly. Amen.

To all such as love to fear God, to serve and worship him in spirit and
truth, and to live in charity and virtue among their neighbors within the
Realm of England, Grace mercy and peace be multipled with you, from God the
father through Jesus Christ his only son, our Lord and only Savior.
BEcause we are assured, that the Devil, not only as an anucient murderer,
proceadeth still in cruel tirannye and extremities, but also as the old liar
from the beginning and father of falsholde in misreporting, slaundring and
beliynge the most sacred verity of Gods holy word, and us poor men, that
have been minis^ers of the same (specially now that we are absent, and gone far
from our native country of England) Therefore, partly to certify such of you as
know us, that we shute still at the old mark of Gods word, neither recanting
nor reuokyng that which we have learned in the ^chole of Go^ and taught
amongst you: and partly, to signifi to as many of you as know us not (and yet
do hear how our adversaries rail upon us behind our backs calling us
Heretyckes, S^^smatickes. etc.) that we are not as they report, but better
framed both in thought, word, and deed: we trust to the glory of God, and
your edifying. For these and such co^sideracions, we have therefore set forth
this humble and unfeigned confession of our belefe, that is to say: how we in
conscience ar persuaded by the infallible testimony of the scriptures,
concerning the word of God written, and the ministry of the same: his Church
also, and sacraments thereof. For as these are the principal points of the
faith and true Religion, which is builded only upon Christ: so if our minds by
the witness of the holy Ghost in his word, be fully resolved herein, then by the
grace of the same most holy spirit, neither our understanding, nor good
wylles, neither yet our bodies shall be stopte nor hindered from prayer ^r
fasting, from patience or obedyence, from peace or Christian quietness, from
doing our duties to God and man, or from e^ercisyng of those good works, that
are comprehended in his holy precepts, and commandments. And thus most
hertely prayng you to keep you still in the Arc with Noah and his household. We
assure you in the word of the Lord, that so dooinge: the fludde shall not
drown you, nether shall the wrath to come, over take you. Amen

FIrst, because we mind not to build upon a weke foundation, we are steadfastly
persuaded, and do reuere^tly believe, all the Articles of the christian faith,
comprehended in three Eredes, commonly called Simbolum Apos^olicum, Simbolum
Nicenum, and simbolum Athanasii.

Item. We do stedfastli believe, end reverence, even from the botome of our
hearts, all the holy Scriptures of Gods b^oke, which is the sacred ^yble,
con^teinyng the Old and Newe-testament: being fullye persuaded (...) our
conscience, according to the testimony of the holy ghost, that the same holy
Scripture, is able to make men learned unto salvation, through the faith which
is in Christ Jesus: And that like as the said holy Scripture was given by
inspiration of God (whose gracious and blessed spirit was the worker thereof)
and is profitable to teach, to improve, ^i. Tim. iii
to refourme, and to instruct in righteousness: that the man of God may be
perfect and prepared unto al good works, even so is it the ^ure word of
prophecy, and very light that shines in a dark place: ii. Pet. i.
so that who so takes head theru^to, does well until the day dawne, and til the
day star arise in his heart.

Item. We believe, that whosoever transgresses (or over passes) and abides
not in the Doctrine of Christ, ^^. John. i
has not God: so that if any man com unto us* and bring not this learny^^ of
Gods holy word, we ought not to receive him into our house, nether to welcome
him: but rather to beware of such false prophets as being inwardlye rauenynge
wolffes, Math. vii
would spoil us through philosophy and de^eifull vanity, after the
tradicions of men, and after the ordinances of the world, and not after
Christ. Col^o. ii.


Item. Our steadfast belief is, that like as if an Angel from heaven, or the
Apostles them selves, should preach unto us any other Gospel or doctrine
concerning Religion contrary to that they have taught already, Gala. i.
we ought to hold them accursed: Even so we are bound to beware, least any man
with vayn traditions or colored holiness, cause us to shote at a wrong mark,
Collo. ii.
or lead us out of the right way.

Item. We believe verily, that whosoever does wilfully follow (or teach) such
doctrine as is contrary to the holy scriptures of God. i. Tim. vi.
The same (for yt he agrees not unto the wholesome words of our savior Jesus
Christ) is a proud ignorant person, and a very wast brain: And that unto
those which will not receive the love of the said divine truth and holy
scriptures to their salvation* Almyghtie God does most iustli send strong
delusio^, ii. Tess. ii.
suffering the^ to believe lies: to ye damnation of al such as disdaini^g to give
crede^ce unto ye truth, have pleasure in unrighteousness

Item. Our belief is, that for all our liplabour and outward apperaunce or
show of Religion* Yet so long as we ^epe us not to the rule of the holy
scripture, but wilfully follow the corrupt tradicions, doctrines, precepts and
laws of men, we worship Go^ in vain, Esaias. xxix Math. xv Mar. vii.
and serve him not in such vpryght sort, as we ought to do.

Item. Our conscience is fully persuaded, that because men are so stubbourne
and disobedient, so hard herted and froward, that they think scorn to herke^
unto the voice of God, and wilfully refuse to be ordered by the teaching of his
holy word and scriptures. God therefore giving them up to their own hearts
lust, Psa. lxxxi
and sufferyng them to follow their own imaginations: does most justly take
part against them, powrynge upon them such great and horrible pla^es, as the
prophet Moses speaks of.

Item. Our steadfast belief is, that whatsoever the almighty and euerliuyng
God commands us by his word (which he has appointed to be the Lantern unto
our feet, Psalm. cxix.
and light unto our paths) like as we ought to have the same in such
reverence Iosu. xxiii Deuteronomy. xi.
that we bow not aside therfrom, neither to the right hand nor to the left,
and that we do not such things as seem good in our own eyes, but Deuteronomy.
iiii.xii.
only that which is right in the sight of the Lord Pro. xxx.
adding nothing unto his words, least he reprove and plage us, and least we
be found liars: Even so, Apo. xxii.
we should not take away or minish ought from his words The Bishops of England
in their book to king Henrye* ye.viii. circa An. M.D.XXXviii*
least he take away from us our portion, out of the book of life

Item. Like as our belief is, that ye said holy word and scripture of God
alone, shows me^ ye right path to come to god, to se him, to know him to love
him, to serve him, and so to serve him as he most desires: so ar we fulli
persuaded, according to s. Austines cou^sail yt it is our bounden duty, as well
to yield and consent to the authority of holy scripture, which neither can
disceiue, nor be desceiued. As also in the understanding thereof, De doct.
Christia. lib. iii. ca.
diligently to observe the circumstau^ces of the places times and persons* and
to take good head, not oneli what, but also of who^ any thing therein contained,
In lib. ad Orosin. co^tra Priscilliam et Origenis.
is spoken.

And here with this humble confesion of our faith in Christ, we do eue^ from
the botome o^ our hearts, right sore, lament and bewail, the present miserable
decay of Christ's true Religion, the manyfold inconveniences the great harm
and horrible abuses, that are entered in among the generations of men of al
sorts and degrees through addyng unto the said holy Scripture, through
minishing of it, and for not duly considering the circumstances thereof: That
is to say, for not regarding, for not obeiyng, and for not following the
infallible truth of the same most reverend word of God: The curssed and
unhappy contempt whereof vndoubtedli has brought into this world, al
wickedness, as well of false doctrine, as of ungodly and sinful living: To the
subuerting of al good order, not oneli in matters of Religion, but also in
things concerning our duties one toward another. Wherefore, being fullye
persuaded, that the eternal God has appointed the ministry of his word, to
be continued in his church or congregation, Romans xii.
and has given gifts unto me^ to edify it withal: i. Cor. xii*
as well by teaching of true doctrine and improui^g of false: as well by planting
of godliness and al virtues, ii. Tim. iii*
as by instructyng of the ignorant, rebukyng of the ^uyll and refourmynge of
things that be a miss. We mind therefore now to confess, what our belief
is consernyng the Church of Christ.

Of the Church,
THough this word (church) betake^ in diverse significatio^s: as for a
particular congregation, sometime of the good, sometime of the wicked, sometime
for an assemble of both good and evil together, And other wise usurped, partly
for an house of commen resort, and partly, for the only state of the Cicargie:
ye^ are we fullye persuaded, and do steadfastly believe, that there is but Ez.
xxxvii Cant. vi. John. x.
oneonly Act. ii.iiii. Ephesians. iiii.
Apostolic and holy Catholic or universal Church and congregation of God
Ez. xxxvii Ioh. xiiii.xvi. i. John. ii Ephesians. iiii.
which being moved, ^aught and gathered together from among al nations of the
whole world, by the operation of the holy ghost, into the unity and truth of
the faith and undefiled Religion of the Apostles. Is not only sanctified i.
Ihon. i. Heb. ix. Ephesians. v.
cleansed, and purified in the blood of our savior Christ, but specialli also
endued with unfeigned i. Pet. i.
holiness of life. This Church has the Lord Jesus builded upon the sure
steadfast and hard stony Mat. xvi. i. Cor. xiii
rock: that is to say, upon him self, against whom the gates of hell cannot
prevail,. Nether has this Church any other founda^ion, the^ that which Es.
xxviii.
(as the prophet says) Almyghti God the father has ^ayde already: which i.
Pet. ii
the Apostle declares to be even Jesus Christ. This Church is the house, the
dwelling place, and congregation of the living God, i. Tim. iii.
the pillar and ground (that is to say, the mayntainer and defendor, the ^ure
stay and vpholder) of the truth.

This Church is the mistical body and beloved Spouse of Christ, Ephe. i.
Collos. i. Psalm. xlv. Ephesians. v. Titus. iii.
who is the head and Savior thereof, who also for the entire love that he
bears thereunto, not only gave him self for it, to sanctify it, and cleansed
it in the fountain of water, through the word (to make it unto him self a
glorious congregation or church without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing,
Ephe. iiii
yt it should be holy and without blame) But also after his ascencion, when he
led captivity captive, provided ritchlye for it, as well with a most bewtiful
diuersitye of offices and ministrations: Roma. xii i. Cor. xii.
as with his own worthy gifts, meet and convenient for the same, in a most
eccellent order, unity, and agreement* to the intent that his said church
louinglye ^olowing his truth, and in all things growyng in him, as an whole
body coupled and knyt together in every joint (w^erwyth one member ministers
unto a another, according to the measure of his gift) may help and edify it
self, Ephe. iiii
constantly to increase in all godlynes, and not to waver therfro^, neither to
be carried with every wind of doctrine by the wilynes and subtelty of men.
Hebr. xiii.
Of this Church are they whom the Apostle calls Citizens with the Saints,
Ephe. ii.
and of the household of God: Which being built together upon the same
foundation, that the Prophets and Apostles were builded upon, are made an
habitacio^ of God in the spirit. This Church and Congregation, is the
Communion of Saints, Heb. xii.
the heavenly fellowship, and blessed compani of al Gods elect and chosen
children, that ever were from the beginning of the world, be now, or shall be
hereafter: even a^l true worshyppers that serve him in the spirit, John. iiii.
and in the veritye, in such holiness and righteousness as is allowed in his
^ight: Luke. i.
they that unfeignedly fear yt Lord, that walk not on still in the counsel of
the ungodly, that stand not in the way of wicked sinners, Psa. i.iii.
and that remain not among the spiteful scorners, but ever delight in the law of
the Lord, and always study to observe and keep his commandments, his rules,
his ordinances, his acts and statutes. Of this Church are the poor in
spirit, the true penitent, the meek hearted, the merciful, the pure and
clean minded, the peacemakers. Math. v.
Here are they, that being hongry and thyrsti for righteousness, do suffer
persecution for the same, and be reuyled, troubled, and falsely belied of men
for the Lords sake. Of this Church are they, whom the Lord calls the salt,
and seasoners of the earth, the light of the world: which so shine before men,
that they seeing their good works and godly living, do glorify and praise
their father, which is in heaven. Of this Church are they, that both observe
the commandments of Christ the^ selves, and teach others also to do the
like, who understanding the law spiritually (according to the Lords
interpretacion) declare them selves to be the perfect children of God, in
loving their enemies, blessing those that curse the^* doing good to such as
hate the^, praying for those that do them wrong and persecute them. Of this
Church are they, yt when they do alms, let not ye left hand know what the
right hand does, seek no vain glory, or to be seen of men: Math. vi
And when they pray, they enter into the priuye chamber of their conscience,
shutting the door to them, and praying to their heavenly father which is in
secret. And though they babble not much in their prayers (as the Hethen do)
and are assured that their heavenly Father does know what things they have
need of, before they ask of him: Yet being taught of the Lord, how, unto whom,
and what to pray, they most obediently follow his order: forgiving others their
offenses, as they them selves have forgiveness, and desire still to be forgeuen
of God. These when they fast, do it not to be seen of men, but of their father,
which sees in secret. Of this Church are they, that gather them selves
treasure together, not upon earth, but in heaven, where neither rust nor mothes
corrupt, and where thieves nether break up nor steal. These dependyng upon the
only providence of God, though they* abhorring idelnes, do faithfully labor
and travail every one in their vocation? the hands working, the eyes looking,
the mouth speaking, the foot going. etc. yet take they no unlawful care or
thought for this life: but first seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness
thereof, and so enjoy at his hand, the rich provision of al necessary things
with a good conscience.

Of this Church are they, Mat. vii.
that give not that which is holy, unto dogs, nether cast their pearls
before swyne These ask and have: Seek, and find knock, and the door is
opened unto them. These doing unto others, as they would be done unto them
selves, enter in at the straight gate, and by the narrow way, which ledeth unto
life. Of this Church are the good trees* that out of the good treasure of the
heart, bring forth good fruitful things. As they that being ware of false
prophets, and herkening only unto Christ's words, do also practice the same
in their life and co^uersacio^: plaiing the parts of wisemen, which against
storms for to come, build their house upon the rock and sure foundation. Of
this blessed fellowship are they, that endurynge steadfast unto the end, and
fearyng God more the^ me^, take up their cross and follow Christ being well
content to ieopard all that they have, Math. x.
and their life also for his sake. These in all their adversity, resort unto
the Lord, taking his yoke upon them, and lernyng of him to be meke and lowly
in heart, Math. xi.
find ease and rest unto their souls. Of this holy congregation and Church
are they, unto whom it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven: Mat. xiii.
whose eyes are blessed, for they se: and likewise their cares, for they being
children of Gods kingdom, and the good seed sown in the fortunate ground do
not only hear the word of God, but also understand it, Luke. xi.
and bring forth plentiful fruit, some more some less, according to the
measure of such gifts, as he has given them. These are the Lords own sheep,
which knowing Hom their shepherd, and his voice, follow not a stranger, but
fly from him, for they know not the voice of strangers. John. ^.
It is the Lords only voice that they harken unto, and him they follow, who
knows them, and gives them eternal life: so tha they shall never perish,
neither shall any manne pluck them out of his hand. The father of heaven, who
has given this holy flock and Congregation unto Christ his sone, is greater
then al, and no man is able to pluck them out of his heavenly fathers hand.
Now is God the father and Christ his son all one, to the endless comfort of
this his universal Church. Psa. xxxii.
This flock of Christ, this holy congregation, is that blessed Church, Romans
iiii.
whose unrighteousness is forgeuen, and whose sins are covered, and not
imputed: Yea in this Church has the Lord himself ordained and appointed the
heavenly ministracion of continual remission and forgeuenes of sins, to al
such as unfeignedly repent of their former wicked life, and truly convert
unto him* For unto this Church has he given the keys of heaven, Mat. xviii.
that whatsoever they bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever
they lose in earth, shall be losed in heaven: Unto this Church has he given his
holy ghost* so that whose sins soever they forgive, John. xx.
the same are forgeuen: And whose sins so ever they retain, the same are
retained.

Act. i.ii.iiii i. Cori. xi.x.iii. Titus. ii.
In this church is the pure word of God, and all the worthy exercises of his
true Religion, the holy Sacraments, prayers, thankesgeuynge ecclesiastical
discipline, etc. duelye and faithfully ministered. And though the particular
members of this church may err, as many (both particular persons and also
particular churches) have erred, and some do at this day, while they are
compaced with flesh and blood: John. x. Math. xvi.
Yet shall not one sheep perish, that is of this holy universal flock,
neither the faith or foundation of this Catholic Church fail. This holy
universal church, as the son in brightness, has beams of light, whereof it
comes to pass, that there be also particular Churches or congregations. Mat.
xvii^*
Where though there be but two or three gathered together in ye name of
Christ, He is in the mids among them. For though we confess and
knowledge, that the holy Catholic or universal church of Christ, is
invisible, and such as our Creed teaches us to believe (yt such a church there
is) Though no mortal man can se the regeneration of the spirit, and the faith
of Christ in it self. Yet a good tree may be known by his fruts. Mat. vii.
Like as the beams then that proceed of the Su^ne, are testimonies and
partakers of the light thereof: Even so, what church or congregation soever
professes the name and Religion of Christ, having and exercising the pure and
sincere doctrine of his Gospel, of his Sacraments, and of al his dissipline,
according to his holy institution, ye same do we take undoubtedly for Christ's
church. Mat. xii.vii.
For by ma^s words and deeds we may discern to allow or disalowe them. True
Prophets also from false, may we know by their fruits. iii. Re. viii.
The heart, God only sees, and judges.

Notwithstanding, to build upon, we are throwli persuaded, that as the said
blessed universal Church, and congregation of Christ, is the pillor and ground
of the truth (for great is the misterye of godliness that it teaches) Even so,
i. Tim. iii.
in such wonderful deuersitie of doctrines, sects and sundry religions of the
world, we should neither have com to the true knowledge and belief of the
Gospel, neither should we be satisfied in our selves or surely fixed to
continewe and abide still in in ye says thereof (as we be God have the praise)
against al herisies and false opinions. If the authority of the said holy
universal and catholic church of Christ, had not wholly and fully moved,
stirred and provoked, admonished and taught us so to do. Co^tra epistolam
fundamenti. cap. v.
But when we considered (with S. Augustine) the estimation and dignity, the
worthiness and authority of the said, universal church, and how uniformly
the members of that mistical body accords, and consents together, in the
unity of the holy ghost, and in the ministracion of heavenly things, our
conscience with all thanful obedience, and with obedient tha^kfulnes, does most
cherfully and gladli agree: as well to learn what the said church teaches us,
and to believe gods word that it preaches unto us. As to be warned by the
cou^sailes that it gives us, and to follow the instructions, lessons and
ensa^ples that it shows us. For sure we be (as we have confessed already) that
the foundation of this Church is fyrme and fast. Herein has the Lord set up
his own light, that has no darkness in it. John. xii.
Here is the truth that desceiueth no man, the life that kylleth no man, and
the kings hye way that brings every man right to his iourneies end. As for
a particular man, Psa. xxvi. Roma. iii. Iaco. iii.
a particular church or Congregation (as we said before) they may err, they
may be disceiued in one thing or other, at one time or other. The consideration
whereof (as it appears) did move S. Augustine, to have most pri^cipal regard
to ye church universal, although the particular churches of Aphrica in his
time, were not defiled and poisoned, as they be now. O that me^ were so
circumspect this day, as to build upon so sure a ground. For though we may
safely give credence to any particular church when it follows the wholesome
doctrine, wherein the holy ghost by his Apostle, did stablish the Church of the
Ephesians, of the Philippians, of the Colossians, of the Tessalonians. etc. Yet
if any such Church do shute at another mark, we shall but loose our game in
doing thereafter.

As (for ensample) what sound doctrine, what wholesome religion, what good and
upright discipline, is there at this present day, in any of the said particular
Churches? Be they not utterly corrupted and poisoned with diverse kinds of
horrible idolatrye, with shameful supersticious, with damnable sects and false
religions, and with the dotyng doctrynes of men? Ephe. v.
Is the Church of the Ephesians yet still light in the Lord, and not rather
barckenes in Mahomet? Has the Church of the Philippians this present day,
fellowship still in the Gospel, Philip. ^*
and not rather in the fylthy doctrine of the Turk? Both the church of the
Collossians continewe yet still grounded and stablished in the faith of the word
of God, Collo. ii.
and not rather blinded in infidelity, and in such horrible idolatry as is
taught by the false doctrines of men? i. Tessa. i.
Is the church of the Tessalonians now converted still from images to serve
the living God, or content to suffer trouble and loss of their goods for
the truths sake, and not rather turned back again to their idols (as the dog
to his vomyte) and become cruel persecutors of Christ's gospel? What sound
doctrine the^ ca^ be had in a church or congregation yt is so corrupted? Yea,
is the church of Rome it self now obedient unto the faith of Christ (as it
was in S Paul's time) and not rather to the Popes ordinances and decrees? Romans
xvi.


Wherefore, inconsideration of the premises, and for auoydinge of such storms
as must needs overthrow the house that is builded upon the sa^de we are fully
resolved in manner above written, concerning the said holy Apostolic and
Catholic or universal church of Christ.

Of the ministry of the word of God.
VUe are fully persuaded, and do sted fastly believe, that the same almighti,
eternal, and most gracicious God, Hebru. i.
who in times past, diversely and many ways spoke unto the fathers by the
Prophets, has in these last days, not only spoken unto us by his own dear
sone, our only Savior Jesus Christ, but has also by him, ordained and
appointed in his Church, the ministry of his holy word: Mar. xvi.
willing his Gospel to be preached unto al creatures, to the intent yt al
Nations Madateu say. Mat. xxviii
might become his disciples, and be taught to observe al things whatsoever he
has commanded. For in consideracio^ of this most gracious purpose, he did
not only give unto his Apostles and Disciples, the holy Ghost, John. xx.
and opened their wits that they might understand the scriptures, but also
committed unto them, and to their succession in his Church, the office and
charge of preaching repentance and remission of sins in his name among al
nations. Luke xxiiii.
For this intent also has it pleased him, to constitute, and ordain diverse
and sondrye Ministers: Roma. xii.
some having one charge, some another: i. Cor. xii.
that the Saints and holy members of his mistical body and Church, might have
all things necessary to work and minister wythall, for the edifying thereof:
for the increase also and conseruatio^ of his true doctrine and Religion.

This holy office, i. Cor. iiii.
which the Apostle calls ye stewardship of the mysteries of God, the
ministracion of the spirit, ii. Cor. iii.
the ministracion of righteousness, the preaching of the atonement, ii. Cor.
viii
and the embassage of Christ (though the blind se it not, and the unthankful
world regard it not) is a noble and precious ii. Cor. iiii.
treasure: which the ministers have in earthen ves^els, ii. Cor. iiii
that the excellent power thereof may appear to be of god, and not of them: yea
of such worthynes is it, that the true ministers thereof are Messengers in the
room of Christ, ii. Cor. v.
as if God himself did* beseech ^s through them, to be at one with him. So
that who so hears the^, hears him: Luke. x.
who so despises them, despises him, and he that receaueth whom soever the
Lord sends, receaueth the Lord himself. John. xiii.
When we consider this (as we are bound to do) it moves us to have the holy
ministracion of gods blessed word the more in reverence. And even so are we
occasioned to do when we call to remembrance, how worthy Apostles.
Euangeli^tes, and Disciples it pleased him. Mat. x. Luke. x. Acts. i.
not only to appoin^e at the first in his primative Church, chiefly for the
excecutinge of this holy office, but also to descrybe by him self and them,
how vpryght Ministers his will was to succeed them: Mat. ix.x. Act. xx. Titus.
i.
what good qualities and gift^ they ought to be endued withal: ho^^ well learned
and exercised in the scriptures, i. Pet. v* i. Cor. iii. i. Cor. iiii. i. Tim.
iii.
how apt to teach other, how true shepheardes, how painful work men in Gods
vyn^ yard, how dylygent laborers in his housbandry and harvest, how faithful
stewards of his mysteries, how honest keepers of hospitality, how void of
fylthynes and corrupcion, how discrite virtuous and fa^teles they ought to be,
how sober, honest and faithful wives, how well ordered housholdes, how obedient
and godly brought up children they should have: how well esteemed also and
regarded, and how worthily provided of nessary liuinges, they ought to be. Of
these and such like things testified in the scriptures, we are out of dout,
concerning the ministerye of Gods holy word.

Of the Sacraments.
IF it be meet and convenient (as it is in deed) that the circumstances of the
scriptures, De^o^. Christian. lib. iii. cap. xii.
as S. Augustine says, be diligently observed. Then is it likewise expedient
and necessary, that in medlyng with Gods holy sacraments, it be also
r^uerently and discretly considered by whom, wha^, where, after what manner* for
whom, and for what intent and purpose, they were ordained. For the ignorance
and not regarding thereof, has marred all the matter, and is the very
occasion, that (as concerning the true understanding and use of Gods holy
Sacraments) men shute either to wide, to short, or to far of: so that thereby
they loose the game, and come not near the marcke.

Now because we must needs confess, as we do reverently with al our hearts,
that the mystery of Gods holy Sacraments is most comfortable, and most worthy
to be tasted, felt and understand in every Christen conscience: And forasmuch
as the Devil, with the cloud of blind and wilful ignorance, has darkened
theeyes of mani a mothers child, so that they do not see nor perceive the
swetenes of this treasure what it is, where it lies, nor the right use of it.
Therefore, albeit ye holy Ghost him self has broken the hard shel of the Nutte
already, yet seeing there are sundry good pieces of the sweet kernel ca^t out,
and lie, some trodden under feet, some shuffeled among the shells. We mind as
sincerely and faithfullye as we can, to do our best in taking up, and laying
forth such parcels of the said most sweet kernel, concerning the mis^ery of
Gods holy Sacraments as the Lord himself by his grace, in this our humble
confession, shall help and teach us to utter.

Now as it is most requisite, worthily to consider the said misterye, The
misterye.
which is the Communion and fellowship that we have in eternal life through the
me^i^es of Christ: Eue^ so we confess, and find it so by ecsperie^ce, that
the verity and truth thereof, does much the more comfortably appear, when Gods
wonderful and most gragracious working for mankind from the beginni^g, is
faithfully called to remembrance. Gene. i.ii.
For man in his first creacion, was made to the similitude and likeness of
almighty God, endued with perfectnes, wisdom, righteousness and life
everlasting. Of the which incomparable kindness and mercy, to the intent he
might still be mindful, and keep the same ever in thankful remembrance, God
prescribed unto him a rule, law, or commandment: which to obey, was even to
continu in the fellowship of the same immortal life that was given him: But to
disobey it, in followyng his own will, contrary to the commandment, Genes. ii.
was to be in service to everlasting death, and to lose his porcio^ in
everlasting life. So when man was fallen from the obedience of the
commau^deme^t, his own nakedness appeared unto him self so horrible (by reason
it was not covered with the image of life) that he began to despair, Genes.
iii.
and durst not show himself in the sight of god. How beit in this terrible
distres, and most woeful stare of man. Almightye God (who ever was and is
merciful) did promis him again everlasting life, which was laid up in his
own son* but so that (according as he, even God himself by an everlasting
decree, had appointed) he would be sati^^yed, recompensed, and pacified again,
in the obedience of al his commandments, by the same nature of man: Roma. ^.
which because of the corruption of sin, that had entered in to it by
disobedience, could not fully satisfye the law, and therefore God made an
everlasting covenant of mercy with mankind, and promised the blessed seed:
namely, that his own son should put upon him our nature, and therewith in
innocence, satisfi the law, and bring us again into the fellowship of that
everlasting life, which was lost through Adams disobedience.

God now, to keep his people in remembrance of this his great merci, required
continual sacrifices to provoke them unto thankfulness, and to give them
occasion from time to time* to setle and reast their consciences still, (...)
hope upon the said promise. And for this cause he reneued the said covenant of
mercy so often and sondrye ^imes by outward Sacraments and ceremonies: in the
which, the death of Christ was so present to the faith of ye fathers, that they
believing the promis made in the blessed seed, apprehended the said life that
was lost in Adam.

Genesis xvii. Roma. iiii.
In Circumcision, which was not only an outward visible sign, but also a very
seal of the righteousness of faith, and a testimony of his grace and favor
^ewardes them through Christ, the holy Ghost certified their consciences of
their portion in the said everlasting life.

Exodus xii.
In the Sacrament of the Passover, when the blood of the Lamb was striked upon
the posts of their doors, and the flesh thereof eaten roasted, and with such
other ceremonies as thereto were appointed. Heb. xi.
They giving faith and credit to the said promis made in the blessed seed,
saw the worthynes and merits of Christ's blood: by the comfortable swetenes
whereof, in the operacion of the holy Ghost, they were assured of the said life
everlasting.

Exodus xvi John. vi.
In the wilderness, Manna was given them from heaven, to declare that the very
true nourishment and food to life everlasting, must come from heaven: which
mankind by steadfast belief through the merits of Christ, should taste, and be
partaker of, and in all the sacrifices and slain offeringes of ye law was the
same misteri represented and set forth to the eyes of faith among the people
of God. Thus the benefit of Gods mercy has been always from time to time, most
louingli opened in his Sacraments and holy ordinances: certifying us (by
faith through the death of Christ) that we have our portion again in
everlasting life, which was lost through Adams disobedience.

Now to come somewhat nerer unto the sacraments of ye new law, we do heartily
agree and consent to the judgment of S. Augustine: Ad Ianu^rium.
not only when he affirms yt our Lord Jesus Christ has knyt together the
fellowship of his new people by Sacraments, which are very few in number, very
easy to be observed, and very e^cellent in signification (as is baptime, and
thesupper of the Lord) but also when he says, yt a Sacrament is the sign
(token or representacion) of an holy thing, the visible form of an invisible
grace, and a visible word of God. Moreover the Sacraments that are of the
Lords holy institucion, we do reverently esteem to be no vain or bare signs,
neither only evidences of the profession of Christen me^, but also certain
assured and effectuous testimonies (or rather seals) of the rightuosnes, Romans
iiii.
grace, and good will of God toward us: whereby he working in us
supernaturally, and after an invisible manner, does not only stir up our faith
toward him, but also establishes and con^yrmeth it the more in the assurance
of everlasting life. Wherefore like as steadfast faith in the operacion of the
holy Ghost does certify us: Roma. v.
even so the Sacraments by propre similitudes being used according to the
Lords institucion testyfye the same. For the holy Ghost (who glorifyeth his
own ordinances with his blessed presence) and also the word it self assures
us, that nothing, though it be outward and external (appointed and appertaini^g
to the right, whole and perfect use of Gods holy sacraments) is in vain, or
but a bare sign, for as much as when the minister does execute the Lords will
according to his holy ordinance, in the ministration of the visible Sacrament
by an outward action. The holy ghost not only certifieth the faithful
^eaceiuers, yt they are partakers of the thing promised, that is to sai:
everlasting life (which life everlasting is even God ye son, John. vi.
whose divine nature is joined with the humanity now syttyng in glory) not
only we say, certifieth, but also inuisibly works in them, Gala. v.
those virtues, whereby they be undoubtedly joined unto Christ, and one toward
another, his mistical members and partakers of eternal life. So that to be
partaker of that everlasting life, is to be as verily joined unto him, and to
be a member of his glorious bo^y of his flesh and of his bones, as his own
divine nature is joined unto his humanity.

O world how mad, o man how blind art thou? that see not this precious
treasure, and taistest not the incomparable swetenes and most heavenly comfort
of this great mystery between Christ and his congregation* Ephesians, v.
Thou gnawest upon the hard shelle, but upon the sweet kernel wherein is
spirit and life, thou fedest not. Would God, his truth could persuade us, yt
to be worthy pertakers hereof, is through faith by the operation of the holy
ghost, to be assured and fully certified, that followyng also the Lords will in
the outward actions of his holy ordinances, and framynge our lives, according
to his wholesome doctrine taught us therein, we have vndoubttedly the thing
that there is promised which is everlasting life in his body and blood.

For first, as concerning flesh and blood, we were in fellowship with
Christ, in the loins of our forefather Adam, Gene. iii.
to whom he was promised immediately after his offense, but opened unto the
world, when he became incarnate: Heb. ii.
So that this fellowship was entered with us, in that part which was properli
ours. In respect whereof the father of heaven (through faith and operation of
his holy spirit) vouchsafe to make us partakers, of that which was properly
his: namely the bread that came down from heaven, which is life it self,
optained by Christ's death, whereby his merits are become ours. So that then
was this felloweship fully joined, when the heavenly marriage between our nature
and his was made, in the unity of person in him, and not by co^fusiu^ of
substance no more the^ either his divine or humayn nature is confounded, though
he be both very God and very man. Thus through faith (whereunto this heavenly
matter is offered) and by the workyng of the holy ghost, we have our fellowship
with everlasting life, in his body and blood, which he took of us and which
now sits in glory, where also our soul is present through faith so that we
be one with him.

The fruitful knowledge and understanding of this heavenly mystery, is
evidently setfurth to the eyes of faith* not only by the first institution and
practice of ye Lords holy Supper, but also by his most comfortable words
before in the Gospel, John. vi.
where he says: it is God the father, that does grant us, his true bread,
namely his own son which came down from heaven, and gives life unto the
world. For he only deserved, that the father should give us again, this life
that was lost.

And like as the son says, that the father should give us the bread that
came from heaven, that is to say, his own son (who^ he also calls life,
because he is the life it self:) Even so the son says, that the bread which
he would give, John. vi.
should be his flesh which he would give and offer to the father for the life of
the world: Namely, that the world by his death, might have that life, which
he said, the father would give: and that is even the very true bread that
came down from heaven. So yt in the Gospel, the son touching his deuinitie
which came from heaven, is called bread: And like wise his vmanitie which he
offered up upon the cross, he calls bread.

Thus through faith, we have the perfourmaunce of that which was promised,
namely, of ye divine nature which is life after a more aboundau^t sort, then it
was lost in Adam: i. John. i. i. Corin. ^. Ephesians. v.
So that this is, and may well be called a very fellowship: and so in deed both
Saint John and S. Paul terms it.

The worthy Sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord, was instituted only
by himself, in the Parler where they did eat the Easter lamb, the same night
wherein he was betrayed. And as concerning the manner how the Lord and they that
received it with him, did use it: How he also himself willed others his
deputies and ministers of his congregation and church to do the same (for whom
like wise, and for what intent and purpose he did institute and ordain it) it
is sufficientlye mentioned by the three Evangelists and by the Apostle Paul.
Mat. xxvi Mar. xiiii Luke. xxii. i. Cor. xi.
Touching the which we must consider, that forasmuch as Christ did institute
this to be a Sacrament, and taught by his most worthy word and practife, a
ce^taine order in the ministration thereof. Therefore as the things therein
contained, ought Sacramentally to be understand, without any absurdity, or
interruptynge either of the action or mystery. So if the order and form by
him prescribed, and commanded to be used (by such as are appointed for the
ministratio^ thereof) be omitted Then is that no Sacrament of his.

For Sacraments are as substancial couenauntes and agreme^tes, whose nature is
to declare unto us, some right, title, privilege or gift, that we have or
shall receive thereby: whether they be grounded upon a commen custom, or
commanded to be observed, by such as have authority to make a law or
ordinance for the same. For whi should the order prescribed in this holy
Sacrament, be worse kept, or less observed, then was the rule that God
appointed in the Sacraments of the old law? Their sacraments had orders,
which were kept: and whi should not the rules of our Sacraments be observed
likewise?

Circumcision had a prescribed day what persons should be Circumcised, Genesis xvii
and what part of the flesh should be cut away. etc. The Lord calling it
both his covenant, and the token of his covenant.

The celebration of Easter, had like wise of the Lord a time appointed, Exodus
xii.
in the which every household, having a lamb or a kydde of one year old,
being a Male without blemishe, should slaye him: And not only take and strike
the blood of him upon the two side posts, and on the upper doorepost of the
house,, but also eat the lamb (or kydde) the same night, with unleavened
bread, and with sower herbs, nether raw nor sodden in water: but roasted at
the fire, the head, the feet, and purtenaunce together, with their loins
gyrded, shoes on their feet, sta^es in their hands, and to eat it in haist,
nothing remainyng over until the morning: The scripture calling it the
Passover, and the sacrifice of the Lords Passoeuer.

And diligently is this to be noted: Namely, that like as ye fathers in old
time did faithfully observe and keep the said rules, nether omyttyng any of
them, nor minishyng them, nether addyng ought unto the^ that the Lord himself,
had not appointed,: Even so albeit that the cuttynge away of the fores^ynne of
the flesh in Circumcision, had the name of the Lords covenant, and though
the other sacrament was called the passover of the Lord, Yet were they never
the less (without any strife, brawlyng or contention about the names)
obediently and tha^kfulli in godli quietness used and observed

The Sacrament of Baptism also, has his ceremonies and rule appointed of the
Lord: ma. xxviii Man. xvi
as to put water upon the child, or to dy^p^ him in water, to pronounce him
baptized in the name of ^he father, the son and the holy ghost. John. iii.
Acts. ii. Titus. iii
etc. The scripture namynge it the new birth, the baptism of remission of
sins, the fountain of the new birth. etc. Where as is likewise to be noted,
that they do horribly abuse the Sacrament of baptism, that either mynishe from
it any of the rules prescribed by the Lord himself, or add there unto, their
own rites and supersticions, whether it be salt, spittle, creme, oil, or any
such things as may deface the worthiness of Christ. Yet has there no such
mischaunce happened unto this holy sacrament, as either to teach or believe, that
there is any transsubstanciatio^ of the water in baptism, or that it loses the
nature of water, though it be appointed and turned to a very holy use.

Now to return again to our purpose: The worthy Sacrament of the ^ordes body
and blood, has his prescribed order and rule. And, so that this holy sacrament
be, according to the practice of his blessed institution, both ministered and
received to gether. The election and appoyntme^t of the time thereof, is
referred and left to ye godly discression of Christ's Church. For ye Apostle
says: Quotiescumque. etc. As often as ye eat this bread and drink of this
cu^pe, i. Cor. xi.
ye shall show the Lords death, until he come. Nevertheless, omitted it may
not be, nor left undone, but used in due time accordingly, and in such sort,
as is appointed by the word of God, mat. xxvi. Luke. xx. i. Cori. xi.
who says: Take ye, eat ye, drink ye al of it: Do this, in the remembrance
of me. And by his Apostle, he has given this order, that we which mind to be
partakers of this holy Communion, shall have no contencion nor strife among our
selves but refourme our abuses: coming here unto, not only together, but
also after a better sort, What things ar required before the holy communion.
rather then after such evil wise, as we happlye heretofore have done: One to
tarry for another without disdain, and (before we eat of this bread and drink
of this cup) to prove, try, and examine our selves, our minds and
consciences, our words and deeds: calling our whole life and conversation
earnestly to remembrance, lamentyng and confessyng our sins unto God calling
upon him for mercy, converting us whollye unto him, knittynge our selves
together in the unity of faith, and godly love: and so to come to the holy
Sacrament: Where first the minister, taking the bread, geuyng thanks and
breaking it, ought by the Lords ensample, to deliver it unto other, The order
to be kept at ye holy communion.
willing them also to take and eat it in remembrance of the Lord, whose
words also he ought to repete accordingly. And likewise taking the cup, to
give thanckes, and to deliver it to the communicantes, willing them al to
drink thereof, in remembrance of the Lord.

This is now the order, appointed to be observed at the ministration of this
holy sacrament, The name of this holy Sacrament. i. Cor. x.xi
which the scripture calls the Supper of the lord the Communion (or
fellowship) of the body and blood of Christ. Concerning the which, if the Lord
had authority to make a law, or to set an order, for the due ministration and
use thereof. Then we also that be his subjects, ar bound to observe the same:
and nether to ad ought thereto, contrary unto it, nether to minish or take away
from it, any thing that he has wylled us to use: Or else, we plainly disapoynt
our selves, of the right title and possession of such comfortable commodities,
as we, by virtue of this heavenly covenant and bargayne, should elece be
sure of. For as this is a special gift, appointed by the last will and testament
of our Savior Christ, who in the true ministration of this his holy sacrament
(by the operacion of this blessed spirit) has promised to make just
deliverance of the thing promised, So is it by him condicioned before hand,
that we shall duly receive and use the same: and not to eat of the bread, or
drink of the cup of the Lord unworthily, i. Cor. xi.
to our own damnation.

In Civil causes the like order takes place. Where a leace is made, it must
not only be signed, sealed, and delivered, but also received, and the party
put in possession: Not delivered (I say) by every man, but only by him or his
deputy, that has authority to make or give the leace: neither may every man
receive and e^nioye it, save only he, to whom it is made or given, or that has
right thereto. Again, a leace commonly is not made without conditions: which
if they be broken, does not ye farmer the^ forfeit his leace?

And what mean we else by this, but even to show that it is an horrible thing,
and far out of order, that while the Lord in this his holy Sacrament offreth
us so large a covenant of mercy, we shall think scorn, to keep the
conditions thereof, and the rules that he has prescribed unto us? No man
doubtless (no not in Civil matters) would be so served: where like as it is no
bargain, til both parties be agreed, so comes it to no perfect effect,
neither can it stand unless the duties, co^dicions and promises be kept.
Nevertheless this thing shall appear much more evident, if we compare the
practice of these present miserable days* to the order of the lord and his
Apostles in the primitive church, and lay the one against the other. As for the
perfourmau^ce of the conditions on his party, there is no doubt: For where as he
couenanteth with us in this holy Sacrament, so to feed, nourish, and comfort
our consciences, that he will even seal us unto him self, set his mark upon
us, and take us for his own. He certif^eth us assuredly, that upon such
conditions, as we also upon our allegiaunce, are bound to keep (which we must
either do, or else become unworthy Receauers to our damnation) we have fellowship
with him, and are partakers of the same eternal life, that he him self has
purchased for us in his body and blood.

But how now? How keep we our touch with him? By his order there should be no
^cisme nor discencion among us, about this matter: And yet Lord what a business
is there about the defense of a new found transubstancia^ion, to prove yt bread
is not bread, Ye shall se shortly a book when eueri part of ye mass began.
and that after the recityng of a few words of the Lord, there remains the
substance, neither of bread nor wine? And what a do is there, about the manner
of Christ's presence in the Sacrament? Lord what tossing and turnyng, what
detorting and wrestinge of the Scriptures is there, to prove the carnal and
natural presence of Christ's flesh and blood (yea that in the form of bread,
there is contained the only natural substance of Christ, God and man, flesh
blood and bone) to the utter confounding of the two natures in Christ, though
both the circu^sta^ce of Christ's action, the propertyes of his humaniti, the
nature of a Sacrament, the Articles of ye Christian faith, the evident
testimonies, as well of the scripture, as of those that are esteemed the best and
most worthy ancient writers, declare the contrary?

Men should refourme al abuses about this matter, and come to it in a better
sort then they have done: And do they not wilfully keep and maintai^ their
abuses still? Yea, are they not eueri dai in their doings wors and wors*

Men should come to the Sacrament together, and the wole godly assemble to
communicate as brothers and sisters in ye Lord. But Alas, they make a massing
matter of it: where on man alone takes upon him to receive ye thing that the
whole congregation ought to be partakers of: and where one should rather tarry
for another, then that any disorder should be committed about so worthy a
Sacrament.

Men ought first to prove and eramen well their consciences, to call themselves,
their thoughts words and deede^ justly to account, earnestly to repent them
of their sins, to lament and bewail their manyfold offenses, to acknowledge
and confess the^ unto God, heartily to call on him for mercy, wholly to convert
unto him, and lovingly to reconcile themselves wit^ their neighbors, before
they presume to aproche unto the table of the Lord. And do they not yet fall
into it like Hogs, walowing still in the filthenes of their abominable living
with out any just remorce of conscience, with out any true repentance or
amendment of life and without such charytable recon^iliacion, as was wont to
be among the worthy Co^munica^tes of Christ's holy Sacrament?

The Priest ought so to minister, and in such a language, yt the people might
understand what he says: But he hudling it up in a corner by him self,
mu^bleth we can not tell what. His duty is se^sibly to declare unto us the
Lords death: that we thereby might be styrred up, as well to remember and taste
the swetenes of this mystery of our redemption, as to be thankful unto the Lord
for the same: But the Pressed speaking to the wall, and not unto us, keeps us
still in blind ignorance. So that as we cannot consider what the Lord has
done, does, or offers to do for us, so is it no maruayle, that we remain
still unthankful,

We should at the ministracion and recept of the Sacrament, have good natural
bread: but instead thereof, we have printed waifers, and such starched
stuff, as is not pure and perfect bread, nor like unto that which was used in
the eating of the Lords holy Supper at the first. The Lord bids his
disciples take the bread: but our lay people (who^ we trust yet to be the
Lords disciples) are forbidden to touch it. The Lord says: Take ye, and eat
ye, he says not, take thou it alon, and let no man else eat with the. He
says, take and eat: he says not, lift it up above your heads: But now the
Priests take and lift it up an high. He says: Take and eat, and says not
hang it up: But now it is taken and hanged up by a line or cord. He says: Take
and eat, and says not, take and worship it as God: But now men crouch and
kneel unto it, honor and worship it as their maker. The Lord says. Take and
eat: He says not, put it up in store. or keep it in a box till another time:
But now it is reserved and carried about in procession, and in the streets,
that the people may fall down (yea, when they se it not) knock their breasts
and worship it. The Lord says: Do this in remembrance of me: He says not,
do it in remembrance of others: but now the Priests do their Mass in
remembrance of the quick and dead, in remembrance of Angels and saints:
they make an oblacion and sacrifice of it for the souls departed, for beasts
and Catfel, for syknesses and diseases. etc. The Lord wills all the Disciples
that were with him, to drink of the Cup, and the Evangelist says* that they
al drank of it: But now the part of the Sacrament is taken from the lay
people, as though Christ had not shed his blood for the^, as well as for others.

What can we then justly look for at the Lords hand to be partakers of in
this worthy Sacrament, when we so unworthily disdain and think scorn to
minister, receive and use it according to the Lords most holy institucion: but
chop and change, add and minysh, after the pleasures, imaginacions and fond
fantasies of men, and not after the word of the Lord, nor after the rightful
practice of his primitive and most pure Church?

Because the Corinthians did so unworthily behave them selves about this holy
Sacrament, by reason of these and such like abuses as we have now spoken of,
and for that they made no difference of the Lords body, that is to say,
because they so little regarded not only his mistical body the church and
congregation, but also the death and merits of his natural blessed body that
suffered and was crucified for them: therefore (says the Apostle) many are weak
and sick among you, and many sleep. And what thing else under the Sun, has
more provoked the wrath and indignation of god over us, or is a greater
occasion why he withdraws his grace and holy spirit from us, and otherwise
also se^deth his sondrye plages amongst us: Yea, what has been or is at this
day, a greater cause of his displeasure, the^ is the most filthy and
abominable idolatry and supersticion of their mass, the blind and wylfull
abusing of the Sacrament, when neither the doctrine of the Lord is truly
taught nor believed, neither those worthy fruits of repentance follow, that so
godly flourished in the primitive church, and that so virtuously should appear
in every one that receaueth ye holy communion?

But now to conclude, for our own part: This worthy Sacrament of our Lord and
only savior Jesus Christ, we so honor and reverence, that we are fully
resolved and perswade^ (by the testimony of his holy word) that it is a
synguler and precious Jewel* which the Lord himself, by his last will and
testament, has most graciously committed and left to his own holy
congregation and church, to the intent that the same worthy Sacrament, which
he ordained to be a special renewing of his gracious covenant with us, and an
undoubted testimony and seal of his loving mercy toward us, should be also a
continual and frutful exercise of our faith love and hope to himward, and a
mighty prouocacio^ unto charity and al good works among our selves. So as we
first duly examining our own consciences, and then assembling our selves
orderly to that solemn memorial of our redemption, hearing there the death of
the Lord, declared unto us: calling the same in special (and all other his
benefits in general) most thankfully to remembrance: lamenting, bewailing,
and repe^ting us earnestly of our sins: knowledgyng and confessing them unto
God, ^euoutlye calling upon him for mercy, professing a new virtuous life:
converting us wholly unto him, and forgeueing one another in brotherly
reconsiliacion from the botome of our hearts, should in the unity of the holy
Ghost, aproche reverently unto the table of the Lord, and worthily receive such
notable increase of heavenly comfort, and spiritual repaste in our
consciences, as He there for that purpose (by the communion and fellowship that
we have with him in his precious body and blood) most louinglye does offer
unto us, even clothing us, as it were with a new power and strength from
above: that we being armed a fresh with his own weapons, may from hence^orthe
fight themore valeauntly under his baner, against the flesh, y^ world, and the
Devil: which to do, he grant us his grace and holy spirit. Amen.

From Wittonburge by Nichola^ Dorcastor. Ann. M.D.Liiii. the.xiiii. of May.

