THE HISTORY OF THE UNITING OF THE KINGDOM OF PORTVGALL TO THE Crown of
Castill: Containing the last wars of the Portugals against the Moors of
Afric, the end of the house of Portugal, and change of that Government. The
description of Portugal, their principal Towns, Castles, Places, Rivers,
Bridges, Passages, Forces, Weaknesses, Revenues, and Expenses. Of the East
Indies, the Isles of Terceres, and other dependences, with many battles by
sea and land, skirmishes, encounters, sieges, orations, and stratagemes of
war.

Imprinted at London by Arn. Hatfield for Edward Blount. 1600.

TO THE MOST NOBLE and abundant president both of Honor and virtue, HENRY
Earl of Southampton.
Right honorable and most worthy Earl,
IT is not my fortune to be so infortunately read, as to begin (after the
common stamp of dedication) with a grai-headed Apophthegme, or some straied
sentence out of Tully, but in such proper and plain language, as a most humble
and affectionate duty can speak, I do here offer up on the altar of my
heart, the first fruits of my long-growing endeavors; which (with much constancy
and confidence) I have cherisht, only waiting this happy opportunity to make
them manifest to your Lordship: where now if (in respect of the known
distance, betwixt the height of your Honorable spirit, and the flatnesse of my
poor abilities) they turn into smoke and vanish ere they can reach a degree
of your merit, vouchsafe yet most (excellent Earl) to remember it was a fire
that kindled them, and gave them life at least, if not lasting. Your Honors
patronage is the only object I aim at; and were the worthiness of this
History I present, such as might warrant me an election out of a world of
Nobility; I would still pursue the happiness of my first choice; which has
since been confirmed to me by my respected friend the translator, a Gentleman
most sincerely devoted to your Honor: For the subject it self I dare say
nothing; since it is out of my element to judge. But I have heard others report
it (and some of them also judicious) to be a thing first and excellently
written in Italian; then translated into French, and generally received in both
those toongs through all christendom for a faithful, elegant, sinewie, and
well digested history: what the beauties of it are now in this English habit,
I make your Honorable Lordship the first and most competent Censor; wishing
that before you begin to read farther, you could but read my silence.

By him that wants much to express his duties to your Honor, EDW. BLOVNT.

The Authors Apology unto the Reader.
IF it argues guilt to be accused, no man shall be innocent; he is therefore
blameless, that being charged, defends himself: Gentle Reader, the first
impression of this history of Portugal, came no sooner forth, but many
(greedy to detract from another glory) did therein bitterly wrong me,
accusing me to be ill affected to the Portugal nation in general, and a
severe censor of the private actions of great personages, and of the officers
of that crown. And albeit it behooves him that shall write of late accidents,
in the Theater of this universal world, to bear the malice and folly of
many; besides that, he shall hardly satisfy all; yet were it more tolerable,
if some (content wrongfully to backbite me,) were not so transported with their
own passions, as to labor to have the use of this Book forbidden throughout
all Spain; notwithstanding it had been allowed by the Inquisitors: Albeit I
know well that many men of judgment, and lovers of truth, have showed
themselves favorers of this work: yet have I thought it fit in this second
edition briefly to make my innocence known. And although they have invented
many more to these two slanders, yet will I satisfy every point I think
necessary, with this supposition for a firm ground, that the truth and
diligence of a history, be the qualities that give it spirit, and life, the
which by no means can be infringed, without converting the most grave and
profitable manner of writing, into the most vain and prejudicial of all
others: So as if my accusations grow from the truth and my diligence, I will
not yield my self guilty, seeing I cannot amend them without error. But let
them understand that I write only to those Readers that can judge of the
truth of a history and the newtrallitie of the writer: First of all, they must
consider it was my chance to write the actions of that realm, which happened in
those four most unfortunate years, which succeeded that of 77. so as there is
no reason that such as report I was inclined to disgrace the Portugals, should
from the quality of the time, sinisterly judge of the disposition of the
writer; neither let them hold him partial in the conquerors behalf, seeing
that in accidents of war, they can hardly honor him that falls, but he that
suffers himself to be vanquished, must with his loss, willingly bear the
blame that grows thereby: The which the ancient writers could so well observe
(whose example I do willingly imitate) that if Titus Liuius had begone and
finished his history in the course of Hannibals victory, he had been held for
a Carthaginian; and Josephus in describing the calamities of the Jews, and the
triumphs of Titus, seemed a Roman: If I writing of two battles, where in
the one, the Portugals lost their king; in the other their kingdom; besides
that at sea, and the loss of the Terceres; what offense is it, if I seem not
a Portugal? seeing that if I were one, I should not seem to be so: or how is
it possible to convert this mornefull history into praises, making him seem
valiant that loses? without doubt, if it had fallen to my lot, to write the
deeds of that nation, whereby they made show how apt they were to arms, and to
noble attempts, as the victories they got of Castile at Aliubarotta, and at
Trancosa, the conquests they made in Afric, their wonderful nauigations and
happy success in Asia, touched in this history, as occasion required. I had
not then been more faithful then now I am, though more acceptable to
Portugals, yet men of judgment do with one mind feel both gain and loss,
praise and dispraise, when they be truly related: So as without doubt we may
conclude, that no man ought to censure the inclination of the writer by the
matter he treates of, be it either in favor or blame of the nation of which he
writes; but only of the truth and indifferency he professes. My accusers
must also understand, that a Historiographer does not wrong any nation, in
describing the qualities which the heavens that cover them, do infuse upon
them, the air they breath, and the water they drink, especially when those
properties be not base but excesses of virtue: As for example, if a man should
(imitating Julius Caesar) write, that the French are in the beginning furious,
and in the end, faint; he should not for this show him self an enemy, nor
disgrace that mighty and warlike nation: And who should say that the Spaniards
are proud, should he therefore impugn their reputation published through the
world? neither should he offend the Portugals, that should say they are
naturally presumptuous, seeing they neither can deny it, nor do seek to hide
it; yea themselves are wont to say, that they live by opinion, that is, they
support themselves more, with that they imagine themselves to be, then with
what they are in effect: my accusers should likewise consider, that I offend
not the Portugals, in saying, that the ignorant regard not dangers a far off,
and fear them near, if they mean not to separate them from the condition of
man, and against all reason make equal ignorance with knowledge. Moreover I
would gladly know why it were not lawful for me without offense, to relate
with truth the misfortunes and calamities of the Portugals, and the altered
form of their realm, as well as for some of the same nation to write many of
their actions blame worthy, and yet not held discourteous: The entry which
Henry the bastard, king of Castill made armed into Portugal, running from the
confines of Gallitia, unto Lisbone, where he lodged, forcing obedience in all
places, was it not more dishonorable then any thing I have written, king
Ferdinand not being able to make any resistance? Read the Chronicles of John
the second their natural king, being quiet and peaceable, what conspiracies
were practiced against him by the nobility of his realm, so as he was forced
to seek revenge by stabbing, and to behead some of the chief publicly, is
not this a reproachful thing? Although some allege, that the king exceeded in
the execution, and that by nature he was a severe man, and full of revenge, yet
there want not others that do number him amongst the saints; but be it as it
may, it lies not in me to judge, and yet this book is Printed and sold in
Lisbone, whereas my book (that treates not of matters of so great doubt) is
mightily abhorred. As for the private personages of the realm, neither have
they reason to surmise that I have spoken of them, either with passion or
immodestlie, the which I believe themselves have found, if they have had any
leisure to read this history with judgment, or have any perfect knowledge in
the Italian tongue. But relying upon the report of such as (inclined to flatter)
reprove all writings, that are not corrupted with flattery, it is no wonder,
if they be induced to believe, that I have written discurteously of them and
with passion: But to make known the contrary, they must understand, that of
vices which are common to states, and to men's private humors, we may say the
like as has been said of those that are commonly incident unto nations, that
they blemish not so much as they ought to be concealed, but march always
united to the state and quality of the person. For example, he that talking of
a young gentleman, should say, that he were phantasticke, choleric, amorous,
arrogant, for all this he does him no wrong; for besides they are no base
affections, they are commonly incident to youth and nobility: In like sort, an
officer respected by his prince, or any favorite whosoever, ought not repine,
if he be described to be tealous, circumspect, ambitious, a temporizer,
careful in his own causes, and careless of others, being qualities that do
accompany princes favors: so as when I touch any one with such like, no man
of judgment ought to green more, then if I should term him choleric or
flegmatike, being certain natural qualities, as the humors and inclinations:
Notwithstanding when I particularly note such points as seem blame worthy,
although they be public and apparent, yet do I suspend my judgment,
attributing the faults to the emulation of courts, and the ambition of
competitors: And such as will not be satisfied with this exception show
plainly they desire to be flattered; but they strive in vain, for I esteem
flattery in a writer, to be like the sin of idolatry. Some have been so
sensible as to note for an excess (speaking of any officer) to sat covertly,
that men transported slander him with some secret action, to such I can make no
answer, seeing they are not content that I term them passionate that blame
others, that I reprehende surmises that I call in question that which others
affirm for certain, excusing in a manner the accused.

Others have labored to publish unto the world, that in my relation touching
the title of the realm, I have showed my self partial for the Catholic
king: To such I can not say any thing, but wish them to be advised, they accuse
not the divine providence as partial, which deprived of life twenty
successors of that crown, all preceading the said king. But I would have
these men to tell me if in this history (where I could not allege Bartoll
nor Bald) I have omitted any one point of importance, which has been alleged
by the pretendents, and have not set every reason down as their own aduocats
did plead it: Let them consider if there be any thing omitted touching the
representation of the Duchess Katherine, of the transmission of Rainucius
Farnese, of the precedence of Phillibert duke of Sauoy, in case that Henry had
out lived Philip, of the election the people pretended, of Antonie his grounds,
and his pretended legitimation; and to conclude, if there were anything
defective of that which Queen Katherine of Medicis alleged against the eleven
kings of that realm: Now if all these reasons which I have so largely set
down, can not hinder the king of Spain from being the eldest kinseman, that
Henry left when he died, a male, and legitimate, what fault is there in me?
If men will not believe that Katherines prerogative by her father be of more
virtue and efficacy then Philips own right, and that the imperfection derived
from his mother does more prejudice the king, then that of the Duchess which
remains in her own person, how can I help it? It is most manifest, that such
only as are partial have held me partial in relating plainly, this title
with the rest, without giving mine own judgment, and the rather for that they
see such as are indifferent, do happily esteem it better then the rest: I may
not be more tedious in this respect, hoping it shall suffice for every man of
a free judgment to discern mine innocence, from the malice or ignorance of
mine adversaries. But moreover I entreat them that know me to be a writer not
accustomed to lie, to consider that I have written to Italians in the Italian
tongue, who could not perfecty understand the substance of this history, if I
had given them less knowledge of men whom they knew not: And to verify this,
let a Portugal writer in Italy describe in his own tongue, unto his own
countrymen the tumults of any of our cities, he shall well find, (if he desire
to be understood in Portugal) whether he may forbear to specify much more
then I have done, of the humors of the head and principal members of that
province whereof he writes. But if all this suffices not to iustimine me; I
make God judge of the sincerity of mine heart, and the indifferency I have
strictly observed.

THE GENEALOGY OF THE Kings of Portugal from the beginning of that Kingdom,
unto the end of the house of Portugal, with the pretendants to that Crown.
HENRY issued from Besancon, first Earl of Portugal, married with Therasie
daughter to Alphonse the sixth, King of Castile, about the year of our Lord
1090. by whom he had Alphonse Henry, which was the first king. Therasie
Henry, and one other daughter married to Ferdinand Mendes.


1. Alphonse Henry, first Duke and King of Portugal, son to the said
Henry, he succeeded his father about the year 1112. he took upon him the
title of King about the year 1139. he reigned in all about 72. years: he
married with Malfade Manrique de Lara, by whom he had issue Sanches, who was
after King. Vrraca, Queen of Leon. Therasie, Countess of Flanders. Malfade.


2. Sanches the first, son to the said Alphonse, about the year 1184. he
reigned 28. years: he married Aldoncia, daughter to Count Raimond Berenger of
Barcelone, by whom he had Alphonse, King. Ferdinand, Earl of Flaunders. Peter,
Earl of Vrgel in Arragon. Henry. Therasie, wife to Alphonse of Leon. Malfade,
Queen of Castile. Sanches, a Nun. Blanch, and Berenguela.


3. Alphonse the second, son to Sanches, the year 1212. he reigned 11.
years, and married Vrraca of Castile, daughter to Alphonse the noble, by whom
he had Sanche, King. Alphonse, King. Ferdinand. Leonor, Queen of Denmark.


4. Sanche the second, called Capello, son to Alphonse the second, the year
1223. he reigned in troubles unto the year 1257. he married Mencia Lopez, by
whom he had no children: he died in Castile incapable to rule.

5. Alphonse the third, called the Brave, brother to Sanche the second, of a
regent he made himself King about the year 1257. and reigned 22. years: he
married with Matilde Countess of Boloigne in Picardie, by whom he had
Ferdinand or Peter, and Robert: in her life time he married with Beatrice,
bastard daughter to Alphonse the 10. called the wise King of Castile, by whom
he had Denis, King. Alphonse. Blanch, a Nun. Constance.


6. Denis, son to Alphonse the third, the year 1279. he reigned 48. years,
and was married to Isabella, daughter to Peter King of Arragon, by whom he had
Constance, Queen of Castile. Alphonse, who was after King. Peter, Earl of
Portalegre.


7. Alphonse the fourth, son to Denis, in the year 1325. he reigned 32.
years, and married Beatrice of Castile, by whom he had Peter, that was King.
Marie. Alphonse. Denis. Iean. Eluira, Queen of Aarragon.


8. Peter, called the cruel, son to Alphonse the fourth, the year 1357. he
reigned 10. years, and married Blanch, daughter to Peter King of Castile,
whom he put away, and after married with Constance daughter to Iean Emanuell,
by whom he had Lewis, who died young. Ferdinand, King. Marie, wife to Ferdinand
of Arragon. Beatrice, died young.


And of Agnes de Castro, a supposed wife, he had Alphonse. Iean. Denis.
Beatrice, Countess of Albuquerque.


And by Therasie Gallega his concubine, he had Iean, who was King.


9. Ferdinand, son to Peter, the year 1367. he reigned about 17. years, and
married Leonor Tells de Meneses, by whom he had Beatrice, Queen of Castile.


10. Iean, called of good memory, son to the said Peter, the year 1383. he
reigned about 49. years, and married with Philip, daughter to Iean of Gaunt
Duke of Lancaster, by whom he had Blanch. Alphonse. Edward, King. Peter Duke
of Coimbra, who had by Isabell of Arragon his wife, Peter that was Constable;
Iean, King of Cypres; Isabell, Queen of Portugal; Philip, a Nun; Ieams, a
Cardinal; Beatrice, wife to the Lord of Rauestein. Henry, Duke of Viseo.
Isabell, Duchess of Burgundy. Iean, master of Saint Jacques. Ferdinand,
master of the order called d' Auis, or Saint Benet.


11. Edouard, son to Iean, the year 1433. he reigned 5. years: he married
Leonor of Arragon, daughter to Ferdinand the 1. by whom he had Alphonse, King.
Ferdinand, Duke of Viseo, who had by his wife, Philip. Leonor, wife to
Frederike the 3. Emperor. Catherine. Iean, Queen of Castile. Beatrice, wife
to Iean, Master of Saint Jacques. Leonor, Queen. Dominique. Emanuell, King.
Isabell, Duchess of Bragance.


12. Alphonse the fifth, called the Affrican, soon to Edward, the year 1438.
he reigned 43. years: he married Isabell, daughter to Peter Duke of Coimbra
his uncle, by whom he had Iean, who lived but a while. Ieanne. Iean, King.


13. Iean, the 2. son to Alphonse the 5. the year 1481. he reigned 14. years,
and married Leonor, daughter to Ferdinand Duke of Viseo, by whom he had
Alphonse, who died before his father.


14. Emanuell, soon to Ferdinand Duke of Viseo, borne in the year 1468. began
to reign in the year 1495. and reigned five years: he died at Lisbone the
third of September 1521. he married Isabell the eldest daughter of Ferdinand
and Isabell, King and Queen of Castile, by whom he had Michaell, who died
young: and to his second wife, he took Marie sister of the said Isabell, by
whom he had Iean, who was after King. Isabell, wife to Charles the 5. Emperor,
of whom is issued Philip, King of Spain. Beatrice, wife to Charles the third
Duke of Sauoy, from whom issued Emanuell Phillibert, father to Charles Emanuell
now Duke of Sauoy. Lewis, father to Anthony the Bastard. Henry Cardinal,
King. Alphonse, Cardinal. Katherine. Ferdinand. Edward, husband to Isabell,
daughter to Iean Duke of Bragance, by whom he had Marie, wife to Alexander
Farnese Prince of Parma, father to Rainuce now Duke of Parma; and Katherine
wife to Iean the second Duke of Bragance, son to Theodose. Anthony, who died
soon after his birth.


And of Elenor, daughter to Philip Archduke of Austria, sister to Charles the
fifth, he had Charles, who died young. Marie, who died a maid of the age of 56.
years.


15. Iean the third, son to Emanuell and of Marie his wife, borne the 7. of
June 1502. he began to reign the 15. of December 1521. and reigned 36. years;
he died the 27. of June, 1557. and married with Katherine sister to Charles the
5. Emperor, the 5. of September, 1525. by whom he had Alphonse. Marie, the
first wife to Philip the second King of Spain, of whom issued Charles that is
dead. Katherine. Beatrice. Emanuell. Philip. Iean, Prince of Portugal, who had
by Ieanne daughter to Charles the fifth, Emperor, Sebastien, who was King.
Anthony.


16. Sebastien, son to Prince Iean, borne the 20. of January, 1554. he began
to reign the year 1557. and reigned 21. years; he died in the battle
against the Moors the 7. of August, 1578. being unmarried.

17. Henry, Cardinal, and Primat of Portugal, son to King Emanuell by
Marie his wife, borne the 16. of January, 1512. in the year 1578. he reigned
about a year and a half, and died in the beginning of the year 1580. he was
the last of the house of Portugal, to whom succeeded.

18. Philip, son to Charles the fifth, Emperor, and of Isabell, King of
Spain, etc. borne the 7. of May, 1527. etc.

THE UNITING OF THE REALM OF PORTVGALL TO THE CROWN OF CASTILL.
The Contents of the first Book.
The original of the Realm of Portugal, the description thereof with their
new conquests: The life of King Sebastian, his first voyage into Afric, his
enteruiew with the Catholic King at Guadalupa, the preparatiues of war made
at Lisbone for the enterprise of Afric: the kings departure from Portugal
with his army.

I Undertake the History of the Realm of PORTVGALL; from the time that king
Sebastian the first, passed into Afric with a mighty army to make war
against the Moors, which inhabit Mauritania Tingitana; till that (after many
afflictions) this Realm was united to those of Spain, under Phillip the
second king of Castill. A subject of importance for the general state, by the
increase of power to so mighty a king: yea considerable for the diverse
accidents happened in so short a time, contrary to common hope; and profitable,
by the examples of the instabilitie of this world, and the dangers that
Princes and people run into by their ill grounded resolutions. I hope to
relate these events sincerely with truth, having been present at the greatest
part, and received the rest from a faithful Reporter. I am void of passion,
an enemy to the vncorrupt writing of Historiographers, being neither borne in
any of those countries, nor subject or vassal to any king or prince. But
before I enter into the welspring of those wars, I have thought it convenient
to make a brief relation of the state of the Realm, of the situation,
beginnings, enterprises, and such like, to the end, that being to report the
fall, we may withal see the rising thereof, by what means it increased, and
was supported, how and when it declined, and finally altered his form.

The description of the Realm of Portugal.
Portugal is a part of Spain, lying upon the furthest borders of the Ocean.
It bordereth upon the East with the kingdom of Castill, upon the West with the
great Ocean, upon the North with Gallicia, and toward the South with the
Atlantike sea and Andelouzia. The late writers have divided it into six
countries, which they call Comarques, that is, beyond the river of Tagus,
Estremadura, betwixt Duero and Minies (and this with the country which
stretches to Coimbra is the ancient Portugal) behind the mountains Beira,
and Algarues, which last has also the Title of a kingdom. It contains in
circuit 850. miles, whereof 400. run along the Sea shore, the rest is maine
land, which makes it in form long and narrow: It has in it eighteen cities,
with many great villages and castles, in number above 470. Three of these
cities have Archbishopricks, Braga, Lisbone, and Euora: whereof the first is
Lord both spiritual and temporal. Nine have their Bishoprics, Coimbra,
Lamego, Visco, Porto, Miranda, Portalegro, Guarda, Leiria and Eluas: the other
five remain without dignity, and those are Braganca, Tauira, Lagos, Faro and
Silues: These last four be in the kingdom of Algarues, whereof one Bishop
has the Title. It is watered with many rivers, whereof two are most famous,
Tagus and Duero; the first runs by the walls of Lisbone, and six or seven
miles off discharges it self into the Sea; the other does the like by the
city of Porto, and two miles from thence falls into the Ocean: from their
mouths unto the city they are no rivers, but as it were arms and bosoms of
the Sea; and most assured and capable ports for many great ships which may
sail far up against the stream, but further in that of Lisbone then of the
other, whereas many great vessels pass fifteen or twenty miles up beyond
the town: besides these two ports, twenty miles from Lisbone, toward the
South, is Settuual, which has a small Tower at the entry thereof, with a port
capable of many ships. And in Algarues is Tauira, Lagos, and Villeneuue; these
three are of reasonable capacity, the rest are less, with many pleasant
plashes. The seat of the country is commodious for all parts of the world;
being in the midst of many great kingdoms, fit for the ancient and later
nauigations: For turning toward the West, they discover directly Gallicya,
Biscay, France, England, Germany, and the other Northern Regions. Before
them lies the Islands of Azores (otherwise called Terceres) the fortunate
Islands, with the countries called the West Indies. On the left hand lies
Andelouzia, and the Streits of Gibraltar, by the which they enter into the
Mediterranean Sea, for the Navigations of Italy and Greece. And leaving the
Streits coasting Afric, on the left hand they discover many nations and new
people, unknown to the ancient, who believed that the burning Zone was
inhabitable: from which places many ships arrive at Lisbone with great riches,
chiefly from the East Indies, the which the Portugalles themselves (as we
shall declare hereafter) conquered: besides their traffiqne with the kingdom
of Castile, which lies behind them.

The description of Lisbone.
Lisbone is the best and chiefest of all their Cities, on the which the whole
Realm dependes: It is very populous, yea many believe that of all the cities
of Christendom (except Paris) it contains the greatest number of people. The
air is very wholesome and temperate; distant from the Equinoctial nine and
thirty degrees; and with the ebbing and flowing of the salt water (which is
great upon that coast) there blows always a temperate wind, which does
refresh it. It is neither wholly plain nor all mountains, but divided into
five small hills, betwixt the one and the other of these, the plain extends
unto the River. It has been walled, whereof some part continues to this day;
but for that it has been since much augmented, that part without the walls
exceedes the other in greatness: There stands upon an high hill a very ancient
castle, which has no other strength in it but his height, nor any guard, but
is reserved as a prison for noble men. At the mouth of Tagus, on the city
side, stands a Fortress built after the newest manner, which they call the
rock of Saint Julian, made to defend the entry of the River. The fruit it
brings forth surpasses all their neighbors in bounty: and although it
yields not corn sufficient to feed them, yet have they provision daily out
of France and Germany. The whole Realm is at this present greatly inhabited,
being replenished with many Noblemen and Gentlemen, and much building of
ships, and vessels for sundry Nauigations: Besides the order of the knights of
Saint Jacques and Alcantara, or of Saint Bennet, which they call d'Auis (of a
place so named,) these carry a red cross, and these a green, like unto the
Knights of Castill) when as the Templers were suppressed, they did institute
another order with the same revenues; which they call the Knights of Christ,
bearing a red cross, and in the midst a white, the which are bound to go to
the war against infidels, to whom Pope Alexander the sixth, did since grant
liberty to marry. And their Kings having increased their revenues, a great
part of their Nobility affected this order, although they have many times
received men base and unworthy. A great part of this Realm was sometimes
united to the crown of Castill, but in the year of our Lord one thousand one
hundredth and ten, Alphons the sixth being King, that part toward the north
was separated, giving it in marriage for a certain tribute, to Henry nephew
to the Earl of Burgundy, borne at Besanson, marrying Therasie his bastard
daughter: for that coming out of France with Count Raimond of Toulouse his
uncle, who was after Earl of Gallicia; he went to the wars which the
Castillians had against the Moors that possessed Spain. And although some
derive the original of this Count Henry from Hungary, others from Aragon,
and from other places; yet this is the most approved opinion: But it happens
in the original of Kings, as of great rivers, whose mouths are known, but
not their springs.

The Portugals conquests.
Portugal was then obscure, untilled, poor, and reduced into straight limits,
yet Alphons Henry, son unto this first Earl, did greatly augment it by his
valiant exploits, taking many places from the Moors by force, against whom
having woone a great victory, in a pitched battle, he was proclaimed King by
his soldiors, in a place called Campo d'Ourique, and following his victory,
woone Saint Arem and Lisbone, remaining peaceable Lord of the Realm; he had
the title of King confirmed by Pope Alexander the fourth, for a certain small
tribute. Their first king which succeeded him, named Alphonso the third, did
no less augment it by another means: For having (before his coming to the
Crown) married with Matilda Countess of Boloigne in Picardie, being now in
possession of the Realm, he put her away of his own proper motion, and
without cause, taking to wife Beatrice, bastard daughter to Alphonso, the tenth
King of Castill surnamed the wise, to have in dowry with her (as indeed he
had) the kingdom of Algarues. So as their lymits being extended as they be at
this present, and the Moors subdued, who kept them in martial exercise, they
began since to make war with the Kings of Castill, although their Dominions
were always greater then the Portugals; the which they did so often and with
such obstinacy, that these nations all of one continent, issued from one
stock, and of one language, were enflamed one against the other with so
mortal a hatred, that it remains even until this day, but more with the
Portugals then the Spaniards. And although these late wars did breed them
more honor then profit; yet were they not without some utility; for that this
continual exercise did maintain them in discipline and keep them from
delights and idleness, capital enemies to any State. Since which time they have
not remained idle, but (inured unto war) won unto themselves some honor
under John the first, at the persuasion of Henry his son, they labored to
take from the Moors certain places in Affricke, the which succeeded happily.
For in time they became Masters in Mauritania Tingitana of the towns of
Ceute, Tanger and Arzilla, (and this is that ancient Zillia) and other places;
which since they have either lost, or abandoned to the Moors (as they did
Arzilla) being of great charge and small profit. They only maintained and
defended the two first, and built toward the West, Mazagon, being seated at
the mouth of Hercules straites; for holding those places the Moors should not
harbor so near unto Spain, but they serve, as a buckler unto that Province.
By reason of these events they extended their hopes yet further, so as the
Islands of Madera, not far distant, and the Terceres, lying from Lishbone 850.
miles, in the forty degree of latitude (then untilled and uninhabited) were by
them discovered and peopled: And not yet content (especially the said Henry,
who aspiring to higher matters, though with less hope then the effect which
followed) they began (sailing through the Ocean) to coast Affricke, searching
new countries and nations: So as running along that coast by the space of many
years, they went on so far, that coming to the other Hemisphere, they
discovered all Ethiopia. And although Alphonso the fifth of that name, and the
twelfth King renewed the war against the Spaniard, yet did they not discontinue
their navigations, to their great good; but in the end having made peace with
the catholic King Ferdinand, in the year of our Lord 1479. they had more
leisure to think of their new conquest. It is worth the observing, that in
capitulations then made, it was particularly specified, that the peace was
concluded for a hundredth years and one; naming always a certain for an
uncertain: But this proved a prophecy: for it continued just a hundredth
years and one; for so much time passed from those wars unto this which I
undertake to write: if the words of the Treaty agree with the quality of the
event. The Realm was greatly strengthened both with people and wealth, and
since increased more; when as Ferdinand and Isabell, King and Queen of
Castill, in the year 1482. expelled the jews out of their Dominions being
then in great numbers: they agreed with John the second, successor to Alphonso
the fifth, and obtained liberty (paying eight ducats for every person) to
enter into his country, upon condition to depart at a certain time prefixed,
and that the King should appoint them shipping to transport them. So as upon
those conditions (which were not fully observed) there entered about 20000.
families, and in every one ten persons at the least: the time of their
departure expired, and not performed, many remained slaves; others either
unwilling to depart, or to loose their goods were baptized, as the rest had
done that remained in Castill. So as under the name of new Christians, the
greatest part remained in Portugal unknown; being vndistinguished, and allied
for money with some Noblemen of the country; they labored to be admitted for
citizens: And although (according unto reason of State) this manner of peopling
were not good, being of a nation different in blood and law, the which in
multiplying might cause an important division, being many in number; yet
brought it great profit to the Crown. Since in the time of Emanuell the
fourteenth King, who began to reign in the year 1495. they continued their
new navigations, with greater feruencie, and more quiet: For the Castillians
being grown mightier by means of the forces annexed to their Crown, and
having by new alliances drawn unto them the love of the Portugales, the one
durst no more contend, and the other suffered them to live in peace. His
predecessors having many years coasted along Affricke, they built a fort at
Argin; took the Islands of Hesperides, which now are called Cape-Vert;
fortifyed the Castle of Saint George in Ethiopia, which they call Mina;
discovered the Princes Island, and that of Saint Thomas, which lies
perpendicularly under the Equinoctial, with certain small Islands thereabouts,
they became Lords over all. And passing further, they entered into league with
the Realms of Congo, and Angolla, all Moors; having passed the great Cape of
Of good hope.
Buena Esperanca, and the Island of Saint Laurence, right against it upon the
main land they became Lords of Soffolla, Mozambique, and Melynde: where
according to the humors and quality of the people; they had won some by love,
and some by force, although for the most part where they set footing, they
prevailed by Arms. In the time of the said Emanuell they passed the mouth of
the red sea, traffiquing at Socotra, and Calahiate, they did run through the
Persian gulf, and (having passed the mouth of the river Indus) they entered
into India, where first by traffic, and after by force, they landed at
Calecut, Cochin, and other places thereabouts; but more strongly then in any
other place under the conduct of Alphonso Albuquerque, a famous captain at
Goa, a small Island in the Realm of Accen, near unto the country of Idalcan,
the which is now a city with an Archbishopricke, chief of that State, where
the Vizeroy makes his ordinary abode. They have gone along all that coast
building small fortresses, and having turned back to the mouth of the said
gulf, they are become Masters of the I Will of Ormus; and along that coast have
conquered the cities of Chaul, Damane, Bazain, and Diu. Upon the point of the
coast of Mallabar (which they call the Cape of Comery) turning toward the
gulf of Gangis, they have traffic, and fortresses in the I Will of Zeilan,
which some take to be the ancient Taprobana, where grows the best Cinnamom.
And having passed the said gulf toward the East, and the mouth of Gangis,
they discovered the other coast, at the point whereof (which the ancient call
the golden Chersonesse) they became Lords of the town of Malaca, five and
twenty miles from the great Island of Somatra (held also of some for
Taprobana.) And passing on further, not only by their traffic, in the Realm
of Pegu, and other countries upon the firm land; but also by their
navigations, they have discovered the greater and lesser Iaua, the kingdom of
China, the great sea of the Isles of the Molucques, from whence come all the
Cloves and Nutmegs, with many other drugs, the I Will of Iappon: To conclude, they
have sailed on so far as they have met in those quarters with the Castillians
that came to the Conquest of the West Indies, discovered by Christopher
Columbus a Geneuoys, in the name of the Kings of Castill. Of late days some by
these two nauigations have compassed the whole world, and joined East to West:
They have also in the time of Emanuell conquered (opposite to Ethiopia, and to
the Cape of Of good hope.
Buena esperanca) the province which they call S. a Croix, commonly called
Brazill, joining to Peru, running 1500. miles in length, yet stretches it not
far into the maine land: they have divided it into eight parts, which they call
Captaineships, and have in a manner given it to those that have conquered it,
reserving to the King the greatest part of the jurisdiction. And although for a
time it did seem of small profit, so as the criminal Judges of Portugal did,
and do yet still, confine and banish thither thieves, murderers, and such
like malefactors; yet being fertile, it is greatly inhabited, so as at this day
there are great dwellings and many buildings for sugars. The principal towns
be the Bay of Alsaints and Pernanbuc: All these countries of new conquest
(whereof we have made mention) are rich, and of great importance, from thence
comes yearly (as we have said) into Portugal, ships laden with sugars,
spice, drugs, stones, with many other precious things and of great value. And
to say the truth, this nation is worthy of great praise; that having but a
small and barren country, they have made themselves equal (by the good
institutions, frugalitie, and virtue of some of their Kings) not only to all
the kingdoms of Spain: but have gloriously maintained war against Castil, a
Realm far more rich and mighty, then that of Portugal, and their other
neighbors. They have showed the like virtue, nay rather greater, far from
home, as well in Affricke, as at the Indies, having not only performed so
wonderful a navigations, as was held in the beginning by the wisest to be rash
and foolish; but also given such testimony of their Arms in those parts, that
the writers hold many of their deeds to be miraculously performed, by reason of
the inequality wherewith they were attempted, having showed themselves in
fight at sea, and defending of forts, more valiant than in any thing else. And
besides the conquest of so great an empire, in so long and large a sea, as we
have written; it has caused an other good of greater importance for Christian
religion; the which is now planted in all those countries: So as whole Realms
which were Idolatrous, are now obedient to the Apostolic Sea (to the great
commendation of the Jesuits, whom in that country they call Apostles) who have
and do still maintain a spiritual war. Notwithstanding the Portugals who for
the space of 460. years had been busied in these glorious attempts, who had
planted their crosses in the farthest bounds of the East, whereas the name of
Christ was not yet known, they have not since followed the steps begun, but
contented with the weak borders of the Indian seas, they have not pearst into
the maine land, but (corrupted with the pleasures of the people, and enriched
with the traffic of merchandise) they have been content to enjoy their
gettings, not acknowledging the benefit of the giver of graces: and having
converted the military revenues of Commandries into pleasures, they became
idle and vain; attributing to themselves the honors and ceremonies which
faithful Christians reserve unto God: they lived long in this estate, yet in
good opinion of the world. This corruption and weakness of the Realm brought
in by the delights of Asia, was in the education of king Sebastian discovered,
and rejected by the Jesuits, who as religious men, desired and labored much to
reform it: But they applied not fit medicines for so languishing a body, not
considering the impossibility suddenly to reclaim a whole people already
corrupted with liberty, to the extreme rigor and sparingnes of these Fathers.
A hard matter to perform not only in a kingdom, but also in the precinct of
their monasteries: Whereupon they made sumptuarie laws, and especially upon
victuals; which the ancient Spartaines could hardly have tolerated: They did
specify what meats were allowed, and what defended, distinguished wherein
every man should employ his money, taking from them in a manner all that came
from foreign countries, were they for profit or pleasure. So as these violent
remedies, proved not only unprofitable and ridiculous, but did confirm the
opinion of such, as hold that Clergy men are as incapable to govern in
politic affairs, as secular magistrates be in ecclesicall causes: but God
(when he means to punish (takes away man's understanding, and gives him an
ouerweening spirit, even so did he with the Portugals, sending them
chastisements for their offenses, committed in time of prosperity; or by his
secret judgments, when as they thought themselves most secure, their fall was
the greater being in their greatest glory. For this nation the proudest in the
world, in this last war of Afric, became slaves unto the Arabians and
Moors; and being free, in a short time by their war against the Castillians,
were conquered by them, whom they hold for their capital enemies.

The life of king Sebastian.
The afflictions of this Realm took their beginning in the twentieth year of
the age of Sebastian, who (borne after the death of his father, and a little
before the decease of his grandfather) (by entreaties, and to the fatal ruin
of his subjects) strong of body, and of a courageous mind, full of
ouerweening, (the which is a natural vice in Portugals, not content with his
own dominions) resolved (as it were by force) to alter the quiet, which his
Realm had so long enjoyed. And although it seemed hard of execution, being
environed with the territories of Phillip of Austria King of Spain, his dear
friend and kinsman, more mighty than himself, with whom he might not contend,
nor pass by land into any other country. But as it is easy to perish for him
that is desperate, he let him understand the excessive desire he had to ruin
himself and all his. He had first plotted a war against the Indians, which
his kinsmen and subjects would not consent unto. But as there was some
difficulty wholly to withdraw the young Prince (who had a warlike spirit)
from this enterprise, such as were near about him labored to diuerte him by
means of an other which they laid before him; turning all his resolutions
upon Afric to indomage the Moors which live in that part which is called
Mauritania Tingitana, whereas the Portugals maintain (to their great charge)
upon the borders of the Sea, those three forenamed fortresses, Ceute, Tanger,
and Mazagon, the buckler and key of Spain; by which the Moors have
heretofore conquered it. But this diuersion whereunto they persuaded the King,
was cause of great ruins, proceeding from want of judgment; for although it
were hard wholly to dissuade him from the enterprise of the Indies, and
therefore convenient to represent unto him some other action; yet should they
advisedly have foreseen, not to draw him from one mischief to thrust him
into a greater. But these men diuerted him from an enterprise far off, and of
hard execution, by representing unto him a nearer, easier to effect, but more
perilous. And although they surmized he would not have undertaken it but with
deliberation, yet should they not have given too much confidence to his young
age, for the which the Jesuits were greatly blamed, who having planted their
religion in this Realm more then in any other of the world, and with more
zeal, as enemies to the enemies of God, they did encourage this young Prince
(whom Queen Katherine had given to them in charge) to this enterprise with
careful instructions, the which as then they might easily effect: But finding
the King soon after ready to execute it with rashness, they had no more the
credit to divert him being in disgrace. So as this yoonge King bred up amongst
women, religious persons, delights and pleasures, had a more bold and warlike
spirit, then if he had been borne and nourished in the midst of armies. He
raised certain troops of footmen of his people of Lisbone, whom he did
inrowle and train up to the Pike and Harquebuse, sending them once a week to
the field to practice, with intent to use them when need should require.

Sebastians first voyage into Afric.
The which he stayed not long to effect: For in the year 1574. he assembled
(against the will of the wisest) certain of his soldiers, and with four
galleys and certain ships and caruels passed into Afric, under color to
visit his Fortes; although in his mind he had a desire to do more then he
spoke, and as young and without experience, thought to effect more then he did.
Being arrived in those countries, he only discovered, finding his own
weakness, but in light skirmishes, which are made daily upon those frontires
with the Moors* he showed himself most willing to be in person, vexing
himself when he could not do as he desired; but as a royal person it
behooued him to contain himself within the terms of gravity, the which he
often exceeded. He returned soon to Lisbone, still devising with himself
some new manner of war, and was so disquieted and careful in his conceit,
that he neither said nor did any thing that tended to other end, devising not
as a king, but as a private soldier, to accustom his body to labor, seeming
unto him by this means to make himself more strong and better able to endure
the discommodities of war. This inclination (wherein the heavens had some
part) was not gainsaid by any of his chief Counsel, nor kinsmen of riper age,
who might have dissuaded him, and drawn him to have enjoyed his Realm: For
although the action seemed rash, yet ambition and fear of the Kings disgrace
were of such force, that the Nobles, Magistrates, and great persons (who might
have forced him) durst not open their mouths, nor oppose themselves against
his will: and if any one did mutter or speak to the contrary, they were men of
base quality, and not admitted.

The Cardinal Henry his uncle, brother to John the third his grandfather,
and Queen Katherine (in whom flattery should find no place) had small
credit with the King, neither did they use the authority they might have had,
both fearing they should not prevail; but loose (with the Kings disgrace) the
small commandment was yet remaining in them; so as by a fatal silence they
suffered this young Prince to return the second time into Afric, with
apparent peril: wherein Peter D'Alcasoua was a chief actor, who having before
time been Secretary of the Realm, and Counselor of the State, greatly
favored of King John, and Queen Katherine, was now disgraced, and put from
his places when as the Cardinal Henry gave the government to King Sebastian,
the which happened more by emulation, and for that the Cardinal would settle a
new form, and plant new officers, in the managing of the affairs, then for
any faults that were imputed unto him, were they true or false. But in the
declining of favorites it always chances, that faults serve rather to
justify the ambition of an other then the offenders punishment: And in these
afflictions he had lived content, for being wise, and rich, he had borne his
adversity with a constant courage, still expecting some means to return into
his place and dignity; the which fell out easily by the practice and industry
of another. For Martin Gonzales de Camera his competitour, having succeeded him
in his offices, with some other depending of the Jesuits, whom the Cardinal
sought to bring in, they had no less conflict with their enemies then Peter
had with his, for that Aluaro de Castro favorite to the king, of a contrary
faction, with some of his friends (desiring secretly to withdraw the Kings
affection from Martin and his party) took occasion to effect it, when as the
King was at Cape Saint Vincent, whether he went in Summer to satisfy the
desire he had to go to sea, making him believe (and it may be not without
cause) that Martin and the fathers (as men ignorant in matters of State, and of
the wealth of Princes) had wasted the treasure of the Crown, and cut off the
means, for all such enterprises as he might execute, by their laws made upon
the changes of money: the which if they did not revoke, it were impossible to
effect his glorious designs. This was a deadly blow; yet did they add one
more of greater moment, giving the King to understand (being young and high
minded) that he was oppressed by them, that they ruled in effect, and he in
show; and they passed on so far, that they caused a Secretary of the chamber
well favored of the King, and a great talker, (presenting him one day with a
commandment of small importance to sign) to say unto him that he might boldly
subscribe it, for that he was king until he should return to Lisbone: so as
mingling sport with truth, they drew this young Prince from the affection he
bare to the ministers which had been given him by the Queen and Cardinal,
and changed the doctrine wherein he had been nourished. But Peter D'Alcasoua
reapt the whole fruit thereof, for the King being estranged from his enemies,
and the laws made by them revoked, Aluaro de Castro the author thereof died,
none of his faction remaining save Emanuel Quaresinia, who had the office which
they call Dispaccio, of great importance, being Controwler of the Kings
rewards, who having neither experience, nor authority to maintain himself
long in this degree, nor yet judgment to contend with Alcasoua, the said Peter
laid hold of this occasion, to recover his former place: And to effect it the
more safely, he married Jews his eldest son, with the daughter of
Christopher de Tauora, a great favorite of Sebastians. Being thus returned into
favor with the king, he easily maintained it, seconding his humors, in making
the means easy to recover money, and unfolding all doubts for the execution
of his enterprise: by reason whereof he made him Chamberlain, or rather Veador
de Hazenda, a place of greater countenance then the other, employing him in
most important affairs. And although his cunning did somewhat assist the King
in his determinations, yet was there another occasion presented which made his
hopes increase, which was this.

Long time before there died in Afric Mulei Mahamet Cheriffe, he who had
united the Kingdom of Feez, Marroc and Turedant, the which he had alwais
possessed, divided with his brother Mulei Hamet: It seems that these (whiles
they lived quietly together) made a law, that all the children that suruiued
after their decease, should succeed in the kingdom before any one of the
nephews should enjoy the succession; so as to the youngest uncle should succeed
the eldest nephew: yet after their decease, although they left many children,
the greatest part thereof (even as it happened unto their fathers) died by the
sword, or were strangled in prison, for the jealousy of State, by the
commandment of Abdala, one of the sons of Mahamet, who succeeded his father,
and reigned xvij. years, the most happy and peaceable Prince that ever that
country enioied. This man although he were cruel, yet did he refrain from
murdering his three brethren; it may be for that they were very children, when
he came to the succession; but growing to more years, they fell to distrust
him: so as two of them fled to the Turk; the third took his way by land and
went to live amongst the Arabians. And although the law had decreed that the
next brother should succeed to the Crown, yet Abdala resolved to swear his
eldest son Mahamet his successor, which being performed, suddenly this new
Prince practiced against his uncles, sending a Moore to Tremisenne to kill the
eldest, who was detained by the Turks, the which he did effect; wounding him
with a dart in the Mezquita. This act did greatly trouble the other brother
Mulei Moluc, young and of great hope, who (remaining at Algier) demanding
succors in vain from Philip King of Spain, by the means of Rodorike
Alphonso Pimentel, Earl of Benauent, then Viceroy of Valencia; he resolved to
go seek it at Constantinople, where he attended long with patience;
exclaiming against his kindred, and not obtaining that which he demanded, till
in the end (having given an honorable testimony of himself in the last sea
fight at Nauarin, betwixt the armies of the league and Turk, and at the taking
of Golette) he obtained three thousand soldiers of the Turk for this
conquest; upon certain conditions that were not observed. With these forces
and his Moors that followed him, which wanted not in Afric, he entered his
Nephews kingdom (for his brother was now dead) and defeated three armies,
whereof the last (which seems wonderful) consisted of threescore thousand
horse, and ten thousand foot, and took absolute possession of the Realms,
living with great reputation both of the Moors and Christians. Mulei Mahamet
being in this manner expelled his country, he fled to Pignon of Velay, a
fortress which the Catholic king holds in Afric, and from thence by the
counsel (as they say) of a Renegado, he sent his ambassadors to the said King,
letting him understand of his disgrace, and craving aid to be restored to his
estate. Whereunto the Catholic King having made no answer conformable to the
desires of the Moore, being gone to Ceuta, he did the like office with King
Sebastian, showing unto him, that by this occasion he should easily make
himself Emperor of Marocco. The young Prince fed with this vain hope,
seemed now to have a lawful subject to make war, whereon he resolved, and
to succor the Moore Mahamet. He propounded this to his Counsel, laboring to
prove that it was both profitable and honorable, whereunto (although there were
some of contrary advise, laying before him that he was without heirs, that
Christians should rather employ their arms against heretics then Infidels,
that his forces alone were too feeble for so great an action, strengthening
their reasons with many examples: notwithstanding as Princes blinded with their
own desires, will not allow the mishaps and disgraces of an other, issuing
from their ill measured Counsel, to serve them as examples of better advise,
there was neither reason nor example could prevail against the Kings opinion,
but fortified in his resolution by many (who either for their own particular,
or for want of judgment) did counsel him to war, it was concluded.

Sebastians enteruiew with Phillip at Guadalupa.
And although his own weakness was unknown unto himself, yet was he advised
by others to take a companion, and to draw the Catholic King into this
action, believing it were easily performed: the State of Afric being of
greater importance for his kingdom which was adioining to it then for
Portugal. He desired greatly to marry, to have issue (although his Phisicions
feared much he was unable for generation) and would willingly have taken one
of the daughters of the Catholic King, whereof they had given him an assured
hope: for these two causes he desired to enter parle with him, sending Peter D'
Alcasoua as Ambassador unto him, with commandment to treat of three points,
that is, for aid in the action of Afric; for the marriage of his daughter,
and for an enteruiew. The Ambassador departed, and effected with great
diligence the charge his master had given him: and having attended some time
in this court, he obtained all three, the promise of marriage with one of his
daughters, when she should come to years, for as yet they were too young;
That the Catholic King should go to Guadalupa to meet with King Sebastian:
And as for succors he should furnish men and galleies, to undertake the
enterprise of Alarache, the which was spoken very coldly. For the Catholic
King knowing the Portugals to presume beyond their strength, and holding it
nothing safe to undertake this action of Afric without great forces, he
labored what he could by letters to temper this heat, dissuading him with
many reasons (if not from the enterprise) at the least not to go himself in
person: but this young Prince resting immooueable in his counsels, and most
obstinate in his opinion, did still importune him by letters. Phillip confirmed
the succors of men and galleis, so as the Turk should send no men into
Italy, and that they should undertake Alarache in the year 1577. the whole
being referred unto their enteruiew at Guadalupa. The Ambassador returns home
more favored then ever, seeming to have effected more then was thought or
looked for: In both Courts they make no great delays, but take their way for
Guadalupa, where both kings arrive with no great trains, but with the chief
Noblemen and Gentlemen of their Realms: There the Portugals (who arrived last)
were received with great shows of love, finding in all places of Castill,
where they passed, the kings express commandment to receive him of Portugal
as his own proper person, so as at Badagios and in other places, where he
past, the chief men went to meet him, the prisons were opened, and he
conducted to his lodging under a cloth of estate. The Catholic King took
great pleasure to see young Sebastian, whom he entertained as his host, laying
aside all terms fit for a greater King, entreating each other equally in
majesty, talking particularly of the war, being both profitable and
honorable for the Realms of Spain. The Catholic King did not dissuade him,
yet he advised him not to go in person, excusing himself that he could give
no great succor, by reason of the continual charge he was put to in Italy to
resist the Turk: but Sebastian being fully resolved to go, and admitting no
excuse, Phillip desirous to please him, accorded with him in this sort. That
the general opinion being, and especially of the Duke of Alua, that this
action would require 15000. foot, not Portugals, but of other nations,
trained up in war, divided into Italians, Germans, and Spaniards; that the
king of Portugal should entertain ten thousand, and the Catholic King five
thousand, furnishing the enterprise with fifty galleis; (always provided, if
the Turk sent not an army into Italy) and thatthey should go unto Allarache,
without entering into the maine land, and this to be attempted in the year 1577
otherwise he should not be bound to any thing. This treaty being ended, every
one returned from whence he came.

Preparation for the war of Afric.
In Portugal they made slow preparatiues to war, and in the first beginning
their money failed them, for that the revenues of the Crown are small, and
ill employed. The whole Realm upon the maine land yielding but a million, and
one hundredth thousand ducats a year: The greatest part in customs (the which
be unreasonable) paying for all things twenty in the hundredth except fish,
which paieth the one half. The new found lands, as Saint Thomas, Myna, Brazil,
and the Indies yield but a million at the most, which makes in all two millions
and one hundredth thousand ducats, which comes to the Crown: And although the
Indies yield one other million of rent, yet make they neither receipt nor
payment thereof, being wholly retained there for the entertaining of armies
and garrisons. Of these two millions and a hundredth thousand ducats, there
remains nothing at the years end in Court, and if the King use any
liberality, his charge exceeds the revenues; for that they receive without
order, and spend without measure: For these Kings were never so happy as to
be served with men of judgment, and discretion, who could order the revenues
and expenses; but giving the charge always unto Noblemen, who were advanced
thereunto by favor, and not by merit, (an ordinary custom in that country)
they studied to maintain themselves in that throne by other means, letting
the revenues of the Crown go as it would. So as what in wages of officers,
rents, created, recompense for life, privileges (which they call Giuros) sold
by him, entertaining of Fortresses in Afric, preparation of nauies, and
expenses of the Court, all is spent. They went therefore seeking here and
there for money, forcing the people to contribute, and the chief Citizens
extraordinarily: for although they gathered much by this means, yet they did
draw upon them the curses and exclamations of the people, being most
affectionate and obedient to their King; but nothing prevailed against the
burning desire of officers. They exacted from the Clergy the third part of
their revenues, whereunto they would not yield: yet seeing the Pope yielded
unto the Kings affections, they granted a hundredth and fifty thousand ducats.
They granted unto the new Christians paying two hundredth and five and twenty
thousand ducats (that which before had been for a time granted and often since
denied) that for sinning against the Inquisition they should not loose their
goods as they did. They imposed a new custom upon the salt, and exacted money
from the Nobility, and Gentlemen of the Realm, against their ancient
customs; many being by this means unjustly vexed. Amongst other Noblemen, the
King sent to Frauncis de Melo, Earl of Tentuguel, who excusing himself, did
write unto the King, with greater liberty then possibly reason would allow:
For noting greatly the demand of money, which they had made unto him, as
unjust, he said, it agreed not with the virtues with which his highness was
endued; neither did it seem reasonable, that they whose fathers had been
helpers to conquer the Realm, should be subject to the impositions and
tributes, which are paid for the wars, where of many of meaner quality were
exempt. He laid the blame of these demands upon the sins of the Realm, but
much more upon such favorites as the King had about him, of whom he complained;
he produced the example of that fatal chance, which happened at Tanger, to
Henry and Ferdinand, sons to King John the first, seeking to make wars
against the Moors at the peoples charge, who ought in reason to pay rather
then Gentlemen: inferring thereby that he could attend no better success of
the action the King now took in hand, being at their charge, who had never
contributed, although the Realm by reason of wars had been seen in greater
necessity then at that present, he concluded (beseeching the King to consider
better what he did, and to imitate the example of his ancestors, and not to
leave a worse of himself to his successors.) This letter, which the King read
with disdain, freed the Earl and many others from the contribution of money,
seeking by other means (but chiefly by the blood of the poor) to supply
their wants. And to the end there might be greater plenty of money within the
Realm, he commanded that the Royals of Castill, which before were defended,
should be now current, valuing them a ninth part more then they were
accustomed, which many noted as ominous. The King began now to draw his men
oftener to field, putting them into squadrons, to come to encounters, and to
counterfaite all that which is acted in war, where he himself was often
present, in danger of his person, in the midst of their harquebuzes, yet had he
neither Captain nor Sergeant that could instruct them, only one John de Gama,
who in the habit of an Hermit, became a great master of the war. So as
notwithstanding the great pain they took in this exercise in manner forced,
having never seen any thing, they remained more ignorant then at the
beginning. The King gave himself much to hunting, accounting it a glory to
encounter with the most furious beasts, wherein he grew very expert: If he went
(as he did often) for pleasure from one place to another, either by sea, or
upon the river of Tagus, he thought it a shame to go in calm weather, but
still attended some storm whereby it seemed that some furious destiny lead
him headlong to his end. But in the mean space time steals away, necessary
provisions want, and all things proceed slowly foreward. They must provide
money in Italy, to levy the Italian footmen, and to pay the Germans: but
the Pepper whereby it should be raised, was come but that summer to Lisbone,
from whence it should be sent by the merchants ships to Liuorno, there to be
sold. This enterprise, the which (for that they sought to do it with little
money, we may term indiscreet) was now almost made impossible, and Peter
D'Alcasoua (who was Chamberlain, and had charge of the treasure) durst not
discover the defects unto the King, fearing his displeasure, if he should now
contradict that which before he had allowed: He did still temporize with hope,
that the Catholic King should excuse himself from furnishing the men,
whereunto he was bound, upon color of sending an army into Italy against the
Turks, or for some other pretext, the which he greatly desired, that the whole
blame might fall upon Phillip: neither was he without hope, for the exceptions
under which he had promised, made him believe that which fell out otherwise. In
the mean time Mulei Moluck hearing of these preparatiues, fearing the
Catholic king should join with the Portugals, sent wisely unto him to will
him advise what part of his Territories he pleased to have, the which he would
give to be his friend and confederate. The King presently let Sebastian
understand his offer, aduising that it were a matter of consequence to keep
the Moore in hope and to send unto him to expound his meaning, the which must
needs be profitable, seeing that practizes are no suspensions of arms, whereof
there might grow some good effect; for possibly the Moore would neglect his
defense, or yield that quietly which they pretended to take from him by force:
but this young King, who knew not how much better an assured peace were, then
an expected victory, and who desired rather to win by force, then by
agreement any place whatsoever, pressed the Catholic King not to treat any
accord with Moluck. But Phillip knowing Sebastians designs seeing him neither
willing to accord, nor able to perform the enterprise, the which was likely
to be broken, he labored to effect it himself; and seeing summer now come,
and neither Italian nor German soldiers in Portugal, he made offer unto him
by John de Sylua his Ambassador, that if he were not prepared for the
enterprise as it was convenient, he would furnish both men and shipping, so as
he should pay the two thirdes of the charges, according to the Treaty. But
forasmuch as this offer was far off from the mark, whereat the King of
Portugal shot, it was neither heard nor accepted. And although the season of
the year was now far passed, and the preparatiues weak, (matters being
concealed from Sebastian, who was abused by his ministers) yet he feared
nothing, but that Phillip should excuse himself, and not keep promise on his
behalf, which should make him unable to perform the enterprise, whereof he
was so desirous; so as he labored to obtain of him an assured promise of
aid, without exception of the coming of the Turks army, the which he
secretly feared, and his ministers greatly hoped for, so were their minds
distracted. The Catholic King being advertised hereof, seeming unto him
impossible to do any thing that were good, either to satisfy, or to withdraw
himself from the promise that he made, left it to the judgment of his
Ambassador, to make offer unto the King of the fifty galleis lent, and the five
thousand foot, to be presently employed (if need were) according to the
Treaty; but he should have a special care not offer them, if he did see any
impossibility to imploie them, being unwilling to hazard his forces alone
without such as the King of Portugal was bound to levy: Upon this offer which
the Ambassador had made, Sebastian being come to himself, and casting up his
reckonings, he found himself unable that year to pass into Afric, by
reason whereof he caused proclamation to be made, that the enterprise should be
deferred until the next year: Phillip a little before (being moved with the
practices of this war,) had sent Captain Frauncis D'Aldana diguised into
Afric to view the towns and fortresses upon the sea coast, who (being in
great danger) returned. This man he sent to Sebastian, who receiving many
favors, he informed him particularly of the state of Afric: And although
Aldana made the enterprise more difficult then he supposed, yet could he no way
discourage him; but laying aside that discourse, he inquired secretly of him
(as of an expert soldier) of many things touching the government of Armies,
wherein Aldana did amply satisfy him. The King now believing he should be well
able to execute all he understood, not knowing the difference betwixt saying
and doing; the winter come, he gave Aldana leave to depart, honoring him with
a chain of gold, of one thousand ducats, making him promise to return when
he should need his service.

In this mean time for the year following Sebastian (by the means of Gomez
de Sylua, his Ambassador at Rome) treated with the great Duke of Tuscane, to
levy in his Territories three or four thousand foot, accepting in part the
offer which the great Duke had made unto him, not long before by his
Ambassadors, but the effect followed not. He sent likewise Sebastian de Costa
into Flaunders to William of Nassau Prince of Orange (who being chosen head of
the Flemmings against the Catholic King, commanded in those parts) entreating
him to assist him with three of four thousand Germans: He likewise
dispatched four coronels throughout his Realm of Portugal, to levy twelve
thousand foot; and those were Michael de Norogna, James Lopez de Sequeira,
Frauncis de Tauora, and Vasco de Silueira, the which had never been at the
wars. He assembled some Spaniards which came at the brute of wars, and of
this voyage, whereof he gathered a good number, without the consent of Philip,
and in Castill it self without any noise of drum he enrolled many soldiers
for this war, which caused Philip to punish some Captains afterward: But
notwithstanding all these goodly shows, no man believed it would take effect,
for besides they did esteem the Kings forces, too feeble to attempt any war,
much more beyond the sea, (whereas the charge would be greater) they did
conceive that when the Catholic King, the Cardinal Henry, Queen Katherine,
and the people, should see all lets taken away, they would not suffer the King
to go in person, which made every man suppose that after the expense of much
money, it would vanish to nothing, as it had happened the last year, and some
years before, with the army of Edward the Kings uncle, prepared for the same
Countries of Afric, and some other enterprises. But forasmuch as we can
hardly resist the divine powers, it seemed that all things did second the
effect of this enterprise: the Queen (a Lady of bounty and great value) who
as well for the love she bare unto the King, being bred in her bosom; as to
content Philip her nephew, who was the son of her brother, did vehemently
dissuade this enterprise, she died. The Pope forasmuch as this war was
attempted against Infidels, giving succors in time of need, opened his
spiritual treasures, granting the Bull of the Croysada, which till that time
was not brought into the Realm. The ships of the Indies returned home to a
safe Port very rich. The Prince of Orange although he were sufficiently busied
in the low Countries, yet showing how little he esteemed the forces of the
Catholic King, granted out of his troops the three thousand foot, which
were demanded; so as all things seemed to yield unto the Kings will. All that
time which was the ninth of November, there appeered in the Zodiaque, in the
sign of Libra, near unto the station of Mars, the goodliest and greatest
Comet, that has been seen in many ages, the which happening in the progress
of this war, amazed many, who looking to examples past, said it was a sign of
unhappy success, and that coming from a corrupt air, it did endomage the
delicat bodies of Princes. And for as much as the ancient Captains with their
divines, did interpret it to good, not for that they believed it, but to
encourage their soldiers: the Portugal likewise taking it for a favor said,
that this Comet spoke unto the King, saying, Accometa, which is to say in the
Portugal tongue: let him assail them, not having any such belief, but for
flattery, fearing more the Kings choler, by reason of his rough inclination,
then the heavens.

Philip at that time by a certain treaty of peace had pacified the war of the
Low Countries, where Don John de Austria his bastard brother was governor, who
seeming not absolute Master of the people, and the Prince of Orange his
adversary not well satisfied, desiring rather to be Lord of all, then governor
of a part, they began new practizes against the conuentions agreed on. And Don
John's letters being surprised, (the which he had written into Spain,) by the
Lords of the country they discovered, that upon the Princes fortifying of some
places in Holland, he had an other intention then he made show of, who finding
his letters surprised and his purposes laid open, desirous (as he said) to
subdue them by arms, he thought it not safe to remain unarmed in those parts:
So as one day seeming to go take the air, he retired himself to Namur, upon
the frontire of Flanders, toward Lorraine, with his greatest favorites, and
there discovering his mind, and dismissing such as he trusted not, he suddenly
called back the Spanish foot (the which according to the Articles of peace)
were departed, and scarce arrived in Italy; and having made a new levy of
Wallons and Germans, the war began in those parts more cruel then before,
and with greater disadvantage for the King: for that in the conformity of the
treaty of pacification, they had left all the fortresses in the hands of the
Flemmings. By reason of these new broiles, and for that the war of Afric was
deferred a year more then was agreed on, the Catholic King framed an excuse
to deny his promised succors to the King of Portugal, showing that it
behooued him to provide in Flanders for his honor, and the safety of his
brother; hoping by this means to divert him from the enterprise, but it
prevailed nothing: for the other being rash, resolved in any sort to undertake
it, whether he had his expected succors or not, thinking (being young) with
his own forces and the Italians and Germans which he attended, to be able
to conquer the world. This resolution displeased Philip and did much afflict
him, for being unable to assist him, he feared that without his aid the day
would be perilous, and seeing the danger increase, he continued these good
offices with more vehemency, either to break off the enterprise, or at least
to dissuade him from going in person: whereupon he did write many letters of
his own hand full of love; he caused the Duke of Alua to write unto him, and
in the end sent the Duke of Medina Celi (one of the greatest in Spain) to do
his last endeavor to divert him; but all was in vain, he would attempt it at
his own cost, although the Catholic King sent him not one soldier. And for
as much as good deeds are often taken in ill part, some said that all these
demonstrations of King Philip were but cou^terfeit, and that he wished
Sebastian should go, for howsoever it should succeed, he should receive a
benefit thereby: if it happened he should take Allarache or any place upon the
coast, it were more advantage to Philip then to him, having his Dominions
fronting nearer to Affricke then the other; but if he should happen to die in
these wars, a greater good should come unto him, being heir unto the Realm.
But to say the truth, Philip was moved to do this office toward Sebastian,
both of his own quiet disposition (being no friend to broils) as also for
another private subject, of no small importance, which was: At that time the
Treaty of Truce was revived betwixt him and the Turk, whereunto both were
moved for one and the self same respect, not to divide their forces at such
time as they had most need of them to be united; the Turk against the Sophi,
and the King against the Rebles in Flaunders: So as without infringing this
Truce, the Catholic King could not send any Army to endomage Affricke, being
tributarie to the Turk, and especially of Mulei Moluc his friend and
confederate. And this excuse was so much the more tolerable, for that he
labored to comprehend the King of Portugal within this truce, desiring him to
enter into it, but he not only refused it, but also answered, That he
marvelled he would treat a peace for three years with the Turk, to avoid war
during that term in Italy, being most assured that Afric should be
replenished with Turks, and the three years expired, he should have that war
in Spain, which now he sought to avoid in Italy: He did advise him not to
conclude; or if he would needs, not to comprehend him, to the end he might
afterward secretly assist him against Mulei Moluc: by means whereof with
small charge he might assure himself of Italy by the truce, and of Affricke by
war in the name of the Portugals. Philip disallowed of these frivolous reasons,
soliciting Sebastian to resolve himself either to enter or be excluded: After
some delays he was contented to be comprehended therein. But as these
Treaties were in handling, he supposed it should not any wise hinder his
enterprise of Affricke: And therefore Preparation for the second voyage of
Affricke,
they armed their gallions at Lisbone, they stayed merchants ships, they
enrolled all their shipping throughout the Realm to transport men, horse,
victuals, and munition, making ready other preparatiues: Lewis Dataide was
named general of this Action, but he did not exercise the charge with the
authority due to the place, for as much as the King with Peter D'alcasoua and
some other his favorites, resolved and gave order for many things concerning
the war, which belonged to the General to do, or at the least to consult of.
But as he was not greatly pleasing unto the King, although he were the most
renowned of all the Portugals, so did he not follow this enterprise being sent
Vizeroy to the Indies: Diego de Sosa was made General at the sea, Christopher
de Tauora his Chamberlain, and master of his horse (whom he loved entirely)
was made commander of all the Nobility that should go into Affricke, and of
many strangers that came by adventure, giving him the Title of Captain of the
Adventures, by means whereof he was preferred before all the Nobility. And
for that he could not make himself equal with the Moore in horsemen; he
resolved to fortific himself better with foot, commanding that no man should
furnish himself with horse, but such as he should appoint, the which should
not be lightly armed, but barded, like to the ancient men of arms, so as many
gentlemen that prepared to go on horse back remained on foot. It was strange
to see the Portugals furnish themselves to war; for being an exercise that
requires order and measure, all things were there disordered and confused: The
faults which were committed in taking of Musters, giving of paies, superfluity
in many things, and defect in other, were infinite: The gentlemen after a new
prodigious manner attired themselves like unto the Castillians, in steed of
scouring their Arms, they guarded their habits, for corslets they provided
dublets of silk and gold, they were charged with sugar and conserues, in steed
of water and biscuit: The vessels of silver, and the tents lined with silk and
satin were without number, every gentleman went furnished like a king, and the
poor soldiers died for hunger: To conclude, it seemed they supposed that he
that went brauest and best furnished with delights, and pleasures, should
soonest conquer the enemy; contrary to the opinion of true soldiers, who
believe that when a man goes to the combat clad in gold, and silk, he is
either slain or returns home laden with blows; but when he goes covered with
iron, and steel, he returns a conqueror laden with gold. Sebastian was
careful to whom he should leave the government of the Realm, for that there
was none remaining of the blood Royal, but his uncle the Cardinal, whom
(being very old, and not greatly pleasing unto him) he would not willingly
admit to so great a charge, yet having no other, he went to Euora where he
lived, entreating him to take the care in his absence, the which he would by no
means accept, excusing it by reason of his age, and indisposition; so as he
made choice of four governors to command in his name, which were George
d'Almeda, archbishop of Lisbone, Peter d'Alcasoua, Frauncis de Sada, and John
Mascaregnas, to whom he gave full power in all things, leaving with the^ a Seal
which did imprint with ink this word REII, with the which he commanded the^ to
subscribe their dispatches.

In the mean time upon Afric side, the Cheriffe Mahamet did still solicit
Sebastian, by Ambassadors to make haste, and by no means to abandon the
enterprise, and with many hopes he gave him to understand, that (besides a good
number of soldiers, he had already armed) he was most assured, that upon the
present view of the Portugals ensigns in Afric, being known that they came
in his favor, the greatest part of towns, fortes, and men of war would
rebel against Mulei Moluc and come to him. It is most true he dissuaded the
King for going in person, saying, it was not necessary, but would prove very
hurtful, alleging that the Moors (which easily would yield at his devotion)
seeing the King of Portugal there in person would grow jealous, least he came
to subdue them to the Christians; and therefore would not so willingly leave
the enemy. The which he said, both for that it might so fall out, as also
fearing (not without reason) that if the King were conqueror, and there in
person to, he would not leave him his kingdom free. Al these things greatly
enflamed Sebastian, and the more the Cheriffe dissuaded his going, the more his
desire increased, supposing that the Moore grew fearful that his coming
should deprive him of his kingdom, he did firmly believe that he should
conquer it: and continued so blind in this desire, that he caused a crown to
be made and carried with him, with other preparatiues to be crowned King, not
knowing in the morning what the evening brings. But it seemed to him that
fortune began now to smile, for that Albacarin the Moore, who commanded for
Mulei Moluc, in Arzilla, a town upon the borders of the sea, sometimes
belonging to the Portugals, and voluntarily abandoned to the Moors, by the
intercession of the Cheriffe Mahamet, had delivered it to the governor of
Tanger, whereof the King received great contentment, and believed now the Moore
had such as he said, affectionate to his party.

At this time the Irishmen rebelled in diverse parts of that kingdom,
pretending the liberty of Religion, and complained to Pope Gregory the 13.
taking for their leader the Earl of Desmond and others, as Oneale, and some
other of the savage Irish, affirming that if they were aided, they could easily
draw the whole Island from the Queens obedience. The Pope did communicate
this with the Catholic King, exhorting him to undertake this action, as most
godly, and to succor this people, the which they resolved to do. But forasmuch
as the Queen of England did seem in words friend unto the king, and did as
the Spaniards supposed covertly underhand assist the Prince of Orange in
Flaunders against him; the King would likewise march in the same path, and
make a covert war against her: they concluded to assist this people in the
Popes name, but secretly at the kings charge. To this effect they levied
certain footmen in the territories of the Church, whereof six hundredth under
the conduct of Thomas Stukeley an Englishman, fled out of England for treason;
(who a little before had obtained the title of a Marquis from the Pope,) were
embarked at Ciuitauechia, in a ship of Genua, to be transported into Ireland,
the which arrived at Lisbone, in the time they made preparation in Portugal
for the war of Afric: the king hearing of their arrival, and that for want
of money he could have no Italians out of Tuscane, desired to see them, with an
intent to retain them, and use them in the war of Affricke, and having caused
them to disimbarke, and to lodge at Oeiras near to the mouth of Tagus, he went
one day to view them; and although they were no chief men, yet did he admire
their order, their speedy discharging of their Harquebuzes, their disposition
to handle the pike, and their strict obedience: and having had some conference
with the said Stukeley, they persuaded him to promise to go with him into
Afric. The Catholic King for that he would not show himself a party,
would not contradict it. The Pope was so far off, that before the news
could come unto him, he gave them impresse, and they remained for his service.
In this time the foot which were levied by three Coronels, approached to
Lisbone: the fourth which was Frauncis de Tauora, should imbarke in Algarues.
The three thousand Germans (which the Prince of Orange had granted) were
(under the conduct of Martin of Burgundy, Lord of Tamberg,) arrived within the
mouth of Tagus, in Flemmish ships, and were lodged at Cascaies, and
thereabouts, to the great amasement of the peasants, not accustomed to the
charges of war. King Sebastian before his departure, desired to see the Duke
of Alua, whom he sent unto, but he excused himself upon the King; and the King
at the entreatie of the Duke, upon the infirmity of the old man; so as his
desire took no effect. The Dukes friends told him he should have accepted
this favor; whereunto he answered, that having known by the practices and
discourses of Guadaluppa, and by the Kings letters, his resolution to pass
into Afric, he thought it impossible to divert him from that opinion, that
having been discreet in his youth, he would not in his declining age make
himself author of the ruin, which he did foresee of a King and kingdom.
Sebastian without any grave Counselors, hastened his departure, impatient of
the least delays, his forces being all assembled with the ships at Lisbone;
the soldiers (which were scarce nine thousand) were embarked against their
will: The Noblemen and Gentlemen likewise had every one a ship armed, wherein
he should imbarque, with those under his command, but hardly were they drawn
from their dear houses. And although there were a certain day for their
departure appointed, yet was it The second voyage of Sebastian with his army
into Affricke.
not observed: So as the King going one morning in great troop to the
cathedral church, with the Standard he meant to carry into Afric, he caused
it to be hallowed with great pomp, and delivered it to the master of his
horse, and so returning (many believing he would have returned to the palace)
he went directly to the galley wherein he would pass, to hasten the rest,
saying that he would presently depart: And although this were the xvij. day of
June, in the year 1578. yet did he stay eight days in the Port, and never
disimbarked, preparing the rest of the soldiers, who were no sooner ready
then the day after Midsommer: at what time having a prosperous wind, the whole
army set sail, to the great pleasure and contentment of the King, who young
and unskillful, guided by some sinister star, or by that divine permission
which would punish this people, went into Afric, to a dangerous (although a
glorious) enterprise, leaving the Realm emptied of money, naked of Nobility,
without heirs, and in the hands of ill affected governors.

THE SECOND BOOK.
The Contents of the second Book.
The King of Portugals passage into Affricke: his counsel and resolution to
enter into the maine land; the way his army took; the preparatiues for the
war of Mulei Moluc, the quality and disposition of his camp, the battle
of Alcazar, the overthrow of the Portugals; the death of King Sebastian and of
Moluc, and the creation of King Henry.

THe King of Portugals departure from Lisbone, was so mournful, that it gave
apparent signs of evil success, for in so great a number of men, and of so
diverse qualities, there was not any one with a cheerful countenance, or that
did willingly imbarke, against the common custom in the beginnings of war,
but all (as it were presaging of ill events,) complained they were forcibly
drawn unto it. There was such a deadly silence in the port, that (during all
the time of their abode in so great a number of ships) there was neither
flute nor trumpet heard. The Kings galley issuing forth, was carried down
with the current and brake her rudder against a Flemmish ship: a cannon shot
from the town slew one of his mariners in the boat; so as if we shall give
credit to signs as the ancients did, these seemed very ominous. The first
town they touched upon the maine land was Lagos in Algarues (where did
imbarke the regiment which Frauncis de Tauora had levied in those parts) and
certain other vessels joined to the army, so as in all one and other they
made near one thousand sail; but except five galleis and fifty other ships,
all the rest were unarmed, and the most of them were barks to pass horse and
munition. They arrived soon at Cadiz, whereas the Duke of Medina Sidonia
feasted the King, with chasing of bulls, Iocodecanna, and all other delights
that poor Island could yield. The Duke labored to persuade The arriving of
the Portugal army in Afric and their proceedings.
him not to go personally into Barberie, but he prevailed not, having
soiourned there eight days like a fleet of merchants, without guard or
Centinell, directing their prowess toward Afric, in few days they arrived
at Almadraues, betwixt Tanger and Arzilla, where having cast anchors, they
stayed some space. The King having then an intention to disimbarke at Alarache,
a small town of the Moors, lying fifteen miles toward the south, a little
before the army approached the land, being fully resolved to depart; the King
with his five galleis and four gallions (leaving the rest of the ships) went
to Tanger, where he made a short abode: for having sent Mulei Cheque son to the
Cheriffe, of the age of twelve years, by land with Martin Correa de Sylua, and
certain horsemen Moors and Portugals, to the end they should draw toward
Mazagon, and back the people thereabouts that should revolt against Moluc; he
returned to his army, having supplied the fortresses with fresh soldiers, and
taking into his ships the Cheriffe and eight hundredth Harquebuzers that were at
the guard thereof. From the Almadraues, he went to Arzilla with all his fleet,
where seeing his soldiers distressed for water, he commanded them to land and
refresh themselves, meaning to imbarke them again, or to transport them in
barks to Alarache: But wavering in his thoughts, nothing was constant, for the
soldiers being landed with no small confusion, it was hard to force them to
return, for the small obedience they were in, and for the necessity of water,
whereof they must make provision, so as he continued long irresolute. The army
was lodged upon the sea shore, having on the one side fortified their lodging
with rampires of earth and wagons, on the two other sides the sea and the
town served them for trenches: It remained in this estate fifteen days,
during which the Portugals landing with their King, had so troubled all the
province, that the Moors that are neighbors to the sea towns, as Alarache,
Tituan, and others, were resolved not to make any resistance, but to abandon
their towns, and had already transported their poor wealth with their wives
to the mountains.

But Mulei Moluc being at Marrock, had before both from Portugal, Cadiz, and
Arzilla very particular advertisement of the King of Portugals preparation, and
of the quantity and quality of his men, wherewith he was greatly moved,
seeming unto him that Sebastian pretended to deprive him of his kingdom being
a Moore, to give it to another Moore, no more friend to him then he was,
without any pretext or judgment to whom of them the estate did justly
appertain. And seeing the accord with the Catholic King took not the effect
he desired, he resolved upon his defense: but weighing how much better an ill
peace is then a just war, and discerning well the discommodities, great
charge, and dangers it draws with it, he labored first to compound with him,
making offer to the King to give him ten miles of the country lying about
his fortresses in Afric for tillage. But Sebastian who was of another
conceit, made him answer that he had been at great charge in leuying of
foreign forces, and therefore he could not desist from the enterprise,
unless he would yield him Tituan, Alarache, and Cape D'Aghero. This demand
seemed too excessive to the Moore, and therefore made answer that he must
pause thereon, although the siege were before Moroca, and that the King should
offer to give him in counterchange Mulei Mahamet his capital enemy, That he
had conquered those Realms with his sword and policy, and meant to defend them
with all his forces. He commanded presently Rhodeuano his purueyor general a
Portugal Renegado to bring to field all his Tents and Pauillions, the which
was performed the next day, being in number above 4000. The six and twentieth
of May he went toward Suse, the chief city being Northward from Moroca, to
give order in those parts for certain things there concerning the war. But
having intelligence upon the way that the King of Portugal was issued out of
Lisbone, he returned suddenly to Moroca, where having left the said Rhodeuano
as his Vizeroy, he assembled those men of war he commonly keeps in pay in
that Realm: he lodged his camp at Camis, and from thence came in three days
to Temisnam (towns which lie toward the frontriers of Portugal) where he
fell sick with great castings and a fit of an Ague. There he understood that
Sebastian was come to Cadiz: and although he were very sick, yet continuing
his course, he went to Sale with 14000.horse, and 2500. Harquebuzers, whereof
one thousand were on horseback, and the rest on foot the most part of
Andelousia, and Renegados. Here he understood the Portugals were arrived at
Arzilla, and therefore having passed the river of Marmore at a foord, having
caused some quantity of metal to be brought from Moroco, he cast four pieces
of great cannon in his camp, three of them with certain other pieces he drew
with him, the other he sent to Moroco, marching himself toward Alcasar; Mulei
Hemet his bastard brother, governor of the kingdom of Fesse, was already
come to field, by his commandment, as general of the horse of that province,
and having assembled all the soldiers both horse and foot thereabouts, was
come to the place which they call the fair of Thursday, six miles near to
Alcazarquiuir, where he expected his brother to join their armies together,
having two and twenty thousand horse, and five thousand five hundredth foot.
There Moluc arrived the xxiiij. of July so sick, that he could scarce endure
on horseback, who having marched long in his Litter, seeing his brother a
far off, he took his horse to meet him, when they approached the one to the
other, Mulei Hemet put spurs to his horse, and being come near his brother,
he lighted and kissed the ground, in sign of humility, the whole army giving
a great volley of shot. His sickness increasing daily, Mulei Moluc entered not
with pomp (as the manner was) into his lodging, but returning to his Litter,
seated his brother in his place, to effect his entry, himself going before to
take his lodging. And forasmuch as he understood, that Sebastian had sent Mulei
Cheque with troops to Mazagon, he dispatched Mulei Dan his nephew with two
thousand horse, and some foot to make head, least he should indomage those
quarters: Toward Cape D'Aghere, and Alarache, he likewise sent men; but hearing
that Sebastian was disimbarked at Arzilla, they returned to the camp. Moluc
was a man courageous, hardy, and free in words, seeming to make small account
of the Portugals, he said openly, that whosoever went not willingly with him,
he should retire, suffering any freely to depart that were more friend to
Mulei Mahamet then to him, wherein they should do him a favor; the which he
spoke not to contemn the enemies forces, but knowing how hardly he should
stay them that minded to leave him, desiring rather they should then go, then
attend until a battle, or revolt at some other time when they might do him a
greater mischief: And therefore to give them the better means to escape, he
made choice of three thousand, out of such as he suspected, sending them to
discover the Christians Army, to keep them busied with courses, and to give
them often Alarums, not with any meaning they should do this exploite, but if
they meant to fly, they might effect it at their pleasure. But this meaning
unknown to that nation, wrought in them a contrary effect to that which Moluc
attended: for having construed this commandment to the fidelity and trust he
had in them, they meant still to remain faithful, so as few went unto the
Christians army: The greatest part did well perform that which Moluc had
given them in Charge, for being divided sometimes into 600. sometimes more,
sometimes less, they ran to the Trenches of the Portugals lodgings, molesting
and slaying those they found scattering from the Army.

A light skirmish of the Moors against the Portugals.
In the mean while the Portugals remaining in their lodgings, before they had
yet discovered the Moors, deceived with illusions had twice taken the Alarm
in vain: seeing themselves one day followed at the heels by 600. horse, like
men that had never yet seen the enemy near or far off, although they were in
a strong lodging, joining to a friend town, and an Army at sea within
Harquebuze shot: yet ran they fearfully to imbarke, and notwithstanding that
the Enemies (after a light skirmish with the Moors of Cheriffe Mahamet who
were lodged a little without the trenches) returned presently, yet the
Portugals were so amazed, that being kept from imbarking, they fled from the
camp going by land to Tanger, and so fell out of one mischief into another,
for by the way they were taken prisoners by the Moors of Tituan and other
places thereabouts, who lay in wait to rob and spoil. But the King gathered
courage by this first view of the Moore so suddenly retired, for remaining
before within the city, he would now lodge without, to be more near unto the
skirmishes when need should require. The next day discovering 2000. of the
enemies horse, the King went to encounter them with 600. horse, but the
skirmish being begun the Moors retired, wherein the King carried himself
more like a valiant soldier, then a wise Captain, following Edward de Meneses
Marshall of the camp, who marched ten miles from the Army with no small
danger, having neither footman nor Harquebuzer for his guarde: the safety of
his person being of great importance to the whole Army, he seemed rather
weary of his life then to do any act of a brave mind, who being a King and
might live deliciously was pricked forward with the only desire of glory.

The means of Moluc to defeat the Portugals.
Moluc had news of this encounter beyond Alcazar where he lodged, from whence
he departed not, both for that he expected some troops from Tituan and
Mechinee, (places upon the sea coast,) the which arrived soon, as also to draw
the Portugals into the firm land; for so he understood they intended, yet he
feared it could not so fall out, doubting they would continue along the sea
coast, being most convenient for them. Yet he resolved if they entered not into
the maine, to march toward them withal speed, and before they should attempt
any thing, to follow them at their backs; thereby to draw them into the want
of many things, not meaning to join battle with them but upon great
advantage: but if they should enter into the maine land, to suffer their
passage as far as he might with assurance, and after cut off their return to
sea: In this manner he doubted not to obtain the victory almost without
fighting, both for the great number of men he had in his Army, as also
understanding the Portugals were ill provided of victuals, drawn thither by
force, full of delights, and void of experience.

The counsel and resolution of the Portugals to enter into the maine land of
Affricke.
In this time the King of Portugal assembled the chief of his counsel to
resolve of his departure, demanding their advise, what course they were best
to take: Many durst not speak freely; for although they thought the best
resolution to go by sea to Alarache, yet discovering by daily practices that
the King was otherwise resolved, relying more upon flattery then upon the
truth; they chose rather to counsel him ill and please him, then to advise him
well and contradict him. He was desirous to go by land to play both the
captain and the Serieant, not foreseeing the difficulties the way would bring,
nor the danger whereinto he did run, but as ill advised (having no
advertisement of the enemies Army) thought with security to ouerrune their
country, and that the Moors should fly before him as those few had done
which appeared at Arzilla. One of the The Counts of Vimioso seconded the des
gnes of the King of Portugal.
chief that did most applaud his humor was Alphonso of Portugal, Earl of
Vimioso, who had been (in the Kings former voyage into Affricke) Chamberlain,
and had charge of the victuals; wherein he behaved himself so sparingly, as if
they had continued any longer in Affricke, or else at sea, they had been
starued, the which his enemies took as an occasion to disgrace him with the
King, whereof he had been ever since secluded. This man (both ambitious and
cunning, did second the Kings humors, although he did know with himself they
were rash and hurtful, and against that which he thought convenient)
persuading him to march by land for two reasons: The one to make known unto
the King upon his march the want of victuals there was in his Army, by reason
whereof he could not proceed: to make his officers odious, and to whip them
with the same rod he had been scourged before, whereby the voyage should be
broken. The other reason was to show himself valiant to please the King and to
recover his disgrace, seeming unto him that whether he did advise it or not,
the King would undertake it, and since that he must of force hazard his life,
he thought it best to make himself Author of the resolution: if it succeeded
ill, the loss would be general; if it happened well, he alone should have the
honor of it, seeing that he alone was of that opinion. He settled the Kings
weak judgment, and therewithal enflamed this desire to march, saying that
this Army in Affricke being master of the field, should not show any fear by
imbarking, but turn head wheresoever it pleased and open all passages. And
although they were possibly inferior to the enemy in number, yet their valor
exceeded them, being well known unto the world how much a Moore was inferior
to a Christian, adding thereunto that to disimbarke at Alarache it might prove
uneasy and dangerous; he said that both King Philip and the Castilians would
report the Portugals durst not without their aid enter one foot into Afric,
that they had disimbarked rashly and had retired like cowards. Lewis de The advice of Lewis de Silua concerning this voyage.
Silua one of the Kings chief favorites spoke his mind freely upon this point,
saying, there was no reason for an Army to march by land, that went to a town
adjoining upon the sea, having so goodly a Fleet, which might easily be
furnished with fresh water for so small a voyage, which was their only want.
He alleged that it was most easy to go by sea standing in no fear of any
enemy, most profitable, for that the way short and the descent easy,
understanding that there was no resistance: contrariwise it was most dangerous
to march by land, being ignorant where the enemy did lie, and what forces he
had: So as supposing him to be far off, he might be at their backs, and having
any wants which happen often in an Army, being far from the sea, they should
hardly be supplied; that betwixt Alarache and them did run the river of Lixe
(called by Ptolome Lixos) upon the left bank whereof stands the town, that
having neither bridge nor barks to pass, they must (leaving the sea side by a
long course seek a foorde, or the Moors bridge, whither being come, it were
doubtful to know with what facility they should pass it, being likely the
enemies would fortify the passage. Betwixt these two contrary opinions the
one by sea, the other by land, the third was spoken of, the which was to
march along the sea side in view of the Fleet, with their Chariots upon the
left hand in steed of Rampires, and being come to the mouth of the river to
pass them with their barks, but this opinion (which seemed to be less
hurtful) was not liked of by the King; although the rest that would have gone
by sea gave ear to it most willingly; yet those that did contradict it,
although they were more in number, yet being of less authority (the King
being of the other party) the worst of all three (which was to go by land)
prevailed.

Mulei Mahamet seeing the King so hot in this action grew daily into new
fears, hoping of no good success, he doubted before, that if the King should
have the victory, he would charge him with too heavy a yoke, but having
viewed the Army, he lost all hope of victory if they should fight, and
therefore thought it most convenient to advise the King to go by sea to
Alarache, hoping he should easily win that place and return into Portugal
with that victory, leaving his The counsel of Mulei Mahamet to the King of
Portugal.
Army in Affricke, by means where of he hoped to win such credit that they
should abandon Moluc and fly unto him; and yet if he would fight to do it with
more facility and greater judgment then it seemed to him Sebastian would. But
his counsel prevailed no more with the King then the rest, so as commanding
Diego de Sosa to attend him with the Fleet at Alarache, he marched with his
whole Army to Alcasarquiuir, being the direct way unto the bridge, having but
The Army of the Portugals and their quality
13000. foot, and 1500. horse; that is 8000 Portugals, 3000. Germans, 1000.
Spaniards, and 600. Italians, with twelve pieces of Artillery: but the more
they advanced into the firm land, the more their fear increased, and
chiefly of them that persuaded to go by sea. And although some did again
show unto the King, that Errors in war cannot be repaired, that it would be too
late after to change his resolution, and that he ought to have great care in
the execution of those things that cannot be redressed, beseeching him not to
cast himself into so dangerous an enterprise, and above all not to leave the
sea, laying before him the peril, the small gain, the want of victuals, and
the little or no experience of the soldiers: yet nothing prevailed, but as it
often happens that we reap a bad recompense for good counsel, being
disco^tented with those he should have favored, he would scarce hear the^.
The rest knowing by this proof he would accept of no counsel, durst not
advise him for fear of his disgrace. The Army had no chief leaders able to
command, and therefo^re could neither march, lodge, nor fight in order: For
although the King served as General, Edward de Meneses Marshall of the Camp,
with some others of less quality, yet they wanted experience: for although
the strangers had their commanders of more experience in actions of war then
the Portugals, as the Marquis general of the Italians, the Lord of Tamberg of
the Germans, and Alphonso d' Aguilar of the Spaniards, yet for that none of
them was General, and being strangers they might not dispose of the Army, so
as none of the Portugals knew his charge. The King the 29. of July made his
first lodging at the Milles three miles from Arzilla; the second at Menera;
where he had advertisement that Moluc approached. From thence he wrote his
letters to Lisbone to Peter d Alcasoua briefly, but full of ouerweening, in the
which he said he understood that Moluc drew near him, and if he escaped not he
would join battle with him. At that time arrived The arrival of Aldana in
the Portugal camp.
Captain Frauncis d'Aldana who had promised to serve the King, and for that
effect had obtained leave of the Catholic King, (which no man else could do):
as a man expert in war having viewed the ill disposition of the Camp, began to
execute all the greatest charges, disposing the soldiers in the best order
that he could, although being a stranger and of no credit with the Portugals,
he could not effect all he understood: In this sort they marched slowly lodging
always in places of advantage, by the industry of the said Aldana and of
Philip Terzy, who served as Ingener; although they discovered some horse, yet
knew they not for certain what Moluc Letters and a Present from the Duke of
Alua to the King of Portugal.
pretended: Aldana brought unto the King letters from the Duke of Alua, with
present of a headpiece which was the Emperors Charles the fifth, and a
cassocke of white taffetie, with the which the said Charles entered conqueror
into Tunis: He said unto some, that he had been sorry the King should attempt
any thing in the firm land of Affricke: But hearing by his own letters that
he would only go to Alarache, he did receive great contentment, and did
commend his resolution; being in the mean time come into certain small hills
which they call Cabeza d' Ardana, they took their third lodging, from thence
they went to Bercain, but to come to the fifth they must pass the small river
of Mucazen at a foord, the which falls somewhat lower into Lixe.

Moluc advertised of the Portugals course, having made longer stay at his
lodging beyond Alcazar then he meant, to give the enemy better means to
approach, his troops being joined, he dislodged the second of August, marching
toward Alcazar: The day following he went directly toward the bridge, which
the Portugals sought for, and being passed did strongly encampe themselves
toward the sea, not meaning to pass any farther: the ways being full of
hills, though easy to mount and to pass with carriage and artillery, yet not
commodious to give battle where the army consisted most of horsemen. The
same day the Portugals had passed Mucazen, and come to their fifth lodging,
they were in doubt whether to encampe on this side or on the other side of a
small river, which begins in the marshes of Alcasarquiuir, part of the army
having passed the water, they turned head, resolving to lodge on this side:
there they understood that Moluc approached, making show to fight; and if it
had not grown late the armies might have discovered each other. Moluc grew
then extremely sick, without hope to live many days, not forbearing to
command and dispose of all things that were necessary with great resolution:
and seeing the enemy to draw near, he first Molucs speech to his brother.
called his brother unto him saying. That although he did not think him to
have the spirit and courage fit for the place, he would give him; yet being
his brother, he made him general over all the horse, that he might fight,
conquer, and die with them, assuring him that if he were noted with the least
show of cowardice, he himself would strangle him with his own hands, and
issuing forth of his tent, he put his army into battle, going himself from
rank to rank in a small The quality of Molucs army.
litter carried by men, executing the office of a Sergeant. His army consisted
of many nations, there were three thousand Moors of Andalousie, as well on
foot as horseback under the conduct of Doali Algori and Osain their
Commanders, valiant men, which are those that passed into Affricke from the
wars of Alpussarres or the mountains of Grenado; he had also three thousand
foot, and twenty five thousand horse, with a thousand Harquebuziers on
horseback, the most part of them Renegados and Turks, all of them men of
war, entertained daily in pay: and this was the principal force of his
camp. He had about ten thousand horse gathered together, and five thousand
foot, so as in all he had about forty thousand horse, and eight thousand
foot, besides a great number of Arabians and adventurers that were come unto
him. Moluc had no great confidence in the hirelings or Arabians, esteeming the
first fearful, and the last inconstant. Amongst his entertained bands, he
had likewise three thousand horse, which (as is said) he suspected to be
friends to Mulei Mahamet, and not greatly favoring his rule. But the Portugals
who for their honor do willingly augment their number, affirm that the Moors
were threescore and ten thousand horse, and twenty thousand foot, and the
Moors (who do increase their own actions) do report their number to be very
great: but it is verified by men without passion, that although Moluc could
have assembled threescore thousand horse, and more footmen then he did; yet
had he no more in his army, then we have specified, with thirty and four
pieces of artillery. Moluc kept to himself the title of General, he gave to
his brother (as is said) the charge of all the horse. Osarin of Raguse was
Colonel of all the Harquebuziers on horseback: Mahamet Faba of the Renegados:
Doaly of the Andalusians, the rest were under men of less quality, every one
commanding his nation: and Musa was captain of his guard. The same day toward
night Moluc sent Soliman the master of his horse, a Renegado of Cordube, with
certain horse to view the enemies army, and to discover if they were in
battle, who descrying the Portugals that had passed the river to return
again; did not believe it had bin done to leave the river betwixt the two
armies, but imagined they had retired* he returned to the camp with this false
news that the Portugals fled; wherewith the Moors being moved, would have
pursued and not let them depart without some damage: but Moluc would not
suffer them, and as a wise Captain who pretended only to defend himself,
and to make a bridge unto the enemy if he would fly, said, Let them go in
a good hour, I will not run after them; suddenly he altered the disposition
of his army, not for that he believed the Portugals were retired; but being
informed by Mahamet Taba Colonel of the Renegados, that there was treason in
his camp, forasmuch as there were three thousand Harquebuziers Moors, that
had neither powder nor bullet, suddenly he caused to be proclaimed, that
whosoever wanted munition should repair unto the Purueior, and he should
furnish him, and every Harquebuzier that should be found the next morning
without fifty bullets, and two pounds of powder, should be corporally
punished: He called unto him likewise all the Captains (and to be more assured
of their fidelities, and to take from them all means to effect any treason
they might have practiced) he changed every man's charge, and made one Captain
of an others company, without leaving any man of quality in his accustomed
place.

This night passed with more quiet then the neerenes of the armies did
threaten: And although Sebastian had proclaimed that no man should shoot at
any Moore, that should willingly retire himself into their camp, but receive
him; yet there came not any one, either for that they bare no such affection to
Mahamet as he made a show of, or for that they kept so strict a guard in the
Moors camp, that none could issue forth, as indeed they did. It prevailed
little for Mahamet to plant his colors in the head of the army, as it were
calling them, for no man stirred. And the day being come the Portugals held a
Council what to do? The King became more mild, having assembled the chief,
heard with greater patience the opinions of The conceit of the Portugal to
fight.
such as would not have proceeded so far. They propounded either to retire
back, or to march against Alarache, and to pass the river at the mouth: but
the most expert in war, those that had dissuaded the course they had taken,
and labored by all means to fly the sight of the enemy, held that they must
fight; the resolution being too late now to avoid the battle, and to turn
head: for to retire they could not without great loss: to stand still, want
of victuals would not suffer them: and to continue their undertaken way, they
could not without the hazard of a battle: that it was better to encounter
the enemy valiantly, then to give him courage by a retraite, or by shunning
the way. The Cheriffe Mulei Mahamet, although his hopes to recover this
kingdom were grounded upon the only victory of a battle (and that the King
being master of Alarache and the sea towns, he should reap no profit
thereby) yet did he all he could to dissuade him from fight, esteeming the
Portugals to be inferior, persuading them to keep close together, and to
seek means to retire although it were with some loss. And although Sebastian
were some what tempered, yet was he not amazed, like to all the rest, but with
great courage desired the combat, not esteeming the enemies forces so great as
they were: No man durst contradict him, both for that (as it is said) many
thought it necessary to join battle, as also for that the Portugals do
generally think it cowardice to dissuade from fighting, holding it more
honorable to loose a battle with rashness, then to conquer with cunning and
judgment, without fighting. For this reason it was resolved (after great
contrariety of opinions) to march against the enemy, although some practices
of peace were yet in hand, but with weak hopes: So as the same morning The
order of the Portugals army.
they dislodged, having divided their army into three squadrons, the one
following the other immediately, and almost united together; that in the front,
was in a manner divided into three, for in the midst the adventurers were led
by Aluaro Pirez, brother and Lieutenant to Christopher of Tauora: on the left
hand were the Castillians led by Alphonso d'Aguilar, lined with Harquebuziers
of the same nation, commanded by Lewis d'Godoy: and the Germans were on the
left hand under the Lord of Tamberg, intermixed with Harquebuziers Italians,
and those Portugals that used to be at Tanger, commanded by captain Hercules
d'Pisa: every nation was set in long ranks with their Commanders in the front.
In an other squadron which did second this, were the Portugals of Michell de
Norogna and Vasco de Sylueira, with harquebuziers in flank: and in the other
which served for the rereward, were the Portugals of Diego Lopez de Sequeira
and Frauncis de Tauora (although that Sequeira remained at Arzilla,) for the
guard whereof besides two wings of shot, there were three hundredth
Harquebuziers in the rereward: on both sides of the army were their horsemen
divided being in all fifteen hundred, placed in triangles, whereof the right
wing was commanded by George d' Alencastro Duke d'Auero: on the left side was
the standerd Royal, Iean de Sylua, Ambassador for the Catholic King, and
young Theodose Duke of Barcellos, (for so they call the eldest son of the
Dukes of Bragance) and on the right hand a little separated, were about two
hundredth horse, of those which live commonly on those frontiers, which they
call Affricans: not far from them were the Moors, of the Cheriffe Mahamet, but
few in number: In this order they marched with their baggage in the midst
betwixt their horse and foot on the right winge, leaving a space on both sides
betwixt their squadrons to retire if need were.

The disposition of Molucs Army.
Moluc who lost no opportunity, had now put his army in battle; he placed
his footmen (which were all Harquebuziers) in form of a cressent; the first
rank were of Andalusians; the second of Renegados, and the last of Affricanes
placed expressly in this sort, for that one nation being enemy to an other,
they might press forward their contraries, and not suffer them retire: upon
the two horns of the cressent, he planted two squadrons of ten thousand horse
in each; and behind (as it were in the rereward) followed in equal distance,
all their horse in small troops, resolving (if they meant to fight) with so
great a number of men to compass in the Portugals army, and charge them on
every side. But in the mean time his sickness increased, feeling himself die
by degrees: and although his Physicians used all their skill to succor him,
yet decaying howerly, they found he could not live two days. He felt a
double death by reason of the time wherein he died, and not being able to
execute his resolution in this war, he doubted that he should not leave any
one that could effect them. For although he were then in battle, yet had he
no meaning to fight at that instant, foreseeing (after that he understood the
Portugals did march into the maine land with their baggage) if they sought to
delay the battle, they were all undone, and that without the loss of any one
man he would take them all prisoners, by reason of the want they should find in
that poor country of Affricke: But seeing this resolution (which required
time and could not be effected in haste) would not succeed by reason of the
shortness of his life, he was much troubled. He thought it not convenient to
discover his conceit unto his brother, that should succeed him, both for that
he much doubted of his judgment, and knowing assuredly that if he died before
the victory, the Moors would fly, and rebel against his brother, and yield
to the Portugals, chiefly by the pretense of Mulei Mahamet, and in this manner
the kingdom would be lost. Afflicted with these cares, seeing the enemy near
with so great an Army, and his death approaching, he resolved not to trust his
heir, but leaving his first resolution, rather during his life to hazard a
bloody and doubtful battle against all Reason of war, then to die with
fear of the loss of his Realm, the which he knew assuredly would happen
after his death: being resolved to fight, all practices of accord dismissed, he
assembled the chief commanders of the Army, and spoke unto them in this
manner.

Molucs Oration to his Army.
Your valor (soldiers,) and the justice of the cause which has put Arms
into your hands, will not suffer me to speak much to encourage you to fight:
For you are those who under my command, have always brought to happy end
every enterprise were it both difficult and dangerous. The enemies which you
have in front, are the same Portugals, which in times past, your fathers and
your own right hands have often vanquished and overcome. The Italians and
Germans, which are come to their succors (more terrible in name then in deed)
should not any thing amaze you, being men without experience, and in small
numbers. And as for me who have sometimes made trial of them, I take upon me
the charge to yield them subject to your forces. And if reason prevail any
thing in battle, shall not the victory be on our side? We lived quiet in our
houses, without vexing or molesting any one, content with our fortunes, not
practicing against the wealth and prosperity of any other: And a nation by
nature our enemies, differing in law, comes from a far country, not only to
pull from me my Crown, but also to spoil you of all your goods, to deprive
you of your liberty, and to ravish your lives: You perchance suppose, that in
this wicked people, piety has so much force, as to plant Mahamet in the
kingdom (a stranger, contrary to their Religion) whose friendship and bounty
is unknown to them; they should undertake this pains to hazard themselves to
death. It is the thirst of gold, and of your blood, with the desire to rule,
that has brought the King of Portugal hither, supported not by his own
forces, but with the hopes he has to deceive you, under this fained show of
piety, to this Infidel Mahamet; who if he had any feeling of a man, should be
rather contented, to live subject to my Empire, according to our laws, then
(inuading my Realm by force) procure the destruction of his own blood, the
ruin of his country, the slaughter of you all, and the slavery of himself.
But the deceit is apparent to you all, there remains nothing but that you
oppose your valor, which shall fight in a most just cause: You shall repel
injuries from your families, maintain your liberties, preserve your lives, and
win honor, and conquering, or dying in what sort soever, you shall gain
Paradise. Moluc would have spoken more, but his soldiers interrupted him;
crying, that he should presently lead them against the Portugals, whereupon he
held his peace, retyring himself into his Littor in the midst of the circle of
his Army, where were his colors and his guard.

In the mean time the Christian Army marched on, and approached near the
enemy, in an open Champion, (which the Moors call Tamiza.) When as Moluc half
dead, viewing this weak Army approach in so small a number, being not above
12000. foot, he gave order they should not fly, as he had resolved before,
that seeming assured The beginning of the battle.
of the victory there might few eseape: And therefore extending the horns of
his croissant and the troops of his horse, he drew them into a large circuit,
keeping his men round, about a cannon shot from the enemy, he environed all
the Portugals camp, joined the two horns at the back of the rereward, making
it an ouall circle: having thus environed it, he then straitened it, drawing
his troops more close together (so cunning were these barbarous people) so as
the Christians Army being compassed in of all sides with their horse, the
Moors footmen stood in front to stop their passage: They continued long in
this estate, the Moors discharged their artillery at a reasonable distance,
the which though it did a little indomage them (some bullets passing through
the ranks) yet did it no great matter of importance. The Portugals fearful
and amassed (imagining upon the first moving of the Moors, that they dislodged
to depart) seeing themselves environed, did likewise discharge their cannon,
but with so great disorder, and so much out of season, as it did small hurt.
And forasmuch as the Moors (having charged their cannon again, began to play,
although to small effect) yet the Portugals were so much terrified, that upon
sight of the fire, they fell all to the ground: wherewith the King (least the
artillery should any more annoy the Portugals, and augment their fear,) gave
sign to the battle: whereat the squadrons of the auantguard and of the
horse, did jointly move with wonderful force and great valor: then their
footmen encountered the Moors, who came to it resolutely, for that the
Andalusians, (desirous to revenge old wrongs) did their best endeavors: The
auantguard did so withstand their force, that although the fight was in equal
balance whilst the shot played, yet when they came to handie blows, the
Moors had the woorst, for they were thrice broken and put to flight, with the
loss of their colors: But for that their number was great, the battle was
still renewed by their Commanders, with fresh troops and new order. In the
rereward they likewise charged Frauncis de Tauora, with the regiment of Diego
Lopez de Sequiera, where for a while they resisted weakly: Those in the
midst were the last that fell to arms: But Moluc gave them no long time of
rest, for he sent to assail Vasco de Sylueire, and Michael de Norogna, on both
sides, so as at one instant they fought on all parts: These made weaker
resistance then the rest, for that some of them casting cowardly away their
arms, and falling on their knees, yielded to the discretion of the Moors, who
for the most part divided their heads with their Cimiters, in recompense of
their base yielding. The combat being hot on all sides, the circle of the
Moors horse, and their squadrons that were behind, drew near, and first
charged the auantguard, where they found their succors were more necessary
then in any other part; (for that the Italians and Castillians had cut in
pieces a great number of the Moors, and of their best men,) pressing the
Christians army on all sides they could approach, without any disorder of
their own, who now grown fearful, began to The Portugals have the
advantage of the Moors.
loose ground, and to shrink together, to the great coffeehouse of the
King, who for any labor of his, could not contain them in their ranks. As
these Moorish horsemen began to move, the Portugals horse that were accustomed
to live in those frontiers, the Moors of the Cheriffe Mahamet, and the Duke of
Auero with his triangle did valiantly march toward them, charging the first
they met, and greatly endomaging them, and put their horsemen on that side to
flight. This happy beginning of victory lasted little: for whilst the Duke
who commanded the greatest number, did fight hand to hand, he discovered on the
one side not far from him, a great troop of the enemies horse, the which he
durst not attend, doubting his own strength, but turning head, followed
expressly the chase of those that were before him, thinking to return to the
fight with greater advantage, as indeed he did: for turning his horse, he went
to charge them that came to encounter him in flank; but finding him self
ouercharged on every side, wanting courage to withstand them, and turning his
horses violently, pressed by the enemy, he found no place of retrait among the
squadrons, but rushing through the ranks of the Germans, some part of the
horse entering amongst the foot, bredde a great confusion; and being unable to
relieve themselves, they wrought no other effect, but disordered their friends,
who were after less able to resist the enemies horse and foot, that came to
charge them: On the other side of the army, where stood the Standerd royal,
and the rest of the horse, which set forward somewhat slower, they made a
great slaughter of Moors, (although the King were not present, being gone
toward the vanguard) whom they pursued even unto their artillery: But being
succored by one of the squadrons that were behind them, the Moors returned
furiously unto the fight, so as in short time it happened unto the Portugals that
were in that part, as to their other horse, whose success was so much the
worse, for that on the outside they were charged by the Moors, and within,
their foot were disordered by their horse, who had the charge on the other
side, and all amazed, fled; so as in a moment all was confounded, the
Portugals horse remained disordered, and dispersed, showing small courage, and
less discipline: for although it were full of Nobility, and men of
resolution; yet were there many young men sent by their fathers, who not
expecting they should come to fight, were the cause of this disorder: so as in
one place you should see men of one squadron both fight valiantly and fly
away cowardly not being pursued: yet the Commanders of the horse, and some
others, turning face to the enemies, they both by words and effect encouraged
the rest, and slew some that fled: But as their number was small, and the
amasement great, they prevailed little. In the vantguard (where the King was a
looker on) they made great resistance, killing above two thousand Moors, but
they were in so great numbers, that the Italians and Spaniards who fought on
that side (not being succored by any others) after they had encountered the
enemies with their daggers, were in a manner all flaine, not overcome, but
weary with killing. The small order they observed to inuest the enemy, was
hurtful unto them; for the front being composed of diverse nations, who
contented to make show of their valor, they did not one stay for another, and
the Germans more flegmatike, remained behind; so as their forces dismembered,
wrought not that effect they had done united: yet notwithstanding the valor of
those men, the first charge of the horse, especially of the Affricanes,
commanded by Edward de Meneses, struck a great terror Molucs fear.
in the beginning unto Mulei Moluc; for seeing his men fly (although he were
sick to the death) mounted to horse in choler, going toward them that ran
away, to stay them, and encourage them. And although the press increased, and
the shot of the Christians drew near, he made show to march himself
foremost, either to retain his men by shame, or by the hazard whereunto he
should thrust himself: But his greatest favorites came about him, some
holding him by the stirrops, some by his gown, and some by the raines of his
bridle, beseeching him not to hazard himself. But he persisting his
resolution, and they to stay him, he grow in choler, laying hold of his
sword to disperse them, at what time being seized with a cruel fit of his
disease, he swouned, and had fallen from his horse; but being taken down by
them about him, he was laid in his Litter, where putting his finger unto his
mouth in sign of silence, suddenly, or (as some report) before he was laid
down, Molucs death.
he gave up the ghost. The Renegados which remained near about him, kept his
death secret, with great care, having so formerly appointed if he should die;
an argument of great magnanimity in this Barbarian, who measured his counsels
with the hour of his life, and provided that death should not deprive them of
the victory. The Litter being shut, they placed at the door a witty young
child, who being instructed what he had to do, making show to speak unto
him, and receive his answer, told them his pleasure was, they should pass
forwards. This secret was of great importance to the Moors, The Arabians
spoil their friends
for without doubt if his death had been discovered, they had all fled. The
Arabians who were not come with any intent to fight, but with a desire to
spoil the conquered, having first viewed some Moors run away, that their
Mercenaries grew fearful, who kept their lodging, doubting some ill success;
they fell upon the Moors baggage, and spoiled it, putting to flight such as
kept it, who running even unto Feez, with many others of the camp, gave out
that the Moors had lost the field: so dangerous a thing it is in an army to
conduct a nation light and unconstant, who upon the least contrary event
falls upon his friends. But fortune who had hitherto been doubtful,
although it seemed more to favor the Moors then the Portugals, after the
Italians and Castillians were defeated, remaining yet a good number of
Germans and adventurers disordred, did now show it self apparent in favor
of the Moors, and the victory assured, having gotten their artillery: For
the Renegados who were in the second rank of the Moors, their orders being
open, did without any confusion receive the Andaluzians, and all those that had
been broken by the vanguard and fled, who returning a fresh to charge the
adventurers and Germans, they found but weak resistance. The arrival of
certain Renegados that fled from the enemies prevailed but little, bringing
news of the death of Moluc: For although some went up and down crying
victory, and publishing that Moluc was dead, thereby to encourage the
soldiers; yet was there no means to draw the Portugals to imitate the example
of the strangers; but all fearful without any courage, retiring themselves,
they still lost of the field: The squadrons of the maine battle did not yet
move, but unfurnished of shot (who without keeping their places were crept
foreward) did stand firm without succouring of their friends, saying, that
such was the Kings commandment, and therefore charged by the Moors shot on
horseback, were miserably consumed, when as their commanders finding their
errors would Frauncis de Tauora slain in the battle.
have drawn them forward, the soldiers were so amazed, that they could not
do it. In the rereward Frauncis de Tauora was slain with a shot, having
long by his valor withstoode the Moors charge; but being dead his men grew
more amazed then before, crying for mercy without fighting, and flying away
without any respect of the King, who was come thither from the vantguard: they
retired of all parts so far back, with so great a confusion, and without
consideration whither they went, that all the squadrons in a confused order
came close together on all sides; so as the horse, soldiers, chariots*
munition, tents and pauillions, with their other baggage, came all confusedly
together on a heap, and in such a strait, that many were trodden down in the
press, and smoothered under the horse and chariots: So as this army which did
contain above three miles in compass, was in a moment consumed by the sword,
and did so restrain it self through fear, that a small room might contain
it. The Duke of Auero, Ambassador for the Catholic king, Aldana and some
other chief men, having gathered together some horse, charged the Moors first
on the one side, and then on the other, where they did see greatest need, but
being disordred and few in number, if they prevailed on the one side, they
received hurt on the other: For at the same instant when as certain of them
attended the King toward the rereward, whereas there needed succors, there
came a great number of Arabians against the vanguard, who according to their
custom, to fall upon those, whom they see in route, charged that part with
such fury, that they slew almost all the Germans with their Captains, and
many men of The death of the Duke of Auero, and of Aldana, and the imprisonment
of the Prior.
account: There the Duke was slain with a shot, Aldana died likewise: the
Ambassador of the Catholic King was hurt and taken prisoner, so was the Prior
and the Marshall of the field. These being dismounted, every man fled; the
Moors entering into the ranks of the Christians, with their Cymiters cut them
miserably in pieces: Whilst this was a doing, the fire fell by chance into
the Portugal munition, which did endomage them no more then the Moors: for as
they entered among their baggage, it consumed many of them. The circle of the
Barbarians horse did no way guarde the passage toward the sea, so as the
Christians that meant to fly that way, might easily do it, but such as thought
to return to Arzille were either slain or taken prisoners; for such as
escaped the Moors, being ignorant of the ways, and passage of the rivers,
were either drowned, or fell into their hands, who made them slaves: There
were many drowned, deceived with the rising of the river, and ignorant of their
former passage; for whereas the rivers (and particularly Mucazen) do ebb and
flow, like the Ocean by the course of the Moon, filling it self with salt
water, when the army passed they were almost dry; but in their return, the
Tide (as they commonly say) being full the rivers were greatly risen, whereof
the Portugals being ignorant, and unskillful of the Ford, fearful, and chased
by the Moors, they were swallowed up; so as of a great multitude of
Christians, which were in this battle, there escaped but one hundredth, so
well could the Barbarians execute their resolutions. The King (who in the
beginning when as Molucs artillery first played, went through the army in
coach with Christopher de Tauora) took his horse, and as they say, went
courageously toward the vanguard, where remaining a while a looker on, sending
first one, then another, to command what he thought was necessary, he was
lightly hurt with a shot in the right arm toward the shoulder, whereof making
small account, he went ordering things in all parts of the army, leaving the
triangle of horse where his Standerd remained. But for that he was young, and
deprived of the greatest treasure that Kings can enjoy, I mean a wise man
near him in whom he should trust, when he did see his men begin to break,
and the Duke of Auero to go forward and retire back, he came furiously with
certain Gentlemen that were about him, to fight among the soldiers,
encouraging his men valiantly by the effects, but with The King of Portugal
fights valiantly, but is vanquished.
few words. Those that beheld him fight, woondered at his courage, for
although that they slew three horse under him, without any whit daunting him,
yet was he never weary to charge, strike, and succor all parts of the army,
where was greatest danger: But being but a man, aided by few, he cannot
resist the enemies fury; nor make his friends partakers of his valor. Many
of the Nobility which remained yet on horseback, seeing the army in route,
sought the King in all parts to help to save him: but the Standard which was
carried before him as a mark to know him, was now taken, and the bearer
slain; and being deceived with another somewhat like unto it, which Edward de
Meneses carried, they followed the one in stead of the other; so as the King
remained as a man lost, with some of his most trusty servants about him, and
one Renegado, who labored to save him: Having in vain sought to fly, being
advised to yield with his arms, he would by no means agree unto it. One
amongst them holding upon the point of his sword a white napkin in sign of
peace, went toward the Moors, as an Ambassador for the rest to yield: but
they either barbarous, or wrathful, took the messenger prisoner, and charged
the rest, who being few in number, wearied, and without courage, they were all
slain. Some say, there grew a controversy amongst them about the Kings own
person, and for that occasion they slew him: They sent after to secke his
body, and by a notable example of the The King slain by the Moors, and
carried to Molucs tent.
inconstancy of this world, they carried it naked upon a saddle pommell, into
the royal tent of Moluc, where letting it fall to the ground, it was carefully
viewed by the Nobility that was there present, and a public certificate made
that it was he, keeping it aftewardes at Alcazer-Quiuer. Such was the death of
this unfortunate King, wherein chanced all things that might make him
lamentable, his young age, the expectation of his virtues, the want of
succession, his violent death, and the imprisonment of his body. He was endued
with excellent qualities, but nothing profitable unto him, wanting by reason of
his unripe years, that predominante virtue of our actions: For all his
resolutions that did guide him to so rash an end, were grounded upon his
magnanimity, zeal to religion, liberality, thirst of military glory; of
the disposition of his body, and the vigor of his courage. It seems that we
may well say of this unfortunate young Prince, that which was sometimes spoken
of Alexander the Great; That Nature had given him virtue, and Fortune vices:
For in truth Sebastian had his virtues of nature, and his vices from his
education. Mulei Mahamet escaped his enemies Mulei Mahamet drowned.
hands, but his too great haste to pass Mucazen, and to recover Arzille, was
the cause he was drowned in his passage. Those whom idleness had made curious,
did note the diversity of these Princes deaths, for being all lost in one
battle, within the space of six hours, the one died of his natural death;
the second by the sword; the third was smothered in the water. When as Hamet
see the battle won, he ran toward his brother, thinking to find him
alive, and to rejoice with him: but being come to his litter, they informed him
of his death. And although Moluc had left one son, Hamet proclaimed king of
the Moors.
yet did they salute Hamet as their King, running through their camp with
ensigns proclaiming of his name, according to their custom: And for that
according to the conformity of the grandfathers will, the eldest (as it is
said) of the nephews should succeed, therefore Hamet was sworn Prince. The
Moors fell to spoil, and take prisoners, making a very rich booty, by reason
of many precious things the Portugals had brought with them into the camp; but
especially for the prisoners, which were in great number, and of great
importance, for their wealth and nobility: besides that the Moors make more
account of one Portugal prisoner, then of any other nation, for that being
delicate and not able to suffer, they redeem themselves for great sums, as
these gentlemen did afterward; who by an example of small patience, set
themselves at six thousand ducats a piece and more. This day was famous by
the death A battle famous by the death of three Kings.
of three Kings; that is, Sebastian, Mulei Moluc, and Mulei Mahamet, by the
imprisonment of all the Nobility of a Realm, and of so many soldiers; a
thing seldom or never happened; and also for the importance of Sebastians death,
in the other affairs of the world. The number of the dead, was not so great
as of the prisoners; but for that the truth is hard to be verified, it has
bred diverse opinions in the Portugals: Some have reported that the enemies were
infinite in number; others have bin more moderate; yet have they augme^ted this
point: Notwithstanding there died three thousand Moors, and as many
Christians, or more; amongst the which were some The names of the chief slain
in the battle.
men of account: For besides the Captains of the strangers, and the Duke of
Auero, there was slain Alphonso of Portugal, Earl of Vimiosa; Jews
Coutigno, Earl of Rodondo; Vasco de Gama, Earl of Vidiguera; Alphonso of
Norogna, Earl of Mira; John Lobo, Baron of Aluito; Aluara of Melo, son to
the Marquis of Ferrara; Rhoderick of Melo, eldest son to the Earl of
Tentuguel; Iamie brother to the Duke of Bragance; John de Silueira, eldest
son to the Earl of Sorteglia; Christopher of Tauora; and many other of
account, so as some noble families were there wholly extinct. Arias of Silua,
Bishop of Porto, and Emanuel of Meneses, Bishop of Coimbra, died likewise: The
Duke of Barsellos, with Anthony Prior of Crato, were taken prisoners. The new
King having gathered together his army, and the greatest number of prisoners
he could get, resolved to return to Feez; where he entered in great triumph:
For besides the colors taken, and the number of Captives he led with him, he
caused the body of Mulei Mahamet to be found out, and having flaied it, and
filled the skin with straw, he carried it in triumph, to take from the Moors
all the hope they had conceived in him. After he studied carefully to discover
The covetousness of Hamet.
the Gentlemen that were prisoners, taking them from the Moors and Jews, who
had bought them for a small price, to draw from them a greater ransom, as
indeed he did: Whereupon he was noted by some to be more covetous then
valiant, seeming a great indiscretion, that after so great and absolute a
victory, remaining no relics of an enemies army, he should so suddenly
betake himself to rest. They would (being but twenty and five miles from the
fortes which the Portugals held in Afric) he should presently have labored
to force them, and have freed the Province from such a curb (being the opinion
of the most expert) that if he had advanced his camp, he had soon forced
them, unfurnished both with men and munition; and the Portugals that were there
in guard remaining so astonished, for the death of their King, that they could
hardly have made defense, and so much the less having small hope to be
succored out of Portugal, Sebastian having carried with him all the Nobility
which were wont to defend those places. So as upon this discourse, many
said, as was spoken to Hannibal of the same nation, that the Affricanes
although they know sometimes how to vanquish, yet could they not use the
victory: But all well considered, the Moore proceeded in this action, with
more judgment, then others believed, for not suffering himself to be carried
away with prosperity, having advertisement that the Realm of Feez (the which
they had received from such as had escaped the day of the battle the hands
of the vanguard of the Christians and of the Arabians) was somewhat altered,
seeing himself newly King, he thought it more convenient being armed to go
pacify his people, and take assured possession of the Realm, then to busy
himself with new conquests, and leave the certain in doubt for the
uncertain: Besides, having well considered the conquest of these fortresses of
the sea, he did not esteem them easy, but of hard attempt: for besides they
wanted no garrisons, and that Portugal was not yet so unpeopled, but that it
might soon be succored, he held it for most certain, that King Philip for
his own private interest would defend them with all his force, the which he
might easily effect by reason of the great number of galleies he had prepared
ready in Spain, fearing perchance that which had happened. And for that he
doubted the Andaluzians might have some intelligence with the Turks, and
practice some treason against his person, he cut off the head of Doali and
some other Commanders, and of some others of his train. By this means Hamet
got the name of a wise and considerate Prince, the which he preserved,
governing himself with judgment.

The Portugals army at sea returns to Lisbone.
Diego de Sosa General of the army at sea, who as we have said, remained
near Alarache, hearing the noise of the artillery, and the brute of the two
armies, most assured they were in fight, he knew not what to do: for although
his commission was there to attend the King, yet he doubted least the view of
the enemy might force him to change his resolution, or that the way should be
stopped, and that he should expect him in vain, not resolving whether it were
more expedient to return to Arzille, or attend in that place: He made likewise
a question, whether he should batter Alarache, (whereunto he was inclined)
thinking by his cannon to give the King a figne of his being there, and to
trouble the mind of the Moore, while he was in fight; but he resolved not any
thing, detained by his blind commission, and the advice of some other
Capteines. The army being broken, he received letters from Peter de Mesquita,
governor of Arzille; and withal, news of the success, in part false,
writing unto him that he should return with the army to Arzille, and that
King Sebastian came thither to imbarke. And although this letter did not
easily move him, doubting that Mesquita, demanded the army more for his
own assurance then otherwise; yet being certified of the Kings death, he ran
along the coast unto Tanger: seeking to gather up the remainder of the army,
and so after return to Lisbone.

These things passed in Afric, the news came (but without good assurance) to
the Governors the fourteenth of August, which did so amaze them, that for a
time they knew not what to determine, yet they kept it secret, resolving in
the mean time to call the Cardinal Henry (who they said) succeeded directly
to the crown, he a little before not greatly pleasing nor agreeable to his
Nephew, in a manner retired himself in the Abbey of Alcobassa, to whom with
great dissimulation they sent father George Serrano, of the order of the
Jesuits, to declare unto him the success, and to beseech him to come to
Lisbone, to receive the Scepter; although on the other part some reported that
Peter d'Alcasoua had secretly advertised the Catholic King of all things,
beginning to yield obedience, as to him whom he did foresee would be future
Lord of the Realm, if this were not a practice of his enemies to make him
more suspect unto the Cardinal Henry: generally through the Realm they knew
nothing of assurance, for all passengers were stayed by order from the
Governors; all letters that came from foreign parts were taken, giving the
people to understand a thousand fables, doubting perchance, that if the
people knew themselves to be without a King, they would attempt something.
The City of Lisbone, as also all the rest, were in great garboile,
understanding that there was a Carrier come with such news, as had greatly
altered the Governors, not knowing what it was, seeing the Council daily
assembled, the letters retained, to understand that they had sent both into
Castill, and to the Cardinal, to hear that both the Christians and the Moors
camps were approached, held the whole Realm in fear of some ruin. There was
none in Lisbone but had some interest in this war, who so had not his son
there, had his father; the one her husband, the other her brother; the traders
and handie-crafts men who had not their kinsemen there (and yet many of them
had) did venture their wealth in it, some of them for the desire of gain, and
others for that they could not call in that which they had lent to Gentlemen,
and soldiers: by reason whereof all were in heaviness, every one seemed to
foretell the loss of such friends, and goods he had in Afric: and although
they stood yet doubtful, yet might you understand their secret sighs.

A message sent to the Cardinal Henry by the Catholic king.
The Catholic King, advertised of the success of Afric, and of that which
was treated in Portugal, sent thither presently Christopher de Mora, a
Portugal; at that time a Gentleman sewer, one of those which went into Castil
with the Princess mother of Sebastian: He carried with him two Commissions:
the one was to visit Henry, and to let him understand the King would
presently send to him another personage for the full perfourmance of that
office: The other was to sound the hearts of the Portugals, for the which he
was thought best able, being there borne, and well understanding the state of
the Realm. They gave him not the title of an Ambassador, for that being
doubtful of the life or death of John de Sylua* (who was in Afric with that
charge) the King would not yet appoint any other. Mulei Hamet, before his
going to Maroc, desirous to make the Catholic King his friend, sent to that
effect, to present him the same peace, that had been betwixt Moluc and him,
offering him in gift the body of King Sebastian, which he held prisoner. This
Ambassador being arrived in the Court of Castill, the An embasage from Hamet
to the Catholic king.
King heard it willingly, and although he accepted the delivery of his
Embassage, yet would he not receive the Kings body, but appointed it should
be consigned to the Portugals, and therefore Andrew Gasper Corse, in the name
of the said Cheriffe, did consigne it by public act, to the governor of
Ceuta, for the Catholic King: who at the same time (to requite the Moors
bounty) sent Peter Venegas of Cordube for his Agent into Afric, with a
present of stones, valued at a hundredth thousand ducats, as well to continue
the treaties of peace, as to demand the Duke of Barcellos, the which he
granted, and sent him after free to the frontiers. In this time the Cardinal
came to Lisbone, at whose arrival they published this heavy news, so as this
inward and general sorrow, which was suppressed by the uncertainty of the
report, increased and The Portugals sorrow.
burst forth into tears, and lamentations: I cannot well describe the
general sorrow, how all things were filled with sighs, how every man was
ouerladen with mourning: It was a pitiful thing to hear the women (whereof
the most noble in their houses) from whence you might hear the noise, and the
rest in the streets, pouring forth their cries and tears unto heaven, the
which they redoubled so often, as the news was confirmed by any new
advertisement: And as it often happens that minds suppressed do oftentimes
turn to superstition, so they and likewise many men did not believe what was
said; but hoping beyond all hope, and trusting more then they should
(although it were verified unto them that their husbands and kinsfolks were
dead, yet would they have them still living,) and deceived by sorcerers and
witches, but most of all by their own desires, remained long without their
widows habit, expecting in vain news of him which was passed into an other
life. Many men complained, and some cursed the King, and such as suffered him
to go into Afric, one blames the King himself, an other his favorites, some
the Cardinal, and some the Chamber of Lisbone, who had not hindered so foolish
a resolution; some did see that Portugal was near her last period, and with
their own misery lamented their countries. The Governors yielded their
Cardinal Henry swerne King of Portugal.
government to the Cardinal, who by the Nobles and Magistrates was sworn
Governor and future successor to King Sebastian; The which was done to quiet
the people, expecting a better confirmation of this news from Afric, which
stayed not long but was verified from all parts. And therefore they resolved
to finish the ceremony which they have accustomed in bewailing their King
dead, and to break their Scutchions, which was this: There parted from the
Magistrates house, a Citizen on horseback, covered himself and his Horse all
in black, with a great Ensign in his hand likewise of black, bearing it
upon his shoulder that it The ceremony of the Portugals in bewailing their
King dead.
might traile on the ground: After him followed three old men on foot in
mourning weeds, with three scutchions in their hands, like bucklers or
targets, bearing them high upon their heads, without any figure of them, but
all black: Then followed some Citizens of the same Magistrates, and other
inferiors in great numbers: All these went through the principal streets of
Lisbone, and coming to the steps of the Cathedral Church, which is near to
the place from whence they parted; those which hold the scutchions, mount up
certain degrees, and one amongst them lifting up his target, cries with a
loud voice, People of Lisbone, lament your King Sebastian, who is dead: Then
all the people weeps and cries: Having ended his words, he breaks his
Scutchion as a frail thing, striking it on the place where he stands: Then
proceed they on, and being come to the new street, ascending the stairs of
the little Church of our Lady of Oliuera, an other of them which carries the
Scutchions, pronounces the same words the former had done, and breaks his
Scutchion in the same manner: The like is done by the third, upon the stairs
of the Hospital: So as all the three Scutchions were broken in these three
places, and then they return from whence they came. At this time Christopher
d' Mora arrived at Lisbone, who desirous to deliver his Embassage from the King
unto the Cardinal, was not permitted; for Henry (I know not the reason) would
give him no audience, before he was sworn King: Therefore they made haste to
perform ordinary ceremonies, which done, the King did hear him lovingly, and
he remained in the Realm, executing the charge his master had enjoined The
ceremony of the Portugals in swearing their King.
him: The form of the oath was done in this manner: The xxv. of August the
Hospital Church of all Saints was hanged with tapestrie of silk, in the which
they erected a little scaffold, on the which they placed a seat of cloth of
gold; thither came the King in the morning, in the habit of a Cardinal;
going from the palace there marched before him eight Attabales, or drums on
horseback, after the Moresco manner, and nine Harolds all on horseback,
carrying upon their cloakes their coats of Arms: after followed on foot,
almost all the officers of the Court, those of the Chamber, and other
Magistrates; behind them was the Duke of Bragance on horseback bare headed,
bearing in his hand a sword, with a scabberd of gold as Constable: a little
after came the Cardinal upon a Mule, the which Aluaro de Silua Count of
Portalegro Lord Steward of his household, led by the reins; there followed
after many Noblemen and Gentlemen on horseback, with much people on foot: The
Cardinal environed with a great multitude ascends the stairs of the
hospital, being entered the Church, having heard Service, and ended his
prayers, he seats himself in the chair prepared on the scaffolde, where
presently Frauncis de Sada (one of those that had bin governors) put the
Scepter in his hand, and Michell de Mora Secretary, standing a little off,
said, (reading it with a loud voice,) that King Henry, by the death of King
Sebastian, did succeed in the Realm, and therefore they had delivered him the
Scepter, and that he was come to take the accustomed oath, to maintain and
observe unto his people, and to any other all liberties, privileges, and
conuentions, granted by his predecessors: which done, the Secretary kneeling
before him with an open book, the King laid his hand thereon, swearing so to
do: then did the Attabales sound, every man crying Reale Reale, for Henry King
of Portugal: this done he rises, and with the same company holding always
the Scepter in hand, he returned to the palace, the Attabales sounding, and
the Herolds crying from time to time as before.

THE THIRD BOOK.
The Contents of the third Book.
The descent of the Kings of Portugal; The pretendants to the succession; The
resolutions of King Henry; And the peoples demands; The voyage of the Duke of
Ossuna into Portugal, and other Ambassadors from the Catholic King; The
imprisonment of the Duke of Alua: The Catholic Kings letters to them of
Lisbone: The States of Portugal: The grounds of the pretendants to the
succession; The sentence of Henry against Anthony Prior of Crato, upon his
legitimation by virtue of the Popes Brief: The reasons of the Catholic King
to the Realm against every one of the pretendants: The preparatiues to war
of the Catholic King against the Realm of Portugal; The suspension of the
brief; The second sentence of Henry against Anthony; The alteration of King
Henry his will concerning the succession; And the Popes offers to the
Catholic king.

MOst men from all the noted parts of the world, had their minds and
judgments turned upon Portugal; both for that hitherto the affairs of
Sebastian were worthy attention, as to see now Henry come to the Crown, who
was old and without successor; which made all Princes doubt that the
succession of this Realm might trouble the public quiet: for the Pretendants
were diverse, their actions differing, all allied, and all with grounds: And
although their forces were unequal, yet were they made equal by certain
respects: But to the end we may the better understand the grounds of every
one of the pretendants, I will make a little digression to report briefly The
descent of the pretendants to the Crown of Portugal.
the descent of these Kings. And although from the first unto Henry there
reigned seauenteene, yet do I not think it necessary to take their beginning
but from Emanuel forward who was the fourteenth, who began his reign in the
year of our Lord 1495. for that of his only progeny is issued the number of
Princes that pretended to the Crown. This man had three wives: of the first
which was Isabell, daughter to Ferdinand King of Castill, widow to Alphonse,
son to John the second of Portugal, he had no other children, (for she died
in childbed) but Michael, who died in the cradle, who had been (as they say)
the pillar and corner stone to unite it and Spain together: But by his death
the Portugals lost the kingdoms of Castill and Arragon, whereof Emanuel and
Isabell his wife were sworn Princes; the issue male of the blood royal, being
extinct in Castill. His second wife (which was Marie sister to Isabell, third
daughter of the said Ferdinand) brought him many children, vz. six sons;
and two daughters, Isabel was married to Charles the fifth Emperor; Beatrice
to Charles the third Duke of Sauoy; John did inherit the kingdom; Jews died
without marrying, leaving behind him Anthony his bastard son, he (who as you
shall hear anon) was the cause of great misery to his country, by reason of
his pretention to the Crown: Ferdinand deceased without heirs; so did Alphons
who was Cardinal, called by the title of Saint Blaise; and Henry of the title
of Saint Of four Crowns.
Quatre Coronez, this outliued all the rest, and it is he of whom we speak:
Edward took to wife Isabell daughter to Iaime Duke of Bragance, by whom he
had Marie, which afterward was married to Alexander Farnese Prince of Parma;
and Katherine, at this present wife to John of Bragance; he had likewise a
son, the which being borne after the death of his father (who lived but four
years in matrimony) was likewise called Edward, This is he who disfauoured by
Sebastian died at Euora, in the year 1576. of his third wife, which was
Leonora daughter to king Philip the first of Castill, archduke of Austria, who
was after married to Frauncis, the first king of France; he had none but
Charles who died young, and Marie, who being about six and fifty years old,
died a maid at Lisbone, in the year 1578. But returning to John, the third
son of the second wife, who succeeded Emanuel in the kingdom, he contracted
marriage with Katherine, sister to the Emperor Charles the fifth, and had
issue Marie, who after was the first wife of Philip the second king of Castill,
now reigning, from whom issued Charles, who died young; the which if he had
lived, without doubt had preceaded the Cardinal Henry in the succession of the
crown. The said John and Katherine had many male children which died young,
one only outliued the rest, named John, who (as some say) died young with
excessive love of his wife, sister to the said Philip, leaving her great with
child, and after delivered of Sebastian, during his grandfathers life, who
soon after passed to an other world, and this is that Sebastian which died in
Afric.

The pretendents to the Crown of Portugal.
Let us now come to the pretentions: The Catholic King, as it is said, put
himself foremost, being borne of Isabell the eldest daughter of Emanuel: And
although as a Castillian, he was naturally hated of that nation, yet he
supposed that being mighty, compassing The King of Spain.
in the Realm with his dominions, and the Portugals inexpert, he should soon
either by love or force become master thereof: John Duke of Bragance challenged
the Realm as the right of Katherine The Duke of Bragance.
his wife, alleging he was nearer to the succession then the Catholic King,
being (although a woman) daughter to the said Edward, brother to the said
Isabell. And forasmuch as the Duke is the greatest personage of the Realm, and
his subjects most warlike, trusting on the favor of Henry; who did then grace
him, and having small experience, in the affairs of the world, he held
himself half in possession. Alexander Prince of Parma, son to Octauius The
Prince of Parma.
Farnesse, did pretend it for his eldest son Rhainucius, as male, issued from
Marie, the eldest daughter of the said Edward, sister to the said Katherine.
And although his territories were far off, yet besides that some supposed the
Church should favor him, it seemed the Portugals would be pleased to have a
young king, whom they Anthony Prior of Crato.
might breed up after their own manner. But Anthony Prior of Crato, son of
Jews, who was brother to the said Henry, sought the Crown, but with more
vehemency, saying, he was legitimate, and no bastard, as it was supposed: And
although he were without lands, and disgraced by Henry, yet being favored by
the people, he supposed that Henry dying, he should in despite of all the
rest The Duke of Sauoy.
be crowned. Emanuel Philibert Duke of Sauoy, although son to Beatrice,
yoongest sister to the Catholic Kings Mother, and yoonger then the said
King, did not yet leave off his pretentions, but with greater modesty: And for
that amongst the pretendants strangers, the Portugals were more inclined to
him, then to any other, it was supposed he would not let slip the occasion:
And this inclination proceeded from the opinion they had, that in regard of
the quality of his person, he should be fitter then any other to defend
them from their enemies, and if need were, he might vigorously resist King
Philip if he should stir, both by reason of his valor, and for the means
he had to molest him in his Duchy of Millaine, joining unto Piedmont, using
chiefly the alliance The people of Portugal.
and neighborhood he had with France. The peoples pretention was not
unconsidered, for that the issue male of their Kings failing, they pretended
the election to belong to them: they grounded it, that women did never succeed,
but in an interreigne, a woman was excluded; and John the first, the tenth king
of this Realm, chosen by the people: It seemed that this pretention should
not only be contrary to all pretendant strangers, but also might breed The
Queen mother of France.
a division within the Realm. Katherine of Medecy (widdowe to Henry the second
King of France) did likewise pretend, saying that she was before all others,
by an action fetched a far off, but fortified with lively reasons by her
Ambassadors. The ground was, That when as Sanches the second reigned in
Portugal, whom they called Cappello of the habit which he did use, Alphons
his brother married with Matilda then Countess of Bulloigne in Picardie: And
that after by the weakness of Sanches, the people with the consent of Pope
Honorius the third, then reigning, called in Alphonse to be as tutor and
governor of the Realm (a testimony of the ancient Religion of this nation)
who even in temporal matters did fly unto the Pope: And although at his
coming he did but usurp, yet soon after the King dying without heirs, the
Earl did lawfully inherit the Crown; having had before by his French wife
some children, who understanding her husband to be King, and not to return any
more to Bulloigne, having prepared certain ships she went to him into
Portugal: But for that Alphonse being now King did treat a marriage in
Castill, to have the Kingdom of Algarues in dower, as he after had, without
the consent of the Pope, she was neither seen nor received by him: So as all
the other Portugal Kings which have succeeded, have drawn their original
from this Alphonse, and the children of his Castillian wife: The Queens
Ambassadors said, That all the Kings which had succeeded him, and his
children, had (as Bastards) unjustly inherited, and that the kingdom ought to
return by direct line, to the heirs of the lawful children of the said
Alphonse, and the Countess of Bulloigne, whom they said to be Queen Katherine
of Medicy, mother to King Henry the third, daughter to Laurence of Medicy, and
of Magdalen of Bulloigne, the only remainder in direct line of that house, and
heir to that County; the which although she did not then possess, being
incorporate by the Kings of France, as a matter of importance, seated upon the
limits of Flaunders and England, yet they gave unto the Queen in recompense
the Earledom The Pope pretends the election.
of Lorangueil which she now inioyeth. They did likewise affirm (but with
small reason) that the Pope did pretend, alleging that the Realm was not
only the spoil of the Cardinal, but when as Alphonse, who was the second
Earl of Portugal obtained of the church the Title of a King, he bound
himself to pay certain marks of gold for a Tribute. But here of they made
small reckoning. These pretentions did much afflict the minds of Princes, and
made the people fear some broils, understanding that both the Queen of
England was displeased against the Catholic King for the affairs of Ireland,
and that the King of France, and the Turk, were not contented to see King
Philip become so mighty, conquering a kingdom of so great importance: On the
other side, Philip would not endure that any other but himself should become
Lord, for the neighborhood of their countries, supposing the least
inconvenience that could happen, was the civil war betwixt the Duke of
Bragrance and the Prior.

The deliberations of King Henry at his coming to the Crown.
But returning to the Cardinal Henry, being seated in the royal throne,
although he were of 67. years of age, and not healthful, yet he looked about
him, and (as it were determined from above, that Portugal should fall by
degrees to his declining) he did not provide for the state, according to the
opinion that was conceived of him: but the Realm by reason of their miseries
passed, remaining as a body empty and afflicted, which needed a wise
Physician to restore it. But as one mischief comes not alone, the new King did
more torment it; for although many supposed, that he being old, a priest, and
of an exemplarie life, he should lay all passions aside, and be more careful
to settle the state of the common wealth, then he had found it, yet
notwithstanding he could not temper himself with such disposition as was fit
for his years and degree: But as it often happens to such as have been
oppressed, who coming to rule, seek revenge of their enemies, even so did he
(not imitating the example of Lewis the 12. King of France, who disdained to
requite the wrongs done him being Duke of Orleance) he resolved to revenge the
injuries done him being Cardinal, if they may be well termed injuries, when as
Princes be not respected of their inferiors as they ought: For being not
greatly favored by the King his predecessor, the ministers and favorites of
his nephewe did not respect him as was fit, not conceiving (being so old and
Sebastian so young) that ever he should have attained to the Crown: By reason
whereof he deprived almost all the officers of the court, and some of them that
did manage the Kings Treasure of their offices, and advanced his own
servants. The first on whom he discharged the heat of Peter d' Alcasoua in
disgrace with King Henry.
his choler was Peter d' Alcasoua, for that he did detest him from the time he
was Secretorie, and he Governor of the Realm, during the nonage of Sebastian:
as also for that he thought to have reason to punish him, having been an actor
in these wars, and seconded the Kings will, and as one of his Chamberlaines
had had the greatest charge to make the preparatiues for the war, he did
suspend him from all his offices, and proceeded against him by way of Justice:
And although all his faults were restrained to this, only to have counseled,
or at least not dissuaded the king from the war of Affricke, yet his process
being verified, he suffered condemnation by the Judges, to loose all his
offices, privileges, and recompenses, which had been given him in the end of
Sebastians life. It prevailed not for his justification, to allege, that if
the Cardinal himself did not persuade the enterprise, yet at the least he did
consent unto it, and approve it, which fault was greater in him, then in any
other, that his persuasions should be of more importance with the king, then
all men's, seeing that for the pre-eminence of his place he alone might speak
clearly, and force him, which others could not do, fearing as subjects (and
with reason) the indignation of a young king; the which (they say) he ought not
to have feared, both for his quality and his age, which should neither yield
to fear nor hope. He took the same course against Jews de Silua, and many
others that came out of Afric, whereby it was apparent the King knew not
absolutely how to use clemency, nor wrath: for neither did he pardon as a man
of the Church, nor revenge as a displeased Prince. This bredde an alteration in
all the affairs of the Realm, neither was it sufficient that such as were
advanced to these new offices, were men without experience, who by their
ignorance did mightily trouble such as did treat with them, but for that we
easily incline to the woorst, some of them under color to seem affectionate
servants to their king, not only provided for that which passed their charge,
but examined the actions of their predecessors; finding therein a thousand
cauils, and preferring the appearance of the kings profit, before justice,
they disannulled conuentions and laws, to the great trouble and damage of
many, and small honor to themselves, and then did they seem to do best
justice, when they did molest most, such as Sebastian had favored, and wrought
quite contrary to that which had been formerly done: Notwithstanding, if any
thing were done by them that was absolutely good, it was the disannulling of
the impost of salt, which Sebastian had imposed.

Whilst these things passed in Portugal, the Catholic King Sebastians
obsequies at Madrill.
having sent Christopher de Mora thither, and Peter de Venegas into Afric, he
performed the funerals of Sebastian, in the Church of Saint Jerome at Madrill,
although it was secretly muttered that the Duke of Alua should say, the King
should have performed it in Portugal, in our Ladies Church of Belem, where
the other Kings are accustomed to be interred, inferring it may be, that Philip
was successor to Sebastian, or at the least should assure himself by force
of the succession after Henry, causing himself to be sworn Prince. The report
of the Dukes words, did greatly move Ferrant de Silua, Ambassador for
Portugal, and all the Portugals, being a speech that did pearce their hearts,
proceeding from a person whom they held enemy to their nation, for the old
grudges betwixt him and Ruigomes de Silua, a natural Portugal, in great
credit with Philip; besides that, being a principal man of account, they
feared least he spoke it with participation of the Kings mind, and took The
discord that fell out for that one said Philip did preceade Henry.
it as a declaration of his meaning. In this time they spoke diversely of these
affairs: For although amongst the Castillians, the Duke himself, and one or
two other principal persons, had this consideration, yet in general they did
not believe it, neither had they considered that Philip should inherit this
Realm, but they supposed it did of right appertain to the son of the Duke
of Parma. But the Portugals (who had better considered thereof, and whose laws
were more in favor of Philip then those of Castill) were amongst themselves
better resolved: neither was the Catholic King long unsatisfied; having both
in his own Countries, in Portugal and other places caused learned men
diligently to examine who was by right and equity the true successor of this
Realm, he began now to conceive that after Henry the succession appertained
unto himself: And now he found, that it was not only the general opinion
of the Doctors, but some amongst them, yea of the Portugals themselves, did
maintain that the King did preceade the Cardinal, and that these Realms did
appertain to the Crown of Castill. They alleged (but with the authority of
few Doctors) that the laws of Portugal, and the Civil likewise, ordain,
that in case of Realms, the inheritance shall go to the nearest kinsemen of
the last possessour, provided always, that he be issued from the same stock:
That Sebastian being the last, the Catholic King was the nearest kinseman he
had, and of the same race; for besides that he was the eldest of the Nephews
of King Emanuel, he was brother to the Kings mother deceased, and preceaded the
Cardinal a degree, being brother to his grandfather. They did likewise renew
the ancient pretention of the Castillians, saying, that by right the Realm
appertained unto them, for that King Alphonse the sixth, could not by general
consent, nor with any reason disunite it from the Crown; neither Alphonse the
tenth give the Algarues to his daughter in dowry, nor free it of the tribute
whereunto it was bound. And although this last pretention to preceade Henry,
seemed to the King and his ministers of force, yet he resolved only to follow
the first, and to succeed the Cardinal, for desiring to enjoy the Realm with
peace, Henry being already proclaimed king with the consent of the people, he
supposed he could not without offense, or without forces take possession
thereof: besides the respect he bare unto his uncle, and the hope of his short
life. Here may be noted the hazard (if we may so term it) whereunto the King
(if he had interest by his affinity) did thrust his heirs, by the concealing
of his right, fearing to offend that nation. For besides that during the life
of Henry, the Portugals should have leisure to prepare against him, if they
were not disposed to yield to his subjection, and if he should die before the
Cardinal, his successors were excluded from this great inheritance, and
Emanuel Phillibert Duke of Sauoy did preceade all the rest.

While these things were consulting in Castill, the King of Portugal somewhat
settled in his Throne, and the heat of his first inclination tempered, all the
States of the Realm entreated him to provide, that before his death a
successor were declared, that after his decease they might not live in
suspense: And therefore the Magistrate of the Chamber of Lisbone, being
superior to all others of the Realm, made great instance upon this point, and
one day all the officers being assembled, they went to court, where one of
them in the name of the rest spoke thus unto the King; Your The demands of the
people of Portugal.
Highness shall understand, with how great desire and affection his people of
Lisbone, beseeches the Lord to grant him a long life, for thereon depends
all our good, hoping that in time it may alter many things which now holds
us in careful consideration: The wound of afflictions, which this Realm has
suffered, is yet so green and so lamentable, as we will not at this present
make mention thereof; It suffices they are such, as the memory will never be
extinct whilst the world continues: and although we be bound to lay the
fault upon our own offenses, yet may we attribute a part to the negligence of
the people, and of such as at that time did govern the common wealth: But
being expedient not to heap error upon error, it seems we ought with a lively
voice, and due humility, cry unto your highness, that (as a just and holy
king,) you would prevent the miseries that hang over us: It cannot enter into
our thoughts to move you to marriage, being no judges of your conscience, and
disposition; but we may well say, if these two considerations do allow it, why
do you suffer the delay of one day? If you be resolved not to marry, your
Highness ought with the like care to say unto such as pretend to the succession,
that within a time prefixed they should come to deliver their reasons; that if
the successor be a natural borne, the people shall have some breathing from the
afflictions they suffer; if he shall be a stranger, it seems convenient they
should know it, and have leisure to advise what to do: For if our sins
permit that the Lord shall call away your Highness, being in the state we are
now, what shall become of us? being most apparent that all such as pretend to
have any title, do consult, arm, plot, and measure their forces, while the
people remains doubtful, not knowing with reason unto what part to incline:
Your Highness dying in this time before the deciding of the cause, we beseech
you to consider the oppressions they shall suffer, the spoilings, the murders,
the dishonoring of women and holy things, and all other excess, which is
commonly practiced in such times, the which may be wholly avoided, by knowing
who shall succeed unto the crown. We do solicit your Highness to swear a
Prince, (for it may be, he that at this present has interest to this Realm,
God may call him before your Highness) but the contrary happening we may plainly
know who shall succeed, for herein consistes the quiet of this Realm: if you
do it not willingly, or that there be any let, you ought to consent that the
people declare one, especially they of the city of Lisbone, upon whom all
Portugal dependes: The holy Ghost, who is the guide of kings, inspire your
Highness, that by his merits, the anger of God may be pacified, the which he
powers down upon us for our offenses, and grant that we may amend our lives,
and preserve your Highness in health, for which all his people pray. In this
manner the officer of the Chamber spoke in vain, but forasmuch as it seemed
unto the king (over ruled in this respect by the divine power) that the remedy
was not so easy, nor the matter so soon decided, as they supposed; he made
answer, that it was a care graven in his heart, the which he would effect with
all possible speed, resolving to have regard unto it.

But this succession gave greater cause both to think, and talk secretly,
and openly in Castill then in any other place; for the King resolving by all
possible means to unite Portugal, with his other Kingdoms, the Nobility did
not willingly entertain it, but did seem that the greatest from Charles the
fifth forwards, had not tasted the greatness of the King, less respecting them,
then had done the ancient Kings of Castill, making them march in one degree of
equal justice with their inferiors. The other Gentlemen and common people
were nothing inclined to this union: Saying, that if this Realm were not
separated from the rest of Spain, they should have no means to marry their
Kings daughters, but into other provinces, which were dangerous both for that
the women did not inherit, and for the heresies wherewith the northren Regions
be at this present infected: Many and of all qualities, (who holding
Portugal as the Sanctuary of Castill) were content with the separation,
remaining as an assured retreat for offenders. It seemed to the King that he
should not only send a sufficient man thither to perform that office, but
also that it was necessary, that one of the chief of Spain, and best
acquainted with the affairs of State, should go to propound the cause of
succession: For this occasion they named as it is said Gasper Council upon the
Embassage the King sent to Henry.
Quiroga, Cardinal and Archbishop of Toledo: Ferdinand Aluares of Tolede, Duke
of Alua; Anthony of Toledo, Prior of the order of Saint John's, master of the
Kings Horse; Frauncis Pacheco Cardinal of Burgos, all principal personages:
Quiroga was thought very fit by reason of his dignity and wisdom, together
with the experience he had gotten in the court of Rome, having been there long
Auditor of the Rota: The Duke of Alua for his authority, experience, and
wisdom, was thought the better, for beginning to fear they should come to
arms, it seemed that he best could treat of the succession, and withal
sound the Portugals forces, and what succors they might draw unto them, and
afterward if need required, being a great captain, could by his advise
undertake the war with greater assurance. Many did approve Anthony of
Tolledo, for besides the opinion, they had of his wisdom, he was accounted
godly, religious, and otherwise virtuous, the which they supposed would make
him more pleasing unto Henry. But in the judgment of the most advised, they
preferred the Cardinal of Burgos, for besides those other good parts which he
enioied with the rest, he was thought most able to treat the matter of State;
besides that, being a priest, and a Cardinal, they should seem to The Duke
of Ossuna sent to Henry.
send unto Henry a companion. But notwithstanding, there was not in Spain any
greater personages of like experience unto these, to manage a matter of so
great importance, being the greatest that ever was presented unto this crown;
yet the preferred Peter Girone Duke of Ossuna; and although his quality (being
great among the greatest of the Realm) was worthy of any charge,
accompanied with many virtues, and some other particularities, that were
necessary for the voyage; notwithstanding, some did attribute this election to
the ordinary diseases of the court, and to the respects which Kings Councels
do commonly use, inferring thereby that therein he was extraordinarily
favored by Peter Fassardo, Marquis de los Veles his kinsman, at that time
favored by the king. Some said also (and it may be not without ground) that
it was not convenient to send any personage into Portugal, whose wisdom,
and judgment were known unto the world, to the end the Portugals should
not fear to treat freely with him of all matters, but it was necessary they
should esteem him affable and courteous, to discover easily unto him their
minds; of which humor the rest were not. And although on the one side the
Cardinals did seem fittest to treat with a king, who was also a Cardinal;
they did think The imprisonment of the Duke of Alua, and the cause.
on the other side that Henry might take it ill, to send one unto him, who was
equal with him in dignity. There happened at the same time a matter which bred
no small wonder in this court, and in others likewise, the which for that it
chanced to a person of whom we are often to make mention, although it be
somewhat from our purpose, we will not leave to report. The Duke of Alua was
banished by the kings commandment, to Vzeda, five and twenty miles from the
court, for that Frederick his eldest son, being taken at Tordefillas, a
village of that Realm, for that he refused to marry with one of Queen
Isabella of Valoys her maids, to whom (as she said) he had promised, whilst
the king was entreated by her friends, to force him to marry her, he by the advice of his father, brake prison, and was gone to Alua, to marry with Marie
de Toleda his cosen, daughter unto Garcie, he which was General at sea, the
which he effected, returning presently unto the same prison. The Duke bare
this affliction with great humility and constancy, so as all hatred ceasing,
his very enemies did pity his misery. This banishment was remarkable, both
for his estate, age, and the notable services he had done unto this crown, as
also to see the integrity of the king, who notwithstanding the necessity he
seemed to have of his person in matters of importance, that drew near, could
not cause him any thing to dissemble the execution of that which he thought fit
for justice, or his reputation: It was also remarkable for the great offices,
which some Princes did in his favor; but most of all his holiness, who did
instantly solicit his delivery by the means of his Nuncio, saying, that
although he could not presume of the kings just intention, but that the Dukes
imprisonment proceeded from some great cause, yet he could not in duty but
perform this office: It was said, this good will of the Pope toward the
Duke, proceeded from the service he had done unto the Apostolic seat,
having made long war against the Infidels and heretics, and also for that
which he had done against the Church it self, effecting that which was
convenient to his king, whilst as enemy he was contrary unto it, as he did
defend it, being a friend, binding unto him, not only Paul the fourth, who
was then Pope, but also his successors. And it seems strange that the greatest
love they say the Church had unto him, sproong from the war which he made
against it: The Deputies of Castill which were then in court, labored for him,
and although the king sent them word they should be contented, and not sue
unto him, for that he would not refuse any thing they should demand, yet
this manner of demanding and denying served for a great office. The King from
the beginning, was in hope to make himself peaceable Lord of the Realm of
Portugal, although he were not ignorant of the small inclination the Portugals
had unto him, but he let pass nothing which he thought fit to gain their
loves; and to this effect he did write to all the chief cities of the Realm,
his pretention, offering and threatening; but in the greatest part his letters
were not received in public. To the city of Lisbone, he did write in this
manner: Most Philips letters to the city of Lisbone.
noble, and our well-beloved, although I have appointed Christopher de Mora to
say unto you some things, which you shall understand from him, yet would I
give you to know by my letters, that there is no man in this world (more then
my self) that has felt the loss of noble king Sebastian my nephew, and of
his men: The reasons for which I ought to have this just feeling, are easy to
be considered, having lost a son, and a friend, whom I loved tenderly, and in
the same degree I held and hold all those that are lost with him, for I do
cherish and love all them of this Realm as my own subjects: And I think it
is not unknown, the great diligence I used to divert his journey, as well
personally my self at Guadalupa, as also before and since by my ministers,
whereof many of the principal of this Realm are good witnesses: But not to
revive so great a grief, let us lay apart the things which cannot be remedied,
fixing our eyes on the true consolation, which is, that those afflictions were
given by the hand of God, and suffered by the greatness of his providence: we
ought likewise particularly to comfort our selves, that in this wretched and
miserable age, this Realm has gotten for their Governor so Christian and
wise a Prince, as is the king mine uncle, whose rare virtues, and exemplarie
life, gives us cause with reason, to expect that he will settle the present
affairs in so peaceable an estate, that we shall proceed in all things with
the mildenes and gentleness I wish, for the love I bear to all, and singularly
for the degree of amity, and affinity, which has always been betwixt these
two crowns, and betwixt my self and the Lords of the same Realm, being all
of one blood, and my self and my children, nephews of noble king Emanuel,
being nourished and brought up by the Empress, and Lady my Mother. For these
causes and considerations, I have as great respect to the king mine uncle, and
as great cause to wish him a long and happy life as your selves: But the
affairs of the succession of this Realm, being in the estate you know; I have
with great consideration, and due advise examined the right, which it has
pleased God by his secret judgments to give me: And causing this action to be
viewed by men of great learning, and conscience, both within mine own Realm,
and without; all do find, that without doubt the succession thereof does
rightly appertain unto me; and that there lives not any at this day that can
with reason contradict me, by many and clear grounds, being a male, and the
eldest, as it is apparently known. And having resolved to make this point
known to the noble King mine uncle, with love and due respect, I have
earnestly entreated him, that it would please him presently to declare it, as
he is bound, for the discharge of his conscience, and for the bond he has to
do right and justice; but most of al for that it concerns the preservation,
peace, rest, augmentation, and prosperity of these Realms, and of all the
subjects thereof, the which he ought both chiefly to care for, and to procure,
seeing that besides the said effects, it shall cause an other of greater
importance, which is that which concerns the service of God our Lord, and the
assurance and increase of our holy Catholic faith. I thought good to do the
like office to this city, having regard unto the fidelity, whereof it has
always made profession, and being the chief of these Realms, assuring you
therwithall, that he that shall inherit, is no foreign king, but a natural
borne, as I have said before, seeing that I am nephew and son to your
natural Princes, issued of the same blood, and will be always a father to
every one of you, as you shall find when it shall please God: But at this
time I will entreat you, that with your wisdom, and great experience, you
would consider and note wherein I may honor and favor you, not only to
conserve your liberties, and privileges both ingenerall, and particular,
desiring that all other cities of the Realm, should understand the same,
whereof I pray you to give them notice, being requisite that every one
should know the love and affection which I bear to all, and it shall be just,
that in knowing it, you conform your self to that which is the will of God,
whose judgments and determinations no man may resist, but we ought to believe
that what he determines is for the best: So as trusting, that both this city,
and the rest, when time shall require, will do that whereunto they are bound:
I have nothing to say, but that besides the feeling which I have had of
miseries past, I have been in particular grieved for the loss of so great
numbers of the Nobility and Commons of this Realm, whereof that battle was
the cause: And therefore I require you to advise, what I may do for those that
remain yet slaves, and write unto me: for although I both have, and daily had
that care, I have thought fit and couenient, yet shall I be glad to understand
your advise, that all things convenient might be performed for their
delivery, and rest assured that whatsoever shall concern you, I will deal in
it with the love of a father, as you shall know more particularly by the
effects, when as occasion shall serve to make trial thereof, the which you
shall understand by Christopher de Mora, to whom I refer you. The Catholic
king sent this Letter by the said Mora, to be delivered to the Magistrate of
the Chamber, who going for that intent presented it unto them: But being
troubled, they doubted that in receiving thereof, they should offend against
the Crown, so as refusing it, they willed him to take it with him, and deliver
it to the King, the which Mora denying, it remained still with them vnopened:
And least they should be ignorant of the contents, he drew a copy out of his
bosom, and read it unto them publicly, dispersing sundry copies throughout
the city. The orignall was by the Vereadures carried to the king: This did
smally further Philips affairs, but rather hinder him, and was by the wisest
both of Spain and Portugal, and also by some of the Kings Counsel, held as
a remedy not fitting the Portugals humor; who generally hating the
Castillians, being new and rude in this matter, it was not probable The
deliverance and return of John de Silna, Ambassador for Philip in Portugal.
they should yield upon a simple Letter. At this time there came
intelligence, that he who had the charge of Ambassador of Portugal, was not
only living in Alcazerquiuir (although sore hurt) but that the Cheriffe had
released him, and was coming with the body of King Sebastian to Ceuta, and
from thence within few days (being at Christmas, in the year 1578) they
understood he was arrived at Civil, his coming was (by the best acquainted
with the affairs of Portugal) held very profitable, for returning to his
charge, he seemed more sufficient then any other to treat of so weighty a
cause, being endued (besides his good judgment) with many other good parts,
necessary for the mannaging of such a business. For besides that he had good
experience of King Henry his disposition, and the humor of the Portugals, he
was very pleasing unto them, it may be, for that he was of the house of Sylua,
who being very noble in Portugal, passed into Castill, during the
controversies betwixt king John the first, and the master of the Auis, and
being borne of a Portugal mother, they held him for their countreyman:
Besides that, with the favor of King Sebastian, he was married in Portugal
with Phillippa de Silua, heir to Aluaro de Silua, Earl of Portalegra, Lord
Steward of the Kings house, and one of the principal Noblemen of the Realm:
But whilst that every man expected his present departure from Civil to
Portugal, the King called him to Court, saying, that he would first instruct
him by mouth, of his intentions, and of the present occurrents. In the The Duke
of Ossuna arriues in Portugal, and his proceedings.
mean time the Duke of Ossuna arrived within the Realm, who seeming to be
sent only to perform complements with the king, he was lodged, and roially
entertained at the charge of the Court, where having delivered his simple
legation, he went to Settuuall, to visit Magdalen Girone, his sister, widow to
George d' Alencastro, Duke of Auero, but he returned suddenly, making show he
had new commission to treat of the succession, wherewith king Henry was
greatly discontented, being unwilling to have the presence of a personage so
qualified, on the behalf of Philip as it were a witness of his actions, the
which did likewise displease all the Portugals, the rather for that (with Mora)
he began to solicit the King to declare Philip successor of the Realm,
showing unto him formerly by many reasons that his title was just.

Now did King Henry at the great entreaty of his subjects resolve to set the
best order he could touching the question of succession, and to content them:
For this cause remaining greatly in suspense, having consulted the matter with
few, but of his greatest favorites, they concluded after much counsel,
infinite opinions and many disputations, that it was not convenient at that
time to declare any one Prince: The reason was, that the nearest heir unto the
Realm, they supposed to be the Catholic King, whom they hated most, and
therefore sought by all means possible to fly his command, thinking nothing
more fit to effect it, then to protract the nomination of the Prince, not
meaning to specify any: For naming any other they should procure his
indignation against them, and give him occasion or his heirs that should
succeed him, to attempt an action better grounded, whereas by delaying it,
there should remain unto them (at the least) this weak hope, that the
Catholic king (although yoonger, yet mortal) might die before old King
Henry, which happening they should be freed from the Castillians, and then
should succeed (as it is said) the Duke of Sauoy, of whom they had no such
fear, but would more willingly yield to his subjection. King Henry inclined
to the pretense of the Duches of Bragance.
The King supposed that Katherine Duchess of Bragance, preceaded all other
pretendents, except the Catholic King, aided (as it may be) by his own
natural inclination, he converted all his thoughts in her favor, and (if it
were possible) to give her the crown, writing to the university of Coimbra,
many allegations in her behalf: To effect this, it was thought necessary to
cite all the pretendents, to appear and produce their reasons, the which was
suddenly put in execution, although in the judgment of many it was thought out
of season, seeming more convenient first to conclude it in parliament, and then
to effect it, whereby it was apparent that the king did govern himself daily
without order, or any constant resolution what he would do: He did yet
foresee, that dying before Philip as it was likely, the Realm should remain
confused, and without a Governor which should rule the Realm, during the
interreigne, and that the Noblemen and Commons should presently swear
obedience unto them, and after examine the reasons of the pretendents. And
although they feared that King Philip would be displeased, yet they hoped to
satisfy him, promising it should no way prejudice his title, nor any thing
delay it, but only to proceed with more ground, as it was convenient, giving
out, that King Henry would marry, and send to Rome for a dispensation, being
a Priest, so as being capable of issue, it was not expedient to swear a
Prince: This matter being concluded amongst few, and of the chiefest, within
few days after (least it should not seem to be done in private, but with a
general consent,) and to choose governors Henry called to Court the three
estates of the Realm, that is, the Clergy, the Nobility, and the Deputies of
the cities, and towns, the which assembled the first day of April, in the
year 1579. in the great hall of the palace at Lisbone, the King having The
States of Portugal at Lisbone.
before him nine Herolds, accompanied with the Duke of Bragance, and many
Noblemen, he went in the scarlet habit of a Cardinal, retaining nothing of a
king but the scepter, being mounted upon a scaffold of wood prepared at the
upper end of the hal, four steps higher then the Deputies, he seated himself
in a chair prepared for him, covered with cloth of gold under a cloth of
estate of the same: Every one being in his rank according to their ancient
degrees: A summarie of the Oration made at the assembly of the estates.
Alphonso de Castelbianco a priest stood up, (by the Kings commandment) at one
of the ends of the scaffold, who with a long speech, after he had a little
renewed the sorrows of their forepassed miseries, and mittigated them with
hope of a future good, he forgot not to praise the King, with all virtues,
adding, that being weak, he did not spare his life, employing it to what was
profitable to the Realm; he compared him in his government to the King of
heaven, in his love, justice, pity, and sacrificing himself for his people;
he commended this assembly, resembling it to the Councels, and said it could
not err: he concluded the king had there assembled them to propound what was
convenient for the Realm, and to provide for it with their advise. The first
act being ended, it was decreed, that daily the Clergy, the Nobility, and
the Deputies of the Realm should assemble a part, the which they effected,
where they found diversity of opinions, and very different one from an other:
some of them (friends to the conclusion) would suddenly have it determined to
whom the Crown appertained, without hearing the pretendents allegations;
others held the parties should be cited, and that they should proceed with
deliberation to sentence, after instruction of the process; many inclined to
have governors; others would not hear speak of them, every one taking the
course never to agree. The king hearing of this, having called the chief of
his Council one after one, and acquainting them with his resolution, he showed
unto them, that it was so convenient for the liberty of the Realm, so as all
difficulties accorded, they concluded not to make any election of a Prince at
that instant, but the pretendents being heard, the King should judge to whom
the Realm belonged, that he might be declared after his death: And although
God did suffer (it may be for a punishment to the Portugals) that the King held
this Council for the best, yet experience An Ambassador chosen to go to Rome,
to obtain dispensation for Henry to marry.
did show, that it was the woorst course they could have taken, for to put
the cause in process, did breed vain hopes in some of the pretendents, which
after were causes of great ruin to the crown. And to the end the motion of
the kings marriage should seem to be spoken with some ground, they named
unto the estates Edward de Castelbianco to go to Rome, and treat with the
Pope for his dispensation: The nomination of 5. governors, and of the judges of
the succession.
they did choose fifteen gentlemen upon the back of the roll, whereof the
King with his own hand should write five of them, which so chosen, should
govern the Realm, until it were decided who should be King. There was also
about this nomination of the Governors, no small controversy betwixt the King
and his Council of estates, for that the king would absolutely name the five,
the Council would not consent unto it, but they would do it: And when they
were agreed that the Council should name fifteen, and the King choose five of
them, there grew a new discord among them; for the Council desired to know
who should be these five; some would not only have them published, but also
during the Kings life put in possession of the government, that after they
might be the better obeyed: but notwithstanding, they resolved to keep it
secret, yet generally they coniectured (and truly) who they were. They chose
also four and twenty Judges upon the back of the roll, of these the King
did name eleven, to judge the cause of the succession, if he should not
determine it before his death: This was held, and chiefly by the Castillians a
fault of importance, the king showing himself to be ignorant, that his royal
jurisdiction did end with his life, and that this naming of Governors was to
rule after his death, whereof they had an example with them, of Elizabeth
Queen of Castill, who in vain prescribed laws for the government of the
Realm after her decease. In this sort the States ended, and soon after the
Duke of Bragance, with the Nobility, The oath to obey the elected Governors.
and the Deputies of the Realm, swear obedience to such as the king had chosen
Governors, and to him that should be declared king. It would not be forgotten
the manner of oath the Prior took, for being called before the king, and
commanded to swear to obey the form aforesaid, he answered that he would
first speak unto him: The King replied, that there was no need, but that he
should swear, the which he refusing to do, the king grew in choler;
whereupon casting his eyes upon his friends, that were about him, as who
should say, that he was forced to lay his hands upon the Evangelist, against
the opinion of many, who believed he should rather commit some disorder then
swear. The Roll of the Governors with the nomination upon the back of it
was locked up in a coffer, and delivered to the keeping of the Magistrate of
the Chamber of Lisbone, the people whereof were male content, fearing it had
been given to the Castillians: The which The discontentments of the people of
Lisbone.
was apparent, for that a little before there came boldly to the assembly of
the Nobility, before the whole Council, two mechanic officers, of those that
representing the people, are employed to the Magistrate of the city. The one
of them craving audience, said, they had understood, that some of the chief
of that assembly, neglecting their duty and honor, had spoken slanderously,
and wrought against the public good, and surety of the Realm, which like
good Portugals they resolved to prevent, as before the inhabitants of the same
city had done in the times of king John the first, and of other kings: And
therefore they required the whole Council, (as the chief and principal
member of the common wealth) to aid and support them, that they might not
loose their honor and privileges, thorough partialities and private respects:
They said also that for this effect, and for the defense of justice, and to
chastise seditious Portugals, they were ready, with fifteen or twenty
thousand men, betwixt the city and the county, which they would assemble if
need were, in two hours, to burn the houses of such as should speak too
boldly, or treat against the public good and quiet of these Realms, the
which they would not put in execution, hoping to see them punished, and the
matter redressed by some other course: He concluded, that he thought it their
duty to give this advertisement, that with more assurance, they might all
treat of the common good, without fear of violence, or any prejudice, and to
stop the mouths of those, (who suspected in such a cause,) make all things
impossible, without seeking or procuring of any remedy. Having ended this
speech, one of the wisest of the assembly made answer, that this counsel was
acceptable, for the love and affection they had to the common good; but there
was not any one amongst them which did not desire it with the like zeal, and
therefore they should rest assured, that all things should be handled with good
order and carefully: but notwithstanding this answer, they returned with
threatening. This assembly discovered to the Catholic King, not only the
intention of the Portugals in these affairs, but also of Henry desired to
marry.
King Henry himself, for that it seemed unto him, they rather held a form of
conspiracy against him, then a council of the states. Henry encouraged by his
followers, for a time intended to marry, daily consulting with his physicians
to see if he were apt for generation, which seemed strange to all such as had
known him; for every man believed (considering the chaste life he had always
led) that although he had come yoonger unto the Crown, he would not have taken
any wife; and now talking of it being decrepit, of age, and a Priest, it
seemed, the desire to exclude the Catholic King, from the Realm prevailed so
much, that it did estrange him from his ancient disposition. But honors breed
in men alteration of manners, although his age made men think his inclination
was rather forced in him then voluntary: Some of the wisest said that the
Catholic King should have a special regard, least he were abused in this
marriage; for although the age and disposition of the said Henry might well
assure him, yet the matter being of such importance, he should suspect some
supposed or adulterate child, or some such like deceit: But having (possibly)
labored at Rome that no dispense The Catholic King sends a lacobin into
Portugal.
should be granted to Henry, he sent into Portugal Friar Ferrant of
Castillio, of the order of preaching Friars, and an eloquent divine, the cause
of his voyage being unknown, I my self being unable to search the secret: It
was generally thought he went to dissuade the King from marriage, with many
reasons, and especially saying, that in so dangerous a time by reason of the
Heretics which did reign, when as Heretics did tolerate marriage in men of
the Church, if he now did it, being Priest and King, he should The predendents
to the Crown of Portugal, cited to declare their reasons.
give them a very ill president; and this conceit of his going was confirmed
to be true, having understood he was neither willingly heard nor presently
dispatched. The pretendents had been cited, which were the Catholic King,
the Duchess of Bragance, the Duke of Sauoy, the Prince of Parma, and Anthony
Prior of Crato to send and show their reasons. The Catholic King did not
answer in form, although Henry had written unto him with his own hand, but
only sent a certificat with a Secretary to his Ambassador in Portugal, that
he had been cited: Many disallowed this diligence, and all agreed that the
King, causing the Duke of Sauoy and the Pryor to be cited, had not dealt
therein iudicially, saying, it was a mean to breed contention, the Prior being
manifestly a bastard, and the Duke apparently after King Philip.

Philip frames a counsel of the affairs of Portugal.
Who being cited, framed a new Council of some of the Lords of his Counsel of
State, of his Confessor, one other Divine, and five Doctors of the Council
royal, which he called the adioining of the succession of Portugal, they were
twelve in number, and did only treat of those things that did concern that
point. At this time John de Silua arrived at Madrill, from Civil, to be
informed of matters concerning his charge, who, although he were graciously
received of the King, and did often enter into Council, both to give his
advise, and to take his instructions, yet did they delay his dispatch,
sometimes with one excuse, and sometimes with an other: And although he did
earnestly solicit that he might enter into the mannaging of so great an
action, as was the union of this Realm, and after so many travails past, go
comfort his friends with his presence, yet in this particular, he had either
many crosses, or small good fortune. For being prisoner in Afric (although it
seemed to John de Silua solicites to be sent back into Portugal.
these Counselors, that this charge (as his) should not be otherwise disposed
of, until they had certain news of his life or death:) yet notwithstanding
it seemed, that both the Kings meaning, and the disposition of his ministers,
were inclined to dispossess him, not only when he was present, but even then
when he had most reason to believe it, for that the King, having already
discovered himself in secret matters to Christopher de Mora, would not
peradventure reveal them to any other, whereof they were apparent signs, some
curriers coming out of Portugal directed to other ministers, then to those
that did handle the matters of succession: Besides the Duke of Ossuna (to whose
will both the Cardinal Archbishop of Toledo, and other counselors did
conform themselves) having entered into great familiarity with Mora,
recommending him to the King, labored that no other should be sent to treat of
this business, seeming as it may be unto him (as some did suppose) that he would
not so easily agree with Sylua, being more haughty: He answered to these
objections, offering not only to agree with the Duke of Ossuna, and with all
those that should be sent, but if it were not their pleasure he should deal
with those causes of the succession, he would willingly desist and only treat
of that which did simply concern the charge of an Ambassador, and after
retire himself if need were: But this modesty made him more suspect, for
thereby they might judge he desired nothing more then once to have an entry,
and after to make himself Patron of the whole Christopher de Mora called
again, and sent Ambassador into Portugal in steed of John de Silua.
cause. At that time Christopher de Mora was called to court, who treated
secretly with the King of many things concerning the Realm, he labored to be
sent back with the Title of Ambassador, yet many supposed his commission being
ended, he should not return: But being accounted, (as he was indeed)
confident, judicious, and diligent, although of no great experience in matters
of weight, being made gentleman of the chamber, he was sent back with the
Title he desired, and to keep Sylua from returning into Portugal, all his
hopes being frustrate, they stayed him, saying it was convenient the King
should retain him near about him, to judge the better of what should be
written out of Portugal. And having reduced the number of twelve cou^sellors
of the succession to four, he commanded he should be one, the rest being the
Cardinal of Toledo, Lewis Manriques Marquis of Aguilar both of the council of
State, and Anthony of Padiglia, President of the council of millitarie
orders: The general discourse concerning the election of the one for
Ambassador, and the exclusion of the other was diverse, but when as the excluded
could not prevail (according to the counterfeit show of the court) he took
all for a favor.

Whilst these things passed in Castil, the pretendents in Portugal both
natural borne and strangers called by citation, framed their reasons, and
every man labored to make the King capable of his right: The Duke of Ossuna
pleaded for King Philip: Charles de la Rouuere for the Duke of Sauoy, Ferrant
Farnese Bishop of Parma for Rainucius Fernese. The Queen of France was not
cited, yet did not she desist from her pretention, by the means of Urban of
Saint Gelais Bishop of Cominges, who had some difficulty to be admitted. The
King seemed long doubtful in this point; for on the one side with the
inclination he had to the Duchess, he would exclude al others, and with the
desire he had to frustrate Philip, he labored to admit all that did pretend: In
this point hatred prevailed before affection: Enduring this infamous allegation
of the Queen, who said that Henry (of whom she demanded justice) and eleven
other Kings his predecessors, had been all bastards, and unlawful, for that
was her plea: And although he doubted of the Bishops procuration, after some
difficulties, promising to satisfy him within a limited time by an other
commission, he was received to plead, appointing him an advocate in the cause.
The principal grounds of the pleaders were these: Anthony at the end of
fifty years would The grounds of the Prior.
be admitted for lawful, having never before pretended it, and therefore
undoubtedly the succession of the Realm did appertain unto him, for that as a
male issued from a male, he said, with the quality of his father, he did
surmount his age, wherein Philip did surpass him: that being a male he was
before the Duchess, and did vanquish Rhanucius by his age and neerenes.
Phillibert Duke of Sauoy, Of the Duke of Sauoy.
did not wholly deceive himself, for as he assisted not for any other end,
but to show that as the nearest of kin he did preceade the Prince of
Castill, in case that Henry outliued Philip he Of the Duke of Parma.
was least importune. They did plead vehemently for Rainucius Farnese, and in
his favor, the Doctors of the University of Padua had written, and to confute
the reasons of proximitie, wherein the other competitors did surmount, they
alleged that conformeable to pure and simple law, so many sons as Kings
have, so many heirs of inheritance they do frame, whereof the first line does
inherit whilst it remains, which being extinct; the second does succeed it,
and so consequently in order. That Edward the Grandfather by the Mothers side,
of the said Ranucius, was chief of the second race of the children of King
Emanuel, whereof the first being utterly extinct in Sebastian, the line of the
second ought to succeed, until it were likewise extinct, where by descending
from branch to branch, it came directly to the said Ranucius. And although
Philip and Phillibert were pretendents male, and lawfully issued from an elder
feminine stock, whilst there was remaining any heirs descending from the
elder feminine males (as he was) they could not inherit, and that the
Duchess who was a woman, and Anthony unlawful, ought not to take it from
him, although he succeeded Of the Duchess of Braganca.
them all. The Duchess with more lively hope both of her justice, and of the
Kings favor, had caused to be written in the University of Coimbra, a long
and curious allegation, and the Doctors (who are the learned of the Realm)
hoping to please the King, handled the cause with all possible care: She
labored to prove, that they succeed in Realms by the inheritance of the last
possessor, and that in this kind of succession, the laws allow the benefit
of representation: and in the difficulty which the Doctors move in the
deciding, whether this privilege be allowable to the Nephews, when they do
not join with the Uncle, in the inheritance, they ought to follow those which
hold the affirmative, and that the women do not only represent the degree of
the predecessors, but also the sex: She therefore representing Edwrad her
Father, son to King Emanuel, and brother to king Henry, would precead all
the other pretendents, both the Catholic king, for that he issued from a
daughter, Anthony being a bastard, Ranucius as being nearer unto Henry,
admitting neither degrees, elderships, nor representations, alleging for that
purpose infinite authorities of Doctors. These her allegations were imprinted,
and sent to the Pope, and to all the Princes in Christendom, hoping thereby to
make a great breach in Of the Catholic King.
their hearts. The Catholic king said he was the eldest, and lawfullest
Nephew male of king Emanuel then living, and that not any one of the others,
being not able to make themselves equal unto him, they sought to help
themselves with fixions and representations, the which he would prove by some
laws, were not to be admitted in this case, nor amongst these persons, for
that going before them all ingeneral by age, he did surpass them in particular
one after an other. Anthony by legitimation; the Duchess by sex; Ranucius by
nearenes; and the Duke of Sauoy by the age of Isabell Augusta his mother, elder
then Beatrice, Mother to the said Duke. The The ground of the people.
people allege that the issue male of their Kings failing, in that case the
election appertained to them; fortifying this reason by the example of the
election which was made of their King John the first: The Queen Mother of
France.
but of this pretention being general, they made small account. The Queen
Mother of France, with a strange ground, to the dishonor of so many kings,
would come by direct line to the succession of the Realm, offering to prove
by writing out of the ancient Registers of France, and by the ancient
possession of the Earl of Bulloigne, that she was lineally descended from
Robert son to king Alphonso the third, and of the Countess Matilda, his
first and lawful wife, and that from that time to this, all the descendents of
Beatrice the second wife of Alphonso have unjustly reigned, from whom all the
pretendents to the succession draw their beginnings; and therefore they could
have no better interest then their predecessors. King Henry seemed now more
cold to determine the question of succession, then the importance of the
cause, and the shortness of his life required: He was greatly pressed by the
people, (who be naturally hard to please) seeing his slow proceedings,
complained The peoples complaint against King Henry.
by words and writings dispersed without authors, and were well content their
griefs should come to the kings ears: They inferred that the loss of the
war of Affricke, partly restored by his coming to the Crown, was now
revived, seeing their hopes that he should prevent their imminent dangers,
succeeded vainly: They complained that the time which should be wholly
employed to decide the succession was spent in accidental things, contrary to
their duty, having no other care but to draw into question such as the king
hated, to search by justice things of small moment, to borrowe money of the
merchants to redeem the Portugals that were in Affricke, to treat of new
impositions, to the oppression of the people and such like (some whereof, as
the redemption of prisoners and that which concerns justice, they could not
reject as evil) they blamed the time, and the means that was spent in them:
Passing from this discourse, and having as it were a desire to speak
slanderously, they touched the ministers of justice to the quick, inferring
they had corrupt consciences, that the poor were persecuted, the rich
favored, that all punishments were pecuniarie or barbarous, expressly inverted
to molest the poor innocents, and give authority to the rich culpable, who are
seldom punished: They showed again how much a brief decision of the
succession did import, and that it was no sound advise to cite the pretendents,
and assemble the States, being tedious matters, alleging that if the king to
receive the scepter had no need of these things, neither had his successor,
but that he ought to decide this cause by himself, with the advice of learned
and confident Doctors, and according to that which he should find convenient
treat the accordes and capitulations, with the greatest liberty of the Realm
he could, giving contentment to the excluded, and making of many members one
body, thereby to avoid the bottomless gulf of civil wars. And in truth
this was the wisest and most Christian resolution of all others: They did not
allow of the making of Gouenours, tearming them bodies without a head, saying,
they could not after the kings decease, effect any good, judging there would
be amongst them diversity of opinions, the people would be altered, the great
would disobey, and every one of the pretendents would call himself king,
they did foretell the Realm would be divided in factions, that one would
follow one party, the other an other party, and in the mean time the strongest
would prevail by arms. The most advised feared the forces of the Catholic
king, being near, and always ready, and although some trusting in his
modesty, believed after the death of Henry he should peaceably attend the
sentence, yet such as (more practiced in the affairs of the world) knew that
the increase of kingdoms had neither end nor measure, that they be never given
or taken away by the opinion of Doctors, they feared most of all; they termed
it, a devilish temptation of those, that persuaded Henry to take a wife, or
once to speak of it, saying, they were not worthy that God should now
work miracles for the love of them. The king moved with these reasons, which
were partly delivered unto him, began more vehemently then accustomed, to
treat of these affairs. And forasmuch as the Prior, having taken his oath to
obey the Governors, was retired to Almada, a city upon the river of Tagus,
right against Lisbone, where he made his usual residence, the king doubting,
that remaining there, and coming sometimes to the city as he did, he might
encounter with the Duke of Bragance, and that as concurrents in one action, and
competitors in present, there might grow some perilous contention, the which
was doubted, hearing there was hatred betwixt them, for this cause he commanded
the said Prior, to retire himself to his said Priorie of Crato, the which he
did, and likewise to the Duke (though somewhat later) to withdraw himself:
The Prior was there cited, not (without permission) to come personally to the
court, but to send The letters of the Prior to Henry.
his Attourneies, wherewith being grieved, he did write unto the king, thanking
him that he had admitted him to plead, and complaining that he was in a manner
banished. He said, that he ought not to forbid him to assist in his own cause,
when as the Duke of Ossuna Ambassador for the Catholic king, and the Duke of
Bragance were present at their pleas: For besides the discommoditie he should
have in delivering his reasons, whosoever should see him banished from the
Court, whilst they treated of so weighty a cause, would suppose him so far
in the princes disgrace, as he should not dare to maintain his title: But all
this prevailed not, for the king would never suffer him to depart from Crato,
and although he did obey with difficulty, going often from place to place, yet
would he never admit him to Court. The first process the king put upon the
file, was touching the satisfaction the Prior pretended to give for his
legitimation, wherein he had secretly all the pretendents opposite, desiring to
have it tried first (as indeed it ought to be) for upon proof of his
legitimation, he was either to be admitted or excluded from the succession. And
forasmuch as Princes do commonly execute that carefully which they do affect,
for this reason and to the end the sentence he should pronounce thereupon,
should remain firm, he had obtained secretly at Rome a brief from the Pope,
by the which he gave him authority, absolutely to judge the cause of
legitimation, without any form or process, according The sentence of King
Henry against the Prior touching his legitimation.
to the truth thereof: So as having strictly examined the witnesses, he allowed
some reasons, and rejected others, and duly weighed the process. Finally, he
came to sentence, framed by virtue of the Popes own motion, wherein was
reported in a manner the whole process. The deposition of the witnesses which
were four, two convinced to be false, for they recanted, confessing they had
been suborned by Anthony, and the other two were suspected, being near
kinsemen, and disagreeing betwixt themselves: The words of the testament of
Jews, father to the said Prior were annexed, wherein he called him bastard,
with many other reasons, whereby he concluded, that he declared Anthony, (these
be the proper words of the sentence) not lawful, but illegitimate. And
touching the pretended marriage and legitimation, he imposed him perpetual
silence, still reserving to himself power to proceed against the witnesses,
and himself as he should think convenient: This sentence being pronounced,
the king sent Edward de Castelbianco chief of the Sergeants to Crato, with
commission to apprehende the Prior prisoner: But some imagined this was rather
a show of the king to amaze him, then for any other effect, judging as it
happened, that he would not be found.

The reasons of the Catholic king against the pretendents.
Now was the Catholic king more effectually satisfied touching the interest
he had to this Realm, for although in the beginning the Doctors had resolved
him that the succession appertained unto him, yet desirous to know with more
ground, the opinion of learned men of other provinces, especially of
Portugal, who waighing and disputing the reasons of every pretendent, with
their contrarieties and terms, had resolved amongst them that Philip was
undoubtedly the successor, being the eldest kinsman that Henry had a male and
lawful, and that with these qualities he did surpass and exclude all the
competitours, one after an other. They held Against the Prior.
Anthony directly to be unlawful, having always lived in that opinion, and
was so held by his Father Jews at his death (as it appeered by his testament)
that although he had demanded his legitimation at Rome, and had obtained it,
yet could not any royal or pontificiall Against the Duke of Sauoy.
legitimation serve for the succession of a kingdom. They discharged
themselves of Phillibert Duke of Sauoy in few words, saying only that he was
yoonger of years, and son of a younger sister then the Empress, Mother to
the Catholic King. They denied Against the Duke of Parma.
the reasons of eldership, whereon Rainucius did ground himself, saying
moreover, they might well grant it without danger, for that the same Doctors
which favored this law, do not understand it should take place, if the same
person, from whom they would transport it did not enjoy it. And forasmuch as
Edward was deceased many years before Henry succeeded, or ever thought to come
unto the Crown, he could have no interest nor any considerable hope that might
come to his desce^dents; so as they made small account of all that Rainucius
could allege, touching the linnage, eldership, imaginary degrees, and
transmissions, saying, that such as ground themselves most upon these
subtilities, do lean still upon representations, without the which they are of
small moment, proving that Rainucius could not aid himself with
representation, being out of the degree wherein the laws allow it, and
therefore remained inferior to Philip. Against the Duchess, they alleged
that kingdoms Against the Duchess of Bragance.
appertaining to the ancient laws of nations, the succession ought not to be
ruled by the Civil law full of fictions and subtileties, the which were
framed by the Emperors many years since: And although sovereign Princes did
bring them in for the good government of their subjects, yet had they not
altered the simple natural rules of the succession, the which they affirmed
should be observed in this case, as it had been before the birth of
Justinian, who was the author of these representations. And although some
Doctors would rashly make the succession of Realms, subject to civil
institutions, yet according to this consideration they made Philips title
undoubtful; and those which held this opinion were learned men, and more
curious of antiquity then are commonly our ordinary Lawyers. But least they
should seem to take that course to avoid the laws, they would also
withdraw themselves within the terms of the Civil law, as if it were a
matter in controversy betwixt two persons for a private possession. There did
they prove that in Realms more properly then in any other thing, they
succeeded by right (as they call it) of consanguinitie, that is to say, having
regard unto the first instituter, and that following this law, they should
consider the persons of the pretendents, by themselves without representations
or respect of their fathers, as if they were children of the last possessor, in
which sort Philip remained in stead of the eldest unto Henry: They said also,
that if they should yield that which the Duchess pretends, that they
succeed not in Realms by right of consanguinitie, but by that which they call
inheritance, having regard unto the last possessor, yet could she not be
equal unto Philip, for that the representation where with she pretends to
help herself, does not extend to the Nephew, but in concurrents with the same
uncle, according to the most ancient, most approved, and most grounded
opinion. They added moreover, that the succession of kingdoms, not only by
the right of nations (as is formerly related) but also by the same Civil law,
is exempt from al representations, being not brought in by custom: And although
the Duchess may represent the degree of her Father, notwithstanding it were
impossible she should represent the quality of a male, being a hard matter
that a woman equal only in degree, and in all other things inferior, should
pretend to be preferred before a man in administration of Realms, and that her
private defect should hurt her less, then to Philip that of his Mother: It
was therefore resolved, that of all the Nephews of king Emanuel, he that
should be found to be eldest, a male, and lawful, should precead the rest,
and this was the Catholic King. And Against the people.
although the pretention of the people, and of the most Christian Queen were
held vain, and only moved to trouble Philip, yet did they answer them
formally. Against the people they said, that they had no greater privilege of
election within this Realm, then in the rest of Spain, the which all fall by
succession, when there is any lawfully descended of the blood royal: And that
in Portugal they have less liberty then the rest, growing from the gifts of
the kings of Castill, and from the conquest of the kings of Portugal: And
forasmuch as the people has not given the realm to their first kings, there
could not any thing chance whereby they should name or choose one. And for that
which they allege of the election of king John the first, they answered that
not only this reason did not serve them, but thereby it did appear that the
realm in that case was successiue, having (leaving apart, that it was rather a
violent cry of co^quering Partizants, then a free election) themselves
secretly confessed, that they had no right to choose, whilst there remained
any one lawfully descended of the Royal issue, inferring that Beatrice Queen
of Castill was a bastard, and that the Realm was in the same estate, wherein
other Realms of succession may choose their King, all the kinsemen of the last
deceased being extinct. They Against the Queen mother of France.
pleaded against the most Christian Queen, that her pretention was improbable,
and prescribed, seeing that the successors of the Earl of Bulloigne, had
never made any mention thereof, neither is it credible that since this
pretention was incorporate to the crown of so mighty a Realm, such wise and
mighty Princes, as were Frauncis the first, and Henry the second, would have
forgotten to have called it in question. But the truth was, the Countess
Matilda left no children as it appeeres in her Testament, in the public
Registers of Portugal, making therein no mention to leave any by king
Alphonse, nor to have had any, and viewing the antiquities of the Realm, they
said that a writer was abused, who reported that a young child buried in the
church of Saint Dominico in Lisbone, was her son; and though it should be so,
yet does it not contradict, since she does not affirm she had any children,
but that he died young. They did likewise prove that Matilda had not any, by a
formal request found in the same registers, by the which all the Prelates of the
Realm did beseech Pope Vrbane, that it would please him to disanull the curse
which he had laid upon the Realm; and that he would approve the marriage of
Beatrice the second wife of Alphonse, that he would make their children
legitimate, that there might be no hinderance in the succession of this Realm;
whereby they concluded, that if there had been any lawful children of
Matilda, they could not have persuaded the Pope to prefer the bastards of
Beatrice. They added that these reasons were not unknown in France, and that
of late there had been a book printed of the genealogy of the houses of
Medicy, and Bulloigne, continued unto Katherine the most Christian Queen,
whereby it did clearly appear, that Matilda had left no children by Alphonse
her second husband, having been formerly married to Philip, son of Philip
Augustus king of France, by which marriage she had one daughter named Jane,
who succeeded not her mother in the County, dying before her without issue: So
as Robert son of Alix, sister to Matilda came to the succession, and this is
that Robert from whom they would draw the descent of the Queen Mother, being
the Nephew, and not the son of Matilda. So as not being proved by any means
that Alphonse the third had any children by his first bed, but the contrary
by many reasons; they said the Queen had no reason to pretend, neither had
she done it in time. Philip Philip sends to signify his right to Henry.
therefore being grounded in this action, sendes into Portugal for assistants
to the Duke, Rodorik Vasquez, and Jews de Molina, Doctors of the law, and
Auditors of his Council royal, with the title of Ambassadors, to signify
unto the King, and to his Council his apparent justice, with advertisement not
withstanding that they should do no act, whereby they might infer that they
acknowledge any jurisdiction in the king: Being arrived, and all the Agents of
the Catholic King consulting together, they propounded the matter of
succession in form as they were commanded, delivering in writing unto the king
an ample allegation of the reasons of Philip: But for that in the beginning
they had found the kings thoughts bending to the Duchess of Bragance, they
labored long in vain to make him capable of the justice of their king. They
used all means they thought convenient, and here in Mora performed great
offices, not only with the King, and his favorites, but with the Gentlemen and
Noblemen of quality: so as many with lively reasons, giving to one, offering
to an other, by effects, words and writings, he drew all he could to the
Catholic Kings devotion: It seemed that this manner of sounding the Nobility
with money, and promises, Philip prepares for war against the Portugals.
did then serve to purpose. And although the course which the king held, for
the attaining of his pretention, seemed unto him expedient, yet did he not so
rely thereon, as (knowing the Portugals to be restie) he would omit force,
for that seeing the indisposition of Henry, he sought to win time, and so to
prepare himself, that if he should chance to die, at such time, when as the
Portugals would not yield him the Crown quietly, he might suddenly take
possession thereof by force. But having learned by experience in the war of
Granado, the loss of Golette, and the defense of Malta, that one nation alone
shows not so great a courage, as united with another, this competencie
serving as a spur to animate them, he resolved to prepare to war, with the
forces of diverse nations, as if he had been certain, that of necessity he
must win this Realm by conquest. And although the general opinion were,
that few men would serve against the unexperienced Portugals, and that he
should not find any resistance against his force, yet knowing that there is
not any human force but may be vanquished, he resolved to make an army of
forty thousand foot, considering, that although the Portugals were such as it
was said, yet being at home, and by reason of the hatred and fury of the
whole Realm, they might in one day draw together above seventy thousand men
for any expedition, and therefore it behooued him to be strong. He therefore
commands Inico Lopez de Mendosa, Marquis of Moundegiar, then Viceroy at
Naples, to keep in a readiness his Spanish foot, with the ships and munition
for Portugal, he levied nine thousand Italians, under the command of Peter de
Medicy, brother to Frauncis the great Duke of Tuscayne, he brought down six
thousand Germans, with Count Jerome of Lodrone: and although he might have
raised in Spain a great number of men of all sorts, yet trusting only to his
entertained soldiers, he levied the greatest forces he could, purposing to
join to those Spaniards that were but fresh water soldiers, some of those that
had been in Italy, and such as were come from the wars of Flaunders: But
these things were effected with more ease and less nombers then were
appointed. For although the Viceroy of Naples did in the beginning very
carefully provide for it, yet after he grew cold, abandoning all, having
intelligence that the King had chosen to succeed him in his charge John de
Suniga, great commander of Castill, and that he should return into Spain:
yet the soldiers were enrolled and conducted with arms and munition to
Gibraltar, and other places of Andelouzia thereabouts, from whence they marched
after to the confines of Portugal, the number chiefly of Italians, being
greatly diminished, with hunger, and other discommodities, not without
consideration that nine thousand men seem much in Spain. And although they
arrived a year later then the king had commanded, yet came they sooner then
necessity required: for Henry yet living, they were long idle. But this
prevention was done like a valiant and wise Prince, maintaining an army upon
the confines of his own Realm, without use thereof, during a man's life,
attending his natural death, when as no man is yet so near death, but may
live some years. The Catholic King preferring the danger to be unarmed, and
Henry deceasing before his expenses, gave this testimony, not only of his
wisdom, but of the great desire he had to be assured of this Realm, wherein
he did surmount his own nature, and the custom of the Spanish nation, who by
their long delays, do often fail in their enterprises: The galleies and
ships which had transported these men, went to Saint Marie Port, where the
whole navy by sea should assemble.

Henry was still discontented with Anthony, who (notwithstanding the Kings late
commandment not to approach within a hundredth miles of the Court) wandered from
place to place, drawing the peoples hearts unto him. The King was desirous to
find some means to punish him, with a more rigorous sentence. But the Prior
when as the cause of his legitimation was in question before the King, by
virtue of his holiness brief, mistrusting what happened, had by the counsel of
Alexander Formento, then the Popes Nuncio in the Realm, sent to Rome,
complaining unto the Pope of the hatred his uncle did unjustly bear him,
beseeching him to revoke the cause unto himself, and to be the only judge
thereof, for that the King was suspect unto him: By reason whereof, the Pope
saying that his The suspension of Henry's brief.
first intention was not to make Henry absolute judge to give sentence
inclusiue; he write unto him by an other brief, with defense not to proceed
in the cause, for the which he appointed as new judges the said Nuncio, and
George de Almada, archbishop of Lisbone, but not with authority to give
sentence, but after due information of the process, to send it to Rome. This
brief was sent to the Nuncio, that he might deliver it unto the King, the
which he did, by an apostolic Notarie, fearing he should have refused it.
Henry was greatly moved that the Pope had revoked the cause unto himself,
both for that the execution of the sentence did import, as also imagining he
was wronged by taking the cause out of his hands, whereof before he had made
him judge. So as greatly discontented with the Pope, and his choler increasing
against his Nephew, he would now use his royal authority, and leaving to
proceed as the Popes substitute; he began as King to proceed against the
Prior. And although the Nuncio (it may be by the Popes commandment, or rather
by his own inclination) was favorable unto him, showing himself very opposite
to the Catholic King: yet Henry left not daily, yet coldly, to continue the
cause of the succession; for having cited him to court, and he not daring
appear, he caused his edicts and proclamations to be set upon the palace
gate, whereby he was cited to appear within twelve days. The Prior (who had
soon a copy of this edict from his agents) was greatly displeased, to see the
course the King held against him, yet durst he not appear, fearing if he fell
into the kings hands, the hatred he did bear him would draw him to some
strange conclusion; he resolved therefore to absent himself laboring to
appease his wrath by letters, which he did write unto him, complaining of the
manner of his proceedings in The Priors letters to Henry con
his behalf, striving to make known his better deserving. He said that he
ioyed in his afflictions, calling him in his edicts Nephew, as indeed he was,
and son to that his brother, to whom this Crown cerning his rigor.
having so great a bond, he did not believe he should so son forget it,
although his ill deseruings had bin greater then his fathers merits: He
remembered the respect the King himself, and his predecessors had unto his
father, and the amasement they should have to see him thus by him unjustly
persecuted: He did not attribute the blame of the kings inclination to the king
himself, but to the sins of the Realm, and to the ill disposition of some
favorites, showing on the one side, that he bare with patience, what it should
please God to impose, and on the other side complained of his uncle, that he
did execute against him the passions of private men: And forasmuch as when he
returned from prison out of Afric, some had given out that he had fled from
the battle, and was not taken prisoner, he touched likewise this point,
lamenting to be so slaundered: He complained of the King, saying, that to the
end no man should have compassion on him, he was forced to leave the Court by
night, having only had some speech of his legitimation, showing he was not
worthy of any brotherly reprehension. He did aggrauate his banishment with no
small prejudice to his credit, at such a time as his competitors were
favored, environed with their kinsemen, and demanded justice face to face: He
alleged that his holiness brief which the king had obtained against him, was
ignominious and full of discurtesies, nothing agreeing to the honor of his
father: And although he had obtained an other contrary thereunto, whereby his
holiness had revoked to himself the knowledge of the cause, yet was he resolved
not to alter any thing, but to pass his days in misery and sorrow, whilst
the evil deserved passion of the king should continue: He lamented to have
been forced to give in his proofs within two days, much more time being
granted to any other that pretended; and that they had given no answer to many
things he demanded. He complained grievously of the sentence and commandment,
to apprehend him for subornation of false witnesses, the which he denied,
although he said that in the kings public seat of justice, such as had
produced false witnesses, were not greatly punished: He seemed to be greatly
grieved to be called disobedient, and a troubler of the public quiet of the
realms, excusing himself with most vehement words: He lamented that the
Realm was ruined, which his predecessors had woone, defended, and maintained:
He made no mention of appearance, but said it was lawful for him as to
thieves, to hide himself and fly the face of justice, adding, that if the
faults wherewith he is charged were such, as the laws of the Realm command
the Church to redress, for that he has no sure access, it would please his
highness to grant that Crato should serve as his sanctuary. And although (if
his sins so required) that being Nephew to the king, the first person of the
Realm, his humble and obedient vassal, it could not mollify his uncles
heart, he would crave at Gods hands, remedies for his afflictions: He required
with humility that it might be lawful for him to appeal from his edicts unto
the king himself, better instructed, demanding copies thereof to contradict
them, concluding that if it might not be granted, yet at the least his letter
might be annexed to the process, for if due respect would have suffered him, he
would have caused it to be set up in the same place of the edicts, for the
discharge of his honor, and to make known to the world that he was vassal,
nephew, and faithful servant unto the king. This letter did nothing move the
kings heart, but wrought the same effect with his choler, as a little water does
to a great fire: For being more incensed against his Nephew, he proceeded still
against him. So as within short time he pronounced a new sentence, not as a
Judge, substitute by his holiness, but as an absolute king, that it might not be
subject to any appeal, supposing by this means (seeing he could not cast
him into prison) he should banish him the Realm. Henry's second sentence
against the Prior.
Wherein repeating his faults, his absence, his contumacy, his disobedience,
with the premises (as was) that he had made to draw the Nobility and people
to follow his faction; he deprived him of all his jurisdictions, preheminences,
honors, prerogatives, liberties, graces, and what other recompense soever he
had from the kings his predecessors, commanding he should be rased out of the
books, and not paid any thing, not holding him for a natural borne, but a
foreign to these Realms. He pronounced the like against such as should aid
him, lodge him, or any way treat with him: He commanded him to depart the
Realm within fifteen days, saying, it was expedient for the service of God,
of him, and the peoples quiet. But notwithstanding this sentence so severe, yet
was it not of force to expel the Prior, for being well beloved of his friends,
and common people, he remained safely in secret: And although for a show only
he had retired him self into a monastery of Castill, yet he stayed not long
there, only to procure a certificate (as he did) of his departure: whereof
king Philip being advertised, he was advised by some to take him prisoner, both
to be assured of him, and to please Henry; but he thought it not then
convenient, whereof after he repented him, for Anthony being returned again
into Portugal, it was generally thought that he was ill affected, and grieved
with the king, for the sentence he had pronounced against him. Henry grew
fearful he should attempt something against his person, which so increased,
that (besides his ordinary guard) he raised certain co^mpanies of soldiers
for the assurance of himself, and his Court, a thing at any time unseen in
that Realm. At this time the Ambassadors Henry changes his opinion to the
benefit of Philip touching the succession.
of Philip had made Henry capable of his title: having laid before him, both
the good and evil which might ensue, by giving and taking from him the crown;
who being inclined to do justice, moved therewithal, and with the fear of
war, having well considered the matter, and laid aside all affection which made
him inclinable to Katherine, he resolved with all his power to give it unto
Philip, by the best means he could devise. And having imparted this his
meaning to the Duke of Ossuna, and Christopher de Mora, he said he would end
the cause by way of composition betwixt Philip and the Realm, without
proceeding unto sentence: Provided always that the Catholic king should
grant certain privileges; not dispose the offices of government and justice,
but unto the natural Portugals, and give certain graces and exemptions, to
the general good of the Realm. Here plainly appeered the error of Henry,
who having cited all the pretendents, and brought the matters to terms of
justice, thought it after wards more convenient to come to composition with
Philip, which should have been formerly done, if it were to be done. These
capitulations were sent unto Philip, to Madrill, whom Henry entreated to keep
them secret, as one that feared a contrary disposition in the people. And
although he were not ignorant, how hard the quiet execution of this his will
would be, by reason of the people, and some Gentlemen of contrary faction; yet
commanded he it should be propounded to the states, with all the mildenes it
might be. Some hold that father Leon Anriquez, of the order of Jesuits, the
kings Confessor, was rather the cause of this his unexpected resolution, then
the practices of the Catholic kings ministers, and that from him (in whom the
King did greatly trust) proceeded his first inclination to the Duchess of
Bragance, but fearing the indignation of Philip, he turned the thoughts of
Henry to favor his title. By means whereof in October 1579. he called again
the deputies of the Cities, and other estates, upon color to impart unto them
a matter of importance. Philip disallowed this resolution of Henry, to assemble
the States, for being assured of the small affection the Portugals bare him, he
was most assured that assembling them together, they would never agree to
yield him the Crown, and therefore he advised the King, without any other
assembly, to declare a successor, seeing in the last Estates held at Lisbone,
the whole Realm had given him full power, the which if he would use in this
controversy of the Realm, and not make any new convocation of Deputies, he
should write to every city in particular his intention, and advise, thinking
it more easy to persuade them divided, then united in one body: But Henry not
daring effect it, did solicit the coming of the Deputies. In Italy (seeing
the Catholic King a little before assemble so great forces) they made diverse
conjectures thereof, they furnished the places of ordinary suspect, with new
garrisons: some believed he that had entered league with the Cheriffe, Mulei
Hamet, that both jointly together would attempt Alger, supposing the Moors had
propounded this enterprise for fear of the Turks, and that the king with his
aid would expel them from thence, being so necre neighbor unto Spain. The
Pope understanding the contrariety in Portugal, seeing the Catholic King
prepare so greatly to arms, he commanded Philip Sega his Nuncio in Castillia
to say unto him, that although he knew these preparatiues of wars, were
against Infidels; yet seeing the estate wherein Portugal stood, it might be
supposed it was intended against that The offers of Pope Gregory. 13 to the
Catholic King.
Realm, and being dangerous to come to arms, and to stir up the humors
which cannot be settled at pleasure, he offered himself to be a mediator
betwixt him and Henry, and to settle this business peaceably. The king accepted
the Popes offer in general words, entertaining his Nuncio with delays,
without giving him any resolute answer, for that (as it was said) many things
did trouble his mind concerning this action. He considered of the one side
that being of good years, and his heirs but young, enjoying (except the state
of Flaunders) all his countries quietly, it was not fit to stir up humors
in Spain; besides, being fearful to other nations, they would not willingly
see him augment his dominions, he doubted (that in busying himself in
Portugal) some would then take occasion to breed some alteration in his
territories, and therefore he willingly gave ear to any treaty of peace. On
the otherside he was not well assured of the Popes disposition, seeming he
should prejudice his title, to put it to compremise: besides, that to former
presidents, he would not willingly add this of new, to acknowledge the
Apostolic seat as a judge of Realms. He thought it less danger to attend
the sentence of Henry, then of any other, for pronouncing it (having not
acknowledged him for judge) he was not bound to obey, if it were in his
disfavor, retaining still the right of arms; by reason whereof in this
suspense, he forbear still to give the Nuncio his answer, until that being
better assured of the disposition of Henry, he made answer, that his interest
being so apparent, and the King so well inclined, there needed not any
mediation, the which if it were requisite, he would accept of this office, and
of the good zeal of his holiness. The indisposition of Henry, and the
disquietnes of his mind, did much afflict him, so as he resembled a lamp
near extinct, the which sometimes yields a great light, sometimes seems quite
out: They feared he should die of an accident which happened, and therefore his
Counsel thought good not to attend his death, for the declaration of the
Governors, but to put them as it were in possession, the which was partly
executed. For the King being half dead, they brought unto him the coffer
wherein the Roll was kept, with the names of the Governors in the great
Church of Lisbone, and having opened it, they found them to be George Dalmeda
archbishop of Lisbone; A publication of the governors of Portugal.
Frauncis de Sada, first groom of the Kings chamber; Iean Tello, Iean
Mascaregnas, and Diego Lopez de Sosa, President of the Counsel of Justice of
the city, who took their oaths to govern according to the laws of the
Realm, and to the limited commission, which Henry had particularly set down.
This diligence bredde as well in the peoples minds, as in the Catholic Kings,
a jealousy of the kings death, and the rather, for that two days before, they
would not suffer any to see him, supposing they would keep it secret, until
they had taken counsel, put the Governors in possession, and prepared for
defense: And although it were presently known that the King was yet living,
and so amended, that he had almost recovered his former health, yet the
general opinion being, that he could not live long, all men's minds were in
suspense in this Realm.

THE FOVRTH BOOK.
The Contents of the fourth Book.
The Castillians and Portugals discourse upon the state of Portugal; the
vehemency of the plague; the estate of Almerin; the death of King Henry; the
Regency of the Governors; the practice of Anthony to be chosen King; the
Testament of Henry; the diligence of the Catholic King to understand if he
might with a safe conscience make war; the election of the Duke of Alua as
general of the enterprise, and the privileges the Catholic King offered if
they would deliver him the Realm.

THe Catholic King in the mean time kept his army together in Spain, with
greater pains, and more charge, then he had done else where; for the country
being not greatly fertile, he was enforced to fetch victuals from other parts,
being then about the end of November, 1579. there was then no assurance of
things, whereby they might either dismiss their army, or employ it. For
although king Henry was yet living and well affected, yet the Portugals being
most obstinate against the Castillians, he desired not to live any longer
doubtful of the succession, as well for the charge as for the event; and
therefore he ceased not continually to importune Henry to declare him
Successor, obiecting many reasons, why he was bound to do it, and propounding
many inconveniences which would follow, not doing it, the which was spoken in
doubtful terms; whereby it seemed he would make the equity of his cause
apparent by force: And although this entreatie seemed somewhat to threaten, yet
did it nothing displease Henry, suffering it expressly to be published, that
the people might believe, he was forced to this declaration. The whole Realm
was discontented to see Henry dying, the Catholic King armed, and the small
remainder of time spent in matters of light importance, whereof their
discourses and opinions were as diverse, as they were different in passions.

The discourse of the Portugals upon the state of the Realm.
The Priors partisans being in a manner all of base quality, having their
reason darkened, and not settled in opinion, said, that he was legitimate, and
that the Crown appertained unto him; but that the king of his absolute
authority, hating him would deprive him; and that all his favorites did
concur in this resolution: For the King having always persecuted Anthony by
their advise, they feared that he coming to reign, would take such revenge
as they deserved, and therefore preferring their own security, before the
liberty of their country, they would take the Realm from him and give it to
a stranger. Many others alleged, that although he were a bastard, yet they
ought to give him the Realm, being the nearest allied of the blood royal:
Others in whom hatred to their neighbors prevailed more then any other
inclination, said, that whosoever had interest to the Realm, yet should they
by no means give it to the Catholic King, but rather come to arms, vaunting
themselves to be valiant. They added moreover that they would demand aid
from France, and England, whereof they were assured, and having them, they
doubted not to seat a King, at their pleasures: There were some, yet few, but
of judgment, who comparing the forces of Portugal with Castill, found they
could not fly the yoke of the Catholic King, and although with great
grief, yet they hoped it might prove a gentle amity, and that these Realms
united together, Portugal might reap great profit, by the commerce and
traffic. Many spoke after their own humors, saying, that Anthony leaving the
habit of Saint Iean should marry with the daughter of the Duke of Bragance,
and being united together, they needed not to fear. Others gave out, that the
Catholic King would be contented to give his second son to the Portugals,
for their king, to be brought up amongst them, the which they should accept,
for were it whosoever, it were sufficient to have a King alone. And some say,
that Henry labored to effect this, but Philip soon resolved him, saying, that
he could not do it, but to prejudice the Prince his eldest son, fearing by
this means to leave a seminary of division in Spain betwixt his descendents.
The persuasion of the Catholic Kings Agents, with the Nobility were of great
effect, by reason whereof there were few Gentlemen, amidst this diversity of
opinion, but either did willingly incline to the said King, or corrupted held
their peace, and retired themselves from Court, avoiding all occasion to
declare themselves. Of the five Governors chosen, three were drawn to the
Catholic Kings devotion; and although we should not be amazed, to see the
common people (who by custom inconstant and without judgment) hold the
woorser part, yet did it breed a wonder in many, that the Portugals in
general, every one according to his quality, framed in their minds a
resolution, contrary to that which by reason they ought to have done, in a
matter of so great importance, in the which they should have taken greater
consideration: For that some discoursed without passion, that the Nobility
(accustomed to be respected of the King) should fly the obedience of the
Catholic King, being credible, that Philip (according to his custom) would
with laws and his power, keep them under, and contrariwise, that the people
should embrace him, whom he does equally favor, yielding them equal justice.
And yet notwithstanding the greater part followed the contrary, for the
Nobility did embrace Philip, and the people fled him: For satisfaction
whereof, and to reclaim them from the opinion they held, the Agents of the
Catholic King were desirous (besides the diligence they had used) to publish
throughout the Realm the Kings title, and the mildenes of his yoke, seeming
not sufficient (for the content of the common people) to have privately
imparted it to many. Their adversaries (amongst the which was the magistrate of
the Chamber of Lisbone) would willingly have taken occasion to publish unto
the world their contrary reasons, whereon they grounded; but it was not
tolerated, neither for the one nor the other, to speak publicly in the
assemblies of the people: for besides that it was prohibited, every one durst
not freely discover his intention: For this occasion diverse fell to write the
grounds of their party, by discourse and letters. And although writings breed
not so firm an impression in the mind as the voice, yet their discourse
published, did persuade with greater efficacy then they had done by speaking;
for that writings came to the hands of more men then words could have done,
where, reading and examining them, they wrought great effects.

The Castillians discourse touching the affairs of Portugal.
There were many of these letters seen without authors, and although some were
frivolous, and without sense, yet the better sort which followed the
Catholic kings party, tended to satisfy the people, and to terrify the
motives thereof by the greatness of the action, and the peril of war: They
did particularly touch one after another, the reasons of the pretendents, and
refuting them all, showed that the Catholic King did precead. They made no
small adoo about the process of Anthony, saying, that he was a bastard,
although he had been declared legitimate, and to precead Philip, yet should
they never satisfy the world, but they would surmise some cosinage, devised
to take the Crown from him who ought to enjoy it. They disprooued the reasons
of such as maintained the election of the King to be in the people, having a
lawful successor, bringing in examples of the Popes authority in the
nomination of Kings, as well of Alphonso the first, as of the Earl of
Bulloigne: And if John the first were chosen king, it was after a battle
woone; the Portugals affirming, there were no lawful successors, but bastards
and illegitimate: but by their own reason they said it was apparent, there was
now no question of the election, seeing there remained a lawful kinseman. They
labored to make known that God having called unto him two and twenty
successors, which did all precead the Catholic king, that his pleasure was by
uniting of Portugal to the Realms of Castill, to fortify an arm of the
Church, to resist all the outrageous attempts of infidels and heretics. But
leaving the justice and will of God aside, they discoursed, examining the
honors and blames, the losses and profits, which by the one or other means,
might happen: as for honor, they should not take for any disgrace, and
obedience which fell by lawful succession, alleging that the States of
Castill, (when as king Emanuell did inherit) being strong enough to defend
themselves if they would, received him courteously. And when as the Archduke of
Austria, (although a German) did succeed him, they did the like. They mocked
at such as said that Castill should be united to Portugal, but not Portugal to
Castill; proouing, that no Portugal ever came near this Court, but he was
embraced and greatly honored; many of the principal houses of Castill being
issued from Portugal. They did contradict with lively reasons, such as feared
to be oppressed, like to the estates of Flaunders, Naples, and Millaine; saying
that in Flaunders they had always used the people with great kindness, that
they had been governed by their own nation, and that the Spaniards had no
charge there: That many of the principal had rebelled against the church of
Rome, and against their king, the which he would not suffer, that in this
enterprise (more for that which concerned the good of the Church, then for any
other respect,) the King had spent 50. millions of gold, and that having for
enemies, both Germany, Flaunders, and England, they could not take these
countries from the Kings possession, but having means (granting free liberty
of Religion) to be absolute Lord, and to reap thereby great profit, he would
not accept thereof, only for the remorse of his conscience, preferring the
service of God before all other respects: They said that the Neapolitanes and
Millanoyes had been conquered by force, weak of themselves, and environed
with enemies, that they were not burdened, neither could he do less then
maintain garrisons, inferring thereby, that if they were peaceably inherited,
they should have liberty like good and faithful subjects, and maintain with
more force that which their fathers had gotten, without fear of any thing
whatsoever; but if they suffered themselves to be conquered by arms, they
should be Neapolitanes, Millanoyes, and possibly worse. They commended the
Portugals, as faithful, obedient, and endued with commendable parts, blaming
the baseness of such as were not ashamed to think, they could be ill entreated
of any prince whatsoever. They said, that since Philip was resolute, and that
he had written to the cities of the Realm the assurance of his action, seeing
that in fourteen years he had never abandoned the enterprise in Flaunders
being far off, having so many kings opposite, and the Flemmings suing to be
subject under just conditions, that it is not credible he would desist from
Portugal being so near, so weak without succors, and having so great an
interest: they reported with joy the deeds of the Spaniards, saying, that when
as Spain takes arms, he does imprison the king of France, and the greatest
of Germany; makes the Turk to turn his back, takes from him Malta,
dissolues his armies, maintains continually in Flaunders an army sound and
lusty, breaking and dispersing his enemies, and yet the Noblemen of Spain
remain quietly in their houses. From their valor, they came to the
consideration how Portugal would resist so great a Monarch, entreating them
with affectionate words to have regard thereunto. They said that the comfort
of men of judgment, was to see the small force of the Portugals, for if it
were greater, they might for a time make some resistance, considering their
obstinacy, judging that in the beginning of this war, the kings of the
Indies would presently become Lords of the sea coast, the Moors would
assail the places of Affricke, the French and English would attempt the
Islands, some would usurp on one side, some of another, not only to the
loss of the Realm, but of all Christendom. They brought in the example of
King Sebastian, showing that he was lost for not measuring his forces: And
although the consideration had been easy, many protesting against it, and
many foretelling the future event, yet God took from them their understanding,
as he does from those whom he means to punish, and in this manner he has
deprived them of judgment, who advise to take from the Catholic King the
succession of the Realm. They compared the amity of Castill with that of
France, reporting the wrongs and pyracies, which the French being at sea had
daily done to Portugal, and the small reckoning was held of them that had
complained, and contrariwise the concord and rest which since the last peace
made with the Castillians until that day, they had enjoyed, without the breach
of any one article, blaming the manner of the French, saying that they sought
nothing else but to be admitted, and after to become masters; the which not
succeeding, they striued to be admitted to plead, the equity of their Kings
cause, seeking always occasion to complain. They added, that if the election
were in the people, and that the Catholic king had no enterest, only to be
free from the French, they should unite themselves with Castill, that they
might live in peace, and bridle this French fury, which has often thrown the
Portugals alive into the sea, and slain their governors and the Kings
captains, by their Kings commission; for by this union, besides the service of
God, the French would fear and not spoil so boldly at sea. They commended
king Henry as just and holy, saying, that the best resolution they could
take, was to fall at his feet, beseeching him that seeing the Catholic king
was the most honorable, the most nearest, and the eldest kinsman that he had,
that in the name of God he should swear him Prince, according with him of the
most necessary points, for the liberty of the Realm, and showing themselves
conformeable to the bequest sometimes made by king Emanuell: That they should
not loose this occasion during his life, but (laying aside their obstinate
intercessions) labor jointly to fly the war, and not be forced to yield to
Castill at such time, when as it should not be acceptable, perfourming the
which they should not only preserve their own goods, but inherit others,
seeing the greatness of Castill does indifferently admit all subjects Spaniards,
to the greatest dignities; bringing for examples, that the Archbishop of
Toledo, and the office of the President of the Council royal, which be the
highest dignities spiritual and temporal, were not then enioied by
Castillians. They protested that if they stopped their ears to the truth, and
did open them to apparent lies, they should feel within their own home
war, with the murders, spoils, theftes, The Portugals answer to the
Castillians discourse.
and burnings it bringes with it. On the other side the Portugals made answer
to their letters, saying, they desired no war, but would defend themselves
against any that should attempt it: They alleged many reasons of their
justice and force, with ancient examples of the holy Scriptures, whereas
small numbers in a just cause have vanquished a great army. They refuted that
opinion that God by the union of these Realms would fortify in Castill an
arm of the church, showing many grounds, whereby they should judge the
contrary, blaming the sack of Rome, and some other unworthy actions of the
Castillians. They labored much to prove that the Prior of Crato was
legitimate, and that King Henry had bin a most passionate judge in that cause.
They spared not to touch the reasons of the Duchess of Bragance, showing that
she ought to precead the Catholic King in the succession. They condemned the
said King, saying, that distrusting his Title he had prepared to arms: They
showed by a long discourse, that the union of Portugal would neither breed
them profit, nor honor, but loss and dishonor, were the conditions never so
ample and good: drawing examples from Flaunders and Aragon, showing that the
behavior of the Spaniardes in the Low Countries, had been the cause that
those people had rebelled against God, and against their temporal Lord: They
did object that all nations subject to the Catholic King, were reputed his
subjects in matters of charge, and burdens of the war; but in honors,
recompenses, and exemptions, they were unknown: They valued not the Kings
forces, saying, that if it were fearful to other Provinces, yet was it not so
in Spain, being apparent, that by reason of the barrennes of that country,
he could entertain no great Armies, neither durst he for the weakness of the
places draw in mercenarie soldiers, bringing for example the war of Granado,
where incountring but with four disarmed Moors, there was so great danger
with the loss of so many men. They added moreover that the King had not at
this day one Captain of account, naming a number which were of the Seminary
of Charles the fifth who were all dead, and not any other which had succeeded
them, imitating the Kings humor who loves rest more then arms; by means
whereof he had not augmented his Realm, but lost Goletta, with the States of
Flaunders, and had yet made greater losses, had there been other Kings living
in this age, but that in France, England, and Portugal, the Scepters were in
the hands of women and children. They concluded that it was not credible, that
the Catholic King, notwithstanding his threatenings, and his prepared forces,
would take arms in Spain, for that his forces being united (he was in
danger upon the least contrary event) that some of his Provinces would rebel
against him, and that the French (being a stirring nation) would embrace this
occasion: besides that, being now old and the hours of his death uncertain,
he should consider, that not inioying the Realm of Portugal in peace, and
dying with an Army in Spain, having no heirs but pupilles, he should leave
them in danger, not only to be deprived of the possession of Portugal, but
also to be much troubled in Castill and his other Kingdoms of Spain,
laboring to prove, that the Kings were not there beloved as in Portugal.
Then began the year 1580. a year full of miseries and afflictions for the
Portugals, not only by reason of the war which followed, but also for the
dearth and plague; for that the season having been very dry, the fruit of
the earth was in a manner all lost, neither had the husbandmen in many places
reaped what was sown; besides there came not from France and Germany such
quantity of corn as was usual: But The plague in Portugal, and the
proceedings.
this misery was supportable in regard of the rest, for never was the
scarsitie so great, but things necessary would be found for money: That of the
contagion was most cruel, for having run through Italy, Germany, England,
and a part of France, it came finally into this Realm, from whence it spread
throughout all Spain, but most of all in the city of Lisbone, having begone
lightly the year before, it increased at the entering of this spring, and so
augmented all summer, but declined in the fall. This contagious mortality
(suffered it may be of God for our sins) proceeded not from any corruption of
the Air, but from infection; and was brought into the Realm, by men and
merchandise from countries infected, for the city being a great part unwalled,
and of great traffic, it could not easily be guarded. The natural
inclination of the air, the filch of the city, their feeding of fish (which
all generally do use) and the ill order, nay the great disorder of the
magistrate of the health, in separating the sick from the whole, and in all
other things touching his charge, did help to increase it. The suddennes
wherewith it did infect and kill in a manner all those that did frequent the
sick, as fire does in powder, struck a great terror in the citizens, their
remedies and diets were most uncertain: for although that many did physic
themselves diversely, and were governed in sundry manners, yet there died
infinite numbers of all qualities, experience did teach that the application of
lenitiue things, the drinking of Unicorns horn, and the Bezars stone were
most sovereign remedies, Bezar stone excellent against the plague.
yet to many it did no good. The greatest part of the Nobility, (and of such
as had ability to do it) retired themselves to their gardaines, and farms in
the country, where (although the whole country were infected) yet did they
seem to live more assured, or at the least out of the infection, and from the
horrible spectacle of dead bodies, which were howerly seen in the city, where
the mortality grew so great that there was nothing to be seen but Beeres with
dead bodies, for the burial whereof (the churchyards being full,) they were
forced to use the streets and fields.

The States of Almerin.
At this time were assembled in the city of Almerin where the king remained,
all the Deputies of the Realm, being called thither: The city of Lisbone made
election of Emanuell of Portugal, and Diego Salema, who went not, but were
rejected of the King, as seditious, and deprived of their offices, in whose
place they made choice of Phoebus Moniz, and Emanuel de Sosa pacheco: The said
Salema was not beloved of the king, for that before as Vereador of the city of
Lisbone, he said unto the king, that they understood he went about not only
to judge to whom the Realm appertained, but also to make a composition, the
which he ought not to do, without hearing the people: whereunto the King
having answered, that the people was not capable of this matter, he replied,
that he woondered the king should judge this people incapable, whom he had
held to be most sufficient to raise him to the crown, wherewith Henry was
greatly moved. This alteration of Deputies ministered matter of discourse unto
the world: for it seemed the King had declared himself against the people,
and that not accepting their election of Deputies, he would draw by force
from the States what he Henry changes the Deputies of Lisbone, and the cause.
pleased, but such as knew the true reason, and how that Emanuell, and all
those of the house of Portugal, deserved in this case to be repelled,
commended this act: These were suspect, forasmuch as John of Portugal, Bishop
of Guarda, brother to the said Emanuell, always esteemed more then he was,
would not only precead his equals, but did scarce bear any respect unto the
Cardinal before he was king, whereof grew a great heart burning; so as the
Cardinal to debase him, having drawn forth a certain information of his ill
behavior, liberty of life, and ill government in his Bishopric, sent it to
Rome, so as the Bishop (as it were forced) went to his holiness to purge
himself. He was much grieved with this cross, for passing by the court of
Castill, the Catholic King being infourmed of his voyage, would not suffer
him to visit him, although he were entreated: so as now although the Cardinal
were come unto the Crown, their hatred continued, and having no other means
of revenge, then to oppose himself to his resolutions, seeing him inclined to
give the Realm to the Catholic king, he labored all he could to let it, by
means whereof, he seemed at one instant to be revenged of two kings: for the
effecting whereof, there conspired together the Bishop; Emanuell his brother;
Franncis earl of Vimioso his nephew, (for the co^trarieties, that both
Alphonse his father, and he had with the Cardinal) with other their kinsfolks
and friends, favoring Anthony Prior of Crato, they resolved to make him king,
trusting to the peoples humors. But King Henry having discerned the equity of
the Catholic kings cause, resolved, as it is said, to give him the Realm;
and having assembled the States, he sent Paul Alphonse a doctor, in whom he
reposed great trust, to Villa Vizosa, whereas the Duke and the Duchess of
Bragance remained, giving them to understand that finding the succession of
the Realm to appertain to Philip, and that they were upon the point to
pronounce sentence in his favor, he did advertise them in time, to the end
they might make their composition with him: But having made small account of
this advertisement, interpreting it otherwise, they did not embrace the
occasion, the which was likewise represented unto them by the Catholic king.

The opening of the Estates at Almerin by the Bishop of Leiria.
In this time the Estates were begun in the palace of Almeryn, the ninth of
January in the kings presence, who (being very sick) was brought in his
chair, whereas Anthony Pignero bishop of Leiria, an eloquent Orator, made the
oration, enriched with a goodly style, saying, That the Kings thoughts were
bent to procure the general good of al Christendom, the preservation and
increase of our holy Catholic faith, and the peace and tranquillity of his
subjects, and for the effecting of that which concerns his charge, and to
follow the examples of kings his predecessors, and progenitors, conformeable to
the actions of his life passed, considering with sound judgment, great
experience, and wise discourse how much it does import the general good to
declare (during his life) to whom the lawful succession of the Realm did
appertain; he did apply all his care to the decision of that cause, with so
great study and zeal, that not suffering himself any way to be interrupted
with the many grave and extraordinary affairs, nor by the trouble of his long
infirmity, he had with the help of God brought it to that estate, that it
might speedily be declared, as they had required, and ought generally to wish
for: And seeing the final decision of the cause was brought to that issue, it
seemed convenient to the king, to assemble the States, and to communicate unto
them some points of great importance, for the service of God, and the good and
quiet of these Realms, as they should understand, by that which should be
particularly delivered unto them by his commandment: He exhorted them, that
using the my steries, which had been presented lately to al faithful
Christians, with prayers, sacrifices, works of devotion and charity, they
should dispose themselves to receive the light of that heavenly wisdom,
which God does always impart to such, as frame themselves to receive it,
without the which man's wisdom (were it never so subtle) could not work as
it ought, that doing so, the holy Ghost by his grace would inspire their
hearts, and lighten their understandings, making their wills conformable to his
love, to the end that all that shall be treated of, may be to the service of
God and his glory, the increase of Christian Religion, and the quiet and
profit of these Realms, as he still pretended in all things, and as he does
especially desire and procure in these present occurrents, to the hinderance of
his health, but with a most holy zeal.

The answer of Sosa Deputy of Lisbne.
Having ended this speech, Emanuel de Sosa pachecho, Deputy of Lisbone, rose
up saying: That since God by his providence, (amidst so many afflictions happened
to the Realm,) had given his Highness for successor, (trusting in his virtue,)
they did expect from him a remedy to their eminent dangers: That they were
most assured, that for the love and desire of his subjects peace, he did not
spare his own health, for which love and grace they did kiss his hands,
offering him all ancient and firm loialty, love, and obedience, wherewith the
Portugal nation have been wont to serve their Kings his predecessors. At the
end whereof, the trumpets sounding, the King was carried into his lodging: and
for that Almeryn is of small eceipt, all the Deputies were lodged at Arem,
which is near upon the other side of the river of Tagus, assembling at the
convent of Friars, there to hold their council. The king labored all he
could to draw some good effect from these Estates, using in one case both
mildenes and severity; but he feared greatly the contrary: for
notwithstanding he supposed that he had drawn the city of Lisbone, to choose
Deputies according to his own humor, yet could he not do the like with other
cities, besides he knew not A mutiny at Coimbra.
whom to trust. And now was there happened at Coimbra some small rumor, being
advertised that the Magistrate of the Chamber of that city, with some other
citizens, spoke too freely in the behalf of the Prior of Crato, touching the
succession of the Realm, whither he sent Martin Correa de Sylua, to pacify
these stirs, and to punish the offenders: But they laughed at him, and he
returned without effecting any thing; neither did it preualie, that the king
for that respect did imprison Aryas Gonzalez de Macedo, Deputy of the same
city, who was after freely set at liberty. The king received great
contentment by the answer given him by the Clergy, and the Nobility, having
imparted unto them the interest of king Philip, and propounded that it were
convenient to make some agreement with him: they kissed his hands, yet was
there great disagreement amongst the Nobility, before they could resolve, for
being all reduced to eight and twenty, and those put to voices, the Catholic
king prevailed only with one voice, to the great coffeehouse of the
contrary faction; and herein the diligence and promises of the Catholic
Agents prevailed much. But Henry was no less displeased with the proceedings
of the third estate contrary to his intent and meaning. It was generally
thought that Phoebus Moniz Deputy of Lisbone was conformable to the kings will,
and was chosen to that intent, yet upon the first assembly of the Deputies the
thirteenth of January, he plainly discovered his heart, being all assembled, as
chief of the Council he spoke in this manner. That The speech of Moniz
Deputy of Lisbone.
the Portugal nation was more pleased with deeds then words, and for that he
was a Portugal, although some did believe the contrary, he would speak
little: I believe said he, that every one of you in the Mass of the holy
Ghost, which has been lately celebrated, has beseeched God to direct all to
his honor and glory; for it is that we ought to seek. We have a most holy
king, who being such, it is not credible that he has assembled us here but to
do us honor, and for the preservation of our public good: The Realm has
chosen us for Deputies, all men's eyes are turned upon us, to view if they have
made a good choice: Let us give them to understand, that they have attained
their desires, procuring as much as we may the preservation of our general
good. It does not displease me to hear some say that God has reserved this
cause of succession to be determined in heaven, let us embrace this saying: Let
us go all to heaven to beg mercy at his hands: let us all make us ready as
at the last hour: let us forget all things below; I will assure you on his
behalf that doing so, both here and in that heavenly city he will entreat us
as his best beloved: I rely much upon you, and I beseech you that if by reason
of my sins, I decline from the name of a Portugal, you will help to support
me, that I may not loose it; I will be always ready to join in any resolution
that shall please you. These words spoken with more vehemency then eloquence,
revived the spirits of many of the deputies, who doubted of his inclination, so
that after the creation of the officers, they alleged: That seeing that the
city of Lisbone, having propounded to the learned whether the election of the
King appertained only unto them (as the chief city of the Realm) and
finding it was a thing incident to the whole Realm, that it were convenient,
before the The Deputies of the Realm sent to Henry to be admitted to the
election of the King with the answer.
King should send unto them, to demand permission in the behalf of the
Realm, to pretend the election of the King; being all conformable, they sent
two deputies to deliver this Embassage, who being joyfully received, and with
doubtful speeches, returned with no other satisfaction but that the day
following, he would send them an answer: who being returned to the assembly
and making report what they had done, Antonio Pignero Bishop, arrived, sent
from the King, who spoke thus in his name: That the difficulty in assembling
the States was so great, and the matter treated of, of such importance, that it
was fit to touch the point of the conclusion, laying aside many things which
were of no moment: That the Catholic King (since that his Highness had taken
the Scepter of these Realms) had pressed him to declare his successor, saying,
that he was assured, both by the opinion of Doctors of his own Realm, and of
others, that the succession appertained unto him, but that King Henry made
answer, he must be better informed, and hear the parties pretending to the
same seccession, entertaining him in this sort until he had knowledge unto
whom it appertained by right, and being now satisfied, finding there yet
rests some doubt betwixt the Catholic King and the Duchess of Bragance,
he knew that making declaration by way of justice, it might breed many
inconveniences and troubles to the Realm, being already exposed to many
dangers: And therefore he found no better course then to determine the
succession by way of accord, if he should die before the King of Castil, for by
that means he should provide for all things fit for the Realm, giving
satisfaction to him that should have the strongest pretention: And although the
matter were still in doubt, yet the King had thought it the best course, as
they should well find, and if they would consider thereof, being of such
importance as his Highness had thought it convenient to impart it unto them, and
with their counsel to determine what should be most necessary, for the
service of God and the profit of the Realm. That he did recommend it unto
them, that with quietness of minds, and the only respect of the divine service
and the common good, they should treat and consider of this matter, giving the
King present knowledge of their opinions: This Embassage did greatly alter the
council, who expected an Embassage from the King, whether he would admit their
demand concerning the election, and seeing they treated with them of a matter
half ended, laying aside what the Ambassador had propounded, they resolved to
send back to the King to expostulate an answer of their Embassage, which done
they profited no more then before: But to Phoebus Moniz (one of those which
went, who possibly spoke without respect) the King made answer, with great
patience; That he should have come accompanied with choler; whereunto he
replied, that it was reasonable, seeing his Highness would give the Realm unto
the Castillians: Let him give it to any Portugal whosoever, they were all
contented. The day following the Bishop returned to the assembly, and without
any answer to the Deputies demand, he said unto them in the Kings behalf;
That his Highness understood that some of the Council were mistaken, supposing
the accord whereof he had made mention should be betwixt the King of Castill,
and the Duchess of Bragance; which being contrary, he thought it good to
explain his meaning, that the accord which he labored, was betwixt the King
of Castill and these Realms, and to let them understand that sentence was
ready to be given in favor of the king of Castill, and therefore they should
consider how much more fit it were to end it by accord then by sentence, that
they should well consider of that which he had sent to be delivered unto them,
for being a matter so important to the Realm, it was necessary that all
should be capable. The Bishop being departed, many of the Deputies grew in
choler, some of them saying, that the Bishop (affected unto Philip) had forged
this Embassage of himself, and that it was not credible, the King had
delivered it thus unto him. Many spoke freely, and some sought to interrupt him
before he had ended, seeming unto them that the king not answering their
demand, made small account of this assembly, saying, that he could be no
just judge of this cause, seeing he had declared his intention: But weighing
better if they should confess that he had pronounced it as a king and judge,
they were bound to obey, they began to say, he had made no declaration,
holding it in suspense. They sent to the assembly of the Clergy, to let them
understand what had passed, and to complain, and to the King likewise, to
demand an answer, who (answering them that he would send) did press them to
rest satisfied, and to commit the care of this resolution to some few of them;
whereunto the Deputies would not agree, fearing least the authority of the
pretendents might force them, or corrupt the judges, protesting openly that
they would neither convent nor accord with the Castillians: But King Henry
seeing the Deputies obstinately forcing an answer to their demand, finding
he could neither draw them to composition, nor to compremit the matter to
few, fearing if he should pronounce the sentence, they would make some
exception, resolved to make short, to grant that which they demanded: For
which cause he sent back the Bishop the third time, who with a more pleasing
audience then before, said unto them in the kings behalf. That seeing the
accord he had propounded did not seem pleasing unto them as unto his Highness,
he would make no other motion, but would admit them to plead the interest
they had in the Kings election, giving them notwithstanding but two days
liberty to produce their reasons; The Deputies glad of this answer, sent to
kiss the Kings hand for this favor, craving leave to draw some ancient
writings out of the Records, requiring more liberty of time, the which he
would not grant, referring them to the Sovereign magistrate for the writings.
The Portugals were puffed up with hope, by this permission to elect a King at
their own pleasure, and therefore many more hastily then they should, declared
themselves, protesting they would rather yield to any then to the Castillians:
And not only the common people, but many of the Nobility said the same,
whereof many showing themselves too seditious, were banished the assemblies,
whereas such as seconded the Kings will (besides the promises of the Catholic
Kings Agents) were favored and rewarded by Henry. The pretendents to the
succession were discontented with the Kings inclination, some complained,
others dissembled: The Duke of Bragance relied greatly upon his wives Title:
The Bishop of Parma coming to the assembly of States, complained publicly of
the King with grave words, to whom Emanuell de Sosa made a wise answer,
assuring him of the Kings intent to do justice: whilst the matter stood upon
these terms, the King grew so weak as he could not rise from his bed, King
Henry sick.
giving signs of a short life, yet did he not leave to the hour of his death
to provide for all things necessary. At that time the Duke of Bragance thought
it fit to send Katherine his wife to Almeryn to visit Henry, and to persuade
him to declare her heir to the Crown, the which he did, with small content to
Henry to whom she spoke freely: This her coming (the Archbishop of Euora
uncle to the Duke, having at the same time given a prebend of the same church
of great revenue to Paul Alphonso) bred matter of jealousy, in such as were
affected to the Catholic King, who not knowing the quality of this Doctor,
and the obedience, wherewith they keep The death of King Henry.
the Kings commandments, charged him not to have performed such offices with
the Duchess, as were conformable to Henry's commission; who drawning near
unto midnight passed into an other life, a thing worthy to be noted, that he
began to die in the beginning of the Eclipse of the moon, he died with the
end thereof, as if that the celestial sign had wrought that effect in him
(being a King of a weak body) which it does not in stronger, or at the least,
not so suddenly as Astrologians do write; neither is the hour to be
neglected, being the same wherein he was borne, 68. years before. The
religious which were at his death, said, that he was always talking: About
ten of the clock he demanded how the time went, and being told, he desired
some rest, and that they should call him before eleven. So as being turned on
the other side, he remained sometime, but being called by the Religious, he
asked again what it was a clock and being answered that it was eleven, O give
me (said he) that candell, for now my hour is come, and taking it in his hand,
died soon after, having reigned seventeen months: This was the last King of
Portugal, in whom ended the direct masculine line: And as the first Lord of
Portugal, although under the Title of an Earl was called Henry, so does it
seem the last should be so termed: He was thin of body, small of stature, and
lean of his face; as The life of Henry
for his wit it was indifferent, endued, (besides the Latin tongue,) with some
knowledge. He was always held to be chaste, and did never blemish this
angelical virtue, but with the desire of marriage in his latter days: He was
accounted sparing, giving rather then denying, for he refused seldom, but he
gave sparingly; he was ambitious of all jurisdiction, as well Ecclesiastical,
as civil, zealous in Religion, and the faith, yet in the reformation of
religious persons, he was more stricte then was convenient. He was Bishop,
Governor of the Realm, Inquisitor Mayor, legate Apostolic, and King. But
the more he mounted, the more he discovered his incapacitie; suffering himself
in greatest matters to be ruled by his ministers, not being able to determine
the cause of the succession. Opinions were grafted in him with great
obstinacy, retayning a continual remembrance of wrongs, so as justice was in
him but an iniust execution of his own passions: and for this cause a
religious man (whom he had pressed to take upon him a most strict course of
life) said unto him, that he would obey, seeing there was no human help
against his commandments, seeing he had the will of a man, the authority of a
Pope, and the execution of a king. Finally he was endued with great virtues and
with fewer and less vices, yet were they equal, for he had the virtues of an
Ecclesiastical person, and the defects of a Prince: during his life, he was
feared of many, and beloved of few, so as no man lamented his death, only such
as were well affected (desiring the cause had been first decided before his
decease) had some feeling. The regencie of the governors.
These things happened in Almeryn, where suddenly the five named Governors did
assemble to provide for that, which should be necessary, tearming themselves
Governors and Protectors of the Realm of Portugal: But in this beginning,
after the kings death they feared some mutiny of the people, both at Almeryn,
and at Lisbone; neither did the governors themselves, nor the Catholic Kings
Agents think themselves secure: They hated the assembly of the Deputies of the
Realm, which were continued at Saint Arem, both for that they held it as a
superior council, as also fearing it might cause some insurrection of the
people, and therefore they did still abuse them with words differing from their
meanings: for which cause they sent Martin Gonzalues de la Camera, a gentleman
of the church, who in the time of Sebastian, held the first place in the Martin
Gonsalues sent to the deputies of the Realm.
gouerument of the Realm, which he could not continue: for although he were
not covetous of riches, but full of integrity, yet was he severe and hard to
be entreated, that they held him inexorable: Him they sent being a popular man
and contrary to the Catholic King, whose words they thought should be of more
credit then any others: having particularly reported the Kings death, he said
that the Governors chosen at the last estates, began to look unto the
government, and to give order for things necessary to the Realm: And although
the death of King Henry were a great loss, yet being in heaven, he would
mediate for them, and that they should rest assured that with the greatest
zeal and love to their country they could, they would endeavor to do
justice, as well to those of the Realm, in the pretention they had to the
election, as also to the pretendents to the succession: That they would deliver
them all writings whereof they had need, exhorting them to treat with peace,
and love, without causing of any mutiny, were it never so small, in any man's
favor; and for the better ordering of that which concerned the common good,
they were well pleased they should put them in mind of any thing which they
thought necessary. Having The deputies answer to Martin.
ended this speech, all men keeping silence, Phoebus Moniz answered that they
were all assured, that of the five Governors three were suspect: for when the
King labored to bring the States to make agreement with King Philip, they were
not only conformable to the will of Henry, but did urge them, and commended
this resolution without respect of the liberty of the Realm, seeking only to
please the Kings humor, and their own interest: which being, it was not
reasonable to suffer such suspected Governors, whom they were not bound to
obey, and this was the opinion of them all. Martin replied that he was not of
opinion they should then alter any thing, for in steed of helping, they should
heap danger upon danger, and trouble upon trouble, that for a while, they
should be lookers on, and if in time they should find the Governors not to
do their duty as they ought, they might then help with the same remedy,
seeing they had always authority to do it: whereunto, although Phoebus Moniz
answered, that this remedy could not alwais be applied, for that the council
could not still be united, for the great charges they were at; yet the reasons
of Martin Gonzalues were of such force, that they resolved not to alter the
Governors, as a matter scandalous, but accepting what they had sent to be said
unto them, that they should advise what they thought necessary, they began
suddenly to set down in writing such Articles as they would The resolution of
Gonzalues, embassage.
have performed by the Governors: The which were, that leaving the aboade at
Almerin they should go to Saint Arem, to be nearer neighbors, more in quiet
and in greater safety; that for the avoiding of charge and scandal, they
should discharge the Soldiers as unnecessary: That presently they should
send Ambassadors to the Catholic King, that as Governors of the Realm,
they would do justice to the pretendents in the cause of succession, the which
his Majesty should believe, not suffering within his Realm any attempt
against Portugal: That they should presently provide for the fortresses of the
Realm, as well upon the sea, as in other places, sending trusty Captains,
garrisons, and necessary munition, and to every Province men of great
authority, to force men to defend and succor the weaker parts, that they
should send some unto his holiness, giving him to understand the Kings death,
their succession to the government of the Realm, for the defense thereof
against any one that would usurp it, contrary to equity, against the
sentence which should be pronounced touching the succession, beseeching him to
write to the Catholic King to rest satisfied, and to be bound to stand to
judgment: They did urge them to take information by way of Justice, against
those, that in the cause of succession did suborne with promises of money and
honors, and also such as were suborned, having knowledge that there were many
such: Whereunto the gonernors answered, that they would presently depart from
Almeryn, but whither; it was not expedient then to say, and that it should be
conformable to the demand of the city of Lisbone. They said that they would
not discharge the soldiers being levied by the commandment of King Henry, for
the guard of his Court, and of the pretendents: That some having refused to
carry this Embassage into Castill, yet in the end they had chosen Gaspard de
Casale, Bishop of Coimbra, and Emanuel de Melo who prepared to go: That
already they had commanded al Captains to remain in their fortresses, and
where there were none they were providing, as also of arms, both in the
fortresses upon the river, as in all other provinces: That it seemed not
necessary to send to Rome, but if king Philip made show to stir, they
would beseech his holiness, to do as he has been accustomed, and that they
would proceed with all the rigor against such as should be found culpable
in the matter of subornation. Now had the Agents of the Catholic king sent
news into Castill, of King Henry his death, and were remaining still at
Almerin, fearing some alteration: but this people accustomed to a heavy yoke,
without knowledge of liberty did not stir. The Duke of Bragance said unto
the Governors, that he was ready to obey, and that they should proceed to
sentence for the succession: He sent to the Duke of Ossuna, and the Catholic
Agents, willing them not to fear any thing, that he would assure them from
danger, offering them his lodging, the like did the Governors.

Anthonies course to obtain the Crown.
Whilst these things passed in Almerin, Anthony Prior of Crato, who at the
Kings death was not far from thence, ran unto Lisbone, lodging himself in a
garden near unto the city: he did write unto the Magistrate of the chamber,
and to many of the chief, signifying unto them that he was there, and that
they should come unto him: The which the Magistrate understanding disdained,
sending him word that he should retire, but making no reckoning thereof, he
sent both into the city and places of pleasure thereabouts, some of his
followers, who, both in private and in public gave out, that the king was
dead, and that the Prior expected them there, believing by that means (for the
affection the people bare him) they would all jointly proclaim him king:
which being done in that city (which is the principal) all the rest of the
Realm (for he was greatly beloved) would follow their example, yet he was
soon deceived. And this may serve as an example to those which rely too much
upon the vulgar sort, for there was not any one that durst come unto him but in
secret; and as for gentlemen there were none by reason of the plague: As for
the new Christians which are there in great number (whereof a part was likewise
abroad) they wanted courage, and being rich, feared to do that which might
cause the loss of their goods. The people (most base) of themselves had no
commander, that could move them or lead them, so as having labored by diverse
means to draw men to his devotion, and finding his practice not to succeed,
having spent some time there, he went to the Monastery of Belem, from whence
he did write to the Council Anthony his letters to the states of Almerin.
of States, with words more conformable to the quality of time, then his
intention; saying, That having intelligence of the death of the King his Lord,
understanding likewise that his body should be transported to that Monastery,
and that not to fail of his duty, he was come thither to attend it, seeing he
could not be in time to accompany it, the which he had done that perfourming
this last office, he might do them the service he ought: but understanding
that he was not brought thither, he had assisted the fathers in their
sacrifices and devotions recommending him unto God: And as a true Portugal,
and mindful of the bond, which (as son and nephewe to his father and
grandfather) he had to the quiet and preservation of these Realms, he thought
it good to advertise them, that he was ready to expose for this cause, not
only his life, and receive the laws which they should please to lay upon him,
but also in all present occasions to live in submission and due obedience, not
any way transgressing their commissions: He protested to show the innocence of
those crimes imposed upon him in the sentences, which it had pleased his uncle
to pronounce against him together with the interest he had to the suceession
of the Realm: He promised to yield himself into their hands and protection,
relying upon those persons, who by the special grace of God in so afflicted a
season, had been chosen as a remedy to restore this Realm, referring himself
for the rest to Lewis de Brito who should deliver it by mouth: To this letter
the which was received in council, contrary to the advice of some who said it
ought not to be accepted, Brito added that the Prior would be there with
speed, that they should command where The States answer to Anthony, and his
arrival.
they pleased he should lodge: They answered that he might come when he
pleased, yet they would not intermeddle with his lodging, but leave it to his
own choice: But almost all in general were pleased with his coming. He
stayed not long but presently upon his arrival, he presented the Popes Bull
containing the suspension of the Kings sentence, he began to renew the
pretention of his legitimation (without the final decision whereof they said
they could not treat of the succession) wanting no hope to obtain by the
council of States that which before he did expect from the multitude at
Lisbone: The Deputies of the Realm did assemble daily at Saint Arem, without
effecting any thing of importance: They spent some days only in sending to
visit the pretendents, and their deputies, and to make unto them offers of
justice, and likewise to receive from them thanks for their good dispositions,
wherein all aboured to show themselves protectors of the liberty of the Realm,
and most of all such as least desired it: And for that the going and coming to
Almeryn was very inco^modious, being forced to pass the water without a
bridge, that by this reason in communicating the affairs to the rest of the
States, that is, to the Clergy and nobility, and by treating with the
Governors they lost much time, it was propounded in council to reduce all
together, yet could they not effect it, for many of the Deputies began to want
money for their ordinary charges, desiring rather to be dismissed, then
united: They desired to depart, saying, that they were not furnished from their
cities, but as they were not discharged, so were they not relieved with money:
and although Balthazar de Faria Deputy of Barcellos, the Pryor of Saint
Steuens, and the Bishop of Parma, every one apart did offer money to such as
wanted, that the assembly might not be dissolved, yet the Deputies unfurnished
would not accept thereof, not willing to be bound in their own proper names,
for that their cities were bound to furnish them: Besides in this assembly the
opinions were diverse and few inclined to favor the pretention of the Catholic
king; many knew not what to resolve, and a great part were affected to the
Prior, but all in general feared the Governors and mistrusted their
proceedings, so as besides the aduertisements they sent daily unto them, they
did solicit the execution, making new demands and pressing them above al to
discharge the soldiers: They demanded a copy of the authority to govern left
them by King Henry, and the words of his will which concerns the point of
succession, the which were wholly delivered unto them; his will was made 8.
months before, and contained these words: Seeing at the time of my will making
I have no descendents directly The clause of King Henry's testament.
to succeed to the Crown of these realms, and have called my nephews which
may pretend, and have put the matter of succession in Justice, I do not at this
time declare who shall be my successor, but leave it unto him to whom by right
it shall appertain, and him I do declare my heir and successor, except that
before my decease, I shall name him that has this interest: And therefore I
command all men within these my realms of what quality soever, that presently
after I or the judges appointed shall have named him, to acknowledge him for
heir and lawful successor, and so to obey him. There followed many other words
in reco^mendation of justice and religion, but they served not to this purpose.
And although his will contained these words, yet they say the King at his death
would have resourmed it, and declared the Catholic king successor of the
realm: But the Governors desirous to hold the government for a time in their
own hands, did divert him, saying, That whether he made any declaration or not,
no other then the Catholic king could succeed both by law and force: that it
was not expedient to nominate him, to the end that the realm might with
greater advantage capitulate and agree with him: Many supposed that they did
not dissuade the king from this declaration so much for these reasons, as
fearing it would breed some popular sedition to their hurt, being held as autors
of the said declaration. The limitation which he had left to the Governors
contained, that they could not create Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons,
Bishops, nor Archbishops, nor give any commandery nor revenue which passed 125.
ducats. But in matters of war and reuolutions they might do and give any
thing with the advice of the council and not otherwise. The deputies being
satisfied with these writings, whilst they debated the The speech of the
Deputy of Portalegre.
reasons of their pretended election, Stephen Lopez Doctor and deputy of
Portalegre, spoke publicly amongst them, who having showed how fit it were to
give God thanks for the quiet they now enjoyed, said it was not necessary to
continue so many deputies still together, with so much trouble and so great
charge, that they should be reduced unto few, and the rest return to their
houses. And for as much as they were advertised that the Catholic King began
to arm, they should surcease from the cause of succession, until the said
King had dismissed his forces, and the preparatiues for war he had made, for by
that means the free liberty to treat of the cause, and for the pretendents to
allege their interest was taken away: That by the suspension of the cause,
they shall discover the Catholic Kings disposition in laying aside arms: If
he do it, it shall breed these good effects: That in the mean time they shall
have leisure to provide for things necessary, to gather in the fruits of the
earth, and the pretendents shall live in peace and quiet: if he refuse it
(which we ought not to believe of so Christian a Prince) then shall they be
satisfied, and both the States and the pretendents (united in one body,) may
the better defend themselves, and when as all things were quietly settled, then
to determine the cause, disabling notwithstanding before all things, the said
Catholic King (who using force when as justice is offered him) for being King
of these Realms: And this he said was the disposition of the law, that in the
mean time they should command the Pretendents to the Crown to make their
residence in diverse places, the one at Elues, and the other at Begia, as
fronter towns, swearing not to attempt any thing one against the other. The
reasons of this Doctor as a man of small account were not followed, but the
council being resolved with two The states send to the Governors.
others of the States to send six Deputies to Almerin to treat of matters of
importance with the Governors: Thither they sent them with instructions
different from this form of speech, videlicet, that the Governors should
pass to Saint Arem, and there make their residence to take a view what arms,
men, and munition the city of Lisbone had for their defense, and to supply
what wanted, to take notice what Captains be appointed in the fortresses upon
the river of Lisbone, and being suspected, or not valiant, to place others with
men and other necessaries: That they should send arms to all cities of the
Realm, and train up their men with exercise thereof; that they should beseech
the Pope by his Ambassadors to persuade all the pretendents to take the course
of justice, and lay aside arms upon pain to loose the interest they pretend,
requiring that Emanuell de Portugal purueyor of the fortresses of the Realm
might be restored to the same office, whereof the King had suspended him, and
that they should do the like to Diego Salema, and to Aluaro de Morais in their
offices in the Chamber of Lisbone: And for that they found themselves tobee
unfurnished, they would have all the ships and vessels stayed throughout all
the ports of the realm for the conducting of things necessary for the war.
The Governors made but a cold answer to these demands, as they had done before
to all others, saying, that being matters of so great importance they would
consider of them first, and then advertise them what should be done.

The Cheriffe had as it is said before in the life of King Henry, and at the
instance of the Catholic King delivered the Duke of Barcellos, who having
passed the straight to return into Portugal, being arrived at Gibralter where
(as afterward at Saint Lucar) the Duke of Medina Sidonia Lord of those places
did him great honor, by means whereof he spent sometime in sports: At this
time The duke of Barcellos detained by the Duke of Medina Sidonia.
the news coming of King Henry's death, the Duke of Medina thought it a
matter importing the Catholic King, to deteine the said Duke of Barcellos as
eldest son to the Duke of Bragance, and of Katherine chief pretendent to the
Realm, until the cause of the succession were decided, so as the sports
before showed unto the said Duke in courtesy were now redoubled for this
other intent, detayning him expressly, until he might receive answer from the
King, so as showing him first one place, and then another, this young Prince
was taken unawares: But the Duke of Medina having stayed certain carriages,
under color to show him some feasts, he then conceived the cause of his
detaining, and wrote forthwith unto his father in Portugal, that he should
not then expect him, and that his detention should not any way prejudice the
rights of the Realm, preferring justice before his own life: This letter
being come into Portugal was by the Duke his father sent unto the assembly of
the States, showing on the one side a grief for the detayning of his son,
and on the other side a contentment, that in so young an age, he was so great a
lover of his countries good, offering if need were to sacrifice him for the
service of the Realm: Yet this fear of the Dukes continued not long, for
having written to his son that he should labor to come away, or they should
make declaration of his stay, he was suffered freely to depart; for so the
King had commanded. Some say that Philip had long before this consideration,
having means to stay him, not only in Spain, but also in Affrique, but
fearing to incense the Portugals, and desirous to make the Duke his friend, he
had procured his release in Afric, and suffered him safely to depart from
Andoluzia into Portugal: yet the said Duke of Barcellos or his father, by
whose commandment he was directed, was noted of some ingratitude, for being
invited by Philip to pass by his court as desirous to see him, the jealousy
of the State of these Realms prevailed so much that he did not satisfy his
desire, but took his direct way to Villauizosa, fearing perhaps a new
detention.

These things passed in Portugal when as in Castill the Catholic King being
advertised by his Agents of the death of King Henry, of the small affection
the Portugals bare unto him, of the lively pretention of Authonie and other
pretendents, and to what The diligence of the catholic King to assure his
conscience for the Realm of Portugal.
estate the matter was brought, was greatly discontented, seeming he should be
forced to take arms for the obtaining of the conclusion of his interest. But
desirous to satisfy his conscience in the effecting thereof, he had formerly
the advice of Diego de Chiaues of the order of preaching Friars, being his
confessor, and of some other principal Divines of that order, and yet not well
satisfied with their opinions, least he should seem only to follow the advice
of the dominical Friars; he desired likewise to treat with other orders of
religious persons, and to that intent he sent one to acquaint the chief
Deuines in Spain with the cause, and to demand their advise: This care
performed, not only with the chief prelates and readers in Divinity, but
with the Jesuits and the Friars of Saint Francis, all agreede that the Kings
right being so apparent he was not bound to represent it otherwise then out of
judgment to King Henry, as he had done, and to make his council and the rest
of the Realm of Portugal capable thereof, such as with sincerity of heart
would understand the truth, and by the mildest means, procure (as he had done)
that Henry should declare him successor, and if these diligent proceedings were
not sufficient to persuade the King and the Realm; that then Philip had
sufficiently justified his cause, and that he might assure himself by arms,
without thrusting the succession (which was due unto him) into evident peril,
his person being as it is said, sovereign, exempt, and free from all
reprehension, and only bound to justify his right before God, and to signify
it to the King and the Realm, saying, that this point was now without all
doubt, since the death of Henry, no man living that could pretend any interest
in the decision of the cause. It appertained not to the Pope, being a matter
wholly temporal, nor agreeing with the circumstances, which may give him any
right over temporal matters; and less to the Emperor, being no way
acknowledged by the Realms of Castill and Portugal, and much less to
certain Judges named by Henry, for besides that he could not choose any after
his death, they were now become the material party, and the thing it self
whereon they pleaded: Besides that all the Realm was become insufficient, when
as making themselves a party, they pretended power to choose a Prince, and
although all this ceased, yet would they prove that no Portugal but was
suspect in this cause, and to be excepted against for the manifest hatred they
bare to the Castillian nation: They found likewise that he was not bound to
submit himself to any compremise; for besides the difficulty and
impossibility to find a trusty person in so dangerous and jealous a cause as
this is, the bond of compremise is not incident but in a matter of doubt, and
the definition of doubt is when as the advocate and Doctors conclude, not for
any party finding equivalent reasons for either: but in this, all being of one
agreement, the cause is not doubtful nor to be compremitted.

The Catholic Kings preparatiues against Portugal.
The King being resolved to take arms (having no possession delivered unto
him) provided for it, for this cause he writ to the governors, to the three
estates, and to the five principal cities, to all of one subject, but in
diverse forms; after he had lamented the death of his uncle, he required them
to receive and swear him King, as King Henry had resolved, and declared him to
be; he thanked the nobility and clergy for their good affection shown, when
as Henry had said that the succession appertained unto him; he made offer to
all and threatened cunningly; he sent to the governors a copy of the
privileges which King Henry had required in the behalf of the Realm,
offering to grant them more amply then they had been demanded, protesting,
if they would not obey to use force: But all these things were received and
rejected according to the humors of men. The governors made answer they could
not resolve until the return of their Ambassadors which they had sent unto
them: At this time there was ready at sea as well in Spain as in Italy about
threescore galleys, (whereof Aluaro de Bassan Marquis of Saint Croix was
general) the which should sail The duke of Alua chosen general of the army
into Portugal.
toward Portugal, as the occasion of the time should serve; there was yet no
general named for this enterprise, and every man greedily expected who
should be chosen, for that few were thought fit for so great a burden. The
Duke of Alua was generally held most sufficient, yet few believed that the
King would willingly free him from prison: the Marquis of Mondegiar (who was
returned from the government of Naples) affected this charge, and many believed
he should prevail, in recompense of the coffeehouse he had to be drawn
from Italy: Many believed the King would go to this war in person, both for
the inclination they see in him, as for some other signs which were apparent,
for he not only caused his arms and pauillions to be ready, but also
commanded Ferrant de Silua Conte de Cifuentes, Guidon Mayor of Castill with
the Standard Royal to furnish himself; the which in that Realm is not
accustomed to be carried, but in the Squadron where the King is in person: but
in this case it behooued him to remain irresolute, and to govern himself
according to the necessity and occasions which time should The Catholic
Kings Letters to the Duke of Alua.
discover: In this hope of things the King commanded a Secretary of the
council of war to write to the Duke of Alua, demanding of him if he were
able to serve in this enterprise, whereunto making answer that in that which
concerned his Majesty, he never made reckoning of his health, he was
commanded to prepare himself within three days and to go to the camp, the
which he putting in execution, he went to Barrazas, a village ten miles from
the court, (which was at Madrill,) having no leave to come thither: but that
which caused admiration, the king having at the same time caused the Prince
Diego his son to be sworn by all the estates in a Chapel, although with
ordinary ceremonies, yet with less pomp then of custom, did not admit the
said Duke to the oath, being so near and so great a personage: He did neither
write unto him, nor treated with him concerning these wars but long after: So
as the Duke marching with the army, finding himself not fully released from
the prison wherein he had been, said that the King had sent him to conquer
Realms, drawing after him chains and fetters; such was the severity of
Philip, and the obedience of so great a minister. All Spain was pleased with
this election, for besides the delivery of the Duke which followed, they
esteemed not the valor of their soldiers, without a Commander to their
minds, and in the Dukes person they held any army good. The General being
The Catholic King goes toward Portugal.
dispatched, the King provided all things for his journey into Portugal, he
caused a daughter borne at that time, to be secretly baptized, and having made
the said prince of Castill to be sworn (without calling, or the presence of
Ferrant de Sylua, to his great coffeehouse) the King went to Guadalupa,
being now the time of Lent, under color to perform the obsequies of King
Henry there, and so to draw near unto Portugal to give encouragement to his
affairs; and thus did he write to all the principal cities in Spain. He
departed from Madrill in coach almost all alone without giving order for the
Queens departure, or for the officers of his Court, notwithstanding
cherishing her dearly. After he had passed two days (seeming convenient, and
a great sign of amity that being now to enter into Portugal) he should be
accompanied with his Queen, he called her unto him. The Duke was now gone to
Glierena The Duke of Alua ariues at his Army.
where a part of his army lay, being in far lesser numbers then had been
levied, for that discommodities and sickness had consumed many, and many
places were void by the Captains policy, being in all but four thousand
five hundredth Italians, The nombers of the Dukes Army.
three thousand five hundredth Germans, and three thousand Spaniards come out
of Italy, and other seven thousand newly raised, with fifteen hundredth horse,
which being a body long before prepared, for a matter so well foreseen, seemed
to him but small. But the Duke trusting more to the quality then the quantity
of his soldiers, desired to have them fewer, and of more experience, and these
seemed in a manner all without knowledge, and therefore the King at his
entreatie commanded, that all the soldiers which were come out of Flaunders
into Italy, should pass into Spain, being such whom he knew, and had tried in
the wars, yet they arrived not in time but returned back. The Duke said
that surmounting the enemy in horse, he would undertake this war with twelve
The coming of the Ambassadors from the governors to the Catholic King, and
their negotiation.
thousand foot well experienced, neither did he value the great number of the
Portugals which assembled, as it was given out, making reckoning to waste them
by policy, and to conquer them without battle. The King being come to
Guadalupa, there arrived the Bishop of Coimbra and Emanuel de Melo Ambassadors
from the Governors of Portugal. The King with his Council were doubtful in
what sort to honor them, some would have them treated like subjects, without
respecting them as Ambassadors: Others would not have any thing altered of the
ordinary course observed in those causes; yet not to discourage them, it was
resolved they should be heard as Ambassadors with their heads covered, and that
the King should put off his hat, yet the King had written before to the
Governors, that he would treat with their Commissaries as with subjects. These
labored by a long speech to persuade the King to lay aside arms: they said
that King Henry had greatly desired to end the question of succession, by the
ordinary course of justice, but that death had prevented him: he had in the
States held at Lisbone in the year 1579. not only chosen Governors and
defenders of the Realm, but the States had also named four and twenty
Judges, (whereof the King had chosen eleven) to judge definitiuely the cause of
succession, if he died before the effecting it; the which after happened, and
that the matter being brought to that pass, the realm remained quiet and
peaceable, resolute to obey, and acknowledge for their Lord and King, him in
whose favor sentence should be given, conformable to the oath which the whole
Realm had taken in the said estates: the which was after ministered to the same
Governors in the great church at Lisbone, when as the coffer (which contained
the nomination) was opened, and therefore they were ready to administer
justice, and to acknowledge for King, him unto whom the realm should be
judged by right to appertain: and being thus affected, they beseeched his
majesty to command his ambassadors to assist iudicially to the cause in the
conclusion thereof: But the King being assured of his right, provided of
forces, and seeming no blot to his conscience, made answer that he was well
pleased with the show of zeal to the public good of these realms, and that
he was persuaded that what they had propounded, proceeded from a good
inclination: that he would have bin glad their demand had bin such as he might
have satisfied them, the which he will do always in matter that shall be just,
and tending to the general or particular good of these realms. But the
equity of his cause being so apparent to the world, and remaining no lawful
or competent judge, they neither ought nor could perform the oath which they
said they had taken, seeing it were an apparent prejudice to his title, and a
damage to his own realms: and therefore he entreated them presently to
resolve, to receive and swear him for their king and lord, as God would have
it, they themselves knowing (chiefly touching this matter) what king Henry
thought, determined, and had resolved, and the bond where by they were tied to
obey his will: in doing whereof he would grant unto the realm not only the
privileges which he had set down (the which the Duke of Ossuna should offer in
his name) but any other they should require, being just and reasonable, and
hoping they would take that course which was to be expected from wise men, and
Christians, he would continue his determination. The Ambassadors seemed not
satisfied with this answer, but demanding leave to impart it to the Governors,
they accompanied the king until he came to Merryda.

The conclusion of the States at Almeryn.
Now were the Governors in Portugal (wearied with the Council of the States)
desirous to dissolve them, and having first required a prolonging of the
government the King had left unto them, and not obtaining it, they did signify
unto them that the States were ended, and that the Deputies might return to
their houses, leaving only ten of them to treat of matters which should fall
out, for so small a number might lodge any where, being now forced to leave
Almeryn, and to take some small place near the city of Lisbone, being greatly
entreated thereunto: but the Deputies (who had sent John de Noghera to the
University of Coimbra, to study the point of their pretended election) having
received answer that the election belonged to the States of the realm, they
would by no means be dissolved, persuaded thereunto by the bishop of Parma,
the Prior, the chamber of Saint Arem, and many particulars, offering money to
supply their wants: but they opposed in vain. For although they had sent to
the Governors to allege their reasons in law, laboring to prove that the
States were not to be dissolved, and that their procurations were offorce; yet
the Governors did again disable them, saying, their authorities were of no
force, so as many began to separate themselves, and return to their houses.
The The Governors prepare for defense.
Governors prepared to defend themselves, for although the greatest part of
them were not of that opinion; yet to content the people, and to please the
other Governors and gentlemen of the popular faction, it behooued them so to
do. For this cause they armed their gallions, they brought arms from other
countries, they mustred men for the war, they sent gentlemen throughout all
the provinces of the realm, and labored to employ such as (contrary to the
Catholic Kings faction being present) hindered their resolutions, who
willingly accepted of these charges, seeming to have greater confidence in them
then in any other. Diego de Meneses was sent into the province beyond Tagus;
John de Vasconcello; into Beira; Emanuel of Portugal into the mouth of Tagus;
and many other to diverse parts of the Realm: George de Meneses had charge of
the army at sea; so as they were all dispersed, and the Governors had good
means to effect their desires: yet Martyn Gonzalues de la Camera, no less
popular then the rest, remained in court, of whom the Governors grew jealous,
that having employed him as a mediator between them and the States of the
realm, he was become a superior. But the provision and preparatiues that were
made (although some used all care and diligence) seemed rather done for show
and fashion sake then to any effect.

The manner of the enterprise of Portugal.
In Castill they discoursed upon the manner of this enterprise, seeming,
impossible unto the Duke to gather together so many carriages as was necessary
for the conduct of victuals and munition, and therefore devised to transport
his forces by sea: He determined with few men to keep them busied in
Extremadure to divert them, and under color to hasten the army, to march
toward Andelouzia, and speedily to imbarke his soldiers at Saint Marie Port,
to assail the entry of the mouth of Lisbone, in despite of all the fortresses
that were there: making account to loose some ships which should by chance
touch. But receiving certain advertisement, by men expressly sent into
Portugal, that there was above six thousand chariots to be found, he left
this dangerous resolution, more for the regard of the sea then the enemies. He
determined to march to Settuual thinking it necessary to win a port of the sea
of so great importance, for the harboring of the navy: for coming thither
laden with victuals, and he not able to carry with him by land above a months
provision, it seemed necessary to join the forces and provisions of the sea
to them of the land, and that therein consisted the victory: with this
resolution he went to Merrida, where the King remained, of whom being received
with a cheerful countenance, they treated what course the army should take.
There grew some diversity of opinion betwixt the Duke and some others, who
(persuaded by some confident Portugals) would have the army march to Almeryn,
and there pass Tagus at a foord, or at Saint Arem upon bridges: that they
should force that place being but weak, and so they might pass safely to the
walls of Lisbone, the which without attending any battery would yield
presently, or (it may be) before their arrival: for taking from them the
victuals from the plains of Saint Arem, they should not only besiege them by
famine, but they should so furnish their army with corn, that they should
have no need of provision from the fleet, the which they should better
receive at Lisbone then at Settuual, without hazarding the enteprise, and the
army by the dangers of disimbarking, which (going to Settuual) they must be
forced to do against the forts upon the mouth of the river, and with loss of
time in winning of them: This opinion seemed so grounded, that it required no
less authority or art to disprooue then the Dukes, who being chief of this
enterprise, and to hazard his reputation, drew the King to his opinion. Philip
had likewise environed (as a man may say) all the realm of Portugal with
arms, though not with mercenarie soldiers, yet with such as they could
assemble together; he commanded all Noblemen, whose livings joined to the
confines of this realm, that having enrolled the greatest number of their
subjects able to bear arms, they should be ready at his commandment, yet
in the mean time they should receive gently in his name the cities and
subjects of Portugal that would obey him. In Gallicia Peter de Castro Earl
of Lemos, and Gaspard de Fonsequa Earl of Montere had the charge: against the
province behind the mountains, John Pimentel Earl of Benneuent, and Diego de
Tolledo Earl of Alua: In Estremadura, Beltramo dela Cueua, Duke of
Albequerque, and Ferrant Anriques Marquess of Villa Noua: against Vera, John
Pacheco Marquess of Seraluo; and in Algarues, Frauncis de Suniga The state of
the Duke of Alua his army.
Duke of Besar, and Alonso de Gusman of Medina Cidonia. In the army where the
Duke of Alua was commander of all, both at sea and at land, the places were
thus divided: The Italians had three coronels, Prosper Colonna, Vincent
Caraffa, and Charles Spinelli, having for General Peter de Medicy, brother to
Frauncis the great Duke of Tuscaine, with whom was sent by the said great Duke
Jews d'Ouara, whom the King had made one of his Councellers at war. Sanches
d'Auila was Lord Marshall of the field: There was no commander of the horse,
the Captains being all Noblemen and men of account, they could not
conveniently make them subject to any one of their companions, the place
requiring a man of such quality, as he could not be inferior to the Duke, and
superior to the said Captains, although after in time of necessity Ferrant
of Tolledo, son to the said Duke, was made their leader: Count Jerome of
Lodron commanded the Germans, Frauncis d'Allaua had his ordinary charge as
General of the artillery, but although the preparations were brought to this
point, yet the King daily protested by his ministers to the Governors, of the
inconveniences of the war, if they delivered not the realm in peace unto
him; neither did they cease to treat many things in Portugal concerning an
agreement, and for that the King rather desired to show his forces, then to use
them, to conquer by gentleness then by rigor, he offered unto the realm many
graces and privileges delivering him peaceable possession, and the Governors
(the greatest part whereof inclined thereunto) had already debated with the
Agents of the Catholic King, what conditions the King should grant unto the
realm, the which were published by the Duke of Ossuna, and signed with his
hand, offering that the King should grant them, in The conditions that the
Catholic King offered if they would deliver the realm quietly.
giving him the crown, and they were these: That the King should take a
formal oath to observe all the customs, privileges, and liberties, granted
to these realms by the Kings his predecessors: That when there shall be need
to assemble the States for the affairs of Portugal, it shall be done within
the realm, and that in no other assembly of States whatsoever: They shall
neither propound nor resolve upon any matter concerning these realms: That
appointing a Viceroy to govern, or any persons with what title soever, they
shall be Portugals. The like is to be understood in sending of a Visitor or
Judge, with this condition notwithstanding, for as much as concerns the
authority of the realms, and to do them a greater favor, his majesty and
his successors may send for Viceroy or Governor one of the blood royal, be he
son, uncle, brother, cosen, or nephew to the King: Besides, that all superior
officers or inferior, belonging either to justice, or to the revenues of the
crown, shall be distributed to Portugals, and not to strangers: That all
offices which have been in the times of former kings both of the court, and of
the realm, shall be bestowed upon the natural borne, such as shall deserve
the same when as his Majesty or his successors shall enter into the realm:
And the like is to be understood of all other dignities of what quality
soever, either at sea or land, which are at this present, or shall be
hereafter created: The garrisons which shall remain in any forts, shall be
Portugals. Moreover they said that the traffike of the Indies, Ethiopia, and
other places, appertaining to these realms, being discovered, or to discover,
shall not be dismembered from the same, neither shall there be any other
alteration made then is at this present: And that the officers and their ships
which shall be employed in these traffikes, shall be Portugals, and shall sail
in the ships of Portugal. That the gold and silver which shall be coined in
these realms and their dependancies, and all that which shall come from those
provinces, shall be coined with the arms of Portugal without any other
addition. That all Bishoprics, abbeies, benefices, and pensions shall be given
to Portugals: And the like is to be understood of the office of Inquisitor,
Mayor of commaunderies, of the offices of military orders, of the Priorie of
Crato: and finally of all other ecclesiastical livings, as has been formerly
spoken of the temporal. He did yield there should be no thirds exacted of
ecclesiastical goods, neither subsidies nor croysades, and that for any of
these causes they should procure no bulls: That they should not give either
city, town, place, jurisdiction, nor royal prerogative to other then to
Portugals: And falling any vacancie of the livings of the crown, his Majesty
nor his successors should not retain them for themselves, but give them to the
kinseman of him that did enjoy him, or to other Portugals that shall deserve
them: Provided always that the Castillians and strangers which now live in
these realms, and have been seruitors to the Kings deceased, shall not be
excluded: That in military orders nothing shall be altered of the state it now
stands in: That gentlemen shall be paid their pensions amounting to twelve
years, and that his Majesty and his successors shall yearly entertain into
his service two hundredth Portugals, to whom he shall give that pay which they
call Moradia; and those which have no title of gentlemen shall serve in the
wars of the realm: That when his Majesty or his successors, shall come into
those realms, they shall not take up their lodgings as they use in Castill,
but shall observe the custom of Portugal. Moreover his Majesty in what place
soever he shall be, shall carry with him a man of the Church, a Superintendent
of the revenues of the crown, a high Chauncellor, and two Disambarcadours of
the court, which jointly shall be called the Council of Portugal, by whose
means all matters shall be dispatched, with them shall go to clerks of the
revenues, and two of the chamber, for all occasions incident two their charge,
all shall be written in the Portugal tongue, and all shall be Portugals: And
when his Majesty or his successors shall come into Portugal, he shall retain
the said Council and officers, which shall be united to such as shall treat
of the government of the realm: That all correctors and other officers of
justice, with all other inferior offices, shall in the Kings absence be
disposed of in the realm, as they be at this present: and the like shall be
understood of the officers of purueyors, auditors of the reckonings, and others
of the like quality, concerning the revenues of the crown: He declared
likewise, that all causes and charges appertaining to justice of what quality
or sum soever, should be definitiuely ended and executed in these realms, as
they be at this present: That his Majesty and his successors shall entertain
a chapel in manner and form as the kings of these realms have formerly
done, the which shall be resident at Lisbone, that the divine service may be
continually celebrated with the accustomed ceremonies, except the Kings person,
or in his absence the Viceroy or governor shall make his residence in some
other part of the realm, and would have there the said chapel remain:
That his Majesty shall conformably admit Portugals to the offices of his
house, according to the custom of Burgundy, without any difference betwixt
them, the Castillians, and his subjects of other nations. That the Queen shall
likewise entertain into her service, Noblemen, and the chief Ladies of
Portugal, whom she shall favor and recompense, marrying them in Portugal or
in Castill: That for the good of the people and generally of these realms the
increase of traffic, and the good correspondencie with those of Castill, his
Majesty shall be pleased to open the barred havens on both parties, that the
merchandise may pass freely, as it has formerly done before the impositions
of such customs as are now paid: That he would command that all courtesies
possible may be done for the bringing in corn into Castill for the provision
of these realms: That he shall command to be delivered three hundred thousand
ducats to be employed for these causes following: First sixescore thousand for
the redemption of captives, at the disposition of the house of Pity at
Lisbone, the one half to be employed for the redeeming of poor gentlemen, and
the other half for ordinary persons, all Portugals: one hundredth and fifty
thousand to make the ground of a stock to be lent without interest whereas
need shall require, as it shall be disposed by the magistrate of the chamber
of Lisbone, and the thirty thousand remaining, to cure the infirmity that now
reigns, which shall be distributed by order from the Archbishop and chamber of
Lisbone. They said likewise that touching the provision which shall be made
for armies sent to the Indies, the defense of the realm, the punishment of
pirates, and defense of the frontiers of Affricke, his Majesty shall take such
resolution as shall be convenient within these realms; although it be with the
help of his other countries, and the great expense of his royal treasure.
That in recompense of the love, which the natural borne of these realms do
bear unto their princes, it would please the King to make his ordinary abode
there: And although the government of his other realms which God has
subjected unto him, hinder the effect of this his desire, notwithstanding he
promises to make the most abode he can in this realm, and having no cause of
hinderance, he will leave the Prince in his place, that being brought up
amongst the Portugals, he may know, esteem, and cherish them as his Majesty
does. This role was published throughout all the principal cities of the
realms, by the ministers of the Catholic king; adding thereunto, that if the
Portugals desired more, the king would grant them anything, supposing that as
Christians they would require nothing but just and godly things, inferring (it
may be) secretly, that they would not yield to points of the Inquisition and of
justice.

THE FIFTH BOOK.
The Contents of the fifth Book.
The fortification of the Driehead, the confusion of matters within the Realm,
and of the Governors: The Catholic Kings answer to the Ambassadors of
Portugal, his expedition in the University of Alcala touching his entry into
the Realm: The contrariety of opinions whether the King should march with his
army in person or not: The recovery of Eluas and of Olliuenza: The creating
of Antonie for King: The Governors flight: The embassage of the Duke of
Bragance to King Philip, and his answer: The taking of Villauizosa: The entry
of the Army into Portugal: The yielding up of Stremos.

THe Portugals did not generally accept the offers made by the Catholic King:
for although three of the Governors, the Nobility, and the Clergy, did in
their hearts like of them, yet the third estate did blame them, saying, it was
a roll of deceipts, and a discovery of Philips small force: And that such as
had framed these conditions, were more inclined to their own private profit
then the good of the realm; desiring still the cause might be ended by
justice. The Governors therefore still The Governors solicit their defense.
continue the preparation for defense, and had secretly sent Francis Barretto
into France, to let the Christian King understand their right, and the wrong
the Catholic King did them, seeking to possess the Realm by force, and to
demand the succor of six thousand foot, giving commission to Barretto to go
from thence to Rome to beseech the Pope, to mediate with the King a suspension
of arms, and to bind himself to judgment. They sent Elizee of Portugal
into Germany, to satisfy the Emperor, and other princes touching their
defense, with many iustifications, such force had their desire to choose a
king after their own humor, that seeking succors from foreign princes, it
was the greatest care they used to shake off Philips yoke, for that (the which
would seem incredible) even in the life of king Henry, some gentlemen that
were prisoners in Afric, had required aid of victuals and men from the
Cheriffe, although there were no likelihood he should grant it, seeing that
(besides the diversity of laws) there was no amity, nor other respect of
state whatsoever could bind him unto it. For although the union of these
Realms under Philip discontented him, yet being wise and of judgment, it was
not likely he should discover himself against so mighty a neighbor, nor
trust to the weak Portugals, being offended, and (as a man may say) having
their hands yet died with their blood: They proceeded slowly with the
preparation of their armies and fortifications both for want of money, and for
the often disagreement of their ministers: And Jews Caesar chief purueior,
inclined to Philip, cared not greatly to hasten the affairs, yea expressly
(sometimes with one let, sometimes with an other) delaied them, so as they
only repaired the fortresses upon the mouth of the river of Tagus, and made
new rampires, in places where they might descend, putting greater garrisons in
all places then was accustomed, and throughout all the city of Lisbone, they
began to build many platformes, to plant artillery, for the defense of the
sea, making ready their gallions, and such other ships as they had: Yet
Emanuel of Portugal either not well satisfied with these fortifications, or
being naturally inclined to seem to have more knowlegde then the rest;
resolved (against the opinion of many well skilled in that act) to build a
forte in the midst of the river, at the mouth thereof; for that being large in
that place, ships should not The Dry head, fortified.
pass but within shot of their artillery: it seemed unto him that he had
good means to effect it, for that near to the place whereas it runs into the
sea, there rises a small flat hill of Sand, but little discovered of the
waters, the which they call Cabesasecca, the which deuides the navigations or
entry thereof into two parts, the one lying betwixt the Island and the left
shore (having but a shallow channel) is not nauigable but at a full sea, and
with small vessels: but the other which lies betwixt the Island and the banks on
the right hand, is likewise divided into two channels by a shelfe which they
call Cacippo: That which lies betwixt the right bank and the shelfe, is
defended by the rock or castle of Saint Julian: the other which is betwixt
the shelfe and the sandy hill, which they term La Carriera d'Alcasoua, is not
defended by any forte, neither can the artillery of Saint Julian reach so
far. Emanuell would build a forte in the Island to defend this passage: And
although having dug deep in the sand, he could find no firm ground to
settle his foundation, yet would not Emanuell desist from his opinion, but
having no means to build it of stone, he raised it of wood, filling it with
earth, the which he supplied with artillery, and many other things necessary,
yet could he hardly furnish it with water, for that his caske burnt with the
sun and the reuerberation of the sands, (which is vehement in those parts,
although they were covered A confusion of the affairs of Portugal, and the
Governors.
with sails) did break, and would hold no water. At that time the
Governors did an act of great consideration to animate men to the defense of
the Realm, for by a new and dangerous example, they used religious men as
instruments to execute their intention: commanding all religious houses that
they should not only in their sermons, but also in their confessions, command
their preachers and confessors, to animate the people to defense, in that sort
as they preach the Croisado against infidels: And for that the Portugals are
too ambitious of honor, they commanded them to use this encouragement, that
such should be most honored, who did most readily prepare for resistance, so
as their preachings which should have been religious, were become furious
orations of soldiers: This was greatly blamed by the good and wise, and was the
cause of great hurt to the whole Realm, for besides the employing of priests
in a profaned action, they did animate the poor people to this defense, the
which afterward did thrust them rashly into arms. It was likewise very
hurtful to the religious houses: for as it is dangerous to stir up the
minds of religious persons, these being by the death of king Henry grown more
then before, adding thereunto this other liberty to speak publicly; whilst
they did animate others, it bred in themselves warlike affections, so as having
passed the limits of their profession, in a manner all the Ecclesiastical
state ran into mighty abuses and disorders, as we shall hereafter see: There
wanted money to furnish the charge for this defense, and therefore they desired
to borrowe one hundredth thousand ducats of the merchants, the which (although
they would not agree unto) they were forced to pay: These things were practiced
at Lisbone more then in any other parts of the Realm. In the mean time the
Governors were in division, and irresolute, loosing still of their reputation:
For the Prior continuing still in the cause of his legitimation, and seeming
daily a more obstinate pretendent, threatened such as should contradict him:
The ministers of justice began to decline from their accustomed authority, and
every man presumed to speak and do what he pleased, showing well that it was a
realm without a king, the which was remarkable in two points, which then
happened, as well amongst the religious as the secular. The one was that the
religious of the The disorder of the religious of Belem.
order of Saint Jerome in our Ladies monastery of Belem, being desirous to
recover their liberty which the king had taken from them, who with consent of
the Pope, and of his authority had bound them (notwithstanding the rules of
this religion) to choose superior officers at his pleasure; that is, one of the
four or five religious men that he should name to every office: Friar Emanuel
d'Euora being then Provincial, all the Religious went unto him, saying; That
he was not iudicially chosen to that charge, and therefore he should renounce
his office, and they would choose another according to the Statutes: The Friar
(to whom this seemed of hard digestion) opposed himself to their demand,
with many reasons, and multiplying many words, both of the one side and of the
other, they did forceably put the Provincial prisoner in a Seller, using him
something hardly in their choler: The kinsmen to the Provincial hearing of
this disorder, ran for remedy to Alexander Formento then Nuncio for his
Holiness in that Realm, who understanding the reasons of both parties
(although the Religious protested he was not their Judge) yet he commanded the
Provincial should be delivered, and restored to his charge, citing some of the
Religious men of the Monastery before him as seditious: The Friars (to whom
this sentence was signified by a public Notarie) would not obey; So as the
kinsmen of the Religious prisoner, craving aid from the secular power, the
Governors sent the officers of justice of the city of Lisbone to the Covent,
with three Ensigns of soldiers, to see this sentence put in execution by
force, who being come to Belem, the Friars shut their gates, leaving the Church
open; where notwithstanding the grate of wood which shuts up the great Chapel
and the Sepulchers of kings was close, they went into the quire singing their
Letanies: But after the officers of justice had knocked a while at the Covent
gate, and no man opening it, entering into the Church they burst down the
grate of wood, so as the soldiers coming into the Cloister of Friars, they
laid hold of such Religious persons as they met, with small respect of their
priestly order: And although the elders came with their Crosses, Bulls, and
excommunications, it nothing prevailed, for they must of force deliver the
Religious man, and restore him to his former estate, the which they did,
protesting they had used violence, and that they would complain to the
Apostolic seat. The other case was that Fernand de Doctor Fernand de Pina
slain.
Pina a Doctor and Citizen, being chosen in the place of Diego Salema (whom
Henry had deposed) Vereador of the Chamber, which is the highest degree of
magistrate, that has charge of the city; he was at noone day in the market
place, wounded in the head with a Curtelax, by Anthony Soarez, whereof he died
soon after: the which the Prior had caused to be done, for that Pyna in his
office, had not only spoken ill against him, but also labored to draw the
officers, and all the Council of the Chamber, to the Catholic Kings
devotion: Anthony desired to revenge himself in this manner; and the offender
(who knew better how to strike then to fly) being hurt by the Sergeants, and
retired into a Church, without the city, was taken prisoner by the Justice,
and after some days of imprisonment was hanged, and quartered, the which
execution was done with trouble and fear, least the people should deliver
him: For the authority of the Governors declining, the ministers of justice
were not respected: And for that they knew this murder was committed by the
commandment of Anthony, the people were inclined to save him. The Religious
for the like respect (alleging, that the secular power could not judge him
being taken in the Church) came running likewise to the place of execution to
succor him: And had not Damain D' Aguiar (a severe and resolute officer) had
the charge thereof, who suddenly put this sentence in execution, there was so
great a concourse of people, crying, and of religious men with their crosses,
and excommunications, that the offender had been easily rescued. These
disorders displeased the lovers of religion, and quietness, who blaming somewhat
the Friars, for not suffering their Provincial, quietly to end the term of
his charge, yet did they attribute more fault unto the governors, for
suffering in such a season so public and rigorous an execution, against the
religious, and chiefly upon a Monastery seated upon the banks of Tagus,
saying, that if for no other reason, yet should they have forborne, in respect
that many English and French ships anchored there, whose men infected with
heresy, would rejoice to see the religious in the hands of Sergeants. The
death of Pina was held for an indiscreet and cruel resolution of Anthony, for
being but a matter of small moment, to be revenged by so foul an example, upon
an old man, alawyer, and of mean condition, he had thrust himself into an
exigent either to be held unthankful in suffering of Soarez to die as he did,
or else to do violence unto justice. But for that princes hate the
executioners of their follies, for in their life does live the remembrance of
their errors; even so the Prior hated this man, after the offense committed,
neither did he labor to save him, although his death made him contemptible to
the people. The said prior was the^ at Almerin, laboring the cause of his
legitimation, and soliciting the judges to decide the same, who excused
themselves that they could not do it, (observing the laws of the realm) if he
retired not himself 25. miles from the Court, that in so doing they would
look into the cause: But for that the Duke of Bragance and the Ambassadors of
other princes were there present, he would not depart, and for this reason the
matter surceased: at this time Emanuel of Portugal, who remained at Belem,
labored ambitiously that John Teglio, one of the governors, his brother in
law, conformable to himself in opinion, (principally in the exclusion of
Philip,) should be sent to Belem, with authority from the other governors to
provide by his presence for all things necessary, seeming a matter hard to
effect at Almeryn: The other governors desirous to be rid of his company, and
not daring to contradict any thing that seemed to concern the defense, gave
him authority, and suffered him to go to Belem: There he consulted with
Emanuel, and receiving with some difficulty, the money borrowed of the
merchants, he resolved (for the gathering together of a greater sum) to sell
the jewels of the Crown, the which were there, and therefore causing them to
be brought forth, he dealt with some merchants upon the price. The Duke of
Ossuna was then returned into Castill, leaving Mora in Portugal, with the
other Ambassadors that were Lawyers, who understanding the jewels were upon
sale, the said Mora in the name of the Catholic King, required the said
governors not to sell them, as appertaining to the King, protesting both
against them and the buiers, that they should be bound to restore the price at
their own charge, so as they found not any that would deal with them.

Philip being at Merrida as it was said, having by a long protestation
required the governors to deliver him the possession of the Realm: The Bishop
of Coimbra and Emanuel de Melo returned The answer of the Catholic king to
the Portugals.
the second time, making the like proposition to the King as they had done at
Guadalupa, offering to put the cause to arbitrament, and complaining he had
given them too short a time to resolve: But Philip being now well resolved what
he would do, and infourmed of the aid the Portugals demanded from other
princes, he made them the like answer as before: Many judged the proposition
of those Ambassadors to be ill grounded, saying it was an unseemly thing to
require the King to make himself subject to the judgment of nominated judges,
seeing that King Henry himself (who with more appearance of reason, might
pretend to be lawful judge in this cause) did never require the King to
acknowledge him for judge, neither did he ever declare him contumax, in the
cause debated with the pretendents for not acknowledging him.

The Catholic King came to Badagios the 20. of May, where the Portugal
Ambassadors labored to persuade him, making suite, that before the taking of
arms he should admit an assembly to the estates, but they were no more
admitted to audience; the king resolved to send his answer unto the governors,
and to publish it throughout the whole realm in the name of his Council, the
which he did as follows: That experience had taught that by two examples of
the estates last held at Lisbone, and at Almerin, they wrought no good effect,
in favor of the apparent right of his Majesty, but in the one, and the other,
they had still labored to trouble it, seeking lets, and delays, which might
have bred the loss thereof, and therefore it seemed a treble error to attend
again a new assembly of these estates: That they have no reason to complain
that his Majesty had given them too short a time to resolve, accounting from
the day of the receipt of his letters the xiij. of March, (by the which he
required them to swear him) saying they made no good computation, if they
supposed he were dispossessed of the realm, but from the time that he
demanded it, appertaining unto him from the hour of King Henry's death: but
that his Majesty had expressly contained himself a month and a half
without making of any motion, to the end they should not loose the thanks, by
calling him to the succession whom God had called; and might have leisure
amongst themselves to make clear this bond by which they were tied, and give
satisfaction, making the pretendents capable of reason, to the end they should
not hinder the public quiet, and that they might be intercessors for them and
for the realm, which course the king himself had taught them: That their
excuse might be taken in two senses, saying, they could not receive his
Majesty but in a general assembly of estates, their meaning is, either that
they cannot do it by right, or that they may not do it, for that they dare
not: In the first case they are deceived, for there needs no assembly of
estates, when a king makes his entry unto the realm, although he succeed not
to his father, but to his kinseman; neither were they necessary when as Henry
succeeded to his nephew. In the other case that they cannot do it, because
they dare not; the excuse is good, but not to bind the king, neither in
justice, nor conscience, to desist from taking the possession of his goods, if
the delays make the means difficult. That this deceit should grow from the
opinion they have conceived, that in the end, all that they can do for his
Majesty, is to consigne him the realm by accord and composition; not
remembering that he received it not from their hands, but from God and by his
own right, so as these words of capitulations, transactions, and accords be
neither proper, nor fit; for if they look unto the preservation of their
statutes, and privileges, they should not be called accords, but bonds, the
which his Majesty must accomplish, as lawful king of Portugal: And if they
refer it to that which is newly to be granted them, much less do they
deserve that name, but rather of the liberality, greatness, and mere grace,
whereunto his Majesty, for the bounty and love he bears them will bind
himself, with all the assurance they can demand, so as the estates were
necessary, when as the realm might dispute upon these graces, and choose
another king whom they pleased; but having no authority, but to entreat for
the augmentation of these favors, the estates had nothing to do with his
entry: That they delivered all these things only to make plain the matter,
with the rigor of truth, without any meaning of his Majesty, to refuse such
graces, as had been offered on his behalf, or to give the assurance they
should require for the accomplishment thereof; neither does he stand upon the
means, terms, or words which shall be requisite, to give full contentment to
the realm, although they be in effect the same with capitulations and accords:
That as the inconueniencie they allege wants substance and reason, so those
which are presented in his Majesty's name were so precise and necessary, as
they admitted no more delay, although that he desired to satisfy their
demands, as he always sought to do by effect in any thing he could. That it
is apparent, the army now marching and approaching so near, it cannot turn
head, nor entertain it self, for that the victuals in the country are
consumed, and that which they have in store would be spoiled; besides it is a
dangerous matter to entertain an army obedient so long time at sea, and
therefore were most reasonable to discharge them of this burden: That although
his Majesty be easily persuaded that the greatest part of those which require
him to stay, do it with a good and sincere intention, yet can they not deny
but another sort of people desire and labor to hinder him by the accidents
that may happen, and to cause him to loose the opportunity, wherein he might
employ his galleys upon the coast of Portugal, knowing the season for vessels
that go with oars to be quickly past: That since his Majesty came from
Madrill, he has sought all possible delays, having (as they know) spent three
months in his voyage, to the end they should want no time, to understand,
agree, and accommodate themselves; but although the time had been continued a
whole year, it is apparent the business had been nothing advanced, having
spent so many days in superfluous replyings, during which they might have
assembled their estates, and forgotten them: And whereas on the one side they
offer to hold them with brevity, on the other side (being now the month of
June) his Majesty understands, that neither the Prelates, the Nobility,
much less the Deputies of towns are arrived, and that the elections are not
yet made in many cities, having intelligence that they delay them by cunning
and subornations; whereby it is apparent, that these estates would rather
breed a confusion, then any good effect: And although the small fruit they may
hope for hereby, be evident; yet do they not believe his Majesty will hinder
them until his entry into the realm; but being entered, he will ordain that
which shall seem fit for the service of God, of himself, and of the general
good of this crown, be it by means of the estates or otherwise, seeking
always the most profitable, for the natural subjects of the same realm: That
his Majesty cannot (although he should shut his eyes) rest fully assured of
their propositions, seeing his good subjects in these realms, oppressed and
afflicted, under color of an unjust resistance, which they call defense, and
those only persecuted, and ill entreated, which follow his party, and
acknowledge the truth of his Title, whereas contrariwise those which are
passionate and slanderous perturbers of the peace, good and public quiet, are
favored: That to conclude, his Majesty would have their works conformable to
their words, for otherwise they cannot blame him, if he proceed cunningly:
And that they may understand with how great reason he distrusteth their
delays, he did signify unto them, that he had certain and late advise from
many provinces, that at the same time when as they entreated him with fair
words to stay and attend, they did with great instance demand succors from
other nations, making secret practices most hurtful to the good of the Church,
and the peace of all Christendom, although God would not suffer them to
trouble it: That although with the help of God his Majesty would soon enter
into Portugal with mighty forces, yet should they not believe that he came to
make war against them, but would labor all he could that none should receive
hurt, but such as did oppose themselves obstinately to his just possession,
hoping they would not any ways hinder him, but would willingly make easy all
difficulties, to the end that by their good succors, his Majesty might this
summer turn his force against infidels.

The governors inconstancy.
The governors viewing this grave and wise answer with the kings resolution,
by the which the whole realm was assured to have war, both within and round
about, being odious unto the people, who blamed them for the slack and evil
execution of all matters, and of the weak resistance they prepared, they were
doubtful what to do: They would have left Almerin, for the plague beginning
to reign, and the season hot (the place being sandy) would not suffer them
to stay: And having intelligence that Anthony animated the people against them
in his favor, they desired to retire into some place of strength, as well to
assure themselves against the rising of the people, as for the war, for that
Almeryn was without walls. They judged Settuuall (whither they had called the
estates, although with small hope to hold them) more fit then any other, being
a walled town and a port of the sea, and therefore desired to withdraw
themselves thither: They had devised (at the least three of them) to assist the
Catholic King, for his entry into the realm, in despite of such as should
prepare for the defense, esteeming this strong place fit for that effect, there
to bring in the kings army at sea, and so to frustrate the fortification which
Emanuel of Portugal had made in the mouth of the river of Tagus: but they
could not bring their purpose to pass, for the deputies of the last estates
remaining, discovering their intention, said, it was fit they should all stay
at Saint Arem, so as fearing to give greater cause to suspect, they could not
depart: They added moreover, that leaving the Prior there with the deputies, in
a time when as the Catholic king should begin to take arms, they might in
their absence under color of defense erect a tyranny. So as ignorant what
course to take, or how to redress things, they did (being friends) by their
irresolution more hurt to the Catholic king, then they could have done being
enemies: for the king (hoping these would have delivered him the crown)
proceeded slowly with his army. At that time it chanced that John Gonzalez de
Camera, Earl of Caglietta, died of the plague at Almeryn, so as the Governors
took this occasion to depart from thence, and went to Settuual, with the Duke
of Bragance, the Agents of the Catholic King, and others of their faction;
for having created captains, and placed a garrison, they commanded the gates
to be guarded. The Catholic King having assembled his army near to
Badagios, and received advertisement that his navy was at Saint Marie port,
ready to set sail, before they should enter into Portugal, not yet well
satisfied with the diligence he had used (as it is said) with many Divines;
desired to consult again in the University of Alcala, where the profession of
Divinity flourishes most in those realms, upon his entry in arms into the
realm, and the proposition made by the Portugal Ambassadors: And to that
effect having assembled all the doctors, being in number The diligence of the
Catholic King upon his entry by force into Portugal, made by the Divines of
Alcala.
above thirty, having made their prayers and supplications unto God, in their
sacrifices; and the matter considered by every one apart; it was disputed of in
three sessions: For although the matter were not hard to decide, yet was it
grave and new: All, without any disagreement, concur in opinion with the
first, with whom the King had consulted, and without viewing of their reasons,
they sent a public decree unto the King. There was propounded unto them three
articles: I he first, that the King being certain to succeed by right, after
the death of King Henry to the realms of Portugal: whether he were in
conscience bound to submit himself to any tribunal judge, or arbitrator, who
might adiudge him the realms, or put him in possession thereof. The second
was, that the realm of Portugal refusing to acknowledge him for their Prince,
unless he would first stand to judgment with the pretendents: Whether he
may of his own authority, take possession thereof by force, against such as
shall make resistance, presupposing that there is no doubt or scruple of
conscience in his title whatsoever? The third was, that the Governors of
Portugal, alleging that they and the whole realm, have sworn not to receive
any for King but him that should be iudicially so declared, and that they may
not receive the King otherwise, the rather for that the pretendents complain
and offer to stand to judgment: He desired to know if the said Governors,
and the whole realm, may pretend this oath for an excuse not to receive him
for King. To the first they answered, that the King was not bound in
conscience, to submit himself to any Justice or arbitrament, seeing that he
had of himseife private authority to adiudge unto himself those realms, and
to take possession: They excluded (especially from this authority of judging,)
all Princes, and such as might pretend to take any knowledge thereof. And first
humbly saluting the Pope, and the Apostolic sea, they denied, that this
jurisdiction did appertain unto him, the cause being meerelie temporal, and
nothing concurring where by his holiness should use that indirect authority
which he has in temporal causes, so far forth as they concern the
spiritual good: They showed he was not bound to the censure of the Emperor,
for that the Kings of Spain were sovereigns, not acknowledging the Emperor
in any thing, and much less to any other King. They proved he was not subject
to the commonwealth, nor the realms of Portugul, saying, That when as common
wealths do choose their first King upon condition to obey him and his
successors, they remain subject unto him to whom they have transferred their
authority, no jurisdiction remaining in them, either to judge the realm, or
the true successor, seeing in the first election, all the true successors were
chosen: Being therefore most apparent there is a true successor; it follows
that the common wealth of Portugal has no jurisdiction to judge of him that
does truly succeed, and that the King has as great a warrant not to be
subject to the censure of this common wealth, as he has to be true successor.
And as touching the eleven persons of the four and twenty which King Henry
had named; they said that Henry himself could not be judge of him that did
succeed after him, for that after his death the office of administering justice
was expired, and all his authority and jurisdiction past unto his lawful
successor. Against arbitrators they spoke little, only that the bond of
co^premise had no place, when as the equity of the cause was not doubtful, as
it was supposed. They answered them which said, that the King had no interest
to the realm of Portugal as King of Castill, but as kinseman to King Henry;
by reason whereof, he could not in this case challenge the pre-eminence he
has as King of Castill, saying, that this imaginary division cannot be made
in the person of the King, for it is so annexed to the dignity royal, that
his person cannot be wronged, but the dignity would suffer. And seeing the
Prince may lawfully make war upon an other Realm, for injuries done to his
brothers and friends confederats, with greater reason may he do it, in taking
possession of a Realm which appertains lawfully unto himself. They made
answer to such as said, that (observing the civil and canon law) a matter
litigious, should be judged where it happens, and therefore this should be
decided in Portugal, saying, that these decisions speak of particular
persons, who have their superior Judges, and not of sovereign Princes and
their dependancies. To the second article, they answered with more reasons
then unto the first, saying, the King was not bound to any thing but to
signify unto the Governors his Title and certain interest to the Crown, and
if notwithstanding this demonstration, they should make resistance, then the
King by his own authority might take possession of the Realm, (using if
need required) force of arms, for that in this action it can not be termed
force, but a natural defense of the Realm which is his own, and a just
punishment of Rebels. To the third, they said that this oath could not bind
them that had undertaken to observe it, seeing it is most certain, that
neither in Portugal nor else where, any judge may determine this cause with
the King. Moreover, that this oath is to the prejudice of his prerogative
royal, and as this oath did not bind such as had taken it, so could it not
excuse them from the bond by the which they were tied to receive him for King;
and that the allegations of the pretendents, and their offer to stand to
judgment did not bind the King The Catholic King takes possession of
Portugal.
to acknowledge for judge, such as were not. The Catholic King, having viewed
these reasons, resolved to stay no longer from taking possession of the Realm,
and therefore he caused his whole Army to march to Cantigliana three miles
from Badagios, there to pass into Portugal, where he himself with the
Queen would see it lodged; for which effect he commanded a scaffold to be
made in open field, where being mounted, he set down all the orders, directed
A question whether the Catholic King should go with the army in person.
by the old Duke of Alua in the habit of a young soldier: And although it
seemed the King had resolved to stay at Badagios; yet this matter was disputed
amongst the curious with diverse reasons; and besides the general opnions of
some, who did maintain that Kings ought to be personal in their enterprises,
they did allege some other special reasons, which did bind the king to go
with his army: They distinguished three qualities incident to the enterprise,
whereby the King should go in person: that is, the importance of the
pretention, the hope of happy success, and the difficulty to execute it by a
minister: showing that all three did concur herein, seeing it was a question
for a realm of importance, rich, and bordering upon his other countries, head
of many rich estates, and then in the way of greatness. That the hope of
victory was in all human consideration certain, both in regard of his
justice, and force, as also for the weakness of his adversaries: That the
difficulty to undertake it by a minister was great, and proper in that case;
the King not entering into Portugal to subdue cities, but to win their
hearts; not playing the part of a conqueror, but of lawful Prince; who enters
with necessary forces to suppress the ordinary alterations of realms, newly
gotten, as he had protested to the Governors and estates of the realm; that
such offices for so important causes could not be committed but to the person
of the eldest Prince, being a commission unfit for any child or nephew, much
less for a captain General, being a Castillian of nation, most imperious
both by nature, and for the great and important affairs which he had managed;
besides being for his own particular hateful to the Portugals: They said it
was most certain if the King entered the realm in person, of friends he
should make faithful subjects, of newters friends, and of enemies newters;
where as contrariwise, the Duke would make his friends newters, his newters
enemies, and his enemies obstinate rebels: With these reasons and others, such
as judged the Kings presence necessary in the enterprise, fortified their
opinions: On the otherside it was said, that when the resolutions of the one
side have so great difficulty, as they draw near to impossibilities, there is
no disputing what is convenient, but of force they must obey necessity: that
the question of the Kings entering into Portugal was of this nature, seeing
that by diverse accidents the strength of the army was so weakened, that it was
both in quantity and quality most different from that which had been set
down, for there wanted above six thousand soldiers The Kings army wasted.
of them which had been levied, the number of the Spaniards which came out of
Italy was greatly diminished, and there wanted half of those that were new
raised, and the bands that came from the low Countries could not arrive in
time. If these which were the strength of the army had been joined, and the
number appointed in the beginning assembled, the King might well have performed
the enterprise in person, for then had he made the way open for the succors of
men and munition, from the frontiers unto Settuual, leaving garrisons in all
places to receive and conduct them. But wanting horse and foot necessary for
the action, there was no other remedy but to run the fortune of two great
dangers: The one was to conduct all the victuals with the army, which would
cause a new and monstrous form of Camp, wanting horsemen to cover their
carriages: The other of no less importance was, that the life of these men
depended upon the inconstancy of the sea and wind, which should conduct the
army from Andelouzia to Settuuall, with the other victuals and munition to
serve the want of those whom they transported. And although the Duke contented
himself with the number of his soldiers, he did it trusting to his own
dexterity, and the ignorance of his enemies: And if he hoped to surmount these
dangers, he grounded his opinion upon the Portugals unskillfulness to prevent
him, entertaining him behind with continual skirmishes to conuoy him, the
which if they could effect were dangerous, for there by they should force him
to turn back and fight with disadvantage of the place, where they might be
defeated, or stayed from passing the army over the river of Tagus, the which
were to put a battle in compremise, for the humors which might daily arise;
besides there were some difficulty to join the two parts of the army, the
one being at sea, the other at land, and uneasy to join the^ at a limited
time, and the delay of 20. days would hinder the effect for a years
imploiment; so as they concluded that neither by reason of war, nor of state,
the King ought to hazard his person in this enterprise, for that neither
industry, nor fortune be sufficient warrants for the safety of Princes, who
ought not to ground their resolutions upon an others weakness, but upon their
own proper forces.

Whilst that matters in Castill stood on these terms, and that the Portugals
grew daily more arrogant and confused, it was apparent with small insight how
this realm ran headlong into ruin: Confusion in Portugal.
For all being confounded with vanity, no man knew what he would do, no man was
resolute what he should execute, and if any were yet blinded, they knew not
what course to take: The Governors being at Settuuall, assembled the estates,
being amazed to understand the Duke of Alua was in field, resolute to invade
the realm presently: On the otherside that Anthony was at Saint Arem,
incensing the Deputies, that they should not go to the Estates, practicing the
disorder which happened after. The Duke of Bragance pressed them, showing his
griefs in public, it may be for not proceeding according to his humor. The
Ambassadors of the Catholic King gave them no time to breath. John Teglio was
at Lisbone, preparing for defense, with whom they had no good intelligence:
They desired to content all men, yet feared the peoples fury; they labored
much and provided for nothing. The cities cried for arms to defend themselves,
or to have permission to yield; they answered in general terms without any
effect; they received letters from the Duke of Alua, who accused them of
cruelty, saying, they observed not the custom of all nations, which is, that
when an army enters master of the field, they command all places which cannot
defend themselves, to yield, to the end they may avoid the violent course of
war, to slaie all such as make resistance, whereas not using of this rigor
they shall be forced to bring the cannon before every cottage, and make the
war perpetual, and yet this letter never induced them to set a resolute
order to any town. They were well resolved to give the realm to the Catholic
King, yet could they not conclude for the effecting thereof. They feared in a
manner to be stoned if they discovered this intention, and therefore they
would not hazard themselves, loosing daily all hope to bring the matter to
that pass, that the King should acknowledge the crown from them as they
pretended: Besides the King being wholly of an other mind, they knew not what
they could do, if they had would. The people (who flatter themselves much and
endure little) supposed the defense was easy, every man showed himself a
lion, for the defense of his own house* yet would they not go armed to
field. Those of the house of Portugal, and the other adversaries to the
Catholic King, were in no less confusion then the Gouenours; for having
been obstinate in their opinions, they found they had moved the indignation
of Philip against them without profit: And although they were more confident
in the defense then they ought to be, yet did they fear the kings
protestations, by the which demanding possession of the realm, he threatened
such as should withstand him* The Agents of the Catholic King labored to
suborne those as they had the rest, yet it prevailed not, for being in the
beginning obstinate, confident in the midst, and distrustful in the end to
obtain pardone, they would never agree: yet left they not to hope, that the
more they proceeded in the defense, the better they should let the King
understand their forces, and might compound with greater advantage: And for
that the wars continued, the Governors supposed, that in this forte the King
should acknowledge the crown from them: But he being well enfourmed of all
these matters, and having treated with many frontier towns of Portugal to
yield, having imparted unto them the equity of his cause, by ample
allegations, entreating them not to be the cause of the ruin of the realm,
having caused Peter de Velasco, sovereign The taking of Eluas.
judge of Badagios to write to some particulars, he first attempted Eluas as
nearest unto him: The Citizens fearing they should either in deed or word be
first set upon, attended daily this Embassage; They were divided as it often
happens into two contrary factions; the one inclined to the obedience of
Philip; the other, under color of liberty, and fidelity to the Governors,
would by no means receive him for their Lord. The heads of the first party
were George Passano, and John Rodrigo Passano brothers, followed by many
Citizens, whom they call Esquires: On the other side was Anthony de Melo
captain of the city, whose opinion was followed by the greatest part of the
Nobility, but in far less nnmber then the rest, whereas every man spoke his
mind openly. Diego de Meneses had been there a little before to fortify the
city, and seeking to enlarge their ditches, he found it a matter of some
difficulty, so as he departed without effecting any thing, saying, that he
would return with arms, which the Governors should send; whereof failing,
the Citizens knew well they could not resist. True it is, that the King had
long before prepared their minds by the means of Friar Vincent of Fonseca, a
preaching Friar, kinseman to the Passani, a noble family, and well followed,
inclined from the beginning with all their followers to the devotion of Philip:
he used all means to draw the rest unto him; yet the day of Th'annunciation
of the blessed Virgin, this religious man preaching, laboring to persuade the
people to the Kings obedience, they did not willingly hear him: So as now when
he sought to take possession thereof, having dispatched many messengers to the
Bishop, and Anthony de Melo, in the end he sent Peter de Velasco with letters
to the principal of the town, and procuration to receive this city to his
obedience. Being arrived at Eluas the xvij. of June, with eighteen men
unarmed, although the gates were shut by reason of the infection, yet was he
presently let in by the judge of the town, and going to the church of pity,
he caused the Bishop, the Magistrate of the chamber, and the Nobility to be
assembled, to whom he delivered the letters which the The Kings letters to them
of Eluas.
King had written, containing in substance, that the matter being apparent that
the succession of the realm belonged unto him, he had sent the said Peter
with procuration to receive it unto his obedience, if they would yield it,
adding unto his kind words many offers: And although the Bishop, Melo, and
the Magistrate of the chamber, received these letters and read them, yet the
Nobility did not accept them so easily, for that some feared to commit an
error, and others debating who should receive them, they did not accept them,
yet they agreed that Friar Anthony de la Cerda, Prior of the Monastery of
Saint Dominick should receive the letters for the Nobility, and bring them to
the cathedral church; so as all letters being read, Melo and the Magistrate
(who preceaded the rest) demanded eight days liberty to consult, and to give
their answer, intending in the mean time to send to the Governors: the
which Velasco would not grant, but said unto them, that he would presently
return, wishing them to advise, and not to cause the army which his Majesty
had so near to march to their loss: yet they sent Gaspar de Britto to
Stremos, where Diego de Meneses general of that province remained, to
advertise him of what had passed, remaining thus in suspense until the next
day. When as the Passani informed of Melos intention, contrary to their will
and authority, resolved to kill him, if he refused to yield, and had already
incensed the people against him, causing many to give out publicly, that they
would be Castillians: Velasco went after to the castle to persuade Melo in
private, to make the matter more easy, and not to show himself (without
reason) enemy to the King: But it was in vain, for he said, that he had
received this place from the Governors, and that he would not yield it to any
man without their commandment: If it were adjudged to appertain unto the
King, he would presently yield. Standing upon these terms, there appeared
by the commandment of Velasco about the town ditches, near six hundredth
horse armed, who seized upon the wels and conduits of water, which served the
inhabitants for their watering, putting the Portugals into great fear; so as
now the women began to cry, and to curse Melo, and all those that would not
yield obedience unto the king. Some young men induced by Philips partisans,
seeing into what danger the captain had brought the safety of the city,
resolved to kill him: and going to the Cathedral church where they were all
assembled, they attended at the door to effect it when he should come forth;
but discoursing with the Bishop who persuaded him, ignorant of the danger
wherein he was, a nephew of his named likewise Anthony de Melo, understanding
in the castle in what danger his grandfather was, came forth with certain
Harguebusiers to his succor, and came in time before he was yet issued out of
the church: Old Anthony, seeing this young man enter armed, was amazed, not
knowing the cause, but understanding it afterward, and withal the hazard
whereunto he was brought by such as did watch for him, he sent to Velasco that
he should compound with the magistrate, that as for him he was content to
yield obedience to king Philip, by means whereof all was pacified, for the
Magistrate had already yielded: At the taking of their oaths the Citizens
(ill advised) required Velasco that in the Kings name, he should grant unto
the city many privileges and exemptions of customs and impostes, throughout
the realm, with many other things of importance: And he liberal of that
which he could not give, granted all that was demanded, but these promises
were not observed by the King, saying (as it was true indeed) that Velasco had
exceeded his commission. These things ended, they were advertised that Gaspar
de Britto whom the city had sent to Diego de Meneses was returning with three
hundred men, horse and foot, ill appointed, to guard this place; to whom they
presently sent word that he should turn back, and having discovered the
Castillian horse of himself, he fled with all his troops. The day following
(the usual ceremonies performed) in proclaiming a new King, Velasco
returned, having stayed there but three days: The principal of Eluas went
after to Badagios to kiss the Kings hand, of whom they had better reception
then he is accustomed to give unto such people, sending Garcia de Cardenas
nephewe to the Duke of Alua, to the city, to thank the Citizens for their
good wills.

Eluas being reduced, Peter Velasco for the same intent took his The reduction
of Oliuenza.
way toward Oliuenza, whither he had before written, laboring that Nugno
Aluares, son to the Earl of Tentuguell, being captain of the place, should
depart, the which he easily obtained: for the Citizens who had their affections
inclined to the Catholic King, were resolved to yield unto him, having
entreated the King that it would please him not to make this place the first
whereof he should take possession, seeing that he had woone their hearts,
desiring rather to deserve less by obtaining late, then to be accused of
inconstancy by hastening much: For this cause they not only thrust forth
Nugno Aluarez, but also Diego de Sosa, a knight of the order of Saint John, who
had succeeded in his place.

The news of all this and of the success of Eluas came presently to Saint
Arem, whereas Anthony remained, laboring with the people to be proclaimed
King: He was always impatient in his pretention, notwithstanding the
persecutions that king Henry inflicted upon him, laboring still by all means
possible to aspire to the crown, entreating, threatening, and suborning. He
treated by his Agents with the Catholic King, in diverse manners: Sometimes he
seemed jealous of the Duke of Bragance, and would join with the King against
him: Sometimes he treated to resign his interest to Philip, if he would make
him a good composition, carrying himself as his hopes increased or diminished:
So as it happened unto such as managed his affairs with the king, when they
found themselves to have concluded a matter, they found their authority
revoked. The King in the end, caused Christopher de Mora to talk with him, and
to make offer of all he should demand, for the great love he bare unto him,
without naming either sum or any thing else whatsoever, but for that he hated
Mora, he would not by his means treat of this matter of agreement.
Notwithstanding when as the Duke of Ossuna delivered unto the Governors a copy
of the kings The Catholic king his letter unto Anthony.
mind, as is before set down, he delivered unto Anthony a letter from the
King, wherein he did write unto him: That forasmuch as he was not ignorant many
years since of the good will he had always borne him, the which he had
labored to make show of in all occasions, he was assured he would not prove
ingrate, but show himself answerable unto that whereunto reason did bind him,
and the neerenes of blood that was betwixt them: He said moreover, that having
understood the right and apparent title he had to the realms of Portugal,
he entreated him most heartily to show himself one of the first to receive, and
to swear him for his King and natural Lord, as God had appointed; that by his
example the rest might do that whereunto they were bound, assuring him that
for his own particular, he would hold that regard of him, to recompense and
grace him, as was convenient, referring the rest to that which the Duke of
Ossuna and Mora should deliver unto him. But this letter wrought no effect,
for he then said unto the Duke, that he would never agree, making answer
unto the King that he could not satisfy him, for that being under the peoples
protection, he must govern himself according to their minds; and therefore
understanding that the Castillians began to enter within the realm, he made
haste to dispatch this business with the people and the Deputies; and making his
profit of the possession the King took, seeing the necessity they had of a
commander to make resistance, he induced Anthony proclaimed King of Portugal.
them to choose him Protector, or King: And although this resolution was made
by the most seditious and arrogant, who by force seek to execute what they
please, who would needs proclaim him King, yet were there many that would
not yield unto it, many held it more fit to call him Protector. The Prior
himself was not well resolved of this point, suffering himself to be led (as
in all other his actions) by the greatest number, and his most favorites; who
to induce the people to perform this act, in despite of some that would not
assent, being then in question to build a fortress a little without Saint
Arem, where there stands a small chapel dedicated to the invocation of the
Apostles, they spread forth a rumor that Anthony should go thither the 19. of
June, to lay the first stone, and that all the people should work in that
fortification, laboring in such an assembly to effect their desires. But there
needed no great art, for the people desirous of innovation, ran all thither
that morning. The Bishop of Parma being innocent, and he of Guarda ofset
purpose, came to the chapel where mass was celebrated, in the midst whereof
they exhorted the assembly to defense, and with dark speeches to make an
election: But Anthony arriving soon after, making his prayers a little without
the door of the chapel, the two Bishops went out to meet him, with their
Rochets to hallow the foundation of the fortress, but the ceremony was no
sooner begun, but that Anthony Barachio an impudent fellow, (holding a
handkerchiefe upon the point of his sword) proclaimed Anthony King, being
followed with great noise, and acclamations almost of all the company, who to
assure themselves of such as were not of that faction, or to show a certain
valor drew their swords: At that time Anthony faining a certain modesty,
or thrust forward by his own irresolution, cried no, no, and stepped forward as
it were to stay the people. Peter Coutigno, captain of that place with choler
would have stopped their cries, saying that the Prior desired not to be called
king; but this prevailed nothing, for Baracchio bending his pistol against the
captain, put him to silence; by reason whereof he departed. Anthony whether it
were for fear to see so many naked weapons about him, or that raised by such a
means to that dignity, bringes fear with it, he was amassed and trembled,
giving notable signs to his followers, who helping him to horse at the first
step he stumbled and almost fell, in sign of presaging ill. All the
Nobility that was present followed him on foot, bare headed as King: And
although a great part of the people were unadvisedly come thither, yet all
followed him: From thence the Prior went to the church, and from the church to
the house of the Magistrate, where finding the gates shut, he brake them open,
and was there solemnly confirmed King, with ordinary acts and writings, the
which were signed by all the Gentlemen Portugals that were present, and Emanuel
de Costa Borges with a standerd in his hand, pronounced with a loud voice
these words, Reale, Reale, as their custom is: Being then returned to his
lodging, he prepared to go to Lisbone, there to be proclaimed King, as the
principal place of the realm.

In the mean time Velasco was come to Oliuenza, where entering without stay by
night the xix. of June, he was lodged by Diego de Vasconcellos at the request
of the Passani of Eluas, and having the day following, requested the
magistrate, and the Nobility, to assemble themselves in the Church of Pity,
there to receive certain letters from the king, being all assembled, he
delivered them; the which were publicly read, finding them full of courtesies:
The conclusion was to swear him king; Velasco pressed them to answer briefly.
But as of light occasions sometimes grow important matters, so did it here, for
the Nobility of this place being divided into two contrary factions; the one
was called Loby and Gama, the other Matt s; it chanced that the letters which
the king had written unto the Nobility, were by mere fortune first delivered
into the hands of the Loby, whereof the contrary faction made a sinister
construction, and the rather for that Velasco was lodged in the house of one of
that faction: They resolved to contradict all, their adversaries should
propound: And for as much as at that instant Two contrary factions in Oliuenza.
there were more of the family of the Matti in office, then of the Loby,
seeing their enemies inclined to give place unto the king, they began to oppose
themselves, and without making answer to the letter, they sent with all speed
to the governors, and presently after going to the lodging of Velasco, they
said unto him, that they could not give answer, in a matter of so great
importance, without good advise and aduertising of the governors, demanding
four days liberty, whereunto Peter answering, that he could give them no
longer time then the next day morning, they departed unsatisfied, saying that
they feared nothing, for that God would succor them: where with Velasco
discontented, would have sent Fratyn, an Italian Ingeneur (who was then with
him) to the Duke of Alua to request him to send some troops of soldiers
within the view of the place to terrify them; yet being advised by his
friends that were Portugals, and finding the people affected to the king, he
stayed: The faction of L^by with all their followers seeing the contradiction
of the magistrate, assembled themselves in council, making an act in writing,
signed by them all, whereby they protested that they were ready to obey the
king. In this time Mark Anthony Justinian a gentleman of Genoa, friend unto
Velasco, and kinseman to the L^by, advised him to leave his lodging, and to
talk to the people in the streets, winning them with fair words, the which
having effected, and gathering a great multitude about him, he made unto them
a long discourse, showing the profit they should receive, in yielding obedience
unto the king, and the hurt in following the opinion of the magistrate, seeing
there was a mighty army so near them, wherewith the people who were easily
changed seemed content, and following him to the Church of the holy The
Catholic king sworn at Oliuenza.
Ghost where the Nobility was assembled, Velasco entered and said unto them:
My masters what shall we do? To whom Friar Aluaro in the name of the whole
assembly answered, that they were ready to serve his Majesty: Then Justinian
(raising Velasco from the ground) proclaimed the kings name, the which was
followed by the whole Nobility, and likewise by the people, who going to the
house of the magistrate, they called for the Judge and the Vereadors upon great
penalty, who understanding the people was mutined, and that Philip was
proclaimed king, they were afraid, and went to yield their obedience, the
which the castle did likewise, perfourming the ordinary acts and ceremonies;
Velasco offering in the kings name many exemptions: In this manner but more
quietly in other places, all this frontier did yield as Serpa, Mora, Campo
mayor, Arronghez; Portalegre, and in other places about the realm, they used
the like diligence.

At this time Anthony was gone from Saint Arem to Lisbone: the Governors seeing
that succeed which they had long foretold, did fortify at Settuual, with the
Duke of Bragance, and the Ambassadors The governors neglect the defense of
Lisbone.
of the Catholic King, fearing the new King would march to them. They
neglected the defense of Lisbone, supposing that Peter de Cugna, captain
thereof, and John Teglio, who as is said, was at Belem with their procuration,
would provide for it, as they had commanded them, and had sent two officers of
Justice, to persuade the Citizens to make resistance: But the said Teglio (who
it may be with greater zeal then judgment) was one of those that would have
the cause determined, understanding that Anthony was proclaimed king, was
greatly discontented, for that of force he must leave the government, and make
his peace with King Philip, with greater difficulty, if he should now seek
it: Besides that, Anthony did not acknowledge the crown from him, and
therefore greatly moved, seeming also unto him, that as Governor he did wrong
his companions, (they being at Settuual and he at Belem) to suffer the Prior so
easily to become Lord of Lisbone without blows; he treated touching the
defense thereof, being persuaded thereunto by the Magistrate, who requested him
to enter the city to that end, protesting that if the Prior took possession
it should not be their fault, which could not hinder it, but his who could
and would not: By means whereof, although but coldly, he assembled many
companies of peasants thereabouts, the which he sent for the guard of the
city, and to hinder the Priors entry. He commanded Peter de Cugna to take
care for the defense thereof, being resolute not to enter himself, and having
called to Council, the Gentlemen that were present, they resolved to send with
speed to Anthony, Diego de Sosa, and Frauncis de Meneses, entreating him not to
enter into Lisbone, nor to call himself King, but only Protector, being a
name more fit for all occasions that might happen: And although they went with
this commission, yet many advised Teglio, that notwithstanding all these
demonstrations, he should not hinder the course of the Priors good fortune, so
as wavering in his opinions, not resolving in any thing, he was cause that the
soldiers or peasants that were raised about the city, having neither order
nor commission from the Governors, knew not what to do, whether to accompany
the Prior, or hinder his entry; for that Emanuel of Portugal who had proiected
to make the Prior King, labored to prevent all their resolutions, and having
resolved, he purposely made their executions vain. Peter de Cugna said, that
if John Teglio would not oppose himself in person, that he would not
accomplish it being his inferior; whereunto Teglio replied, that it was the
captains duty, either of them excusing themselves upon the other, both with
several intents.

The Prior drew near to Lisbone, but he was in danger never to come there, for
near to Sacaben which is six miles from the city, staying in the field to
speak with Frauncis de Almeda his friend, there was a Harquebuse discharged
at him, wherewith Frauncis was slain, and no man able to discover from whence
it came, they supposed it was intended against the Prior himself. Soon after
he arrived at the city with a small troop, especially of the Nobility,
having Anthony arriues at Lisbone, and proclaimed King.
few other with him but Diego de Sosa, and Frauncis de Meneses, and therefore
they suffered him freely to enter, being of al those that met him proclaimed
king. There were few at that time within the city, both by reason of the
plague, and for that many held not themselves in safety, seeing the realm in
division, on the one side the Catholic king entered with a mighty army, on
the other side were the Governors in a manner conformeable to the said King*
lastly was the Prior being poor alone, and ill advised, made King, by a
handful of the base people: So as there was not any of the Justice or
Nobility that went to visit him, and of the superior magistrates there was
but one Vereador to be found, the rest being hidden: Notwithstanding, he went
to the palace upon the river, whereof he took peaceable possession, as also of
the Arcynal and storehouse of arms, he created a new purueior, and new
officers of Justice, and new Vereadors, supplying all other offices that were
void: From thence he went to the Towne-house to be proclaimed King with
ordinary ceremonies, all the principal of the city being assembled, to whom
Emanuel Fonsequa Nobrega, a doctor of a bold spirit spoke in this manner.

The speech of Fonsequa for the creation of Anthony.
I see graven in your countenances the joy and content which is conceived in
your hearts, having attained to this so happy a day, wherein you swear him
king whom you so much desire: I account all words frivolous to animate you
thereunto: I may speak unto you with courage, for that your desires exceed my
eloquence: I know that every small delay does not only grieve you, but also
greatly displease you, that any other should effect that first, which you have
so much wished, and which was fit you should have done, seeing that from
this city as principal, the rest of the realm should take their law. But
be as joyful and willing to this act as you please, be my words never so
superfluous, yet encouraged by duty and love, I must briefly deliver unto you
my advise; I will not make any particular repetition of his afflictions, nor
with what judgment he has surmounted them being infinite, and the time
short: Let it suffice you to understand as you do, that by a fatal destiny
he has always encountered against the proud arrogancy of this world: For as
virtues be (by reason of our sins) most commonly hateful to princes in this
age, and vices cherished, as virtuous and nobly minded, he has always been
hated and oppressed: So as sometimes tearming him a bastard, sometimes
preferring those whom he should precead, they labored by all means to
blemish that glory that did shine in him. I will lay aside the disgraces he
suffered with king Sebastian, at his departure for Affricke, which others would
have taken for an excuse to stay, yet acquainted with the frowns of fortune,
although he did iudicially foresee that he went to his ruin, he chose rather
(with so great danger of his person, following the rashness of an other) to
remain a slave unto the Moors, then to blemish his honor with any reproach,
how small soever. He remained prisoner as he had foreseen in that unhappy
day; King Sebastian his nephew died, before whom many other princes all heirs
to the crown were deceased, there remained none but Cardinal Henry, who for
the ripenes of his age, and indisposition of his body, was thought to be of
short life, so as the realm was in a manner without heir. But the King of
kings although he seems sometimes slack, yet does he equally weigh and
execute al things, providing so, that whilst king Henry enioied the realm, in
those few days of his life which remained, he miraculouslie delivered from
the hands of the Moors, him whom he intended should be our true king: I say
miraculouslie, for in truth it seemed impossible that man's wisdom could
deliver him, as it followed, for that according to the custom of those
infidels, he being a prince, he should have been presented to their prince,
and there kept in perpetual prison, or at the least redeemed for the exchange
of cities and fortresses, or for some great sum of money, yet (see if this
were not a miracle) in short time he was delivered, and without ransom. He
returned into the realm, where fortune not yet weary of him, crossed him with
a thousand afflictions, all which he has overcome and surmounted by his
virtues: behold him now here, and although he seem to be environed more then
ever with enemies, yet does he rely upon your valor, and I in his wisdom,
that he will vanquish all things: Rejoice then that he does accept of this
scepter, against his competitors, for the love of you does more encourage him
thereunto, then the desire of rule, offering to entreat you perpetually not as
a King, but as a father, and brother to you all: Whom do you esteem him to
be, to whom this day we give the empire over us? It is the true stock, the
lawful line, and the only plant which remains of our Kings, he is nephew to
king Emanuel of famous memory, borne of Jews his son, the greatest and
firmest pillars, that ever Portugal had, to him these realms appertain by
right: but if it were not so as it cannot be otherwise, yet should we, flying
the rest, cast our selves into his bosom, for by that means we should have
assured liberty, and by the rest a most certain bondage and tirannie. At the
end of this speech, there was great reioicing, and all cried out, a King,
delivering into his hands the standerd of the city: Emanuel Fonseca pronounced
from the windows these words, as they were accustomed to do, Reale, Reale,
for don Anthony king of Portugal, the which was accepted by the people with
great joy: And having made declaration in writing of this act, the Prior
returned to the palace, where soon after taking the ordinary oath to observe
the privileges, and liberties of the realm, and all that other princes were
wont to do, he dispatched his messengers with letters to all other cities,
and places, commanding them to send unto him to yield their obedience. He
made many offers to the Duke of Bragance, and to the Marquis of Villa Reale,
entreating all other Noblemen to come unto him to consult of matters concerning
the realm: But the Duke persuaded likewise by the Deputies of the realm, to
compound with Anthony, would not do it, the Marquis went not, The flight of
Teglio.
and few others did acknowledge him. But Teglio seeing the Prior now become
king without his help, making she we to go from Belem (where he remained) to
Lisbone to kiss his hands, and having agreed with Diego Lopez de Sequeira,
captain of three galleyes that were in the river, he embarked himself in one
of them with the Bishop of Leiria, Anthony de Castro, Lord of Cascaies, Martin
Gonzales de Camera, Emanuel Teles Barretto, Frauncis de Meneses, Jews Caesar
purueior of the Arcynal, with some others, carrying with them forty or fifty
thousand ducats in gold, which he had caused to be brought from the minte at
Lisbone, usurping them from Jacques de Bard, a Florentine merchant, who was the
owner. And in his departure, when most men believed they should go to the
city, they took their course toward the sea, and went to Settuual, where the
rest of the Governors remained: yet two of the three galleis disobeying their
captains, would not follow the foremost, but went to the city. Teglio being
arrived with his galleis at the mouth of the forte of Settuual, the guard of
the town would not suffer him to enter, but kept him off with their cannon,
being disimbarked a little on the one side, he went by land toward the
Governors, to discharge himself, but he was not received nor acknowledged of
them as a companion, who both in their writings, and their speeches with him,
used him as a private Gentleman, and not as a Governor, for punishment of that
which he had done at Belem, and at Anthony his entry at Lisbone: And this was
the only thing wherein the Governors showed their authority, for in all other
things they discovered their fear and inconstancy. The Prior seeing these
men, whereof he held some of them to be his confident friends to fly, to
carry away the money, and to join themselves with the Governors his
adversaries who began to fortify Settuual, discovered plainly that they had
intelligence with the Catholic King: that they would entertain themselves
in that place, until the galleis of Italy, which they understood had been
trimmed at Saint Marie Port, should arrive in those quarters, to give them
entry at Settuual, whereby might ensue his ruin, for that the Catholic King
entering there with a great army, the city of Lisbone should be in a manner
besieged, and therefore having first imprisoned some that were suspected unto
him, and demanded money in loan from the merchants, he resolved with what
speed he could to recover this place, either by love or force, induced to make
this haste by the proceeding of Tristan Vaz de Vega, captain of the fortress
of Saint Julian, at the mouth of Tagus, to whom having written, he made answer
that he could not consigne him the castle, nor hold it in his name, alleging
that he had taken an oath not to deliver it but to such as had put it into his
hands, which were the Governors; so as Anthony reserving this for a second
enterprise, having hastily and by force assembled the peasants about the city;
the artisans, slaves, and other people gathered together, which in all came not
to fifteen hundredth, he transported them to the other side of the river: but
before he himself would pass, he sent Frauncis of Portugal, Count of Vimioso
to Settuual, to treat with the Governors, and to persuade them to yield to
his obedience; to whom he did likewise write, that they should not dishonor
and undo themselves, seeking rather to give the crown to a stranger, then to
him who was their countreyman, that they should come unto him, and he would
freely forgive all things: But the Governors trusted neither to this letter,
nor to the words of the Earl, being greatly bound to the Catholic King,
whereof some of them as favorites to king Henry had assisted to the sentences
that had been pronounced against him: Therefore consulting with the
Ambassadors of the Catholic King, they resolved to defend themselves until
the coming of the kings army, the which they expected howerly. But this
practice succeeded not, for the winds were still so contrary, that the
galleis could not arrive, the which the Duke of Bragance considering he would
not attend but departed: The Count of Vimioso, desirous to expel them from
thence, having incensed the people to sedition, and aided by the guard of
Halberdiers of the court, he took arms, and became master of the Port, many
ran armed to the Governors The flight of the governors.
lodging, threatening with injurious words to kill them: wherewith being feared
and amazed, not only the Governors, but likewise the Ambassadors of the
Catholic King, and all the Nobility of the city, which followed Philips
faction, some fled secretly out at the windows, some by sea, some by land,
except the Archbishop of Lisbone, and John Teglio, who only remained, the one
trusting in his calling, the other in the works which he had formerly done in
favor of the Prior, and in his kinsemen. The Ambassadors retired themselves
the next day into Castill. This act in truth was full of compassion, for
although the Governors for their irresolutions and private interests deserved
punishment, yet men's hearts were moved to see these grave old men, in whom not
two hours before the royal authority remained, fastened to ropes creep out
at windows, to avoid the fury of a young licentious man, who had mutined the
people, and the guard it self against them: Such of the Nobility as
abandoning their houses in those parts, retired themselves, were Fernand de
Norogna, Peeter de Meneses, Edward de Castelbianco, Anthony arrived at
Settuual.
Diego Lopez de Sequeira, Anthony de Castelbianco, Jews Caesar, and some
others. Anthony having advertisement of their departure, passed the river, and
went thither: Where he was received under a cannapie with signs of great joy,
and having given order to the fortification, and guard of that place as it
seemed necessary, he returned to Lisbone, against the advice of some, who
persuaded him to assemble his forces to resist the enemy, and not to repasse
Tagus: But he did it not, saying, he would return presently, fearful (as
many supposed) and not holding himself assured on that side the river:
Cascaies and the fortress of Saint Julian, did not yet obey him, yet
understanding that Anthony was possessed of Settuual, the wife of Anthony
Cascayes and S. Julian yield to Anthony.
de Castro went from Cascaies, after whose departure the city yielded, and the
captain of the fortress of Saint Julian, being written unto by Anthony, that
he would give him four thousand ducats a year rent, made answer, that
seeing the Governors had abandoned the realm, and that he was proclaimed king,
he would hold it at his devotion: By reason whereof, Bastien de Britto, who
served as sergeant mayor of the city of Lisbone, in the place of Peter de
Cugna, turned head, who with certain men gathered together, went by the
commandment of Anthony to encampe about this fortress, so as all places of
importance about Lisbone, remained at his obedience: So did all others in those
parts except the city of Porto, which obeyed not yet.

The Duke of Bragance having foreseen the sedition which was practiced at
Settuual, being departed as it is said, a little before the Governors flight,
and gone to Portel, a place belonging unto himself, near the frontiers of the
realm toward Castill, seeing justice reduced to arms, and himself disarmed,
he thought it now The Duke of Bragance sendes to Philip.
high time to treat with the Catholic King: He sent therefore a Gentleman to
represent unto him, how peaceably he had always carried himself in the
persuite of Justice for Katherine his wife; that he had never troubled the
public quiet, nor in any thing surpassed the ordinary terms of Justice and
reason, and if he had not compounded with him, the cause was, for that he
understood his reasons were great, neither had he means to do it, by reason of
the people who would have withstoode him: Notwithstanding he was now
resolute, if his Majesty would make him a good composition, to yield unto
him all the rights of the said Katherine, and that being agreed, he would
publicly send one to treat with him: He alleged that his subjects being the
third part of the realm, he could make easy, or greatly hinder the
enterprise. He said that the Deputies of the realm had made offer unto him,
that they would procure Anthony to leave the title of King, and unite himself
with him, for the defense of the crown, and that in the end they should agree:
And that the said Anthony had sent to make great offers unto him, the which he
would not accept, not seeming reasonable unto him. He requested his Majesty
to command the army not to endomage his country: Herein he spoke truth, for
although he were a quiet and religious man, yet the Philipins said, that
although he had been otherwise, the King had no cause to fear his forces, for
albeit he had many subjects, yet were they not all obedient unto him. That the
Nobility abhorred his rule more then any other, and that some of his kinsemen
did him more hurt then good, by reason of the emulation amongst the Nobility.
He relied much on the equity of his cause, yet feared he to be forced by the
kings power, which he saw prepared, supposing he would not receive judgment in
the cause from any man. This fear had induced him to write to all the great
Potentates in Christendom, showing his reasons, and demanding succors. The
like office had he done with some Cardinals at Rome. He had sent into France
diverse copies of his allegations, to the end they might be dispersed into
England and other places, making great instance to the two Queens to succor
him with money, munition, and captains: But his weakness being known to both,
although he gave them to understand he went to join with the Governors in
defense, they returned him nothing but courteous words. And some say, that not
content to use this diligence, to such as were envious of the kings good, he
did likewise write to his enemies and rebels, desiring to treat with the Prince
of Orange, and the Duke of Alancon. These things caused him more loss then
profit, as it happens commonly to those that will contend with mighty
Princes, and build their foundations upon the succors of their enemies ill
willers, who will not commonly declare themselves, except their companion be
strong. Hereupon it grew, that the King returned to the said propositions so
ample, and artificial an answer: for (as it was reported) some of his letters
had been surprised by the Agents of the Catholic king, and some other,
especially those he had written to Rome, were sent to the King by them, to whom
he had written them. He answered, that he reioiced, that The Catholic kings
answer to the Duke of Bragance.
in time he had avoided the sedition at Settuual, being troubled with the
danger and indignity he might have suffered: That he knew it to be true that
in the persuite of the right of Katherine, he had carried himself with due
modesty, but by refusing to agree with him were grown the inconveniences
wherein now they were, the which he would gladly they should rather have
foreseen, then have made trial of, with so great disquietnes, and dishonor
unto themselves, for the which he was sorry in regard of the neerenes of blood,
and affection, he bare unto the said Katherine; That his offer to yield him
his right was acceptable unto him, but he would have them to understand that
there was no necessity, to add new actions to those which God had given him,
apparent to all the world. That he had then wished for two reasons they could
have accepted of his liberality, in recompense of their pretention: The first
was, that he hoped by this means, he should not have been forced to enter
armed into the realm, and to make war upon his own subjects, which is one
of the things that does most trouble him: But that good which might have been
reaped by composition, was now extinct by their slacknes, seeing that his
army was already entered the realm: The second reason was, the desire to
increase and prosper his house, to do good to his children, to avoid the ruin
of the estate, and the hazard to overthrow it, whereof there was yet some
remedy, for being so desirous of his good, that only was sufficient to move
him to do them good: He said moreover, that he was much amazed to hear him
confess with his own mouth, that they had daily practiced with Anthony, that
they treated with a rebel who had committed so horrible a crime, aduising him
in sign of love, hereafter to abstain from all such treaties, so contrary
to that fidelity whereunto they were bound, and so unworthy of their
authority and reputation, showing likewise, that he marueiled they would
suffer themselves to be informed from the Deputies, who promised to cause
Anthony to forsake the title of a king, which he has usurped, as if it were an
offense capable of repentance, whereas they should well understand, that they
be ordinary practices and discourses of rebels, to deceive them as they had
formerly done: And whereas the Deputies call it an accord or union for the
defense, let them take heed that it prove not a league, and a conspiracy,
framed to make him partaker with Anthony his offense, from the which God had
yet preserved him: He concluded that he would always give a gentle audience to
that which should be propounded on his behalf, with intention to do him all
the grace and favor possible in his demands. This answer being received, the
Duke sent certain gentlemen to treat an agreement with the king, the which
continued long, making unseasonable demaundes on the Dukes behalf:
Notwithstanding the King desiring that before they proceeded further, he
should acknowledge and swear him for his Lord: The matter remained in
suspense with small content to the Duke, who found not only the hope of his
Justice to fall out vain, but likewise not to be fully reconciled to the king,
who took possession of his countries, having already lost Villauizosa, one of
his chief places, and of great importance, where he made his abode, although
he had well fortified it.

The which happened presently after the reduction of Eluas, by the means of a
Castillian whom he had left within the castle, either trusting in him, or
neglecting of it. This man having intelligence with captain Cisneros, who was
in the Dukes camp, treated The taking of Villauisosa.
to deliver unto him in the night, one of the gates of the castle, the which
descends into the ditch, thereby secretly to bring in the kings forces, the
which he did effect. The night appointed for this enterprise being come, the
Duke commanded Sanches d'Auila, to go with the soldiers he had about Eluas, and
take possession of the fortress, who having taken their Harquebusiers behind
them, marched so that night, that in the morning they came to Villauizosa, and
approaching the gate that was promised them, they found that although it were
open, yet could they not enter, for that being far from the ground, the
ladder which they had brought was too short, and could not reach unto it, so
as in despair to put it in execution, the day growing near, they were ready
to return, fearing to be discovered. But as many times things are fitted to
the violent course of fortune, the Castillians found within the castle ditch
an other ladder, which the soldiers within the forte had by chance left there,
the which bound to that they brought, reached unto the gate, so as all the
soldiers entered the castle, without being discovered, having neither guard nor
centinell, but were all laid to sleep, having a mighty army of enemies
within ten miles of them, so as in this manner the Duke of Bragance lost the
best and strongest furnished place he had.

Many were then of opinion, the King should not go in person with the army,
for although some held it was necessary he should Reasons why the King should
not go in person.
go, alleging the former reasons, yet such as held the contrary opinion,
added unto their reasons, that throughout all the way unto Lisbone, and in the
city it self, they died most violently of the plague, although the air did
not seem corrupted, that it was not convenient to hazard the life of a Prince,
who was a pillar of the Church, and Lord of so many Realms. That they might
answer unto the reasons of conueniencie, which was spoken against this
opinion, that it was like unto all other humane things which have two reasons,
for waighing the one it importes much, and regarding the other, they seem
light: The importance of the enterprise is very great, considering the valor
of the realm, and his interest; but if you consider that they oppose against
the person of so mighty a king, that of Anthony a rebel, who does scarce
deserve the name of a tirant, and that with the Duke of Alua, and so many
Noblemen, Italians and Spaniards, you compare the Count of Vimioso, young,
without experience, and all the rest of their train, and that against so
valiant soldiers of all nations, there come peasants gathered together from the
villages about Lisbone, and the slaves of Ethiopia, you may easily judge the
great indignity the king should suffer being present in this expedition. They
alleged the like reason against the hope of good success; for although it
seemed a matter easily to be effected, considering the quality of the
enemies, yet regarding the difficulties alleged, the matter was in suspense,
remembering the examples of King John the first of Castill, and Alphonse the
fifth of Portugal, either of them entering at diverse times with an army, into
other countries, and both returned flying and broken. As for the sweet content
it seemed the Kings entry should bring, and contrariwise the sharpenes of the
Duke of Alua, they said it was well considered; yet the King remaining at
Eluas, or in any other place upon the frontiers, he should give a general
content. This opinion seeming the better, and with most ground, not only
pleased the King, but bred such an impression in the minds of many, that it
passed the limits, for that the considerations of safety are limited with
fear, so as they began to apprehend too much, saying, the king was not sure at
Badagios, and that he should retire himself to Civil, under color to
dispatch away the army, seeing it had already entered the realm: for the Duke
marching from the frontier, the King should lie open to all attempts of the
Portugals, who might make their courses even unto the walls of the city. That
Anthony seeking to make this diuersion, he might easily effect it with so
great force, as the king should be constrained to retire himself with small
authority, and recall his army, although it were about the walls of Lisbone;
yet would not the king by any means hear speak thereof, but persuaded such
as were of that opinion, that for a world, no, for his own life, he would
not retire a foot back, but was resolved to stay in Portugal, in some place
of the frontiers, which should be thought most convenient, and for that The
Kings army entered into Portugal.
effect retained certain troops for his guard.

The Duke of Alua who had assembled his army at Cantigliana passed the 27. day
of June, by the kings commandment, the small of Caya, which diuides the two
realms, entering into Portugal with great quantity of munition and baggage,
by reason whereof, he carried with him above six thousand chariots, and five
and twenty pieces of canon, and passing under the walls of Eluas, there was
nothing to be done, being already yielded: In three days march he came to
Stremos, receiving all places thereabouts to obedience, which might be amazed
at the brute of the army: But for that he labored to assure the kings person
above all, being entered two days journey within the country, he sent back
Peter Manrique de Padilla a knight of account, and well experienced in the
war, with two companies of men at arms, and Peter d' Ayala Marshall of the
field, an old soldier, with a regiment of Spaniards, who lodged at Eluas,
assuring those quarters from all reuolutions that might be feared: within
Stremos was captain John Dazeuedo The taking of Stremos.
Admiral of the realm, young and hardy, who put himself in defense, and was
cause that the army made longer stay there, then at any other lodging: He
(when as the governors were yet at Almeryn) had obtained by the means of
Martin Gonzales de Camera somewhat allied unto him, the Captainship of that
place, and after being written unto by Anthony as king, he would not obey him,
saying that he did not acknowledge any other superior then the governors, to
whom he had given his oath: At this time the Duke being arrived, he sent unto
him Peter de Luna a captain of horse, with letters from the king, requiring
his obedience, but he refused to yield it, for the same reasons he had given to
Anthony; he trusted more to the defense of the place, then the force thereof
would warrant; and the rather for the diligence of Diego de Meneses, who when
he had speech of the fortifying of Eluas, seeing it could not be effected, he
had retired himself to Stremos, thinking there to make head, and having
animated the people to defend it, he promised them great succors; so as all
agreeing with the Admiral, they were resolute to fight. At this time
Christopher de Mora, who went from Settuual to Badagios, passing through the
city, he persuaded the Landini, chief citizens to yield obedience unto the
king, and for that it was easy for them to turn the people as they pleased,
they induced them soon to obey: So as the Admiral remained alone in his
obstinacy, within the castle with some of his friends and familiars, and
although they labored to bring him to obedience, yet would he not yield,
excusing himself, that it appeered not unto him, that the king was heir to
the realm; neither did the coming of the Prior Ferrant de Toledo son to the
Duke of Alua prevail; who discovering him to be a man of small consideration,
made offer unto him, that the Duke should be bound, that whenever it should
appear that the realm appertained not unto Philip, he should restore him to
the place he now enjoyed: neither prevailed it to let him understand that he
could not resist, making answer obstinately, that when he had done his last
endeavor, he would abandon the place with the loss of his life, seeming that
he could not otherwise save his honor. But this resolution lasted little, for
discovering from the castle, that the Duke had already planted his artillery,
that those of the city which had promised to defend him, were all against him,
and that some Castillian soldiers were entered the city, being all amazed, he
resolved to retire himself, and leave the fortress, wanting courage to defend
it; but in issuing forth the Castillians took him prisoner, and led him to
the Duke, who was in doubt whether he should punish him corporally, to terrify
the rest by his first example; but he pardoned him, and sent him prisoner to
Villauizosa, writing unto the king, that he took pity of him, being young and
without experience. When the magistrate and the citizens had taken their oath,
and done the accustomed ceremonies to obey the king, the army marched toward
Mount mayor by the way of Arraialos, leaving Euora on the left hand, a city
of importance, but then greatly afflicted with the plague: But to the end it
should not remain behind vnyeelded, Euora yielded.
the Duke sent thither Henry de Guzman with twenty horse to take possession
thereof, both for that he knew it was unpeopled, as also understanding that
Diego de Castro (who was Captain there) and the principalles of the city (who
were retired to their gardens thereabouts) desired to yield their obedience, by
reason whereof, the said captain and Magistrate being assembled together a
mile from the city under the Portall of our Ladies church, there Constantine
de Brito a Notarie, received a public act, whereby they delivered the city
to his Majesty's obedience, the which they all assigned. The Duke being now
arrived, in four days march at Mount Mayor the new, where having found no
resistance, The taking of Mount Mayor*
although the Count Vimioso had been there a little before, taking possession
thereof, he came within four days to Settuual, without wasting the country
as is usual in war; for he neither slew nor spoiled the inhabitants of
towns, nor suffered them to tread down the corn which was then ripe: It
seemed that Diego de Meneses had not showed the fruits, that were expected of
his valor within that province, nor of that heat wherewith he undertook the
defense, having for that cause refused the place of Viceroy of the Indies,
which is the greatest charge given in that realm: For having first from the
Governors, and after from the Prior, received charge to defend the said
province, he not only neglected the defense, but also retired himself. He
excused this weak resistance, saying, that the Governors had deceived him, in
not furnishing him with arms, and other things necessary, and that having no
other arms with the people, but words, he was enforced to retire himself.
But whatsoever the cause was, all that part beyond the river of Tagus, which is
the most fertile within the realm, remained disarmed and in pray to the enemy.

Anthony his entry into Lisbone.
Anthony being returned from Settuuall to Lisbone, he was received with great
joy, being the first time he had entered as king: And although the infection
with the division of the Nobility had much unpeopled it, yet made they devises
with great shows of joy. I will not leave to report as a thing remarkable,
that there was a company of poor women which sell things in the market place,
the which marching in order like soldiers with their arms, she which was their
captain in stead of a Halberd carried a fire pan, seeming to remember the
ancient battle of Algibarotta, betwixt the Castillians and the Portugals,
where these being conquerors, they vaunted that a Bakers wife had slain seven
Castillians with a fire pan. The Governors who were fled from Settuuall to
a castle, whereas Ambrose de Aguiar was then captain, imbarqued secretly, and
their fear was so great, as not holding themselves assured in any part of the
realm, they were conducted to Ayamont, a city belonging to the Catholic
king upon the frontiers, where being better advised, they returned into the
realm, putting themselves in Castromarin with great coffeehouse: There they
made a decree repeating the deeds of Anthony, from the time of king Henry unto
that day, confirming the sentences which the said Henry had pronounced against
him, calling him rebel, and troubler of the The decree of the Governors.
public quiet. They declared (giving testimony of the intention of King
Henry) that king Philip was the true succussor. They commanded all cities,
places, Noblemen, and ministers of justice, to obey him, resigning all their
authority unto him: And although it seemed that all Justice was now reduced to
arms, and that the King had no need of this decree, yet was it of great
importance both to justify his cause with the people, as also for that it made
many cities to yield.

Anthonies preparation for the defense of the kingdom.
But Anthony made no reckoning of this sentence, preparing for defense upon the
right side of the river of Tagus, he had yet no other nation but Portugals,
and such as he could gather together, where with he could not frame a camp
upon any necessity; for that the peasants and the people, which were not
entertained for the war, could not abandon their trades to go to field,
and therefore he desired to have mercenarie soldiers, and finding that Frauncis
Baretto stayed long to bring any from France, he dispatched Peter Dora, then
Consul of the French in that realm, into France, giving him money to levy
two thousand men, he named Diego de Meneses, his Lieutenant general, and gave
the charge of his army at sea, to George de Meneses: He understood well the
course of the Catholic army, but trusting as well in the people as to the
passage of the river, he seemed to be well able to defend himself: He grew
doubtful (being ill advertised) that whilst the Duke marched by small
iourneies toward Settuuall, seeming to go thither, he should take the way to
Saint Arem as some would suppose, there to pass the river of Tagus with more
ease, being narrow, and after to march by land against Lisbone, without regard
of smaller towns; Having therefore grounded a great part of his hopes upon the
defense of the passage of the river, being amazed with this news, he sent to
furnish it with men and arms: But understanding afterward that the Duke was
in truth approached to Settuual, that he had taken Alcazar, which is near unto
it, he called back the men which he had sent to Saint Arem, and with some
others which he had forcibly gathered together, he sent them to Settuual,
forcing the Gentlemen one after an other, and all in general to go thither,
sometimes with punishments, sometimes with entreaties, and sometimes with
promises of exemptions and privileges: But for all this no man went willingly,
and such as were forced complained greatly. The Nobility was small in number,
and such as were there, nothing resolute, the people easy to change upon every
light occasion, were slothful, having conceived an opinion that it was not
lawful to fight against Christians, so as some fled, some hid themselves,
and some complained. The kings ministers being new, men ill affected, and not
fashioned to command, as those which had the reins at liberty, did tyrannize
with absolute authority, forcing al men with an unaccustomed rigor, to fight
against their wills. At that time they did tolerate Disorders at Lisbone.
within the city infinite disorders, and thefts to draw money from the
merchants: they imprisoned some which would not presently pay that which was
demanded of them; If any took horse to go out of the city about their
business, suddenly they said they fled into Castill, and with this slander
they seized upon their persons and goods. He was unhappy that did commend the
Catholic kings forces, for he was either stoned, imprisoned, or condemned in
a great sum of money, they took from all men by force their horse and arms,
who so had little credit or no acquaintance with these new officers, were ill
assured: Such as had reckonings to make with the Court were in ill case, for
they were forced to pay what they did owe, without compensation of what was
due unto them: For this cause, and for that they seemed friends to quietness,
some of great means, and very honorable were imprisoned. The barbarous
decrees, the commandments that were made to surcease the paiments and rents,
to bind every man to retire into the city, and stand to the defense, the
opening and spoiling of houses that were shut up were infinite, there was
nothing but rigor, and rudenes, and all was executed by men who with their
ignorance and bad inclination, expressly to cause disorders, made commandments
inobseruable, the crosses of military orders, especially those which carry
the title of knights of Christ, sometime held in reputation, were now given to
many base and unworthy persons, by the intercession of one or other. The new
Christians who were never admitted to these orders, nor to the degree of
Nobility, nor to any royal offices, were suddenly by the favor of this man
mounted to what degree they pleased, not for that he was beholding to any that
had succored him in the time of his necessities, but for that he was easily
persuaded by who^soeuer. The black Negroes to whom (for the great number there
is of them in the city of Lisbone) arms were defended, were suddenly all
armed, and as it were free, commandment being made, that all such as would
serve in this war under captains, likewise Moors assigned for that purpose,
might do it against the will of their masters, and without paying; for which
cause, all the slaves being assembled, and conceiving the Kings commandment
to be more in their favor then it was, shaking off the yoke, leaving their
patrons, they ran unto the city, where taking horse and arms by force where
they found them, they committed a thousand insolences. They coined money in
the name of Anthony, a quarter less then it was wont to be, the reuenew of
the crown was wasted, for besides that he extorted from the treasurers what he
could, he laid hands upon the jewels of the crown, and upon that most
renowned (by the Portugals) saddle and furniture for a horse, enriched with
stones brought from the Indies, which was of great value. The money which Henry
had gathered together for the ransom of the Portugals, which were slaves in
Affricke, was consumed and wholly spent: And this liberty proceeded so far,
that they sought into religious houses, for the money which they thought had
been there laid in guard, and having found some, although it appertained to
friends, and faithful persons, to orphans, and pupils, yet was it seized on,
without number or weight, together with the silver vessels of the same
churches, the which was violently carried away in some places, and in other
places with the consent of the religious men themselves: Neither were the
jewels and treasure which Marie the cosen of the said Anthony left, more
assured, being given to godly uses, for the good of her soul: For
notwithstanding he were greatly bound unto her, yet he took them, and
converted them to his own use. They gave liberty to religious men to arm
themselves, employing them in military charges, to the scandal of the people,
and all good and religious men, and without any fruit. Many of the better sort
remembering the time past, and that wherein king Sebastian reigned blamed
themselves, for then they complained of the arrogancy of his favorites, who
they said had never done any harm. They blessed king Henry saying, that
although he knew not, in the small time of his reign how to govern himself
as he ought, yet did he never err in will, or suffered himself to be so
easily seduced by any to the hurt of another. They cursed the Governors who had
been so slow to resign the government, concluding that rashness had reigned
with Sebastian, irresolute arrogancy with Henry, confusion with the Governors,
and injustice with Anthony. Some excused this last with weak reasons, saying,
there was nothing done amiss by his commandment, being courteous and well
inclined; but that the greedy covetousness of many of his followers caused this
excess, who having long suffered whilst he was persecuted, coming now to rule
they satisfied themselves, making things unlawful tolerable, and that the Prior
durst not deny their demands, nor punish the offenders, both for that the time
was unfit, as also to avoid the name of unthankful, in punishing such as had
aided and succored him, when he was abandoned of all the world, for the severe
sentences of King Henry.

THE SIXTH BOOK.
The Contents of the sixth Book.
The conquest the Catholic King made of Settuual, and of the fortress: The
arrival of his sea-armie, there: The thoughts of Anthony: The voyage of
Cardinal Riario into Spain: The passage of the army from Settuuall to
Cascayes, And the retraite of Diego de Meneses, with his Portugal soldiers:
The confusion of things in the city of Lisbone: The taking of Cascayes, and of
the Castle: The death of Diego de Meneses: Anthony Marches with his troops
to Belem, and to Alcantara: Apardon sent by king Philip unto the Portugals to
draw them unto him: The treaties of Pacification: The delivery of the rock of
Saint Julian, and of the fort: Of Cabesa Secca being abandoned, and the taking
of the tower of Belem.

THe Duke of Alua drew by small iourneies near unto Settuual with his army,
marching with small order, and without fear, as they are accustomed to do in
their friends country: But approaching near, calling the chief commanders he
said unto them; That although they had hitherto neglected all military
discipline, being so far distant from their enemies, now approaching near
unto them, they ought not to contemn them, chiefly having Settuual so near,
a city of importance, wherein it was likely, there was a great garrison: and
therefore that every one hereafter should carefully do his duty, lodging
his camp within the gardens on the north side. He presently sent a trumpet to
signify unto them of the town, that he was come in the name of the Catholic
king to take possession thereof as his own, that they should open him the
gates, threatening them if they did otherwise, with all the miseries that did
follow war, offering both to the inhabitants and to the soldiers, to leave
their persons and The taking of Settuual.
goods free, if they would obey. Those within irresolute and divided,
demanded time to advise: And for that we do usually regard our own private
profit more then any otherthing; the Citizens viewing from the walls, the
soldiers to cut their vines, and spoil their banks of salt, whereof there is
great abundance in that place, would presently have yielded upon any
condition. The mariners and some few soldiers made a cold show of resistance:
Yet Frauncis Mascaregnas who was captain of the city, and Diego Boteglio the
younger, who commanded the soldiers, (having well considered the weakness of
the walls, and fearing the enemy near, whom they little regarded a far off)
were more inclined to yield then to any thing else, neither did it behoue him
to linger long upon this resolution: For Jews Douara had practiced with a
Frenchman, who was captain of a company within the city, to deliver him in
the night, the gate which he had in guard, the which he had performed, but the
citizens being formerly resolved, sent Simon de Miranda unto the Duke, to offer
him obedience, but he could not execute his Embassage: for the soldiers of the
city, who were privy to the resolution of the commanders, being issued
forth to go to Lisbone, they found the said Simon without the gates, and
saying that he had betrayed them, they led him by force to Anthony, who kept
him in prison; notwithstanding presently after, the soldiers of the army were
brought in without condition or order. It is true that in this time the Duke
had planted his cannon, and was resolved to batter it, and for a punishment of
the slack resolution of the inahbitants to yield, their suburbs were spoiled,
so as we may well say, that one of the most important cities of the realm was
taken by threatenings, neither did the wars seem yet to have any beginning. The
Portugal soldiers (as I said) departed free, only Diego Boteglio not trusting
to the Duke, or seeming to be one of those that had actually served Anthony,
would have fled secretly by sea, but he was taken and kept prisoner. The tower
which keeps the entry of the Port, remained yet in the hands of the Portugals:
The which, for that it was a place of hard access, and uneasy to bring the
ca^non to it, although it were small and weak, yet was it held by the
Portugals to be strong, the rather being backed toward the sea with three
gallions armed, which had been sent from Lisbone, under the command of Ignace
Rodrighez Voloso: And although it were manned with few soldiers, yet had it no
need of any great number, not being capable of many: It was well furnished with
Cannoniers, sufficient artillery, and a captain, who amongst the Portugals
was counted valiant. They attended at Settuual the army at sea with great
devotion: For besides that the short season for galleies to live in that sea
began to wear away, if they had made any longer stay, the army at land had
presently fallen into great want of victuals and munition: For this reason the
Duke desired to make himself with all speed master of the fortress, and
therefore he greatly entreated Mendo de la Mota, (for so the captain was
called) to consigne it unto him; the which he refusing, the Duke added some
promises in the Kings The arrival of the Marquis of Saint Crux, with the army
by sea.
name, but they prevailed not: And for that Aluaro de Bassan Marquis of S.
Crux, captain of the said Catholic army by sea, being departed from S.
Marie Port, having run all the coast of Algarues, and reduced many cities of
that country to the kings obedience, was now arrived in this sea, with
threescore galleis, and some round vessels, to the great contentment of the
camp. The Duke was forced, having with great labor made his platformes, to
plant four pieces of cannon, and to lodge his footmen for the force thereof,
to the end the galleies having no other port of retreat, should not be forced
by the winds to run any other course, whereof he gave the charge to Prosper
Colonna: But the artillery was no sooner planted, whereas it might annoy one
of the gallions, that was approached nearer land then the rest, the which being
subject to the Castillians cannon, which slew three or four of their men, they
presently hoised sails, entering the port to yield, where they were in great
danger; for those within the tower seeing them go to the enemy, discharged
all their artillery against them: Colonna turned The yielding of the fortress.
the artillery against the forte, and beginning to batter, the assieged
fainting, chiefly having viewed the army at sea, yielded, upon condition to
depart with their lives, and bag and baggage, the which were stricter
conditions then had been formerly offered. But the Duke although he were well
pleased with the success, yet did he not seem to allow that Prosper should
receive it with these conditions, seeing they had endured the cannon, seeming
that the assieged that had not obeyed upon the first shot of the cannon were
not worthy of pardon: Then the galleies drew near, and having quietly taken
the other two gallions, they entered within the Port.

They had some intelligence at Lisbone of the taking of Settuual, yet not
assured thereof, but by hearesay and conjectures; so ill was the Prior
informed, that by this means he was subject to believe Three poor women
crying to Anthony to succor Settuual.
many lies: whilst he was yet in suspense, three poor women with their hair
about their ears, came to the palace, weeping and crying, that for the love of
God he would cause their husbands to be succored, who alone fought upon the
walls of the city against the whole army of the Duke of Alua, not being
rescued by the soldiers, nor any other, being all traitors: And* for that we
more easily believe what we desire (although it be not likely) then what reason
tells us, he believed that what these women had reported was true, and moved
with their tears and lamentations, turning to the Anthonies care to succor
Settuual.
Count of Vimioso, who had already made offer to go, without any further
advise, he commanded him to assemble what forces he could, and for the
honor of the Portugals blood, go succor that place. To that end they
assembled the whole people by ringing of the bells with other diligence; so as
they imbarqued some by love, some by force, some armed, some unarmed, without
knowledge who should lead them, how they should march, or what they should
do: Fear did nothing retain them, for as yet they had never seen the enemy
in the face, and therefore not only the youth ran thither, but old men armed
with heads and hands shaking, imbarqued, themselves not pressed there unto
(being freed by their age) but upon a certain natural hatred: Many religious
men ran through the city on horseback with their naked weapons in hand,
encouraging the people to imbarque. The women of base condition made the air
deaf; the churches were full of sighings and lamentations, which they powered
forth with their foolish prayers, whereby it seemed they knew not what they
demanded, for they prayed for Christendom, as if they had been besieged by
Infidels: It was the 19. day of July, the heat being extreme, and these poor
wretches who were imbarqued, (attending the course of the water, burned with
the sun, not yet a span from the bank) began to suffer thirst, so as many
repented, and would gladly have returned if they could. But they remained in
this estate until four of the clock in the afternoon, reckoning after the
French manner: at what time Anthony going along the river, reioicing to see
so many ready to do him service, there arrived a Carauell from Settuual, which
brought certain news of the success; the which although it pleased these
people, who (half dead with suffering) disimbarqued again, yet it greatly
displeased the Prior, who having been there in person, and furnished it with
arms and munition, as much as he could possibly, and as he thought was
convenient, he had conceived an assured hope, that it should hold out long,
but seeing it now so shamefully lost, he grew amazed: And although The
counsel of Anthony and his resolutions.
he durst neither in word nor deed, make show of any fear, yet as it were
foretelling the mischief he was greatly troubled with himself: And for that
in the counsels of such as be afflicted, such seems always best, as cannot be
executed, having lost the occasion, he began now to consider, that he had done
ill in not following the counsel of such as advised him not to take upon him
the title of King, for with the name of Protector which he might have taken, it
seemed unto him that he might at al times have made an honorable peace. But
that now being king proclaimed and sworn with subscribing it in so many
places, although he had not suffered any one to kiss his hands, nor taken the
scepter, it seemed unto him difficult, and almost impossible to leave the title
but with his life, yet having well considered by the events, that his affairs
were weak and unstable, he found the enemy to be mighty, and so far
advanced in the enterprise, that he had no means to stay him, nor make him
relinquish arms: He found himself abandoned, as a man may say, of the whole
realm: For the Duke of Bragance the greatest of all the nobility, having made
an agreement with the Catholic king, had retired himself expecting the
event: The Marquis of Villa Reale, who had given him hope to join, appeered
not, and almost all the other great personages of the realm, and a great part
of the Nobility, had followed the examples of these, for that some went openly
to Badagios, to acknowledge the Catholic king for their Lord; some others
stayed, to suite themselves according to the occurrents, so as the least part
came to him, and these were such men, as neither love, nor their own desires,
but fear, shame, and their own private considerations had drawn unto him;
for some filled themselves with vain hopes, by reason of the great
familiarity they had with him; some others being present, could not but
follow him; and others for the rigorous commandments he had made, that every
man should come and acknowledge him, came fearfully, whereof some stood more
in awe then others, for such as had their goods and persons any thing retired,
made small account of his commandment; and such as were near, as more
subject to the execution thereof, came of force, faining great affection: From
these counterfeit looks of the rebellion of cities, of the retraite of
Anthonies fear.
some to Badagios, of the report daily made unto him, of things which bred
doubt in him, sometimes of the fidelity of one, sometimes of an other: he
grew jealous that he should one day be delivered into his enemies hands, by
such as he favored most, to warrant their persons from the great danger
wherein they were: And this jealousy did so increase, that he imprisoned
George de Meneses, captain general at sea, having wrongfully believed, that
he had treated to yield the army to the enemies, and to conduct them within
the Port of Lisbone. Heereunto they added that half the realm was lost, for
all that part of Tagus toward Andelouzia was possessed by the Castillians, and
if there were any corner thereof where they had not been, as at Begia, and
some other places of the realm of Algarues, either they made no reckoning
thereof, or they had compounded; and the other moitie of the realm, where the
enemies had not been, was almost all in suspense, for the city of Porto which
is the principal, and almost all the rest which lie betwixt the rivers of Doro
and Migno, did not yet fully obey, desiring since they were come to arms, to
see who should have the better, only Coimbra was more at his devotion then
all the rest, and showed it self more of Anthonies faction then the whole
realm; for in the beginning of July it began to rise, at the persuasion of
John Rodrigues de Vasconcellos, a gentleman and a priest, whom Anthony had sent
thither, expelling Peter Guedez governor thereof, who fled with the
Corygidor in great hazard of his life, and if the plague had not then afflicted
the city, the disorders had been greater; yet this was but one city only:
whereas contrariwise Saint Arem, the first place where he was proclaimed king,
began to rise against him, for the pacifying whereof, he sent Emanuel de
Sylua, one of the first moters of this popular humor which made him King; so
as he had scarce any city remaining but Lisbone, whereof he had no great
confidence, although the common people by their accustomed braggings, showed
him great affection; in this so apparent danger he found not any of so many
Potentates inclined to succor him, who in reason should not willingly have
seen his enemy aspire to such greatness. So as afflicted with these thoughts,
he had The resolutions of Anthony, and of his counsel.
easily followed the counsel of an accord, although the fidelity of the
Portugals, and the name of King would not suffer him, yet he had no man about
him that could persuade him, but was cured by contrary remedies: For taking
counsel with Diego Boteglio the elder, his familiar, who had followed him in
all his disgraces; and with those of the house of Portugal; although his
flight, if he would have attempted it, were stopped, and small hope of victory
in battle, yet could he not agree and yield to fortune, but resolved to The
Bishop of Guarda seconds Anthony.
defend himself: In which resolution he was confirmed by the Bishop of Guarda,
who as a bold man would have his opinion pass in all things: For he said
the Catholic king was not so mighty as was supposed, that his Spanish
soldiers, were new and untrained, that he would not draw forth of Italy his
trained men, fearing that being busied in Spain, the realm of Naples, or the
state of Millaine should revolt: That the Italians and Germans were few in
number, for besides there were many dead, it was not safe to bring any great
numbers into Spain, a province that is weak, and hateful to all other
nations: That at this present when as the brute should be of his taking arms,
the States of Italy, of Navarre, and of Arragon would rebel: That the Turk
would descend upon his realm of Naples: That Castill it self being grieved
and ouercharged with impostes, would revolt: That France, England, and a part
of Germany, would come presently with many men to his succors, or at the least
in assailing the other provinces of the Catholic king, divert the war,
saying, it had not yet succeeded, the time being too short to give them notice
of his election, or receive an answer: That the realm was mighty enough of
it self to defend it self, on this side the river, until his friends had
means to succor him: These things being delivered unto him by his friends
with so great efficacy, and faining to have received advise, they did somewhat
encourage Anthony, besides that, the desire to reign makes the unbelieving,
credulous: These men besides their aforesaid private passions, although they
did well understand the weakness of the realm, and the lightness of their
reasons, were blinded with two things, whereby they persuaded Anthony from
composition. The counsel of Anthony ill grounded.
The one was, that knowing the offense to the Catholic king to be so great,
that although they should obtain their pardon, yet should they never receive
grace nor favor, but remain still in fear of their lives: The other was to
enjoy in the mean time the government of the realm, the which in a manner was
all in their hands, attributing unto themselves the principal offices, so as
for the affection they showed unto the crown, it seemed that Anthony bare them
respect, and in a manner subjection, so as the fear of life, and the sweetenes
of rule, made them obstinate. Amidst these doubts, the Prior was not without
hope of some succors from France, for that Frauncis Baretto being first of
all sent by the Governors, and then the Consul of the French by himself, with
some little money, he expected at the least one of them should appear with
men, although the Governors had sent Baretto more to please the peoples desire,
with this show, then for any will they had he should work it in effect,
being dispatched with ample commissions, they daily by their messengers
restrained, and in a manner revoked them, so as he effected nothing of
importance: And although that Anthony had written unto him, yet was it late,
and the Consul of the French having received money, stayed still in France to
take his pleasure, so as they expected succors from those parts in vain,
chiefly by reason that the Agents of the Catholic king labored greatly that
court, to keep the Portugals from their desire. True it is, that when Anthony
found them so slow in coming, and that the Catholic Kings galleies were
masters of the sea, he began to be out of hope. Then grew a confusion and
disorder in all things, and forasmuch as their minds were greatly troubled,
all without rest, and all terrified, it chanced that the night following the
day, when as they had received news of the loss of Settuuall, by reason of
the flight of some Castillian merchants, who held not themselves An allarum at
Lisbone.
secure within the city, they took an allarum, with great amasement, crying
that the enemy entered by many places, and as there was no ordered discipline,
nor any man that knew what they should undertake, the fear was so great, the
confusion such and so unreasonable, the running of people up and down to
demand what it was, and to seek for flight, adding thereunto the terror of
the night, in so great and well peopled a city, that there could not be seen
a greater confusion. And although at the rising of the sun having discovered
the truth, this fear vanquished, yet did there a greater seize upon every man's
mind: for understanding in trutth the Duke to be strong, they began to hear
news of the soldiers insolences, which disbanded and drew daily nearer,
giving no small astonishment to see certain Negro slaves return wounded, who
having rashly passed with their ensigns to the other bank, were ill entreated
by some horse and shot of the enemy: They found that Anthony made no
preparation, neither had he any forces to resist, governing himself with small
judgment, and therefore he neither knew how to fight, nor which way to fly,
neither yet how to yield himself: He was daily in counsel with his men, but
as he suffered himself to be governed by many, whose authorities were equal,
and their opinions diverse, so did he never resolve any good thing, Anthony
offers to compound.
as it happens often in the like accidents. They then propunded more plainly
then before the treaty of an accord, and although some, who before did seem
brauest, showed themselves now more mild, yet for that the Count of Vimioso
being a young man, persuaded to war, no man durst contradict him: He affected
the charge of general, but he knew not by what means to displace Diegode
Meneses, who enioied it, so as contrarying one an other, they provided slowly
for things necessary, whereunto was a great hinderance, the credit that
Anthony gave to Edward de Castro, a rich young man, to whom he was bound,
having furnished him with money, who desirous to show himself valiant,
obtained a commission to assemble what horse he could under his cornet,
employing him in matters of greater authority, then was fit for his base
quality.

Cardinal Riario sent Legatinto Spain.
His holiness having intelligence of the refusal the Catholic king had made,
touching his entermedling in the cause, doubted least the wars of Portugal
should alter the quiet of all Christendom. In the beginning he had showed
himself newter to both Kings, seeming to be doubtful in himself to whether
part he should incline: whether unto Henry that would give the crown unto
the Duchess of Bragance, or to Philip that sought it for himself; for by
reason of state he should not be well pleased to see these two realms united,
whereby the Catholic king should become more mighty and superior in forces,
to all other princes: yet did he not willingly seem to oppose against him,
fearing to displease a Prince that had deserved well of him: But understanding
that the two kings were agreed, and that Henry had changed his mind, and
labored to give the realm to Philip, he then made it manifest that he would
favor Anthony, and the Portugals, the which was more apparent after the death
of King Henry, when as he labored to have the cause of succession ended by
sentence: But Philip in regard of the quality of the judges, detested this
decision. But his Ambassadors having labored in vain in this respect (Philip
growing jealous, and not greatly trusting the Popes good meaning) would not
put to compremise, that which he seemed to hold certain: His holiness
determined to send a Cardinal into Spain, expressly to treat upon this
business: Therefore before the Prior was proclaimed king, he dispatched Cardinal
Alexander Riario his Legate unto Philip, with commission to dissuade the king
from arms, and from thence to pass into Portugal, to favor this business,
with commission likewise to offer himself for judge in the Popes behalf unto
all the pretendents.

The discourse of the Spaniards upon this Legation
There were diverse discourses in Spain upon the coming of this Legate; and
although the Castillians feared not his sentence, seeming he should not offer
himself alone to determine so great a matter in Spain, if he had no meaning
to pronounce it in favor of Philip; yet they held it not convenient to put
the matter into his hands, being of opinion that the Pope under color to
perform the office of a general father, came (as it is said) to make
himself absolute judge of realms: that besides the extraordinary authority
he should draw unto the Aposto like sea, he should bind the king unto his
house, by giving him a kingdom. For this cause the King having intelligence of
his departure from Rome, desirous to take possession of the realm before his
arrival, he commanded throughout all Spain where he should pass, that he
should be entertained and received with all possible pomp, whereof the Legate
taking no heed, he accepted of all their kindness. For this cause, and for that
the voyage was long, he spent much time; being arrived at Badagios, he found
that the affairs had taken an other form then when he was at Rome: For he
understood that Anthony was King, and that Philips forces were entered
Portugal, being then at the walls of Settuuall: Finding therefore the matter he
had to treat of thus altered, he sent to his Holiness for new direction, being
in the mean time lodged without the city in a co^uent of religious men which
go barefoote, he sent Traian Mario Apostolic Prothonotarie, to visit the
King, who receiving him with great favor, said unto him, that he was right
sorry, that by reason of his sickness he could not go to meet the Legate, as he
was bound; but when God should give him health he would then perform it,
supposing by this means to entertain him the longer, that the Cardinal
(desirous to enter with accustomed ceremouies) would attend his recovery, and
in the mean time the Duke of Alua should take possession of the realm. But
the Legate seeing his indisposition, and finding how much delay did import,
craved leave to come to him by night The Legate visites the King.
privately in coach, the which with great difficulty was granted, coming
unto him one night, accompanied with the Duke of Ossuna, and the Earl of
Chinchion: But this audience was of small effect, for the Legate by the
alteration of the affairs being irresolute, and the Catholic King most
resolute to proceed in this enterterprise, trusting more to arms, then
words, there was no agreement, the king saying, that the matter was so far
advanced, as it could admit no treating. The Cardianll was lodged in the
house of the Marquess D'Oignion, not being received at his entry with the
ceremonies accustomed for a Cardinal Legate: He remained a while without doing
any thing, but to effect the Popes commission, he would pass into Portugal.
The King who desired to stay him, entertained him all he could, supposing that
the Legate being within Lisbone, it would be scandalous to go against him with
an army: Moreover, he had no great confidence in the Legate, but held him as
suspect, for that being before in Portugal with Cardinal Alexandryn, he had
entered a strict league of amity with the Duke of Bragance, one of the
pretendents, who had lodged and entertained him: So as to delay his departure,
the King being now recovered of his sickness, sent unto him, that he would not
have him take his journey before he had made his entry with the ceremonies
accustomed to a Cardinal Legate; and therefore requested him to go out of the
city, and he would meet him with due ceremonies, the which he did: By means
of which delay, causing some to advise him not to depart, he entertained him so
long that he went not.

The Duke of Alua having now taken Settuuall, he hastened forward: for the
realm of Algarues and many other cities in those parts, having sent him word
that Lisbone being taken, they would obey, he held all that reduced, that lies
on this side Tagus toward The sundry opinions for the passage of the army.
Castill, meaning to pass his army on the other side of the river, and so
march against Lisbone: He stood in suspense where he should pass, whether
beneath Lisbone toward the mouth at Cascayes, or about against Almeryn, and
pass at Saint Arem, or else to send the galleis, although with some daughter
within the river of Tagus, coasting along the left bank, and he himself to
go to Almada or Casillas, there to imbarque with his army, and so to pass to
the other side: The passage of Cascaies albeit it were nearer, yet was it more
dangerous: For although he might well pass from Settuuall with his galleis,
yet was there not any shore, or convenient place to land, which was not
fortified and furnished with artillery, soldiers, and forts, whither the
galleis could not approach without great danger; besides he was advertised that
Diego de Meneses was there in field with many men. To go to Almeryn he
considered that he should find no barks, being all drawn to the other side;
if he carried any with him, they were but few, and to build them there, it
was a matter of long delay, and the largenes of the river would not suffer him
to make a bridge: And although possible in some places he might wade through,
yet the march was long being above threescore miles, that to do it in so hot
a season, in a dry country, without water, with a great army, and much
baggage, was a painful thing: It might prolong the war, and loose their
reputation by turning back, besides they doubted resistance upon the passage
in those parts: To go to Almada and send the galleies within the river, it
was a Counsel approved of the greatest part, and especially of Jews Douara,
saying, it was a most assured thing, that from the bank they might batter the
enemies army with their cannon, passing their army easily, and so become
master of the city without any loss, proouing that neither the rock of Saint
Julian, nor the fort of Cabesa Secca, could greatly endomage their galleies.
But the Duke preferring the shortness of the peril, inclined rather to pass at
Cascaies, then at any other place; and therefore. The army passes at Cascaies.
having taken advise of the Portugals, who had fled out of Portugal into
Castil, and were then come with the army, chiefly of Anthony de Castro, Lord
of Cascaies, who knew the country well, having again viewed the seacoast,
resolved against the opinion of many to pass at Cascaies, and having made
show to march with his army to Saint Arem to deceive the enemy, having in a
manner imbarqued all his foot in the galleies, he took that course. And for
that Diego de Meneses was at Cascaies preparing for the defense, the galleies
being within view of the city, they made show to turn their prooes to that
place which is called S. Anthonies shore, the which the Portugals had
fortified, fearing the enemy would come thither, as a convenient place for
descent: They made this show to draw Meneses from all other parts to come
thither, to make resistance, the which succeeded happily for the Duke; for such
as were The disimbarking of the Dukes army.
in guard in other places, assembled themselves there: The galleies having a
while run this course, the castle of Cascaies discharging some cannon shot
against them, turning their stems to the place which they call the old shore,
which was rough and inaccessible, finding it unfurnished, it was easy to
disimbarque; although before he were in some doubt whether he should proceed
or return back, both for that the wind was grown contrary, as having
discovered upon the hills some armed men, doubting the success would be but
badde, yet he resolved to pass on. It is said, that at that time one of the
Dukes eldest captains, and very familiar with him, drawing near upon color
of some other conference, said unto him in his ear, that this disimbarking,
was rather fit for a General of five and twenty years, then for one of his
age, who houlding him by the shoulder answered, that he could not deny it,
neither could he omit to do it; not withstanding his enemies were without
experience; when as the galleies discharged their artillery, the place
remained without defense, and the army landed without contradiction. The
disposition of the Dukes army.


The first soldier that went a shore was a Hargabusier, who having chosen a
place of least danger, turned his face to the enemy, leaving behind him
sufficient space to form a squadron: Two others which followed him were on
each side, a little behind him in equal distance, making a triangle
equilaterall, besides these two came three others, and then six, and so the
number still increasing they went in rank, the one greater then the other,
stretching forth themselves behind the point of this triangle, making the
body still greater without loosing the form, so as it grew to as great a
proportion as the place could contain, the which were all put into this
form, after whom the Duke disimbarked. Before this shore was a mountain of
hard access, behind the which lay Diego de Meneses with his troops, having
planted upon the top thereof, and betwixt certain rocks, some small pieces
of artillery, to hinder their descent, but they could not use them, for they
were not planted in any place to endomage the galleies; the which being
discovered by the soldiers which landed, some of them disbanding from the
triangle with their muskets, seized upon the cannon, abandoned by their
cannoniers, which were retired behind the mountain, where the rest of the
Portugals stood: The triangle being finished, the Duke thrust forth the point
thereof, and stretched out They charge the Portugals, who retire.
the soldiers as well as he could in a square form to march, having ascended
the mountain by the easiest way, seeing the enemy amazed, neither to fly nor
to defend themselves, and without any form of lodging: He sent about
fowerscore shot to entertain the skirmish, which followed with great
disadvantage to the Portugals, who being less experienced in shooting, and
unfurnished of muskets were often and a far off beaten by the enemy; when as
their shot could not reach them. So as amazed with the death of some of their
men, all the rest began to retire, with no small disorder toward Cascayes,
from whence Meneses said they should return to charge the enemy: by reason
whereof the Duke remained master of the field with greater facility then he
expected; the which was a great sign that all the other things should succeed
favorably, seeing in this of so great importance, he had so happy success.
Every man supposed, (and the Portugals more then all the rest) that the Duke
should have found more trouble in this passage then he had; for besides the
fortifications made in diverse places, they trusted to the discommoditie of the
shore, and in the valor of the said Meneses, Who (having been a captain at
the Indies) had (but most by his liberality) gotten reputation amongst this
nation. But forasmuch as the Portugals deceive themselves most of any nation in
judgment of themselves, the like happened in the opinion they had in this their
captain: yet were they not deceived in their judgment touching the uneasy
descent, for so it was; but these discommodities are easily surmounted, where
there is no resistance. Many Portugals having seen this unhappy The blames of
Meneses, and his excuses.
success, accused the captain of cowardice, who durst not attend the enemy
upon the bank to defend him from the shore, or to ascend the hill; some
(seeming unto them impossible that a man of that account should have so small
valor) charged him with disloyalty, saying that he would not fight, having
been corrupted by the Catholic Kings ministers. He excused himself
weakly, saying, that the soldiers he had, being gathered together of all
sorts, and fearful, would not fight, but doubting against reason of his
fidelity did mutine against him, and would not obey.

A confusion in the city of Lisbone.
These things did greatly amaze both the Prior and the whole city of Lisbone,
for Cascayes being but fifteen miles from the city unwalled, and weak, they
feared the Duke being master of that place, that the enimeis might make their
courses daily even unto the palace gates. And this fear, which often works
the like effects in cowardes by despair, that inconsideratenes does in rash
heads being mingled with choler, did so trouble Anthony, that having rung the
bells, and given the allarum, with great disorder and confusion, he assembled
the whole people within the palace yard, some on horseback, some on foot,
some armed, some unarmed, saying, he would go to field against the enemy. But
at the same time there arrived at court two religious men, who saying they came
from those parts, confirmed the enemies descent, and with all affirmed that
they had bin in skirmish, and that the Castillians had the woorst, having lost
many of their men, and some of their principal captains: The which being
believed, turned their sorrow and ringing of bells, into feasts, and sounding of
trumpets, and shooting of artillery, the which they discharged for joy: yet
soon after they understood the truth; but for that it was late, they deferred
the departure of Anthony with his men unto the next day morning. In the mean
time all things were so troubled, and so full of liberty, that a false brute
being spread abroad, how that George de Meneses (who was prisoner within the
castle) practiced to escape, all the people armed, yea the women ran
thither, whom if a Judge had not defended, although they found him there, and
not attempting any thing, they had murdered. The day following, returning to
assemble the people in fury, having still news of the enemy, without
consideration whither Anthony goes toward Cascaies.
they marched, or what they had to do, Anthony departed with these men toward
Cascayes, but having marched three miles, being arrived at Belem, his choler
somewhat qualified, returning back to view such as followed him, he found
his number less, and in worse order then he expected; for who so had a pike
had no sword, and he that had a Harquebuse, had no match, and altogether were
not above a thousand foot, and five hundredth horse, after the Genette manner:
For although they had assembled a great number within Lisbone, yet many upon
their departure were retired to their houses: Standing a while in this estate,
with the Count of Vimioso, he called all the nobility he had about him to
council, demanding of them what they should do: Suddenly there grew a mutiny
amongst this people, who cried out that they should march on, vowing to kill
any that should speak of their retraite, before they had gotten the victory,
and chased away the Castillians: For this cause some less blinded, who perhaps
would have showed the Prior his weakness, and advised him to retire, durst not
speak: But the sun setting, necessity made his troops feel some part of
those inconveniences, whereof they were yet ignorant, for desiring to eat,
there was not any bread to be found; so as the vain presumption of this people
being vanquished by hunger, in a few hours, they all returned back full of
confusion.

Cascaies taken and spoiled.
The Duke being lodged this night near unto our ladies church of Guida, the
day following he went to Cascaves, which place being unprovided of defense,
was spoiled by the soldiers, against the promise which the Duke had made to
Anthony de Castro; yet the inhabitants had in a manner abandoned it: There did
he pass his horse in galleies from Settuuall, with the rest of the army,
artillery, The castle taken.
munition, and baggage, incamping round about the castle of the said town,
into the which Diego de Meneses had retired himself, unknown to the Duke: And
although this seemed no fortress of defense, yet the Duke having sent a
trumpet thither to will them to yield, these miserable wretches trusted so
much in themselves, that breaking the law of nations, they shot at the trumpet,
and prepared for their defense, saying, that they were all resolved to die.
Suddenly the artillery was planted, and for that the walls were weak, having
with few shot made a great breach, they found their own fault too late,
resolving to yield: And although they made certain signs from the walls, yet
those without would not understand them, so as lifting up a white cloth in
sign of peace, he which held it, being discovered upon the walls, the soldiers
that were in guard, made many shot at him, and slew him, which gave small
hope of help to the assieged: Yet making an other sign, and seeing the
battery ceased not, the which had now made a great breach, dispairing of
pardon, viewing the ruined walls, without any other embassage or composition,
they opened the gates, where the soldiers entered without any resistance: There
they found Diego de Meneses, who with a Portugals confidence, supposing he had
not greatly offended, sent to tell Anthony de Castro who was with the Duke that
he was there, that as one gentleman ought to do for an other, he should
obtain his pardon, and take him into his charge, procuring him a bark to
Diego de Meneses beheaded, and Henry Pereira hanged.
go unto the Prior. But the Duke had him no sooner prisoner, but he cut off
his head, and caused Henry Pereira captain of the fortress, with some other
of the principals to be hanged, to terrify by this first execution the
captains of other forts, that should be obstinate in resisting. The fury and
confusion which the news of these events caused in the city, was incredible;
so as, if by chance the Peasants took any of the enemies prisoner (as it
often happens, with such as for desire of pillage straggle from the camp) he
was most miserable: for whilst they led him bound, such as were armed with
their arms, religious men with their staves, women and children with stones,
did so pitifully handle him, as happy was he that could strike him, and
their licentious liberty was so great, as it was lawful for any one (though
most base) and for every slave to wrong any stranger whatsoever, to imprison
him, and send him to the galleies; for charging him to be an enemy, the whole
people at the least motion would rise and execute what they pleased, were it
right or wrong.

Anthony seeing now all hope of defense upon the passage of the river lost,
and a mighty enemy so near him, sought some remedy for his affairs. All
conditions presented unto him, were most hard: For to issue forth and fight he
judged it a folly, finding his defect of men to vanquish; much less to bring
the battle in question: To defend the city it was impossible, for the
greatness thereof being without walls and weak: His flight by sea was stopped by
the galleies, he would not hazard to escape by land, being unable to carry
with him many jewels, and some money which he had gathered together; and to
compounde with the Duke was brother unto death: So as wavering in these
thoughts, the magistrate of the chamber of Lisbone went unto him, saying, That
seeing the enemy was so near and so mighty, they would not bring the safety
of the city in question, nor so govern themselves, that being weak it
should be a pray to the soldiers: that therefore he should prepare to issue
forth and defend it, the which if he did not, the city could do no less
then provide for her own safety. He answered, that the time was now come
when as they should aid him with men, entertained at their own charge, which
doing, he hoped with many others which he had assembled, God would give him
the victory: but the magistrate excused they could not do it, for the great
charge they had been at by reason of the plague; whereunto he replied, that
within two days howsoever, he would frame his camp, and march against the
Duke: For this cause, having let Anthony marches toward Belem with his men
consusedly.
pass the fourth day of August, most unhappy to the Portugals, for the loss
of the battle in Afric, and having left some of his most precious things in
certain religious houses, he commanded that all soldiers which had been long
before enrolled, and all the people of Lisbone without exception of person
whatsoever, should march toward Belem; the which was executed with great
rigor, forcing many to go in person: For although the hatred against the
Castillians were in general, yet the tailor, the shoemaker, the handicrafts
men, and the peasants, who bragged, that they alone would conquer the whole
world, did not willingly leave their houses, but fainting daily, they chose
rather to encounter with words then bullets, besides, being accustomed to an
other trade, and unfit for war, they had not been trained to shoot in a
Harquebuse, unapt to carry, much less to manage a pike: So as of this forced
and tumultuarie people they had assembled eight or ten thousand at Belem,
whither in the end Anthony went, who still doubtful, and ill advised, without
any resolution, expecting what time would counsel him. The resolution
whereon he most depended was, that if the Duke came against the city, to meet
him upon the way, with some advantage if he could, and give him battle,
propounding like a desperate man, either to vanquish or to die: yet soon
after, when the occasion was presented, he could neither effect the one nor the
other. His troops lay not encamped, but were dispersed here and there, within
the houses of that small place, under the porches of the monastery, and other
such like, without either form or strength of a lodging. He had no captain of
experience, no marshall of the field, nor sergeant that could command the
soldiers, lodge them, and put them in battle if need were. Sforce Orsin a
young man, and valiant, but of no great experience, was come out of Italy, at
the brute of these wars, yet being a stranger and alone, he was not obeyed,
neither did they greatly trust him: The private captains of companies had no
experience, and there was so great want of men, that some friars were made
captains of the Moors, and of the scum of the people, carrying in one hand
their crosses, Religious men divided into factions.
and in the other their arms. It is not to be forgotten (as a thing not
accustomed) the mutinies grown in religious houses, where being divided into
factions, few were affected to the Castillians, few remained newters, and
infinite were those that affected the rule of Anthony, for the favoring of
whose cause, they committed many disorders: The priests were no more temperate
then the rest, many whereof having left their priestly habit, were gone to
field armed: In this confusion Anthony remained three days at Belem, whilst
the Duke approached slowly: The fourth day, he considered that although there
came still unto him some soldiers which had been levied in all the cities of
the realm, yet the army diminished daily, for that the inhabitants of the
city left him, who having their houses near, not accustomed to the
discommodities of war, fled from him, therefore he sent to Lisbone,
commanding upon great punishments to bring unto him by force, al such as
should be found armed, or unarmed, defending that no man should retire to any
other place, but where he was, desiring that as well the cowardes as the
valiant, should run the like fortune with him; supposing (as king Sebastian
had done to his loss) it were possible to force men to fight that were both
unskillful and unwilling: And forasmuch as his only hope consisted in the
peoples favor, to the end they should follow him more willingly, he granted
unto all (but especially to those of his train, free liberty, the which
carrying with it confusion, was cause of great harm; for as the whole city
was filled with Negroes and Peasants, the quieter sort had more fear of the
people the^ of the enemy, yet was there not seen any one to power forth his
hate, or commit any private revenge, of small or great importance, not for that
there are not many dissentions and factions amongst them, but being more apt to
revenge themselves by the tongue then by sword: All rigor to force men to the
field prevailed little, for fear increasing with this diligence, they hid
themselves the more, the which Anthony perceiving, finding himself in no
assurance at Belem, having the enemies camp so near, and a conqueror, he was
advised to pass on, and to lodge about the walls of the rock of Saint Julian,
supposing that two good effects would grow thereby, the one, that his army
should be more safe under the favor of the cannon, and of the tower, the other
that he should assure this forte, being the only defense of the whole realm.
But this advise being disallowed of the greatest part, he retired himself by
the counsel of Sforce Orsin to Alcantara, a mile Anthonic retires to Alcantara.
nearer the city, putting a river betwixt him and the enemy, the which having
the banks high on that part, served him as a fortress. And although this
retraite was rather caused, by the inconsideratenes, wherewith he went to
Belem, then by any new fear of the enemy, yet was it judicious, the place
being strong by nature, and fit for Anthonies intent, who desired not to
retire far from the city, to keep it in obedience.

The Catholic King who remained still at Badagios, understanding the Dukes
proceedings, being on the one side glad, and on the otherside troubled to see
this people attend the scourge of war, besides that he did incense them
against him, whom he desired much to entertain as friends, for this cause he
sought all means possible, as he had ever done, to win them with the least
show of hostility; and therefore he thought it good to grant a general
pardon to all portugals, that had been employed in this action against him,
seeking by clemency to make his enemies friends, the which he published, being
thus in effect: That being informed that in the rebellion that Anthony had
raised, usurping tirannouslie the name of a king of Portugal, many of them
which had followed his faction, had done it, being oppressed, forced, and
deceived, and The Catholic kings pardon to the Portugals.
that seeking to provide that such should not be punished with offenders, and
that the people more easy to be abused then the rest; should not be
chasticed with that rigor which law does inflict; his pleasure was, That al
such (as leaving the part of the said Anthony and embracing his, as of their
King, and natural Lord,) should come unto his service within a certain time
prefixed, to that effect by the Duke of Alua, should be freely pardoned all
their faults, whereinto they had run by taking and following the voice of
the said Anthony: He excepted notwithstanding the Prior and all the seductors,
and authors of the rebellions, committed at Saint Arem, Lisbone, and Settuual,
and all such as had received from him any charges, offices, and recompenses as
King, and such as did serve him actually, all which, should not enjoy the
said pardon. And although this latter point was not approved of all men, yet
the rest seemed to be done with great judgment; for thereby they did not only
discover the kings good meaning, but also his great wisdom, using clemency
to pardon, and martial policy to procure the Portugals to abandon the Prior:
But this writing (although there were many copies dispersed, thorough the
realm) wrought small profit to Philip, and little hurt to Anthony; for
neither did any greater number follow the Catholic Kings party then before,
neither did any man for fear abandon Anthonies; his favorites only were a
little grieved, who examining the form thereof, seemed to be excluded, as
those that had received offices, honors, and recompenses: so as they did see
their offenses, become daily more capital, together with the example they had
seen by the death of Diego de Meneses. Many noted in this pardon, that besides
it was written in the Portugal tongue, it began with the name of King only,
with the ordinary titles of kings of Portugal, and being accustomed to sign
with these words IO EL REY, now he only subscribed REY:: pointed with five
points, called by the Portugals the five wounds, after the same manner the
kings of Portugal had used: so as some said, that in matters of small
importance, he began to show himself a Portugal.

The Duke marches against the rock of Saint Julian.
The Duke of Alua marched easily toward Oeiras, to the rock of Saint Julian,
seeming so to do expressly, that the Portugals might have leisure to resolve:
being encamped so far from the fortress as their cannon could not annoy
them, he presently sent a trumpet to demand obedience: But being the very same
whom he had formerly sent to the castle of Cascayes, at whom they had shot, he
durst not approach near to the forte, fearing they would do the like, so as
only having made a sign a far off, without attending any answer, he
returned, saying that they would not yield: For this cause having planted
their artillery on Saint Lawrence day, they began their battery with ten
cannons, increasing the number unto four and twenty: The galleies could not
approach, for that the forte stood upon the sea, and therefore the Portugal
gallions drawing near to the land, did greatly indomage the Castillians with
their culuerings and other great artillery, but having planted three cannons in
the night, they forced the gallions with a few volleies, to retire themselves
higher unto Saint Katherines shore.

Anthony was now at Alcantara upon a hill, being but five miles distant from
the fortress, where he remained an unprofitable behoulder of this battery,
whereon it seemed his whole fortune depended; for that the whole realm of
Portugal had no other forte but this, that could make any resistance; so as
loosing it, his greatest hope was vanished: but for that he might well succor
it by sea, both with men and munition as he did, he hoped well it should not
be forced; or at the least hold out, until that either winter should draw
on, or some prince (taking pity of his misery) should relieve his estate,
before the winning thereof; without the which he did see himself helpelesse,
and the rather for that he had intelligence that the city of Lisbone (being
grieved with the great insolences committed daily by the soldiers disbanded
from the enemies camp thereabouts,) were resolved not to give him entrance
within the city, unless he returned with victory, or had compounded with the
enemy, fearing otherwise the Duke would be displeased, and being weak, give
it in spoil unto the soldiers. Some were of opinion that the Prior in whom
desire of rule was of more force then religion, or other respect whatsoever,
should (finding al hopes lost) procure that this city (which is in a manner
the whole realm) should remain as a pray to the avarice and voluptuousnes
of the Castillians, desiring that the Portugals being forced to yield, the
realm should be so entreated by the Catholic Kings men, as there might
remain no hope of peace or amity; to the end, that if hereafter he should
pretend the recovery of the realm, the people (in regard of the hatred that
such losses engender, together with their natural inclination) should remain
still enemy, and be more willing to yield to his devotion: For this cause he
sought daily with all his force to reform the magistrate of the chamber, and
to place men, in whom he had great affiance, as well to have entire into the
city if need were, as also to dispose of things at his pleasure: But forasmuch
as the greatest part of those magistrates were mechanicke men, in whom fear
has a more interest, then the respect of a King, he did not greatly trust
them: When he was proclaimed king, there followed him a gentleman of Castill,
who served him as the first vallet of his chamber, seeing the wars to grow
betwixt the Portugals and Castillians, he craved, and obtained leave to A
treaty of agreement with Anthony.
retire himself into his country. This man going to King Philip, made offer
(for the great familiarity he had with Anthony) to treat an accord with him,
being in great hope to effect it; so as he was sent to the Duke of Alua, with
order that he should suffer him to go and confer with the Prior: For the
effecting hereof he came to Lisbone, at such time as the Duke took Cascayes,
and having discoursed at large with the Prior, he informed him of the Kings
forces, and advised him to compound: The Prior gave ear to this treaty, and
Diego de Carcamo, (for so this gentleman was called) did greatly press him to
give him a letter of credit unto the Anthony his letter to the King.
king, with commission what he had in charge. That such as had been their
mediators, were the cause that he had not served him as he desired, but as much
as the time would suffer him, he was ready to do it: That if it pleased him to
send any person as Ambassador to the three Estates, that he would persuade
them to yield him obedience, and that he would say he had defended them so
much as possibly he could, but his succors from France and other Provinces
failing, he could no longer resist, and therefore he advised them to agree. In
this letter which he had written to the King, he did sign Rey. But repenting
him afterward, he did write it again, at the persuasion of Carcamo, and
subscribed it Anthony: having received the letter and his charge, he seemed to
have ended his business; but being with the King, he was returned back to
Anthony, with a resolution which he supposed should have succeeded; but with
certain letters to the Duke of Alua, whereby he was commanded to govern
himself as the estate of the affairs should require. He arrived at such
time as the Duke was emcamped before the rock of Saint Julian. Now did there
lighten forth a great hope of peace, the which soon after vanished away: For
although the Duke seemed to be well pleased with this practice, yet may we well
say, it did not content him, seeming happily unto him, that being so far
advanced, he should have more honor to conquer it by arms, then by
agreement. For which cause he returned Carcamo to the Prior with this answer:
That he was glad of his resolution to The answer of the Duke to Anthony.
serve his majesty, but there was no reason to send an Ambassador to the
States, seeing he held not the crown from them but from the people, to whom
if he pleased he would send, and grant the like graces unto them, which
other cities had received by their yielding. These words were delivered him in
writing, but by mouth the Duke added, that he had been an affectionate servant
to Jews his father, and that as he had now taken arms to deprive him of the
realm; so would he take them in hand again to conquer him an other, so as
it were not any of those that belonged to his King and Lord. Carcamo was not
yet without hope to conclude the business, but now the Spanish gravity hindered
the effect of so great importance: For the Duke supposed he should not give
unto Anthony any greater title then Seignory, and he that was mounted from
Excellency to Highness, held himself contemned, and so much disdained it, that
both for the cold answer, and for this respect, he was assured the Duke would
have no agreement: He therefore made answer by mouth, that seeing he would not
agree, if his people would obey him, and be conformable to his will, they would
either vanquish or all die in that place. Upon this answer, the Duke
(repenting his manner of writing, or it may be, fearing the King would not
like of this kind of proceeding,) sent back Carcamo to say unto Anthony, that
he should send one by sea, or by land, and he would send another, and that in
the midde way they should conclude all things: But the Prior who had small
confidence in the Duke, being greatly moved, made no other reply; but that
Kings were Kings, and captains, captains; but that victories came from the
hands of God: so as the Duke dispairing of the matter, devised for his
discharge, that Anthony had sent him word, that he desired to confer with
him by night in a bark; and the better to induce men to believe it, he went
publicly to lie aboard in a galley, and being disimbarked in the morning, he
seemed discontented that Anthony had not come to conference with him, it may be
(with this apparent justification) to have more cause to make war, and not to
compounde, and so to lay the fault upon Anthony, but in truth they did never
treat of any meeting.

The rock of Saint Julian battered, and the advice of the Inginers.
Now had they battered the fort of S. Julian, touching the which there was
before grown some difficulty amongst the Inginers, upon what part they
should make their battery: Some would have him plant their cannon at the
strongest place, but most convenient to give an assault: Others would batter
the weakest part, although most uneasy to enter; for that their defenses being
taken away, their place of arms should remain open to their artillery;
whereupon the Duke to quite this controversy, went himself; allowing the
opinion of Fratino, and of Philip Terzi, where it happened that having battered
near two whole days, and made but a small breach, the soldiers fainting,
(although they had good means to entrench themselves) their army near at
hand, and the haven always open, Tristan vaz de Vega, captain thereof, was in
doubt, whether he should yield, or defend it so long as he could; but
enclining more to yield, then to fight, he was in suspense, what means to use
to treat secretly, not trusting greatly to some that were about him. A poor
woman cause of the yielding of Saint Julian.
But fortune made the way for him, for at that time a poor woman near to
Oeiras, having her daughter and son in law within the forte, amazed with the
noise of the artillery, came crying to the Duke, beseeching him to give her
leave, to draw her son in law and her daughter out of the forte which he
battred: The old Duke who sought such occasions, embraced this, and said unto
the woman that she should go in safety, causing the cannon to cease in the
mean time. He willed her to say unto the captine of the forte, that he had
done ill to make so small account of the Dukes message, and that he should not
wilfully cast himself away; she delivered her embassage, and being returned
with her daughter to the camp, she said unto the Duke on the behalf of
Tristan Vaz, that he defended himself, having not as yet seen any messenger
from him, whom he would have heard and entertained, and that if he would
assure him upon his word, he would go to the camp to speak with him. The
Duke sent this woman presently back to the captain, saying unto him, that he
might not only come in safety, but if he would, he would send him hostages:
But relying upon the Dukes promises, he went unto him, and was courteously
entertained: The captain excused himself for not admitting of the trumpet,
saying, there had not been any one with him, nor spoke with any one that was
within that place, the which if he had done, he would have made answer with
that courtesy which was convenient, by reason whereof, the trumpet was in
danger of hanging. The Duke exhorted The rock of Saint Julian yielded.
Tristan Vaz with many reasons to resign the forte, as appertaining to his
king, showing unto him the danger wherein he was: The matter being a little
debated betwixt them, the captain said unto him, that if he would promise in
the name of the Catholic king to perform such recompenses as Anthony had
granted him, he would yield it up; which the Duke freely offering, they were
agreed. So as being returned, leading with him some Spanish captains and
soldiers, he resigned the fortress, where the assieged were so decayed, as
they seemed to issue forth of a deadly prison: And although some did esteem
the captain for this action to be treacherous, and others a cowarde, yet (as
he said) the rock with such inexpert soldiers, was not defensible: besides,
the Governors had declared Philip successor. A little before the yielding of
S. Julian, the Duke had sent to Peter Barba, captain of Cabessa Secca, willing
Cabessa Secca abandoned.
him to yield the forte, the which he having refused, when as he understood the
fortress was yielded, and that the Duke brought in his galleies he would no
longer attend, but having abandoned the place with the consent of the Prior,
and saved certain artillery, he fled to the camp at Alcantara.

The fear of them at Lisbone.
By these losses fear increased in the city, chiefly amongst the principals,
who fearing to be spoiled, were daily more disposed to yield to the Catholic
King; besides they did see small help in the Priors affairs, and they hoped
by their yielding to obtain some privilege from his Majesty, and had before
this made offer of themselves, if the respect of the Prior (who was in field
and so near) had not detained them: At this time they had intelligence of the
arrival of four ships at the Island of Terceraes, which came from the Indies,
very rich, and of great importance for the city, the loss whereof, if the
galleies should seize on them, would cause great hinderance, both in the
particular, and general, and therefore the greatest part wished that one of
the armies would yield to the other, before the ships should arrive: For this
cause the city sent again unto Anthony, to show unto him the danger, and as
it were the siege wherein they were, having the entry of the sea shut up, that
the Duke having so great numbers of men, and he so few, he ought not (though
he might) to hazard the fortune of a field with so great disadvantage. They
did secretly advise him to compound, seeming the best way to end these
troubles, and then the ships might safely enter: Moreover they did suppose,
that if in fighting the Duke should remain victor so near the city, they
should hardly save it from the spoil of the soldiers: Notwithstanding Anthony
for his small experience being irresolute, disdaining the Dukes speeches, and
ill advised by his friends, these reasons could not draw him to resolve; but
the next day he sent to the magistrate the Count of Vimioso, the Bishop of
Guarda, and Emanuel of Portugal, to entreat the city to defend it self, and
to send him more men to the camp, encouraging them, sometimes devising that
the French succors were on the way, sometimes showing the Priors forces to be
greater then they were, and the enemies less. But as the words of the
magistrate did nothing move the Prior, no more did the speeches of the Prior
alter the inward mind of the Magistrate, so as all remained in suspense, every
man with his own intentions: True it is, that as well the said Prior as some
of the magistrates, had easily agreed with the Duke upon certain conditions:
But the Priors will was forced by those of the house of Portugal, and
especially by the Bishop, and the Citizens, by many new officers, who had their
places in perpetuity; the which were wont to be granted but for a time:
These men arrogating to themselves more authority then was given them, would
not suffer the execution of any thing, but what pleased themselves: But for all
this Anthony was not without fear that the city would rebel against him to
his utter ruin, trusting in few, he could find no better remedy, then to
place continually at the gates of the city, and in the army at sea, a number
of religious men of diverse orders, to guarde the entry with the soldiers, and
to keep the keys, trusting deservedly more in them, then in the captains
that were there employed: For in the assemblies and counsels of State that were
often held, there appeered more hatred against the Castillians, and more will
to fight in the religious men then in the secular.

The Duke was now returned to the same lodging of Oeiras, a place both by
nature and art strong: For besides the great number of artillery and
rampires, the country was rough and stony, whereas the horsemen could hardly
fight, in whose force the Portugals relied much: He made no show to dislodge,
for supposing now (as in effect it was) that from thence he held all the
realm assieged, and principally with his galleies, he supposed that both the
Prior and the city, would soon yield unto him: Besides that, to march on,
considering his crafty nature and slow disposition, and the Portugals army
being so near, he thought it not convenient; he labored with all possible
devises to be co^querour without fighting; and had now almost corrupted the
captains of the galleies, and of the tower of Belem, who should soon have
delivered unto him both tower and army; the which had been effected, if
Anthony himself had not gone in person, who having dispossessed in a manner
all the captains of their charges, and placed others, without giving them
respite to execute their practices; but he was now grown so jealous of every
man, finding in all men so great fear, and so little faith, that he knew not
whom to trust, if he were not a religious man, a mariner, or of the baser
sort. And for that it seems always to such as fear that they are betrayed,
it happened that fire being kindled by chance in certain straw which lay about
the castle walls of the city, where his royal tapestrie lay, he grew
suspicious that this fire had been some sign unto the enemies, and that the
merchant strangers whom he had placed there in guard, had made it, for that
they would not go to field to fight, and this fear was so violent, that
without examining the fact, without considering they were Flemmings, whose
nation for the most part were the most obstinate enemies, that ever the
Catholic King had, thrust forward by his own fear, and that of Emanuel
Soars one of the new Veriadors of the chamber, he displaced the strangers
from thence, and being not yet well assured, he commanded that all strangers
should depart the city, and soon after he decreed, (although it were not
executed) that they should be spoiled. These two armies remained eight days
in this estate, near one to the other, without moving, and little
skirmishing; at the end whereof, the Duke sent forth Sanches d'Auila, with a
hundredth and fifty horse, and some few foot, to discover the country, and
plot the means to batter the tower of Belem, they were encountered by three
hundredth horse, and five hundredth Portugale foot, who without order ran
toward them: But for that the Castillians pretended nothing but to discover,
being but weakly charged by the Portugals, having skirmished a while, with the
loss of few men they returned to their lodging, and the day following, they
issued forth with a greater number, and having entered skirmish of the one
side, the Castillians of the other having planted three pieces of artillery,
which the night before they had drawn near unto the tower, they forced (after
some few cannonadoes) first the army The yielding of the tower of Belem.
of galleies to retire to Lisbone, and then the tower to yield, by means
whereof, the kings army at sea, might safely enter into the port of Belem, as
presently they did.

THE SEVENTH BOOK.
The Contents of the seventh Book.
The route at Alcantara: The taking of Lisbone: The sack of the subburbes: The
praise and dispraise of the Duke of Alua: The sickness of the Catholic King:
The voyage of Sanches d'Auila into the Province which lies betwixt Doro and
Migno: The winning of the cities of Auero and Porto: The flight of Anthony: The
taking of Viana: The death of Queen Anne: The Kings progress to Eluas: The
resolution of the inhabitants of the Terceraes: The Popes offer to send an
army against England.

BEtwixt the two armies there was no other let then the rocks of the brook of
Alcantara: The Duke finding that Anthony supposing himself in safety, would
not come to the field, resolved; for that he would not force him in so
defensible a lodging, to seek some other means to defeat him quite, or at
the least to make him dislodge, and free the city from such a curb; the which
he understood came not to his obedience, for that this army was so near
them. But having not yet viewed the enemy, nor his lodging, but from far,
trusting little to the report of others, would first himself see the seat,
and how they were lodged, before he would attempt any matter of importance,
and therefore on Saint Bartholomewes day he issued forth of his lodging with
his whole army, only with an intent to discover: The left banks of Tagus,
whereupon these armies were encamped, is hilly, but yet easy, and is divided
by the brook of Alcantara, as it were into straight lines; the which takes his
name of a small village seated upon the right angle, where it discharges it
self into the river: There upon the brook is a bridge of stone; the banks of
both sides, beginning from the mouth of the river, running a mile upward, are
very high and uneasy, yet upward there lies a champion ground, although
somewhat uneven, yet very commodious for lodging; upon the left bank was the
Portugals camp, in a manner upon the triangle, where the rock is highest
fortified toward the enemy with ill fashioned trenches, and much artillery:
The Duke marched to the right bank, with his whole army, right against the
Portugals; where having made a long stand, considering well the seat to be
naturally strong, but little helps by art, he see the enemies (perceiving his
approach) to put themselves into squadrons, within their rampires, standing
still, without any show of issuing forth, laboring only to endomage them
with their cannons: So as having well resolved what to do, after some skirmish,
he returned for this night unto the place from whence he came, and for the day
following gave this order, that after midnight they should give a hot allarum
on al sides, to keep the enemy on foot, to weary him, and to cause him to
put his men in order, as he had done the day before: He enjoined Frauncis
d'Alua, General of the artillery, that before day he should plant upon the
hills, which discover the enemies lodging, and their trenches, some great
artillery, with sufficient munition, to batter the Portugals ranks, to scour
their defenses, and the place where they should stand to defend the bridge,
when it should be assaulted: He commanded to thrust into the army at sea a
thousand Harquebusiers, five hundredth Italians, and five hundredth Spaniards,
with order to the Marquess of The Duke of Alua his speech to the soldiers.
Saint Croix, to charge the enemies when a certain sign should be given unto
them: He called all the chief Commanders of the camp, and said unto them,
that he hoped to drive the enemy that day by force from his lodging, that he
desired them to be obedient, to observe the directions which he had given, and
should give, for as by that and their valor, the enterprise was easy; so
without order and obedience it was most difficult: That one of the chiefest
points his Majesty had commanded, was to save the city of Lisbone, the which
the king had in so great regard, that he had rather leave to vanquish, then by
vanquishing to spoil it: And therefore he did press them to promise, that if
they were so happy as wholly to break the enemy, they should not only
forbear to spoil it, but defend it from such as would attempt it; assuring
them that the king would be more pleased with the defense thereof, then with
the victory it self: He added moreover, and that with great vehemency; that
if his ill hap were such, as that they should not satisfy him in this, he
beseeched God, that the first shoot the enemy should make, should rather
deprive him of life, then to see a thing so much against the service and will
of his Majesty. These words being ended, and al things executed, the Duke a
little before day (leaving in his lodging a reasonable guard of all nations)
marched against the Portugals in this order, notwithstanding some of the chief
were of opinion, they should first try this army with courses and light
charges, being a general opinion by the aduertisements they had The order of
the Dukes army.
received, that few men would put them to flight. The Duke divided his army
into three bodies, two of foot, and one of horse, the which marched not one
after an other, but as it were in front, as the hilly country would give them
leave: In the middle was the Duke with the greatest part of the Spanish foot,
and some German pikes, divided into four squadrons, which marched not all in
front, nor one after an other, but scattered as the place would suffer them,
being in all about six thousand: On the right side were all the Italians, the
rest of the Germans, and some few Spaniards, ordered in three squadrons, one,
a side of an other, by Prosper Colona, which should amount to the like number:
On the left hand, which was the third body, were their horsemen, commanded by
Ferrant son to the Duke, in the first rank whereof marched their Harquebusiers
on horseback, in the second their gennetters, in the third their light
horsemen, and behind, their men at arms, where Ferrant himself remained;
upon the river which lay on the right hand (the which in that place is about
three miles broad) was the Marquess with threescore and two galleies, and five
and twenty ships, the which lying but musket shot from their foot, served as
a wing to the army on that side, to answer the horse which were on the other.

Anthony his preparation against the Duke.
In the mean while Anthony having viewed the enemies the day before, and how
little they had effected, believed (notwithstanding the great allarum which he
heard in the night) it would fall out as the day before; and that after some
light skirmishes, the enemy (he not issuing forth of his lodging) should
retire the second time; yet desirous to put his men in order as the day before,
he could not do it, for being unaccustomed to suffer, weary with the
travail of the day, and disquietnes of the night, they did not execute that
which was commanded; besides their number was greatly diminished; for many
being accustomed to lie in the town all night, and return in the day, were
not yet come, and others amazed, were quite fled away: And therefore he
commanded the Bishop of Guarda, who played at Lisbone (as a man may say) the
part of a king, to send with all diligence to the camp all such men as were
within the city, who with drums and bells ceased not all night to sound, and
with serieants armed, to drive the citizens and handy crafts men by force out
of their beds, compelling them to go forth armed, with some few whereof, the
said Bishop went to the camp that night. But hereof followed no good effect,
for such as were sent forth against their wills being fearful, fled to other
places, so as the Portugal army neither increased in number nor in order.

The Duke in the mean time presented himself on the right bank, opposite to
the Priors army, upon the hills where he had planted his cannon; where viewing
the Portugals scattered in their lodging, he found himself deceived in his
conceived opinion, that upon the allarum given they should rank themselves
into squadrons: He now perceived that this intent to batter their ranks with
his artillery could not succeed, as he had presupposed, and disordering them
to charge them on all sides, supposing in this manner he should easily break
them: But having changed his resolution, according to the occurrants* being
willing to hazard a battle, he did endomage them all he could with his
cannon, and so did the Prior likewise on his part: He commanded Prosper Colona
to attempt the bridge with his men, that were in the squadrons on the right
hand, striving to pass it, and to win as much ground as he could: He gave
order to Sanches d'Auila with two thousand Harquebusiers, which he had drawn
out of his middle Battalion, having passed the brook above whereas the banks
are lowest, and easiest to ascend to draw the enemy to combat, with all the
advantage he could: charging them in flank even unto their trenches: He gave
commission to Ferrant his son, who taking a greater compass, should pass
the brook, whereas the banks were not high, unto the other side with his
horse, and go against the enemy, but if he should not issue forth of his
lodging, as it was supposed, they should then assail them on all parts at one
instant, he remaining behind with the rest of the foot, to succor where
need should require, in a place more eminent then the rest, from the which he
might discover both armies, where having left his squadrons a little behind
him, he sat him down, viewing how the assault would succeed, and making
necessary countersignes: Prosper Colona came to the bridge before that either
Sanches d' Auila, or the horsemen could attain to the other bank, it may be
for that it behooued them to make a longer march, or for that the Italians (as
the Duke said) to win honor, made too great haste: They found it not
unfurnished, for the Portugals had there planted their soldiers of most
esteem, who at the first assault made great resistance: For although the
Italians fought valiantly, yet was it long ere they prevailed any thing; for
the place being narrow, defended and guarded in flank with some Harquebufiers
which had fortified themselves within a mill, to the which they could not
approach by reason it was environed with water, they came to fight with great
disadvantage, so as having in a manner wone it, they were repulsed with some
losses. But Prosper having caused his soldiers to mount up on a narrow causway,
which kept the water of the mill, by the which they might (though uneasily)
come unto the house, having with the loss of some few assaulted it, those
within were all cut in pieces, so as such as guarded the bridge, wanting their
succors in flank, being endomaged from the same mill, by the Italians, Colona
charging them with greater force at the same instant on the bridge, he woone
it, and passed to the other bank, wherein Jews Douara did good service, who
seeing the Italians repulsed, he caused them to be succored, almost against
the Dukes will, with some German pikes, the which he obtained from the
General: There did they long endure a hot fight, for the Portugals being as
yet ignorant that they were charged in any other other part, all the force of
the army with the Prior himself ran to the bridge, where Prosper repeld
them valiantly, and put them to flight: The Duke beheld what Sanches d' Auila
should do, being most assured that if he obeyed him, all the enemies camp
were broken, but he feared, that seeing the Italians in fight (being
choleric) he should be impatient, to take so long a course as to go charge
them in flank, but would assail them at the first encounter, the which he
esteemed dangerous, but seeing him obedient, he held the battle woone, so as
coming to the other bank with his Harquebusiers, and Ferrant with his
horsemen, they found no resistance: For although that Anthony being scarce
arrived at the bridge, came to this other side, the Portugals beginning now to
understand the success of the bridge, being fearful, presently fled toward
the city. At this instant the Duke gave sign unto the galleies, who without
their masters rowed toward the city with the rest of their army, discharging
their artillery against the Portugals fleet, the which being a little
retired, without any place to fly unto, set sail, but without any resistance
they became a pray unto the enemy.

The flight of Anthony toward the city, his defeat and hurt.
Anthony being inexpert, never supposed the Duke would charge him within his
lodging, seeing himself at one instant so much endomaged with the artillery,
the bridge to be forced, which he held for very strong, his men to fly, and
their horsemen to make way to cut off all way of retreat, he grew amazed:
Notwithstanding, being accompanied with Count Emanuel of Portugal, with Diego
Boteglio the elder, and Edward de Castro; he fled likewise toward the city,
without order, or without any resistance, amidst the prease of his people,
where at the entry of the suburbs, he was hurt in the head by a soldier on
horseback, and if he had stayed but a little longer, or the horsemen made more
haste, he had been taken prisoner, by some Italian adventurers, who were
advanced very far. In this haste he passed with the rest of his broken
army through the city, whereof a part, yet the least, following him, entered
by one gate, and went forth by an other; and the other part which was the
greater, having cast away their arms, hid themselves in their houses, where
they had their wives and children, and such as were come from other parts of
the realm, assembled themselves in churches with great fear: In passing he
commanded the prisons to be opened, so as with a great number of offenders
that were delivered, there came forth such as were committed, as affected unto
Philip.

The Dukes men having slain many of these miserable wretches with their shot
and lances, who fled by four and six together, making but a weak and
unprofitable resistance, came to the city; Ferrant de Toledo as chief,
marching before the rest, under whose authority the whole army was governed,
seeing the battle woone, fearing the soldiers fury should do more hurt then
he wished, did expressly keep them back, causing them to stay, supposing there
might remain yet some men to conquer; and being come to the gates of the
city, he stayed to parley with the Magistrate of the chamber from the walls,
who was come thither to that effect: But their treaties were short, and little
disagreeing, for the Portugals seeing themselves before the Castillians
soldiers, their miserable king hurt and fled, and their army in route, they
seemed to be now reduced to their last exigent: And Ferrant (although a
conqueror) yet desirous (according to the kings meaning) to save the city
from spoil, they soon agreed: Ferrant demanded the city, the Portugals
desired to know in what sort, and although some answered at discretion; yet the
Magistrate offering to yield as other The yielding of Lisbone.
cities had done, it was granted they should have their lives and goods
saved, least by longer stay the soldiers should have occasion to commit some
disorder. Notwithstanding some of the Magistrates being let down from the
walls, were carried behind some Castillian Caualiers to the Duke, who granted
them their demands with better acception, and more freely. Then began the
soldiers against the Dukes will to disband and spoil that part of the city,
which is without the walls, the which is greater, nobler, and fairer, then that
within, and is so spacious, as many great cities are not comparable The spoil
of the suburbs of Lisbone.
unto it: So as although this body in the midst of Lisbone was not spoiled, yet
the suburbs were and all places thereabouts; and likewise some houses within,
the which under color to appertain to rebels, were given in pray to the
soldiers, whom they could no otherwise withstand, seeing they had sufficiently
obeyed, in preserving the city from spoil three days: Many innocent citizens
lost their most precious mooueables, the which by reason of the plague which
then reigned greatly in the city, they had transported to their farms, and
other possessions near thereabouts, where they were spoiled. The extortions
the soldiers committed were not great, but the riches that fell into their
hands were infinite. The galleies did great harm, for besides the spoiling of
the banks of Tagus, and the ransacking of all the ships within the Port,
where they found infinite store of merchandise; they served like wise unto the
soldiers that were on land, as a means to hide and carry away all things
were they never so great, not being forced to discharge themselves of their
baggage, to sell them at low prices upon the place, as it often happens. The
custom houses, that is to say the general, and that of merchandise of the
Indies, always full of precious wares, although they were without the city
gates, yetwere they not spoiled: For by reason of their great riches, Alonso de
Leua General of the galleies of Sicily, sent a guard of private soldiers to
have care and defend them: The religious women, whose monasteries were all
without the walls, were preserved; and withal much wealth that was kept there,
yet much of that which was left in the houses of religious men was stolen away;
but most of all in that of Saint Rock, whereas the Jesuits remain; for
certain Italian soldiers being first entered, were expelled by the Spaniards,
who being sent thither by their commanders, under color to preserve them
being friends, they committed greater excess then the other, being enemies,
would have done; for the Italians being departed, the Spaniards having searched
out the most secret things, and finding them, they carried them by night into
the galleies, and into their houses. The diversity of nations which were at
the spoil, caused more respect to the women, and holy things then had been
otherwise; for the Spaniards most insolent in other countries, were here
against their nature very continent, least by their example the Italians and
Germans in Spain should grow worse. The booty of mooueables and other
precious things, which this city in so many years peace, and by the traffic
of the Indies had gathered The number that were slain in the battle.
together was infinite. The number of such as were slain in the battle was
small, in regard of the little defense they made, notwithstanding there died
not above a thousand of the Portugals, and not above a hundredth of the Dukes
army, of so small force were the peoples arms, rusted with ease. The Duke
when the city was yielded, came himself in person for the defense thereof;
where having made some stay in one of the houses near the suburbs, he
returned to lodge from whence the Portugals were departed. Anthony having
dressed his wound at Sacabem, six miles from Lisbone, marched easily toward
Saint Arem: The Duke standing doubtful whether he remained still within the
city, or were fled, for that the Portugals for his better safety gave out
false rumors. This victory was of great importance, and had been greater if
the Prior had been taken prisoner, for in his safety, the realm (which
should have been in quiet) remained in suspense, all men supposing that he
should repair his forces, and try his fortune The Duke blamed.
a new. The Duke was blamed of many for not using of greater diligence,
saying, it was a great error, in all other things to have set so good an
order, and to have omitted it in this of such importance, some did attribute it
unto negligence, others unto malice, especially for that Anthony had made so
great a stay betwixt Sacabem and Saint Arem; so as he might easily have
suppressed him, and this was the issue of the battle of Alcantara.

In the mean while the ships which came from the Indies, were disanchored from
the Islands of Terceraes, and sailed toward Portugal, ill advertised of what
had passed. And for as much as they had former intelligence of their arrival
at the Islands, it was thought good they should stay there, being valued at
three millions, many doubted they should be lost: For on the one side the Duke
had sent some ships armed to seek them, on the other side the Prior had sent
certain carauels with advise to go to Penichie, a place upon the coast twenty
miles from Lisbone, toward the north, and therefore it was feared they could
not escape the one, or the other, either to be taken by the kings ships, or to
follow the direction of Anthony, and in what sort soever, they should be
lost: For falling into the hands of the Castillians they should be spoiled,
and going to Penichie, the Prior would become master of private men's goods,
and employ them for the necessity of the wars. And some ignorant of
Anthonies commission, supposed they should either go to France or England, and
that the Prior (finding the weakness of his force, by the event of this
battle) should follow them; notwithstanding fortune did so second the
beginning, that two days after the battle, they appeered in safety, without
any intelligence of these troubles within the realm, or any encounter upon the
way; such was the Catholic kings good fortune, that they arrived safe at
Lisbone; where he received what appertained to the crown, and delivered to
every private man his own.

All this while they were in suspense at Badagios, expecting whether this
enterprise should be ended by arms or agreement, and so doubtful every man
was, for that there appeared on either side great difficulty; the rather, for
that the Duke could not stay long from entertaining one of these parties so
different. But the xxvj. day of August, in the morning, there arrived a Spanish
merchant without any letters from the Duke, who brought news of the success:
This man following the Spanish camp, when he saw the Priors army in route,
presently passed the river in a small bark, and took post before him that
brought advertisement from the Duke, who presenting himself unto the King,
delivered what he had seen, whereof he received such contentment as may be
supposed: This news was presently spread throughout all the court, with the
incredible joy of all men, and to the great honor of the Duke, and with such
kind of commendations, as the force of truth does usually draw upon the
sudden, even from the mouth of enemies: But the confirmation of these news,
staying longer then was convenient for the neerenes of the place, and the
importance of the action, they began to doubt with so great perturbation, that
there was no less show of their general desire, then of their received
content: The which was after confirmed by the Arrival of Ferrant de Toledo,
the Dukes nephew, whom he had dispatched with a private relation, not only of
the success, but also of the reasons which had induced them to fight, and his
direction given unto the captain, The commendations of the Duke of Alua.
the which was generally approved of all, with no small honor to the Duke,
saying, that he had now satisfied men's minds, who held him always to be too
cunning and watchful, to assure his enterprise by advantages of lodging, and
stratagems, avoiding the battle by all means possible without great
advantage, following amongst the ancient Captains Fabius Maximus, and amongst
the later Prosper Colonna the elder, whom he sought to imitate: And this
commendation of the Dukes proceeded from his two resolutions: The one to pass
from Settuual to Cascaies, and the other to fight at Alcantara, seeing in the
first he alone did contradict his counsel, and contested both against sea and
enemy: And in the second he resolved to fight dangerously with the Portugals,
within their own trenches, having a well peopled city behind them; and
against the advice of some of the principal of the army. They did highly
commend him to have kept Lisbone from spoil; and at one instant to play the
conqueror and protector, attributing unto him for this respect more honor,
then to have retired his army from the walls of Rome in the year 1557. having
not fought there, unto the gates of the city, as he did at Lisbone.

But these reasons with other, were dashed by a sudden cruel accident, which
so troubled the minds of all men, as there was no time to think nor speak of
any thing, the which was that upon the news of this happy success, the king
fell most dangerously sick, the which so increased, being brought to that
point, that there was small hope of his life, and even his Physicians
themselves almost gave him over: upon this subject was all their discourses,
for the king dying, it was supposed that the protector of Christendom should
fail, and if there were any doubt, that his death in time The Catholic kings
sickness and the discourse upon it.
might cause any alteration, it was then most of all to be feared: for besides
that the affairs of Flaunders were troublesome, the humors of the French ill
disposed, Portugal yet in balance to incline to a contrary party, and the
rest of Spain was not well assured: The opinions were diverse what course to
take, but all was confused, and all full of fear. The Duke of Alua whose
opinion many of the better sort did follow, thought it fit, that the king
dying, the Queen with the prince should presently enter into Portugal, and
go to Lisbone, thinking by this means with the forces he had there ready,
not only to keep the realm in peace, but also to assure the other estates of
Spain: He now labored to stablish the affairs, for depriving from the office
of the magistrate of the chamber of Lisbone, such as had been installed by the
Prior, he restored such as had bin before; calling them unto him, he said; it
was now time that in the cities behalf, they should swear obedience unto the
king, and proclaim his name in the public streets, with accustomed
ceremony; whereunto they willingly offered themselves, demanding leave for
this cause to make public feasts, and that withal, the privileges of the
city might be confirmed: Whereunto he answered, Lisbone swears obedience to
the king.
that there was then no need, but they should reserve it, until the prince
were there present to be sworn, whom his Majesty had resolved to send unto
the city to be bred up amongst them; and as for their privileges, they were
very small, that he would grant them more amply. So as the eleventh day of
September in the Dukes lodging, they took their oath in form, and the next
day after dinner, the magistrate going thorough the city with the standard and
their Attaballes, they proclaimed the name of King Phil p after the accustomed
manner; yet with a weak voice, and small assembly of people. And as in the
proclaiming of other kings there appeered nothing but feasts and joy; here was
nothing to be seen, but secret sighs and hidden sorrow with flattery: The
Dukes army was lodged until the tenth of September betwixt the city and
Alcantara, at the same lodging where the Portugals had lodged, without any
resolution what to do, still expecting some news of the Prior. At which time
there grew (as a companion to war) not A contagious Catar.
only in the camp, but likewise in the city a contagious infirmity of
Catarre, so dangerous, that it did no less harm then the pestilent contagion;
few were free from this disease, and many of them died, especially of the
soldiers, for that to a new disease, ordinary remedies help little: Anthony
soon after arrived at Saint Arem, where the magistrate of that place, (being
the selfsame,) who a little before with so great joy had proclaimed him king,
would not give him entry, so are men's minds turned with fortune; yet having
promised to depart presently, they suffered him to enter upon that condition,
and the day following, he went toward Coimbra.

Saint Arem yields obedience.
Soon after the city of Saint Arem sent to yield their obedience, and
whilst they expected that Coimbra should do the like, they had news that the
Prior was there, that he fortified himself in those parts, that he repaired
Mount Mayor the old, and brake the bridge upon the river of Doro: And although
there were no doubt, that he could assemble men sufficient to terrify the
Duke, yet hereby they understood that the war was not ended, and that they
could not dismiss any part of the army, which they had resolved to send
back, with the galleies of Italy; so as by a little stay, they lost the
season of sailing in that sea with their galleies; but for that the country is
not fruitful, and that victuals grew very dear within the city, they lodged
the Germans at Settuuall, resolving to send the Italians to Saint Arem: But
having the news confirmed, that the Prior assembled forces, the Duke would
not separate his troops so far from him, but lodged the Italians and
Spaniards in the suburbs of the city (which place had been spoiled) to
defend them from the daily rain which began to fall.

The Prior assembles new forces.
At this time the Prior with his train tormented the inhabitants of the
province betwixt Doro and Mignio, assembling men of war by force, and for
that many (doubting sinister events) feared that in saving of him they should
prejudice themselves, he forced obedience upon grievous pains, which he
imposed upon such as followed him not: So as some for fear of their persons,
others of their goods, came unto him; yet were there others, who of their
natural inclination would not leave him until death: In this sort, he
gathered together four or five thousand men, with the which he held the city
of Coimbra in awe, so as it could not yield to the Catholic king: He went
with them to Auero, where having found some resistance, he used his greatest
force: For having with some small pieces of artillery battered the walls, he
gave a confused Auero taken.
assault; but profiting little, his friends within did so weaken the defense by
words and force, that the Priors men entered: The succors which Pantaleon de
Sada brought from Porto, coming too late: There he imprisoned diverse persons,
he slew, spoiled, and ruined all he could: By these acts (which seemed unto
them most glorious) his peasantlie soldiers were grown to that arrogancy,
that armed with hooks, and staves, they threatened to go to Lisbone, to free
the realm from the hands of the Castillians: And this foolish presumption was
not a little furthered with the news, that Anthony had of the kings
sickness, whom they gave out to be dead, being attired all in black the
better to persuade them.

The Duke was well advertised of all these things, finding still more plainly
of what importance the flight of Anthony was: There wanted not some that
charged him to have forborne too long, in sending men after him, yet having
care to assure that which did more import; he would not divide his forces,
until he did see an end of the kings infirmity, who having long labored in
the extremities of death, he began with an universal joy to recover, and
increasing daily the signs of health, he grew well; wherewith fear which
troubled the minds of men being taken away, they began to talk again of the
victory, and of the Dukes actions: But this commendation which was attributed
unto him (as it happens in all worldly actions) continued little, and rarely
shall you find so apparent an example of the inconstancy of the people, and
the force of envy as this was: for suddenly his praises were turned into
murmurings, and open slanders, searching so many reasons to deface the Dukes
merits, as two days before they had alleged to extol his actions. The Dukes
reprehensions grew from the proper ministers The Duke blamed.
of this war, or from such as followed the enterprise, who offended with him
for the diversity of their opinions, or for their own private practices, or
else (as some would have it) desirous to creep into the kings favor by like
reports, did write that the sack had been very great, and freely suffered for
three days, whereunto they would attribute the Portugals disobedience, and
their coffeehouse against the Castillians, laboring to prove, that if the
Duke had pleased, by his authority he might have stayed it, but being
partaker with his kinsemen (who were more employed to spoil then to fight) of
a good part of the booty, he did tolerate it; leaving outrages and thefts
unpunished, although complaints were made unto him. That the terms of
conquest, taking of cities, and route of army, were vain and improper, seeing
that in no place they had found any resistance; and that this multitude of
Portugals, as simple people (deceived by their priests in confessions and
preachings) could not be termed an army, nor their route called a victory:
And so blind is envy, that two armies encountering with many pieces of great
artillery, fighting on the one side for the passage of a bridge, on the other
side in their trenches, the Portugals foot and horse broken, the enemy put to
flight, the standard royal taken, with many other coulors, and above a
thousand men slain, and yet they would not have this a battle: Some which
did charge him with negligence said, that seeing he had an intention to
dislodge this army (after he had attempted the bridge and the trenches) he
should have stretched forth his horsemen further on the left hand, to cut off
the enemies way, and to take him prisoner, if he would fly; but to keep
himself so far off as he could not overtake him, was an inexcusable fault
in so great a captain: Others said, that it was not credible, but he should
have taken him, if he had pleased to place his horse in a convenient place for
that purpose, which every ignorant captain would have considered, but that
he willingly suffered him to fly; that by means of Anthonies liberty, the
war should not seem to be ended, a thing which captains do commonly wish,
preferring their own authority, and their private respect, before the public
good: Others did add that if he would have taken him after his flight, and
the battle won, he might well have done it, for making no haste to fly, he
might so speedily have followed him with his horse as the importance of his
person did require.

The Dukes excuses.
Amongst so many accusations, few durst speak for the Duke, yet some of his
friends labored to justify him, saying, that time, place, and desire to
assure the victory, does often hinder the execution of those things which the
captain wishes: That it was not then convenient to follow the Prior: For
considering the inevitable disorders of the soldiers, in sending many, he had
contrary to the kings pleasure wasted the country, and if he had sent few,
they had not been safe; and therefore he desired to temper this heat of
victory in the soldiers minds, meaning after to send a part of the army in
good order, but when as he meant to effect it, the Kings sickness happened,
whereof he desired first to see the issue, before he would be unfurnished of
his forces. That touching the inuironing of the enemies camp with his horse,
besides that they had no sufficient number to do it, it had not been the
resolution of a wise captain to make a fearful enemy desperate; and to
force him either to fight or become a prisoner. Touching the sacking of the
suburbs, they said it was no small good hap to have so many houses without
the walls of the city; for otherwise they should hardly have kept the soldiers
from spoiling it, and that it was in a manner necessary for the saving of the
city to have something ^o quench this desire, which they had brought with
them. And as there was some difficulty to save the city from the sack, so
was it impossible to keep the suburbs from spoil, seeing the battle was
given within the limits thereof. They laughed at such as said the Duke was
partaker of the spoil, seeming unto them a matter far from his quality.
They showed that although they would not have it said that the battle were
glorious, but unworthy, against a small number of seditious monks,
apostates, and fugitive slaves, yet could it hardly be concealed, for it
could not be denied but that Anthony had a great number of men in a strong
lodging, amongst the which were many of the Nobility, and that which most
supplied their want of experience, passionate against the Catholic king, and
most affectionate to the Prior; that in armies where such things happen, it is
not credible they so easily yield or fly of themselves, if they be not
encountered with a captain that is both valiant, and of judgment, who by force
or cunning does break them and put them to flight. They did prove by lively
reasons that it was not credible that the Duke with a resolution so hurtful to
his king, should prolong the enterprise and seek to continue his command, by
means of the war, saying, that although in ancient common wealths, noble
citizens were desirous to be employed in expeditions, and governments of
armies, to free themselves from the subjection of the Senate; yet was it not so
in the government of later princes; whereas such as be near the king have more
authority, then such as be retired. They added unto these reasons, the
consideration of the Dukes age, fidelity, and experience, with ancient and
new examples; concluding it was likely, that without any private subject, he
had labored with his best endeavor wholly to serve the king: But although he
were vehemently defended, yet could they not wholly root it out of the minds
of men; so is the chance of this worldly Tragedy tossed vpside down, that the
captain which the week before had been triumphant and glorious, lay now in
his bed sick with sorrow, slaundered with his Prince, and his army half
defeated, languishing with hunger and want, infected with the plague, infamous
for excess and violence; some part whereof was true, and some false: so as the
soldiers were troubled, melancholy, and angry; and although with the insolency
of conquerors, yet seemed they like men vanquished: They commanders of the
army were likewise in despair to reap any recompense of their service, so as
the captains which resolved to plant them selves in Portugal, and receive
great recompense by confiscations, were deceived of their hopes: For the King
who had an other meaning, resolved to forget all the wrongs the Portugals had
done him, and not only to pardon their disobedience, but also reward and
cherish them as his children. It was generally spoken, that upon the Priors
defeat and yielding of the city of Lisbone, the King should presently go
thither in person, and by granting rewards and pardons, labor to win the
Portugals loves, and to qualify that bitterness which the spoil and insolency
of the soldiers had bredde. But although there had been already speech of his
going to Eluas, and that he desired to make his entry as king of Portugal;
yet did he not effect it, for that as it is said before, the plague was
dispersed into many parts of the realm. He labored to become master not only
of all places within the realm, but also of all others that depended thereof:
when as the army began first to enter the realm, he had sent into Afric to
demand obedience of those places, but for as much as Anthony had prevented him
by former letters unto the captains, his business being in better estate, then
they proved afterward, the inhabitants would not agree to acknowledge
Philip; by reason whereof, the battle being woone, he sent again unto them;
for The yielding of the places in Affricke which the Portugals held.
being of great importance for Spain, he feared, that remaining under the
Priors command, he should rashly dispose of them so as promising recompense
to the captains, they did acknowledge him for their Lord, but with greater
facility in one place then in an other; so as without any innovation, he
confirmed the same captains, and the same garrisons.

The Terceraes.
The Islands of Terceraes were not neglected by the Duke, the assurance whereof
seemed greatly to import, and therefore upon the brute of the victory, he
sent a messenger thither, with letters from the king, and the city of Lisbone:
but the matter being first well debated at Badagios, it was supposed by the
Council, the Portugals alone to be more fit to manage that business, then if
the Castillians should entermeddle; and therefore the King did write unto
Lisbone to Edward de Castelbianco, that conferring with the Duke as a
Portugal, he should go thither: But he resolved not, for being newly created
officer of the chamber, he found that Edward Borges whom the Duke had
appointed to send, remained accountable to the crown for certain money, so
as he thought not good to employ him, nor to choose any other in his place.
The Duke understanding of the Kings recovery, leaving the care of the Islands
to him that had it, would no longer delay to send against the Prior, and
although the time was unfit; yet the xxij. of September he dispatched Sanches
d' Auila into those parts with four thousand Sanches de Auila against the
Prior.
foot, and sower hundredth horse, who marched directly toward Coimbra, but
understanding soon after that many of his soldiers died by the way, that many
fled into Castil, and that with great difficulty, (by reason of the great
abundance of rain), he should conduct four pieces of artillery, the Duke
sent after him other fifteen hundredth foot, under Diego de Cordoua, and
provided shipping to send the cannon by sea: Sanches d' Auila took his first
lodging at Loures, from thence he marched to Torrez Vedras, where having broken
one of his carriages, he was forced to leave a piece of artillery there, from
thence he went directly to Coimbra, passing by Gibarotta, where he did see the
spoils of that famous victory, which the Portugals had against the
Castillians; from thence he sent two companies of horse to Coimbra, the which
The yielding of Coimbra.
until they had discovered them would not yield their obedience; yet upon
view of the horse, they met them with the keys of the city, and Emanuel de
Sosa Pacheco, commissarie general of the camp, entered to receive their
allegiance. The Prior having news of these things at Auero, would not attend
Sanches d' Auila, remaining in suspense, whether he should imbarque himself,
and abandon the realm; but having received letters from some of Porto, who
promised to obey him, he marched thither wards with all the troops he could
make, whereof having yet made no mention, being a place of importance, we will
digress a little to report the estate thereof, during these troubles.

The estate of Porto and the reduction.
The inhabitants thereof do account themselves the wisest amongst the
Portugals, who hearing the Catholic king began to arm, and that the
Governors did rule, sent to court, demanding arms and munition for their
defense if need were: But their Ambassadors arriving at Almeryn, they found
the Governors were retired to Settuual, and that the Prior was proclaimed
king; so as the Embassage they had in charge to impart to the Governors, they
delivered to the new King, without warrant from their superiors, who gave unto
them such artillery and munition as they required: The Ambassadors being
returned therewith to Porto, there grew a division amongst the Citizens, for
some (affected unto Anthony) approved the Embassage; others being more severe
said, that being sent to the Governors, and delivering their Embassage to the
Prior, they were worthy of blame: So as one part would receive the munition,
and artillery, and use it at their need, saying, that they should receive
it, although it came from their enemies; the rest would by no means accept
it, seeming that thereby they did acknowledge him for king, and make themselves
suspect to the Catholic king; the which they would by no means do, but
entertain themselves as newters and lookers on: but the plurality of voices
refusing to accept the arms, the Ambassadors (by the advice of Pantaleon de
Sada, Ferrant Nunes Barretto, and John Rodrigo de Sada, who were the most
famous men that governed the city) left the artillery and munition within the
castle of Fiera, a little from thence, leaving the city unfurnished. But the
Duke disimbarking at Cascaies before the battle of Alcantara, they sent to
yield their obedience. When as the Prior came into these quarters he seized on
this artillery and munition, and therewith battered Auero; from thence he went
to Porto, where although some had given out most slanderous speeches against
him, so as it was likely they would have no agreement nor conuention with him,
yet the greatest part, inclined to obey him: he was joyfully received of all
under a cannapie: and Pantaleon de Sada with his companions, (foreseeing the
humor of the people) without seeking of any remedy, excusing themselves, if
they were not obeyed, would not stay there but imbarking themselves in a
carauell they went into Gallicia, and from thence to Lisbone.

The Prior stayed ten days in this city, spoiling some private men's houses,
that were his enemies: he took sugars and other merchandise from the
merchants, and sent them into France; he demanded to borrow one hundredth
thousand ducats of the people; and being advertised that Sanches d' Auila
approached, and that Coimbra, Mount Mayor, and some other places, had delivered
up their keys, he sent the Bishop of Guarda to Viana, and to Ponte de Lima, to
assemble more forces, and to stop the passage of the river.

The Portugals and Castillians disagree.
The Duke of Alua was now at Lisbone with a troubled mind, for seeing the
Portugals become more insolent then before, and to disagree with the
Castillians; he had no authority from the king to punish them, or to do such
execution as was convenient, and had been accustomed to do in other places;
that the Prior yet kept the field with his forces; that daily there grew
quarrels within the city, betwixt the Castillians and the Portugals; and that
the nations were so incensed one against an other, that it was to be feared it
would breed some great disorder. And although the Castillians had express
order to endure all things, yet had they not the patience: For this manner of
the Dukes proceeding, (misconstrued by the Portugals to proceed from fear)
growing daily more proud, they forced the Castillians to quarrel with great
discourtesie: For redress whereof, the Duke having somewhat fortified the
castle, which is seated upon a small hill near the city, a most ancient
building, drew thither the greatest number of his soldiers, artillery,
victuals, and munition, taking them from the guard of the city gates, where
they grew odious; by means whereof he was more assured, and less hateful,
and the Portugals choler somewhat qualified.

The yielding of Auero, and other exploites of Sanches d'Auila.
At this time Sanches d' Auila, approached near to Auero, where he was met
without the walls by the principal of the city, who wept for joy, but chiefly
amongst the rest, such most reioiced as had been kept in prison, in danger to
loose their lives for resisting the Prior. Having there received the oath of
fidelity from the Magistrate, understanding that Anthony was gone to Porto,
he followed after, desirous to encounter him with all the speed he could:
Diego de Cordoua being now arrived at the camp, with troops which the Duke
had sent after him; the which by death and the flight of many were diminished
to five hundredth: He made diverse lodgings, molesting the country little,
being arrived at Rifana of Santa Maria, the which is fifteen miles from the
left bank of the river of Doro, upon the right bank whereof, Porto is seated,
he devised by what means he should pass the river; supposing he had no
greater difficulty then this to vanquish the enemy: He knew it was very
violent, running betwixt high mountains without any forde; he carried with
him upon carts, some small boats to cast into the river; the which although
they were few in number, yet did he mean to run along the shore, and to
take others; but the ioints thereof were so shaken and open with the way, and
carriages, that hardly could they serve: Having therefore passed the monastery
of Griso, toward the river, he sent to the shore to search for other
boats, but he found not any; for besides the Priors commandment, that no
bark should pass from the right shore, three or four being armed scowred
the river up and down, to hinder their passage; whereupon he sent with great
expedition, as well to places near, as a far off, to search for some,
whereof he failed not, for although there were none near the city, yet in
places further off up the river, where the Portugals supposed the Castillians
would not come, they found and took many; whereunto joining those of
Massarellos (a place upon the left bank) the inhabitants whereof (discontented
against the The statagem of Anthony Serrano to recover aboate.
Prior, who had burned their houses for not duly obeying his commandment) were
fled with their wives and boats unto the Castillians camp. It did also some
what help, that Anthony Serrano one of the captains which Auila had sent to
discover, having run almost to the mouth of the river, and not found any,
discovering one, whereunto he durst not approach, putting his men in Ambuscado,
stripping himself half naked, seeming to have been robbed by the Castillians,
and calling the water men to him by the voice of a Portugal spy, which he had
with him, he caused the boat to draw near, and being entered into it, he
discharged a pistol, which was hidden under him, by means whereof he did not
only amaze the mariners, but gave sign unto the ambush, which discovering
itself, the boat was presently taken, with two or three others (although but
small ones) that were thereabouts; so as all together made five and thirty,
with the which he supposed to pass a good part of his army. Sanches d' Auila
desired much to hasten his passage, supposing that he had men sufficient, but
this resolution was held rash, by the captains that were about him; seeming
uneasy to pass with boats any where but at Pietra Salata, where lies the
ordinary passage, the which was fortified; for in other places the steepness
of the banks would not suffer it, so as they could not deceive the enemy, as
they do commonly, making show to pass in one place, and go to another. They
objected there were few barks, and ill provided with mariners, and although
they would contain a great part of the footmen, yet could they not hold the
horse, the which they must leave behind them, which was not thought
convenient; forasmuch as on the other side, they did not only see the place of
their disimbarkment fortified with artillery, and rampires, but also the banks
replenished with foot, and good store of horsemen; so as it seemed they could
not attempt this passage, without great loss, saying that it was better to
seek means to provide victuals, and to behave themselves more discreetly upon
the passage, seeing that their safety was of more importance to the king, then
their speed. Sanches d' Auila waighed well all these inconveniences, yet two
things pressed him greatly to pass; the one was want of victuals, and the
difficulty to recover them, the which increased daily: the other was to
understand that Edward de Lemos, Martin Lopez d' Azeuedo, and Anthony de Sousa
Coutigno, who followed the Prior in this province, had assembled men to come to
his succor, the execution whereof they sought to impeach; adding to this the
small account he held of the Portugals by his experience informer actions,
Sanches D' Auila passes the river of Doro, at Auintes.
resolved in any sort to pass: for this cause he approached with his army
near the river, where the Portugals having fortified themselves within a forte,
which is above the city of Gaija, he thought it should be necessary to
batter it, and there to make some stay. But it fell out more easy then he
expected, for having sent Peter de Soto the elder, with some horse to discover
it, they within (having once discharged their harguebuses against the horsemen)
abandoned the forte, and retired to the city; so as remaining no defense on
that side, he devised by what means he should pass with the least loss. He
himself ran up against the stream, to see if he could discover any other
passage; but finding all rough and steep, he saw no other place convenient,
but Auintes, two miles from the camp, where (although uneasily) both on the
one and the other bank, they might imbarke and descend: There he resolved to
pass, for this cause (being returned to his lodging) he published his intent,
but some of the army being of a contrary opinion, having assembled them all
together, he said unto them: It will seem The speech of Auila to his soldiers.
strange unto you, that I have resolved to morrow to pass this river with the
whole army, supposing, it may be, that it is uneasy and dangerous, for the
season being unfit, the banks steep, the enemy upon the other side, armed and
fortified, should make you doubt the victory; especially being in greater
number then we are: But for as much as where the fear is least danger, I would
let you see that there is no cause to fear any peril, but an assurance of
honor and profit: These doubts (if you have any before your eyes) be all
vain, for the season does not offend us, seeing that the waves are calm, the
banks give us sufficient room, and our enemies fortifications are as weak, as
their resistance has been hitherto: Remember that coming from Settuuall with
the galleyes, you descended at Cascayes, where the same enemies under the most
famous Captain of Portugal had their army, and yet they neither hindered our
landing, or scarce endured our sight; for in a manner without seeing us, they
did abandon the most important place of the realm. Call to mind that all
Portugal, being assembled with their counterfeitking, lodged at Alcantara, a
place by nature most strong, furnished with artillery and other arms, in
their presence, we battered the rock of Saint Julian, and forced it to yield,
not daring once to succor it, or issue forth to any small skirmish: and
think you that the weakest part of this army, and the most timorous, being
retired on the other side of this river, shall make a greater resistance, then
it did united? In this action we ought to strive for two things; the kings
service, and our own honors and reputations; the which fortune seems to
frame, as is most convenient for us: For if the enemies we have in front, were
so lodged, that there remained no let betwixt us, we should do the king small
service, and win our selves little honor by the conquest; but our good
fortune will have it so, to the end our praise may be the greater, that
Anthony had taken (as a buckler against us) this river and these banks, and
that there he should show us his forces; that the general opinion is, that
there he may trouble his Majesty in the just possession of the realm, so as
chasing him, we shall deserve the greater recompense, by performing an
enterprise that seems uneasy, the which in my judgment will prove no more
difficult, then the rest of this realm has been, if you be the same men you
were few days since: Yet suppose not that I acknowledge these victories wholly
from your valor, for I think I may attribute it better to his Majesty's
right, and the injustice of Anthony. Who is he but knows that the realm
appertains by just title unto our king? what judgment seat is there in the
world which has not of themselves given sentence in his favor? And
contrariwise, who is ignorant that Anthony has tyrannously usurped the title
of a king, that he has neither right nor title to the realm? that he is a
bastard, insufficient, and incapable of this degree; which things are known to
all men, and therefore the justice of God will make us instruments to punish
him that deserves it: So as neither rampires, rivers, nor fortresses, can serve
him that is in the wrong, for that a guilty conscience, not only weakens the
heart, but makes all forces vain. The equity of the kings cause, and your
valor, are not to be encountered by so weak enemies, but will surmount
greater difficulties then this, as you have seen, and shall see tomorrowe, if
it please God. These words with the authority of the captain most renowned
amongst these soldiers, made all men judge that his resolution was well
considered, and therefore Sanches d' Auila for the night and the day following,
did thus order the army: He caused them to plant upon the bank, directly
against the town, such artillery as he had, in a place convenient, both to
scour the passage, and to endammage the other side; leaving his lodging
guarded with Germans and Spaniards, he took the third part of his foot,
his boats and horsemen, and went by night unto the passage, where he had been,
there to imbarke and pass to the other bank, meaning to charge the enemy in
flank; the other two thirds of the army under the charge of Rodorick The
stratagem of Auila to pass the river.
Sapatta should imbarke at Pietra Salata, in the rest of the barks, and draw
after them so many horses as they could, tied by the reins, making show to
pass there, to the end to keep the enemy busied with this fear; yet
commanding them not to pass, until they should see the enemy charged by
the other third part, which had been transported at the other passage. All
these things were duly executed; for the Portugals being unexperienced in
war, could not provide for so ordinary a stratagem; so as Sanches d' Auila
being come to the town side, he found so weak resistance, that although some
companies of soldiers were run thither, yet he landed easily: And whereas
their boats were not able to transport all their soldiers together, the first
which landed, having entered skirmish with the Portugals, before the coming of
the rest, having slain ten or eleven of them, they put them all to flight.

The Prior believed not the Castillians should so soon have passed, but
understanding what they had done, and the small resistance of his men, being
not yet generally published, having assembled The oration of Anthony to his
soldiers.
many and of the chief, he spoke thus unto them: Tyrants use in their
pretentions, when they distrust their right, to fly under other colors, to
force, using this in steed of justice, to obtain their desires; but just and
loving Princes, not only submit themselves to justice, but do continually
strive to be conformable to the will of their subjects: As for me, at such time
as the succession of this realm failed, I was resolute to obey him, that by
right should be declared king: I remained quiet, until that Philip
dispairing of his justice, and taking arms, it pleased you to name me your
king and protector: I accepted this burden more (as God shall preserve our
liberty) not seeing any one that could govern you with true love, then for
any desire to rule: how I have behaved my self, how every thing has passed,
you know, who have been always, and in all things, not my subjects but my
companions: want of time would not suffer us to provide many things necessary
for the war; for I was no sooner named king, but the enemy prepared, having
before plotted many ambushes, and resolute what to do, invaded us with his
forces, the which was cause that the munitions appointed and the succors
promised by Christian princes, could not come in due time; the which has made
our success unhappy: we have (in a manner disarmed) already tried the hazard
of a battle, if you think good to adventure it again, against an enemy
that follows us, do as you please, but I am not of that opinion, for having
hitherto adventured my person, and made this breast a buckler, I am not now
resolved, except you do otherwise advise me, to thrust both you and my self to
the hazard of a doubtful battle; by the victory whereof, although it
should remain on our sides, there could not succeed the intention we have, to
expel the enemy out of this realm, and by loosing it, I should be frustrate
of the hope I have conceived, to free you soon from the yoke which hangs over
you. God is my witness, that al which I have done, and shall do, neither has
been, nor shall be to any other end, but for the love of you, and to make
equal this balance of justice, the which is now forced by the might of the
greatest enemy that ever Portugal had. I know well you will believe me, but
if any amongst you does distrust my words, let him consider, that if I had not
regarded your profit, but mine own private interest; I had been now quiet,
rich, and reconciled with the Catholic king, who has often sought me, by
offers, and large promises; and you had been tyrannized over, and in a manner
slaves, as those be that have no kings of their own country: But God forbid
that ever I should prefer mine own profit before yours, or mine own
benefit before the realms, whose people have so much loved my progenitors: I
may well at this time, yield unto the unjust forces, that do oppress me, yet
will I never renounce the realm, nor my title, but with new arms and new
force, I hope again to try mine action; so as this sorrow which I now see in
your faces, shall be soon turned to joy; those arms, that munition, those
men, which are not now arrived in time, shall serve hereafter: And if it be a
human thing to take compassion of the afflicted, I hope, being so unjustly
molested, to move pity, not only in the most pitiful, but also in the
cruellest nations of the world. I know that this love which you have always
borne to me, and my predecessors, shall no ways be diminished by any sinister
event, and I am so well assured, that although we shall be now separated one
from another, that shortly we shall be assembled again to your great benefit
and profit, and to the shame and dishonor of our enemies. These words did
move the hearts and eyes of many, no man answering him a word; so as being
retired with his faithful followers, he departed as it were in secret, without
The flight of Anthony to Viana.
publishing his departure, and going to the Monastery of Aronca by the
unknown way of Vairam and Barcellos, he came to Viana.

Sanches d' Auila having passed all his troops, and put the Portugals, that
kept the passage to flight, he came against the town, the which being ignorant
of the Priors intent, manned with many soldiers, resolved to defend themselves,
keeping the Castillians all they could from approaching with their artillery:
Being come to the enemies cannon, Rodericke Sapatta arrived at the same instant
The flight of the Portugals.
with his boats, who landed without any contradiction, but the Portugals
prevented them with their flight; so as there remained not any one: Sanches did
long pursue such as fled, and caused his horse to follow them; but the rainie
day and the diversity of the ways, gave them good means to escape; so as the
Castillians returned The city of Porto yielded.
with the slaughter of few. The conquerors believed, that the Prior was yet
remaining in the city, seeing them make show of defense, and continually to
play with their artillery, the which did small hurt: But whilst that Sanches
looked about who made resistance, and sought out the fittest lodging to force
the town, the citizens discovering the Priors flight, changed their
resolutions, making a sign of peace with a white cloth from the walls, which
was an assurance of the victory, and of the Priors flight; by reason whereof,
dividing his horsemen into two parts, he caused them to pursue him, by two
diverse ways, and the magistrate of the city, issuing forth, yielded his
obedience, who offering to open the gates, Sanches commanded him to the
contrary for fear of the soldiers, who were greedy of the spoil: But
notwithstanding this order from the captain, the city was in danger to be
sacked; for remaining yet within some of the Priors soldiers, as some of the
chief of the Castillians entered by one of the gates, the inhabitants let
forth the Portugals by an other; the which they could not do so secretly, but
they were discovered by some of the companies, that lay abroad, who suffering
them to pass, entered by the same gate, and began to spoil some houses, on
that side of the town, and so had continued with the rest, if before the
arrival of the other companies, Sanches d' Auila hearing the noise, had not
run in person with the officers, and stayed them by his authority.

In the mean time the Prior entering Viana, finding he could no longer make
resistance within the realm, resolved to imbarke and sail into France, and
for that cause did furnish a ship; but forbore to imbarke, by reason of the
contrary wind. At this time there arrived at Viana one part of those horse
which persued him, having intelligence of his being there, against whom the
city put themselves in arms: But the captain saying unto them, that if they
refused to obey, they should be spoiled by the army which approached, and would
arrive that day or the next, they grew amassed, and yielded upon condition, to
have their lives and goods saved. Upon the view of these horsemen, the Prior
finding himself in so The taking of Viana.
great danger, in a place of small trust, and disarmed, resolved rather to
contest against the waves, and winds, then against the enemy; and therefore
he embarked with the Bishop, and some other of his train, hoping, that whilst
the city made resistance, he lying there concealed, some small wind would
drive them from the land: But fortune (to speak after the common phrase)
seemed not yet weary of him, for the sea swelled more, and the winds
increased, and continued so long, that the Castillians being entered, and
demanding for him, they had intelligence he was in the ship, making
preparation to go take him, whereof they seemed to be assured. But the Prior
understanding thereof, seeing into what danger he was now brought, having
divided his treasure (which was not great) to such as were about him, he
attired himself like a mariner, and accompanied with the Earl and Bishop,
and some of his other favorites, with the most precious things that he had, he
took boat in great danger of drowing, landing upon the other bank of the
river of Minio, the which is directly against the city. The which the
Castillians discovering, made haste to pursue him: But Anthony saues himself
on the other side of the river Minio, in danger to be taken.
for as much as the river is not to be passed there, before the Castillians
could embarke, he had time to save himself, loosing all his servants, and some
things of price, yet had he all his most precious jewels sowed in his
garments. True it is that since there was found in Castill some pieces of the
rich caparison, where of I made mention, in a soldiers possession, who said,
he had then taken it from one of the Priors slaves; but the King suspicious
that Anthony had been his prisoner, and delivered for that ransom, kept him
long in prison. It seemed that Fortune did accompany the Prior to preserve
him, it may be for some greater affliction for this Realm, for at the same
instant he left his boat, and went to land, there arrived on the same side
that other troop of horsemen that pursued him, who had easily taken him, if
they had once suspected he had been there; but discovering on the other side a
troop of horse, imbarking to pass the river, not able to discern (by reason
of the distance) whether they were friends or enemies, nor for what reason they
passed, they were in doubt what to do, during which time the Prior retired
himself: And although by their approach they found by their colors who they
were, yet before the one could understand the others resolution, the time was
spent and they effected nothing.

The king did now begin to recover his health, after so dangerous a
sickness, at which time Queen Anne his wife fell sick of a The death of
Queen Anne.
rotten fever, the which in few days brought her to another life; wherewith
the king was much grieved, being a Lady wholly conformable to his humor, and
endued with singular bounty. Having recovered his former health, forbearing to
enter the realm, until The King enters into Portugal by the city of Eluas.
all were reduced to his obedience, seeing now the Prior to be defeated, and to
hide himself, he went to Eluas the first city of the realm, where the
Portugals received him with great joy; for that in this city and others,
bordering upon Castill, their hatred is not so mortal against the Castillians,
as in other places: There he did open the barred havens, that is, he disanulled
the imposts, which were paid, as well in Castill, as in Portugal, of all such
merchandise as passed from realm to realm; the which amounted yearly to
150000. ducats; he set a tax of 80000. ducats upon the Priors person, as a
rebel and disturber of the quiet of the realm: He proclaimed a parliament at
Tomar, the fifteenth day of April, where he would assist in person, with the
general opinion and great hope of all men, that all Portugals that had
offended, should there receive their pardon, and the obedient have reward; and
that to all in general, he would give great recompenses, granting to the
cities of the realm whatsoever they demanded. There remained neither city
nor place, within the maine land of Portugal, that had not yielded their
obedience to the king of Spain: For after the Priors flight from Viana, all
was in the Castillians power; the places of Affricke were obedient, and so was
the Island of Madera; as for the places further off, time would not yet suffer
them to have any certain news.

The description of the Islands of Terceraes and the inhabitants thereof.
There remained the seven Islands of Terceres, which had not yet made their
submission, having advertisement that (only S. Michaels excepted) all the rest
refused to obey; and for as much as they were of no account, this disobedience
made them famous: Although they be seven in number, yet are they for the most
part small and ill peopled: That of Saint Michael (a hundredth miles nearer
Spain then the rest) is the best: There the Bishop of all these Islands has
his residence: They call their principal town Punta Delgada, the next unto it
is called Tercere, whereof all the rest take their name: This is fertile, and
by nature more strong then the rest: Angra is their greatest dwelling, whereof
the said Bishop takes his name: The rest, as Saint Marie, Fayale, Pico,
Coruo, and Flowers, be lesser, and some of them wholly unpeopled: The
inhabitants of all in general be superstitious, and vain, grounding their
discourses upon fancy; for since the battle of Affricke, they would never
believe that king Sebastian was dead: And although this opinion was held long
through out the Realm, yet has it been more confidently believed there then
in any other places; for notwithstanding they had seen the innouations which
happened in the time of King Henry, and of the Governors, yet did they still
hope he should appear: But when the Prior was proclaimed King, it seemed they
were somewhat satisfied; for having presently sent unto these Islands to take
possession, with letters unto all the Magistrates; he was there sworn and
willingly obeyed: and to perform this Act of obedience, they sent as
Ambassadors unto him, Stephen Siluera and Friar Melchior of the order of Saint
Frauncis, who arriving at Lisbone, could not execute their charge; for being
defeated at Alcantara he was fled toward Porto, yet making no account of the
enemies victory, they followed the Prior, and there in the name of all the
inhabitants of these Islands yielded him obedience. After in the month of
November in the year 1580. they returned to Tercomes, giving an account of
their charge, adding that notwithstanding Anthony had been broken at
Alcantara, yet he began in the Province betwixt Doro and Mynio with 30000. men,
to be revenged upon the Castillians: And although they had after intelligence
of Philips absolute victory, and of the flight of Anthony, yet they continued
firm in their opinions, wherein they were daily confirmed, for that (as it is
said before) the Kings ministers had neglected to send unto them; whereas
contrariwise Anthony and the Earl of Vimiosa did still solicit them by
curriers and letters to continue firm: the said Earl, having sent Anthony
Scalyn a Frenchman unto them with letters, whereby in the Priors name he did
commend their good affection; they so far passed the bounds of joy, as they
received him into Angra in procession, and under a cannapie, conducting him to
the Church of pity, where the said Friar Melchior preached, applying their
intentions to the will of God: and Friar Blaise Camello did sing Mass, who in
his prayer, with a lould voice prayed for two Kings, that is, Sebastian and
Anthony, saying unto the people which demanded news of Sebastian, that the
fourth of August he would satisfy them. The inhabitants of the Island of Saint
Michaell, which had no such seditious firebrands, as that of Tercera, being by
nature more peaceable, furthered by the Bishop who followed the Kings party,
did not run into so great disorders, but showed themselves daily more
obedient unto Philip, who having intelligence of all these things, desired to
try if he could by gentle means draw this rebellious nation to his
obedience, and at the last, remedy the error of his ministers; for to conquer
them by force was supposed difficult, the Terceraes being naturally strong, and
environed with high rocks, besides the sea going so high in those parts, as no
ships can live above three or four months in the year: This enterprise was
then supposed to be of more importance then it had been, not so much for the
quality of the place, as for the situation, being an unavoidable passage for
the ships that come from the Indies, and the new found lands, as well from the
East as from the West, where the Frenchmen harboring, they might greatly
endomage Spain: for this consideration the King sent Ambrose d' Aguiar, with a
letter and ample pardon in a manner to all offenders, if leaving the part of
Anthony, they would follow The resolution of the inhabitants of Terceraes
his. But arriving near unto Angra and sending his letters to land, the
Islanders took counsel what to do; but the people being then mad and without
government, did not approve the opinion of this counsel. The richer sort
regarding their private profit would obey, for having all their rents in corn,
the which they commonly send unto the realm, they could not make sale in any
other place; but being few, and not daring to speak their minds, they
delivered it doubtfully: The poor, (who finding the less corn were
transported from the Islands, the better cheap they should buie it,) not
caring to have any traffic with Portugal, would by any means follow the
voice of Anthony. Many kindled with rage, advised they should suffer Ambrose
d' Aguiar to enter the city, and after cast him in prison and punish him as
Ambassador to a Tyrant. Some held they should send him away without answer:
Some of the chief (who feared they were not comprehended within the pardon)
did what they could to prejudice the Kings part, for dispairing to obtain it,
they labored that no man should follow his voice, but so to wrong Philip as
they should lose all hope ever to be reconciled: wherein they prevailed so
much, as that Ambrose d' Aguiar (who was appointed to be Governor of the Island
of Saint Michaell) was sent back. They caused a Mass to be said, where all
the people did swear to die for Anthony: In which humor they were still
confirmed by false reports that were blown abroad: For although the Prior were
yet hidden in Portugal, yet the ships which came from France, and England,
to traffic at the Islands, to the end they might be the better favored and
received, brought news that he was in their country, raising a great Army.
The people being in this humor easy to take any impression, there suddenly
steps up a Smith of the basest sort, who followed by the multitude, played the
Southsayer; saying that the tenth of March without all doubt, King Sebastian
should come into that Island. The day being come, with great expectation of the
people, there appeered a great ship at sea, the view whereof, did so much
alter this people, that the Smith crying, this was the ship wherein the King
was; every man ran to the shore to see him, as as it were expecting
Sebastians landing. But although the ship followed an other course, not
drawing any thing near to the Island, yet the people left not their vain hope,
but some of them affirmed, that the ship had put three men into their
cockboate, the which were entered into the covent of Saint Frauncis, supposing
it should be King Sebastian, Christopher de Tauora, and the Cheriffe. And
although this lie might easily be deciphered, yet their offenses would not
permit it, but running from one scruple to an other, it seemed they were
destinate to live in suspense: for these friars of Saint Frauncis, against the
truth of priesthood (understanding the peoples opinion, that the King was in
their covent) did confirm it, giving them to understand it was true, and the
better to induce them to believe it, seeming on the one side to keep it very
secret; on the other side showing they had guests of importance, they demanded
secretly (but so as it might be known) to borrow beds of silk, silver
vessels, and other things fit for a kings service: They caused also garments to
be made, and kept their gates more strictly then of custom, saying in their
sermons, that they would give them two natural kings; and some hearing them in
their masses to pray for Sebastian and Anthony, supposed he was in their
monastery, and not Sebastian, seeing that since his departure from Viana,
there was no certain news of him. In this Island Ciprian de Figueredo
(sometimes servant to the Count of Vimioso) being sent thither for judge, was
become ringleader of all the rest: This man (being contrary to the Castillians,
and agreeing with the monks) did countenance their practices, remaining in
their covent, from morning until night: He confirmed the people in their
foolish belief, that the King was there. This nation was not well settled in
matters of religion, for growing insolent by their liberty, some preachers
attributing unto themselves more authority then they had, promised absolution,
and many things which they ought not, making show they would build a church
after their own fashion, and for that the lesuites The Jesuits walled up at
the Terceraes.
had opposed themselves, or at the least were not of one consent, they were
walled up within their monastery.

And although these Islands were not al obedient, being a slow enterprise, yet
the war seemed as then in a manner ended, that Philip having great forces in
Spain, knew not how to employ them; and forasmuch as the soldiers (returned
from the wars in the low Countries) were now upon the way, coming from
Italy toward Portugal, with some others newly levied, they said the King
(adding some few forces thereunto) might raise a great army to be employed
upon that occasion, for the which they understood the Pope as careful of his
charge, had renewed the practizes to bend these forces against England, the
which would not obey the Romish sea, and therefore he propounded to king
Philip, that if he The Popes offer against England.
would levy an army and send it to this conquest, he would assist him in
this enterprise with the treasures of the church; offering to grant unto him
Croisades, exemptions, and subsidies, and to acquit him of a million of gold,
which he said was due unto the church, for the revenues he had received of
the Archbishopricke of Toledo, by title of sequestration, when as the
Archbishop was suspended from his charge. But the King having newly taken
possession of the crown, seeing the Portugals not well quieted, sought first
to pacify the realm, before he would undertake any other enterprise:
Notwithstanding at the Popes motion, who said, that arming in those parts, he
should not only keep Portugal in awe, but all Spain and France likewise.
It may be he would not have refused to send a good part of his forces, if not
into England, yet into Ireland, if the Popes ministers had been more resolute,
or had been furnished with a more ample commission; but the sufferance of the
foldiers, and the great charge, admitting no delay, Rome being so far off,
they agreed not, but the King dismissing the Italians, caused the foldiers upon
the way to return back, and divided his army into garrisons.

THE EIGHT BOOK.
The Contents of the eight Book.
The soldiers complaints: The Catholic King visites the Duchess of Bragance:
The Kings voyage to Tomar: The general pardon: The estates wherein they swear
fidelity unto the King, and unto the Prince Diego: The demands of the
estates: The kings entry into Lisbone: The unhappy success of Peter de Baldes
his men, at the Islands of Terceraes: Anthony his departure out of the realm,
and his arrival in France: The arrival of Lopez de Fegueroa at the Islands,
and his return without effect: The preparation of the Jlands: The estate of
the affairs of France, and of the low Countries: The recompenses which the
King gave unto suitors: The opinions of the manner of giving them: The
enterprise of the Islands: The preparation to war by King Philip and the
French, and the departure of their armies at sea toward the Islands both from
France and Portugal.

IN these wars, amidst the cares of the realms disquiet, and imminent
perils, Frauncis de Villafagna, doctor of the laws, and Auditour of the
Council royal of Castil, which is the sovereign seat of that realm, came to
Lisbone; sent by the King with letters unto the Duke, whereby he was commanded
to favor him in the execution of his commission; the which being presently
published, containing no other matter of importance, but a simple
commandment, with the rest of the ordinary officers, to examine the accounts
of the army, and to sign the warrants for paiments, it seemed a slight
charge for so great a personage; the which ministered matter of suspect, that
under so simple a show, there was hidden some mystery of importance; and the
general opinion was, that he came to censure both the army, and the Duke
himself: And although the Duke should have been best informed, yet he made no
show to know it, but favored the Doctor, admitting him to the Council of
war, and to other grave matters, which did not concern him: The rest of the
Captains and Spanish soldiers, which could less disse^ble, spoke with more
liberty, and less patience then the Duke; saying it was a new The complaint
of the Dukes soldiers.
manner of Justice, never heard of; seeing that of necessity the controversy
must be betwixt the captain general and his army; or betwixt the army and
the enemy, not able to discern which should be the contrary parties, for it
seemed the soldiers, neither could nor ought to make themselves parties,
against their Commander, neither ought the enemies to be admitted against a
conquering army. And if so strange a thing should happen, it might likewise
be supposed, that the enemy should be declared faithful, and the army which
had conquered the realm pronounced rebels. They inquired wherein the Duke had
offended; if as a Governor, or as a captain; for said they, he could not
err as a governor, having never resolved the smallest matter, without the
kings advise, besides that he had not governed above two months: If as a
captain, what had laws to do with arms, and the military style with the
civil? But for all this discourse, they did not greatly weigh the Dukes
offenses, supposing in the end that his greatness and innocence should
protect him: Their own private interest did most of all trouble them, loosing
all hope of recompense for their former services, saying, that for this last
and notable exploite, they did rather see punishment prepared then rewards:
They imagined the king did not well conceive how they had conquered him a
kingdom in eight and fifty days, after the same manner (to follow their
own phrase) as the kingdom of heaven is woone, that is to say, in fasting,
with bread and water, and without taking from any man; the which they said,
being furnished with nothing but biscuit, and having no liberty to spoil any
town: They could not endure to be slaundered by idle courtiers, and bachelors,
(for so the soldiers in hate and derision of laws and justice, term the
greatest Doctors of the Council) saying, that those men remained at Badagios
to drink cool in summer with ice, scorning those that suffered these dangers.
They remembered their labors suffered at sea, coming out of Italy; the famine
of Spain; the intolerable heat of Estremadura; the plague of Portugal; the
severe discipline of the Duke, and the gibbets set up for every small disorder:
they added, that to the end the victory gotten at Porto should not remain
unpunished, the King (to speak plainly) had sent another Doctor against The
auditor of Gallicia sent to Auilas camp.
Sanches d'Auila, and that part of the army which had made an end, and assured
him the realm. And it was true that Frauncis Tedaldo Auditour of the seat of
justice, which remains in Gallicia, was sent thither, who did strictly inform
of all manner of excess imputed either to Autla or his soldiers: They said it
was apparent in this court, how much, letters were preferred to arms, seeing
that all such as followed this action unarmed, had wrested from the soldiers
the fruits of their labors, and the price of their bloods; seeing the King
had satisfied their desires in the greatest measures they could wish, not
giving any recompense unto others; the which they proved in setting down
particularly, the offices the King had given to the Duke of Ossuna and other
Ambassadors; for they did assure, and it is true, that the greatest in Spain
aspire to no other charge, then to be Viceroy of Naples, whereunto they labor
to come by many degrees, and that the King had reserved this for the The
Council of the Kings chamber.
Duke of Ossuna. As for other Noblemen and Gentlemen, they sought for nothing
more then to be of the Kings chamber, which place he had given to Christopher
de Mora, together with the best offices of the realm of Portugal. They
touched likewise the Lawyers which be of the Kings Council, saying, they
could not aspire higher then to be of the Council of the Chamber, the which
is a tribunal of three or four Doctors elected, who determine with the King
of pardons, and other matters of grace; and that this office which Rodorique
Vasques enioied, he had likewise given to Jews de Molina, preferring him
before his ancients. These speeches with others more inconsiderate, were spread
amongst the soldiers, with a soldier-like liberty. And although they erred not
much from the truth, yet men without passion, judged that this aggravating was
unjust and slanderous; being no great marvel, that a King, who ought to have
regard to infinite matters the which passed the consideration of private men,
should give ear to the many complaints that were made against this army, and
force them to their purgation; and that it was not likely that Villafagna, or
Tedaldo, had power to judge in this case, but only to examine the truth: That
whereas Villafagna had in a manner carried his commission secret, it was an
argument of the Kings respect, and modesty, who sought to proceed with the
more mildenes, and without any blemish to the Duke, or his captains, although
it was not reasonable the soldiers should tread this realm under their
feet, as the rebellious country of Flaunders, or of a King that were an
enemy; or give unto the Portugals the odious titles of rebels and disloyal,
although they deserved well the name of troublesome and transported subjects,
uneasy to yield unto this new yoke. This mutiny continued long, but for as
much as the Commissioners did not punish any, nor as I believe, made any
trial, their humors grew more calm, wherein the wisdom of Villafagna
prevailed much, together with the small subject they found, when as they came
to examine the truth of such complaints, as had been made to the King.

Now the day appointed by the King, for the assembly of the States grew near;
but before he should go to Tomar, the place The King visites the Duchess of
Bragance.
appointed for their assembly, he meant to visit Katherine Duchess of
Bragance, who for that cause was come from Villauizosa, to Villa Boim, whither
he went to her, accompanied with all the chief of his Court; and having
stayed with her half a day in great familiarity, he returned to Eluas, and
from thence departed toward Tomar: He did not there so suddenly dispose of
rewards as the Portugals expected; having (as it is said before) made a
Council for Portugal, of special men, to whom he referred all matters, not
admitting the Castillia^s, to entermeddle with any cause of the realm; no man
was heard nor dispatched as he pleased, for the King made no haste, and his
ministers were confounded in the quantity, and quality of their requests; not
able to resolve in so intricate a business, so as the care of expedition was
delaied; by reason whereof the Portugals said, that although the King, in his
letters, words, and habit, seemed courteous, and altogether inclined to
Portugal, and had promised great rewards; yet in particular (whether it were
his fault or any others,) they yet see no recompense. To the Duke of Braga^ce
who aspired to great matters, as then they gave nothing, being excessive in his
demands, he had only confirmation to be Constable of the realm, they gave
him the order of the golden fleece, and the King favored him extraordinarily,
taking him to mass with him behind the curtain, without any other
recompense, which might either The King sworn at Tomar, and the Prince Diego.
breed him profit or power. Before the entry of the Parliament, the
ceremony of swearing the King was performed, and soon after, of the Prince
in the monastery of religious men of the order of Christ (a religion which is
not any where else) where he was lodged in the same sort, as was said of King
Henry, but with more pomp, being in an assembly of estates, and with less
noise being done with less love; yet was it worth the sight, both for the
great number of the Nobility, and the goodly representation of the King, in
his habit of cloth of gold, which Henry had not, being The kings pardon to the
Portugals.
a Cardinal. There he granted the pardon expected with so great desire, the
which although it had the name of general, yet was it held by the Portugals
to be limited artificial, and conditional: It did pardon generally all such
as had been employed for the Prior against him, but particularly he did except
many, and namely two and fifty, the chief whereof was the Prior himself, the
Count of Vimiosa, and the Bishop of Guarda: he pardoned no religious man; he
made all such as had served the Prior, received honor from him, profit,
charge, or office whatsoever, incapable ever after to bear office, or to
exercise those they had enioied before; so as they said, this pardon served
none but such as had made light faults, or had nothing to loose. This did much
incense the minds of the Portugals, who found themselves deceived of the hope
they had conceived by this pardon all to remain freed; the which although they
much disliked, yet could they not get it reformed; but soon after all such
were cited by proclamation as were not pardoned, to the The beginning of the
parliament at Tomar.
end their process might be made: The Deputies of the realm being now
assembled, the Estates began the xix. day of April, where Anthony Pignero
Bishop of Leira, made an oration before the king, saying, First, that the
Estates, seeming to have the assistance of the holy Ghost, by the profit
which should redounde to the subjects, that Philip following the custom of
former Kings, had assembled them, to the end that with wisdom, love, and fide
litie, they should represent unto him, what they thought convenient for the
general good of these realms: He did greatly amplify the graces done by his
pardon, terming it the fruits of his clemency, he did show, it was a ground of
hope of greater good: he concludes, noting the greatness of the Kings love and
goodness, promising to increase al their honors, recompenses, and favors
conformable to the loialtie and obedience they should carry to his service:
Whereunto was briefly answered by Damian d'Aguiar Doctor, one of the Deputies
of the city of Lisbone, saying, That in the cities behalf, and of the whole
realm, he did thank his Majesty, both for the grace of his pardon, as for
assembling the Estates, offering him obedience: All the Deputies both in
general and particular demanded what they pleased, to whom they granted many
things, as titles of knighthoode, rents for life, offices, and to some present
money: there were eight or ten of the meanest gentlemen, chosen of the order,
and enobled with such other like things, the which was done rather according to
the use of Castill, then after the manner of Portugal; for in this realm it
is not the custom to give any thing to Deputies: He gave greater recompenses
to the whole realm in general, granting in a manner al those, former things
mentioned, which the Duke of Ossuna had promised the Governors in the Kings
name, if the realm should yield peaceably (except it were to the garrisons)
liberty to sail to America, and the west Indies, and to participate with the
affairs of Castill, as if they were borne there; saying, that it was
convenient, before he should grant them, to impart them to the Estates,
being prejudicial unto them. The Deputies delivered unto the King a list of
what they demanded, and advised touching the government; whereof the
principal were, that the King should take a Portugal borne to wife; that he
should send the young prince to be brought up within the realm: that the
The demands of the Estates.
States of Portugal should be separate from them of Castill, with their coin
apart; and many things touching the abatement of impostes, the displacing of
garrisons, the ordering of justice, and such like, whereof few were granted
at that time of any importance; and to all the rest, they made answer with
doubtful hopes: The Nobility, the greatest part whereof (not having borne
arms against the King) supposed to have deserved much, appointed thirty
amongst them to make petition unto the King, for many things, in the name of
the whole Nobility: First, that he should grant them jurisdiction over
their subjects: That such Doctors as had been employed in matters of justice
should not be censured but by gentlemen: That the King should make no man
noble, but for the good deserts of some notable service, and that it should not
pass unto his heirs, but upon special grace: That the chief offices of the
realm, as the chief Captaine-ships, the three Purueiors of the Arcinall, the
storehouse of the Indies, and of the custom house, with such other like,
should not be given but unto Noble men, whereof nothing was granted. Many
did not attribute this refusal of their demands unto the kings own nature,
nor unto the injustice of their requests, but most complained of those
Portugal favorites which governed.

Touching the University of Coimbra.
Many were of opinion the King should suppress the University of Coimbra,
and thought it necessary by all reason of state, saying, that it was not safe
in a realm newly incorporate, to suffer an assembly of three or four
thousand young men, in a manner exempte from the jurisdiction royal, the which
might well be called a Seminary of seditions, and Anthony his disciplined
soldiers, ready to follow any other natural rebel of the realm whatsoever:
That the avoiding of this evil should cause a great benefit, that the
Portugals should go study in the Universities of Castill, where passing the
heat of their youth, and growing familiar with the Castillians, they should
return into Portugal more roially affected, and more sufficient to administer
justice then they were: They alleged moreover that those lawyers had both by
words and writings, wilfully opposed themselves against the Kings right,
chiefly when as Henry was inclined to the Duchess of Bragance; that some of
them transported with this passion, had in their public letters wrested
against Philip, not only the imperial laws, but also the holy canons,
interpreting them contrary to their true sense, and contradicting themselves,
and therefore they were worthy of punishment. But although this opinion
seemed grounded and confirmed by many Portugals; yet the King either by his
bounty, or the assurance of his justice, or of his absolute authority, or
else, withhelde by the natural inclination, he seemed to bear to the
Portugal nation, not only preserved this University, but also took it into
his protection, confirming their liberties and privileges; he not only
received the Doctors which had read and writ against him, with great mildenes,
but also with a noble resolution, confirmed them in their lectures, and
preferred others to them that were void.

The Pope seems content with the success of Portugal.
In the mean time the Pope discovering the Priors weakness to maintain
Portugal, and that there was no means of agreement, having called home his
Legate, he seemed well content with Philips success, saying, that his only
intention was to avoid wars, so as having obtained great rewards for his son
or at the least assured hopes, he granted unto the king, that George de Taida
bishop of Viseu, who was his first chaplain, should be iugde without appeal
of all causes, concerning the Ecclesiastical rebels, and of the process of
their confiscations; so as the Prior, in a manner doomed to sentence of death,
with the Bishop of Guarda and others, were again cited by edicts, to be
deprived by justice of all spiritual livings they held within the realm.
There was yet no news of him, notwithstanding the reward promised, and the
great care the Castilians used through the realm to find him, yet were they
daily less certain, for that disguised in a base habit, he went unknown
oftentimes amongst those that sought for him. He had intelligence that the
Count of Vimioso was come by land into France, laboring to move the French
to war against the Catholic King, promising great succors by the people in
the matters of Portugal: By reason whereof, and for the Priors concealment,
the King kept in a manner his whole army dispersed in the fortresses and
cities of the realm; and although he had dismissed the Italians, and sent the
greatest part of his galleies into Italy, yet they gave out, that he after
repented, the realm seeming daily less peaceable; and that the French in
those parts might arm a good number of ships of war and more conveniently in
that sea then the galleies, whereof four being in Algarues, had taken a French
pirate with great slaughter, who being a knight of Malta had fought valiantly:
By reason of these garrisons, of the rigor of officers, of the small recompense
The Portugals animated, and wherefore.
that was given them, and of the conceit that the Prior was yet within the
realm, the Portugals hearts began to turn, some of them assembled at times,
lamented the misery wherein they seemed to be, by their not agreeing to defend
themselves, or not yielding in time; yet the greatest part held opinion, that
united together they might have made resistance. They could not endure, that
the Castillian officers should intermeddle in matters of justice as they
pretended to do; neither was the Portugals disdain appeased, in saying, that
the King having commanded John Andrew Doria, Prince of Melfy, to conduct the
Empress his sister into Spain, whom he had caused to come out of Germany, was
for no other cause but to leave her Gouernesse in Portugal, and so return
into Castill, and that as a woman she should reign with greater mildenes then
the kings of Portugal had done: for although this was the common discourse,
yet many held opinion that the king should not depart, being constrained to
keep garrisons, the which he would not dismiss, until he were better assured
of the Prior, of whom they spoke diversely; for some held, that he was dead,
and spoiled by the Castilians, who for that they would yield no account of
the jewels he had about him, kept it secret: Others said, that he had sent
into France, and England, from whence he expected great armies, at whose
arrival, he would discover himself: Many supposed that he should keep
himself secret within the realm until the death of Philip, who according to
their discourse, could not live long; and yet was there small difference
betwixt their ages, at what time showing himself as he did upon the death of
king Henry, he should again take possession of the realm, the kingdoms of
Castill remaining in the hands of pupilles. And although some believed that he
was departed the realm, yet the greatest part held that he was there yet;
laboring to escape as covertly as he could, fearing to be taken prisoner, the
which was true indeed, as it appeared by some of his friends that were taken
in the port of Lisbone, who sought to imbarke with some provision of victuals
they had made, who confessed upon the rack, that he was in the realm, amongst
which was Peter d'Alpoe Doctor of the laws, who since for that cause and
others of high treason lost his head at Lisbone.

The Estates were now ended, and the king desirous to go to Lisbone, but for
that the preparations, and triumphs which the city pretended, were not yet
ready, he went to Almada, which is directly against the city, upon the other
bank of Tagus, to give them time to finish their preparations: At what time
the King having intelligence that those of the Islands of Terceraes,
notwithstanding the letters which Ambrose d'Aguiar, had carried stood firm in
their first resolution of defense, he sent Peter Baldes with four ships, six
hundredth Spanish foot, and some cannon, with commandment to assure himself
fully of the Island of Saint Michaell, which was obedient; to spoil the ships
which should come from the Indies, and not to attempt any thing by land until
he had sent a greater supply of men. The Court was ill appointed at Almada, and
the needful ministers for dispatches, could not all be lodged there. The King
The Kings entry to Lisbone.
desirous to enter the city, would not attend after Saint Peter's day, when
passing the water with his galleies, he la^ded in the city, upon a bridge of
wood, framed for that purpose, without giving them time to finish their arches,
and statues prepared for his entry: But the sloth and ignorance of the workmen
was in part cause, yet did they make a sumptuous preparation: Upon the bridge
he was met by the The speech of the Magistrate of Lisbone to the king.
Magistrate of the chamber, where Doctor Hector de Pyna, one of them, spoke
thus in the behalf of the city, showing the joy they had conceived of his
entry: That as this city was the greatest in the world, so God had
deservedly given them conformeable to their own desires, a great monarch to
be their Lord: He excused the people saying, That if they had no sooner
obeyed, it was done rather by error, then their own free will; and that
remaining in their own power to choose a king, they would have made election
of no other then himself. And touching the death of Ferrant de Pyna, he said
that this city had first of all shed blood for his service, seeing that the
said Ferrant when as Anthony caused him to be wounded, was a member of this
Magistrate: He excused likewise the sleightnes of their joys, by the
afflictions of the war, the spoil of the city, and the plague, remembering
their losses of Affricke; concluding that they hoped by his Majesty's favors,
this realm should not be said united unto Castill, but that all the other
realms were joined unto Portugal. He then went on horseback under a canopie
of cloth of gold, unto the Cathedral church, the streets being richly
hanged, were full of people, who made show of great joy for the Kings
arrival, where having done his devotion, he went in the same sortvnto the
palace, accompanied with all the nobility on foot. This realm within the
space of two years, had (as a man may say) five kings, a thing seldom or
never happened in any other place, and it seemed that God in so short a time
had thus altered the state of things for the peoples punishment, for all of
them wasted their poor subjects: Sebastian by his rashness; Henry by his
irresolution; the governors by fear, and their private interest; Anthony by
tyranny, and Philip by arms. But when all was in a manner quiet, he entered
this city, the proper seat of their kings: It was supposed, the sorrows and
troubles passed, should now be converted into joy and quietness; but for that
it is an equal punishment to a people, either to have tyrants ruling by force,
or to make a bad election of The Portugals discontented.
governors: The Portugals were scourged with this last rod, desiring rather to
be commanded by Anthony, being of so small might, and with all other disgraces
that proceeded from him; then by the great power of Philip, impatient to see
him so slack, in dividing amongst them the dignities, commaunderies, and
revenues of the crown; whereby they grew out of hope ever to draw such
recompenses from the Court of Castill, as they had usually drawn from that of
Portugal. And although he had given unto Frauncis de Sada, sometimes governor,
the title of Earl of Matosignos, to Ferrant de Norogna that of Lignares, which
his father enjoyed, made as it is said, Christopher de Mora one of his chamber,
and established Peter d'Alcasoua in his office of Chamberlain, contrary to
the decree of king Henry, wherein although the king of himself were well
inclined, and resolved to dispatch every one, with greater liberality, then
the kings of Portugal had ever done; yet this distribution according to the
new decree, appertaining to the Council of state of Portugal, wherein as it
is said, their opinions being diverse, and the respects of hatred and love,
diverse, nothing was resolved, and the abundance of petitions caused these
delays, for that every one either justly or without cause, demanded
recompense, so as the whole realm did not seem sufficient to content them:
the which being ill considered by many, they said he would stay from giving
until he were assured of the Islands, and of Anthonies person. But The council
of state of Portugal reduced unto two.
the king finding, that these difficulties, and the slacknes in proceeding,
grew by the excessive number of Counselors, resolved (according to the custom
of former kings) to refer the dispatch of such as demanded recompense, unto
two persons alone, the which were Anthony Pignero, Bishop of Leiria and to
Christopher de Mora: It may be seeming unto him, that these two amongst the
other officers were most free from all private respects, the Bishop for that he
was near his grave, by reason of his age, and infirmity, although of a sound
judgment, and without kinsemen; and Mora being a creature of the kings, bredde
in Castill, and held for virtuous, and fearing God.

The estate of the Terceraes grew daily worse, with whom all traffic was
interdict, there was news that this people being very obstinate, called in
foreign succors, resolving in no sort to obey Philip: They understood that
Peter Baldes was arrived, and that the Kings letters with the reward he had
carried for that nation, were not received but contemned: By reason whereof,
the King desirous to subdue them, before the end of this summer, and judging
the enterprise easy, for that they had no trained soldiers, armed certain
ships, and furnished them with soldiers under the conduct of Lopo de Figueroa,
who stayed not long before he departed with commission to attempt with Baldes
to become master of the Islands: Baldes lay now about the Islands, expecting the
Indian fleet, his Baldes attempt upon the Terceraes.
mariners had often both by day and night landed with their boats to steal
grapes which were then ripe, and drawing sometimes near the rocks, upon the
which the Portugals had planted behind a small rampire three or four iron
pieces, they parlied often with them; the one not fearing the other: Peter de
Baldes finding the Portugals carelesnes, and being advertised that some within
the Islands (amongst a great multitude) were well affected to the Catholic
king; had often resolved to send some men on land, to the end that such as
followed the kings party, who were said to lie in the mountains, might join
with them, and altogether set upon the city of Angra, or at the least so
fortify themselves at land, as they should not be repulsed: But for as much
as this resolution, with so small a troop was dangerous, and against the Kings
commission, the which knowing well he did not execute; yet having intelligence
that Lopo de Figueroa was to be sent from Lisbone, to undertake this enterprise
with a great number of men, who being arrived, he should be commanded to
obey, he did confidently believe that at his coming, either by love or by
force, he would be master of this Island, and win that honor whereunto he
aspired. So as (such force has the desire of honor,) having ill measured his
forces, and against the Kings commandment, he made haste rashly to try,
whether the resolution which he had formerly conceived would succeed well,
whereunto he was likewise persuaded by some of the Island, who as unskillful,
had their wills more ready then their power: So as early on Saint James his day
in the morning, having shipped in a manner all his soldiers in their boats,
he sent them to land, whereas the mariners had been accustomed to go,
betwixt Angra and Praia, the which they call the house of Salga, where having
found small or no resistance, they landed easily, and the Portugals The
preparation of them of Angra against Baldes.
who had the guarde of this artillery, fearfully fled away. The Castillians
being now become masters thereof, began to build a small rampire of stone, to
the end they might hold a more firm footing on land, and retire such as
followed the Catholic kings party; but they had no time, for the inhabitants
of Angra, hearing the Castillians were landed, had given the allarum by bells
and other great noise, so as many of their stoutest issued forth to skirmish;
and although they did no matter of importance, many returning terrified or
hurt, yet did they keep the enemy from fortifying; who remaining in that
place from the morning until afternoon, there went not any one Portugal unto
them; for although there were some disposed thereunto, yet durst they not,
distrusting both the one and the other; being chiefly terrified by the example
John de Betancour affect to the King.
of John de Betancour, one of the principals of that place, who having
conspired with above a hundredth citizens, upon a certain day to run armed
through the city, and proclaine King Philip, he supposed with his authority,
and the followers he expected, to move the people, against Ciprian de
Fegueredo, and make himself Lord of the Island in the Kings name: But having
not duly examined the judgment, valor, and constancy of such as he had
chosen for his companions (things necessarily required in them that are to
execute matters of such importance) being deceived he did not effect this
enterprise; for although he had many friends and copartners with him, being at
the hour appointed come unto the place, calling the rest, and proclaiming the
kings name, he was not followed of any man, but was environed by the people and
beaten, outraged, in danger to be hanged, and therefore no man durst stir. In
this space the number of Portugals, which the Governor had assembled to go
against the enemy, was little less then two thousand, who treating in what
manner they should issue forth, they left not to consider, that although the
Castillians were fewer in number, yet were they more experienced, and better
armed: A religious A stratagem with oxen made by a religious man.
man of the order of Saint Augustine (for here as well as in other parts of the
realm, religious men deal in matters of war) advised that before their men,
they should drive a number of oxen, and chase them with all force against the
Castillians, the which being put in practice, was the safety of the Portugals,
and the defeating of their enemies; for that raising a great dust, they were
not discovered by the Castillians; they defended them from their shot, and
disordred the enemy: for the Castillians having by their long skirmish with
some of the city, spent their shot and powder, being now charged by so many,
they thought to retire themselves to their boats, and so to imbark, which they
resolved too late: For that the Portugals approaching near, covered, and in
safety, having the oxen as a rampire, they drove them against the enemy with
such violence, that they were forced to disbande, and to quite them the place;
at what time being charged by the Portugals with few shot, and many lances,
they fought a while with disadvantage: For the Portugals The ill success of
Baldes soldiers.
being many in number, the Castillians could make no great resistance; besides
that, being minded to save themselves by their boats, they retired toward the
sea; the which being then rougher then when they landed, their boats could
not come near the shore, and the mariners which were in them were likewise
fearful to approach, for that the Portugals shot at them from land; so as
the soldiers to save themselves, waded up to the neck in water, and yet hardly
could get to their boats, suffering the punishment of their rashness; for the
enemy seeing them now fly without resistance, fell to killing, without
pardoning of any, and not only followed them unto the water, but made an end
of such as being already entered, the sea had cast up again to shore half
dead, not hearing The cruelty of those of Tercera.
any that cried for mercy: But the Portugals being now grown inexorable, not
only slew the soldiers, but pages and vallets, so as there died above four
hundredth, and not thirty Portugals, (whereof some of them were but hurt) in
this action; hatred prevailed more then any other respect, for having reserved
only two alive, which termed themselves Portugals, the extraordinary rage of
these men showed it self, who grieved with those few that were saved, turned
with cruelty to mangle the dead bodies; for cutting them in pieces, one carried
a head in triumph, one, one member, an other, an other, dragging whole bodies
through the streets with a thousand indignities. The day following, there
remained not within the city, child, man, nor religious person (except the
Jesuits) that went not to the camp to see the slaughter of the enemies, with
instruments and dancing, taking pleasure to cut and mangle these insensible
bodies; and some affirm, that there were of them, who tearing out the hearts of
the dead, would feed upon them. The Governor having put the arms of the
dead men into wagons, and drawing their colors after him, entered the city
with great joy of the people: Baldes having hitherto been a better mariner,
then he seemed now a soldier, found by this unhappy event, with how much more
judgment, he should have undertaken this action: but as one mischief is
followed by many, grief did so blind his understanding, as he could not
succor his soldiers as easily he might, and give them means to retire to
their ships, if drawing nearer to land he had discharged his artillery
against the Portugals, who were the first that gave the name of bloody unto
this war.

The defeat of Baldes is prejudicial unto the king.
This important effect, did greatly prejudice the Catholic kings affairs,
for this nation being grown more cruel and more rebellious, found there was
no hope of agreement, nor remission, whereby the King (who lived in some hope
they would be reclaimed) grew no we wholly desperate by this unhappy
success: and the rather, for that searching the Prior throughout the realm,
they had intelligence by letters from Flaunders, that he was arrived in
England, from whence he should go into France to demand succors,
understanding also that there was hope he should obtain them: By reason
whereof, they did fortify the seacoast of Portugal, and especially the rock
of Saint Julian: And although this storm seemed yet far off, yet they
regarded it the more, for that the king was unfurnished of men, and the people
generally of the realm, little inclined to his devotion; so as it seemed, if
the Prior would again hazard his fortune, that at the only sight of his
colors, the people would take arms: There was no restraint could hold them,
seeing the Italians had been discharged, the Germans and Spaniards, whereof
many being dead, and many growing rich, fled away; there remained in all not
above four or five thousand, whereof one thousand was already employed with
Lopo de Figueroa, who was sent unto the Islands: for although there were
fifteen hundredth appointed, yet the Germans went unwillingly; and for as
much as the ships after their departure, which was in July, returned more then
once back, by reason of the contrary winds, many of them stole away, not
returning to the army, the which greatly diminished their number: the rest
were divided into garrisons, in the Province of Doro and Mynio, and other
places; so as there remained scant a thousand men within Lisbone, which seemed
a small guard for so great a city. This departure of Anthony The Priors good
fortune.
was in truth strange, and it seemed both in this and other like things, that
he was either happy, or had an extraordinary gift of nature: For remaining
captive in Affricke, after that unfortunate battle of Sebastian, he was the
first of so many prisoners that was freed, being likely for the quality of his
person, to have been the last: but he could so well hide himself, and
conceal what he was, that he was delivered without discovery: And even when
as he departed from Viana in October 1580. until June, 1581. he remained still
within the realm so secretly, as he was never discovered, the which is the
more worthy of admiration; for that the diligence the King used to find him
out was admirable, for all Judges, all Captains, and all soldiers, were
carefully employed: And although they had sometimes advertisement of the place
of his abode, and did follow him in a manner by his foot, yet could they never
find him. Ierom Mendosa with the help of Emanuel of Portugal (in whom it was
likely Ierom Mendoza treats an agreement with the Prior.
that Anthony should trust) treating an agreement labored much to speak with
him: But although some of his familiar friends came unto him sometimes at
Alanquer, sometimes at Vidigueira, with hope they should meet, yet did he
never discover himself unto them; but the slight execution of the punishment
inflicted upon such as did co^ceale him, did greatly prejudice their search;
for many thereby did boldly receive him. The Duke of Alua his officers, in the
end of Lent, had like to have surprised him in Lisbon, where the Duke had so
many spies, and corrupted so many of his friends, that it seemed undoubtedly he
should fall into his hands: but when as with greatest heat he should have
pursued it, he grew cold. For understanding that the king held some regard of
Mendoza his practice, who with doubtful hopes gave him to understand, that
the week before Easter the Prior would cast himself at the Kings feet, he
feared to amaze him, but the said Mendoza labored in vain: For as it happens
to him that fears Anthony distrusting all men, performed nothing of what he
promised; neither went he to any person where he had appointed, so as there
neither followed the effect that was expected, but they lost all hope to do any
good: Yet was it apparent that the affection which this nation bare unto him
was of great force, for although that fortune prevailed in many more then
faith, yet in his afflictions, and having so great an imposition laid upon his
person, there was never any one amongst so many, in whom he must of necessity
trust, that ever sought to betraie him for hope of recompense; although some
labored to save themselves, amongst which was Edward de Castro. And therefore
he went safely throughout all the ports of the sea, he was at Lisbone as it
is said, where the king himself remained, not finding means to imbarke; some
of his men being surprised, he went to Settuual, where by the help of a
woman, he hired a Flemmish ship for six hundredth crowns, with the help of a
religious man, of the order of Saint Frauncis, and with ten of his
faithfullest servants, he embarked Anthony arriues at Caleis.
by night, and so went to Caleis, where we may truly say, that God had not
yet withdrawn his hand from punishing of this nation, and that this was as a
scourge; for by reason of the affection this people bare unto him, it was
necessary to keep this people in awe with garrisons, to the great hurt and
ruin of the subjects.

The Indian fleet expected, and the discourse of their arrival.
Now was come the year 1581. at what time they expected the ships from the
Indies, Brasil, Saint Thomas, Cape Vert, and all other new found lands, the
which stayed somewhat long, and put them in some fear, being looked for with
greater desire, then ever any were: Some feared they would not come, others
wished they should come, many held opinion they should willingly stay at
the Terceres, and from thence go into England, the which if they should not
willingly yield unto, touching unadvisedly at the Islands, they should be
forced thereunto by the Ilanders. They were wished for, both for the riches
they carried, as to understand by them how the people of those parts were
addicted to the obedience of the Catholic king, whereof many doubted: Such as
held opinion they should safely arrive at Lisbone, said, that the Indies and
other provinces could not maintain themselves without Spain, and should be
forced to yield obedience to whomsoever that should be Lord of Portugal:
that they needed not fear the Terceres, although they had spoiled some ships
which they had taken, or that had anchored there of their own free will; yet
now the Castillian army being master at sea, upon their discovery they would
conduct them to Lisbone, not suffering them to approach the land: Such as
supposed they would not come, said, that the said ships were departed from
Lisbone in the year 1580. after King Henry's death, during the Governors
reign, and that Jews de Taide Earl of Toghia, Viceroy of the Indies, knowing
there was a space-gouernement, with likelihood of war, would attend the
event without yielding obedience to any, for that he would then show it when
he had intelligence, who were king, to be the more acceptable unto him, or
hoping that amidst these tumults, there would something remain to his share:
But if notwithstanding he were resolved to send them, he would appoint a
captain of his own making, and conformeable to his own will, with commission
to obey him to whom he were most affected, and that it were hard to judge whom
he wished most to be King: besides that Emanuel de Melo being captain General
of the same army when it departed from Portugal, being a devoted servant to
the Prior, and had made show to be of his faction, it was likely that if he
returned, and had any intelligence of the Priors being in England, the which he
might easily understand at the Islands, that he would sail thither, the which
if he could not perform in the same ships, he would then land in the
Islands, and after sail in other boats, whether he pleased with hope of gain
and booty: And although it were true that the Indians could not maintain
themselves, yet France and England might more aboundanly furnish them, and
with greater profit then Portugal. But for as much as in discoursing of
matters which depends upon an others will, we cannot consider al causes of
their errors, a matter private to the divine knowledge, it fell out in an other
manner then had been discoursed: For the Earl Viceroy of the Indies, having
by the same ships received letters from the Catholic King, who informed him
of the equity of his cause, and of his intent, with large promises, whereunto
(and by the means of others which he received from the governors) he gave
credit, preferring them before such as he had received from Anthony, resolved
to obey the King; so as the ships departed, and being arrived near to the
Terceres, they came sailing without ever discovering of the The Indian fleet
met with a French ship near the Terceres.
kings army; for that Baldes discouraged with his ill success at the Islands
could find no fit place to encounter the^. True it is, that after they had
remained a whole day amongst those Islands, they were encountered by a French
Bark sent from the Terceres, who entreated the Captains to go to Angra: The
Portugals demanded the state of the realm, that they might thereby know how
to govern themselves, but for that there were none but mariners, they could
neither persuade, dissemble, nor speak the truth; but contradicting
themselves, those of the fleet could draw nothing from them, but was
confused: For one said that the Catholic king was master of the realm, an
other, but only of a great part of it; and that Anthony with a great army
made war to expel him, whereby there grew some controversy in the fleet:
For some (especially such as had little to loose) would land in the Island;
others would have them hold together until they had certain intelligence of
the state of the realm; others without expecting any further information,
would have them go to Lisbone, and yield themselves to him that were king. The
Captain general being retired into his chamber to parley with certain
Portugals and French men, entertained them with these practizes; but the
mariners doubtful of some evil, the rumor being appeased, directed their
course toward Lisbone, where remained their wives and children, although some
opposed themselves. It seemed that these ships being of such importance to the
Prior and his disseines, he should have used more care to intercept them, then
it seemed he did; but in truth he omitted no diligence, The diligence of
Anthony to have the fleet.
for he wrote unto the Captain general of the army, that at his arrival at
the Islands, they should be delivered unto him, whereby he entreated him with
large promises to remain there, and to consigne him his army, and not to the
Catholic King. But the too great diligence of the Governor, as it often
happens, did him harm, for having sent forth a Bark with these letters, to
attend the ships, they did not encounter them, so as sailing toward
Portugal, upon the mid way, they met with the army of Lopo de Figueroa, who
woondring at the negligence of Baldes, whom they denied to have seen, he
furnished them with water and other refreshings: The fleet arrtues at Lisbone.
They arrived after at Lisbone, to the great contentment of the king, and yet
they stayed so long upon the way, that it was constantly believed they were
gone into England, and now the merchants began to assure their goods with the
loss of the fifth, and the Captain was extraordinarily favored by the King.

The arrival of Figueroa at the Terceres, and his return to Lisbone.
In this while Lopo de Figueroa arrived at the Terceres, where he understands
of Baldes his misfortune, having viewed the Island fortified on all parts where
he might descend, and by nature inaccessible, finding himself to have few
men, the enemy victorious, and the season of the year far advanced, the
seas swelling betimes in those parts, he resolved (and with judgment) to
return to Portugal, without attempting any thing by force. He first sent one
to advise the city of Angra, to yield obedience unto his Majesty, promising
them pardons, recompenses, and many favors, but they measuring the assurance
of his promises, not by the Kings clemency, but by their own merits,
arrogantly made him answer, that he should say in what part he would
descend, and they would open him the passage; by reason whereof Figueroa
returned into Portugal, Baldes imprisoned in Portugal.
with Baldes, whom the King presently committed to prison; yet he was after
delivered, showing the instructions that had been given him, to be doubtful,
and not to prohibit him to fight. This return of the army encouraged the
Ilanders, persuading themselves that Figueroa had greater forces, then indeed
he had, and seeing him fearful to descend, they supposed he made great
reckoning of theirs. They wrote the news of all these things unto the Prior
being in France, who thanked them with courteous letters, and sent them
artillery, harquebusies, powder, and other munition, promising to furnish them
with men: He commanded them to seize upon the goods of all such as arrived
there, being subject to the Catholic king, and send them into France, so as
they sent him all the merchandise which they had taken in four or five ships
come from the west Indies. And for as much as it seemed to many, that this
could not continue, that the King should send from Portugal a great army
against them, so as they should not be able to The preparation of them of
Terceres.
make resistance, they dispatched into France one Anthony Aluarez, and an
other base officer, to understand what the Prior did, what forces he had, and
what they might expect from thence, who being returned with the orders, the one
of Saint Jacques, the other of d'Auis which the Prior had given them, they
reported, at his entreatie, that he had a great army ready to descend into
Portugal, the which in truth was not so, bringing letters to the Governor,
whereby the Prior gave unto them likewise a collar of the order, with a
thousand ducats of reuenew, the which moved some others to go into France,
from whence, as also from England, there came some few soldiers to the Island
in ships which sailed into those parts, yet they were never three hundredth in
number, being often of opinion to send them back, for that the winter was at
hand, and to call them back in summer, the which the people would not yield
unto, saying, that since the King had sent them, they would entertain them.
The Jesuits being walled up within their monastery, to whom they gave meat
but twice a week, greeuing to be thus wrongully imprisoned, upon a certain
day they opened the doors of the Church, and having placed the sacrament in
the midst, they would try by this means, if they might remain free: The
ministers of justice went unto the covent, to demand the reason of this
innovation, to whom it was propounded by the fathers, that if their offenses so
required, they should punish them, but holding them as suspect, they should
suffer them to depart into Portugal. The resolution was (after some speeches
used beyond the terms of modesty) that the fathers should be walled up
again, and a certain person who A miracle performed by the Iesits.
said that in justice they should burn these priests, with their monastery,
the which they had deserved for the affection they bare unto the Castillians;
he stayed not long to acknowledge his error, for departing from thence, he fell
sick unto the death, and God would have him confess (as he said) that this
grief happened unto him for that occasion: All the other religious men did what
they could to wrong these fathers, who being of a contrary opinion, and
practicing profession of war, could not endure that these should be Castillians
in their hearts, refusing to enjoy that liberty: They imprisoned the Vicar, who
governs the spirituality in the Bishops name, which remains in the Island of
Saint Michael, and chose an other after their own humor. These things did
much displease the Catholic king, whereupon he resolved to undertake this
enterprise the summer following, although he doubted it for many causes, which
behooued him to provide for, together with the new iealousies which grew,
having intelligence that the Turk prepared an army at sea, to send to
endomage Christendom. That Lucciali a famous pirat, and Captain general of
the Turks army, was come from Constantinople to Alger with threescore and
ten galleies, and although it were to no other end, then to visit the state
of Affricke, and to provide for it, fearing that the king of Spain, by reason
of the new Acquisition of Portugal, and the wars wherein the Turks were
busied against the King of Persia, might trouble this province; yet he
ministered matter of suspect, for the Catholic King having treated with the
Cherriffe to yield unto him Alarache in exchange of Mazagon, and not agreeing,
for that the Moors are great deceivers in their promises: It was suspected the
Turk understanding this practice, had sent Lucciali to divert this exchange,
to fortify Alarache, and furnish it with Turks; so as being so near
neighbor unto Spain, and a convenient port for galleies, it might greatly
annoy him: But he returned after to Constantinople, being called back at the
pursuit of his competitours.

The estate of France and Flaunders.
The State of Flaunders ministered matter of consideration, for although the
Prince of Orange had long enjoyed the greatest part of those provinces, yet the
king had great hope, especially now upon on the conquest of Portugal, that
this people would be advised, and that one day he should reclaim them; but
this hope soon failed, for that Frauncis de Valois Duke of Alancon, brother to
the most christian King Henry the third, being entered with arms into
Flaunders, and having succored them that were in Cambrey, he forced the Prince
of Parma Captain general for the king (being at the siege thereof) to retire:
And although being master of the city, he presently returned, yet the state of
France seemed troublesome and ready to attempt some new and important
alteration; the rather, for that the French were animated by Anthony Prior of
Crato, who was come thither out of England, being embraced by the Queen mother
of France, and visited by the whole Court. They had intelligence likewise of
a practice which displeased them, that the said Duke of Alancon should marry
with Elizabeth Queen of England, and for that he had passed and repassed above
once into that Island, it was given out the marriage was secretly concluded, but
whether it were so or otherwise, the death of the said Duke of Alancon ended
that combination; but men of the greatest judgment, believed that her Majesty
of England was not married to the said Duke, because she had refused so many
great Kings and Princes in former times, and had lived with the reputation of a
most chaste, and virtuous Princess. The Catholic king complained to the most
Christian king, that he had received the Prior his rebel into France; of the
succors given to Cambrey, and blamed the marriage with England, laboring to
divert it all he could, saying, that he ought by no means to yield unto it,
for the difference of religion. The King of France, as they said, made answer
to these propositions by his Ambassador: That as for the marriage, he left it
to the Duke, who was thereunto inclined, with all the Nobility in France, and
that he was not master of their wills: That the Prior had been received by the
Queen mother, who being Queen (as she believed) of that realm, had received
this her vassal: That he had opposed himself to his brother, touching the
succors of Cambrey, but his admonitions were of no credit. This answer
confirmed the Catholic king in the opinion he had conceived, that these
expeditions which had been made in the name of Alancon, were all lets
proceeding from the King, and covered with this mask, seeming impossible that
the Duke (contrary to the Kings will and pleasure) should raise so great
forces in France. The which although it seemed incredible, yet France had
continued long in such an estate, that it was no marvel, for that King Henry
and his predecessor Charles the ninth, having been molested by their subjects
upon the points of religion, all was in disorder; and although the state seemed
somewhat better pacified, yet their minds, by the means of these former
troubles, remained still inclined unto war: And for as much as France,
England, and Flaunders, did somewhat assist in these matters of Portugal, for
the better understanding of things that follow, it may be lawful for me to
digress a little to speak something of these countries.

The Queen of France discontented with Philip, and the cause.
In France lived Katherine de Medicy, mother to the king, whose age and valor
all France obeyed: she seemed to be discontented with the Catholic king for
diverse respects, but that she made most show of, was, that he had taken the
realm of Portugal by force, refusing to submit himself to justice, saying,
that she had more interest then he; whereupon it was supposed, that (moved
with this disdain) she should labor to make war against Portugal: with
whom agreed the said Duke of Ala^con her son, no less enemy to the Catholic
King then the mother, moved thereunto, for that having demanded one of the
daughters of the said King in marriage, he was refused, for that he required
with his wife, a portion fit for her quality: He was followed by the whole
Nobility of France, whom he might easily lead where he pleased, although it
were against the Kings liking, the which grew, for that remaining the third
son to Henry the second, with small hope ever to aspire unto the crown,
having two brothers Charles and Henry his elders, having a great mind and
stirring, he gave ear to al such as discontented with the king, or desirous of
innovation (whereof there are numbers in France) labored to alter the quiet
of Christendom, with whom he had often resolved to conquer himself some new
estate out of France. Persuaded to this resolution by such as were about him,
he supposed for a time, that his brothers were opposite unto him, and that by
no means they would like of his greatness: so as that which was given him by
the wisest for good counsel, he did interpret to the ill affection they bare
him; and that they sought to obscure the glory whereunto he aspired: And this
jealousy increased when as his brother Henry was called to the crown of
Poland, by not giving him presently such places as he enioied in France. By
this and such like, those which followed him, took an occasion to settle in
his conceit, a hatred against his brethren, giving him to understand, that
they detested his greatness, the which they could so well effect, that although
the said Henry did afterward come, by the death of Charles the ninth, from the
crown of Poland to that of France; yet the Duke continued still his first
desires, and that with greater train then before: For some considered that
Henry being sickly, and without children, he should one day be king: It was
therefore no wonder, if without the kings consent, yea contrary to his liking,
he attempted many things, although there were some show, that the king his
brother had intelligence with him. And although his forces, joined with the
Queen Mothers, were of importance, and might well cause the Catholic king to
fear, yet it seemed, that those of England would likewise join with him: For
it was given out, that Elizabeth doubting the Kings force, and knowing the
Popes intention against her, having seen the proof thereof in the affairs of
Ireland, sought to secure hirselfe, that they might not wrong her, and to that
end she entered into an agreement (as it was said) with the Queen and her
yoongest son, to the prejudice of Philip, whereof the effect was soon seen.
The Duke of Alancon sworn Duke of Brabant.
The said Alancon being returned again into England, being already agreed
with the Prince of Orange, who was the instrument of all these practizes, he
passed from thence to Antwerpe, where the peoples humors being before disposed
by the said Prince, he was received in all these places with great joy; and
the xix. day of February, in the year of our Lord 1582. they did swear him
Duke of Brabant, the which caused a general admiration for many reasons: It
seemed strange, that the Prince of Orange, in a manner absolute Lord in those
countries, the which he had so long defended, would upon the end of the work
spoil himself of the state, and give it unto a stranger, without constraint,
without profit, and to the prejudice of his honor: And although it seemed he
had done the like to Mathias Arch Duke of Austria, and afterward sent him back
into Germany, it was not credible that he hoped ever to do so unto the Duke;
for besides that he was entered in a manner by maine force; his power, the
neernes of France, and the favor of England, might well induce men to believe
that he would so establish himself, as he need not fear to be expelled.
There wanted not such as would excuse the Prince, saying, that the people were
now weary, and unfurnished of money, by reason of so great wars, that they
could not relieve him as he had need; and thefore it behooued him to seek
some one that should aid him against the Catholic king, who having now
recovered the realm of Portugal, should be able with greater ease to molest
those countries, and seeing that he was forced to seek for succors, there was
no greater person then this, making in a manner an muincible union of these
estates with France and England; besides, the Prince should attain to the
wished end, which was to deprive the Catholic king of the whole possession,
and many did so much rely upon the Princes foresight and judgment, that they
supposed he would like wise expel Alancon when he pleased. Many blamed the
manner of the Dukes proceeding, who sought to usurp an others patrimony
without any title: others excused him, forging laws of state after their own
humors, saying, that the privileges of the country did allow, that if the
Catholic King did not observe them, they might choose a Prince of themselves,
the which the King having broken, they had sought out an Preparation; of the
french against the Terceres.
other Lord. The effect of the league was not yet ended in those parts, but to
divert the Catholic King from making war in those countries, at the
mediation of Anthony to trouble the state of Portugal, they prepared a great
army in France: Some said it was to be employed against the same realm,
hoping the people would rise against the Castillians: some supposed it should
be sent to succor the Terceraes, the winning whereof, Philip threatened to
attempt; and some believed that they went for no other intent, but to surprise
certain ships that came from the new nauigations, charged with gold and
spice. There happened at that time in Flaunders, The Prince of Orange wounded by
a Biscaine.
a matter of admiration and seldom seen: For the Prince of Orange being in
Antwerpe, quiet, and in the greatest fortune that he was ever, was shot in his
house, rising from his table, in the midst of all his servants, with a pistol,
by John Scaurigni, a young man, a Biscaine, moved thereunto by zeal of
religion, as he pretended: the bullet hitting him under his right iawe, passed
forth through the window; and although he was supposed to be dead, yet was he
cured and lived, and the offender was presently slain by his guard, and all
such as were found accessarie, were executed.

Whilst these things were determined in France and the low Countries, the
king (who remained still in Portugal) sought to give The kings recompense to
the Portugals.
contentment to the Portugals, who having long, and with importunity sought
for recompense, were in the end all in a manner dispatched, giving unto many
of them orders of knighthoode, much of the revenues, and all the offices that
might be given, to the great grief of the Castillians, who said, that this
realm with more right appertained unto Philip, seeing he had inherited it,
bought it, and conquered it. This distribution was made by the two Deputies
with great bounty, yet wrought it no good effect in the Kings favor, neither
was it acceptable; for finding two kind of Portugals, which sought for reward;
that is, those to whom Philip in the time of Henry and the Governors, had
promised money and honors to follow his party; and such as faithfully without
promises, yea, refusing them, had loially served him: It was in a manner
impossible to equal their recompenses, so as one of the parties should not be
discontented; but they proceeded so, as some were grieved, and others proud:
For besides the errors that were committed by reason of the ignorance of the
officers, being more easy to promise then to perform; the kings Agents had
made large offers not only to such as could help, but also to many of small
means, and less countenance. The King desired in any case to satisfy these
bonds; and although he would have rewarded the most faithful above all
others, yet could he not perform it, for that by reason of their excessive
promises, all the revenues of the crown had not been sufficient; so as it
often happens in Courts, they gave not unto them that deserved, with the like
proportion, as to such as were unworthy: So as the love of the subjects was
nothing increased by this means, for the most trusty were discontented,
seeming against reason to be worse entreated then those, which had been
less faithful, but with reward in hand, alleging also that many of them
had not performed that, for which they were paid; seeming sufficient unto many
to remain newters; and to some that had served Anthony, to say, that they were
forced, and such as were least faithful (for that their hearts were not so
firmly settled to the Kings service) they supposed to have carried themselves
wisely: They esteemed every small matter to be of great importance, and
(supposing the king to understand well what need he had of them,) in contempt
of the rest they grew insolent. These were the general causes for the which
the greatest distribution that ever was within the realm, was not pleasing;
but the nature of the Portugals is uneasy to content, in this respect, for
being envious, they do feel with greater grief an other man's profit, then
their own loss: Those of the baser sort, although they expected no answer,
having enriched themselves in their trades, by the great multitude of
Courtiers; yet could they not suffer the Castillians to be superiors, and as
it is usual with the common people, they desired innouations; the which the
King discovering, did greatly trouble his mind, finding himself to fail in
that, which he supposed should have bred him a quiet enjoying of the realm.
He did appoint (as it has been The Empress Mary comes to Lisbone.
said before) that his sister Marie, widow to the Emperor Maximilian the
second, being then in Germany, should come into Spain, with Margaret her
daughter: And although the discourse of her coming were diverse, for that some
supposed she should remain at Madrill, with the kings daughters; others, that
she should come into Portugal, where the King would leave her as Gouernesse
of the realm, to go unto the States of Aragon, whereunto he was called; yet in
the end she came unto Lisbone: Notwithstanding, whether the rumors of France
increased, by reason whereof the King would not depart; or that it was not
fit that of an Empress she should become Gouernesse of a small realm, the
King for that time did not depart, neither did she govern at all. True it is
that having resolved to leave Cardinal Albert, Arch Duke of Austria, the
Empress son in the government of the realm, he began to acquaint him with
the dispatch of affairs, and having one day assembled the Council of estate,
he said unto them, that for that he was burdened with the government of many
The Cardinal of Austria made Governor of Portugal.
realms, whereof he had the care, he desired somewhat to discharg himself;
and for this consideration having thought the said Cardinal fit for the
government of the said realm of Portugal, he would leave the charge unto him,
and therefore hereafter they should hold their Council in his presence.

The Terceres in confusion.
In this space the Portugals of the Terceraes within the city of Angra were in
no small confusion, for after they had imprisoned John de Betancour, walled up
the Jesuits within their College, taken diverse ships, and committed extortions
upon diverse Citizens, which followed secretly the Catholic kings party;
there grew among themselves some difficulty, for that it seemed unto many that
Ciprian de Figueredo, chief governor, did not continue with that vehemence he
had begun. And as it happens to him that rules, all the seditious did malice
him; so as upon any small matter, they took occasion to slander him and acuse
him of infidelity, although the cause may only be imputed unto him, that this
Island was not obedient unto King Philip: by reason whereof, being desirous in
the beginning of winter, to dismiss certain ships which were there detained,
and likewise to deliver the Jesuits from the prison wherein they were, all the
obseruers of his actions opposed themselves, and chiefly the other religious
men, as those in that place, being more seditious then the rest, feared most,
and were most watchful of the affairs; so as he that in a manner had been
absolute Lord, the people being now incensed against him, he found that he
could no more execute those things, which had been before tolerable. And
although he labored so, as the ships were dismissed, yet could he not
deliver the Jesuits; for he must of force, with greater rigor, try the
peoples inconstancy, and the distrust of Princes: For having advertised
Anthony being in France, of the estate of the Island, and of the authority
that many took upon them against him, demanding when he would come into the
realm, adding withal, that this Island was ruined, and that it could not long
continue in this estate; Anthony grew in jealousy of him, furthered by the
letters he had received from his enemies, the which said plainly that he was a
traitor, and therefore he resolved to send from France, unto the government
of these Islands, Emanuel de Sylua, whom he had newly made Count of
Toresuedras, one of his chiefest favorites, who arrived The carriage of Emanuel
de Sylua at the Terceres.
there in March, with as ample commission as might be given in that place, and
having dispossessed Figueredo from his charge, he began with a barbarous
tyranny to molest both friends and foes for the recovering of money: Before
his arrival, a ship laden with meal departed from Angra, with show to go
unto Brazil, the which being not far from the Island, took her course for
Lisbone: Some supposed that this was a practice of Figueredos, and that by this
means by his letter, he had demanded pardon of the Catholic King, and
offered to deliver him the Island, aduising him what course to take; for
afterward an other ship departing from Lisbone, it was known, they not
only carried the kings letters to Figueredo, but also to many of the better
sort, the which took not the effect that was expected; for the said ship
arrived after the coming of Emanuel de Silua, so as Figueredo being
dispossessed of his place, could not execute his practice, if he had any such
thing in hand.

The preparation at Lisbone against the Terceres, and the advice upon this
enterprise.
During these stirs, they made a slow preparation at Lisbone for the Islands,
for that the King was not yet well resolved to attempt it in the year 1582.
his Council varying in their opinions: Some advised him, presently with all
his power to force them, alleging that the longer he delaied it, the more
dangerous the enterprise would prove; for both the French, and English, who
(as it was said) were bound thither, would, if they landed, fortify, if
they had time; so as hardly afterward they should find any entrance: They
did likewise weigh this enterprise with regard of honor, saying, that it was a
thing of small reputation and dishonorable, that so weak an Island, should
dare in the view of Spain, resist the forces of so great a King: They showed
of how great consequence it was, being (as they said) seated in a place which
was the only refuge of all the ships, which came from the east and west
Indies, and from all the new nauigations, into Spain: for although there were
other Islands in this sea, yet was there not any so commodious as this, the rest
being very unfit; and if the French and English became masters thereof (as it
was to be feared if they protracted time) and lodged their armies there, they
might from thence encounter the ships of those nauigations, the which by reason
of their long voyage return home weary and torn, and (being of themselves
indefensible) spoil them, to the great loss and dishonor of al Spain: They
made the enterprise easy, saying, that besides that from France they had
received no great provision of arms and munition; in the I Will it self, the
greatest part of the Nobility, and many other would obey the king, but they
were forced by the multitude, and durst not discover themselves; yet when the
Kings colors should with a mighty army be discovered, there would appear
in a manner as many friends as enemies: Others, that were of a contrary
opinion, said, that this enterprise was worthy of great consideration, the
which they ought not rashly to undertake, for attempting it advisedly, it was
most assured; but going to it hastily, it were dangerous: They showed that the
Island was by nature very strong, by reason of uneasy landing, being of all
parts rough and inaccessible, but in some few places, which it was likely they
would fortify and guard: They said, that the garrisons of strangers which
they understood were there, were they never so few, with the inhabitants of
the Island, were sufficient to hinder their landing: They made great reckoning
of the roughnes of the sea, the which commonly suffers not any ships to ride
there above two months in the year, concluding it was better defer it, then
attempt it in vain, as they had twice done with small honor: They said, that
the assurance of the enterprise consisted in delay, for that the Island should
be neither stronger nor better furnished then it was at that instant, seeing
their strength is by nature, and that a great garrison cannot long live there;
that by delaying, the inhabitants themselves will be advised, for (besides the
insolency of the French) wanting their traffic with Spain, they should
grow so poor, as they will soon acknowledge their errors: That the ships
from the Indies made so small stay at the Islands, as they had no need of them,
but only to take in fresh water, wherewith they may furnish themselves at
Saint Michaels. These reasons held the Catholic king in suspense, and for
that he was a friend to peace, he inclined to delay: but as the news from
France, Flaunders, and England, did vary, so did they hasten or slack the
preparation for the enterprise.

The Catholic King arms in all places and the cause.
In this sort, and with no small trouble of mind, the three first months in
the year 1582. passed away, but having intelligence at the spring, that they
did arm many ships, both in France, Flaunders, and England, and that they
were meant for Portugal; that the Turk (notwithstanding his war against the
Sophy) threatened to send forth his galleies; that certain troops of foot
were come out of France unto the Marquisat of Salusses; the King thought it
expedient to arm, both to perform this enterprise of the Islands, as for the
guarde of many places, where he might be endomaged: He thought it a hard thing,
and unworthy, to suffer the states of the Low Countries, to be wrested from
him by the Duke of Alancon, without revenge: He did foresee that the charge
would be very great, and that he was furnished with little money, and less
credit; for by means of the decree he had made against the merchants, he was
cause of more hurt to himself, then to his creditors. The provisions it
behooued him to make were all forced, for he could not do less then provide
for Italy, as well in regard of the French as of the Turk: He must of force
entertain an army in Portugal, for although the Realm were in show quiet,
yet the Portugals being of a stirring humor, he could not avoid to arm a
navy sufficient to encounter the Fleet: He thought it necessary to provide
for Flanders, if not wholly to recover those estates, yet for fear he should
loose more. But that which troubled the King more then all the rest, was the
ships which he expected this year from the Indies, and Newfound lands;
fearing that the French having the advantage of the Islands, might spoil them,
finding that some Pirat had not only passed into that sea, but also threatened
to assail the Island of Saint Michael, and that of the Maderes: And The kings
order in preparing.
therefore the King began to prevent all these dangers in this manner. He
mustred all the foot he could in Spain, and caused them to march toward
Portugal, especially to the Province betwixt Doro and Minio, to the government
whereof he sent Ferrant de Toledo, Prior of Saint Iean: He sent the Marquess
of Saint Croixe to Seuille to arm all the great ships he could, and to
prepare some galleies: In Biscay he commanded eighteen Biscaine ships to be
furnished, to make their randeuous in Andelouzie, where they prepared their
galleies, and built a good number of great boats to land their soldiers: He
wrote into Italy to the Viceroy of Naples, and to the Governor of Millaine,
that either of them should levy 6000. Italian foot: He gave order in Germany
to bring down 10000. Germans under color to send these two nations into
Flaunders: And for to be assured of the Island of Saint Michael, although that
Ambrose d'Aguiar were there with one Galeon, he sent thither Peter Peixotto
with five other ships, who arrived there in good time; for certain French
Pirates were assembled to assail it, the which they did not forbear to
attempt, for Peixotto with his ships lying at anchor, before the city of punta
Delgada, three French ships leaving other six behind showed themselves,
supposing that with his five ships he would not fail to fight with them three,
and as he should retire the other six coming to succor them, they might
conquer them, and after this victory Peixotto sent to Saint Michaels, fought
with by certain French ships.
assail the Island being weak and unarmed: But this devise succeeded not for
Peixotto (who desired not to fight, but to preserve the Island all he could)
would not come forth against those three French ships, the which he forbear
the rather, for that the other six ships which remained behind, discovered
themselves, so as the Frenchmen finding they could not deceive the Portugals,
and their ambush (as one may say) being discovered, being loath to retire
without some booty, they resolved to charge Peixotto as he lay at anchor: But
the wind grew scant to approach to land, and the artillery from a certain
weak forte, would not suffer them to join: But the Captains ship, being of
better sail then the rest, drew so near, that he grappled with a Portugal,
where they fought above three hours, with great slaughter on both sides; but
the French had been victors, if Ambrose d'Aguiar who was at land, foreseeing
that the loss of the ships would be the overthrow of the Island, had not
succored Peixotto by boats, sending him above an hundred and fifty men, with
the which he defended himself, and the French ship, unloosing itself,
retired to the rest, worse handeled then the Portugal; but it was supposed
that if the wind had been any thing stronger, so as the other French ships
might have come up to the Portugals, they had been taken in the view of all
the Island. And for that soon after there arrived eighteen Biscaine ships at
Lisbone, which the king had commanded should be armed in that Province; he
sent four of them with six hundredth men, for the assurance of that Island, the
which arrived soon after the departure of the French. Summer was now come,
and there was still news from France, that they made greater preparation for
war, arming many ships in all their ports at the instance of Anthony The
Catholic kings affairs went slowlier forwards then the importance of the
cause required, for that it seemed the Spaniards were not yet well assured,
whether the French would turn against Portugal, and not go to the Islands;
yea, some believed, that making show to do so, they would take their course
for Flaunders, seeming more to importe wholly to assure those countries, and to
expel the Catholic Kings forces, then to undertake an other enterprise of
greater difficulty: And the assurance of this opinion did help the Fren^ch,
for it did divert or at the least divided the Spanish forces, and was cause
that in Spain they prepared not their armies with such expedition as was
convenient: But having after assured intelligence, that the French prepared to
encounter the ships that came from the Indies, and the new found lands, the
provision for Flaunders went slowly forward in Italy: And in Spain they made
greater haste of their navy, for the which there was want of sailers, and
other necessaries, yet with some trouble they had prepared in Andelouzia about
twenty ships and twelve galleies. The Marquess was returned to Lisbone,
giving The Marquess of Saint Cruze embarkes for the Terceres.
order to the navy to go to Cape Saint Vincent, and there to attend their
charge: At his arrival he found within the river of Tagus twenty other ships
ill appointed, comprehending the Biscaines and some Flemmings, hired in a
manner by force, where having shipped six thousand Spanish foot, under Lopo
de Figueroa, the Marquess embarked with many noble men, Ferrant of Toledo,
going as a private soldier, with some other gentlemen. This was not the kings
first intention, being resolved to assemble the body of his army in
Andelouzia, whither the ships of Biscay at their departure had commandment to
repair: but in sailing, being come to Lisbone, and having hired some others
with the gallions of Portugal, the king supposed the greatest number was
there, and that he should spend time to cause one part of the army to go
seek the other; supposing they should meet, he commanded both the one and
the other to sail toward Portugal, as they did, laboring to join by the
way: And although all this was slowly executed, yet had it bin more, if the
king by his own presence had not hastened their departure, the which was not
before the x. of July, in the year 1582. so slow are the Spaniards by nature
in the execution of their business: At that time the French army departed
with Anthony, and all his followers, being in number above threescore and ten
sail, and seven thousand foot, whereof Philip Strozzi and Mounsieur de
Brisack were commanders.

THE NINTH BOOK.
The Contents of the ninth Book.
The description of the Jland of Saint Michael: The arrival of the French
army there: The arrival of the Spanish army: The battle at sea: The death
of Philip Strozzi, and of the Count of Vimioso: The voyage of Anthony to the
Terceres, and his manner of proceeding: The sentence of the Marquess against
the prisoners, and his execution: The death of the Duke of Alua, and his
praises: The new estates where Prince Philip was sworn, by reason of the death
of Prince Diego: And how the Cardinal Archduke of Austria was made Governor
of Portugal.

The hopes of the French army at sea with Strozzi.
Whilst the French and Spanish armies sailed toward the Terceres, both
Courts were in suspense, and in diverse hopes of success: but in France they
conceived more assurance then in Portugal; for the French not esteeming the
Spanish forces, held themselves superiors, in number both of ships and men,
and having the Islands at their devotion, they stood assured that their army
should both spoil the Indian fleet, sack the Island of Saint Michael, and
overcome the enemies army, if they joined with them: And they relied so much
thereon, that extending their hopes farther, furthered by the promises of
Anthony, and of what he said, that he had followers in Portugal, they hoped to
approach the realm, and to put men on land, and to arm the unarmed Portugals;
for which cause they carried great quantity of arms, and to set so firm a
footing upon the maine land, as they should easily maintain themselves, so as
with this intention many Noble men and gentlemen embarked with the Army, both
for that the French are easy to move, as also herein The hopes of the Court
of Spain touching the Army at sea.
to please the Queen mother. In the Court of Spain, their thoughts were not
all so conformeable, nor so joyful; for the Portugals, being now as contrary
in their humors to the Castillians, as they had been ever, making hope equal
to their own desires, seeing the affairs now in equal balance, many wished
they should make no resistance, and many expected the coming of Anthony: The
rest of the Portugals, more content with the present state of the Castillians,
showed great hope the wars should now end, saying they were assured, they
should defeat this Army, take Anthony prisoner, and either by love or force
subdue the Islands; yet inwardly they were not well satisfied: For seeing their
armies divided, without hope to join, it seemed unto the wisest the victory
was not so assured as some supposed, and that the Spaniards by giving battle
should hazard to lose much and win little, and contrariwise the French to
win much and loose little; for that the greatest mischief that could seem
to happen to the enemies, was the defeating of the Army, and taking the
Islands from their obedience, which things although they shoud all happen, yet
were they not of any great moment to France; but if contrariwise the Spanish
Army should be defeated, their loss would be equal to the French; for
besides the ships, they should with all lose with the Island of Saint Michaell,
the hope to recover the rest, the Indian Fleet withal their treasure should
serve as a Pray to the French, and the realm should be still in doubt, subject
to all those inconveniences, which so great a loss should bring with it,
chiefly unto a realm newly conquered. This fear was augmented, for that their
Army, which consisted of good ships, and was manned with good soldiers, was
notwithstanding unprovided of mariners, and wild fires, whereof some were
drawn by force, and the Marquis himself went with small contentment, not for
that he feared, but having been at his departure, somewhat discountenanced by
the King, blaming him to have been too slack in the dispatch of the Army;
besides going, in Flemmish ships, and with Germane soldiers, little acquainted
with the sea, increased these doubts: yet outwardly these men showed a great
confidence, grounding the rests of their hopes, upon the quality of the
Spanish soldiers, and the greatness of their ships. Many woondred how the
words of Anthony could so prevail in France, as in a manner to move all that
Court to undertake his protection, with so great vehemency as they had done,
not showing any pretention he had unto the Crown, having no great hope to make
him Lord, nor to employ such forces as he pretended to have, seeing, that such
as favored him were kept under in Portugal with great garrisons: And this
readiness of the French, seemed to them the greater, for that before they had
showed themselves more slack to succor the Portugals against the Castillians,
when as they had a fitter occasion and a more grounded hope of good success,
then now they could have; for in the year of our Lord 1466. Alphonse the fifth
King of Portugal, going into France to demand succors of Lewis the eleventh,
for the wars which he had against the Catholic King Ferdinand, he obtained
nothing at all, but having spent some time in vain returned home in despair.
But laying aside all old examples, it seems that if the French should have
risen in favor of Anthony, either to aid him sincerely, or to use him as an
instrument, to set footing in Portugal, they might have done it with better
means in the year 1580. when possibly they might have disquieted Philip in
taking of possession, or at the least kept him that year from passing the
river of Tagus; so as it seemed strange to see France send forth so great an
Army out of season, in favor of Anthony a fugitive: But the estate of worldly
affairs considered, it seems there are new reasons, whereby the French should
be more easily induced then they had been then; for to have a brother to the
King of Frannce, in a manner to possess the states of Flaunders, and the
Queen mother to pretend to the inheritance of the Realm of Portugal, and to
be moved against Philip, were all subjects to draw the French ready against
this Realm, and divert the Spanish forces.

The arrival of the French ar
In this while the French army arrived at the Island of Saint Michaell the
fifteen of July before the Spanish, and drawing near the village of Laguna
there they cast anchor, and landed about two mie at the Island of Saint
Michael, and the description thereof.
thousand foot. This Island has not above an hundred miles in circuit, it is
in form so long and narrow, that extending it self from East to West above
forty miles, it has not above twelve in breadth; that part which looks to
the South is most fertile, and best inhabited; for toward the North, except
one village which they call Riuiera the great, there are few dwellings. Upon
that part which is toward the South, beginning from the East, and at the Cape
which they call Morro, running toward the West, there are diverse habitations:
The first which is five and twenty miles from Morro, they call Villa Franca;
wherein there are five hundred houses: The second Acqua de Palo; the third
Laguna, all smally peopled: The fourth is the town which they call Punta
Delgada, greater then the rest, the which has upon the West a small Castle.
Betwixt these dwellings there run into the sea some promontories; the first
before you come to Villa Franca, is called Punta de Garza; the second La
Gallea, betwixt the said place and Acqua de Palo; betwixt Laguna, and the
city, there are two others, but less, that is Pugnette, and Test de Chien:
At the point of Pugnette, Or the dogs head.
toward Laguna, as I have said, the French landed, and having spoiled the
village, they marched on to seek for greater Pray.

The death of Ambrose D, Aguiar.
A little before Ambrose D' Aguiar, who had the place of Governor, was
deceased in the town, and although his wives son would have succeeded in the
Government, yet it seemed that Peter Peixotto, Captain of the five ships, was
amongst the Portugals of greatest authority; but Laurence Noghera, a man of
courage and valor, was Captain over the Spanish soldiers, in that which
concerned matters of war: All the inhabitants being fearful, had already
transported their wives and goods unto the mountains, and having discovered
the Army, this fear increasing, the town remained empty of all things. The
chief being assembled in counsel, they resolved to run their ships on
ground, that the enemy might have no use of them, and go to field with their
Spanish soldiers, with the Biscayne marrines, and such Portugals as would go;
the which was not fully executed, for the Biscaines would not suffer their
ships to be broken; and Peter Peixotto was unwilling to have his men defeated;
yet the soldiers put themselves in order to march against the French, led by
Noghera and Peixotto: They had gathered together above two thousand Portugals,
who with the Castillian soldiers and Biscaine mariners, made near three
thousand: but Laurence Noghera being doubtful of the Portugals, before their
departure exhorted them with mild words to fight; making show of fear that
they would abandon him; but they made answer, offering themselves with such
willingness, and courage, as he hoped to prevail, and therefore issuing forth
against the enemy, he hoped to force them to retire.

The French drew near unto him, but having intelligence by their auant
courrers, they resolved before they approached nearer to leave the right way,
and go to the city and castle without fighting, hoping to find all
unfurnished: for this cause having left the sea shore, they went more to land,
which being known to Noghera, altering his course he went to encounter them:
The skirmish being The first encounter of the French.
begun, when as the captain hoped to use his men, he saw his Portugals fly,
so as being unable with his Castillians and Biscaines, to withstand so great a
force of the enemy, he retired himself to the castle being wounded, with the
loss of some of his men, where soon after he died; the remainder being in
hope (amongst the which the Bishop Peter de Castiglia behaved himself wisely)
to be able to defend themselves, although they had more hope in the coming of
the Catholic army, then in their forces: Peter Peixotto although he were in
credit amongst them, yet fearing that all was lost, stealing forth by night
with a carauell, he went to Lisbone, to advertise the Marquess; but it was
not his hap to meet him; yet was he for all this being a Portugal, favored
of the king: There appeered at this time, amongst the Islands, one of the Indian
ships, very rich; yet the French were not so happy as to meet with it,
although it sailed almost in view of the Terceres, for having intelligence by
a French ship of the occurrents of those parts, he left his right course and
went to Cape Saint Vincent, and from thence to Lisbone in safety.

The news of these things which Peixotto brought to Lisbone, did more confirm
the hopes of the Anthonians, then trouble the Castillians, or their followers;
for those varied in their thoughts upon every small event; and to those who
were more settled, it seemed, that hitherto the French had not only done any
thing of importance, but contrary to that which good soldiers ought to do,
they had assailed this Island: For that it seemed their principal intention
being to seize upon the Indian fleet, or to cause a tumult within the realm,
they should not busy themselves, and spend time in any other action, with
small hope of gain: for that the Island being weak, and the town without
walls, it was apparent, that to be masters thereof with trouble, were to labor
in vain; for although they did subdue it, yet the weakness and facility of
landing will always force them to obey whom soever should be master at sea:
besides they were in danger, the Spanish fleet arriving, whilst they were
troubled on land, their army found at anchor, might easily be defeated; yet
the French seemed little to fear it, for that they remained long careless at
land, at what time Anthony was lodged in the covent of Saint Rock near unto
the army, laboring both by words and threatening to have the forte, and being
after come to the town, he wrote generally to all that were within, requiring
them to consigne it into his hands, as his own, offering to suffer them to
depart freely; but having no answer conformable to his desires, he caused some
pieces of artillery to be landed from the ships to batter it; but there
followed no effect, for the Spanish army arrived.

The arrival of the Spanish army at the Islands.
Which having sailed eleven days with variety of weather, having discovered
the Island not being joined with the ships and galleies, which were parted from
Andelouzia, but only the number which came from Lisbone, whereof there
remained four ships and some carauels behind, three of them (let with the
tides) could not get out of the river of Tagus with the rest, and the fourth
returned back upon a great leake, so as the Army consisted but of eight and
twenty ships; for although the other three got forth the next day, yet they
arrived not with the rest at Saint Michaels, but before them, where having
intelligence of the French, they went to sea, without joining afterward with
the army: The first place the Marquis discovered was Le Morro the one and
twentieth day of July, and arrived the two and twentieth at Villa Franche,
without having any intelligence of the French Army: In this arrival the
Spaniards had some disadvantage, for that the enemies lying close to the land
with their ships, and in a manner covered, saw them come a far off without
being discovered by them. The day before the Marquis had sent forth Captain
Aguirre with two carauelles armed to discover, with instructions what course he
should take, if he found the enemy, to whom he delivered letters for Ambrose
D'Aguiar, of whose death he was ignorant, whereby he did advertise him of the
coming of the army, of the number of men and ships he had, and how he did
howerly expect the ships and galleies prepared in Andelouzia, demanding news
of the French army; if it were passed, with how many sail, and for what
place; saying, that his intention was to fight with them, and therefore he
should will Peter Peixotto prepare himself with his ships to follow him. As
the Marquis had cast anchor under Villa Franca, one of the three carauels,
which had stayed behind and after passed them, being laden with horses came
unto the Captains ship, assuring them, that the three ships which had remained
within the river of Tagus, were arrived two days before at the Island, and
were returned back, and that certain French ships had taken two other
carauels laden with horses, and that they did hardly escape them. But the
Marquis gave no trust unto their words, although the French army were there;
he sent other men to land, to learn the truth, who returned soon without
knowing any certainty, for that their approach to land being defended, they
had contrary reports made unto them: Notwithstanding the Marquis did still see
more apparent signs of the disobedience of the Island, especially upon the
return of one of the caruels of Captain Aguirre, the which reported that the
said Captain with the other had been taken by a French ship: for this cause
the Marquis called Lopo de Figueroa Marshall of the field to council, where
they resolved betwixt them to land some men, both to take in fresh water, to
have certain intelligence of the affairs, and to approach with the army to
some more convenient place for that effect. But they remained not long in these
doubts, for they had no sooner appointed some to discover some better anchoring
place, the army being under sail, they began to discover toward the town
certain ships, the which increasing still in number came against them, judging
what it was, as in truth it was the enemy, laying aside what they had treated
of, having assembled Peter of Toledo, the marshall of the Camp general, the
Marquis of Fauara, Peter Taxis Commissarie general, Frauncis Bouadiglia
Marshall of the field, and some other gentlemen and Captains, they called a
new council, where it was propounded, The Marquis resolves to fight.
whether they should fight or take any other party. The Castillian army had
no place of retreat, to return back they could not, without great danger, to
get the wind of the French there was no means, for with their lighter
ships, and easier to turn into the wind, they might chase, fly, fight, and
retire themselves from fight at their pleasure: So as the Spanish Captains
framing their opinions according to the necessity, the matters standing so as
the free election remained not in them, resolved to fight: Anthony having (by
the letters, which the Marquis had written to Ambrose d'Aguiar, taken in the
carauel with Aguirre) intelligence what forces they had, and what they
expected, and with all of his intention, for this cause he had resolved with
Strozzi, Brissac, and the Count Vimioso, that it was fittest to fight with
this army, consisting of so small a number of ships* before the other part
which they expected should arrive; and therefore having imbarqued with all
possible speed, they came in battle against the Marquis, having first labored
but in vain to take the Castle by new threatenings. Then did the Marquis The
Marquis order for his battle.
appoint what order he would have the army keep in the fight: Upon the right
side of his gallion called S. Martin, he placed that of Saint Matthew, wherein
was Lopo de Figueroa; and on the left, that of Frauncis Bouadiglia with four
other ships of succor, all the rest were put in order, only Christopher
d'Erasso remained behind, with a great ship of importance, for that having his
mast a little crased, he durst not use any force; so as the Marquis had but
seven and twenty ships, in all the which, especially in the two gallions they
gave very good order for the fight: For having divided the soldiers into
their ranks, and appointed diverse commanders, they provided not only for all
necessities, but also for any thing that could chance with great judgment;
but it was in vain, for at that time the armies came not near one another, by
seven or eight miles, both for that the wind was scant, as also for that the
night approached; so as after the Marquis had discharged a piece of artillery
as it were in sign of Battle; the French bent toward the city, and the
Catholic army turned to sea, not having any intelligence of what had passed
at land, neither should he have had it so soon by any other means, if the
same night John de Castillio, who had succeeded Laurence Noghero in the
castle, had not advertised the Marquis what had happened in the Island, and
assured him that the fortress held yet, both to the end he should have care
to succor it, and to have succor from thence if need were: For this cause he
sent by night one of the patrons of the Biscaine ships in a boat with his
letters, aduertising him of all the success since the arrival of Anthony,
until that time. He said that the enemies army consisted of eight and fifty
sail, whereof eight and twenty were great ships, with six thousand
fighting men, that if the Catholic army were not strong enough to encounter
them, he should retire under the fortress, where the one might succor the
other: The Marquis made answer unto him by the same messenger, that he should
be of good courage, that his Majesty's army was strong enough to vanquish the
enemy, as he hoped to do the next day: So as the morning being come, the
French came with great joy to encounter the Spaniards, who for that effect had
put themselves again in battle, but although the French had both wind and sun
favorable unto the^, yet the calm was so great as they could hardly approach;
so as the two armies continued one against the other until the afternoon, when
as the wind growing somewhat stronger, the French began to make show to charge
the Spaniards: But seeing them in order without any show of fear, they did not
effect it, but continued until night, sailing equally toward the Island of
Saint Marie, fifty miles from that of Saint Michael toward the south,
sometimes upon one board, sometimes upon another, the French making often show
to join with them, being in their power to do it, the wind being favorable
to them, and contrary to the Spaniards: But night being come, the French
resolving in any sort to fight, the day following they sent ten ships along
the I Will, with intent to follow the enemies army, and to charge them in the
dawning of the day on both sides, but the wind grew calm and they could not
sail. The day following, which was the four and twentieth, the Spaniards
likewise desired to fight, although it seemed with some disadvantage, wanting
that part of their army, which was prepared in Andelouzia; yet they grieved to
have their enemies before them not being able either to fly or fight but when
they pleased, the which increased their desire, and thinking it would so fall
out by changing of their sails from one side to another, imagining the French
would also follow the like advantage: but although the enemy did then make
more apparent show to charge them, then before; yet nothing followed, but only
the general ships, with others that were nearest unto them on both sides,
spent many volleies of great shot, whereby the French had greatest loss by one
of their ships which sunk presently: Having spent the whole day in this sort
toward the evening, the Marquis, to try if he could get the wind,
commanded all his fleet, upon the nights approach, should turn toward the
Island of Saint Michaell, to get the wind of the enemy, giving them to
understand that the Admiral ship that night (least the enemy should discover
their intent) should not carry his ordinary light, but about midnight
discharge a cannon, to draw the rest of the ships near unto him: This order
was given, and duly The Marquis gets the wind of the French army.
observed, by all the fleet except two Easterlings, who not being advertised
by the negligence of him that had the charge, strayed so far from the fleet,
that having lost the sight they could not recover it, and having within them
four hundred German soldiers; it seemed this army decreased daily both in
number of ships and men: And for that the wind grew somewhat high, the Marquis
thought it convenient after midnight having discharged his cannon, to hang out
his lantern as he did, the which succeeded well, for the getting the wind of
the enemy: yet this devise prevailed little, for upon the break of the day,
it was the feast of Saint James the Apostle the five and twentieth of the
month, whom the Spaniards call upon in their battles; they discovered the
French army scattered a far off, as well to succor the ship that did
sink, as also to repair some other hurts received the day before by their
cannon: But some affirm that the French would not willingly fight upon this
Saints day: And although the Spaniards might well have charged them, yet did
they forbear, for that the ship of Christopher D'Erasso which had his mast
crased struck sails, and discharged a piece; so as finding that it was wholly
broke, they were enforced to enuiron her with the army, least in this danger
she should be set upon, whereby the French recovered the wind they had lost:
and the ship of D' Erasso being repaired, so as they might carry half their
sale, the Marquis having tied her with a cable towed her at his stern, and so
this day passed without any other effect, but spending of some great shot.

The French disagree.
These shows of fight, which the French had so often made, were not altogether
counterfeit, for although the first time, and peradventure the second, they did
it only to sound the enemies disposition; yet after they resolved to fight,
but their opinions were not so conformeable in this Army, as in the Spanish;
for although Philip Strozzi, Brisack, the Count of Vimioso, and some others
desired to join, yet many were loath to see it; and therefore seeing the
Admirals ship not to begin the fight, the rest did not force of it: Strozzi and
the Earl, who were both in one ship, were more willing then all the rest, yet
had they not charged the enemy; for that the ship wherein they were
embarked, was a worse sailour, then many others: For this cause being not able
to make such speed as they desired, they could not begin the battle, so as
their friends which were in other ships, supposed the fault to be in them, and
not in their ship, and that they might, if they had would: Which opinion was
furthered by the small desire they had to fight; the which Strozzi finding, he
resolved to change his ship, and to take an other of more speed; and
therefore having passed with the Earl and his men into that wherein was
Monsieur Beamont, marshall general of the camp, being of better sail, he
resolved therewith to charge the enemy; the which he did the day following,
being the xxvj. Saint Annes day: upon the dawning both armies being at calm
not above three miles the one from the other, and 20. miles The beginning of
the fight at sea.
from Saint Michaels, they sailed gently toward the Island, until the wind
growing somewhat fresh in favor of the French, toward noone both armies
approached, being not above ten miles from the Island: Being there set in
order, in the vangard of the French marched the general ship with Strozzi
and the Count of Vimioso; the admiral with Mounsieur Brisack accompanied with
three English ships, followed by all the rest of the fleet, some nearer, some
farther off: In the Spanish, the hulke wherein was Frauncis de Bouadilla, went
before the rest, there followed the gallion Saint Martin, wherein the Marquis
was, who towed after him the ship wherein was Christopher d' Erasso, then
followed that of Saint Matthew, wherein was Lopo de Figueroa, these went before
as a buckler to the rest of the fleet which followed. The French had divided
amongst them the Spanish ships, where with every one should grapple, but it
was a matter that could not succeed, for the wind, the sea, and the order
which had been so often altered, hindered that resolution: The gallion Saint
Matthew stayed somewhat behind, the which was cause it was first set upon, for
the captain and admiral of the French, with other three ships turning their
prooes upon her, went to charge her, and the captain with great dexterity to
avoid the shot, joined with them toward the prooe, and boorded the gallion
from the middle forward, leaving place for the rest to approach, the which
invested her round with a great stream of fire and shot: Lopo de Figueroa
being under their lee, not able to use his sails as he would, seeing such,
and so great ships come to charge him, stayed for them. There began a cruel
fight, their artillery did much harm, especially the Spanish, being the
biggest, so as two of the French ships being sorely beaten therewith, and with
their small shot, after some fight, fell upon the gallion, which remained
betwixt the captains ship the admiral and an other, who being succored with
fresh men in small boats from the other ships, troubled Figueroa much,
especially having his ship fired by the enemy in many parts: But being a
man of great valor, accompanied with expert soldiers, he made an honorable
defense, and with great resolution prevented all inconveniences. He remained in
this estate above two hours without any succor, at the end whereof, a
Biscaine ship of Peter Garagarza, wherein were two companies of Spanish
soldiers, drawing near, succored him much: The Marquis seeing in what danger
this gallion was, would gladly have succored it, but he could not so suddenly
perform it, as need required; for being forced to return back, and sail
directly against the wind, a matter impossible, but by turning on the right
and on the left to gain a little way, he feared in the mean time she should
be vanquished: Against the said gallion Saint Martin, wherein the Marquis was
when as the Saint Matthew was charged, there came likewise two great French
ships, but they were so beaten with the cannon from the said gallion, and from
the ship wherein Frauncis de Bouadilla was near unto the captain, that one of
the enemies ships was like to sink, and so passed on, so as the Marquis being
freed, he caused all the army to turn toward the gallion Saint Matthew, and
with all possible speed drew near unto him; upon the turning of the army
the areergard fell to be vangard, as it happens in the like case, so as the
ships of Michael d'Oquendo, of captain Villauiciosa, and an other Biscaine,
which were the first to succor him, remained in the front, and all three
invested the French admiral, who being ill entreated in this cruel fight,
fell from the gallion Saint Matthew. Another ship, wherein was Michael de
Benesa, passed on forward, and valiantly grapled with the French captain on
the outside, so as the gallion Saint Martin wherein the Marquis was, could not
approach near any one of the enemies chief ships, being environed with his
friends, so as he was forced to turn about and pass on: The French admiral
defended himself with great courage against the three ships; that of
Villauiciosa which fought in the prooe, did end omage him greatly, but the
captain thereof was slain; that of Oquendo which fought in the stern had
boorded her, with his men taken prisoners and ensigns, and began to spoil:
But the captain finding that his ship by reason of a shot, was in danger
of sinking, fell from her to repair her leake, so as being in a manner freed
from the enemy, he took his Mounsier Brisac flies.
course toward Saint Michael, yet he could not get thither, but sunk by the
way, being spoiled by the artillery; and Mounsieur Brisac saved himself in a
small boat: But these two armies did not so join as it was expected; for that
the French army, although they had a full wind, yet would they not willingly
grapple with the Spaniards as they might have done; but many of them stood
idle, discharging only their great shot: And although some of them labored to
board Frauncis de Bouadilla, and Christopher d' Erasso, yet the artillery kept
them off, so as they durst not approach: A Biscaine ship wherein were
captains Michael de Cardona, and Peter Pardo, boorded a French man, which was
fallen from the S. Matthew, and forced her to yield, being already weak, having
spoiled and abandoned it, she after fled: Captain Villauiciosa the elder*
with his ship wherein was the company of Jews de Gueuara, boorded an other,
and after a long fight vngrapled herself, and one or two ships more boorded
her, and the rest fought passing only by, and discharging their artillery.
The gallion Saint Matthew made a great resistance, two of those ships which had
fallen from her, battered with the cannon, sunk; and although the general of
the French were succored with many men, yet was he so beaten, that they within
began to yield, but for that there were many Spaniards dead, and many hurt, so
as there remained within the gallion not above seventy able men to fight, Lopo
de Figueroa would not suffer them to enter, and make the victory absolute, the
which the French finding, and receiving presently a new supply of three hundred
men, they vngrapled hoping to save themselves: But the Marquis who stood upon
his guarde, sailing first on one side, and then on another, pressing the enemy
with his artillery and small shot, when he saw his ship fall off, he charged
her, and so did another Biscaine ship on the other side, wherein was Captain
Bastida and John de Viuero; but the fight continued not above one hour, at the
end whereof the Spanish general became Master of the enemies ship with the
loss of above 300. French: there found they Philip Strozzi, whom presently The
death of Strozzi and of the Count Vimioso.
they transported into the Marquis gallion, but being wounded to the death, he
died presently, without speech, to the great grief of all valiantmen: The
Count of Vimioso was taken prisoner by Coronell Mondenaro an Italian
aduenturer, but being wounded unto the death, he lived only two days,
embraced by the Marquis as if he had been his kinsman. Such was the end of
Frauncis of Portugal Count of Vimioso, more honorable then any one of those
which had followed Anthony unto this day: He was young, endued with good
parts, both of body and mind, if they had not been accompanied with a
certain childish vanity, which made him thus obstinate; besides such as knew
him lamented his death, being by nature amiable: There found they also with no
small admiration fourscore gentlemen, whereof thirty were Lords and had their
subjects, with many other persons in number above three hundred: The fight had
continued five hours, when as the French seeing their general yielded, their
Admiral lost, two others sunk, and many broken with artillery, they began to
fly; but the Marquis, by reason of the night, pursued them not, fearing for
that they were better sailers he should not board them, and being separated he
should be forced to divide his army, the which he would not willingly do;
besides he should be constrained to leave the gallion Saint Matthew behind him
in danger, being unable to sail without tackling, sails and anchors, the
which the enemy had burnt and thrown into the sea: There was one thing
worthy the observation, that being within this gallion a Priest called John
de Iaem Chaplein unto the Marshall of the field, a man which had seen Apriest
dies for fear.
the wars, during the fight being under the lowest deck of the gallion, when
he saw so much wild fire cast by the French, hearing their shot, and finding
the hurt the cannon did, he died, only of fear and amasement, having
received no wound: The Spaniards recovered one of their carauels with horse
which had been taken, and had taken more of their French ships, if they could
have manned them with mariners to conduct them; but for this cause the Admiral
(which was cast away) abandoned, and some others torn and abandoned by the
French were not kept; for this consideration the Marquis burnt two, which had
been abandoned and some The number of the dead in the battle.
others ran upon the Island: In this battle the French lost seven or eight of
their best ships, and there died in the fight above two thousand of their men,
with many hurt; as for the Spaniards there died about two hundred, and above
five hundred wounded: The Portugals, pertisants unto Anthony, say, that the
French fought not at all, for that the Captains were corrupted by King Philip,
and Edward de Castro beheaded by Anthony.
this opinion increased, for that after Anthony caused Edward d' Castro to
lose his head in the Island, supposing him to be the means thereof, but they
were deceived; for although that Castro had promised many things unto the Kings
ministers, when as they delivered him out of prison, whereunto he was
committed when they took him flying out of Portugal, yet could he never
effect any; but the cause of his death was for certain practices begun after
this defeat, and for that he had committed murder upon the person of Anthony
Baraccio a dear friend unto the said Prior, and one of them that had
proclaimed him King. Behold the issue of the sea fight, at the Islands, which
possibly is one of the greatest that ever happened within the bounds of the
Ocean; for although in the Low Countries there has been like factions, in
these last wars, yet were they not truly within the Ocean, but in channels
and rivers near unto the Islands of Holland and Zealand, rather at land then at
sea. But the issue hereof besides the greatness of it was of more importance
then ever any: for besides that not only the Realm of Portugal by this
victory remained settled, but also all Spain; if the contrary had fallen
out, all had been full of confusion, for that the French, pursuing their
victory, might with these forces, their good fortune, the presence of Anthony,
and the inclination of the people, renew the war in a suspended kingdom,
more dangerous for the Spaniards then ever, seeing the great number of inexpert
Portugals united with so many French soldiers, might give them great hope of
happy success.

Anthony his voyage to the Terceres and his atchieuements there.
Anthony who remained in a small bark, light and well furnished, the day
before the battle, when as they had resolved to fight, although his whole
fortune depended in a manner on this day, not finding himself secure in this
place, retired with two other small barks to the Terceres, where in the city
of Angra, they had prepared for him a sumptuous entry, with arches, images,
and all triumphs, commonly used at the joyful coming of Princes: But
deuining, it may be the unhappy success, these preparations seemed out of
season; for having forborne to pass to a bridge of wood, which they had built
only for his coming, whereby he should enter the streets that were
garnished, he landed far from thence with small company and more sorrow then
joy: There did he howerly receive sundry news of the army, and by little and
little he understood the success thereof, with an incredible grief, the
which increased the more by the intelligence given him of the death of Strozzi,
and the Earl, and now caring for his safety, wavering in his thoughts, he
knew not how to behave himself in so rough an accident: for although he
relied much in the inhabitants of the Islands, and in the strength thereof,
seeming to be safe in this place, yet feared he least the Marquis pursuing his
victory, should assail him, and that his men having their hearts vanquished
with this loss, should not be able to make resistance; and therefore he
inclined rather to abandon then defend it: He was some what assured of this
fear upon the arrival of seventeen French and English ships to that place,
of those that had fled from the battle to repair their hurts received, to
cure their wounded men, and to take in water: with these men he thought
himself able to defend it, yet had they all but few soldiers, having in the
battle succored the Count of Brisack and Strozzi with all their men; yet
there arrived still more, for at that time there returned but eighteen French
ships into France, with Brisack, and five other English: Mounsieur de Lands,
captain of nine ships flying from the battle, went to Fayale, where his
soldiers began to spoil, and although it were not his meaning, but having
avoided the sack, retired to Angra, yet for this cause they would not suffer
him to enter, or else that Anthony doubted his safety.

The Marquis as it is said, the day being ended, resolving not to pursue the
enemy, he drew near to the Island of Saint Michael to repair his ships, to
look to his hurt men, and to water; but the wind being contrary would not
suffer him, keeping him three days off at sea, the fourth he drew near to
Villa Franca, where he landed his hurt men, and provided what he needed, the
inhabitants of all parts of the I Will having yielded their obedience. The first
of August Frauncis de Bouadilla landed with four companies of soldiers, in the
midst whereof upon the sea shore, he put all the French prisoners, leading
them to the market place of Villa Franca, The sentence of the Marquis against
the French prisoners.
unto a scaffolde built the height of a man, where with a loud voice was read
the sentence of the Marquis, whereby showing that the Catholic King having
peace with the most Christian King, against the said peace publicly sworn,
an army of many adventurers was come out of France in favor of Anthony Prior
of Crato, with an intent to take the Catholic Kings fleet, which he expected
from the Indies, and the new found lands, and to spoil the Islands, as they
had already done that of Saint Michaels; and that the same army having tried a
battle against his Majesty's, the French had been broken and overcome; in
the which being taken eight and twenty noblemen, and two and fifty gentlemen,
and many other mariners and soldiers, he declared them taken as enemies to
the quiet, and public good; disturbers of the traffike, and favorers of his
Majesty's rebels; that as such, and as public pirates he commanded the
Auditor general of the army, that for their chasticement, and for the example
of others, he should execute upon them the punishment of natural death,
beheading the Gentlemen, and hanging the rest, which passed the age of
seventeen years, being so convenient both for the service of God, and of the
two kings. This sentence seemed cruel to all such as heard it, and chiefly
unto the Spanish soldiers, both for that they feared the like The Spaniards
discontented with the sentence and the reason.
might happen unto the^ an other day; as also for that they would not lose the
profit which many expected by the ransom of the said prisoners; or else for
their own good inclination, so as some of the soldiers laying aside all
respect, said it was not well grounded, for that there was no firm and
inviolable peace betwixt the Catholic King and most Christian, but war, and
that those were neither pirates nor thieves, but valiant soldiers: That there
was no peace, they proved it by the wars of Flaunders, more hot then ever,
where the French did in a manner possess all the Catholic Kings patrimony:
And that they were no pirates, they proved by the letters patents they had from
the King, under the which the ships and soldiers were enrolled; besides, the
number and quality of these men were such, as it appeered clearly, they
would not have attempted it of themselves, if the king had not sent them: And
although betwixt the two crowns they dissembled many things, the Christian
King excusing himself sometimes upon his mother, sometimes upon his brother,
that they were all devises of Princes; but for all that, they were not without
open war, the laws whereof (they said) was not so stricte, as to command
them to hang all their prisoners. And this execution did so move the hearts of
many, The Spanish soldiers entreat for the French.
that some of the principal soldiers being assembled together, went (with a
commendable example) unto the Marquis to make intercession for the life of
their enemies, who answered, that the most Christian King had expressly
commanded, that all Frenchmen that should take arms against the Catholic
King, should be corporally punished; so as the same day these Gentlemen with a
general pity, and great severity were beheaded upon the scaffolde, and the
mariners and soldiers hanged in diverse places, and The French beheaded and
hanged.
the pity was the greater, being apparent that they were all not only
valiant soldiers, but Catholic and devout Christians: The blame of this
severe execution, was not imputed to the Marquis, supposing that he had
express commandment from the King, whom likewise they excused, for having so
determined, seeing it was not to be presumed that so many personages of
importance, should come with such an army and remain prisoners, especially
knowing that Philip by his own inclination was not cruel: yet on the other
side, they considered, that the King in his mind should have conceived a
cruel disdain against the French, seeing that under the shadow of amity,
peace and alliance, Kings writing daily one to the orher, greeuing and
rejoicing at their troubles and contents, did not only aid his rebels, but
also took his countries, and sent so great an army to endomage him: And
although that Princes do usually dissemble, and counterfeit in many things, yet
it seemed the French under a new kind of dissimulation, would make war,
whereby they did infer that this execution did nothing displease the King.
The army being a little repaired here, the Marquis went to the I Will of Coruo to
meet with the Indian fleet, and having past in view of the city of Angra, he
put Anthony and all the people into confusion: for although the Marquis
content with the victory, would not thrust himself into a new danger; yet
Anthony doubted that in the heat of the victory, he would pursue and assail
the Island; in the which although he had men enough both of the nation, and of
the French, yet were they fearful and disordered; and Anthony himself at the
same time provided a light ship to imbarke if need were. These news came
slowly to Lisbone, for the which they were in great care, having news of the
fight, by the means of a A kind of small ship.
Zabra of Biscay, but a French ship which had been sore beaten by the gallion
Saint Matthew, being fled from the battle, gave assurance of the event; for
being arrived disguised at Settuual, he was discovered, finding within her
some Spanish soldiers dead; in the bosom of one of them was written all that
had passed in the army, since their departure from Lisbone until the time
that he was slain: The Marquis attended long about the Islands for the Indian
fleet, whereof two being arrived, the seas growing high he came with them to
Lisbone, to the great joy of all the court, where The carriage of Anthony
after the sea fight.
he was extraordinarily favored by the King.

Anthony after the Marquis his departure remained more quiet in mind,
supposing that for one whole year he need not fear any enemy: He greatly
grieved for the death of the French prisoners, fearing it would prejudice his
cause in France: But Emanuel de Silua pressed him to revenge in hanging about
fifty or threescore Castillians, which were there taken prisoners at diverse
times, the which he would not suffer, being better inclined: He was ill
furnished with money, although he had great store of arms and munition: For
this consideration he daily (all by the invention of the said Silua) made
rigorous commandments to draw money from the people, and from such as did not
follow him willingly: He caused gold to be coined, which he valued at five and
twenty roials, although it weied but eight: He made testons of silver,
weighing a royal and a half, the which he made current for half a duckat;
and the copper money which was worth three in Portugal, he valued at ten:
And for that many were retired to the mountains, to be free from troubles
within the city, he commanded every one to return, and if any deferred his
coming longer then the time limited by his commandment, they presently
seized his goods: Many for fear of the soldiers had carried and hidden their
goods without the city, and therefore he commanded every one to bring them
back again, whereby he gained much; for he demanded a loan of money of such
as came and brought it back; and if any one obeyed not, he sent Soldiers to
search their goods, and to spoil them, with a thousand indignities: It was a
lamentable thing to see how the Church causes were handled, for the religious
men (except the Jesuits) employed in military actions, retained nothing of a
priest, but the habit, and the name; as for sermons, confessions, and such like
things, they came from them, as from men which had not God before their eyes:
And Anthony himself during these afflictions, had not his mind free from
lasciuiousnes, for the women of honor could hardly be free from his lusts,
having too familiar access into the monastery of religious women: amongst
whom, as well as amongst the men reigned the passions of the affairs of the
Realm, with no small scandal and great disorder, and many of his, as also of
the French followed this his example. Anthony lived this kind of life until
the month of October, irresolute what to do: To go into France after the
loss of so great a number of the nobility, he held it not safe, neither knew
he how he should be looked on, for he feared as much the disdain of
particulars, as he hoped in the protection of the Queen mother. To remain
there, he saw it a thing not able long to subsist with so great garrisons, not
having wherewithal to pay the soldiers, nor in a manner how to furnish The
departure of Anthony for France.
his expenses: He resolved therefore with such ships as he had to depart for
France, but first would go toward the Madera, and the Island of Canarie,
that by spoiling of some weak places, he should content the soldiers with
some weak pray. For this cause having prepared about thirty sail, he not
only shipped his soldiers, but with a new devise he commanded all the
citizens which he suspected, and all religious persons affected to the
contrary party, as the Jesuits and others to imbarke, making this
commandment most rigorous to those that could least observe it, to the end
they should redeem this voyage with money: But all as unprofitable in sea
causes, excused themselves with lively reasons and entreaties; but it prevailed
nothing, making answer to the yoonger, that he had need of them for his
guarde, and to the old, for counsel; so as many sought to content him with
money as he desired, every one according to his ability, by means whereof
they were freede from his commandment. But this invention was soon
counter-checkt by another, for many desired to leave the Island and to imbarke,
not with intention to follow the army, but to sail into Spain: Some of the
Captains of the ships, understanding their minds, agreede with the
Portugals, not to deliver any money to Anthony for their stay in the Island,
but paying them the like sum and much less, they would land them in
Portugal, so as many trusting to the French, and English, not paying any thing
to Anthony, embarked with them, agreeing for a certain sum to be set on
Emanuell de Silua stays at the Terceres.
land. Anthony departed with this army from the Terceres, leaving Emanuel de
Silua in his place, with five hundred Frenchmen under the charge of Baptiste
Florentin, and Charles a French man their Captains: He arrived at the Island of
Saint Michael, where having stayed long thereabouts, fearing the Spanish
garrison there, he durst not land, being forced to leave it by a storm that
rose: Then some of his English and French ships, left him, keeping promise with
the Portugals, that were embarked with them. In the mean time they had news
in France of the defeat of the army, and the death of so many prisoners,
which caused both in court, and throughout the The French displeased at their
overthrow.
Realm a great grief and disdain, and enflamed the French to revenge, and as
they had Flaunders near, and matters in that estate (as has been said) there
they discharged their choler; neither did they forbear, after the return of
Anthony to treat of a new preparation, of an army at sea for the summer
following.

It was given out in Spain, that the faction of Anthony and the French against
Portugal, was dashed; and that they had weakened their forces, yet did they not
dismiss their hired ships: At that time two galliasses being arrived from
Naples, it seemed the king would assemble a great army for the next year, and
make himself absolute Lord of the Ocean, both in respect of the affairs of
Anthony, as to assure his ships, from the Indies, and new found lands, from
the French and English, and to force the Island. The Catholic King desired to
return into Castill, both for that he was called by The amplification of
pardon toward the Portugals.
the states of Arragon, and to finish the marriage of his daughter with the
Emperor; as also for other business of the realm, and was upon the point to
effect it, in November 1582. but he would first extend his pardon granted at
Tomar to such as had followed Anthony: For this cause having excepted the
religious persons and ten others, he pardoned freely all the rest that
should present themselves within a certain time; but this wrought no effect,
for there came few, and many said, that the King being yet displeased, could
not make a free pardon. This departure was after stayed by the news of the
death of Diego his eldest son, who as he had been sworn Prince of
Portugal, at the estates of Tomar, he would likewise that the same oath
should be made in the person of Philip his second son being then sick. And
for that he had no other issue male, the succession masculine of these Realms
remaining in the breath of one only, together with the kings age, and the
disposition of the affairs of the world, both the quiet and seditious were in
care: But for the swearing of him he assembled the estates at Lisbone, in the
month of February, resolute to accomplish this ceremony before his departure.

At that time the Duke of Alua (consumed with a continual fever) died, in the
palace of Lisbone, in the Kings own quarter, being of the age of threescore
and fourteen years. During his sickness The death of Duke of Alua and his
commendation.
he was greatly favored of the King, who did visit him a little before his
death: There is no doubt but the King apprehended the loss of such a servant,
which bred no less coffeehouse in him, then pleasing to his enemies: But
the Portugals observed, that the day following he went publicly to mass,
without any show of discontent, contrary to the custom of their kings, who
upon the death of men of less quality (having done any notable services to
the crown) retired themselves for a time; the which seemed the more strange,
for that King Emanuel upon the death of a notable Pilote withdrew himself
three days: But the actions of great Princes, are so subject to the censure of
the vulgar, as the wisest minister matter of discourse to the curious and
malicious to slander them. With him died (as a man may say) all the warlike
discipline of Spain, for there remained not any one captain equal unto him:
He was of a goodly stature, of visage lean and grave; he had rare gifts of
nature, and fortune, the which he augmented much by art; he was of a noble
mind; of a ready and subtle spirit, assured in judgment, and peaceable: He
was not greedy of worldly wealth, sparing in giving, but honorable in the
expenses of his house; he was a great dissembler of the disgraces of the
Court, and cunning in their secret practices, for so it behooued him to be, to
prevent such as were his competitors* He was generally hated, for that he
treated proudly with his inferiors, and his equals hated his greatness. The
ambition to purchase the Princes favor (a shelfe wherein proud minds cast
themselves) was great in him; for this respect it may be, or for the
pre-eminence and greatness he pretended above all other officers, the which made
him odious; he was not much pleasing to Charles, and less to Philip, although
from their birthes until their later days, he had served them 60. years: But
Princes love them better whom they have rewarded, then such as have served
them. He was greatly inclined to warlike discipline, wherein he was so
cunning, as there was not any captain of his nation, in long time comparable
unto him; and to conclude, for his many years, and great experience, there was
not in a manner any one in the world but yielded unto him: He was of great
judgment, and dexterity, to encampe and make choice of a lodging, so as
always with less forces then the enemies, he kept them in awe; he was so well
experienced as he never refused battle wheresoever he came: He did willingly
hazard his own person, but his soldiers with greater consideration, trusting
more to policy then fortune: He was a rough and inexorable executioner of the
severe laws of war, of whose pitiful cruelty depends the health of armies,
and the conservation of States: He was by nature inclined to vanquish without
effusion of blood, and was employed in wars conformable to his inclination;
for the greatest part of them, being defensive, wherein a wise captain should
rather temporize and suffer the enemy to consume by the difficulties of war
in a strange country, then to hazard an estate upon so unequal a game, as is
the winning of a battle against him that has but men to loose. To this
effect he answered the council of war, in the kingdom of Naples, in the
year 1558. when as the Frenchmen being expelled, they would have charged the
enemy retiring, he said, he would not hazard the realm against a cassock
of gold, for such was then the habit of the Duke of Guise, Lieutenant
general to Henry the second King of France; yet some did blame him, to be
too wary in the execution of matters of importance in war: He served his
King in greater charges, and with greater authority then ever any of their
subjects, and it may be, there has not been in many ages a captain, which
has so long managed arms, nor displaied his ensigns in so many countries:
For he has made war in Italy Spain and France, in Hungary, Germany,
Flaunders and Afric; although he were accustomed to say, that he had done
nothing, seeng that he was never so happy as to see a Turkish army: But the
last wars of Flaunders did somewhat obscure the glory he had gotten; for
although The blames of the Duke of Alua.
as captain he did war valiantly, yet he knew not, (as it happened to him in
other places) how to use the victory, but arrogating too much unto himself,
he caused a statue of brass to be erected for him in the Cittadell of
Antwerpe, which the king caused afterward to be beaten down. It appeeres that
he could, better carry himself in adversity then prosperity; for in the
one he had great force, in the other too much conceit, so as he reaped more
commendations by afflictions, then by victory: He showed in dying the
magnanimity he had in his life, and that which is of great moment, he showed
tokens of a religious Christian, being happy that Friar Jews of Granata, that
famous preacher (whose divine writings are pleasing to the world) was present
at his death: They did substitute in his place Charles Borgia Duke of Gandia, a
man of greater virtue then experience.

The obsequies of Sebastian and other Princes Portugals.
The King had caused the bones of King Sebastian to be brought out of Affricke,
the which with King Henry's that were at Almerin, he would before his
departure see solemnly interred in the church of Belem, near to the other
Kings of Portugal; and for that cause remained there three days: He caused
also to be brought from diverse parts of the realm unto the said monastery
the bodies, or at the least the ashes of his kinsfolks, the children and
nephews to King Emanuel, who (as a man may say) dying, resigned him the
crown, that they might be all kept together: There was made a most sumptuous
obsequie, with great shows, and all the religious persons in the name of Henry
were present, for the rest had been performed before, and in the funeral
sermon Sebastians acts were likewise touched, and Henry extremely commended,
the which was more pleasing being dead, then the praises of Philip living and
present, wherein the Orator dilated much, having first in particular set down
the branches of King Emanuel, and brought the succession to the said Philip.

I will not leave here to make mention as of a rare matter, although A
reformation of the Calendar.
it be somewhat from our purpose, that in this year of our Lord 1582. they
did reckon ten days less then in others: for by the Popes decree, all
Christian princes obeying the Romish sea, gave commandment to cut off ten
days in the month of October, so as for the fifth day, they should generally
write 15. the which was done to fit the times to the means and principal
aspects wherein the heavens were, when as our Redeemer Jesus Christ suffered,
that they might celebrate Easter, and the other feasts upon their proper days.
The which they had not formerly done; for that the true course of the sun,
which makes the year, being certain minutes of an hour less then the time,
which they until then had taken for a year, it seemed that in the course of
so many years so small a difference had mounted unto ten days, so as by this
equality, it was made conformable to the time past.

The King began to unburden himself of the affairs of Portugal, for to go
into Castill; and therefore the xxvj. day of January A new assembly of estates
at Lisbone, where the prince Philip was sworn.
in the year 1583. having assembled the estates of the realm, they began in
the palace of Lisbone, where after Alphonso de Castelbianco newly made Bishop
of Algarues, had briefly made the proposition, showing how much the King was
grieved with the death of the Prince, and the necessity there was to swear a
new: Melchior d' Amaral, one of the Deputies of the city of Lisbone, made
answer in the behalf of the whole realm, showing the desire and readiness
they had to perform this act: Whereupon the young Duke of Barcellos, as Duke
of Bragance, beginning (for his father with sword in hand did supply the
office of Constable) kneeling down before the King, held forth his hand to
take the oath after the accustomed manner, the which being likewise performed
by all the rest, this ceremony was ended. He procured that the assembly of
Deputies for this effect should not be called estates, to the end he might
take away all occasion of demanding new things, or to redemaund those which
had been required in the former estates, and not granted; and therefore he
had contrary to the custom sent into all places, briefes of the procurations
the Deputies should bring with them, so drawn, as they should not extend
further then the swearing of the Prince; and although it were so executed, yet
the estates did not forbear, especially he that was for the Deputies of the
realm, to revive the demands made at the estates held at Tomar, with some
others; and especially that it would please his Majesty to show magnanimity
and clemency in giving a general pardon to all such as were culpable of
Anthonies offense; saying, it should greatly profit, and do little harm: But
whatsoever the cause was, he neither satisfied them in this point, nor in any
other of importance. He dispatched some Portugals which sought reward, for
although he had given unto many, yet were they not content: But
notwithstanding all this care and diligence, whether it were his fault or his
ministers, or else the disposition of the suitors, or of all together, there
remained many of them discontented, part of them for that they were not
recompensed, and others for that they did not seem to be recompensed according
to their merits. The Duke of Bragance at the assembly of the estates, hoped to
have received recompense from the King, which he supposed to have deserved, for
although he were rewarded, yet was it not according to his expectation, for
aspiring to greater offices, and greater authority then he had, it seemed the
Kings will was therein directly contrary, so as, for that the recompenses were
small in regard of the greatness of his hope, they were not published, but he
was suffered to reply that they might be after specified. The Marquis of Villa
Real received likewise no contentment to his liking, so as both remained ill
satisfied, and the Duke leaving the Court, being long before sick, died soon
after, although the Portugals say, that the grief he conceived of the weak
recompense he received from Philip, hastened his days. The King at the time
of his departure reformed the state of justice, publishing many new laws,
suffering the Portugals to attire themselves more freely with silk then other
kings had done: Cardinal Albert made governor of Portugal.
He made Cardinal Albert Archduke of Austria, governor of the realm in his
absence, leaving him notwithstanding accompanied with three counselors, that
is, George d'Almada Archbishop of Lisbone, Peter d'Ascasoua, and Michael de
Mora, who was Secretorie of the realm newly created Notarie, which they call
of the purity, so great a charge as yet had never been given, but to the
chiefest personages of the realm, whereunto since the time of King John the
third, that Michael de Silua Bishop of Viseu, who was after Cardinal, went to
Rome in disgrace, there was never any advanced. The King gave procuration to
the said Cardinal, causing him to take an oath in the presence of the council
of State, and of the magistrate of the Chamber of Lisbone, to govern with
justice, and to resign him the realm at his return. The Empress his sister,
who was to go into Castill, visiting first the Nuns of the monastery of
Santos, who may lawfully marry, she took forth and carried with her Julian
d' Allan castro, of the age of thirteen years, who by the decease of Maudlyn
Girone her mother, remained Duchess of Auero: The Portugals were much grieved
with this act, for although she said, the King would provide she should not
marry but with his liking; yet notwithstanding she seemed to be ravished, and
many feared that he would not marry her in Castill. The kings departure from
Portugal.


When these things were ended, the king departed the eleventh of February, in
the year 1583. the which greatly displeased the quiet, and did glad the
seditious; for those feared, least there should grow some controversy betwixt
the people and the garrisons; that the soldiers ill paid would mutine, and
that the Cardinals authority, was not of such force as the kings presence, to
redress it; and contrariwise the rest hoped, that the kings absence, the small
affection the people bare unto them, the oppression of the garrison, and the
great dearth, would in the spring (considering principally the army which was
prepared in France) minister matter of alteration; although it now seemed that
things succeeded in favor of the kings intention; having intelligence that in
Flaunders the Duke of Aloncon seeking to assure himself of the city of
Anwerp, wherein he was as Lord and Protector, having his army lodged
thereabouts, it had not succeeded, for forcing of a gate, and having drawn in
three thousand French, they were by the great valor of the Citizens repulsed,
and the one half slain; so as it seemed the Flemmings would no more trust the
Duke but compound with the King. Such Portugals as had received no answer to
their demands, doubted of all dispatch in the Kings absence: but this fear
was qualified by the opinion which they had conceived, that the Cardinal
remaining governor, they should be no less favored by him then they had been
by the King himself, albeit this hope soon vanished after the Kings
departure; for the Cardinal did not only forbear to use the authority which
he seemed to have left him, but he refused to sign the commandments or
other writings which concerned the affairs of the realm: And although some
believed that he had forborne to do it, for that the king was yet upon the way,
and not out of the realm, upon a respect of sovereignty, yet they were
deceived; for the King being out of the realm, he did not sign, the which
bred a great disdain in the Portugals, who pretended to hold the realm
distinguished from that of Castill, it seemed that this manner of government
which the king used from Madrill was a more strict union then they desired,
besides the troubles of their expeditions for the distance of the court: And
this disdain was much augmented, for that the king had placed in the council
of the revenues of the crown which they term d'Hazenda, two counselors,
Castillians of nation, a doctor, and a merchant, saying, that it was unseemly
and against their privileges.

THE TENTH BOOK.
The Contents of the tenth Book.
In this last Book is contained the death of Sanches d'Auila: The sack of the
Islands of Cape Vert: The carriage of Emanuel de Silua Governor of the
Terceres: The preparation of king Philip to force the said Islands: The succors
sent thither from France: The fortification and the garrison. The departure of
the army from Lisbone: The description of the Island of Terceres: The arrival
there of the Spanish army: The assault, skirmishes and taking of the Island:
The yielding of the French: The taking of the Island of Fayale, and the
obedience of all the rest: How that Emanuel de Silua lost his head, and many
others put to death: And the return of the army to Andelouzia.

THE estate of the Realm after the Kings departure remained all that winter
quiet; and although the people had their minds yet disquieted, and some of the
nobility not fully satisfied, having left the kings court, and the Cardinals
likewise, retired themselves to their castles and houses, yet no man durst show
any discontent. The greatest part, although they loved peace and desired the
tranquillity of the Realm, yet were they in their hearts contented to see the
Terceres make resistance, and continue in the devotion of Anthony, and the
French supposing that whilst the King had any wars, he would entreat them
better, and bear them more respect, then they thought he should do, if all
were pacified: neither prevailed it, that the Portugalles were made much of in
Castile, and admitted near the King as they had woonte to be when he was in
Portugal, nor yet that the said King had (it may be to make the present
government conformeable to that was passed,) obtained from the Pope the
authority of the Legate, for the Cardinal even as Henry enioied it, the which
bredde a great benefit to the realm: for as it happens to passionate minds,
they were not removed from their opinion: for the Cardinal being made Legate
for two years only, they feared that the time being expired, they would take
an occasion to recall him into Castill, and so the Realm should be reduced
into a province, and that the king remaining at Madrill, should govern it. At
that time Sanches The death of Auila.
d'Auila died, being stroke with a horse, for that leaving chirurgerie, he
would be cured by a soldier with certain blessings, the which caused the
Castillians to mourn: for although he were but marshall general of the
field, yet remaining, after the death of the Duke of Alua, of greatest
knowledge amongst the Spaniards, in the art of war, there was not any man
near the Duke of Gandia of so great experience: He was a man without fear,
and happy in war; esteemed by the Duke of Alua above all the soldiers of his
time; but this life which he had unto his old age so happily adventured at the
cannons mouth, was now taken away by death, upon a small mischance.

In France it seemed that all the French were turned unto the affairs of
Flaunders, affecting them more then Portugal* and although there were an
intent at the Priors instance to set forth some ships of war, yet found
they therein coldenes and want of money, whereby it appeered, that whereas they
attempted something, it should not be to offend, but rather to provide for
defense: And although they had now intelligence that certain French ships The
French spoil the Islands of Cape Vert.
guided by the Portugals, and especially by one Emanuel Serradas, had invaded
the Islands of Cape Vert, and spoiled some part of them, yet they made no
account thereof, understanding they were but small barks of pirates. At the
Terceres Emanuel de Silua was The carriage of Silua at the Terceres.
still governor, who showed himself an obstinate enemy to the Catholic
King, a faithful minister to the Prior, and a cruel persecutor of the
Philippines: Notwithstanding ill disposed, of small judgment, and little
experience. With these his qualities he afflicted the poor people in diverse
manners, for the means which he invented to borrow money, to molest and
condemn many persons, were insupportable: The pride and arrogancy whereunto
he was grown, (as it happens often in him that is not accustomed to command)
made him seem invincible, and immortal; the wrongs he committed were so
infinite, that justice had lost her place; the liberty his friends and
servants took upon them was without restraint; the subjection and servitude of
those that did not flatter him was such, as the slaves were more free. I leave
the executions he committed upon such as would have compounded with the
Catholic king, and could not conceal their minds; for using many
stratagemes to discover their affections, wherein as he found any one less
obstinate then himself, he was miserable, being cruelly punished both in body
and goods: And for this occasion he caused many to be slain, betrayed by one
Amador Vieira, who having been secretly sent into this Island by King Philip,
to continue his followers in their fidelity, to sound the disposition of the
people, and to draw all he could to his devotion; after he had well executed
his charge, he revealed unto Silua such as had discovered themselves, by whom
they were miserably afflicted. And as tyranny taught him, he daily made new
ordinances and laws in the name of Anthony; the officers and ministers of
justice in the city, which were usually chosen by voices, he alone would have
the naming of them. He was not only contented to observe those laws which
treated of high treason, but also made a new law more severe, that such as did
but talk of that matter should suffer death, and that such witnesses should
serve, although less in number then the ancient laws had ordained: He would
have the sentences in such cases registered by the Magistrate of the city, for
a perpetual memory to all to terrify and tyrannize the more. There was
within the Island little above seven hundredth French soldiers, one only
company of English, and about three thousand Portugals; it was fortified on all
parts where they might land, with above thirty fortes, and many trenches
made, with such art and diligence, as it seemed impossible to enter, if they
were guarded: And although these things with the other qualities of the place,
made it uneasy to force, yet Silua judged it stronger then it was, and did
trust (as a man of no experience) more in the defenders then was convenient.

The Kings preparation against the Terceraes.
In the mean time they prepared an army for sea at Lisbone, and assembled the
Spanish soldiers, to employ them against this Island, under the command of the
Marquis of Saint a Croix, being more in number, both in ships and men, then the
year before: besides there was speech to send four galliasses and twelve
galleies, for which cause they shortened their yardes, providing square sails,
and of a third maste which they call the mean. In Spain there The discourse
in Spain upon this enterprise.
were diverse opinions concerning this army, making diverse discourses thereon,
both by word and writing: Such as were not to be employed in this action, to
whom no part of the honor or praise did belong, made it easy, saying, that
the people were already so wearied, poor, and oppressed by the garrisons, as
the army should no sooner appear, but they would be at the Kings devotion:
And the cause why they did no sooner yield, was the subjection wherein they
were held, and although they neither would nor could come to composition, yet
were they easy to force; for the city of Angra and all other places being
dismantled and weak, they had no other defense then the landing, the which
they supposed were impossible to hinder, proouing by ancient and latter
examples, that in war there was no means to stop the course of passage of
rivers and landing in Islands, seeing that to keep so great a circuit, there
was an infinite number of men required; and being once landed all the rest were
conquered* On the other side, such as embarked with the army to make it more
glorious whatsoever event were, labored to make the enterprise of greater
difficulty then it was, saying, that the Island was little, well peopled,
aboundning with victuals, rocked round about, and seated in the most
inconstant sea that is, where they could hardly ride three months in the
year, whereof one part before they could arrive would be spent, that they had
not any port where to retire themselves, the which made it easy to be
defended; adding thereunto the obstinate disposition of the people, the
despair they had of any assured pardon, the fortifications made by the French
(in that point very diligent) with the provision of munition, soldiers, and
captains, made the place inexpugnable: They added, that it was likely the
French, (if it were but to divert the Spanish forces, and continue this moate
in their eyes,) would labor to support the Island, which should be of less
charge to them then to the Spaniards in raising their armies to force it.

But whilst they prepared this army in Spain, and that they discoursed upon
the occurrents, Anthony employed all his forces in France, so to furnish the
Island as they might be able to defend themselves: And although the Queen
favored him, yet whether the heat of the year past were grown cold (it may
be through the unhappy success of the French army, or that the Prior found
himself bare of money, or whatsoever it were) they made a weaker provision
then was expected; yet at the Queen mothers instance, Mounsieur de Chattes
sent to succor the Island.
Mounsieur de Chattes a knight of Malta, who was governor of Deep, being
experienced in these later wars, went with few more then twelve hundredth
French men, although the report was fifteen hundredth: He carried letters to
the Magistrate of the city, not only from the Prior, whereby he did greatly
commend and encourage the citizens, showing that on them he did ground all his
hopes to return into the realm; but also from the most Christian King, and
the Queen mother: The King by his letters reioiced at their constancy,
showing how much he desired to aid them against those enemies, who sought to
suppress the liberty of the realm of Portugal, for the pretention (those be
his very words) that his mother might have to their conservation; and
therefore he sent unto them this gentleman with ships and men, giving them
many other terms of love. The Queen referred them to the Kings letters, with
assurance never to abandon them in their just war, referring herself, and so
likewise did the king, to that which the commander should deliver unto them.
Being arrived and joined to the rest, and with the Portugals of the Island,
which in all were near six thousand; Silua supposed that although he had many
fortes to keep, yet should he easily defend them, and the better, for that
the ships which had spoiled Cape Vert, were returned and brought much artillery
with them, the which joined with that which Chattes had brought from France,
and so much more which they had before within the Island, both for the guard
thereof, and taken in ships, which they had spoiled, amounting in all to three
hundredth pieces, whereof many were of iron and very small: But notwithstanding
all this, and that the Portugals showed their accustomed ouerweening, yet as
men that feared, they left not to conduct their wives and children to the
mountains, and to hide that which they held most precious. Chattes as a
warrior, having viewed the seat of the Island, the fortifications, garrisons,
victuals, and munition within it, doubted of the defense; for all seemed
sparingly furnished, and the soldiers to be fewer in number, and of less
experience then the place required; neither was the Island so rockie and
inaccessible as was described: whereupon being retired with Emanuel de Silua,
he A discourse between Chattes and Silua upon the strength of the Island.
desired to know whereon he grounded his defense: But he, whether blinded with
the tirannie he there used, or else with his sins, did so augment the number,
and extol the valor of the Portugals, that he would have them not only
believe they should easily defend themselves, but that the French were in a
manner superfluous. The French man held not himself for all this satisfied,
laboring to remedy that which he thought remediable, esteeming still more of
the number and valor of the Portugals then was convenient: The fortification
seemed unto him ill directed, for he persuaded them to bring into their chief
castle all their munition and victuals, that if the Spaniards should chance
to land in any part, their whole forces might retire thither to make
resistance, until that winter coming, the army should be forced to retire;
for as much as without this retrait, the enemy setting foot on land, the
town with all other places being unwalled were lost. Silua did contradict
these reasons with words contrary to his meaning, saying, that when the
soldiers had a second place of retraite, they would make a weak resistance at
the first, and that the shore was so fortified as there was no fear that the
enemy could land. But in truth he made no account of any of the castles, for
three reasons: One for that he wanted victuals to furnish it for any time, and
for so many men: The other for that he would not willingly shut himself into
any, having a meaning to fly: And the third was, that distrusting the French,
he would not trust them with any strong forte, least they should become
masters: In this sort the captains disagreed, whereupon they not only ceased
to treat of this practice, but having before resolved to abandon all the other
Islands being weak, and having no superfluous men to send thither, they took
a new resolution to send unto Fayale, as most inhabited, four hundredth
French, under the conduct of Mounsier de Carle, with the which and the
inhabitants of the Island, having a small castle, they hoped to defend
themselves.

The kings army departs from Lisbone
Whilst these things passed at the Terceres, they had put the Catholic Kings
army in a readiness, the which departed from Lisbone the eeue of Saint John
Baptist, being in number above threescore ships, besides Zabres, Carauels, and
barks; for there were twelve galleies, and two galliasses, for the other two
came not in time from Naples, five gallions, and above thirty great ships of
diverse nations: there were few less then ten thousand soldiers, the greatest
part Castillians, having no other nations but a thousand Germans, two
companies of Italians, and two of Portugal adventurers. The Castillians were
led by their marshall of the field, Lopo de Figueroa, Frauncis de Bouadilla,
and John de Sandoal, the Germans by Count Ierom of Lodron: the Italians
obeyed Lucio Pignatello: Felix of Aragon was captain of the Portugals; and the
Marquis over all had charge at sea and land. This army although it were not
very great in number, yet we may say the Catholic king had never so many
trained Spaniards as in this: For besides that the greatest part had been in
Italy, such as had been in the battle at sea of the league against the
Turk, were there, and likewise those that remained at the wars of Flaunders.
As the fleet went out of the river, a ship striking against a shelfe was
made unfit to sail, and an other having not sailed far lost her helm, but
having transported their soldiers into other ships, they went to harbor. This
fleet sailing altogether, the swiftest ship of sail was feign to stay her
course for the slowest, and the galleies being of all other swiftest, were
constrained to linger for the ships, but for as much as this was the first
time that ever these kind of vessels with oars had been within the Ocean so
far from land; the Marquis wished that they should not lose the occasion of
fair weather, which they had to pass the gulf, fearing, that every small
storm might endomage them; he therefore desired rather to dismember them from
the army, then to retain them with peril: For this cause the xxvj. day,
understanding the Patrons desire to go before, he suffered them to depart
alone toward the Island of S. Michael, with order to attend him there, so as
sailing more at ease with scant winds, the third of July they discovered
land: And for that the wind would not suffer the army to approach, the
Marquis sent a Zabre unto Punta Delgada, commanding Augustine Iniquez, coronel
of two thousand Spaniards, which had remained there the year before for the
guard of the Island, to ship all his men within the galleies, which had
arrived there before in safety: he should likewise take with him certain
pieces of battery, and moiles to use at land if need were, with other
provisions: and therefore setting up all his sails, the wind growing somewhat
better, he drew near with his ships to Villa Franca, and from thence went in a
galley to Punta Delgada, where likewise a part of the army had cast anchor:
he set all things in order, but the winds growing contrary, he could not
depart before the xxij. day, when as setting sail he came the xxiiij. to the
Terceres.

This Island is situated as is said in the fortith degree of latitude, and
three hundredth and forty two of longitude; it has forty miles in circuit,
extending it self in length from the east unto the west, so as it is not much
above twelve miles broad; and although it be rough The description of the
Terceres.
for the most part and stony, yet is it in a manner all inhabited toward the
south, for the commodity of the shoares it is more populous then the rest, for
coming from the west, you first discover the city of Angra, a place in a
small bosom of the sea, but not greatly secure from the winds, where of it
takes the name, for Angra in their language is a bosom: Joining to this city
there is a castle begun in the time of King Sebastian, and made defensible for
the guard of this port: Six miles toward the east, near unto a dangerous
shore, which they call the port of Mole, is Saint Sebastian, a place smally
inhabited, and three miles farther is that of Piaggia, so called being the best
landing place of all others. This place is near unto Punta de la Serra, which
is the last promontorie toward the East, behind the which turning to the
North, is another place which they call Agua Alua, six miles from that of
Piaggia. This coast toward the North, although it be as we have said,
inhabited; yet does it not contain any places of worth, being replenished
only with peasants houses; near to the point of the West there is a small
assembly of inhabitants, which they call the Altari.

The Marquis being arrived at this Island, he discovered within The arriual of
the kings army at the Terceres and their proceedings.
that small bosom of sea of the city of Angra, those ships which had brought
the succors, and some others assembled for spoil, with some merchants. He
cast anchor at Saint Sebastian, beginning visiblie to find, that the Island was
no less fortified then had been described unto them. The fleet lay only a
cannon shot from land, so as there was many a shot spent at them in vain
from the forts, not suffering his men to discharge one volley (it may be) for
that it seemed unto him a vain diligence, or rather as he said, the better to
justify his Kings cause. He commanded four galleies to lie before the
town, to serve as a bridle for those ships, and to keep them from coming
forth, the which was held too much ouerweening, some holding opinion that he
should in dissembling give them means to depart, rather then to force them to
despair: He suddenly sent a trumpet to land, offering to all such as were in
the Island a general pardon in his Majesty's behalf, if they would yield, but
approaching to land, he was unkindly kept back by their artillery: The pardon
concerned the succession of the King to the crown, the disobedience of the
Island, and the clemency of his Majesty, he offered unto all such as were
natural borne, their lives and goods, if they would yield obedience, and to
strangers, ships to transport them into their countries, with their goods,
arms and ensigns: But being not able to publish it by this means, he sent
two Portugals secretly to land, who delivered a copy thereof to Emanuel de
Silua; but making no account thereof, he concealed it, least others should see
it, supposing (it may be) that it was now too late to use it, and therefore
he not only refused to accept of this pardon, but also threatened to hang
them that brought it, if they discovered the cause of their coming, least the
Ilanders should likewise embrace it. The army spent all the xxiiij. day and
the next following in discovering the circuit of the Island, with the places and
fortifications, in consulting where to land most fitly, and what course to
hold: The Marquis himself, the marshals of the field, with other of the
chief commanders in a small bark ran along the shore, they found they had
fortified more carefully then elsewhere, in the city of Angra, and Piaggia, as
places most fit for landing, and it seemed that the French did watch there with
greater care then in other parts: Some Portugals of this Island, who going to
discover had been taken prisoners by them of Saint Michaell, and now brought
unto the army, said, there was no fitter place to land then at the port of
Mole, near Saint Sebastian; but whether they spoke it to deceive the
Castillians, the place being more rough then it seemed, or that they delivered
their opinion faithfully, the Marquis had still his eye upon that part; for
finding it rather less fortified then the rest, although the shore were not
so commodious there as in other places, enclining rather to fight against the
difficulties of Nature, then Rampires made by Art, he resolved with the advice
of the greatest part to bring his army thither upon Saint Annes day in the
morning, being the six and twentieth of the said month, happily by reason of
the victory the year before, sending in the mean time his galleies and other
small barks by night and by day to keep the enemies in Allarum at diverse
places, but most of all at Piaggia thereby to disquiet them, and to draw them
thither.

The diligence of the Ilanders for their defense.
In the mean time within the Island, both Mounsieur de Chattes, and Emanuel de
Sylua, labored to divide the soldiers and munition into their several
places, appointing the greatest force at Piaggia, supposing the Marquis would
land there as most convenient. Sylua although in show he seemed conceited of
his forces, yet had he provided a great bark ready within the port, and some
boats at Altary, to fly if he found it needful: Chattes was not yet
satisfied, for although he had men sufficient to keep a great town, yet he
held them few, for the defense of an Island with thirty forts; the one so far
from the other, as the first could not succor the last, nor yet that in the
midst as well for the distance of the way, as also for the discommoditie and
roughnes of their situation: He thought it convenient to have a squadron of men
so placed, as upon any accident he might succor where need required, the which
could not be effected; for there were so many forts and trenches to guarde,
that having divided his soldiers but sparingly, there remained none, but
rather wanted: He found also, that having sufficient for that purpose, he had
no convenient place to lodge them, and to succor any place distressed; for
that placing himself in the midst, he were too far from all quarters, and
approaching to any fort, it were impossible to succor the rest. To provide for
those defects, according to that which was possible, they set certain bells
upon the hills, that the sound thereof might be a sign of succor, and such as
were not charged in their fortes, and trenches should repair thither.

The Marquis having now chosen out of his army 4500. of his best foot,
amongst which was a good number of the Germans, the Italians, and the company
of Portugals, the regiment of Lopo de Figueroa and Augustine Inighez, the night
before the six and twentieth day he imbarqued them upon his galleies, and in
many other small barks, being the greatest calm that was ever, and having
given the allarum in many other places with greater vehemency then before, he
went toward port Mole giving order that soon The landing of some of the
Marquis his men
after the whole army should follow: He arrived there at the point of day, not
being in a manner discovered by the Ilanders, for that the darkness of the
night had covered them, where he found they had three forts with their trenches
and artillery, but ill furnished with soldiers: As the galleies approached,
they often discharged all their artillery against the defenses, to the end
that at the same instant, the soldiers might more safely land, the which
caused more terror then hurt, although they dismounted one piece of artillery,
which the enemy had often discharged: And although they shot often from the
forts, and that the place was naturally uneasy and full of rocks, where their
descent was broken; yet these nations one in envy of another contemning all
peril lept to land, and he that could not easily attain thereunto, cast
himself willingly into the sea for more haste, although the ground upon the
shore were soft, and those few Portugals which were there were not the last,
but in the point showing greatest courage. There was within the forte (whither
these men marched) three ensigns of soldiers, whereof The first assault given
by the Marquis his men.
two were Portugals, and one French, which made in all but two hundred men,
against whom all these soldiers marched, running furiously without order to
the assault, for that the seat and the neernes of the enemy, gave them neither
place nor time to put themselves in order. The French resisted valiantly, but
for that they were few prevailed little: In the beginning they slew a Captain
and an ensign bearer of them without, with five and twenty or thirty other
soldiers; but some within being wounded, the Captain of the French slain,
one of the companies of Portugals left the defense, where they had a little, but
fearfully, fought. The other company which remained made some more resistance,
but hearing the bells ring, and no succors come, seeing also some of their
friends dying, they abandoned the trench, so as the French remaining all alone,
some of them being already dead, they were not able to make resistance against
so many assailants; so as in less then an hour, the Marquis men were masters
of those forts and tre^ches with small loss. The news of this assault being
bruted throughout the Island, the French, the greatest part whereof remained
toward Piaggia, hearing the sound of the bells, and viewing the signs of
fire, ran to the succor, and were followed by Emanuel de Silua with many
Portugals: But the way was so long and uneasy, having four or five miles to
march, that they were not come half way, before the enemies were masters of
the fortes and trenches, so as having made a stand upon a little hill near
unto Saint Sebastian, they put themselves in order to march against the
Castillians. But on the other The second landing of the Marquis with his men
and their skirmish against the French.
side the rest of the army during this assault landed, and being mounted to a
small hill, they framed a confused squadron of all nations together, for the
more dispatch, and to be ready against the succors that came, but there was
small need; for the French and Portugals would not approach, and such as had
abandoned the trenches, turned not until they were joined to the rest: So as
the Marquis having more respite then he expected, changed his esquadron into a
new form, dividing every nation, and having marched a little forward, they
began the skirmish on both sides with great courage; and fortune after her
accustomed manner did long play her part: For although the French were so few
in number, yet they did twice recover from the Spaniards, their first rampires,
and at the third time they came to the second: But the Marquis finding that the
want of pikes was cause of this disorder, having placed some Germans, and
increased his strength against the French, they did better withstand their
fury, the which notwithstanding continued not long, for being noone before
that Emanuel de Silua had made provision of victuals, they were so wearied with
the watches of the last night, with the way they had marched, and with fasting,
that they could not continue; yet the skirmish lasted, sometimes with more
vehemency, sometimes with less, until night. Near unto them the Portugals
had gathered together above a thousand oxen, thinking to force them against the
enemy, to break them, and to make proof of that which they had tried two
years past, against Peter de Baldes his men: but Chattes did not allow of
this stratageme, holding it for a refreshing to the enemy without any profit;
for it was not likely that that which had casually chanced against six
hundredth men, would succeed in the like sort against twelve thousand,
whereupon they sent them back. As the Marquis had viewed this troop of
beasts, having reinforced the point of his army with German pikes,
commanding them, that if they came, they should quietly suffer them to come
on; so passed this day, the French not ceasing to disquiet the enemy with
certain pieces of artillery, they had planted upon those hills: Then did
Emanuel de Silua resolve to fly, the which he could not easily effect, for
that every man kept a watch over him, and therefore he caused a false brute
to be spredde abroad, that he had threescore sail of French ships at sea which
came to their succor; and seeming that he would Silua his flight hindered.
send to meet with them, he caused the prepared bark to go out of the port,
that it might attend him at Altary; but when they came at the mouth, the
artillery from the fortes would not suffer them to pass, either ignorant of
their intention, or for that the authority of Silua began now to decline, so
as returning back, the flight of Emanuel was prevented. During this time, the
Spaniards were distressed for water, being forced until then to furnish
themselves from their army, whereof the French had great store, and therefore
the Marquis consulted that night to amend (if it were possible, the next
morning) the seat of their lodging, the which was held somewhat difficult;
but for as much as both good fortune and badde has no limits, he found less
difficulty then he expected; for the same night the greatest part of the
Portugals under Emanuel de Silua, terrified with the skirmiand;sh of the day,
the number of the enemies seeming too great, having abandoned the French,
retired themselves confusedly to the mountain, although worthy of
admiration; for being the very same obstinate rebels which esteemed themselves
so great warriors, as they would never hear motion of accord, peace, nor
pardon, it seemed strange that now, when as (laying a side words) they needed
effects, they departed so shamefully, and changed their minds so suddenly;
for in The Portugals abandon the French.
their flight they said, that this Island appertained to the Catholic king,
and that it was reason to yield it unto him: But we ought not to value the
constancy of the peoples hearts, nor their valor. The General of the French,
seeing the Portugals departure, and that Emanuel de Silua (who had so highly
commended their valor) stood in a trance, he resolved to save himself with
his men; the day drawing near, he began likewise to retire to the mountain
of our Lady of Guadalupa, with hope that Silua had given him, that there in a
certain place of strength, he should be able so long to defend himself, that
the kings army (winter drawing on) should be forced to retire, and that
afterward if they could not recover what they had lost, they should have an
easy means to return into France, but for that the quitting of their
lodging was not very safe, fearing least the Marquis standing upon his guarde,
should charge them, he caused as many of his soldiers as he could spare, to
march before, leaving some behind to maintain skirmish with the Spaniards,
and to entertain them a little if they approached. But the Marquis having soon
discovered the enemies departure, The Marquis takes S. Sebastian.
advanced with his whole army, putting those few that remained to flight, he
recovered the water, and Saint Sebastian with some pieces of artillery, where
the soldiers having refreshed themselves, and all the French departed, he took
his way toward the city of Angra, distant about ten miles, finding no let
in his march, for that the enemy fearfully had taken a contrary course. This
city being nothing fortified to the land lay open, and therefore was
abandoned, not only of the soldiers, but also of the inhabitants themselves,
who fled as well out of the castle as the town. The army arrived there
after great labor, for the season being very hot, the country dry, not
finding upon their march one drop of water, the soldiers endured much, and
some of them (especially of the Germans died for thirst. Being arrived, the
spoil of the city Angra put to be spoiled three days.
continued three days, although the houses were for the most part empty, so
as the greatest number of men that were found there, were prisoners, whom they
set at liberty: By means of their entry into the city, all the other fortes
were taken, for being only made against the landing, they were toward the
land open and indefensible: As the army marched against the town, so did the
galleies in like sort, against those ships that lay in the harbor, and drawing
near unto them, they would have forced them to obey with their artillery,
but they shot in vain; for being abandoned by such as were left in them, there
was not any man left to make answer, The Portugal ships spoiled.
which the galleies discovering, they boorded and spoiled them. The booty both
at land and sea, was not very great, for besides the artillery they found not
any thing of great importance. The slaves which were in number above fifteen
hundred was the greatest recompense they got: The city being spoiled and other
places thereabouts, the Marquis desired that the inhabitants should return to
their houses; for although the soldiers which were retired into some place of
the mountains, had carried with them some prisoners both men and women, the
which after they delivered freely, yet the greatest part returned not; and
therefore he caused a general proclamation to be made, that every man (some
excepted) should freely return unto his house; but the Portugals being
distrustful they were few that came at that time, although after by little The
Marquis sends to Fayall.
and little they grew more confident. Things being reduced into this estate,
although the French remained still in the mountain, the Marquis thought it fit
to send unto other Islands to force them to obedience, especially to Fayale
where there remained a garrison: For this consideration having imbarqued in his
galleies and some other small vessels 2500. foot drawn out of all nations,
he sent them to the said Island, under the conduct of Peter de Toledo.

Whilst these went unto that other enterprise, the French remaining in the
Island of Tercerae, although they had somewhat fortified themselves in the
mountain, being ill provided of victuals and munition, and worse succored by
the Portugals, resolved with The French compound with the Spaniards.
the most honorable conditions they could to make their composition with the
Marquis: Mounsieuer de Chattes remembered that he had known being in Malta,
Peter de Padiglia a gentleman that came with the Marquis an expert Marshall of
the Spanish camp, to whom (remembering their familiarity) he did write his
mind, demanding free passage not only for himself and his troops, baggage,
Arms, artillery, and ensigns; but also would have passage granted for all
Portugals that would imbarke with him. This letter in some sort pleased the
Marquis, being in hope to come to agreement and to remain an absolute
co^querour without effusion of more blood, before the sea should grow more
rough: But this demand seemed unto him unreasonable, refusing to hear talk
of any Portugals to be transported into France. Amongst the principal of the
army there were diverse opinions what should be done: Some would presently have
marched against the French men to win time, and charge them without any
further accord or condition what soever: Others discoursed with greater
judgment, saying, that it was convenient to make an agreement with the French,
both for the shortness of the time they could stay there, as for the
difficulty they should find to go unto them; for they made an account to
spend five days in that enterprise, two in their march, one at the least in
conquering, and two in retiring, and that they had no commodity in the army
to carry victuals by land for above two days, wanting wagons, bottles, and
such other necessaries: But these difficulties were surmou*nted by the courage
of the soldiers, who grown proud, could not endure that so small a handful of
French, being so near, should make show to defend themselves against so
great a number of old soldiers and conquerors, whereupon they did offer to
endure all discommodities to go unto them: And although he were not resolved to
do so, yet this Brauado caused the enemies to have straighter conditions, then
otherwise possibly they The condition of the accord.
had had, the which after long treaty was thus concluded. That the French
should deliver up their arms and ensigns, retaining only their swords,
that they should be lodged in a quarter of the town: that they should give
them ships and victuals to return into France: The accord was no sooner
made, but it was put in execution, for the third of August the French came
from the mountain, and without the city delivered up their arms with
eighteen ensigns, their drums; and phifes, as it had been agreed, and entered
disarmed into the city, passing thorough the Chattes does visit the Marquis.
Marquesses troops which were armed and in guard, where the commander Chattes
with the Lord of Carrauaca marshall of the field, and other principal
officers did visit the Marquis, by whom they were kindly enterteined.

In this time the galleies and other vessels were arrived at Faiall with the
men that Peter de Toledo carried, and passing with them Goncalo Perera a
Portugal, who had wife and children in this Island, They of Faiall kill a
trumpet that was sent unto them.
the said Peter thought it good to send him before as a trumpet, to entreat
the people to yield, supposing that being of that conntrey, he should have
credit amongst them, to let them understand the Kings forces, and the dangers
that approached, to the end they might the more easily yield obedience: But
Anthony Guedez de Sosa, who was captain of this Island, neither respecting the
messenger, nor the reasons which he delivered, nor yet regarding the example of
his stronger neighbors, having outraged him, both in word and deed, in the
end he slew him, as if in giving him this notice he had touched him in his
honor. Peter de Toledo seeing the messenger not return, surmising what had
happened, resolved to disimbarke his men, and finding the Island not so rockie,
and less fortified then the Terceres, the second of August he landed his The
landing of Peter de Toledo at Fatal, and the sack thereof.
men almost without resistance, and marching against the town, he was
encountered by four hundredth French, and many Portugals, where the skirmish
began, the which increasing, the French and Portugals were feign to retire into
a small castle, whereinto they had drawn the greatest part of their
artillery and munition, Anthony Guedez de Sosa hanged by the arm, and
wherefore.
where after they yielded in the same manner as those at the Terceres had done,
and Sosa suffered the punishment of his inhumanitie, being hanged by one arm
after his hands were cut off. It is strange to see the confidence of these men,
the which (nothing terrified by examples) did induce them to cruel excess,
and yet did not force them to fight it out unto death: but the Portugals
unexperienced, do not account of dangers they see not, and when they see them,
they fear them more then they are to be feared. There was no more to be done
in this island; so as having spoiled it, leaving Anthony of Portugal for
Governor, with two hundredth soldiers, Peter de Toledo returned with his
galleies and other ships to the Terceres, where the rest of the Islands of Saint
George, Pico, and Gratiosa came to yield their obedience. The Marquis having
agreed with the French, caused a diligent search to be made for Emanuel de
Silua, who entitled himself count of Torres Vedras, Governor and General
of the Islands, but being retired to Altary, and finding that such as had the
charge of certain boats, in whom fortune had more force then loialtie, had
broken them against the rocks, he found all hope vain for his safety,
having no means to free himself by the French composition, being attired in a
base habit he hid himself in the mountains. But it seemed the heavens had
decreed, he should suffer punishment for his offenses, by the hands of his
enemies, for that a moorish slave, who hoped by that means to save himself,
discovered him to a Provost marshall, who seeing him before his eyes, knew not
what he was; so as having taken and Emanuel de Silua taken, and executed with
others.
brought him to the city, he was kept with some other of the principal rebels
and seditious, until the process of their death were made, by the auditour,
in the name of the King and the Marquis, as general of the army, specifying
all their faults that were executed upon the prisoners. The Germans first put
themselves in battle in the chiefest part of Angra, keeping the entry of
every street, and there causing a fire to be made, they did burn all the
money they found to be stamped with the coin of Anthony, the which although
it was not little in quantity, yet was it nothing worth, being for the most
part of base metal, with small mixture of silver: After they cut off
Emanuel de Silua his head with a sword, after the German fashion, to the
general grief of all the assistants: For being of a lovely countenance, and
having in this last hour with great resolution confessed himself culpable,
and to have deserved this punishment; he demanded pardon of one after
another, of all such as present or absent he thought to have wronged, saying,
that he alone had bin the cause of the misery of this Island, and that he alone
ought to suffer the punishment; the which joined to the contrition he showed,
did move the hearts even of his enemies: And in truth we may well say that he
framed himself to the speech of Dionysius the tyrant, that to leave a tyranny
they must not ride poast, but stay until they be forced, for in truth he
attended until he lost his head. His head was set up publicly in that place,
from the which that of Melchior Alphonso was taken, whom a little before he had
put to death, for being affectionate to the Catholic king: And it was
observed, that being required by the kinsemen of the dead, to take it from
thence, he made answer it should be removed when his stood in the place,
which he meant should be never; thus do men suddenly foretell their own
miseries. Emanuel Sarradas, who as we have said spoiled the Islands of Cape
Vert, and Amador Vieira (who with the title of Ambassador to his Majesty, had
betrayed such as trusted in him, did likewise lose their heads. They The French
men sent to the galleies.
did hang many, and many (especially of the French) taken prisoners before the
capitulation, were sent to the galleies: The Marquis was commanded to dispatch
with all speed, and to go with his army to Cales, and some said the King
would turn his forces against Afric, and sease upon Alarache, and possibly
attempt the like upon Algier, being fitter to undertake those enterprises in
Autumn then in any other season of the year: And therefore having left John
de Vrbina with two thousand Spanish foot for the guard of the Islands, he
failed with the fleet and the rest of the soldiers toward the port of
Andolouzia: and in the mean time both in Castill, and in Portugal, they made
greatioy for this victory, with public feasts, but not so great as was the
grief of Anthony his followers, whereof many (hoping that the strength of this
Island should yet be a subject for Anthony to return into the realm) were
discouraged, so as there remained no ground, whereon to settle their hopes,
although many expected that Anthony suruiuing Philip, the estate of things
might so change, as they might yet attain the accomplishment of their desires.

FINIS.
A Table of the especial matters contained in this History.
A
ABdala, son to the Cheriffe, page 14 Advise of John de Silua touching the
voyage of Afric 35 Aldana sent by Philip to discover the fortresses of
Afric 21. arriues there at the Portugal camp 37. is slain 49 Aid
demanded by the Portugalles from the French King 139 Alarm at Lisbone 189
Embassage from Henry to the Catholic King 56 Ambassadors chosen to go to
Rome touching Henry's marriage 78 Ambassadors for the Governors to Philip and
their negotiation 130 Ambrose d' Aguiar sent by Philip to the Terceres 241. he
dies 281 Anthony Prior of Crato taken by the Moors 49 pretends to the crown
of Portugal 62. his grounds for his pretention 83. his letters to King Henry
87. declared illegitimate 89. his course to obtain the Crown 120. his letters
to the Estates at Almerin 121. his arrival there 122. proclaimed King at S.
Arem 160. comes to Lisbone and is proclaimed there 164. received at Settuuall
under a cloth of Estate 169. received into Lisbone with joy 176. prepares to
defend the realm 179. importuned by poor women to succor Settuuall 184. his
counsel and resolution 185. his fear 186. his counsels ill grounded 188. he
offreth to compound 190. he marches toward Cascaies 196. he marches toward
Belem with his men confusedly 199. he retires to Alcantara 201. his letters to
King Philip 204. he prepares against the Duke 213. he flies toward Lisbon 215.
is overthrown and hurt 216. he gathered new forces at Coimbra 222. his speech
to his soldiers 234. he flies to Viana 236. he saues himself over the river
of Minio 238. his good fortune 259. he arriues at Cales 260. his care to have
the Indian fleet 263. his voyage to the Terceres 293. his carriage after the
sea fight 295 his departure for France 298 Angra given to be spoiled three
days page 319 Anthonic Guedez de Soza hanged by the arm and wherefore 322
Anthony Scalin a Frenchman received into Angra under a Canapie 240 Apparition
of a Comet 22 Army parts from France with 70. ships and 7000. men 278 Army
of Spaniards part with 6000. men 277. they arrive at Saint Michaels 283. defeat
the French 291 Arrival of four ships from the Indies 219 Auero taken by
Anthony 223. and recovered by Auila 230
B
Battle betwixt the Portugals and Moors page 44. famous by the death of three
Kings 52 Baldes his attempt upon the Terceres 255. his soldiers overthrown
there with oxen 257. his overthrow prejudicial to the kings service 258.
imprisoned in Portugal 263 Bezars stone excellent against the plague 109
Beginning of the fight at sea 288 Bishop of Guarda seconds Anthony page 187
Brisac flies from the battle 290
C
CAbessa Secca fortified 140 and abandoned 207 Calender reformed 302 Cardinal
Riario sent Legate into Spain 190 Cardinal of Austria made Governor of
Portugal 271. 304 Cascaies and Saint Julian yield to Anthony 169 Cascaies
with the Castle taken and spoiled by the Spaniards 197 Catarre most contagious
221 Castillians discourse of the affairs of Portugal 103 Christopher de Mora
sent into Portugal in the place of John de Silua 82 Chattes sent to succor
the Terceres 310. he and Silua discourse upon the strength of the Island 311. he
visits the Marquess 321 Conditions of their accord ibid. Charles Borgia Duke
of Gandia succeedes the Duke of Alua 302 Catherine Duchess of Bragance
visites King Henry 116 Ciprian de Figueredo Governor of the Terceres put from
his charge page 307 Clause in King Henry's will 123 Conditious offered by Philip
to the Portugals if they would quietly yield the realm 134 Confusion of the
affairs in Portugal 140. 154 Confusion in Lisbone 196 Coimbra yielded 228
Conclusion of the Estates at Almerin 131 Conte of Vimioso seconds the King of
Portugals will 35. he is wounded to the death 291 Counsel touching the
Embassage that king Philip sent to Henry 69 Counsel of the kings Chamber 246
Counsel of Estate in Portugal reduced to two 255 Cruelty at the Terceres 258
D
DEcree made by the Governors for Philip against Anthony page 178 Demands of
the Estates at Tomat page 249 Description of Lisbon 3 Deputies of Portalegre
their speech page 124 Deputies of the realm demand of Henry to be admitted
to the Election 113. their answer to Martin Gonsalues 118 Description of
Portugal 2 Description of the revenues of Portugal 17 Description of Molucs
army 39 Diego de Meneses beheaded 198 Discontentments of the people of Lisbon
79 Discourse touching the precedence of Philip and Henry 66 Disorders at
Lisbon 179 Duke of Auero and Aldana slain 49 Duchess of Bragance pretends to
the Crown of Portugal 61. her grounds 84 Duke of Sauoy pretends 62. his
reasons for it 83 Duke of Parma pretends for his son Rainuctus 62. his
reasons 83 Duke of Ossuna sent to Henry 66. his proceedings in Portugal 75
Duke of Barcellos detained cunningly by the Duke of Medina Sidonia page 125 Duke
of Alua imprisoned and the cause 70. made General against the Portugals 128.
he arriues at the Army and the number thereof 128. the estate of his army
134. passes his army at Cascaies 193. lands there, and the disposition
thereof 194. marches against the rock of Saint Julian 202. his answer to
Anthony 205. his speech to his soldiers 212. the order of his army, ibid.
blamed for slacknes 218. his praises 220. blamed, and his excuses 223. his
soldiers complain 245. his death, with his praise and dispraise 300
E
EDward de Castro beheaded by Anthony 292 Eluas taken 155 Emanuel de Silua
stays at the Terceres 298. his carriage there 307. his flight hindered 318.
taken and executed with others 323 Empress Marie comes to Lisbone 271 Estates
at Almerin 109. begone by the Bishop of Leiria 110 Estate of France and
Flaunders 265 Euora yielded 175
F
FActions in Oliuenza 161 Fear in the city of Lisbone 207 Flight of Teglio
167 Figueroa arriues at the Terceres, and returns to Lisbone 263 Fonsequa his
speech for the creation of Anthony 165 Fortress of Settuuall yielded 184
Francis de Tauora slain in the battle page 48 Francis de Melo Earl of
Tentuguell writes to king Sebastian 18 Francis Barretto sent by the Portugals
to the French king for succors 139 Francis de Valois Duke of Alanson enemy to
king Philip* and why 266. sworn Duke of Brabant 268. seeks to be master of
Antwerpe, but in vain 305 Francis de Villafagna, Auditor of the Council of
state, sent to Lisbone by king Philip 244 French army arriues at S. Michaels
280. their first encounter 282. they disagree 288. they are beheaded and hanged
295. displeased with their overthrow 299. they spoil the Islands of Cape Vert
307. they compound with the Spaniards at the Terceres 320. sent to the galleys
324
G
Galleys arrive at the Terceres in safety 312 Generals ship of the French
taken by the Spaniards 291 George de Meneses general at sea, imprisoned by
Anthonies command page 186 Governors of Portugal published 99. they prepare for
defense 132. their inconstancy 148. they neglect the defense of Lisbone 163.
they fly from Settuuall 168. their decree 178
H
HAmet proclaimed by the Moors 52. his covetousness 53 Henry Cardinal called
to the crown of Portugal 55. sworn king 57. his resolution coming to the
crown 64. he favors the Duchess of Bragance 76. he desires to marry 80. his
sentence against the Prior touching his legitimation 87. he changes his mind
in favor of Philip, 97. he falls sick and dies 116. his life 117 Henry
Pereira hanged 198 Hopes of the French army at sea with Strozzi 278 Hope of
the Spanish court touching their army at sea 279
I
IEan de Betancour affected to Philip page 256 Ieron Mendoza treats with
Anthony 260 Jesuits called Apostles in Portugal, not able to redress the
corruptions of the Portugals 9. blamed as moters of Sebastians voyage into
Afric II. walled up at the Terceres 243 John de Silua Ambassador for Philip
in Portugal, delivered and returns out of Afric 74. he labors to be sent
back into Portugal 82 John d'Austria gouernou^r of Flaunders for king Philip
23 John d'Azeuedo admiral of Portugal taken prisoner by the Castillians 176
Island of the Terceres described 313 Island of Saint Michael described 280
Inhabitants of Fayall kill a trumpetter that was sent unto them 322. are taken
323 Irishmen demand succors of the Pope against their Prince 27
L
Laws made between Mahumet Cheriffe, and Hamet his brother touching the
succession of the realm 14 Legate visites the king 192 Leon Henriquez
Confessor to Henry supposed to have drawn him to favor Philips title 98
Letters and a present from the Duke of Alua to king Sebastian 38 Jews Dataide
Cont of Toghia sent Viceroie to the Indies by Sebastian 25. obeies king Philip
262 Lisbone chief city of Portugal 3 yeeldes to the Duke of Alua 217 swears
obedience to Philip 221 Lucciali comes to Algier with seventy galleys 265
M
MAgistrate of Lisbone persuades Anthony to compound 208. Mahamet son to
Abdala kills his uncle 14. is expelled by his uncle Moluc, and seeks for
succor of Philip and Sebastian 15. disswades Sebastian to go in person into
Africa 26. despeares of the victory 36. disswades the battle 41. is drowned
in Mucazen 51. his skin fleied off 53 Manner of the enterprise of Portugal
page 132 Marquis of Saint Cruz arriues at Settuuall with an army by sea 183.
he imbarkes for the Terceres 277. he resolves to fight with the French, and the
order of his battle 285. he defeats them and gives sentence against the
prisoners 294*he landeth some men at the Terceres 316 his skirmish with the
French 317. takes S. Sebastian 319. sends to Faiall 320 Martin Gonsalues sent
to the deputies of the realm 118 Messenger sent to Cardinal Henry from king
Philip 55 Meneses blamed and his excuses 195 Mulei Moluc prepares against the
Portugals 31. his means to defeat them 34. his advise to the king of Portugal
36. his speech to his brother 38. his army 39. the ordering thereof 42. his
oration to his soldiers 43. his fear and death 47 Mutiny at Coimbra 112
N
NAmes of the chief men slain in the bataile of Afric 52 Number of the
Christians and Moors slain in the battle ibid. Number slain in the
battle at Alcantara 218 Number slain in the battle at sea page 293
O
OFfer made by Moluc to the kings of Spain and Portugal 31 Oliuenza yielded
to the Catholic king 158 Opinions touching the passage of the river of Tagus
192 Order of the Portugals and Moors army 41, 42 Original of the hatred
betwixt the Portugals and Castillians 5
P
PArleament at Tomar 248 Peiyoxto sent to Saint Michaels fought with by French
ships 276 Peter d'Alcasoua sent ambassador to Philip 16 punished by Henry and
the cause 64 Peter de Medici general of the Italians 134 Peter Dora Consul of
the French sent into France for Anthony 178*he remains there with the money
he received 188 Peter de Toledo lands at Faiall and spoils it 322 Philip king
of Spain meets with Sebastian at Guadalupa 15*persuades him to accept of
Molucs offer 20. labors to divert Sebastian from Afric 24. accepts peace and
Sebastians body 56. claims the crown of Portugal 61. writes to the city of
Lisbone 72. sendes a Iacobin into Portugal 80. erects a council for the
affairs of Portugal 81. his reasons against the other prete^dents 81 his
reasons for his prete^tion 81. he gives Henry notice of his right 91. he
prepares to war against the Portugals 92. his care to assure his conscience for
the realm of Portugal 126. his answer to the Portugals 144. he takes
possession of the realm 152. his army is wasted 153. his letters to the
inhabitants of Eluas 156. his letters to Anthony 159. proclaimed at Oliuenza
162. his answer to the Duke of Bragance 171. his pardon to the Portugals 201.
he falls sick 221. he enters into Portugal by Eluas 238. he visits the
Duchess of Bragance 247. sworn king at Toruas with the prince Diego 248. his
entry into Lisbone 253. his recompense to the Portugals 270. he prepares
against the Terceres 273. he arms in all places, and the cause thereof 274.
his order in preparing 275. he departs from Portugal 304. his army departs
from Lisbone 312. arriues at the Terceres and their proceeding* 314 Plague in
Portugal 108 Places fortified by the Portugals 140 Portugals conquests at the
Indies 4. they prepare for the war of Afric 25. their army lands in
Afric and their proceedings 30. the quality of their army 37. their
conceit to fight 39. the order of their battle 40. their advantage of the
Moors 41. their army at sea returns to Lisbone 54. their sorrow 56. their
ceremony in bewailing their king dead 58. they pretend election of their king
62. their demands 66. their reasons for the election 84. they complain of king
Henry 85. their discourse upon the estate of the realm 101. they answer the
Castillians 106. they disagree with them 229. they are discontented 252. they
abandon the French 319. their ships are spoiled 320 Pope pretends election 63
Pope Gregory the xiij. his offer to the Catholic king 98. he favors Anthony
190 his offer against England 243. seems content with the success of
Portugal 251 Porto yielded 236 Preparations at the Terceres 264 Preparations
of the French for the Tercer^^ 269 Prince of Orange wounded by a Biscaine 269
Pretendants to the crown of Portugal and their descent 60. cited to declare
their reasons 80 Prosper Colonna, Colonel of the Italians 134. he passes the
bridge defended by the Portugals 215
Q
QVeene mother of France pretends to the crown of Portugal 62. her reasons for
it ^^ she is discontented with Philip, and the cause 67 Question whether the
Catholic king should go in person with his army 152 Queen Anne died 238
R
REason of the Portugals by way of discourse touching their future King 66
Reasons and grounds of king Philip to the realm of Portugal 67. examined by
divines 126 Regencie of the Governors 118 Religious men divided into factions
200. they hold military charges 180. and keep the keys of Lisbon page 208
Resolution of Gonsalues charge 119
S
SAint Arem yeeldes obedience page 222 Sanches d' Auila Marshall general of
the Spanish camp 134. he is sent against Anthony 227. he passes the river of
Doro at Auintes 232 his speech to his soldiers, ibid. his stratageme to pass
the river 234. he dies 307 Sebastian king of Portugal his life 10. his first
voyage into Afric 11. his enteruiew with Philip at Guadalupe 15. he is
persuaded to make war in Afric by Mahamet ibid. lands his army at Arzille
30. he fights valiantly and is vanquished 50. he is slain by the Moors and
carried to Molucs tent 51. his funerals at Madril 66. his obsequies with the
Princes of Portugal 302 Settuuall taken 182 Summarie of an oration made at the
assembly of Estates 77 Sosa Deputy of Lisbon his answer page 111 Spaniards
discourse upon the Cardinals legation 191 Spanish soldiers discontented with
the sentence given against the French prisoners 295. they entreat for them
ibid. Spaniards discourse upon the enterprise of the Terceres 309 Stratagem
with oxen divised by a religious man 257 Stremos taken 175 Strozzi slain 291
Suburbs of Lisbon spoiled 217
T
TErceres 227. the description thereof 239 the resolution of the inhabitants
241. their confusion 272 Testament of King Henry 123 Thomas Stukley an
Englishman with 600. Italians serves King Sebastian page 27 Tower of Belem
yielded 210 Tower of Settuuall taken 184 Treaty of accord betwixt King Philip
and Anthony by the means of Carcamo a Castillian 204
V
Valor of the Italians and Spaniards 49 Valor of King Sebastian 50 Viana
taken 237 Villauisosa surprised 173 University of Coimbra 250
W
WOmen at Lisbon arm like soldiers 178
FINIS.

