A Brand taken out of the Fire. Or The Romish Spider, with his Web of
Treason. Wouen and Broken: together with The several uses that the World and
Church shall make thereof. Gathered out of the 64. Psalm.

Psalm. 112. verse. 18. This shall be written for the generations to come, and
the people that are created shall praise the Lord.



AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld for John Hodgets, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Church-yeard. 1606.

To the High and excellent Princess ELIZABETH, eldest Daughter to our
Sovereign Lord JAMES by the grace of God of Great Britain, France and Ireland
King, defendor of the faith.
MOst gracious Princess: vouchsafe (I pray you) the remembrance of that
blessing, the enjoying whereof (I doubt not) was exceedingly welcome unto you.
And let your favorable acceptance, pardon the boldness of the remembrancer, who
having nothing of his own, worthy to congratulate your Highness coming unto
our City, has been glad to take the opportunity of that gift, which the
Lord has bestowed upon you, in this great deliverance, and to present you with
the remembrance of your own renewed estate. For as in this deliverance,
whatsoever you are, or have, is newly given unto you: your most renowned
Father, and Princely Mother, your loving brethren, and tender sister yourselfe
and all: all new gifts, even newly created; by this great work of God: so is
this remembrance, a renewing of this great deliverance, as reviving the work
daily unto you, and provoking you thereby to answer it in newnes of life.
Accept therefore I beseech you (most excellent Lady) the reviving of that
work, by which you are that which you are: that so it may further you to that
which (by Gods mercy) you shall be. And to this end shall my vows and prayers be
renewed unto our God for you, And so I humbly commend your Grace to the grace of
God.

Your Graces most bounden, Thomas Cooper.

To the right Honorable, the Lord Harington, and his most virtuous Lady.
RIGHT HONORABLE: seeing the Lord has joined you both in the benefit of this
great deliverance: therefore have I been emboldened to join your Honors also
in this remembrance thereof. Though I do not say with the Jews, concerning
the Centurion, that you are worthy of this blessing: yet I may safely say what
Peter did of the other Centurion: that herein has the Lord remembered your love
unto the Gospel, and care unto his Saints. My hearts desire is, that this
deliverance may increase these blessings unto you, that so you may grow up from
grace to grace, 'till you attain unto the full measure of the age of Jesus
Christ: to whose blessed protection I commend your Honors, and your Princely
Charge. And so I humbly take my leave.

Your Honors in all duty. Thomas Cooper.

To the Right Worshipful my Christian friends and Auditors, master Mayor of
Couentrie, Master Archdeacon: the Justices, Master Steward, All those of the
Councels, together with All that do unfeignedly love the Lord Jesus, and do
long after his glorious appearance.
RIght Worshipful, two causes there are which have moved me to put forth these
plain and unpolished meditations: the one is the general good which we have
all received from the hand of our gracious God in this late great deliverance
of Prince and people, Church and commonwealth, from that bloody and hellish
practice of our desperate adversaries: the other is that particular good which
I have received from you, since my coming among you. Concerning the common
good which we have all been partakers of: surely it has been such, and so
great, as that if we should hold our peace, the very stones would speak. And
therefore that they may not be a witness against me, I have in your hearing
spoken of this deliverance. And because it is required that we should not only
declare the work of God, but commend it also by writing unto the generations
to come: therefore have I taken this further pains, to commit to writing such
notes as I have observed concerning this great work, that they may be trials
of our present thankfulness, for the blessings received, and furtherances
also to strengthen our faith, and establish our posterity, that they may wait
upon the Lord in the affiance of the like mercies.

And the rather have I been encouraged hereunto, by that particular good which
from time to time, since my coming among you, I have received from you, that
so it might be some pledge of my thankfulness unto you for the same. I may
well say you have comforted my body, and my soul: not only my outward man,
when I was a stranger to you, and by reason of the visitation of my family, in
some affliction. A kindness which by Gods mercy I shall not fail to leave
recorded to posterity, when opportunity shall serve: but specially my soul
and inward man: in beholding your Order and love unto the Gospel. Which though
it has made you stincke in the Nostrels of the common adversary: yet has
this savor of your oyntmens, caused the Saints to love you: yea the hatred of
your enemies has the Lord recompensed with such extraordinary pledges of his
favor, As that you have not only your lives and liberties given you for a
prey, but further also the Lord has honored your City with the presence and
protection of a gracious Princess: not only by making your City an harbor
for a season unto that royal branch, but thereby in mercy opening a way (if
you shall accept it) by so comfortable a protection, to the strengthening and
continuance of your holy liberty in the ways of God, And surely if you shall
not use your liberty as an occasion, to the flesh: if the dead flies of
hypocrisy, and luke-warmnesse shall not corrupt that precious ointment: but
you shall streng^hen that which is ready to die, and do the first works, and
continue therein: you shall undoubtedly be a sweet swelling savor in the
nostrils of the Lord, and so not only have your City blessed with the dew of
heaven, and fatness of the earth, but by the mercy of God, you shall be lead
forth in your most holy faith, to receive the ends thereof even the salvation of
your souls: Which, as I do heartily sigh and long after, so have I to this end
thought fit to stir up your pure minds by these meditations: that you might
have somewhat of mine with you, as a pledge of my thankfulness unto you, for
your love toward me: and a Spur to provoke and continue our thankfulness
unto God, for his wonderful mercies, renewed and continued unto us, in this
great deliverance: and that herein I may free my self from imputation of
vanity and negligence, which may happily arise from the strangeness of the
Title, and plainness of the matter, give me leave (I pray you) to yield you
reasons of them both.

Concerning the Title, my purpose is therein to discover the nature of our
adversaries, who would have done us so great evil. A very cursed generation,
and full of deadly poison, extremely cruel where they can prevail: and yet by
the Justice of God, breeding their own bane, when their sin is full, even
bursting a sunder with the poison thereof, and justly confounded with their
own malice. So is the Spider, Yea as the Spiders Web is cunningly Wouen, and
quickly broken, so are and shall be the devises of our adversaries: they shall
not be established by their iniquity: but their own cunning has and shall be
their confusion. And let this satisfy you concerning the Title.

As for the plainness, and rudeness of the matter, if you do duly consider
the rule of my direction. I trust you will acknowledge, that the power of the
spirit is best seen in weakness: and that plain lines, do best answer a
straight and even level: the evidence of the spirit, is best seen in
plainness. You see I have informed my self in these meditations, by the most
perfect Pattern: a Psalm of that Princely Prophet David, that man of
afflictions: when his life was endangered by the subtlety and violence of his
close and treacherous enemies. To be delivered from these, he flies unto his God
in prayer: and the rather to prevail, he lays before the Lord the desperate
practices of his enemies: thereby implying: that unless the Lord stood unto
him, he justly feared that they would swallow him up. This fear of his, is
the rather confirmed: because he saw them soddaine and fearelesse in their
mischievous practices: And why they should be thus fearlesse, he discouers in
the next words: because they did by many sorts of encouragements meet with this
fear. And here begin our meditatio^s: derived as you see from this pure
fountain: and watered all along with the streams thereof. If this heavenly
treasure has so shined in this earthen ves sell, that the excellency of that
power, may appear to be of God, and not of us: give God the glory in the
treasure, and be humbled in respect of the vessel. If the vessel has
received that honor from this beauenly treasure, as not to have handled it
craftily and deceitfully: but in declaration of the truth shall be approved, to
every man's conscience in the sight of God.

Then if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them th(...) (...)ish. But I persuade
myself better things of you, even su(...) (...)company salvation. And let this
be your trial, that you are contented to hear the same things again. So
accepting these pains according to the intent thereof, you shall happily ease
yourselues of the Mother and the Daughter, forgetfulness and unthankfulness:
and burden me willingly with further pains, for the further building of you
up in Jesus Christ. To whose protection I commit you. I pray you to bear with
the faults escaped in the printing, and correct the grosser of them as
follows.

Page 19. lin. 11. for rest, read cost. ead. lin. 21. for that may, read that
we may. ead. lin. 1. for we, read he. ead. lin. 29. for bloody execution, read
for the bloody execution. page 22. lin. 30. for Rhamaes, read Pharaoes. page
23. lin. 5. for perpetual, read external. ead. lin. 8. for framing, read
foaming. ead. lin. 30. for so Satan, read superstition. page 29. lin. 30. for
thing, read change. page 34. lin. 28. for save, read some. page 35. lin. 24.
for life restored, read life are restored. page 43. lin. 28. for mean, read
main. page 44. lin. 28. for the, read these.

THE Romish Spider.
THE FIRST PART. The weauing of the Web.
Psalm. 64. Verse. 5. They encourage themselves in a wicked purpose, they common
together to lay snares privily, and say, who shall see them?

6. They have sought out iniquities, they have accomplished that which they
sought out, even every one in his secret thought, and the depth of his heart.


THe holy Ghost, having in the latter Wicked, sudden, and and fearelesse in
treasons.
end of the former verse, set out the desperate resolution of the wicked, in
their attempts against the Lords Anointed, by two Circumstances; The one, That
they are sudden in execution, implying their desperateness; The other, That
they fear not, arguing their boldness and confidence in their proceedings,
does in the two next verses yield a reason, Because they use many policies
thereunto.
for this their desperate confidence, by discovering their devilish policy in
the manner of their practicing, as also in the variety and secrecy thereof.
For whereas of all other sins, the sin of treason has cause most to
affright the heart of man, not only in regard of the majesty of the Prince,
who carries the Image of God, full of terror and astonishment to the wicked,
but also in respect of the heinous punishment that attends the same, (not to
omit In that this sin beeedeth fear.
the racking of the conscience in the horror of the sin) may it not
therefore seem strange, that wretches should not fear to commit so great a
sin, that Subjects should run of boldly, and desperately to lay hands upon
the Lords anointed? The Prophet David was so affected, 1. Sam. 24.
when he had but cut off the lap of Saules garment, a wicked and reprobate
King, that his heart smote him with conscience of some great evil, in lifting
up his handagainst the Lords Anointed. And when the Amalekite 2. Sam. 1. 15.
brought news unto David, that he had slain his enemy Saul, hoping to
receive some great reward, the good King was so far from delighting in the
death of his enemy, as that rather remembering him to be the Anointed of the
Lord, he not only bewailes his death with a great lamentation, but further
reprooues the Amalekite with this severe check: How wast thou not affraide to
life up thy hand against the Anointed of the Lord? and rewards him with such
wages, as so heinous a murder did require. To fear then in attempting against
the li^e of a Prince, as there is great reason, in regard of the haynousnesse
of the sin, and the Majesty of the person against whom it is committed, so
there had need be great policy used to banish this fear.

What this policy was, the holy Ghost proceeds to relate unto us, in these
two verses following: leading us Four Policies of the wicked to give them
encouragement in their mifchiefes.
to the consideration of diverse notable points of policy, in the practices of
these Traitors against their Sovereign, to make them confident and secure
therein, that so they may be taken in the pit, which they have dug for
others.

The first whereof, respects the manner of their plotting, and it is here set
out unto us to be twofold.

First, (says the spirit) They encourage themselves in a wicked purpose, they
commune together, wherein the meaning of the holy Ghost is, to lead us to a
policy very usual in great and desperate attempts, that they are undertaken
1. Leagues and Confederacies.
and prosecuted by combination of all sorts of strength, as so many helps to
further the accomplishment thereof.

Secondly, whereas close carriage and conueyance is an especial help to
further dangerous designs, therefore the holy Ghost adds, that the special
matter of their counsel was, how they might lay snares privily, signifying
therein, that they did not only encourage themselves by mutual 2. Secrecy.
advise, laying of their heads and purses together, but that a special part of
their advise was this, so to carry their Treasons, that none might see them:
hoping by this manner of plotting, to have speedy, and sudden execution, and
discovering therein the ground and moving cause of all these desperate
practices, namely, they say in their hearts, who shall see them, that is, they
say in effect, there is no God.

Now, because malice is insatiable, and yet jealous too, doubtful to be
discried, and yet desirous to prevail; therefore behold, a second policy in
these traitorous practices, both to delude secrecy, and more effectually to
prevail, they have sought out iniquities (says the blessed spirit) that is,
they have devised store of snares, to entrap the life of the King, that so if
one should fail, the other might take 3. Variety of Plots.
effect, if some be discovered, and so breed security, (as usually they do)
the other, that lie hid might come more suddenly, and surprise more fearfully,
without auoidance.

The snares being thus co^triued in such secrecy and variety, 4. Confidence
and presumption of good success.
that if the secrecy should fail in some, yet the rest might afterward
prevail. Here upon does usually follow a double effect. The one in the
wicked, whose property is, not only to set a good face upon a bad matter, but
further also, in regard of such exquisite cunning, which they have used therein
to grow secure, and confident in the execution of their intended attempts,
undoubtedly persuading them selves of such success therein, as that they shall
have their full desire against the servants of god. This does the holy Ghost
further express unto us, when he says that they have accomplished that, which
they sought for, even every one in his secret thought, and in the depth of his
heart, signifying unto us thereby, thus much; that what plots were laid by the
wicked against the life of the King, were contrived with such secrecy, and
managed with such skill and variety, as that the Contriuers thereof, made full
account that they should prevail, though not in the profession of their
mouths, lest they should be descried, yet in the depth and secret of their
heart, wherein they flattered themselves.

And herevppon follows another effect in the Saints The godly on the
contrary, fear the worst.
of God, who being wise to see the plague which is coming upon them,
notwithstanding the secret and cunning conueyance thereof, finding their sin
justly to have deserved no less, and the malice of the wicked ready to inflict
upon them much more, do hereupon grow to a distrust in them selves, that
surely so far as they see, there is no means to escape; and so in respect of
their sins, submit them selves under the mighty hand of God, and many times
in their infirmity, do not stick to complain that they shall certainly be
ensnared with the practices of the wicked. And so also the words may be
referred as being spoken in the persons of Gods children assaulted with these
troubles.

Wherein we may behold the admirable wisdom of the lord, who having certainly
determined to free his servants These contrary effects make away to the
manifestation of Gods mercy and justice.
from the rage of the wicked, in disappoynting their practices, and turning
them upon their own pates: does by these two effects, of the confidence of
the wicked, and despair of Gods servants in them selves, prepare a notable way
thereunto: For, concerning the distrust of Gods children in themselves, seeing
no means from flesh to avoid the danger, as this must needs cause them to
renounce all confidence in the flesh, so does it more confidently cast them
upon God, and provoke them more earnestly to call for his assistance, the more
they see them selves stripped of all help from man: Whereby it comes to
pass, that calling upon the Lord in the day of trouble in this full affiance
of help in him alone, they are delivered by him, that so they may glorify
him, As for that security Psa. 50. 15.
of the wicked, grounded upon the secrecy and multitude of their mischiefs,
what is this else but a messenger of their destruction? and the more confident
they are in the success of their proiects, the nearer is their confidence to
the confusion and subversion of them; yea herein will the Lord reject their
confidence, that a sudden destruction 1. These. 5. 3.
shall come upon them, and they shall not be able to avoid it. For so it
felloweth in the next words.

But God shall shoot an arrow at them suddenly etc. Wherein Which is most
wonderfully discovered in co^founding these several policies of the wicked.
mark I pray you the wonderful power and wisdom of God, in meeting with
their several policies, by his most just and answerable Judgments.

For are the wicked wise, and deliberate in plotting their enterprises? are
they long in weauing, and wary in co^triuing? behold, the Lord does confound
this their wisdom 1. Their deliberat plotting is confounded by sudden defeature.
by coming upon them suddenly, that they which had such store of wisdom to
co^triue mischeife against others, shall now be to seek of any wisdom for
the avoiding of such sudden arrows of Gods vengeance as shall come upon them.
Behold here their wisdom turned into folly.

Again, are the wicked subtle in devising many stratagems? 2. Their manifold
snares with one terrible blow.
behold, the lord will with one blow cut them of at once. Affliction shall not
rise upon them the second time; who had hoped many times to have ensnared the
Saints of God: Behold here the multitude of their wicked conspiracies
confounded with one stroke of Gods righteous vengeance.

Thirdly, were they so secret in the contriuing of their mischiefs, that they
gave it out confidently that none shall see: behold the spirit of God gives
them the lie, and tells them plainly, that All men shall see it, yea, they who
had thought so cunningly to have carried their wickedness, as to have gone
clearly away with it, the spirit tells them they shall be discovered, and to
confound them the more, in this discovery, he tells them plainly, that their
own tongues shall fall upon them. They that say, their tongues Psa. 12. 4.
are their own, who is Lord over them? shall now see, that the mighty God
ouer-rules their tongues, and makes them the instruments of his glory, in the
discovery of sin, and the executioners of his vengeance, in the punishment of
the sinner. Behold their secrecy, even confounded from their own mouths.

Lastly, do the wicked strengthen themselves in their mischeifes by
confederacies and leagues? Lo, the Lord 4. Their Confederacies scattered.
will scatter their companies when he comes to Judgment against them, so that
whosoever does see them shall fly away: Behold here the disvniting and
breaking of their confederacies.

The practices of the wicked thus wonderfully defeated, Here follows the use
that is made thereof. 1. General, All men shall see it.
and they being justly met with all in their mischeifes, by answerable
judgments, what now is to be done by those that are delivered? what must we
repay unto the Lord for all his wonderful mercyes?

The holy Ghost proceeds in the two next verses to inform us in such duties
as concern us in this case, All men shall see it (says the blessed spirit)
that is, the eyes of all men shall be fastened upon it, to observe and behold the
wonderful works of God. And whosoever shall duly observe these great works
of God, and shall give him the reverence that is due unto his name, for the
execution of so great judgments, his mouth shall be opened to 2. Shall declare it.
declare the work of God, he cannot be silent in a day of so good tidings,
nay, he shall not only speak of what is done, but his understanding shall be
convinced, that it was not the arm of flesh but the Lords own doing, nay, he
3. Understand it to be Gods doing.
shall further understand the greatness of the deliverance, he shall
understand (says the holy Ghost) what God has done. And this use shall every
one make of great deliverances. But the righteous, who only has true interest
2. Particular to the saints.
therein, when he has apprehended in his judgment the greatness of this
mercy; when he has attained in some measure to a large knowledge thereof;
then shall his heart be enlarged to reioyce-therein, and finding it to 1. To
rejoice.
be the Lords doing, which is maruailous in his eyes, this shall be a means
to make him trust in God, and thereby 2. To trust in God.
finding his heart upright unto the Lord his God, he shall again rejoice in
the greatness of his mercy. Thus shall the righteous do, whose hearts are
upright in the Lord. Thus shall a great deliverance be entertained by them.

Now, that we may approve our selves to be of the number of these, having
thus briefly delivered the sum of the Scripture, let us turn back again, and
consider the several lessons therein contained, that so we may lay them unto
our hearts, as they lie in order, and make further application of them, to our
building up in Christ Jesus.

And first, let us consider the policies, whereby Rebels and desperate persons
so animate themselves in their traitorous practices, that they are fearelesse,
and exceeding presumptuous in the devising, and prosecuting thereof.

They encourage them selves etc. (says the holy Ghost) 1. Observation The
wicked strengthen and encourage themselves in their wickedness, and why?
in a wicked purpose: That is, they use all outward and carnal means to
strengthen, and confirm them selves therein, that so they may not be daunted,
and driven from their purposes. A policy very usual among the wicked in
plotting of desperate attempts, and indeed uery necessary to the effecting
thereof. For where the conscience of so great evil must needs disharten them,
there all outward encouragements will prove little enough. And herein does
appear the wisdom of the world, that what is wanting in the inward
approbation, shall outwardly be supplied by carnal comforts. But above all the
cunning of Satan, is here most lively discovered, who, purposing to bring the^
to confusion by these desperate practices, does therefore oppose these outward
encouragements, to the inward checkes and discouragements of the conscience,
that so the checks of the conscience might in some sort be counteruailed, and
thereby neglected: and the heart being by this means hardened, and so in the end
made past feeling, 4. Ephesians. 19.
the wicked may break out more desperately in their attempts, as being now
possessed with a deadly security, whereby, having made up the measure of their
sin, when they shall say peace, and security, and fear no evil, then shall
1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.
a sudden destruction come upon them, and they shall not be able to avoid it.

Lo, hear the wisdom of the wicked in this encouraging of themselves; and
yet behold a further depth of their wisdom in the means, and manner of this
encouragement, and yet all tending to their further confusion.

These means I have observed to be of two sorts; The first are carnal,
serving only to satisfy the flesh; but the Two sorts of means, whereby the
wicked do encourage themselves.
second are spiritual, pretended to satisfy the mind in these lawless and
monstrous actions, and so to give color of justifying the same.

The Carnal furtherances, to these desperate attempts Carnal, and they are
two.
are of diverse sorts. First, a combining and uniting of forces together, by
leagues, and associations; and that for diverse ends. First, to give credit
unto their attempts in regard Leagues and Confederacies.
of the multitude; secondly, to breed terror of their purposes, as proceeding
from so many; and lastly, that what cannot be don secretly, may by force openly
be maintained. So did the nations of the earth, band themselves against the
Lord, and against his Anointed. So did the Tabernacles of Edom Psa. 2. 2.
conspire with the Israelites, Moab with the Ammonites, Gebal, Amelech, the
Philistines, and the rest, when they said: Come and let us cut them off from
being a nation, and let the name Psa. 83. 3.
of Israel be no more in remembrance. So did the enemies of God, combine
themselves in that unholy League, even in our age, for the rooting out of the
poor Church of God. And so did that viperous brood, thus encourage it self by
secret leagues and associations at home, and abroad, to ruinate, and destroy
utterly the most excellent estate of the blood Royal, the Church, and Common
wealth.

And shall the wicked be thus wise in their generation, to strengthen
themselves in their mischiefs, against God, and his Church, by combining their
forces together: and shall not we which are the children of light, much more
be knit together in the bond of peace, that we may jointly bend our strength
against the common enemy? shall the the shadows separate us, when the
substance is endangered? It was a comfortable speech of Judah unto So let us
strengthen our selves against the^. Judge. 1. 3
Simeon his brother; Come up with me into my lot, that we may fight against
the Canaanites, and I likewise will go up with thee unto thy lot, (so, says
the spirit) Simeon went up with him. So should brethren join together;
Brethren against the common enemy, that his force may be weakened. Oh that
Simeon and Judah would thus join together for good; as Simeon and Leui are
brethren in evil. Only let us be careful, that we be not yoaked unequally,
that so our conjunction being in the Lord, it may be blessed of him.

A second carnal means, whereby the wicked are encouraged in evil purposes,
is a gift in the bosom, some present 2. Carnal means are gifts and rewards.
Leut. 16. 19.
pay before hand: whereby, they are not only blinded in the true judgment of
their sin, but in regard thereof, they are also drawn on to adventure such
punishments as may befall the same. So was Balaam attempted to curse the people
of God: So was Judas hired to betray his master: Number. 22. 18. Mat. 26.
So was Lopas enduced to poison his mistress; and so has the foreign gold,
deceived many of our Italianated Devils.

Oh that we could be as bountiful to good purposes, as these are to bad, that
we could be as willing to employ This teaches libe ality to good purposes.
our treasure for the good of the Church, as these are open handed for the
spoil thereof, that we could be as forward in aduenturing, for the saving of
souls, as these Pharisees are compassing Land and Sea, sparing no pains,
neither Mat. 23.
thinking any cost too much, to make one of their profession; though when he
is made, they make him twofold more the child of hell, than they themselves.
Certainly, if we be not; the thirty pieces of silver, shall one day condemn
us, and Least the wicked condemn us. Math. 26. Exodus 32. A third carnal
means, is hope of Honor and preferme^t.
the earings, and bracelets of the people, which they willingly imparted to
Idolatry, shall at the day of Judgment give sentence against us.

A third carnal means to encourage the wicked in their traitorous purposes, is
the hope of such honors and preferments as may afterward befall them. Great is
the abiectnesse which is incident into pride, and the slavery which ambition
is subject unto, is intolerable. What wickedness is there which the hope of
honor will not digest? what danger is there, which it will not cause to
adventure? Let our first Parents, be but tickled with this hope that they
Genes. 3. 45.
shall be like unto God; and they will not stick to commit that, whereby they
become subject to the Devil. Let Diotrephes have this spur, and he will
easily make shipwreck 3. Ioh. 9.
of a good conscience.

Oh that our climing heads would consider this: that such pleasant baits, have
such deadly hooks! And seeing there Use. 1. 2. Teaching us to seek heaven as
carefully in well-doing, as these hunt sha dowes with sin. 2. Cor. 14. 17.
Least otherwise they be our Judges. Spiritual encouragements to resolve the
conscience.
is an eternal weight of glory reserved for us in the heavens, which only
may be compassed by good and holy means; Oh that the hope of a certain, and
euer-during honor, might so far provoke us to well-doing, as the hope of this
vain, and transitory shadow, prevails with the wicked to whet the^ on to
evil! Well, let us try our selus hereby, least otherwise they condemn us in
the day of Christ. And so much of the Carnal means.

Now it follows, that we speak of the spiritual means. By spiritual means
we understand such, whereby the mind and conscience is in some sort resolved,
and seemingly satisfied; but indeed deceived, in the doing of so great, and
outrageous mischiefs. For in vain should Satan offer all these carnal
means, to persuade the attempting of such monstrous, and horrible actions unto
those, that pretend conscience, and boast of exquisitie perfection in all their
actions; if now the conscience were utterly unresolved in the lawfulnes
thereof. What policy then does Satan use to persuade the conscience. Surely, as
he is the Lords executioner to blind the minds of such, who not obaying the
truth Being indeed but strong delusions of Satan. 2. Cor. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 3. Esaias.
5. 1, Romans 28. Ioh. 16. 2.
are therefore justly given over to be deceived by strange delusions, so as God
of this world, does he blind the minds of Infidels, not only making the^ to
shut their eyes against the truth, but further also infatuating their
judgments, that they shall call darkness light, and light darkness, and so
their judgments being perverted, he works upon their affections, not only
to move them to do such things as are most inconvenient, but further so to
flatter themselves in the doing thereof, that in so doing, they shall do God
good service. So has that great deceauer bewitched his followers, not And
Antichrist. 1 That it is lawful.
only persuading the lawfulnes of that act of the murdering of Princes,
although contrary to the word of God, and common law of nature and equity, but
further advancing the fact to an high degree of merit, yea advancing the
authors 2. Nay meritorious.
(if they will believe him) to an extraordinary measure of glory, for this
their abominable act of the murder 3. Of extraordinary glory to murder
Princes. 1. Justified by Bulls.
of Princes. And that nothing may be wanting to encourage them thereunto.
Behold he has his Bulls to release them of their loyalty, as if he were able
to loose that on earth, which is bound in heaven: and that their disobedience
may not be discovered, here serve his dispensations to tolerate their obedience
so long, till opportunity shall serve 2. Dispensations.
to effect their mischief. And when the wickedness is to be accomplished;
behold then he binds them to the same even by the straightest bonds of their
religion. We read of the soldiers that lay in wait for Paul, that they bound
themselves by an oath, that they would not eat, before they And bound thereto.
bad deprived him of his life. But this man of sin, is not content only with
an oath, but their vows must further 1. By Oaths.
be in heaven (as Parry acknowledges:) yea, to make up the measure of their
wickedness; Behold, they must confirm 2. Vows.
themselves by the sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus, that so
they may more desperately shed 3. Sacrament.
the blood of the Lords Anointed.

Oh that we were wise to consider these things! That seeing the verdict of the
conscience is the warrant of every action, and yet the conscience may be so
informed, as to Learn hence to have the conscience rightly informed. Romans 14.
1 By the word. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2 And obedi^ thereunto.
give aim to such vile and abominable practices: we would therefore labor
for the true information of the conscience, that so it may give in a right
verdict. Certainly as there is no knowledge to the word of God, so there is
none to this, to inform the conscience. And seeing that obedience to this
blessed word of God, is the only means to have this saving knowledge continued
unto us, labor we in the fear of God to make conscience of this obedience,
that so the conscience may not be given up to such strong delusions; And seeing
that the knowledge of the 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Gospel is the doctrine of obedience, oh let us not harken to that devilish
polycy, which says, that where the people are ignorant, there they may be best
ruled, but where they are full of knowledge, there they grow busy, and will
prove seditious. But let us endeavor, that the word of God may dwell
plentifully among us; that therein performing obedience unto God, we may also be
blessed in our obedience unto man: Let it no more be said, that ignorance is
the mother of devotion, but let it now appear that ignorance is the mother of
rebellion. And if this be a case of conscience to lay hands upon the Lords
anointed. Oh let us take ^^ede of the Take we heed of such cloakes and fear
we not such curses.
cloak of religion, which may be a broker to such vile practices. Let us not
fear the curses of such an accursed religion, whose vows and sacraments
employed to the strengthening and encouraging of such damnable mischeifes, do
necessarily draw down a curse, and not a blessing thereupon. Yea detest we
utterly such an abominable religion, whose foundation is treason, and whose
practice is blood-sheding And in the name of God proceed we courageously to
the rooting out thereof: that so, the more they curse, and rage against the
Lords ordinance, the more the Lord may bless, and prosper the same, Psa. 910.
28.
the more they foam and break out in the discovery of their damnable
enterprises, the more may they rypen and make up the measure of their sin,
that so the Lord may consume the^ with the power of his coming. Distrust we
from hence forth all popish holiness, which is to be approved But detest we
the religion and power of Room.
and gained by such impious practices. And seeing this is the fruit of all
foreign subjection; from the bottom of our hearts renounce we all such
usurped power, which thus exaltes it self above all that is called God, and
thus controwling the word, and abusing the means of Gods worship to such
horrible purposes, presumes and iustifyeth the remoouall of the Lords
anointed. It follows. They commune together to lay snares privily, and say,
who shall see them.



Behold, here a second policy, whereby the wicked confirm A second poli cy of
secrecit.
them selves in their desperate practices against the Lords Anointed, namely,
the secret plotting, and conueyance thereof. And this very fitly, in regard of
the sin, and also very justly in respect of the sinner. For as every sin is
Romans 13. 12. Ioh. 3. 20.
a work of darkness, as well in that it hates the light, and delights to be
committed in darkness, as also, in that it is Satan's That which sin delights
in. Mat. 25.
power, to bring us to utter darkness; so, is also this sin of treason, and
rebellion aginst the Lords Anointed. And, as other sinners desire to be hatched
in darkness, both To avoid shame. Ioh. 24. And punishment.
in regard of the shame, which otherwise the light would bring with it, and
also in respect of the fear of punishment which attends the same: so also in
these respects, this sin of treason, delights in secrecy, both, in that it is
an odious and monstrous sin, and therefore is ashamed to be known, but
especially, because, how soever other sins may go scotfree in this life, yet
this has a severe punishment justly assigned thereunto, the fear whereof does
necessarily impose this secrecy: And herein especially That which Satan
espe^ia^^ labors, either
does Satan's cunning appear; that, whereas he has a purpose by this sin, to
bring traitors to their utter confusion, therefore, does he principally further
this their secrecy hereunto. For, whereas sin being not judged in this
life, shall certainly be judged in the life to come: therefore, by this
secrecy, does he flatteer these monsters, for the avoiding of temporal
judgments, that so, either avoiding the^ here, they may be sure to meet with
them in another life; That notheing punished here, may receive it wages in bell.
or if so be (as likely it does not miss,) that they shall be met withal in
this life, by the sword of the magistrate, yet their secret carriage of the
mischeise, breeding security, and so excluding repenca^ce, though they shall be
judged of man: yet because they do not judge themselves, they shall not escape
the judgment of the Lord. Herevpo^ it is, that the holy Ghost, entending to
show, how the wicked encouradgethemselues in an evil purpose, having declared
in the former point, their policy in combining, and strengthening themselves,
by carnal and spiritual means, to give the better onset to so desperate a
practice, does now proceed to lay open the means, whereby they hope to go
clearly away with it, in regard of the suddenness and unexpectedness of the
same: and also that the contriuers thereof, having accomplished their wicked
purposes. may yet notwithstanding avoid such punishments as are due unto them.
They commune together to lay snares privily, and they say, who can see them?
That is, they consult together to do their feat secretly, and in their
unknown practices, they bless their souls, and say, that none shall see
them, Treshams Letter to the Lord Mounteagle.
They shall not know who hurt them.

Lo here, a second policy of the wicked in laying their snares, that which
they do, shall be done secretly, that so it may clenly, and without danger be
conuayed. And that we may perceive it is a matter of importance, the holy
Ghost tells us, that it is not don, without great advise, They commune together
in their best aduizements. Thus did the Jews often consult together, against
our Savior Christ, and the manner of their council was, to surprise him
privily, As did the Jews.
and to remove him secretly, (as building on that false God, that if he
stood, their Kingdom must needs down) because both they feared the people,
and therefore durst not openly at the first set upon him, and indeed standing
upon the credit of their seeming holiness, they would if so they might, have
avoided the open shame, as to be counted the murderers of so holy a man. And
so for the same cause those murderers of Princes, howsoever And so do our
adversaries carry their mischiefs secretly.
it be a ruled case in the books of their devilish policy, that all power, that
spurns at that usurped Hierarchy, and will not bow to their triple Crown,
must necessarily be* removed (as being convinced in their conscience with
that true ground, that the ordinance of God which is lawful government, will
certainly overthrow their usurped tyranny:) yet neither will they be seen (if
it may be,) in so horrible a practice, neither will any of their wiser Patrons
openly justify the doing thereof, but upon the unhappy success of the same.
And the reasons are; 1. Least they which profess humility should openly be
taxed with pride and ambition. 2. Least they which profess holiness, should
be openly charged with such horrible impiety.
first, least that they which (in the greatest) profess so great humility, (as
to be the servant of servants) should openly discover their insatiable
ambition, that they will be exalted above all that is called God. And secondly,
least they which profess so great holiness, and teach such strictness of
obedience unto others, should apparantlie be convinced of such monstrous
impiety and disobedience.

And as their religion is naught else but a mystery of iniquity, cloaking sin
from the eye of the world; so in their several policies for the managing of
that Kingdom, and in those manifold weapons of their warfare, whereby they
mantaine their Diadem, and resist all opposite powers, we shall find that
secrecy has been an espetiall point, which herein they have aimed at, that
they might not be That they delight in secrecy, appears in their weapons.
seen in these their stratagems. It was the policy of the Jews that they
might not be seen in the fact, or else devolue the hatred and envy upon
others, to execute their malice against our Savior Christ by others. So did
they hyre Judas to betray Christ unto them: so brought they in Pylate to give
sentence upon him. And surely such has been the cunning of these Antichristian
Locusts, if we In the manner of their inquisition.
shall observe the manner of their bloody inquisition. Accused we must be, and
yet we shall not know by whom; tormented we shall be, and yet not see by
whom. If any be seen herein, it shall be some of our own house, either some
weak Protestant, that has yielded for fear of torture, or some damnable
Apostata, that has been corrupted with bribes, that so our grief may be the
more, and their envy the less: they may be free from the imputation of
cruelty, we loaded the more with the abuse of our profession. Thus as their
practice has been to lay their snares secretly, and to accomplish their malice
by the deputation of others: so that their posterity might have a president of
such practices, and have continual warrant to the accomplishment of the like,
behold their deuelish subtilty in incorporating of their cruel laws, into the
laws of such nations, among who^e they have erected their Their incorporating
of their Canon law into the laws of nations. To cloak their wickedness by
laws of the state.
Kingdom, that so their bloody and tyrannycall proceedings might be
countenanced by such estates, whose overthrow by the same they principally
intended. So that if at any time their proceedings should be called in
question, they may have this cloak to keep of the rain, that it was not the
high priests but Pilates doing, it was the law of the Land, and not of the
Pope. And as this has been an ordinary course of their policy, for the more
clenly co^ueyance of their mischeiuous practices, against the Saints of God:
so, when I do consider the weapons of their warfare, wherewith especially they
fight, for the upholding of Their secrecie^ further is discovered in their
weapo^ns
their Kingdom, me think I see secrecy especially aimed at therein. The
weapons wherewith this man of sin has usually stroue^, for the upholding of
his triple crown; I do find especially to have been these three. First,
combining with Satan to destroy by charms and sorceries; Secondly, Which are
3. 1 Sorcerie. 2. Poisoning. 3. Gunpowder.
attempting of life by variety of poison; And thirdly, laying secret traynes of
gunpowder to take away the same. In all which, as that purple stru^pet has
been most fruitful, and desperately prodigious, so by the nature of these
weapons, it may easily appear, that as she principally labored this, not to
be seen in her mischeifes: so, in not being seen, her glory might be the
greater in that opinion of holiness, which would redownd to her hereby, in that
her enemies were so confouded by such invisible means, Thus as the weapons of
her warfare employ her secrecy: so shall this cunning yet further appear into
us, in the devilish managing of these desperate weapons. To attempt the life by
poison may admit great secrecy, but if we consider Proved by their weapon of
poisoning.
the manner and ordering of this weapon, herein shall we see a depth of
wickedness, hardly to be sounded by common wisdom. To take life away
speedily by this desperate In the tempering thereof, that it may not kill
speedily.
engine, this may breed suspicion, and prove dangerous unto us. And therefore
this practice of the Monk of Swinstead, is now counted foolishness, and
unadvised malice in any to take such a course: because by tasting and such like
means the snare may be discovered. How then shall we do to lay this snare
privily, that it may take effect, and we be out of danger? Here consider I pray
you, the depth of Satan: the poison shall be so tempered, as not to effect this
operation until some time afterward, that so if we take part, yet by some
present Antidote the infection may be killed, and others not suspecting the
danger, as not yet perceiving the same, may so suffer the contagion to prevail
by degrees in the body, that though afterward it be perceived; yet speedily
seazing upon some vital part, it may not by any physic be corrected or
cured. When I do consider the poisoning of the saddle, Infecting holy things
therewith, that so not s(...)specting danger, we might be the sooner and yet
more secretly deceived.
and do remember withal that policy of the poisoning of the host, that
breaden God which the Papists worship: me thinks I see therein yet a further
depth of Satan's cunning in using this weapon to the maintenance of his
kingdom, and a further height of wickedness, breaking out in this case. That
ordinary meat should be subject to this infection, that apparel and such
like, should be infected therewith, this, as it is a matter suspicious, so is
it provided for, by tasting, ayring, perfuming, and such like: but who would
ever suspect such abominable impiety in so principal a part of their divine
worship? what charitable or religious heart, would once dream of any snare
couched in so holy mysteries? their tasting is not used, because there is no
suspicion, there danger is not feared, where so great devotion is pretended.
Well learn we hence, to what use serves this great Idol in Popery, and
consider we by Learn here by the way what account and to what use se^ue their
holy things.
this, what reckoning these Atheists make of their religion, what is the
principal scope and end thereof, and take we heed that at no hand, we
drink of their cup, lest though we meet not with this poison to infect the
body, yet we find a far more dangerous, to destroy both body and soul. I
must not here forget that which I trust we shall always remember, that other
weapon of this least, wherewith it defends it Kingdom, a weapon invented and
framed even in their own forge: I mean Gunpowder, and such instruments as are
employed therewith. Proved se(...)o^dly by their weapons of Gunpowder.
That this is a weapon of the Popish Kingdom, and principally used, in regard
of the secret mischief thereof, I hope we now have had new comfortable
experience, the Lord make us wise to discern these trains. And let us never
forget the secret conueyance of the snare, that some may not be secure in the
greatest calmes; and yet let us not fear, though the train shall be laid as
deep as hell, seeing our God reigns there, to discover such mischiefs. As
for the other weapon of secrecy and And thirdly by they(...) weapons of
secrecy and en^hauntments.
witchcraft, as this is a maine pillar of their Idolatry and lying Miracles,
so has it been also a new desperate weapon to defend their kingdom, witness
the manifold practices by this engine, against the life of Queen Elizabeth,
and blessed be our God, who has delivered our gracious Sovereign from the
like snare. Is not this a usual arrow of the Popes quiver?

Thus, as secrecy is the cloak to the accomplishment So have they labor ed
secretly when the fact is done, to avoid the hatred and punishment.
of their mischiefs, as heretofore has been declared by the former
circumstances; so for conclusion, let us consider in a word, what policy is
used in the co^cealing of these snares, that though they be discovered, and
take effect, yet for all this they be buried. Certainly, the sin of
Rebellion is most odious, and detestable; yea, though it do take effect, yet
leaves behind it a very hateful blot of perpetual infamy, which would not
willingly be undergone, though I love the treason, yet (the rule is true) I
hate the Traitor, because we will do the like unto me, as he has done unto
others, yea, there is a fearful punishment following at the hecles of the
same, which we would gladly avoid. Say then the Plot be discovered, and the
Treason known; how shall I now prevent this blot of Infamy? how yet shall we
avoid apprehension thereby? Behold here again the depth of Satan, and mark
well how would carry his snares in secrecy.

It is not treason, but religion thus to do, here is a large cloak to hide
this mischief. It is our glory to deliver 1 Here the cloakes are pretenses of
religion.
the Church out of slavery, yea, though it rest the best blood that shall
withstand it: here is a goodly pretense of delivering the Church, when indeed
our purpose is by remoouing government, to do every man even what he
lists. And that we may escape apprehension and punishment, observe we yet
further Satan's subtlety: To deny the fact impudently, to forswear it
damnably, these 2 Impudent denying and forswearing.
thus are ordinary and usual in this case, to outface the matter boldly;
yea, to threaten desperately, if we be not favorably used: these things have
not been wanting to free our selves from torment. That may not be discovered, 3
Threatening. 4. Refusing of oaths. 5. changing of our names. 6. apparel.
we will refuse an oath, that we may not discover others, we will bind our
selves by an oath, we will change our names, that so we may not change our
sin, and our kind, and condition shall be dissembled by strange apparel,
and all this to carry in snares secretly; yea, that we may do mischief more
desperately, and yet avoid the outward hatred thereof, we will have visors
and anticke 7. Putting on of Visors.
cloakes, bloody execution of the Saints of God. And if all this will not
serve the turn, then behold a further depth of Satan's malice. Is there any in
disgrace and under the burden already, behold our iniquity shall be posted
over unto them, and they shall bear the hatred and 8. Laying the fault on the
weakest, and accusing true religion so the fact of supers^^tion.
undergo the punishment, of what we have committed. Thus when Nero had set
fire on the City of Rome, he laid all the blame upon the Christians. Thus when
any calamity befell the Empire, presently the fault was laid upon the
Christians, they cried, to the rack to the fire, to the mines with the
Christians, this is long of them. And thus had these deadly enemies purposed
(if their plot had taken effect) which God forbid; to have fathered it upon
those, who endeavor to serve the Lord with a pure heart. But blessed be God,
who is good unto Israel, even unto those that Psa. 75. 1.
are pure in heart. And blessed be the name of his Majesty for ever, who has
preserved his Anointed, and his seed from these fatal engines, and has
justified the innocence of his servants in the sight of their enemies. And let
this now be the subject of our ordinary meditations, great deliuera^ces gives
he unto David his king, and to his seed for ever. Psa. 18. 52.


As for these policies of our enemies, in laying their 1 Learn here, not to
judge by the show, but the substance.
snares privily, as this may teach us to judge them by their works, and manner
thereof, They hate the light, and therefore their works are evil; that we
may not be bewitched with their abominations: so let us learn not to be
affraide of their snares, howsoever they be cunningly and secretly conveyed.
Certainly, howsoever they may hide them from the eye of man, yet our God, who
watches over us for good, and them to disappoint them: he beholds 2 Nor to
fear their secrecy.
their practices, and his secret is with the righteous to bring to naught the
devises of our enemies, and to hide his servants in the secret place of his
pauilion from the pride of men. He that would not hide from Abraham, what
concerned the destruction of the wicked, that so his brother Psa. 27. 5.
Lot might escape the danger; he will not hide from his children such dangers,
as are coming toward them, but will open their eyes to see the plague, that
so they may hide 3 So that we do not wilfully shut our eyes, or blindfold Gods
works.
themselves under the shadow of his wings. Only let us not wilfully shut our
eyes by presumption or security, lest hereby we betray our selves wilfully
unto the subtlety of our enemies. Let not foolish pity, or policy bleare us,
in seeing these snares, or judging slightly of them. Let not looseness in our
selves, take away courage from us, that so we may not dare to take notice of
the practices of the wicked, lest the conscience upon this knowledge be amated,
and dejected, and so possessed with a fearful expectation of the^. Let us not
deprive our selves of that true light, which may inform the conscience herein,
lest otherwise we be given up to be blinded by the enemies. Let us not imitate
4 Nor Imitate this policy in our secret carriage of our own sin.
the wicked herein, either seeking for the darkness, to commit sin more
securely, or in using any carnal cloakes to hide the same: lest our secrecy in
sin give power to their secrecy in plotting such punishments as are due to
the same. Let us not presume of impunitie, though we Whatsoever cloaks we may
have for the same.
have committed sin secretly, seeing what we have done covertly the lord will
openly discover to our greater shame: and when man cease to punish, then the
Lord himself will awake to execute vengeance. If we may have a cloak for
sin, to carry it clenly: if authority may outface, or money buy it out, if
wit will defend it, or impudency deny it; if example may color, or custom
extenuate: Oh let us not be deceived by any of these cloakes, seeing there is
nothing Seeing they will deceive us. Luke 8. 17.
so hidden, which shall not be revealed, and the more we have cloaked our
sin, the more we shall inherit shame and confusion, when it shall be
discovered: yea, the very cloakes which we used to hide our sin, shall one
day be means to lay open the same, and the rust of that riches which we have
used wrongfully, shall at the day of judgment Ia. 5. 2.
give in evidence against us: and be a means to consume us with fire. Oh
consider this you that forget God and say in your hearts; the Lord sees not.
Behold your own iniquities shall find you out, and such weapons of
unrighteousness, Ezech. 8. 12.
wherewith you have fought against the Lord, they shall now prove his weapons
to be avenged of you. Remember that ^he Babilonians, with whom Israel plaide
the harlot were the scourge of God appointed to strippe her As did the
Babilonians the Jews Ezech. 23.
naked, and fearfully to spoil her, who while she was faithful with her God,
was a terror to all our enemies. Oh let us therefore take heed of daubing
with our enemies, take we heed in any case of buying our peace, by committing
abomination with them, lest it come to pass, that as we have served our
selves of them, by taking part in their filthiness, so they shall serve
themselves of us, by making a spoil of us. And the Lord shall serve himself of
us both, and purging us by them of such dregs as remain, and hardening them by
us to their final confusion. Oh let us therefore cleave unto our God, that he
may still keep the city, and preserve Rather let us make God our hiding place by
true repentance. Psa. 127. Psa. 21. So shall he either discover, or deliver us
out of the secret snares of our enemies.
his Church among us: and then undoubtedly, though many snares be laid for us,
yet the lord will awake to discover the^ unto us, yea, this blessing shall a
faithful king receive at the hand of God, that his hand shall find out all his
enemies, and his right hand shall find out the^ that hate him, So it pleased his
Majesty to direct the heart of our Anointed to apprehend this mischief, and
principally out of the Letter contrary to all gra^maticall, or reasonable
constructio^ to scan the same, yea though the snares might happily take hold
upon us, yet will the Lord arise to deliver him that is snared, the snare shall
be broken, and we delivered. As for our enemies that have thus secretly laid
these snares. Behold the Lord will rain snares upon them, and so take them in
the pit, which they have dug for others, only let us Psalm. 11.
trust in God and wait upon him, so when the iniquity of our enemies shall be
discovered and disappointed, there shall our righteousness all come forth as
the light, and our well doing as the noone day, that the Lord may be glorified
in the justifying of his children, and we comforted in the experience of his
protection. It follows. And they say, who shall see them?

That is, They say in effect, that none shall see them, and so they do put out
the eye of Gods providence, and thereupon conclude indeed, that there is no
God. Such was the ground of Rhamaes oppression, Who is the Lord, that Exodus 5.
I should hear his voice, and let Israel go? Such was the ground of the
Idolatry of the Jews, they say, the Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken
the earth. Such was the ground of the persecution of the wicked, that he, not
only Ezech. 8. 12. Psa. 10. 3.
thinks always, There is no God: but further also, he contemns God, and
says: God has forgotten, he hides away his face, and will never see. And
this does the holy Ghost yield to be the reason, why the Gentiles were given up
into a reprobate mind, whereby they became full of unrighteousness, even
because they regarded not to acknowledge God. And surely as the profession of
Popery is a flat denial of the power of God, as being a voluntary and
perpetual worship, plausible to the sense, and agreeable to reason, so the
practice thereof is nothing else, but a maine Sea of impiety, framing out
justly it own shame, and confusion. Thus has their spiritual fornication
against God, and his ordinance, brought forth that fruitful sin of carnal
Fornications, and uncleannesses of all sorts. And thus has their desperate
rebellion against the Lord, and against his Anointed, exalting themselves
above all that is called God, brought forth that cursed Monster of treason, and
rebellion against Gods Lieutenant upon earth. It being a certain consequent,
that they do not love God whom 1. Ioh. 2.
they have not seen, who hate their brother whom they see daily: It being a
righteous thing with God, that their sin of treason against his Majesty
should be known, and discovered by their treason against the Magistrate, that
how the Magistrate may be justly provoked to fight against the beast, both for
the safety of their estates, and for the glory of God, utterly to destroy the
Kingdom of Antichrist.

Who so is wise, let him consider this, and in this glass of Rebellion, let
him observe an heart of Atheism. And if this Atheism be so easily to be
discerned in her brood, as we may not look for grapes of thorns, or figs
of thistles, any better fruit, from so cursed a tree; so let us in the name of
God disclaim, that so Satan which in the root and fruit, fights against God
and man.

And discern we wisely the truth of that Religion, which joining God and man
so graciously together, does teach us not to separate those, whom God has
joined, but to maintain this holy Unity, even with the loss of our dearest
blood; and in the fear of God cleave we unspeakably unto that holy truth,
which teaches us to give unto (not to take from) Caesar, the things that are
Caesar's, and unto God, the things that are Gods, that so honoring Caesar
aright in giving him his due under God, we may under Caesar, live a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness 1. Tim. 2.
and honesty.

And seeing there is not a more effectual means to provoke us to obedience,
than that the eye of God is continually upon us: As this was a spur unto our
adversaries for their treason against the Lords Anointed, that God should not
see them, so let it be a continual motive of our conscionable obedience unto
God and man; namely, that the Lord our God looks continually upon us. And
that we may not want a lively evidence for the same, let us only consider how
the Lord watched over us in this deliverance, that if he had been on our side,
and watched over us, when these snares were privily laid against us; surely,
they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. Yea,
the waters had drowned us, and the stream had gone over our souls. Oh that
this deliueuerance Psalm. 124. 2. 3.
may for ever stop the mouth of Athiesme, and root out that cursed brood,
which exalts it self against the Lord. Certainly, if the defeature of such
mischiefs shall not now open our mouths to acknowledge the power, and mercy
of God unto his Church, the practice whereof has opened the mouths of the
wicked, to say, there is no God: Let us look that as the Lord has justified
himself against them, by delivering us out of their hands, so will he also
justify himself against us, in laying further punishments upon us, even by
exposing his people as a pray unto their enemies, that they may learn to give
him the honor that is due unto his name. If the fear of his rod will not
cause us to depart from evil, we shall feel the smart of his holy
indignation, and the shaking of the rod shall not serve the turn, if by it
we have not returned unto the Lord our God. Oh Lord, it is not in man to walk,
and to direct his steps. Turn thou us unto thee, and then we shall be
turned. For why should the wicked say, Where is now our God? Why should thy
Children complain, that thou have forsaken them. Oh Lord, thou art our God
from everlasting, and world without end: thou have magnified thy self in the
sight of our enemies, and put to confusion those that hate us; Oh, let us
therefore draw nere unto the Lord our God; let us renew our covenant with thy
Majesty to the final confusion of our enemies, and to the preventing of all
such further mischiefs, that they shall practice against us. It follows.
They have sought out iniquities. A third policy of multiplying snares.


That is, they have studied and invented diverse sorts of mischiefs, to
accomplish thereby more certainly their desires. Behold here a third policy
of the wicked to supply that which may be wanting in their former devise of
secrecy: that though one plot be discovered, another might take place, and
still another might be one foot, though a former were prevented. A very
desperate and most effectual And that very dangerous.
policy to bring their purposes to pass: not only in that this variety of
stratagems, tyres out policy, and carnal wisdom, and puts it to a Non plus
in preventing so many mischiefs; but further also great terror, and
distraction cease on the hearts of weak ones, in regard of such strange and
manifold snares: yea, by this means, those whom God has given up to these
snares, are here appalled with woeful despair, and so hereby lie open to the
snares, as having given over all hope to avoid the same. We may find some
steps of this corruption, even in the Saints of God. When David saw, that there
was no end of Saul's malice, but still he was followed with new pursuits, the
holy Ghost signifies, that it wrought this effect 1. Sam. 27.
in him, that he said in his fear, as des(...)airing of deliverance: I shall
now perish one day by the hand of Saul, and thereupon be^ooke himself to a
most desperate course even to fly for succor unto the enemies of God. For
where fear does possess us, that mal^ce is endless, and her mischiefs so
many, that they cannot be avoided there care will fail us, for the preventing
of them, as thinking our labout lost, against such unavoidable snares. And so
being careless in the danger, we lie open thereunto: and are either betrayed
by desperate security in the end unto the same, or else seeking to avoid them
by vile and impious courses, we do hereby exclude our selves from the
protection of the Lord: and so cause the malice of our enemy to light more
heavily upon us. It has been no new This is ro^e^ polic^e, b^t used of ola by
the wi^ked against the godly.
thing with the enemies of God, thus to multiply their snares against the
servants of the Most High. Infinite was the malice of Saul against the
Anointed of the Lord, and as was his malice, so were his snares accordingly.
The first occasion to the snares was the evil spirit, as no marvel if the
Devil be the beginner of all mischief. And behold the notable cunning of
Satan, in laying a snare in the calling As by Saul against David. 1. Sam. 16.
14 23.
and profession of David, that whereas he was skillful to play upon the
Harp, and therefore was required of Saul to alay the fury of his torment;
coming into Saul's presence to ease him of his anguish, he might be exposed to
the rage and malice of his enemy: and very hardly did 1. Sam. 18. 11, 17.
he many times avoid this snare. Secondly, his wife was intended a snare unto
him, and her dowry also was laid as a snare, that the hand of the Philistines
might be against him. These secret snares being broken, then follow open 1.
Sam. 24. 24
practices: and here was malice as endless, as it was causeless. How was the
poor servant of God hunted up and down, as a Partridge upon the mountains,
being never in safety of his life, till his enemy was deprived of his. Thus
was David followed with manifold snares, by his By Satan and his instruments
against David's Lord.
enemy Saul, and so was David's Lord, by Satan and his most malicious
instruments. Mark (I pray you) how Satan sets upon him. First, he lays a
snare of distrust, persuading him to make bread of stones, as if God were not
Math. 4. 5.
otherwise able to provide for him in the wilderness. When that would not serve,
he lays a contraria snare of presamption, wishing him, To cast himself down
from the pinnacle of the Temple, that so he might exclude himself out of Gods
protection. When this would not prevail, yet he lays a third snare of
worldly pomp and glory, moving him thereby to fall down and worship him,
that so he might rob God of the glory, that was due unto his name. And as
was the father, so were also the children, even the nation of the Jews, whose
salvation he labored. Their malice did not cease against him, so long as he
was capable of it, and for the acting thereof, they wanted not store of
mischiefs, when they could not prevail by smiting Math. 6. 15.
him with the tongue, then they fell to stone him with Ioh. 10. 31.
stones, when they could not draw him within the compass of rebellion against
the state, then they accused him of blasphemy Math. 22. 17. Math. 27.
against God, when themselves durst not openly be seen for fear of the
people, then they corrupted one of his own house to bring him to his end:
sometimes they Math. 26.
made vproares against him, that he might be oppressed of the people: sometimes
they accused him of compacting Math. 12.
with Satan, that so they might make him odious and abominable to the people:
sometimes they propounded curious Math. 22.
question to entrappe him in his words, other while they would wrest and
pervert his gracious speeches. And when they had caught him, their malice was
yet insatiable. Buffeting Luke 22. Math. 27.
would not serve, but further, they must whippe him, and to grieve his
righteous soul the more, he must be clothed in purple, to be scorned and
derided of them. This Ioh. 19.
will not serve, but he must be crowned with thorns, that so his torment might
be yet increased: yea, further yet to lengthen out their malice and his
pains; behold they devised a lingting, and yet most shameful torture, to
bring him to his end. Nailed must he be on the cross, to increase his pain,
and yet to lengthen out his life, and he must be hanged between two thieves,
and accounted among evil doers, that so together with his body, his good name
might be killed. Thus was our head Christ Jesus persecuted by his own: And
thus must all his members look to be dealt withal Not to trouble you with
rehears^ll of foreign stories, neither to seek furth^r in our own, than what
is fresh in our memories; how did the enemies of the Gospel multiply their
snares against us, in this late practice And by our adversaries against us in
this conspiracy. Esaias. 9.
for the restoring of their Kingdom. To take away the life of the King, this
was but an entrance. Nay, we must cut off root and branches too, if we shall
make sure work, was this all? Nay, the esta^es of the Land, they must also be
cut off, that so strength and council being removed, and the heads being cut
off, the Conquest might be the easier, and the confusion the greater. Is this
yet all? Nay, the life of the Kingdom true Religion, must be extinguished, and
all the Professors thereof, utterly rooted out; that so Idolatry may take sure
footing again. And to make up the measure of their mischief: the execution of
all this practice must be laid upon true Religion: that herein their malice
might reach to heaven, and in some measure insult and triumph over God himself.

Behold here the travail of the wicked, which is to bring forth mischief:
behold the fruitfulness of malice, which can devise store of snares: see the
property of the What does this teach us.
wicked, they are restless in commiting evil, and never weary of practicing
against the Saints of God. They cannot 1. The nature of the wicked frui^full
and restless in sin. Prou. 4. 16. Mich. 2. 1.
sleep, except they have done evil, and their sleep departs, except they
cause some to fall: Nay, they will spare their sleep, that they may imagine
mischief on their beds, and when the morning is light, they practice it: Even
as the wild Ass used to the wilderness, that shuffeth up the wind by
occasion at her pleasure, who can turn her back: So the wicked Ierem. 2.
run on without controwlement in the multitude of there mischiefs, and it is
their sport, and pastime to commit sin with greediness. Let us therefore
try our selves by this property of the wicked. To commit sin, is an
infirmity 2. To try our selves whither this nature be changed in us. 1. Ioh.
1. 8. Psa. 103. 3.
incident to the most regenerate, but to make it our study, and delight, to
commit sin with greediness and to continue therein; this cannot stand with a
sanctified nature. I delight in the Law of the Lord concerning the inward man
says that chosen Vessel Saint Paul:) and therefore, 4. Ephesians. 19. Rom 7. 22. 20.
verse.
if I do that which I would not, it is no more I, but sin that dwells in
me. Ohlet us, howsoever we cannot choose but sin, yet notwithstanding delight
in the law of the Lord, that so our sin may not be imputed unto us. Once have
I spoken (says holy Job) but I will answer no more, yea Job. 39. 38.
twice, but I will proceed no further: If we have once oftended, 3. To be
plentiful in good works, not to be weary of well doing.
let us do so no more, lest otherwise a worse thing happen vnio us. And if so
be the wicked are so fruitful in mischief, and unwearied in evil to gain
hell thereby; oh let us never be weary of well doing; let us be plentiful in
good works, seeing if we faint not, we shall certainly reap an euerlast^ng
reward in heaven. Lastly, seeing the enemies of the Gospel are never weary of
mischief, but still are devising and practicing against the Just. Oh let us
not be secure of them, nor hope to win them by gentleness, seeing
conniuencie at their wickedness, is but a spur to further mischief, as
giving them respite and opportunity to commit the same. If we shall wisely
stand upon the guard, and keep this enemy at the staves end, though happily
his malice might hereby be increased, yet seeing his sin is by this means
ripened, and when the Harvest is ripe, the sickle shall be put in, his practices
shall be so (...) from prevailing against us: as that Psa. 37. 15.
the pit which he has dug, he shall fall into himself: Psa. 9. 15.
his own s^ord shall enter into his own heart, and his bow shall be broken:
and in the s^are which he privily lays for us, shall his own foot be
taken. It follows.

And they have accomplished that which they s^ught for etc.

The meaning is that they are persuaded secretly in their souls that, what
they have devised shall surely take The fourth policy of the wi^ked namely
(...) confidence and p^esum^t on of good s^ccesse. and why?
effect. Noting unto us their presumpt^ous confidence, and building upon these
their plots and p^lices. A thing very usual in the practices of the wicked,
to pro^ise the^ selves undoubtedly good success therein: not only in regard
of their natural corruption; whereby they are apt to conceive highly of their
own devises, especially carried in such strong, and yet secret manner: but
principally the justice of God is seen herein, who giving them up to this
resolute confidence, does thereby prepare the way to their more fearful
confusion. So did the enemy secure themselus against the Lords Anointed, that
they had already So did David's enemies. Psalm. 35.
devoured him, as having so hemd him in with their secret and manifold snares
that he could not possible escape: yea for the further confirming themselves in
this confidence, because his only protection was from God; therefore so far
did they proceed in this presumption: that measuring the favor of God by
outward prosperity, they concluded hereupon falsely upon some light affliction
that did befall him A mischeife is light upon him and he that Psalm. 41.
lies shall no more rise: and their reason is. God has forsaken him:
whereupon they encouradge themselves in Psalm. 71.
most confident manner, come let us pursue and take him, for their is none to
deliver him. Yea so blasphemously confident grow they herein, as building upon
the strength and effectuallnes of their snares, that they even make a mock at
Psalm. 14. 6.
the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his refuge, and as if so be god
were not able to deliver out of their hands, they deryde his confidence in the
Lord his God, saying, he trusted in God let him deliver him, let him save him,
seeing Ps. 22. 8.
he loves him. Implying thereby most impiously, that they had him so sure,
that his confidence in God should not deliver him out of their hands. Thus did
Senacharib So did Senacharib. Esaias. 36.
open his mouth against heaven; when he sent his messenger unto Hezechiah
saying, Let not thy God deceive thee in whime thou trustest etc. Employing that
the Lord could not deliver him out of his hands: Thus did the mother of Sisera
flatter her self, when she looked out of the window So did the mother of
Sisera. Judges. 5.
and said, why is his chariot so long a coming, why tarry the wheels of his
chariot, expecting indoubtedly her sons return with victory: and thus did her
wise Ladies answer her with own words, have they not gotten and they divide
the spoil etc. showing also their confidence in the good success of the
battle. And surely if we shall consider the hopes of our enemies, concerning
the good success of their desperate attempts: as their micheifes have not been
short of any, so their confidence also has been with the best, For was not the
Navy which was sent against us in So have our adversaries been confident as by
The like Practizes in 1588.
88. entitled the Invincible Armadoe, as if no force were able to scatter it.
And did not their Friars tauntingly, and most blasphemously preach, that they
had Pope (and Devil) and all to fight for them, but the Hugnenots and
Lutherans had none but God to stand on their fide, as if he were no body, to
withstand them? had they not divided the spoil in conceit, before they saw
the shore, which should have been gained? had they not brought whips, and
other instruments of torture to execute their cruelty upon us, as if they made
account to be masters of the field. And And their practizes at this time
appears.
surely consider we the practices at this time, and we shall see their
confidence to have been increased, with their malice, and their mouths, even
desparately opened against heaven, for the confirming them more assuredly in
their bloody expectation. If we shall remember the exceeding insolency and
pride of these enemies, for some few months before the intended execution of
their practices, (a thing The^r insolency before the day.
not neglected by careful heads,) what did it speak unto us, but their
confidence in the success thereof? Was it not written to that honorable Lord,
that it was decreed by God and men, to punish the iniquity of the time,
therein, both making the Lord a party in this their damnable enterprice, and
also thereby building so certainly upon the accomplishment theirof, as if it
were the decree of God himself. What preparacions they had made for the
advancement of themselves, Preparations as if the^r mischief r^e^e
a^complished.
and execution of the faithful, after the terrible blow should be given:
their sumptuous apparel, store of bloody weapons, proclamations and such like,
all in a readynes, as if the thing were done: did it not most lively d^scouer
their confidence, that they had accomplished that which they sought for. If we
would know what might be the reason of such The reasons of this the^r
confidence.
presumption, and desperate confidence: let us consider the resolution of their
conscience, which though erroneous, yet hereby the stro^glier con^eited, and
the more obstinatly presumptuous Resolution of conscien^e.
in the success of it own apprehension. Let us remember their apprehension of
the cause for which they 2 Apprehensio^ of the cause.
take the quarrel in hand, which being in their deceived judgments so just,
yea meritorious; must needs puff the^ up with confident hope of good success
therein. Add we hereunto the approbation of this fact not only by the
conscience 3 Approbatio^ of it, from their holy Father.
at home, but by the Lord of their conscience abroad, whose oracles they esteem
as the oracles of God, yea whom they worshipe above all that is called God:
and therefore no marvel if they match his decrees, with the decrees of the
most high, and say it is decreed by God and men. And having so sure a warrant
(as they think) for the attempting of their mischiefs; is it any wonder, if
they promise exceeding good success unto themselves therein? Were it only the
policy which they have used in the managing of their practices: their
encouragme^ts to strengthen, their secrery to entrapp, and their manifold
snares to weary 4 The notable contriuing of their mischeifes in such strength,
secrecy, and variety.
out, surely these so notable policyes, concurring thus together, must needs
give spirit to their hopes, and confidence to their practices: That seeing they
are so strong, that none is able to match them, how can it be, but they should
prevail: seeing so secret, that none can see them, how can it be, that any
should avoid them: seeing they are never weary in devising of mischiefs: how
should any at length not be over wearied by them. But above all the wisdom
and power of God is here in most evident, who meaning to give his enemies a
terrible blow: not only 5 Above all justice of God iu giving them up to this
confidence to their more fearful confusion.
to their bodies but even to their souls: and to make their fall such as they
shall not be able to rise again, does therefore in his wisdom let them alone
so far in these their devilish practices, that having brought them in a
manner to ripenes, and perfection, as they could wish, they might hereupon be
lifted up with pride and confidence in the good success thereof: that by the
sudden defaiture of these practices afterward, their confusion might be the
greater both to body and soul: not only to the body in such punishments which
do attend them, but especially into their souls and consciences either
breeding in them an obstinate allowance of their devilish practices, when they
shall see their expectation so deceived, and their wisdom confounded. Oh this
will make Ahitophell even to hang 2. Sam. 17. 2^
himself, this is it, that will strike despair in the hearts of these rebels,
and make them even desperately run upon their own swords.

Marvel not we therefore, if we see the wicked puffed And therefore let us
not be amated at this confidence of the wicked.
up with confidence in their mischeifes: for it is the cheifest portion that
they have of al their iniquity, this is all the poor comfort they find theirin,
namely to flatter them selves in the good success thereof, yea this is the
stro^gest band whereby Satan does hold them: Rather admire we the wonderful
wisdom of the Lord, who prepares the^ But admire the power and wisdom of
God herein.
by this carnal confidence, to their greater confusion; and makes the pride of
their wisdom to be the break-neck thereof. And seeing it is no shame, to
learn good even of our enemies; seeing confidence in evil is a messenger of
their destruction, let us try our standing in grace, by our And learn we
hereby, to try our standine in grace. To be confi.
fear in sin. Certainly as the fear of offending God, is a means to
prevent sin: so fear in the sense of our own unworthiness in regard of our
sins, working repentance not to be repented of: is the means to restore unto
us the joy of Gods salvation, which before we had lost: than so we may either
avoid, or sanctify such judgments, as are due unto our sins: And if the
wicked are so confident in evil purposes. Oh let us not cast away our
confidence and dent in weldoing. Heb. 10. 32.
couradge in well-doing, which has so greatre compence of reward. Lastly
seeing confidence in sin is a note of ripenes, and when the measure is full,
the vessels shall be emptied: Let us not be cast down, when we see the wicked
Joel. 3. 13. To look for the confusion of the wicked, when we see them thus
confident.
insolent and that especially in the confidence of their wickedness, neither
let their presumtion in their mischiefs be any matter to hinder us in the ways
of our callings: but rather let us patiently wait upon the Lord, and commit
our selves into his hands in well-doing, as into the hands of our faithful
Creator: upon an undoubted assurance, that the malice of the wicked, is
hastening to an end, when we shall see it swollen and puffed up with pride of
good success. Though we may say in our infirmity, upon view of their power
and malice, as Elishaes servant did: Alas, how shall we do, we are but dead
men: yet let us here 2. King. 6. 17.
see by faith, and not by sense: and then undoubtedly we shall have Elishaes
eyes, to see more with us, than those that are against us, yea, if we can be
still, and behold the salvation of the Lord, our enemies whom we see this
day, we Exodus 14.
shall see them no more. And if we would desire, that the Lord would show us
some token for good, whereby we may see the confusion of our enemies near at
hand; we As being a certain token offered unto us by the Lord to discern the
confusion of our enemies. Prou. 16, 8.
cannot have any more evident, than this; that before destruction the mind is
haughty. Our enemies are secure and confident in the accomplishment of their
practices. For so it follows in the next words.

THE SECOND PART. The Web broken.
Psalm. 64. Verse. 7. But God shall shoot an arrow at them suddenly, their
strokes shall be at once.

8. They shall cause their own tongues to fall upon them, and whosoever shall
see them, shall fly away.


WHere in, the holy Ghost using a borrowed This is the second part of the
Scripture, describing unto us the defeature of their practices and confounding
of the enemies.
speech from Archers, and their shooting, does hereby signify thus much unto
us: that as the arrow flies swiftly, we know not from whom, and suddenly
hits, we know not when; so shall the Judgments of God come upon the wicked,
when they are least looked for, and suddenly surprise them to their greater
confusion. Wherein first, it is worthy our observation, that the holy Ghost
ascribes this notable defeature, and overthrow of the enemy, First, from the
Author hereof almighty God.
to the proper office, and work of God. God shall shoot. For what can be a
greater terror to Traitors and Rebels, than to know, that as they in resisting
power resist God: so they shall have God to fight against them, before Romans 13.
4. Prou. 21. 30. Hence have Kings a notable comfort, that God will maintain
his own calling. Psa 30. 1. Psa. 75. 7. Psalm. 144.
whom they shall not be able to stand; Against, whom no power nor wisdom,
nor counsel, shall be able to prevail: What greater comfort can there be unto
Princes than this, that whereas it is God, that exalts them, and not they
themselves, it is he also that will maintain his own calling, and
institution, and rescue his servants from the hurtful sword. Certainly,
though Magistrates are so exalted, that they are above all others; yet by this
they may learn, that the Lord is above them: that so they may be And are
hereby taught that they are under God.
humbled in the sense of their greatness; yea, though they are so high in
regard of their callings, that all humane power is subject unto them: yet this
herein may humble them much more: that they are placed in such mutable and And
being excluded his protection are subject to the malice of the meanest.
slipperie places, that if the Lord withdraw his protection from them, they
shall be subject to the power of the meanest creatures. Oh, that Princes would
learn hence to establish their thrones, by kissing the son, and aduauncing
his kingdom: oh that they would learn to bound themselves within the compass
of Gods protection, by serving And therefore should learn to kiss the son,
to keep themwithin Gods protection.
the Lord in fear and rejoicing before him in reverence: So should the Lord
establish their Kingdoms for ever, and their enemies should be clothed with
perpetual shame: so should their earthly honor be a pledge unto them of
everlasting glory: and this, that they governed faithfully over men, under
God, should be a means to further them to reign with God for ever. Only, let
them take heed that they tempt not the Lord, that because the Lord will And to
use their authority, under God to the punishmen of sin.
find out their enemies, and avenge their cause: therefore they shall be
secure and careless in observing their practices, and meeting with their
wickedness by lawful authority, upon pretense of leaving the matter unto God,
and to gain an opinion of unseasonable clemency. For as it is presumption to
be our own caruers in vengeance, when our private callings will not warrant us
therein: so to keep the sword in the scabberd, when it is put in our hands,
and not draw it forth for the cutting off of the wicked, as this is a
betraying of that power which is committed unto us, so it is the means to
exclude us Gods protection, and thereby to expose us to the malice of our
enemies. And though on the other side we shall not be able to meet with all: (as
who is able to search the heart of man;) and indeed, when the leaders shall be
cut off, it stands many times with policy, and agrees with clemency, And then
shall they be sure, under shadow of his wings.
to let the rest escape: yet neither let the wicked hereby flatter themselves
that the bitterness of death is past; neither let the Children of God
distrust, but that all their enemies in time shall be confounded. For though
David may spare Shimei, when revenge is not fit: yet the Lord And their enemies
shall in due time be met withal.
will have a time to meet with that railing enemy; and to snare him in the
ginne, that his own mouth has laid. And though the adversaries of the truth,
may happily in some part for a time escape: (as it is necessary, so^e should
still remain, that the faithful be tried: (yet let the^ know that their
destruction sleeps not. Though Ioab may escape while the Sons of Zeruiah,
are to strong for the Kingdom, and his sin not yet break out to ripeness
When their finne is ripe, 1. Kin. 2. 34.
and perfection: yet the time shall come, when Solomon shall be strong enough
for him: and the guilt of his former bloodinesse, shall drive him forward, to
receive the wages of blood, by causing him in the end, in the time of vengeance.
to break out into apparent Rebellion. Oh consider this, you that embrew your
hands in blood, and for the time go uncontrolled, because power is in your
hands. Behold the blood that you have shed does cry for vengeance: and in
the appointed time, the Lord will give you up to such a thirst of blood, as
that none but the blood of the mighty will quench the same; that so your sin
now meeting with a power able to match it, may receive the wages due unto the
same. Certainly, whosoever makes not conscience, to spill the blood of those,
who are dear in the sight of God, over whom he may have power: he shall in the
end make conscience of shedding no blood: that so at the length, he may meet
with his match, to shed his own blood. Would God our oppressors, and
blood-suckers would consider this, and in the Book of this providence, read
Let Oppressors, and all blood suckers, read their success, in the Book of
this prouidenee. Prou. 21. 1.
their own success. And though happily there may be a pardon for the first
offense; though the clemency of the Prince may remit the first fact: (as the
heart of the King is in the hands of the Lord, and it is the glory of a man to
pass by an offense) yet surely where there does not follow a thorough
reformation of life, there will certainly be a relapse into the same sins,
that so at length vngeance may meet with them. Adomiah may escape once though
he prove Traitor to his Lord: yet his sin is restless, and at length will
find him out, and in the end he shall be caught in the bonds of his former
iniquity. Oh consider this you that abuse the patience of government, to the
hardening of your hearts, and multiplying of your iniquities, even with
greediness against your Sovereign: Let all malcontents, and presumptuous
opposites, take heed how they abuse the patience and clemency of government.
certainly, the Lord which awaketh for the preservation of his children, who
preseueth his Anointed, and maintains his own cause, he, even he will give
you up, to such desperateness of iniquity in the end, that it shall pay you
in due time, the shame it owes you, to the glory of God, and your just
confusion. Even so (oh Lord) hasten the confusion of thine enemies, or convert
them speedily, for the accomplishment of the elect. It follows. Shall shoot
an arrow at them suddenly.

Behold now the admirable wisdom and powers of God in this effectual manner
of defeating his enemies, by The second circumstance in the defeature of the
eenemie, leading us to the wisdom and power of God, in the manner of
defeature.
confounding their poliyes, in their several practices, with his contrary
judgments answearable thereunto: And first consider we, how deliberate
consultation is here confounded with the suddennes of the vengeance: that they
which took such time and laysure to bring their purposes to pass, they which
so advisedly consulted, to do mischeife unto others, shall now have no time or
leisure to consult their own deliverance, because the hand of the Lord shall
come suddenly upon them, So does the Lord threaten As first by sounding their
wary, and long hatched treasons, with his sunaeden geance.
Babel that rod of his indignation, that he will come upon her suddenly with
many plagues. So does the holy Ghost prophecy of that spiritual Babell that
not only in one day but even in one hour she shall be overthrown: Yea her
judgment shall come upon her as the casting of a great millstone into the
midst of the Sea, so sudden and violent shall be her As he has done of old.
destruction. So do the servants of God point out unto us the destruction of
the wicked, that it shall be sudden and fearful which cannot be avoided. A
most holy and righteous course of Gods proceeding against the wicked, whether
we consider the affection of the Lord in laying And why?
these punishments upon them, or the end which he aymeth at, in confounding
them in this life: or lastly the use that he entendeth in regard of others.
Concerning the affection of the Lord in the punishments of the wicked, as Heb.
12. 8. 1. To show that he punishes the wicked in anger. Psa. 2. 5.
the Lord chasteneth his children in love and of very faithfullnes causes
them to be afflicted: so on the contrary does he consume the wicked in his
wrath and sore displeasure. And therefore as he gives warning unto the one, to
witness his love unto them, that so they might be prepared to meet the Lord: so
on the other side does he over take the wicked, with his sudden judgments,
that being unprepared thereunto, they might be ouer-whelmed with the fury of
his speedy indignation. And this also does the end of their afflictions
manyfestly declare, For whereas the Lord in these temporal plagues, entendes
to give them a taste of eternal 2. To pledge unto the wicked in temporal
Plagues, eternal punishments.
vengeance: therefore does he lay them suddenly upon the wicked: that so
confounding them by this suddenes, and driving them to their wits ends, their
hearts might not only be hardened and so enraged against the Lord, but further
also this confusion of their wisdom, driving the^ to despair, they shall be
possed with the fearful expection of Heb. 10. 27.
the vengeance to come. And surely seeing God does turn all things to the good
of the elect, therefore also does he 3. For the good of the elect. Romans 8. 29.
make the punishments of the wicked profitable unto them: and that especially
by the consideration of the suddennes of them. For hereby the saints of God are
In whom security is prevented, and comfort, given in their troubles by this
difference, betwixt the godly and the wicked herein.
forewarned of security, lest a sudden judgment do overtake them: hereby they
are admonished to serve the Lord in fear, in that he deals so roundly and
suddenly against the wicked: hereby also they gather comfort in all their
crosses and troubles: that the Lord makes a difference between them and the
wicked, even in that which seems to be alike unto both.

Oh that our careless impes would consider this: who 1 Here Is a lesson for
careless and presumtuous sin^^rs to fear asuddain surprizall.
spend their days in wealth, and put the evil day far from them, that so
they may more securely approach the sea of iniquity; that they would remember
this sudden reckoning, and lay unto their hearts this course of Gods justice,
even to take sin napping, and suddenly to surprise it. That they would
remember how Jeroboam was smitten, even when he stretched out his hand to
smite, that they would remember the sudden handwriting with sauced
Belshazzers, To remember sudden coming of Christ.
sacriligious banquet: Surely though sudden vengeance did not meet with us in
this life, yet did we remember that for all these things we must come to
judgment, and that our judgment shall come suddenly in the hour that we know
not: It would make us be watchful even every hour, that so though it be
sudden, yet it may not be sudden unto us, as being ready and prepared in some
measure thereunto. And seeing the suddenes of a judgment breeds great
distractio^ and takes away time of council or resolution, as this should teach
us not to be afraid of sudden death, If so be that we have been by an holy life
prepared thereunto: neither to censure others for dying suddenly: seeing we
have sufficient testimony of their former lives: so it should be a very 2 Here
we may learn. 1 Not to fear sudden judgments if we be prepared.
fair warning unto us not to put of our repentance unto the time of our
deaths, least the horror and suddenes of that messenger, distract us in our
reckoning, and so we be surprised, before we have made even with our God, And
seeing the sudde^nes of a judgment, is herein only a note of Gods wrath, in
that it finds the wicked unprepared thereunto: as we are therefore not to pray
further against sudden judgments, then that they may not find us unprepared:
2 Not to put of our repen tance till death.
so are we not to distrust of Gods mercy though we be suddenly met with all,
if so be that our souls have formely been prepared to temptations. Only we
may rather wish, (if it so please the Lord) to see the plague before it comes:
3 To wish that we may see the plague before it comes.
that so, fearing therod, we may depart from evil; and thereby either remove
or sanctify the judgment unto us. Certainly as confindence in sin makes
every judgment sudden, so fear in the sense of our iniquities, preparing us
to the end, Confidence in sin makes every Judgment sudden, and fear of
sin makes no Judgment sudden. 1. These. 3. 5.
does thereby effect, that no scourge shall be sudden unto us, As for the the
wicked it is not so with them, their confidence in sin makes them secure, and
their security breeds a sudden judgment. And thus does the Lord confound their
wisdom in consulting and deliberating, advisedly of their mischiefs against
the saints, by coming upon the^ with his sudden judgments. But this is not
all. For though the judgment be sudden, and so take them unprepared A second
circumstance, describing the manner of Gods wisdom, in the defeature of the
enemy.
yet it may be slow and moderate and so give the^ time of preparation, even
while the scourge is upon them. To prevent this, the holy Ghost adds, that
their stroke shall be at once. That is, their Judgment shall be as speedy in
executing, as it was sudden in surprising: that so not taking time before to
prepare themselves, now the swiftness, and greeuousnesse of the Plague, may
take away time of preparation afterward; and so conuincing justly their former
abuse of the time past, does thereby exclude them from all hope of mercy for
the time to come: yea this speediness of the judgment, implying also the
sharpness and terror of it, does hereby make to their greater confusion, as
being not able to undergo so extreme a scourge. Their strokes shall be at
once.

Behold here a second point of Gods wisdom and power in the punishments of
the wicked: he will be a Namely, meting with their manifold practices with
one blow or stroke of his vengeance. 1. To confound their policy herem. 2.
And to destroy them more fearfully.
swife witness against them, to take them in their sin: and take away from
them opportunity of repentance, that so his wrath may be powered out in full
measure upon them. Surely a most holy and righteous course, not only hereby to
confound their policy, in devising many snares, as seeing them now all broken,
as it were with one stroke, but further also to consume such fearfully, who
thought all plagues too little against the Anointed of the Lord. So does the
Lord threate^ the wicked, as with sudden, so with speedy Judgments upon the
wicked (says the holy Ghost) he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and
stormy tempest, this is the portion of their cup: all which are both sudden
and speedy plagues: making quick riddance, where once So has the Lord
threatened.
they take hold. So has the Lord executed from time to time, when once the
date of his patience, has been expired toward them. So was he long before
he reckoned with the oldworld: an hundred and twenty years time gave he
them to make up their account, but when he came to And so has he executed.
Judgment, in less than half a year did he accomplish his fierce wrath:
and swallowed up in that short time (excepting only righteous Noah, and his
children, together with the other unreasonable creatures, that were reserved
for future generation) even all the Nations and creatures of the earth. So did
the Lord deal with Sod^me and Gomorrha: he rayned upon them fire and
brimstone, and so with one stroke made a full end of them: so that affliction
did not 1 Nah. 12.
arise the second time. And howsoever he deals not generally thus with all
sorts of sinners; yet because the sin of Treason, is a monstrous and capital
offense, nearly touching And so especially has he met with this sin of
treason.
his Majesty, as challenging his power, and spurning at his government:
therefore has he used to meet with this sin, above all others, in this
fearful and speedy manner: So did he justify his servant Moses, in that
prophetical challenge, which he made against these desperate Rebels, Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, putting it to In Cora, Dathan, and Abiram. Number. 16, 29.
this trial, for the approbation of his calling: that if these men died the
common death of all men, then the Lord had not spoken by him: the Lord (I say)
justified herein the authority of his servant, and confounded their unnatural
Rebellion, by a strange and wonderful judgment answerable thereunto. For as
they were unnatural, and would not endure a superior over them; so the earth
became Ver. 32.
unnatural, and would no longer endure their burden; but even left her
soliditie, to swallow up such monsters: and so conveyed them justly to the
Dominion of hell, who would not endure that power which was from heaven. So did
the Lord meet with that rebellious Absolon, by as Absalon. 2 Samuel 18. 19. 14.
strange and speedy a judgment, answerable to his sin: making the crown of
his pride, his long and beautiful hair: to be the halter to hang him up,
betwixt heaven and earth: suddenly was he caught up, and speedily was he
dispatched by another, who in that murder happily made way for his own
ambition, and also for the like fault drank after 1 King. 2. 27.
of the cup of vengeance.

Oh, that the enemies of government would consider Let Traitors think hereaf
in the pride of their manifold practices.
this: that in the depth of their consultations, to lay many snares for others:
they would remember that one stroke of Gods vengeance, would be too heavy for
them. Surely, the consideration of this, that they are not able to endure the
wrath of God: would bridle and qualify their malice against the Lords
Anointed: and move them contrariwise to hearty and cheerful obedience unto
man, that so thereby they might regaine the favor of God. Certainly, if they
say in their hearts, there is no God; and Psa. 14.
therefore stand not upon that favor, which they do not acknowledge: yet let
them respect the power of man, That so they may regaine Gods favor in their
obedience to his ordinance.
which surely shall meet with their desperate attempts. And lest by their
secret conueyance they might hope to escape; let them know further, that their
sin shall find them out, and rather than they shall escape unpunished:
Behold, (says the holy Ghost) Their own tongues shall fall upon them, to
betray their wickedness: and become the executioners of Gods righteous
judgments upon them. For so it follows.

He shall cause their own tongues to fall upon them. Lest the Lord confound
the^ in the things they most trust in. A third degree of Gods justice, against
the wicked, confounding their secrecy from their own mouths. Prou. 11. 8.


Lo here a third degree of Gods justice against the wicked: themselves shall
be the instruments of their own confusion: and the snares which they have laid
for the righteous shall confound themselves, that the Lord may yet be more
apparently justified when he judges: and the wicked more confounded by the
cause of their discovery. A very usual, and righteous course of Gods
proceeding against them, discovering both the admirable uprightness of Gods
Judgments upon them, and also his profound wisdom in executing the same. It
is a comfortable promise which the Lord makes unto his children, That the
righteous shall escape out of trouble, and the wicked shall come in their
stead. By which phrase (that the wicked shall Pro. 11. 8.
come in their stead) the meaning of the holy ghost is, that look what
troubles the wicked have devised against the So does the Lord threate^. ^sa. 7.
Godly, what snares soever they have laid to entrappe them, they shall be the
pits whereunto them selves shall fall, and their own mischief shall light
upon their own pates. So does the spirit of God witness that it has befallen
the wicked, he has made a pit and diggedit, and is fallen into the pit that he
has made: and concludes the like And so has he executed.
course of Gods justice for the time to come: that his mischief shall return
upon his own head, and his cruelty shall fall upon his own pate. So did
cruel Haman erect a gallows Hesth. 7.
to make away the servant of God, and yet at length was hanged thereon. So was
the sword of Goliath the instrument of his own destruction. And upon the
experience Sam. 1. 17.
hereof, the spirit commends it as worthy the observation And thus shall the
Lord make away to his further acknowledgment. Psa. 9. 16.
unto all posterity, and makes it a notable means to declare the justice of
God. The Lord is known by executing of judgments, the wicked is snared in the
works of his own hands, Higgaion Selah. Signifying, that this admirable
course of meeting with the wicked, in their own policies, and snaring them in
their mischiefs, which they have intended against the righteous, is a means to
make even the And the wickeds further confusion.
wicked acknowledge God, and to confess his righteous judgments, in thus
taking them in their inventions. So when the enemies of God, had intended by
powder, to So dealt he against the late conspi^ators.
devour the Lords Anointed and his posterity, and thereby to bring an vnter
confusion, both upon the church and commonwealth, and it pleased the Lord to
take some of them in their own snares, and by the like engine, to seize upon
them; then did they acknowledge the righteous hand of God, and whereas before
they stood upon Confess. VVinte^.
a desperate defense, now being amated and confounded with this admirable
justice of God, they were not only compelled to give testimony thereunto, but
further also to yield themselves, in a fearful and desperate manner unto the
same, and were further justly cut off, even by the like vengeance.

Behold here the righteous and wonderful justice of Lo here the equity of
Gods justice. Eccle. 10. 13.
God against the wicked, in rendering treason with treason, that they which have
intended to betray others, shall now betray themselves, and so make way to the
righteous judgments of God. Oh, let all discontented and desperately malicious
persons, learn hence this lesson, That they think no evil of the King, no
not in their privy chamber, that they neither speak nor practice any evil
against the Lords Anointed. For behold, not only the souls of Let
malcontents take heed of the secret thoughts or practices against the King,
seeing their own tongues shall discover them.
the heaven, shall carry the voice, and that which has wings, shall declare
the matter, but there is a bird in the bosom, that shall discover the same,
and shall give the tongue no rest, though it be never so hemd in with his
double guard: till it have eased the conscience, and justified the Lord. And
seeing the Lord is known by this manner of executing his judgments, that the
wicked are taken in their own snares, there by causing even his enemies to give
testimony unto him: tremble then ye A^heists, which say in your hearts, there is
no God, when by his visible Judgments, Let Athiests learn, that there tongues
are not their own but that their is a God that o^er^rules them. Ier. 3. verse.
25. verse. 23.
he thus iustifies himself against you, and compels your mouths to confess
his power. And seeing his righteous purpose, by this his admirable proceeding
against you, is to confound you in the thing you most put confidence in, Oh,
lie down in your confusion, and let shame cover your faces. in that you and
your fathers have sinned against the Lord your God. Say now with those true
conuerts, That the hope of the hills is in vain, that all your carnal wisdom,
and confidence has grossly deceived you: And let this wonderful wisdom of the
Lord, thus finding you out in your secrecy, and confounding you in the same;
cause you to hate the darkness, that has so deceived you: And to give your
selves Let Papists hate the darkness that has th^s deceived them.
hereafter to be informed by the light, that so howsoever your sin may be met
withal, by te^porall judgments in this life, yet being a means to work in
you true repentance, your souls may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

As for us (beloved) who have this experience of Gods mercy let us not
hereafter be afraid of the policies of the As for the Sa^nts of God, let them
not fearethe secret policies of the wicked. Nor close with them. But resist them
wicked; let not their power, and secrecy, nor any subtlety, that they shall
be able to use, cause us to close with them in their policies, or to eat of
such things as please them: that so we may hold them friends unto us thereby,
and free our selves from the snares, which they have laid to entrap us. If we
resist the Devil, he will fly from us. And if we give not our strength to
these Witches children, and betray not our selves unto them, by fearing their
policies, and so daubing with them: Behold, the Lord watches over us, to
ouer-turne their mischiefs, and rather than fail their own And then they shall
fall, even with their own weight.
tongues shall disclose them: that so they may fall into the pit which they
have dug for others. It follows. And whosoever shall see them, shall fly
away.

The meaning whereof is, that the terror of such judgments, A fourth means of
the wisdom of God, in confounding the leagues and confederacies of the
wicked, by scattering and dispersing them. Not only the Actors in the
mischief, but the spectators also.
which the Lord has laid upon them, shall so distract and confound their
wisdom in their leagues and confederacies, that they which banded them selves
together, for the desolation of the church: seeing now the same delivered, and
them selves justly met withal: shall not only hereby be scattered and
dispersed, by the severity of the vengeance: but further also shall most
fearfully disperse them selves, to avoid (if it may be) that revenging hand.
Yea not only the Actors in this mischief shall be put to flight: but whosoever
shall see this fearful hand of God upon them, shall be roused hereby out of his
former security: and seeing his own sin in the glass of their vengeance:
shall fear the rod, which lights so heavily upon them: and fly for his life to
avoid the same. So do the judgments of God scatter the devises of the wicked:
So do they also awake and terrify others, that are subject to like notorious
sins.

Thus when the Captain of the host of Israel, had executed So has it been in
former time. Iosu. 5. 1.
the wrath of God upon some part of those accursed Canaanites: the holy Ghost
witnesses, that the fear of him fell upon all the nations round about, who
being guilty of the same sins, did therefore expect the like judgments, and so
in a desperate manner exposed them selves thereunto. So when the Champion of
the Philistines was cut of 1. Sam. 15. 51
by the Lords warrior, the holy Ghost witnesses that the Philistines fled and
were dispersed. And this to have been the effect of great judgments, upon the
enemies of God, So has the holy Ghost witnessed of Egypt, Rome, Ashur, etc.
Ezekiel. 31. Revel. 18. Esaias. 13. 14.
the holy Ghost witnesses in their several co^fusions. Yea thus have the
judgments of God, from time inflicted upon malefactors, been the means to
awake others, and so to terrify them, that have been guilty of the same
sins, that by some token or other: either by flying or blushing, by
complaining or pytying, by justifying or such like, they have very wonderfully
betrayed them selves, and so have exposed them selves to the like judgments. So
were the companies of these rebels scattered, when once the head of their
treason was broken: so did they further each other to their just confusion.

A most wise and righteous course of Gods proceeding against the wicked: that
they which will not be joined with And that justly, because they labor the
dissoluing of the Communion of Saints.
God, but say, let us break his bands, and cast away his cords from us:
should not have any durable socyety among themselves: that they which abuse
society to fight against God and his church, might want the comfort of society
when they have most need thereof, and be scattered from each other, for their
more speedy apprehension, and confusion: who have labored to dissolve the
communion of the saints. Even so, oh Lord, let all the enemies be scattered,
that such as belong to thee, being thus disapoynted in their carnal
fellowship, may seek to be members of that body of thy son, which no malice
of Satan shall ever be able to separate.

Observe we here, first, the wonderful power of God Learn we hence, that no
confederacy can prevail against God.
by confounding the strength of the wicked, in this banding and combining of
them selves against the godly: and learn we that their is no council nor
confederacy against the Lord: Nay though the wicked shall make a league with
death and be at an agreemont with hell it self: though Satan and all his
legions should conspire with them against his little flock, yet when the Lord
shall lay judgment to the rule and righteousness, to the balance their
convenient with death shall be dissolved, and their agreement with hell shall not
stand. Let us not therefore be seduced, to cast in our lot with the wicked,
Pro. 1.
let it not encouradge us to sin, because many go the broad way: seeing as
multitude of offenders does increase the sin; so does it further the punishment
due thereunto, as provoking so many instruments to the execution of vengeance,
as there are miserable partakers in the greeuousnes of the sin. If we desire
to have comfort in society, let us have fellowshipp with our God, by the
obedience of faith, let our delight be in the saints that are on earth: So when
the wicked fly and are scattered fearfully, we shall see the vengeance that
has justly overtaken the^, yea this righteous hand of God in dispersing the
wicked, shall be the means, to confirm and knitt us comfortably together,
that we may go up into the house of the Lord to sing praises unto his name:
Thus when the Lord shall be beneficial But to delight in the Lord and in his
saints. Psa. 142. 7. Psa. 38. 11.
unto me, then, says the prophet, the righteous shall resort unto my company,
who before stood a far of for fear of my plague: Yea when the Lord shall
return the captivity of Sion, this shall further be a means of the increase
of the church. Then says the spirit, shall ten men take hold out of all
languages, even take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, and say we will go
with you, for we have heard that God is with you. Thus as the confounding of
the practices of the wicked, shall be a means to scatter and disolue their
confideracies, so the deliverance of the church, shall be a furtherance to the
gathering again of the dispersed of Israel, that they may behold, and
confer of what the Lord has done for them, and so be provoked to join
together in due thankfullnes unto his Majesty for the same. For so it follows.

The third part of the Treatise, containing the use of these works.
9 All men shall see it, and declare the work of God, and they shall
understand what he has wrought.

10 But the righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and trust in him: and all that
are upright of heart shall rejoice.


WHich two verses, being the conclusion of the Psalm, do Here begins the
use that is to he made of great Deliueran^es.
lead us to diverse uses, which are to be made of such wonderful Deliverances,
which the Lord performs unto his servants: all tending to express true
thankfulness unto God for the same. The first whereof is.

All men shall see it. That is: first, whereas the eyes of men were blinded in
the knowledge of God; now this wonderful deliverance, shall open the eyes of
all; not only First they shall open the eyes of all men.
the carnal eyes of the wicked, to see God in these works, but further also
the spiritual eye of his Saints, and dearest servants: which being much dimned
and d^rkened with such clouds of Even of Carnallmen.
afflictions, as have lien heavily upon them and grown hereby, even to doubt
of the eye of God, providence over them, as if he had forsaken, and utterly
rejected them: Now being delivered, and plucked out of the snare, the And of the
Sa^nts much more, whose eye of f^^th, dimmed by afflictions:
eye of their faith is hereby cleared, and the eye of their judgment more
settled in the assurance is now cleared by this Deliverance.
of Gods protection And as men ravished with the strangeness of the
deliverance, their eyes are set and fastened thereupon, that so their faith may
be more strongely rooted in God, yea they do even feed their eyes, with the
contemplation thereof, that so their faith may be nourished thereby, yea they
can never satisfy themselves in beholding so wonderful a mercy, that so the
mind being thoroughly possessed therewith, they may never satisfy themselves
in thankfulness for the same, which as it is the end and use of all Gods
mercies, even to take up the cup of salvation, and to give thanks unto the name
of the Lord, for the same. So shall we find this beholding of Gods wonderful
mercies to be a most effectual means to further the same, whether we consider
those As removing such temptations as do hinder it which are. Psalm. 106. 7.
temptations that do hinder thankfulness unto God, or such means as do
usually further the accomplishment thereof. The temptations that do hinder
thankfulness are two: I want of understanding what God has done for us,
misunderstanding in the
want of understanding how God has done for us, and nature or
secondly misunderstanding and misconstering of the benefits of God: either in
the measure of the blessing Psalm. 49. 20.
nature of the^, as if all were done of duty, and merit, and not of free
grace and mercy, or in We may be discovered not to understand what God has
done for us by these symptoms 1. by saying wherein. 1. Mal. 4. 2. By seeing
only with the lest eye.
the measure of them, as if we knew best what was fit for us then God himself.
The former is a disuse general unto those that enjoy great blessings: man
being in honor, has no understanding, but may be compared to the beasts that
perish; the other is more g special unto those, that think they have best
right, and make the best use of the^ (as our meritmongers and wil-worshippers
of al sorts) By the one whereof we shall be so blinded that we cannot see how
God has done for us; by the other, we shall be perverted, as not to know what
we again are to do for God. If our minds shall be so blinded, as not
understand what God has done for us: this disease will be known by these
symptoms and accidents, h First though God has revealed his love toward us,
even in all the blessings, which our hearts have desired, yet will we say
impudently: wherein do thou love us? acknowledging nothing of what the Lord
has done unto us; Secondly if in some sort we shall apprehend the goodness
of God, yet shall we be so blinded on the right way, with the love of these
earthly things as that though we have and may farther be pertakers of
spiritual graces, yet shall we account these as nothing, in respect of the
comforts of this life, but with profane Esau, resolve, what is this birthright
unto me seeing Genesis 25. 30.
I die for hunger, as seeing only with the left eye into the blessings of the
left hand: still shall we cry out with those Psa. 4. 6.
carnal beasts, who will show us any good, as if there were no good but the
goods of this life, as if all spiritual comforts were nothing unto us, seeing
we wanted our bellies full of these hidden treasures. A very dangerous
temptation This a common disease of Carnal Ghospellers.
incident to our carnal ghospellers, who measuring the Lord principally by the
things of this life, are so affected and satisfied therewith that having these
things, they take it as a sufficient pledge of Gods favor toward them, but
wanting the same, they by and by murmuer, and repine against the Lord, as if
he had at all showed them no good. If therefore God give them their desire as
he did the Israelits concerning the body so far as they see him, and yet send
And a fearful judgment.
leanenesse into their sou^es, not giving them that which they see not, nor
seek after; as surely as God is not unjust; in giving them herein more, then
their hearts can desire, so they must needs be inexcusable, in that having
as much, Psa. 73. 6.
nay more then indeed they sought for, they would not seek yet for more of
that bountiful hand, which was not wanting to give, but that they wanted faith
to receive. 3. Token of no^ understanding is forgotfulnes. Psa. 78. 11. Lame,
3. 23.


A third token of not understanding what God has done for us, is our
forgetfulness of such benefits which are daily bestowed, certain it is that
the mercies of the Lord are renewed every morning, and yet who is there that
makes up his audite thereof once in the week: nay may we not be justly charged
with th^s, that God is not so ready to give, as we to forget, he not so
forward in bestowing, as we in burying his blessings in forgetfulness. And is
not this to forget the goodness of God all one, as if we did not understand
it? nay surely; we shall find it to lie more heavily upon us, in that this
forgetfulness, both implies some apprehension of them, and therefore makes us
more The danger thereof.
inexcuseable, then if we had not understood them at al and so exposing us
most desperately unto all impiety, does thereby hasten the wrath of God upon
us. Thus may we fail in the understanding of the good, that God has done for
us: and by means hereof, we lie open to two dangerous evils: Twofold. 1. We
shall not be able to make any good use of the blessings we obtain. Ierm 17. 6.
the one whereof is, that not apprehending the good which we receive, we shall
not be able to make use of any good, but as the Prophet Jeremy tells us, we
shall be like the heath in the wilderness, neither being able to see when any
good comes, and so not able to make any profitable use thereof: by which
means proouing unprofitable servants, we shall be subject to Math. 25. 28. 2.
We shall have them taken away from us, and instead of them, shall be recompensed
with Gods righteous Vengeance Esa. 26. 10.
a second judgment, not only to have such tallents taken from us, but in
steed thereof, as the Prophet Esaiah threatens, Seeing when mercy is showed
unto the wicked, he will not learn righteousness, but in the land of quitie
he will do wickedly, and does not consider the greatness of Jehovah,
therefore thus says the holy Ghost: Seeing they will not see, oh Jehovah, when
thy hand is exalted to their good, therefore they shall see and be confounded
with the zeal of thy people, and the fire of thine enemies shall devour them.

Thus shall it befall those that will not behold the mercies of GOD, to be
stirred up thereby to thankful obedience for the same: if they shut their
eyes against Gods blessings, the Lord will open them with his judgments, and
they shall see in the day of Judgment, GOD the A^enger, which will not
acknowledge Pal. 94 1. Genesis 15. 2.
him, their great reward. Would thou therefore avoid that sight of Gods
vengeance, which shall spiritually blind thee, that so thou may be oppressed
with the horror of it, and it shall necessarily open thine eyes, that thou
may be the more confounded with the sense of thine own misery?

Oh then To prevent these evils, we must not cease beholding of what the Lord
has done for us.
learn to behold the good that is present with thee: First, if Gods hand be
exalted in favor upon thee, if the eye of his providence has waited over thee
for thy deliverance, if he have not only bestowed great blessings upon thee,
but renewed them daily unto thee, by preventing and remoouing the evils which
might have taken them away, oh cease not again, and again to renew those
streams of Gods mercies which he has powered out unto thee, that they may lead
thee to the fountain; and so quite thee therein: Certainly as the works of God
are worthy this duty, that they should be regarded and therather. Because this
beholding. Psalm. 11 1. 4
so do they abundantly herein requite the same: in that the invisible things
of God, namely his eternal power and godhead seen in the creation of the
world, being considered in his works, Will requite our pains abundantly, as.
do show the glory of his kingdom and speak of his power. If therefore thou
shall not slightly passover the mercies of thy God, but shall take a full view
of them, as their worth does require, they shall be so many teachers, to
instruct thee in the knowledge of thy God: that so thou may acknowledge him
the 1. Teaching us to know God. Romans (...). 19. Psalm. 145. 8.
giver of them, yea they shall further lead thee to a knowledge of thy self,
that so finding thy self 2. To acknowledge him the giver of them.
unworthy of the least of Gods mercies, thou may both be humbled in the gift,
and so 3. To acknowledge our selves unworthy receauers.
give glory to the giver, and 4 That we may give him the glory in ^^asing our
selves.
advanced also to greater blessings as having been faithful in the less. If
thou shall with a large eye, behold how great things the Lord has done for
thee, 5. And so advance our selves to further blessings. Psalm. 4. 1.
thou shall herein behold the greatness of the giver, and so thy mouth shall
confess to salvation: Great is the Lord and worthy to be praised. And if thou
shall wisely behold what God has done for thee, and so shall give him the 6
Yea t^see by faith the greatest blessings 2. Pet. 1. 8. 1. Ion. 50. 1. Cor. 2.
1^. 1. Cor. 15.
praise that is due unto his name this shall be a means to sharpen thine eye of
faith, that so thou may be able to see a far of. And then behold as our
Savior told Nathaniel, Thou shall see greater things then these, yea such
which never eye saw, nor yet ever entered into the heart of man: thou shall here
see by faith and hereaftet see face to face. This benefit may thou gain by
beholding the bles sings of God. But this is not all. For if thou shall with a
single eye look further into such mercies as God has bestowed upon thee: thou
shall in the greatness of his goodness, behold thine own And thus we shall in
the greatness of Gods mercies so apprehe^d our unworthiness as. Aba. 3. Y.
vileness, then nearer thou approachest unto God in the apprehension of his
mercy, the deeper shall thou wade into the sense of thine own misery;
rottenness shall enter into thy bones, and horror shall possess thee: That is
the apprehension of Gods power and great goodness shall abase thee in his
presence, that so thou may find rest in the day of trouble; that so in the
sense of thine own vileness acknowledging thy self unworthy of the least of
those mercies thou have aheady received, thou may be partaker of further
deliverances. Thus shall the beholding of Gods blessing, causing thee aright to
Thus acknowledging our selves unworthy of the Least blessings we. Luke 76.
know thy self by them, lead thee also to a right understanding of them,
namely that they are the free gifts of God and not due unto us, whereby thou
shall happily overcome the second temptation. For now in the glass of thine
own wretchedness, thou shall plainly see, that Shall overcome the second
evil of misunderstanding the works of God.
whatsoever thou have, it is of the (...). that they are not ours by merit but
of srce mercy. Dan. 9. 7.
free mercy and bounty of thy God, thy self being so sarre from deserving
any good, as that indeed nothing is due unto thee, but shame, and confusion of
thy self for ever. By which as thou shall be humbled in the sense of thine
own unworthiness, and so be both contented with that thou have, and employ
thy Talent in fear and trembling: so shall thou hereby reap these benefits:
not only that, that which thou have be it never so little d shall serve thy
turn, yea be far better unto thee then great riches of the ungodly. (so long
as thou have the vessel of a thankful heart and faithful calling to entertain
and use the blessings, but further also whatsoever thou have being by these
means 2. That the measure which thou have is fitest for thee as that which God
has allotted unto thee. Psa. 37.
sanctified unto thee, it shall be a Pledge unto thee of that unchangeable love
of GOD: who having bestowed these things upon thee of his mere love and
mercy, therefore seeing whom he loves. By this the things thou have being
sanctified.
he loves unto the end as he has begun the work, so he will perfect it
in thee, 1. Shall Be continued 2. and be Pledges of further blessings. Ioh. 13.
1. Phi 6.
and will not cease following thee with his blessings, till he has made thee
perfect in his Son. Behold here the singular benefit of this duty of
beholding the works of GOD, namely, that thereby we Shall Be prepared in some
good measure to thank fullness.

Which if we shall not attain unto, as all have not As for the wicked which
have their eyes opened to behold these blessings.
faith (to see this spiritually into them,) yet behold the wonderful wisdom,
and power of God, in making the wicked here inexcusable, in that they shall
not choose, but behold the great and gracious works of GOD: and howsoever they
shall say in their hearts there is no GOD: yet with their eyes, in these his
works, they shall most plainly see him. A very notable and effectual means
to convince the Atheism of the world, and such as leaves all utterly without
excuse. For though many may pretend ignorance, Their ignorance and Atheism
shall be convinced hereby.
and simplicity, that they cannot comprehend GOD in his word: yet who can say,
that he has not seen him in his works? what eye can be shut at so great
a deliverance? what ear will such fearful judgments even make to tingle, as
do light upon Traitors? Tremble therefore, oh thou Atheist, at the providence
of GOD, who has a way to confound thee in thine own wisdom, and very
wonderfully to condemn thee, in thine own policies. Did thou say in the
depth of thy heart when thou laydest snares against the righteous: That no eye
should see, no not the eye of GOD himself, Flattering thy self in thine own
iniquity, That the Lord is hid in the Clouds, and cannot see, neither will
the GOD of Jacob regard it? And did thou hope hereby to escape scot-free, as
deceiving thine own heart, That the Lord will neither do good nor evil Yea
their secrecy in continuing of their plots shall further be confou^dea in that
their wickedness shall be apparent unto all men. Fzech. 8. 12. psa. 84. Job. 22.
1. Zeph. 1^.
Consider 3. Zeph. 5.
thou unwise that the Lord will bring his judgments to light, that every eye
may see them, and then, thou shall see the eye of God was upon thee: what thou
have Done secretly the Lord will then discover openly, that all men 2. Sam. 12,
may see it, and laugh at thee saying. This is the man, that took not God for
his strength, but put his strength in his malice, and in his mischievous
policies; yea thine own eyes shall see now, what before thou Psa. 14.
would not believe, That the Lord cares for the righteous, but as for the
wicked, them does his righteous soul abhor: that so though thou continue thy
malice against the saints, yet now thou shall not hereafter have this comfort,
1. Tim. 1. 18.
that thou did it ignorantly, because thou have seen that And so they
shall be without excuse. Esaias 5.
God takes their part, and therefore against this revealed light, conuincing
thine own conscience, thou shall hereafter appear desperately to fight
against God. Now shall thou say no more Let him make speed, let him hasten his
work that we may see it. For thou have seen the wonderful justice and mercy
of thy God: and if this sight will not appall thee; but still thou will
persecute: know then, that thou shall one day And yet if they continue
practicing against the just. Reave. 1
see him to thy confusion, whom Let them besure of vengeance in due time.
Math. 24.
thou have now pierced in his members, when thou shall wish the mountains to
hid thee, that thou may not see him, and yet shall lie naked before the eye
of his justice, by which thou shall be pierced with eternal sorrows. Oh that we
would try our selves by these things: that, seeing the beholding of the works
of God; shall condeme the Atheist, because he is not able to make a As for us
that have been partakers of this great deliverance, let us take heed that the
Atheist do not condemn us.
further use of them; whether therefore the c Atheist may not condemn many of
us professors herein, who will not vouchsafe the work of God that
entertainment as he has done? If this wonderful deliverance of the state and
Church of God, at this time, has so far prevailed even with the profanest
enemies, as that they have stood at a gase in the view thereof, as sometimes did
the people of Israel at the Corpse of Amasa. If the very adversaries themselves
have wondered at the providence of GOD 2. Sam. 20. 12.
in the defeating of these practices, and bin compelled to acknowledge his
power therein, if they have abhorred and disclaimed the same outwardly with an
utter detestation: nay if God have so opened some of their eyes hereby, that in
the glass of this iniquity they have seen the Mystery of Popery, and so
either for Fear, as sometimes Hesh. 8. 17.
did the heathen upon a like occasion: or for conscience have seen the truth
and embrace it: Certainly these shall one day rise up in judgment against us, if
we shall either bury in forgetfulness, or deprave in malice, or in envy
diminish, 1. If we labor not our utmost that this work may be s^ene.
if either we shall for fear conceal, or in policy suppress this great
power of God. Nay if we shall not be confirmed in the truth, by such
wonderful mercies of God, if these shall not be means to make (...) detest
popery and no longer to gloss with it, which are thus able to turn the hearts
of our enemies, let us look, 2 If we be not confirmed in the truth of religion
and
that they shall deprive us of the benefit of this deliverance, and reap the
haru^st, which God has sowed for us, well, let thus teach us not to come short
of an Atheist, least otherwise he go before us in the kingdom of heaven. If
the Lord exalt his wonderful works upon us, let us be lifted up in the name
of God, to a due contemplation of them, that so beholding the mercy and
Justice of God in the same, our eyes may be messengers unto the the mouth, to
speak of the wonderful works of GOD. Certainly, if the eye has effectually
conveyed the object to the heart to affect it: therewith the heart (like a full
vessel which cannot hold) out of it abundant apprehension will inform the
mouth, to declare unto others the wonderful works of God, and as Andrew when
he had seen his Savior, could not hold his peace, but he 1. Ioh. 41.
must needs go tell Simon that he had seen the Messiah, that he also might
be partaker of him, so shall the thorough view of such mercies which the Lord
has bestowed upon thee, open thy mouth to declare them un to others that they
also may come and see how gracious the Lord is, and together with thee, may be
partakers of his mercies. For so it follows. And declare the work of God.

Behold here a second effect of great deliverances d A second effect of great
deliverances.
they shall open men's mouths to speak thereof. And that for two ends If
thoroughly we shall behold this admirable work it will provoke us to speak
thereof.
both that the righteous confessing and acknowledging the work of God, might
hereby perform some part of thankfulness for the same, and the reprobate
being thus compelled to acknowledge the greatness (...) vayleable to
thankefulnes in the Godly and to make the wicked without excuse Psalm. 116. 12.
of Gods mercy unto his Church, might the more be convinced, in that they will
not be reconciled to the same, (so says the holy Ghost) concerning the poor
man that is delivered.

They shall look upon him, and run to him, and their faces shall not to
ashamed, saying a This poor man cried and the Lord heard him, and saved him
out of all his troubles, by the contemplation of Gods mercy unto his servant,
they shall now be encouraged to come unto him, who before stood a far of for
fear of his plague, and now ioying with the redeemed of the Lord, they shall
concur with him, in acknowledging the mercies of the Lord, yea says the
spirit, So does the spirit prophecy
they shall not now be ashamed, and confounded, (as if he had been devoured
they might have had cause) but one the contrary, they shall be confirmed in their
calling Psa. 34. 6.
by the experience of this delivery of his servant, and be comforted by the
same, even in the like occasion So have the Saints martyrd Psalm. 58.
of their own, that they shall be partaker of the like mercies. So when the
righteous shall see the vengaunce thus inflicted upon the wicked, and shall see
himself escaped thus out of the snare, and the wicked fallen, thereunto he
shall say, verily, their is a reward for the righteous, Psalm 34.
that is, not one, but And thereby confirmed themselves for the time to come.
all, the righteous shall be recompensed So have the saints practiced. Psa. 58.
9. 10.
by the Lord, yea he shall collect from the experience of this deliverance in
hand, that their is a reward for the righteous yet in store, a full deliverance
out of all troubles. So with the Apostle Paul, in the like case, when he had
witnessed how the Lord had delivered him, in the 17. ver. that he concludes in
the 18. And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve
me unto his heavenly kingdom. And as the righteous shall say thus for the
comfort of his soul, so shall he further say, to the glory of his God,
doubtless their is a God that Judges the earth, out of 2. Tim. 4.
question the judge of all the world, will do right, in delivering the souls
of his servants, and clothing his enemies with perpetual shame, and confusion.
Thus shall the mercies of God open the mouths of his children And given glory
to God.
to give him the glory and to comfort themselves in the meditation thereof.

And thus also shall the mouths of Yea the mouths of the wicked shall be opened
also. Psa. 126. 4.
Atheists be opened by the same, that their mouths may be for ever stopped,
and confounded thereby at that great day, so witnesses the spirit, concerning
the deliverance of the Jews out of the captivity, that the very Heathen
spoke thereof and said, the Lord had done To acknowledge the greatness of the
work.
great things for them, to their just confusion, who yet refused to join with
them: so have the Adversaries been compelled to confess that the Lord has
Fought for us, to their greater confusion, who yet afterward would fight
against God.

Nay behold here a further means to the confusion of the wicked. When the Lord
had delivered his servant Daniell from the jaws of the Lions, the sight of so
wonderful a work did so affect that heathen Monarch, as that he not only
proclaims the power of God, but further also enioynes by a solemn edist, that
the GOD of 2. To co^sesse God therein and prescribe worship unto him. Dan. 6.
Daniel shall be reverenced, and acknowledged. and yet all this to his further
condemnation, because Idolatry was yet continued, and maintained. And so no
doubt have our adversaries abroad, and enemies at home been enforced to speak
of Gods wonderful mercies toward us. And yet behold a further means herein,
for the condemnation of the wicked. When Saul observed the admirable providence
of God, not only in delivering his servant David out of his hands, but in
delivering him to be a prey even to him, that was persecuted, his mouth was
further opened to his just condemnation: lo he is enforced to justify the
servant of God and to condemn 1. Sam, 24. 18.
himself. Thus said he unto David, thou 3. To justify the Innocence of his
servants.
art more righteous then (...), for thou have rendered me Good, and I have
rendered thee evil, oh what a comfort is it here to the servants of God, that
wisdom shall not only be justified of her children, but even of her enemies,
our very adversaries shall give testimony unto the goodness of our cause, oh
what a terror is this unto the wicked, that they shall thus desperately fight
against the light of their own consciences, that when they see that the Lord
does maintain his own cause, and when they have been compelled to
acknowledge, that our cause is Gods, yet they shall continue their malice
against so good a cause, yet they shall thus desperately fight against heaven,
and provoke the holy one of Israel to their just confusion. And yet behold the
Lord will open their mouths further to their fearful condemnation, even by
the gracious deliverances that he performs unto his children.

It was much that Saul should justify the innocence of David, wonderful was
the Lord herein, to wring from a reprobate, the approbation of his servant, and
very holy herein was the Justice of God, in discovering this wilful obstinacy
of a castaway, that so he might prepare him thereby to his further
condemnation. But all this while, 4. To prophecy and foretell in some sort the
deliverance of gods Children and their own confusion. 1. Sam. 27. 2.
innocence though it were praised, yet it went a begging. David might be
promised a kingdom and yet was not sure of his life; Nay for the safeguard of
it, he is driven to a narrow shift; even in a sort to venture his innocence it
self. So are Gods children to seek of that which is theirs in hope, that God
may have the glory of what they do enjoy, so does the Lord prepare his, to the
obtaining of a blessing, that coming unto it at so hard a rate, they might
more highly prize it, when they shall obtain. But did not the Lord here give
his servant some token, that he would recompense him according to his
innocence? yea surely: the Lord that opened the mouth of his enemy, to give
testimony unto the one, he also opened the same to be a Prophet of the other.
Harke^ (my beloved) and wonder at the providence of God, I know (says Saul)
that thou shall be King, and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in
(...). Sam. 24. 19.
thy hand. Lo here Saul is among the Prophets to declare glad tidings to the
Saints, and to speak fearful things against themselves. Harken how the wife
of Haman becomes a prophetess unto her husband, of the deliverance of the
Church, and a swift witness of the destruction of the enemies thereof. If
Mordecay (says she) be of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have
begun to fall, thou shall not prevail against him, but shall surely fall
before him. Mark (I pray you) the ground of this prophecye, the wicked have
begun to fall before the righteous nation, some upper hand have they had
against their enemies, what does this infidel collect hereupon? surely the
wicked shall fall more and more before the righteous, till at lenght the
righteous shall have dominion over them in the morning. Would thou then have a
token that thine enemies shall be confounded? consider then how from time to
time they have fallen before thee: certe^ly if thou be of the seed of the
Jews, and of that royal generation, thou shall one day have all thine enemies
thy footstool. Would thou have a further evidence to confirm this unto
thee? behold the Lord shall open the mouth of thine enemy to bewray their
fainting spirits, that so thou may be comforted as Gideons Soldiers were) by
this testimony of thine enemies that the Lord shall give them up into thy hands,
and thou shall make a full end of them. Oh but (thou will say) how can these
things stand together? Saul tells Which they do hasten by persecuting the
Saints. Ioh. 12. 19.
David he shall certainly be King, and yet he continues persecuting him to take
away his life from him: May not this be a policy to make him secure, that he
may the more easily seize upon him? I see indeed (will the weak Christian say)
that God has delivered his church from time to time, and I hear even the
enemy giving over for a time, And therefore though we may be troubled and
distracted by this increase of the wickeds rage. 1 Samuel 27. 1.
as confessing with the Pharesie, Behold we prevail nothing against him, for
all the world runs after him, and yet I see the adversaries are in hope
still, I see they are still practicing, and plotting against the souls of the
righteous what may I conceive hereof? may I not justly fear with David, that I
shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, that at length these adversaries
shall obtain their desire against the church, and thereupon resolve rather
upon some indirect course to corrupt my conscience, or abate of my sincerity,
that so glosing with them, I might find favor Yet is it a certain taken unto
us that their time is but short. 12. Reu. 12.
in their sight. Oh stay here, whosoever thou art, that shall be thus affected,
give me the hearing a while to satisfy thee herein, Tell me I pray thee, why
does Satan our maine adversary so violently and incessantly persecute the
Church of GOD? does not the spirit give thee the reason, because his time is
short, if thou therefore see the instruments of Satan, still to rage more
fiercely against the spouse of Christ, know thou for a certenty, that their
time is but short, and that thou may not want a prophecy to confirm thee
herein, consider but what their desperate practices do speak unto thee. If
they were not afraid to loose their kingdom, if they had not a presage in
their conscience, that Christ's Kingdom would one day And their d^sperate do
practices prophecy unto us that they fear the loss of their kingdom. Iho.
11. 47. 48.
prevail, surely they would be still, and follow their flesh potts; they would
not so persecute, and plot as they do: they would not thus spend their goods
and venture their lives, and all against the poor Church of God. Alas it is
not for Christ's kingdom, (what pretense soever they have) for they have said
plainly. We will not have this man to reign over us. But the truth is to
hold their own. Here is the matter, the Jews had this Oracle from their
Father the Devil, that if they let Christ alone, the Romans would come and
take away their Kingdom, And therefore As appears by the like in the Jews.
they resolve that Christ must be persecuted, his death must be the life of
their usurped power: their conscience told them that they were but usurpers;
the very life and holy conversation of Christ, was a manifest conviction and
condemnation of them, so that Who dealt thus against our sauio^r Christ.
their conscience told them that Christ Jesus was that holy one, whom they
ought to have obeyed, and yet their hypocrysie replied, if we give him honor
we shall loose ours, and so their deuilish policy concluded to their own
confusion, better one perish then our whole Kingdom go down, feign would
they have done him homage, so he would have served their turn, to Daube up
their hypocrisy, and underprop their to^tering Kingdom, but yet because
they saw his course to be clean contrary a sharp reprouer of their
hypocrisy, and a main beaterdowne of their carnal pomp, and vanity, To the
hastening of his glory and their own confusion. Act. 2. 22.
hereupon against their conscience, they followed their persuite against him:
and do you mark herein how their Father deceived them? their practices
against the son of God made way to his Glory, and the redemption of mankind:
and so proved the occasion of the overthrow of So does GOD confound the wisdom
of the wise.
their kingdom. So does the Lord Confound the wisdom of the wise, and turns
their malice upon their own pates. In like sort the adversaries of the Church
have carried themselves. A kingdom they have usurped upon by the power of
Satan, and through his Subtilty and violence, Our adversaries in like sort
deal against the flock of Christ. Because it threatens the overthrow of their
carnal, and ambitious kingdom. Dan. 2.
they have seized upon the Lords inheritance, and exalted themselves in the
temple of God, above all that is called God so that a man would think they
need fear no downfall as having with Tyrus built their n^sts so high Oh but
all this honor is nothing unto them, so long as Mordakie will not bow unto
them, there is a little flock which is a great ^o^^ in their eye, as being
founded upon that stone ^^wen out without hands, which as the Lord has
prophesied so their consciences are convinced withal, That it shall break in
pieces whatsoever exalts it self against God, If Mordakie would bow to
Hamon, and the Which in deed is the true cause of al their quareles how soever
they may pretend conscience and religion. As appears by their spoiling of
Papists as well as Protestants.
Saints of God worship their God Mauzzim: if the corner stone would endure
their hay and stubble and such like trumpery, then happily it should not be
pushed at. And yet (by your leave) there is no trusting to them in this case,
if either their be any Opposition against their ambition, or their hope of
spoil and pillage thereby, here the goods of Papists are a like heretical, as
those of Hugunots and the most devoted popelings soonest made their prey, so
little do they esteem religion in respect of their lusts, so easily may we may
perceive the cause of all their quarrels. And yet that they may not want a
visor to deceive themselves and others religion must be the color, and the
cross must be the standard, and the Church and Saints of God must go down,
because they are not profitable and an advantage unto them. Thus because the
spouse of Christ cannot endure the wages and habit of the harlot, because
there is no halting betwixt two opinions, but we must stand for God and him
alone: seeing Dagon cannot stand before the But with as good success as the
Jews.
Ark of God, and the Kingdom of Christ, will certainly confound the purple
Strumpet: Therefore does she band her self with the Kings of the earth,
against the Lord, and against his anointed, and makes continual war with the
Saints of God. But will you see with what Issue? Certainly to the exceeding good
and profit of the church, which is continually Watered with the blood of the
Martyrs, and by these daily afflictions prepared unto her bridgrome: and to the
hastening of their own most woeful and unavoidable destruction. For as the
blood of the Saints, on the one side, crying for vengeance hasteneth the wrath
of And therefore let us not marvayle that the wicked take this Course for the
maintenance of their kingdom^. Math. 24. Neither let their desperate rage cast
us down, but rather be means justly to comfort us ^n that it is a certain
token of their imminent destruction. Esa. 37. 14,
god upon the^, so the increase of their malice adding to the measure of their
sin does at the length bring the same to ripeness, that so the sickle of
Gods vengeance might be put in accordingly. Marvel not therefore if the
adversary increases his rage against the Saints of GOD: for wot you what? his
kingdom has received his deaths wound, and now the only hope is even
desperate wickedness. And shall I now be cast down, when I see them so
desperate? No says our Savior, when you see these things, then lift up your
heads, for your redemption draws near. I need no truer a prophet of the
destruction of Popery, then to observe how it breaks out into desperate and
most barbarous courses for the maintenance thereof: neither need I other
weapons to uphold a righteous cause, then what the malice of mine enemy shall
minister unto me. Only let us be wise to make this use of these weapons, as
Hezakiahs did of the letters of Rabshacks, let us not answer these fools
according to their foolishness, let us not fear their Esaias. 37. 14. Only let
us commend the cause to God and not doubet with these enemies.
fear, nor fret against their malice: but let us in the name of God, commend
the cause unto God, let us be sure that for his sake we suffer these
reproaches, that for him it is we are appointed, as sheep for the slaughter;
let us not cast a way our confidence which has so great hope of reward, but
in patience possess our souls, reserving vengeance for the Lord, and
committing our selves in well dying into the hands of our faithful creator,
and then let us look Andin due time the Lord will accomplish his work. Hebr.
10. 37. 38
undoubtedly, that he that is coming will come in the needful time, the
snare shall be broken and we delivered, and our enemies shall full into the pit
which they have dug for us.

Let us now in a word, examine our selves by this second effect of Gods
wonderful mercies, namely that all men shall declare the work of God. We have
heard, how they do open the mouths of the wicked, not only to acknowledge the
greatness of the work, but to give testimony also unto the power of the
workman, yea further to approve the innocence of the saints, and lastly, to
prophecy of the deliverance of the rightrous, and their own confusion, we
have also heard; how they do open the mouths of the saints, not only to
cheer up one another in the worship of GOD, and to be confirmed in the
sincerity thereof: but further to acknowledge the righteous power of God, and
to prophecy unto themselves, the continuance of Gods mercy, for the time to
come. Uerily there is a reward for the righteous, that is the Lord has stored
up a full recompense for them, in Psa. 58. 10.
that great day. Let us by this make trial how our mouths have been opened
with this great deliverance, Try we our selves how this present deliverance
has opened our mouths.
which GOD has bestowed upon us, that so hereby we may have matter to
discern our estate: surely this work of God has been so wonderful, that if
we should bold our peace, the very stones would speak, thereof; and
therefore it is to be fea^ed, that the stones one day will rise up in
Judgment against many, whose mouths have either been shut up, as being
confounded therewith, or opened blasphemously to the dishonor of God: so did
Some men's mouths have been shut up.
that bloody monster open his mouth indeed, but it was to the high dishonor
of the Almighty, when he said, that it was not God but the devil, that
disclosed so desperate a treason, as thinking that God would not hinder so good
a Some opened hereby to blaspheme God.
work. I pray God he have not many fellows thus desperately blinded: If any
such Athiests, or Rebels, shall thus open their mouths against heaven, for the
discovery of this mischief, as if their God had deceived them, and so now If
they belong unto the living God that it may be an occasion to make them
renounce their Idolatry.
they will no longer stay upon him, I wish if they belong not unto the Lord, my
hearty prayer is that they may be so deceived still, that, that God whom they
will not honor in their obedience to his substitute, may be honored in their
just confusion, from his presence for ever. If any common discourses shall be
put into new matter, hereby to fill up the news at a Table, or else where, to
get himself credit, Some opened in vanity to spend time in discoursing hereof.
and give others contentment: I envy him not, neither do I forbid him,
whether it be of envy or strife, vain glory, or vanity, whether of pretense,
sincerely that this work be spoken of, therein I joy, and therein I will joy,
as knowing it shall redound to Gods glory, and the good of such whom And yet
all shall turn to Gods glory.
it does concern. And I do wish that all men may speak of this wonderful
work of God, that so God may have the glory in that all g^ue testimony
thereunto, and his children may have the comfort in the meditations thereof.

I will not hear undertake to scanne the policy in this case, I know secrecy
is an excellent means to search the bottom of a mischief, that so in the end
it may Only labor we to sound the depth of this practice.
more be discovered, and I pray GOD sanctify it more and more, to such an end;
only my hearts desire is, that the deepenesse of Satan may be discovered, and
the inmost secret of the iniquity of his instruments may be thoroughly laid
open, and truly searched, from that bitter root of will worship, which is the
ground thereof: and then I Math. 24.
doubt not but all men's mouths will be opened in detestation of that monster
of superstition, whose foundation 1. That all men's mouths may be open^d in
destation thereof
is self love, and whose practice is nothinels but an ^mp^^g, and abasing, of
all others, to fill and exalt it self: and when our mouths shall be thus justly
opened in detestation of this ambition, then shall they be opened also to give
GOD the glory for the discovery of this beast, and 2. To give glory unto God.
3. To iustitie the saints and so to join with them. Ioh. 4. 42.
to justify the Saints, for not worshipping the same, that so approving of the
holy ones, we may desire to be like unto them, and GOD may give us according
to our desire. And when we have felt our selves how good the Lord is: as the
Samaritanes professed that they believed not because the woman told them, but
in that they haere and 4. that now we may speak out of our own experience and
soatatine the true under standing thereof.
know him themselves: so now we our selves shall be able to speak of this
deliverance, not upon the hear say o^ apprehension of others, but upon our
own sownd knowledge and apprehension thereof: and that this is the effect of
effectual declaring the works of God, the holy ghost is our witness in that
he adds. And they shall understand what he has wrought.

It is a good effect of great works when they shall open our eyes, to behold
the same as being a good furtherance to see GOD in them, that so we may reach
the Without which neither to behold them.
fountain of these blessings, but if we only see them, and proceed no
further, this good, will only redownd to the Glory of GOD, who being
acknowledged only of us, thus far as in the sight of his work: shall be
herein be Gloryfied in our just condemnation, that having such a light to
lead us to him, as that therein we must needs acknowledge him: we would not
seek him in a further light, wherein seeing him in the face of his son
Christ Jesus, he might acknowledge Nor to declare them shall further us.
us also to be his Children. And therefore the holy Ghost not content to tell
us that all men shall see (...), to acknowledge a GOD, adds further in the
second place, that they shall declare what God has done, signifying thereby,
that the works of God shall further prevail in them to a more particular
knowledge of God in Psalm. 118. 23.
the same, so that they shall declare the work of God: that is, they shall
say, this is the Lords doing: and yet if only our mouths shall be opened to
see that God has done this, and shall no further apprehend what God has done,
that so we may further say, is maruailous in our eyes, neither shall we in the
work apprehend the power of the workman, and so come short herein of the
knowledge of the Heathen, neither shall we be ever able to measure true
thankfulness accordingly: if we cannot comprehend the greatness of the worke^: To
true thankfullnes.
herevpo^ is it that the holy Ghost having lead us from the sight of the work,
to a particular apprehension and acknowledgement of the workman, does now also
in the But by understanding the work we shall be able to measure our thankefulnes
according.
third place, in the knowledge of the workman, teach us to look down again
into the greatness of the work, when he says. And shall understand what he
has wrought, signifying thereby, that when the works of God shall open our
eyes to see God in them, then also by the knowledge of God shall we attain to
the true nature and greatness of the work, that so we may return again
unto God, a proportionable measure of thanks giving for the same. Behold here
a third effect of Gods wonderful works, as being a necessary As hereby
apprehending the goodness of a blessing.
means to the duty of thankfulness. For neither can the affections be
thoroughly inflamed with the goodness of a blessing, unless the understanding
comprehend the greatness of it, and if we shall not comprehend how good the
Lord is unto us, we shall never resolve to return him good again. By
Particular knowledge. of the same. Romans 14.
And seeing that whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and it is not a general
and confused knowledge, but a distinct and particular apprehension of the
goodness of God, which is the means to be get faith, therefore that what we
do, may be acceptable unto God, very requisite it is, that we comprehend what
is the length and the breadth, the high and the depth of Gods mercies toward
us, that so we may perform 3. Ephesians. 18.
the obedience of faith unto our God, accordingly for the same. Which
comprehension, as the holy Ghost desires in the faithful, concerning the
principal work of Gods love toward them, namely their redemption by Jesus
Christ, that so we may be filled with all fullness of God, so seeing all other
works of mercy, are derived from that fountain, therefore are we to labor
the like apprehensio^, of all such blessings as the Lord from time to time
bestows upon us (so far as their compass does require) that so our mouths
may And to this end the word hepeth excedingly.
be filled with due praises unto our God for the same And surely the mercy of
God is herein exceeding unto us, in helping our infirmities to this profitable
understanding, by the wisdom of the Spirit revealed in the word. For if we
shall be thoroughly acquainted with the good word 2. Tim. 3. 16. 17.
of God, as it was inspired of God to make the man of God perfect: so shall we
find it exceeding plentiful to inform our understandings in the true
apprehension of such blessings as are bestowed upon us: that so we may measure
out our tha^ksgiuing accordingly. To instaunce only in that a benefit To
understand the greatness of a deliverance. Which implies 1. some great
danger. 2. a recovery out of it.
of a deliverance, the present subject of our meditations. Mark I pray you,
how the holy Ghost helps our understanding, to comprehend the greatness
thereof. As every deliverance implies two things. First a danger lying upon
us, secondly, a recovery of us out of the same: so has the spirit exceedingly
helped our understandings to the particular apprehension of both these, in
expressing unto us most lively the greatness of the danger, and also enlarging
most effectually the strangeness of the recovery. The greatness of a danger
may appear by these three circumstances, The danger seen (...) the weakness of
the means to resist. 2. in the power of the means that threatens. 3. in the
impossi^ilitie of any means to deliver. ^sal. 38.
first by the greatness of the power that threatens the same^ Secondly, by the
weakness of the means in our selves to avoid the per^ll: and lastly by that
impossibility which appears in any help elsewhere. If our enemies be
mighty, the danger must needs be great, but yet there may be hope, if there be
a power to match the same. If the power be wanting in our selves, the danger is
greater, especially if our own hearts may herein fail us and yet for all
this, though our (...)sh do fail us, and our hearts also, there may be hope
from without to supply our wants, if not from man, who is deceitful, yet from
our God who never fails. But when the light of Psa. 142. Psa. 35.
Gods countenance shall be taken away from us, when we shall look on our right
hand, and there is none to help us: when we shall turn to the left and see no
issue, when Such has been the state of the Church.
we shall say in our haste, that our God has forsaken us, and when we shall
hear our enemies say, they have devoured us, This danger may seem past
recovery: And yet behold the spirit witnesses that such has been the danger
of the Church, and Saints of God from time to time, yea she has found an issue
usually in such Straights, our soul is escaped says the Church even as a bird
out of the snare of the Fouler, the snare is broken, and we are delivered.
Mark As a bird in the snare. Psa. 124 6. Zach. 3. 3.
I pray you the greatness of the danger, how unable is the Bird to avoid the
snare of the Fouler, how effectual is the snare to take this silly Foul, what
hope is there of deliverance when the bird is caught therein, and yet behold
our soul is delivered, even as a Bird, out of the snare of the fowler, so
desperate is our danger, and so wonderful is our recovery, what hope is there
of a Brand taken out of the A pray in the teeth.
fire, surely such has been the state of the Saints of God, Is not this man
taken as a brand out of the free fire. Nay what hope is there of dead bones
scattered in the open fields, Abran plucked out of the fire. As dead and dry
^onse. Ezec. 37. 4. 5. 6.
having been there so long, that they are dried and withered can these bones
live, says the spirit of God: yea says the Lord, behold I will cause breath to
enter into you, and you shall live, Lo here the desperate estate of the Church
of GOD, even as a Dead Man and quite out of mind, nay, as rotten and consumed
to the very bones, by the continuance of the trouble, and extremity thereof, so
that we may not only tell all her boanes: but indeed there And such was our
danger in the late intended conspiracy
is nothing but dead and dry bones left of her. Yet says the Lord these
boanes shall live, yet shall the desolate Church become an exceeding great
Army: yea terrible with banners, to the confusion of her enemies,, understand
therefore the greatness of thy deliverance, by the greatness of the danger,
and sound the depth of thy dangers these points accordingly, call to mind I
pray thee the deadly plot that was prepared for thee in the practice of thine
enemies, which the Lord has disappointed, and by As appointed as she pe to the
slaughter. ^sal. 44.
the depth of the danger, which was ready to swallowe thee up, labor to
measure the greatness of thy deliverance, great was thy danger in that thou
wast Appointed as a Sheep to the slaughter: And yet herein was it greater that
the Danger was not known. By And suddne^lie to be s^a^std upon.
this means was not only all hope taken from thee ^o avoid it. Whereby this
present State, was utterly Which made our present state desperate. And might
have endangered our future estate
desperate, but being sudden unto thee in that it was unknown hereby taking
thee unprepared by repentance to meet thy GOD. Consider how this might have
indaungered Thy Estate for the life to come.

And if the Lord has prevented that Blow, because thou wast not prepared, Oh
take heed to Tempt this GOD by security hereafter, least the like sudden
vengeance may speedily overtake thee: Certainly if the malice of thine enemy be
as Hell that can never be satisfied, And yet shall, if we make not use of so
great a deliverance.
think that the increase of thy sin, will add more fuel to it.

And though the Lord may spare for a time because some stand in the gappe. Yet
when they shall be taken from the judgments to come and thy sins shall be
ripened by continuance therein: Know then for a certenty that thy Danger is
now greater, in that thorough the hardenesse of thine heart, which cannot
repent, thou do heap up wrath, against thy self, against the day of wrath,
and thy Romans 2. 4.
Master will come in an hour when thou know not, and give thee thy portion
with the Hypocrytes, there shall be great weeping and gnashing of teeth.

It was a notable testimony of the Apostles love unto Consider yet further the
greatness of the danger.
his countrymen, that he wished even to redeem their reiection with his own
everlasting perdition, (if so it might have stood with the good pleasure of
God,) whereby the servant of God did imply, that the preventing of a general
danger, was to be preferred before a particular, and that the loss of a
private state, ought to redeem a public. Had it been so then that either
thine own private state had been aimed at, or though the general life of It
was not the life of a private person.
Church and common wealth was shot at, yet if it might have been redeemed with
thy private loss, the danger had been the less, and thy comfort the more.
But behold here the insatiable malice of thine enemy, and therein consider yet
further the greatness of the danger. It was not the life of a private person,
would quench their unmeasurable malice: for then yet the body might have
continued, though an inferior member had bin cut off, Nay, yet enlarge thine
understanding, and conceive yet further. It was not one principal member that
would No not of the head alone. But head and tail, root and branches, all
were shot at in the practice. Esaias. 9. 44.
satiate their ambitious thirst, no not the head it self, and root of the
Kingdom; for the weaker wisdom could resolve them so far, that if the
root were cut off, yet the branches might flourish, and so their malice
discovered, and yet not further their ambition. What then was the plot? and how
grievous was the danger? surely even to cut off head and tail, root and
branches, utterly with one blow; even to ruinate, head and members, Esaias, 15.
church and common wealth; and in one moment to have brought full confusion
upon all estates. Behold here a further measure of the danger, wherein thou
wast: And blessed be God, that we have leisure to meditate these things, yea
evermore blessed be our gracious Father, who howsoever the whole head and body
might be sick, yet because he is our Physician to heal us, and does not
delight in our destruction, but knows what is to be hoped for of his patient,
thought this Physic too desperate and too preposterous, as intended to
destroy and not to sin; and therefore in his mercy has kept it from us, and
in his Justice made our enemies to drink of the cup they had prepared for us.
Well by this thou may apprehend in some measure the greatness of the danger
wherein thou wast; and yet behold I will show thee greater perils then these
intended against thee. There is hope Job. 4. 6. Consider yet further the
greatness of thy danger, In that thy enemy labored to deprive the^ of that
whereby though thou had been killed yet thou might have lived still. 1.
Cor. 15. 19.
(says holy Job) of a tree, if it be cut down, there will yet sprout, and
the branches thereof will not perish, though the root thereof wax old in the
earth, and the stockethereof be dead in the ground, yet by the descent of
waters it will bud and bring forth boughs like a plant. But as for man he is
sick and dies, and man perishes, and where is he? signifying thereby that
there is no hope of him. And surely had we only hope in this life, we were not
only living of all men most miserable, but dying also our hope must needs
perish with us But here is the hope of the Saints, that not only their
sufferings shall give further life to the Church in this world, but shall
prepare them to a blessed life in the world to come. So that now though he
kill us, yet we will trust in Job. 13. 15. 20.
God, not only in that though we die, yet we shall live in the posterity of
the Church, whiles she is militant, but our light afflictions which are but
for a moment, they do cause unto us a far more excellent weight of Glory,
that we may triumph for ever, with the Saints in heaven. Marvelous is our
gracious God unto his children, for the confirming of them in the hope of the
life to come, and that by two especial means, both by the inward testimony
of his Spirit, approving so our innocence that 1 The testimony of thine
innocence.
by the power thereof it breaking forth as the light, and shining at the no one
day, though we die, yet by it we might live with the saints in grace, and
further also by the government of the same Spirit soreuiuing his Church, 2. The
succession continual of the Church.
and renewing the same, in her greatest decays, as that she has, and shall
continue her military life, till the heavens be no more, and even then living
and remaining shall be caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air,
and so for ever to be with the Lord. So did the Lord provide for his seruaint
Job, that when he was weary of his life, yet he was not weary of his
innocence, and he So was Jobs innocence unto him. Job 27. 6.
yeeldes an excellent reason of it in the 8. verse. For what hope has the
hypocrite when he has heaped up riches, if God take away his soul. Implying
thereby that if he were an hipocrite, and had no sound testimony of his
sincerity, then indeed, if GOD should kill him, he could not trust in him, then
he had no hope, if his soul should be taken away. But seeing he knew that the
living Lord had taken away his judgment, because the Almighty had put his And
2. verse.
soul in bitterness, and the ground of this his saving knowledge, was the
testimony of his innocence, proceeding from the undoubted work and evidence
of the Spirit: Therefore does he cleave to the testimony of his good
conscience, as when by he was assured, not only to come out of these
troubles, but further also was bold to profess that He knew that his
redeemer lived, and that he should see GOD in the flesh. Behold the means
Job. 19. 17.
whereby we live though we die, and whereby we are assured that we shall
live for ever: even the testimony of our innocence and uprightness of heart.
And yet behold a further testimony for the confirmacion of the same. Do
thou see the Spirit of GOD ruling in the Church, and governing so comfortably
the troubles of the same: that though she die daily, yet she lives continually
Not only in that though the outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed
daily, but especially herein is the continuate life of the Church wonderful,
that the blood of the Martirs becomes the seed of the Church: Do thou hear
the wicked say, Come let us utterly root them out? Do the Godly complain,
they have So does God comfort his Church with the hope of continual
successiod.
destroyed all, there is no hope: and yet does the Lord say still concerning
the desolations of his Church: The root of the righteous shall not be removed.
Yet therein will I leave a tenth, which shall continewe, and shall be eaten up
as an Elm: or an Oak, which have a substance in them when they cast their
leaves: so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof. Though I utterly
destroy all the nations: where I have scattered thee, yet I will not utterly
destroy thee, but I will correct thee by judgment, and not utterly cut thee
off.

Are these the promises of thy GOD concerning his spouse that she shall
continue unto the worlds end? has the performance of them been answerable
from time to time thereunto, that so by the experience of her former
preservation, thou may collect that the Lord will deliver her to the end: and
by her wonderful continuance in this life, thou may further gather Which as
it may abundantly satisfy us in our greatest dangers and recompense our
greatest troubles whatsoever: that we shall be means of the reviving and
continuing of the Church: So this is our trial whether we be faithful unto
our God, if for the good of the Church we shall thus hazard our selves: to
leave it glorious to posterity.
her abode for ever in eternal happiness? What can thou desire more for the
confirmation of thine hope, then according to thy inward and outward troubles,
to have this double Testimony of the spirit, both in the protection of the
Church without, and the inward witness unto thy spirit renewed, and sanctified:
to lead thee along with cheerfulness in the undoubted expectation of the
reward to come, that so thou may run with joy the race that is set before
thee, and having finished thy course obtain the Crown of everlasting
happiness? And what can better recompense al thy private losses then that thou
art weak that the Church of GOD, may be strong, that thou art abased that the
church may be exalted? Yea though it should so fall out, that the Church were
to be fetched again with thy dearest blood. If now thou shall not set light by
any troubles, that in this respect may befall thee: If now thy life shall not
be vile unto the, That thou may fulfill thy course with joy, If this shall
not be thy testimony that thou have even been ready, not only to distribute
the Gospel of God unto thy people for the after groeth of the Church; but even
thine own soul: surely never look to approve thy self a good shepherd
unto thy people, Neither look to give up thy account with joy, and to shine as
a star in the Firmament for ever. Behold how the hope of the Saints
concerning the life to come, and consider the means that gives them life in
death, even the testimony of their innocence, which shall And herein appeared
the devilish malice of our adversaries. Which with on blow would have cut of
both these comforts.
endure for ever, and the seed of the Church continuing unto the end. And tell
me, if there were ever malice like unto that, which would at one blow have cut
off all this hope, not only to deprive the Saints of their righteousness,
whereby they might have lived in the hearts of the faithful, but so far as
lay in them, even to cut off utterly the seed of the Church, that so there
might not be hereafter any succession thereof.

The Lives of the Saints would not serve their malice, but they will have a
devise to rob them of their innocence, by laying that on their poor sheep,
which the Wolves would have done. It was not the life of the Prince 1. our
Innocence 2. hope of posterity.
and state, which could satisfy their rage. No, they had vowed utterly to
root out the name of religion; and therefore their project was to destroy all
Seed, that might give hope to posterity thereof; not only the royal seed,
Both the royal seed the se ed of the word and the seed of the righteous.
for the after nurserie of the Church; but further also the immortal seed of
the word; yea moreover to abolish utterly the seed of the righteous, that all
hope of posterity in the Church might finally be extinguished, as having
neither Nurse, nor Milk, nor Babe remaining. Oh consider the depth of this
devilish malice, and magnify the depth By this may thou comprehend the
greatness of the danger.
of Gods mercy in thy wonderful deliverance. Remember if ever any danger was
like unto this, which the Lord thy gracious God has plucked thee out off, that
so thy heart may be enlarged to give him due praises for the same.

And yet that thy heart may be further enlarged hereunto; as thou have
hitherto understood the greatness of the danger, in avoiding so many evils: So
consider in the Hearken now thou may understand the greatness of the
deliverance.
second place, in thy wonderful recovery, what plenty of blessings the Lord
has conferred upon thee. And that thou may not mistake the nature of a
deliuera^nce, behold the Spirit leads thee to a true discerning thereof for,
speaking of the deliverance, which the Lord would perform unto his Church,
that the memory thereof might for ever be continued he says. This shall be
written for the generations to come, that By apprehending the true nature of a
deliverance which is as a creation.
this faithful record might prevent forgetfulness. And further, that we
might learn to judge rightly of a deliverance, he adds: And the people
which shall be created, shall praise the Lord, meaning that a deliverance from
so great a danger, was to be accounted no less, then a new creation, that is
of nothing, even raising up a creature, and a new giving of such blessings as
he is furnished withal. Would thou therefore understand aright, what God
has done for thee in this great deliverance? Surely, if thou do not
account as nothing, whatsoever thou wast, or hadest heretofore; if thou do
not esteem thy self, and whatsoever thou art to be a new gest even newly
created, and restored Whereby all things together with thy self are newly
restored.
of nothing: thou do yet conceive nothing to the truth, and worth of this
blessing, and shall in no sort be able to make good use thereof. But, if so
be that thou shall acknowledge, that all things are become new: that
whatsoever thou art, or have, thou must not reckon it from thy birth, but from
this wonderful deliverance: consider what singular profit shall arise unto
thee hereby. So shall each thing thou have being newly given thee put thee in
mind of the blessing.
There is not any thing, thou enioyest but shall remember this deliverance unto
thee, that so thou may be provoked to magnify the deliverer. Nay, this
renewing unto thee of whatsoever thou have, shall provoke thee to concecrate the
same anew unto thy God, that so thy deliverance, working that holy thing in
thee, when by thou shall be renewed in the Spirit of thy mind, and be clothed
with And further thy in ward renewing: That so thou may be fit to rejoice in
thy God for the blessing.
some good measure of holiness and righteousness, thou may sing the new
song of praise unto thy GOD, which becomes the righteous only to perform,
for so it follows. But the righteous shall rejoice in the Lord.

Behold here a further duty in the intertainment of this great deliverance,
and that limited unto the righteous: namely, that they shall rejoice in the
Lord for the same. Not that they shall not behold, declare, or understand, as
And does only belong to the righteous, and why.
well as others, what God has done for them: (for these are good furtherances
to the duty of thankfulness:) but that though they do these things, yet they
shall not stay here, (as the wicked do,) but shall proceed further to rejoice
in the Lord for the same, by celebrating the praises of the Lord according to
his benefits. A duty very fitly appropriated to the righteous. For they only
have right in this joy, and therefore if the Lord have done great Psa. 126. 7.
things for them, they may safely rejoice therein; and they only know how to
use this joy aright, and therefore may with greater liberty enlarge themselves
therein; they only have true cause of joy, even the testimony of their 1.
Cor. 1. 12.
consciences; they only by this joy, do sanctify the blessing unto them, and
so procure the continuance of it; And they only shall have no end of theirioy,
and therefore may not fear the overthrow thereof. And indeed, Ioh. 16.
what greater outward pledge can we have of the favor of GOD, then that he
does not suffer our enemies to triumph over us? And what greater cause Psa.
41. 11.
of joy can we have then this, that the favor of GOD shines upon us? And if
the experience of Gods former Psa. 4. 6.
deliverances be warrants unto us of his future mercies: If because the Lord
has delivered us from the Lion and the Bear, therefore we can safely say,
that Goliath shall be as one of these: And because the Lord 1. Sam. 17.
has delivered us, and does deliver us, therefore we can say further, that
he will deliver us, finally out of all our 2. Cor. 1. 10.
trouble: this must needs enlarge our hearts with unspeakable joy, as being a
part of that earnest of joy, whereof one day we shall be full. Surely, as it
is a righteous thing with GOD, to recompense sorrow unto Obad. 11.
these, who have rejoiced in the afflictions of the Saints: So it is appointed
of GOD, that they which have Psa. 126. 6.
sown in tears and manifold afflictions, should in due time, Reap in joy,
the fruit of all their troubles in the ways of God.

And seeing there is a time for all things, and an appointed time to rejoice,
as there is to mourn. Therefore, Eccl. 3. 1.
howsoever in the day of affliction we must consider, and Eccl. 7. 16.
enter into the house of moorning, yet in the day of mirth and deliverance, we
must be of good comfort, and to express our joy, we must sing praises unto
our God.

So has the Lord himself appointed this time. I will So has God appointed.
Psa. 50. 15. So have the saints practiced. Exodus 15. 1. 20. Judge. 5. 1. Psalm.
18.
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me; So have the Saints employed this
time. So rejoiced Moses and Miriam, with their several companies for their
delirance out of Egypt: So did Debora and Barak exercise the people for their
deliverance from the Cananites: So did David employ himself for his
deliverances from time to time from his enemies: So did the Church rejoice for
her deliverance from that cruel conspiracy Hest. 8. 9.
of Haman.

And as when a judgment has been either threatened or inflicted upon the
servants of God: they have set a part days of humiliation, the better to fit
themselves So has man for the time to come institude days joy and
thanksgiving Ion. 3. 2. Chor. 28.
to meet the Lord by true repentance: as did the Ninevites, Iehosophat, and
diverse others in the like case: So when the Lord has removed the judgment
from them, and has given them a gracious and happy deliverance, that they
might never forget such mercies and be fully enlarged in thankfulness for the
same: they have also separated certain days to be employed principally in the
expressing their joy, by such means as may fit and further the same. Such
were those days of feasting and thanksgiving instituted from time to time, by
the godly Magistrates to remember the blessings that the Lord had bestowed upon
them, and to give him special praises on Hest. 9. 17.
such days for the same. So did Mordochie and Hester institute the days of
Purim for that wonderful deliverance from Hamons intended massaker: which were
so called from the occasion, because Hamon by Lot was encouraged to that
deuillish interprize of destroying the Jews, and therefore to magnify the
power of God in the confusion of his wisdom, and to make the memory of an
enemy to stink to posterity: they called these days the days of Purim. So
did Judas Machabeus institute the feast of the dedication in remembrance of the
purging of the Temple from the prophanations of Antiochus, a Ioh. 10.
feast which our Savior Christ himself seemed to approve by his own presence
in the 10. of John; So did our Gracious Sovereign set apart the 5. of August
in remembrance of his wonderful deliverance from the conspiracies of the
Gowries: And so for ever may the 5. of November be separated and recorded
amongst us, as by the wonderful providence of God in discovering the horrible
treasons of the Papists, being turned unto us from sorrow to joy, and from
murning into a joyful day to be kept with feasting and joy and to all
posterities; so long as the name of Great Britain shall be had in remembrance.
Thus has the Lord appointed days of joy, and thus has man upon just
consideration celebrated and confirmed such days to posterity, not inuenting
therein any other worship then God has appointed, but upon such extraordinary
occasions giving more liberty thereby unto the public worship of God, as
being under God the determiner of order and decency, according to the general
rules of equity prescribed in Gods blessed word. And thus may even private
persons set apart some hour, nay, some day in the week upon the like
occasions to a more entire and immediate worship of God then in their ordinary
callings, as not being otherwise tied to bodily labor on the six days, then
that they might be better fitted to the spiritual works on the seventh; and
not being Extraordinary occasions may take some liberty herein keeping
themselves with in their bounds. 1. Cor. 7.
excluded otherwise from this extraordinary worship on these days of labor,
then for the provision of their families, and obedience to authority, and that
without presumption of Gods providence, and opinion of necessity or merit.
Other institution then this of such festival days I can find none lawful.
Neither indeed do I account even this institution, any otherwise lawful, then
it is kept undefiled from abuse and superstition, Considering what the holy
Ghost adds to try our joy by that it must be in the Lord.

And being thus bounded, the spirit gives us free liberty, Rejoice in the Lord
always, and again, I say rejoice. Because our joy must be in the Lord. 4
Phil. 4. Gal. 5. 11. Gal. 6. 5.
And surely very necessary it is that our joy should be thus bounded, least
our liberty being an occasion to the flesh, sowing thus to the flesh, we of
the flesh reap corruption, and so our joy shall be turned into sorrow. But how
shall I approve my joy to be in the Lord? surely there are these marks to try
it by.

Has the Lord done great things for thee, whereof This shall be known if we
keep a right order and measure therein.
thou may rejoice? surely thou may rejoice freely, if thou keep a right
order and measure therein: both which must be according to the diversity of the
things wherein thou do rejoice. That we may keep a right order in our joy
for the blessings of God, the holy Ghost gives us Romans 8. 32. A good order is
keept by 1. deriuing our joy from the fountain to the stream and 2.
returning it from the stream unto the fountain again. That God may be first
and last in our joy.
an excellent rule, setting down the true subordination of the blessings
themselves. Who spared not his own son, but gave him to die for us, how
shall he not with him give us all things else. Signifying therein thus much
unto us, that, in that the Lord has given unto us the Fountain, he will not
deny us the streams, and thereby teaching us this order in rejoicing for Gods
benefits, as to derive our joy from the Fountain to the Streams: not to rest
our joy in the streams but to return it to the fountain, that the giver of
all good blessings, may be first and last in our joy: First he must be in our
joy, that thereby as we have these blessings and favor of him, so we may be
assured also that we have them in him, and thereby have a testimony that they
are sanctified unto us, that so now we may have a right unto, and comfort in
the use of them: and last also must our God be in this affection of joy. It
must at no hand rest in the blessing, for so it will be a means to draw us from
the fountain, and our resolution then must be so far from rejoicing in the
streams, as that we must count them all as dung in respect of the fountain
Jesus Christ.

But, seeing God is the Giver, and receiver too, Seeing he is the ending, as
well as the beginning: therefore must our joy be determined in nothing, but in
him, that so hereby Phil. 3. 7.
giving him the Glory of the good we have received, this may be a means to
receive that further good which Reu. 1. 8. 2. By rejoicing principally in such
blessings as are nearest to the fountain.
shall perfect us unto glory. And as this is generally to be observed in the
ordering of our joy, that the Fountain must be first and last therein, so also
in proportion, seeing such Streams as are nearer to the fountain, are more
pure, so ought they to have their place accordingly in the ordering of our joy.

The Blessings that God has renewed unto us in this great deliverance are very
many, and yet some come near unto the fountain then others. Some that have
Such are the blessings of the right hand, all spiritual graces and the means
thereof.
been given us (as we say) with the right hand. As whatsoever principally
concern the life to come: Namely the Nursery of the Church, consisting of the
Nurses both temporal and spiritual. 1. Thessal. 2. of the Milk of the
Gospel, and communion of Saints to be nourished thereby: Together with the
manifold pledges and fruits thereof, as Peace of conscience, our joy in the
Spirit, and growth in Christ, and such like.

Others have been the blessings of the left hand, as our Goods, Country,
Friends: etc. Examine we now our selves, whither our joy has been ordered
aright or no, if it has been first the blessings of the right hand, rather
then for the other. Nay, if we could have been contented to have redeemed the
blessings of the right hand, with the loss of the blessings of the left, nay,
if now we can be contented to abate our joy in the one, that we may take
our fill in the other, these are good tokens that our joy is ordered aright. So
was the affection of Mephibosheth ordered aright, when the King would make him
some part 2. Sam. 19. 24.
of a mendes by diuidyng the Lands bewixt him and Ziba, his joy was so inflamed
with the enjoying of the greater blessings, that his Lord the King was come
home in peace, that he even resolved: let him take all Verse 30 Thus must we
try our selves by this deliverance. Psa. 137. 6.
the lands: as being not willing that the lesser blessinge should have any
part in his joy. Oh that we had this testimony of our true joy for this
deliverance, that we did now more rejoice in the reuiuyng of the Gospel, and
the means thereof, the public blessing of happy government, then in any
private blessing whatsoever, prefering Jerusalem to all our mirth.

Oh that many may not justly be charged with this disordered joy, that they
could have been contented to have lost the bessings of the right hand, and
have thought it Least preferring Carnal things before spiritual blessings.
enough, that the things of this life restored unto them. Well let us be wise
in the examining of our own hearts hereby, certainly whatsoever we joy in,
above the Lord, it shall be the means to bring a curse upon that blessing, and
so be the occasion that in the end it shall be taken We make the curses unto
us. And procure that they shall be taken away.
from us, that we which would not rejoice aright in GOD, shall now have
nothing wherein truly to rejoice. But if so be that we have so rejoiced in
the principal blessings, that in steed of them, the other have been vile unto
us, certainly this will teach us 1. King. 5. 6. Math. 6. 33.
to joy in them: though these be taken from us, and being wise with the
blessed Solomon to prefer the greater blessings, we shall have the less also
cast over Math. 6. 33.
and above into the rekoning unto us, that so our joy may be full wanting
nothing: and so using the less, that we do not set our hearts upon them, but
are able to extend our joy unto the giver of them, we shall by this means
Math. 25. And make us such friends even of these out ward things, as that they
shall further us to everlasting habitations. 1. Cor. 15. Luke 6. 38.
being found faithful in a little, be made stewardes of greater blessings,
that so returning all unto our God in that small measure which we enjoy in this
life, he may be all in all unto us in an heaped up measure in the life to come.
And thus ordering our joy shall we find it to be in the Lord, and so shall
we also find it by the right measure thereof, proportioned both according to
the things we do enjoy, as they do exceed each other in worth and
excellency, and also to the right use and employment thereof. So does our
Savior give his disciples the rule, when he had given them that excellent gift
of subduing all adverse power. But rejoice not in this that the Spirits are
subdued unto you; but rejoice rather that your Which shall be furthered by
knowing the right measure. Luke. 10. 20.
names are written in heaven: therein not forbidding them to rejoice at all in
these excellent gifts, (for they were great blessings of GOD, and therefore
they might lawfully rejoice in them,) but teaching them therein a true measure
of their joy, that they should more rejoice Which is best tried by the
descouery of two extremes.
in the more excellent blessings. The best apprehension of this right measure,
shall be gained by the discovery of two extremes, either of rejoicing too
much, when the cause does not require, or of rejoicing too little, if the
matter be of moment: Would thou know in this deliverance, 1 of rejoicing to
much which shall be discerned in this deliverance If it have not bettered us to
heaven Luke 1. 74. 75.
how thou may rejoice too much? If it has not bettered thee in the way to
heaven: If thou have not answered the end of a deliverance, even to serve thy
God more conscionably in newness of life: If thou art so set upon thy lies,
and bound in the seat of the scorners, that thou hate to be reformed, for
all these mercies: though all things are renewed unto thee, yet thou remaynest
in thine old sins. If it be not If we be not renewed with the blessings.
more joy unto thee to do righteously, then to receive good at the hands of
GOD; Why take thou the If we rejoice not more in welldoing then in the
blessing. Pro 21. 15. Psa 50. 18. Eccles. 2. 2.
name of GOD in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed? wretch that thou
art, what have thou to do with joy, that still reioycest in thy sin? Thou
may well say unto laughter thou art mad, and unto joy depart far from
me. Surely any joy in this case is too much unto thee. Would thou have a
president to direct thee herein? when the Lord had delivered the Jews from
the hands of the Ethiopians, it is recorded by Thus did the saints approve
their joy. 2. Chro. 15. 8.
the holy Ghost, that Asa their King being encouraged by the prophets of the
Lord, the First work that he did, was to purge the land of all it
abominations. And so performed true thankfulness unto his GOD in deeds and
not in words. Afterward he gathered together all the remainder of the
people to Jerusalem, to offer sacrifice unto the Lord, and to make a covenant
with him, of 10.
most faithful service. Which, when they had performed in most solemn, and
effectual manner, and bound themselves, further to the same by an oath, yea
further by a most grievous penalty of death for default They rejoiced for the
deliverance when they had made a covenant with God for a better life.
therein. The Spirit witnesses that, all Judah rejoiced at the oath, and
thereupon followed a most comfortable blessing, that the Lord gave them rest
round about. Mark I pray you in this example the true use and intertainment of
a deliverance. Here is sin first removed, which was the cause of the former
danger, that so the like might not after befall them. Then here is a course
taken to prevent sin to come, by most evident signs of true conversion unto
GOD, that so they might enjoy both temporal, and spiritual happienesse. And
then, when the Lord was first made glad with the conversion of his servants,
and when the Angels had cause of joy for the repentance of sinners, then came
joy in a right order from heaven unto earth, and the vessels being thus
fitted to receive this heavenly influence, the holy Ghost records, that the
people rejoiced, and showted even up to heaven, as making a sweet consent
therein with God and the Angels. Oh never let us look And so must we try the
measure of our joy, if it has proceeded from our reconciliation with God,
otherwise it is unseasonable. Amos 5. 18. 19.
to rejoice aright in earth, if by our unfeigned sorrow for sin, we have not
caused joy in heaven. And if so be we have rejoiced before the covenant be
made, know we that our joy is unseasonable, and too much, if any. The very joy
of the Dragons shall be better accepted of God, then the rejoicing of such
sinners, that proceeds not from repentance. Oh let us have respect at least
unto our Seed and posterity. Do we know what we do, by this entertainment
of a deliverance, as to rejoice therein without reformation of our lives?
Surely we provoke the Lord to hate our feast days, he has protested Amos.
5. 21.
he will not smell in our solemn assemblies; But do they provoke me (says
the Lord) and not rather themselves, to the confusion of their faces? Yes
surely, as our Ier. 7. 19.
Savior would do no more works in his own country, And shall be the
occasion to deprive us: Math. 13. 58.
because of their unbelief: so let us not look hereafter for the like
wonderful work of GOD, if this be the best fruit, the multiplying of our
sins: and then consider what wrong we shall do unto posterity, from whom
we shall be the occasion to take such And our posterity of the like mercies.
great mercies, and so expose them unto such fearful desolations as follow
thereupon.

To lead thee a little further in the examining of thy self, concerning thy
exceeding in this measure of 2. Trial of our joy exceeding. Amos. 6. 3. When
we so rejoice for our own good as that we do not sorrow with all for the
afflictions of others.
joy; art thou delivered, and therefore thou may rejoice? Oh but remember
that Joseph is in affliction, and therefore thou must sorrow too. If therefore
thou can not be more sorrowful in the sorrow of the afflicted, then joyful
in respect of thine own private good, surely thy reioyfing is not good. Thou
take too much joy unto thy self, and give too little sorrow unto the
cause of thy brother.

To lead thee yet a step further, in the examining of 3 Trial that we rejoice
too much.
thine excess. Is the Church of God delivered, and therefore thou may
rejoice? Oh but remember the Apostles rule, in a case not unlike. As he would
not have other men eased, that we should be grieved, but the matter 2. Cor.
8. 13.
so disposed, that there may be an equality: so in this case of rejoicing, we
must not so enlarge our selves, that our brethren may be grieved thereby: but
we must now so temper our joy, that there may be an equality, that all the If
we take such liberty therein which may be occasion to grieve others. 1. Not
the enemies of God, for these we may grieve. Psa 112. 9. 10. Yea rejoice in the
vengeance that is inflicted upon them. Psa. 58. 9.
Saints of God may rejoice with us, that have been partaker of the same
benefit with us, as their conditions, and means do require. Indeed if the
wicked shall see Gods mercy upon us, and be angry; If he shall gnash his
teeth, and consume away; If the malcontents and runnegates, that gaped for
the spoil, being now disappointed thereof, hang down their heads, and eat
their hearts with sorrow for the same, as it is the righteous judgment of GOD
upon them; so ought we even to enlarge our joy, that they may be the rather
grieved and vexed thereby: Yea we are to make it the matter of our joy, to see
the vengeance that is light upon them: so that our joy be spiritual even in
the Lord, that they may take no advantage against us: so that we add unto
their affliction, not as they are ours, but enemies unto God. But here is the
point; do thou rejoice in this happy deliverance, and would thou learn
the true measure therein? Surely this is it; So rejoice that all may rejoice
with thee; Grieve not thy GOD, and his Saints, by the profaneness of thy Exodus
15. Moses and Miriam were careful herein.
joy: Remember how Moses and Miriam carried the matter. That their joy might
not be subject to profaneness and sensuality: Moses and the men rejoiced by
themselves: Miriam and the women rejoiced by themselves, Such dancing is
allowable, if the cause be spiritual. Grieve not the poor, by taking too much
liberty in the means of thy joy: devouring that in thine excess, which is
the blood of the poor. Remember the care that the Jews Here was the Jews
care excellent.
had in this case: They sent not only presents to their neighbors that could
requite them again, but they gave gifts to the poor, that their hearts might
be cheered also. Notable was the care of good Nehemiah, to this purpose. And
so was Nehemiahs, that in the general cause of joy all might rejoice. Nehem. 5.
When the Church was delivered out of captivity, and Jerusalem was building up
again: and it fell out by reason of the inequality between the rich and the
poor, that the rich, instead of rejoicing, the poor with their abou^dance and
superfluity, became very grievous burdens unto them, by bringing them into
slavery and cruel oppression; To this end he persuades the rich to leave
their oppression. 8. verse.
The good governor Nehemiah pleades the cause of the poor, and by his courage
and example so provides, that in this general cause of joy, none might be
exempted. Thus does he plead for the poor against the mighty. We according
to our ability have redeemed our brethren the Jews, which were sold unto
the Heathen, that they also might rejoice with us: And will you sell them
again, or shall they be sold unto us, that they may be grieved, and we
rejoice? So says the Spirit, he stopped their mouths, they held A good lesson
for our oppressors.
their peace, and could not answer. Oh that our oppressors and inclosers, were
thus put to silence, that they were not able to answer their selling and
thrusting out of the poor: Well, when he has thus put them to silence, though
he might have commanded (as he was their governor,) yet he falls to entreat
them for a restitution in this case, that so the blessing of the poor might be
upon them, and they might cause the hearts of the widows to rejoice. And what
followed hereupon? The rich are persuaded, and the poor are eased, and so the
mouths of all are opened to praise the Lord. But is this all? does Nehemiah
play the And himself enlarges his compassion to the furtherance of this
general joy.
Pharise, that would lay a burden upon others, which he would not bear
himself? No surely, mark (I pray you) his tender compassion and charity
herein. Though he was no oppressor, and therefore could restore nothing, yet
see how willing he is to part with his own, yea even with that which served
for the maintenance of his estate. In abating of his necessary allowance. 14.
verse.
For twelve years space (he professes) that he had not eaten the bread of the
governor. And whereas the former governors had been chargeable to the
people, by taking of their bread and wine, and he did not so: And he gives the
reason, because he feared God. Not that simply it is not lawful for a
religious Governor, to be maintained by the commonwealth; for indeed it is
most righteous and necessary to be done. But the meaning is to confirm us
this Though otherwise lawful.
rule, concerning equality of joy, that in a case of extremity, when others
are in want; and we by taking our utmost due, may add unto their affliction,
if it shall please God But yet in such a case of extremity to remit of our
right is an extraordinary note of the fear of God.
to make us equal in the general blessing, wherein all are to rejoice: we are
so to dispose of our right in inferior blessings, that they may be means to
further us in the right entertainment of the greater, yielding somewhat of our
state and outward maintenance unto others (so as we may notwithstanding, leave
a competencie to our selves, to maintain a reasonable port) that so they may
join with A good president for our Nehemiahs. Which if they do not observe
they shall signify they could have been willing the poor had been swept
away so they had escaped. And further provoke to cry for vengeance while they
are rejoicing, so shall the Lord hear their cry and confound the others joy.
Let us not therefore, now God has lengthned out our stewardships, beat our
fellow servants.
us in this duty of thanksgiving, as they are joined with us in the blessing
of the deliverance: Otherwise we shall not only signify that we could have
been well rid of them, that we had not cared, so the judgment had swept
them away, seeing we are escaped, as counting them burdens unto the land, and
eye-sores unto us; but further also giving them occasion of grief, when we
should all rejoice. This must needs follow hereupon, that they crying unto the
Lord for vengeance against us, while we are rejoicing in the Lord, for his
mercies toward us: The Lord will hear their cry, and confound our joy, by
delivering them out of trouble, and casting us in their stead. Oh that we were
wise to consider these things, that by this we would try our joy, whether it
exceed or no: if it be the occasion of grief unto others? Far be it from us,
that seeing the Lord has prevented this mischief, and so has lengthned the
date of our Stewardships, therefore we shall fall to beating of our fellow
servants upon presumption, that our master will now defer his coming,
because he has so lately knocked at our doors, and so instead of furthering
the general joy, by the renewing of our lives, we shall yet send the poor into
the house of mourning, and thereby Least our master take us in our cruelty and
give us measure accordingly.
make up the measure of our sin. (Surely says our Savior) that servants
Master will come in a day, when he looks not for him, and in an hour that
he is not aware of, and will cut him off, and give him his portion with
hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Lastly would thou know, how thou may exceed 4. trial that we rejoice too
much, if we so re^oyce now, that we may not rejoice hereafter.
in this joy; Surely if thou do so joy now, that thou may not rejoice
hereafter, either by exceeding in the outward means, whereby thy estate shall
unnecessarily be impaired, or else by giving the bridle unto thy carnal
affections; thou art hereby hindered in the ways of godliness, and art
decayed in thy zeal and courage for the truth. So that howsoever the Lord has
given thee thy desire, in delivering Which shall fall out if this deliverance
be the cause of our decay in Zeal. Math. 25.
thee from the hands of thine enemies yet he has sent leanness into thy
soul, and that little which thou seem to have had, is taken away from thee,
thou have rejoiced too much, and have wilfully ryoted thy stock, which might
have served thee all thy life long. Certainly, if we shall but once learn
how to rejoice aright, it will be a bountiful stock to maintain us all our
lives, not only when God does Job. 1.
give, (wherein usually the wicked do rejoice) but even when God does take
away, which is the most excellent trial of an holy and constant joy.

Examine therefore thy self on the other side, by the other extreme, how thou
may rejoice too little, in this 2. General trial of rejoicing too little.
deliverance and so for want of vessels the oil may cease. Surely if thou
do so only rejoice in this deliverance, co^ferred upon thee as that thou
art not of Moses mind, that Number. 11. 29.
all the Lords people may be partakers thereof: That thou do not wish
withal, a general and final delivery of the Church of God out of all her
troubles, Nay, do not labor in thy calling, the conversion of thy brother,
that he Luke 22. 32.
may be delivered from the bondage of Satan: thy rejoicing is too short, as
wanting both faith in the promises of God, yea and love also, in not provoking
others to be partakers thereof? nay if thou art not so glad of the blessing
which thou have received, as that, though it do not every way answer thine
expectation, yet thou can submit thy self, unto the measure that God has
allotted thee, and using the present good unto the glory of thy God, thou shall
wait with patience the increase thereof, not grudging at that little which
thou have in respect of others, but wisely considering how little thou have
deserved, yet also do thou rejoice too little, because thou do not
rejoice in God, submitting thy self to his will: nay further, yet to sound thy
conscience, if thou do so only rejoice in the blessing thou have received,
as that thou art not prepared in thy heart to undergo the contrary, if thy
God have a purpose to try thee by the same: surely yet thy rejoicing is too
short, as not proceeding from true contentation, as well to want, as to abound.
Again, if thou shall so rejoice in the good thou Phil. 4. 12. 3. Trial of our
rejoicing too ittle.
have received, as not to be emptied in thy self, wholly in the conceit of
thine own worthiness, and to acknowledge that thou art so far from
deserving this blessing, as that nothing is due unto thee, but shame and
confusion of thy face: that thou had had thy desert if the enemy had
prevailed, and God might have been glorified in thy just confusion, because
thou have continually rebelled against him. Surely yet also thy rejoicing is
too short, as being not seasoned with true humility, for want whereof it shall be
taken from thee.

Lastly, if thou can so only rejoice in the blessing 4. Trial of our
rejoicing too little.
thou have received, as not to see further by the same, into the blessings of
the life to come, that so thy joy in this deliverance, may be a pledge unto
thee of that full cup of joy which shall tun over in thy final deliverance,
out of all thy troubles, so that the sight of that joy (though it be a far off)
shall yet so ravish thy heart with the feeling thereof, as that it shall
utterly drown, and swallow up all sense of present joy, for any present
blessing whatsoever, even yet also thy joy is too short, as being a blind and
fading joy, which Psalm. 14.
cannot see a far off, and indeed the portion which God has given thee in
this life, that so thou may not share with the godly in the life to come.

Oh consider this, we that have been partakers of his great deliverance,
whether it has wrought in our hearts such joy which shall never be taken away
from us. Certainly if we shall thus rejoice, we shall rejoice in the Lord, and
then it follows that we shall also trust in him, our joy shall be the means
to confirm our faith, and our faith, shall be the means to confirm our joy,
that no man shall be able to take it away from us. It follows. And shall trust
in him.

Lohere the saving effect of all Gods mercies in his This is a fifth effect of
great deliverances as being indeed the true seasoning of all the rest: and that
wherein the saints do quiet their hearts namely trust and confidence in God.
Romans 14. 23. Psa. 33. 21. 1. Pet. 1. 9.
children, they shall cause us to trust and wait upon our God, as being the
only testimony of our right in these blessings, being the most excellent try
all of our true joy in the^, Being a lively evidence, that they are sanctified
to us, and by experience of Gods mercy confirming our faith for the time to
come: for neither have we any right in Gods mercies, unless we receive by
faith, neither can we truly rejoice in them, unless by faith we give the
glory unto God for them neither though we have right unto them, shall they yet
be sanctified unto us, unless they be matter for the confirmation of our
faith. As therefore we have been taught how to temper our joy that it may be
matter how to increase our faith: so let us learn in a word how to irye our
faith, that so it may be means of the increase of our joy, that the end of
our faith, may be the accomplishment of our joy in the full salvation of our
souls for ever.

There are the notes to try our faith by. Is thy heart The trial thereof. 1. In
ouercomming all evil. 2. In obtaining every good. Evils are either 1. simply
evil as finne 2. Evil by 1. Opinion, as 2. Afflictions, abuse, outward
blessings.
fixed and settled on God? then surely, there is no evil which thou shall not
vndercome, there is no good thing which thou shall not be master of. The evils
that do usually assault our faith are of two sorts, the first are such as are
simply evil, and these are such temptations and sins that hang so fast upon
us. The second are such things as being not evil in themselves are yet
notwithstanding either by opinion or use made evil unto us, those which are
good in themselves, and yet evil by opinion, are such punishments and
afflictions as from time to time, are inflicted upon us. These which being
good in themselves are made evil by abuse, are the temporal blessings of this
life, as riches, honor, and such like: And to these in some sort may be
referred the things that are called indifferent. Would thou now Trial of
faith in over coming of finne, because.
try thy self whether thou be in the faith or no? Examine first thy self by
thy conquest, or sin. If thou say, thou have no sin, thou deceiuest thy
self. Try therefore thy self by thy victories over sin. Does sin assault
thee and Satan entice, behold here is the victory of thy faith, that thou
consentest not to that wicked one. Do thou consent All are sinners. 1. Ioh.
1. 8. 1. Not to cons^nt
unto sin and art deceived by it? yet here is the victory of thy faith, that
thou runnest not willingly with thy full consent, but art drawn violently
against the law of thy mind. Have thou committed the sin, and do lie for a
2 Not fully, but with resistance. Rom 7. 23. 3. Not to limit sin.
time in it? yet here is the victory of thy faith, thou shall be roused out of
it. Not so much by the touch of thy conscience (for that is common to the
wicked) as by the power of the spirit which will raise thee up again. Do
thou fall again into the same sins? yet behold herein is the victory 4. To
weaken the power of sin. Rom 7. ^0.
of thy faith, they are not thy sins (because it is not thou, but sin that
dwells in thee) Nay, they are not the same sins, neither the same in
quality, as having lost much of their former force. Neither the same in
operations, working 5. Even by our relapses.
less hurt. Do thou desire to be freed from all sin? Do thou groan
under the burden, and 6. Desire of death, to be delivered from sin. Romans 7.
24. 1. Cor. 15.
cry out? O wretched man that thou art, who shall deliver thee from this body
of sin? Behold here is a mean victory of thy faith. Be it unto thee
according as thou beleeuest, Corruption in due time, shall be clothed with
Corruption. Thus may thou try thy faith by thy sins, and in the several
victories thereof, confirm thy self therein, not by each of them severally,
but by all of them in degrees: As the Lord, shall lead thee along in the
experience of these conquests.

As for those evils which are so conceived in the world, namely the evils of
afflictions, which are justly lead upon thee. Examine the victory of thy faith
over these, even by these rules. Art thou a christian, and is affliction thy
portion? Let this be the first trial of thy faith, to prepare Preparing us to
them before they come. 2. Tim. 3. 13. 1. Pet. 5. 7. Submitting us to them when
they come. Psa. 37. 7. 1. By following our cal^ings therein. Psa. 37. 4.
thy soul unto them: Put it in thy reckoning, if thou will live godly in
Christ Jesus, that thou must necessarily suffer great afflictions. Art thou
entered into the combat, and would thou have a trial of a conquest? First
submit thy self willingly under the mighty hand of GOD, that thou may
witness thy submission, be are patiently what thy Lord has laid upon thee
that thy patience may be exercised, Lay voluntary afflictions upon thy self,
follow thy calling even in thy greatest troubles.

Give not thy body to fretting at the prosperity of others, 2. and examining
ourselves daily to find out the cause. Psa. 37. 1.
but fall to examining thy self, why it is thus with thee. Having found out
the cause either Sin, or Trial; If sin be the cause by repentance remove
it: If Trial be the cause, to make experience of Gods graces in thee, examine
thy self, again how thou have used the blessings of GOD, see whether some
rust of negligence or corruption, has not fastened upon thee: If thou shall
find it so, yield thy self willingly to the trial, Psa. 34. So shall thou
become conqueror on them all.
follow thy GOD in purging out thy dross, so at length thy righteousness
shall break out as the light, and thy well doing as the noone day.

And thus shall thy faith triumph in all these troubles, Though thou art
afflicted, yet shall thou not be in distress; persecuted thou may be; but
thou shall not 2. Cor. 4. 9.
be forsaken, cast down thou shall be, and yet thou shall not perish, die
thou do continually, and yet behold thou live; never free from sorrow, and
yet always rejoicing, being poor thy self, and yet making many rich, 2.
Cor. 6. 7. 8. 9.
having nothing, and yet possessing all things, though the outward man perish,
yet thy inward man is renewed daily, and these light afflictions which are but
for a moment causes 2. Cor. 4. 16. 17
unto thee a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory.

Thus shall thou not only in affliction, be more then a Conqueror, through
the Supporting hand of GOD giving Romans 8 37.
testimony unto thine innocence, even in the face of thine enemies

But further also by trusting in GOD thou shall be delivered out of them all,
not only from such snares as are laid to intrappe thee in this life, but
through faith thou shall in the end, have a full conquest over them all: GOD
shall wipe away all tears from thine eyes, Reu. 12. 5. In this life so far as
shall make for thy good.
there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying. For GOD shall tread
Satan, and all thine enemies under thy feet.

Lo here the victory of thy faith over all thy troubles, by which thou may
try thy self whether thou art in the faith or no. As thy faith, (if it be
found) will uphold thee in all thy troubles, that thou sincke not under them,
and deliver thee also, so far out of them, in this life, as shall stand with
Gods glory and And finally by death out of them all.
thine, especial advantage, so will it not leave thee, till it have freed thee
from all thy troubles, and offered thee up in marriage for ever unto thy
bridgrome Christ Jesus.

Thus shall thy faith enable thee to triumph over all afflictions, and so
shall it teach thee the right use This shall it also further them, the over
coming of such evils as are incident to outward blessings. Teaching thee to
set a true rate upon them.
of these outward things that so they may not be snares and evils unto thee.

It shall teach thee first to rate them at their just and true value, neither
so to ouerprize them, as to think none like unto them, as Esau did, that so
we may loose the better blessings: Neither so to vnderrate them as not to
account them the good blessings of GOD, for which we must not give accoumpt at
the day of the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Our faith having
taught us to give them their true worth, will hereby also direct us, for the
holy obtaining of them, both in respect of the right order (which is to be
observed 1. To procure them by holy order 2. by true means and 3. in a right
measure.
therein) as also in the means, that must further us to the same, and also in
the measure of our seeking these blessings: concerning the order, it has this
rule out of the word. First seek the kingdom of heaven and the righteousness
thereof, and all other things shall be cast thereunto. Whereby we are A rule
for the order. Math. 6. 36. To seek them in the second place, and: 2. With
condition submitting thy will, to the will of God. 1. Tim. 5. 8.
taught, as to seek, first the best things that so we may have a right in
these: so not to neglect these things altogether, though now they shall be cast
upon us, upon presumption of Gods providence, if we follow the better: but to
remember we have a calling to be employed in, and supplied also by these
things, which if we neglect, we are worse then infidells, which we must follow
that we may be humbled thereby. So has GOD disposed the obtaining of these
things, and so is faith guided in the right order, of procuring of the^. The
trial is that. 1. our seeking of these things do not hinder our enjoying of
the better. 2 that though God has Trial of this right and orderly seeking. 1
If they do hinder us in the better things but that our spiritual gain exceed
our carnal. 2. If we spend more time in seeking the other, the^ these things,
we may imagine otherwise. Faiths assistance herein.
allotted us (as we may foolishly imagine) six days for these things, and but
one for the other, yet we employ more time in seeking the things of the soul,
the^ the things of the body; yea indeed in the seeking of these outward things
which concern this life, we may have this testimony, as that we shall in these
seek only greater things. And herein our faith does help us exceedingly, as
both assuring us that we seek these things not for themselves; no not so
much for our own use as for Gods glory (whose good blessings they are) and
therefore, that we may yield obedience to his commandments: and not despise
his blessings. Therefore, we account them worth the seeking, and also in the
seeking of them, thus resolving our consciences that we seek them not for
themselves to rest in them, but that they may be stepps unto us for greater
blessings, even such as do concern the salvation of our souls. Thus does our
faith teach us to seek them in a right order: and so enableth us to overcome
hereby many dangerous evils, that in our prepoststerous seeking of these
things do usually overtake us, and thereby makes these good blessings evil
unto us. For hereby as idleness and negligence is condemned, even 1. Idleness.
in those that think they have a privilege hereunto, in regard of a more
excellent calling, whereby they either fail in the obtaining of these things,
or else have them cast upon them as a curse, and not a blessing: so the false
ground hereof (even presumption in Gods providence) is also wisely rejected,
hereby faithless and greedy hunting 2. Greediecouetousnes which is the cause
of many evils.
after these things, is also convinced, whereby making haste to be rich, we
cannot be innocent ^and so the blood of the poor b^ing in our houses, bring a
curse both upon them and the owners thereof: yea, further also, this evil
follows hereupon; that over hasty getting, shall be punished with two slow
spending: we, which were so distrustful in 1. Mingling blood with our riches.
getting, shall be as faithless in keeping: both for love of that, which we
have got, and for love also unto our selves, whereby fearing want, (where there
is such fullness) we therefore deprive our selves of the present comfort:
either upon a malicious joy, that we shall have it when others do 2. Faithless
keeping.
want, or upon a desperate fear, that we may hereafter want our selves. All
which evils, as very happily, does our faith overcome in guiding us in the
right order of seeking these blessings (as heretofore has been showen) so
does it further also guide us, in the true means, for the 3. Fearful loosing.
obtaining of them, and so ouercometh such evils as are incident heereunto. To
this end it has his rule from the giver of all blessings, who teaches us to
pray, Give us this day our daily bread, thereby implying that as they are not
Faiths rule against these evils Which is prayer Luke 11. 3.
ours but the free gift of God, so we must seek them as gifts, not in the
confidence of our worthiness, but in the affiance of Gods mercy. And in that
we must pray for the obtaining of them, the Spirit signifies, that as to the
obtaining of them, we must not only use bodyly labor, but Spiritual too (as
being the right and effectual means to prevail with our God for them) and a
testimony also of our right and interest in them: so when we have obtained
them (as many are borne to great possessions, and therefore, because they have
them without bodily labor, therefore they care not for the other means to
estate Tea even they that have them left unto them. 1. Tim. 4. 5.
them truly in them) yet also must we further entitle, and secure our estate
in them, by spiritual means, as by prayer, and the word, being only
sanctified and so secured unto us. Whereby it shall come to pass, that seeking
them by these true and holy means, either we shall obtain what we seek, or
what is answerable unto it, to the glory of God, So shall we either have what we
ask, or what is answereable to it. So shall we learn to keep them. And to
use them aright.
and our greater advantage: by which we shall learn, if we have not these
things, not to condemn God, but our selves, as having not used the right
means in obtaining them: and if we have them, seeing they are kept by the
same means that they are gotten; therefore we shall also learn to preserve
them by prayer, and such spiritual means: whereby we may both be blessed in
the true use of them, and also assured of the continuance of them, so far as
they shall make for our good, and the glory of God. Thus does thy faith enable
thee to prevent these evils: and thus does it also guide thee, in the true
measure of seeking these things: that living by faith and not by sense, and
thereby finding, 2. Cor. 5. 7.
that life consists not in abundance, but in the blessing of God, we shall
so seek these things in their true quality, as Math. 6.
they are fit and agreeable unto our natures and callings: and we shall also
seek them in their true measure, such as may stand with our callings,
necessities, and present occasions; yet subordinated to an holy care of our
posterity, So we have a care of posterity, subordinated to the special
prud^nce of God. Which shall be perceived by true contentationin what we have.
and the special providence of God, watching so always over us, that if he
have given us his son, he will also together with him, give us all these
things: and contenting our selves, with that right we have in them, that
though all are not fit for us, yet all are ours, to be in such measure
supplied unto us, as may justify abundantly our right in them, and make them
pledges unto us of greater blessings.

Thus does our faith direct us in the right seeking of these blessings,
concerning the quality and measure thereof, and so teaches us to overcome
many evils, which for want of this true proportion we fall into, and so make
these blessings evil unto us: not only that evil desire of money, (which is
the root of all evil, and makes thy riches a pit to drown thee in) but
further also, the 1. Tim. 6. 10. 1. The evil desire of money and the cause
thereof. 2. The ignorance of our selves, and the cause thereof 3. Self love.
cause of this evil, namely the ignorance of thy self, and what is fit for
thee, yea further also, the fruit of this evil, even self-love of thy self,
as conceiving thy self worthy of the best, and therefore thou will seek with
the best, why should not thou have as much as he: whereupon follow two other
evils, Envy against thy neighbor, (whose portion is fatter then thine,) and
murmuring against GOD, that in thy opinion deals not so bountifully with his
child, as with profane Esau. All these temptations, thy faith makes thee to
overcome; and yet further directs thee to use the blessing; It teaches Math.
25.
thee to use it, not to bury it in the ground, because it was given thee to
that end: In respect of thy self, it teaches thee to use it soberly, even so
to use it as though thou used it not, making it thy servant for thy better
occasions, and 1. Cor. 7. 31.
not thy master, either by too sparing, or ryotous abuse of it: In respect of
others, it teaches thee to cast thy bread upon the waters, plentifully to
distribute, and yet Eccle. 11. 1.
not without hope of requital, though not from man (for this were to live by
sense) yet from a bountiful GOD, whereby we approve our selves truly to live
the life of faith.

And that we may undoubtedly bind the Lord unto us, behold here a further
power of faith, teaching us as to be contented with what we have, so to
return 1. Cor. 10. 32. 1. These. 5. 22.
the glory thereof in thankfulness unto our GOD. By which we shall not
only avoid distrustful care in the keeping, and fear for the loss of these
earthly and transitory things, (Two evils that do make our possession theft,
and which turns our enjoying into sorrow) but further also, we shall not
fear to give up our account for them, as having laid up in store a good
foundation for our selves by them, against the time to come, 1. Tim. 6. 19.
whereby we may obtain eternal life. And that nothing may be wanting for our
full comfort herein: as by faith, we are taught to use these blessings aright,
so by scattering Pro. 11. 24. And hereby also furthering us.
thus the blessings that the Lord has bestowed upon us, on our selves soberly,
on others plentifully, on our God thankfully, the holy Ghost witnesses, that
we shall have plenty, and abundance; the oil in the cruse, and the meal in
the By these things to la^ a good foundation against the day of Christ.
battle shall not be wasted, until the Lord bring thee to that plenty, where
there shall be no more need of these things Thus shall thou fight, the good
fight of faith, against all the difficulties that may assault thee, in these
outward things, and so ouercoming such euilles as by abuse they are incident
unto, that little which thou have, shall be better then great riches of the
ungodly, as being a furtherance unto thee, of that durable riches, and never
fading honor which remains with, thee for ever in the kingdom Psa 37 16.
Psa. 8. 18.
of heaven.

And now enlarge thy heart, and consider yet further the wonderful conquests
of thy faith: What good thing is there, which heaven and earth does afford,
which is not ours by the power of a lively faith? What should I tell you of the
creatures of GOD? the Creator himself is overcome by faith. How does the
prayer of the faithful Not only the streams. James 5. 16. Exodus 32. But the
fountain A^mightie god who by faith is bound unto us.
prevail, if it be fervent? are the heavens opened and shut by faith? Yea,
hell it self, and all the powers thereof are subject thereunto. Is this the
victory of our faith, that it ouercometh the world? Nay, herein behold the
glorious conquest thereof that it ouercometh him, that made the world. Let me
alone (says God unto Moses) where he p^aied unto him for the people: So
strongly had Moses tied the Lord unto him by his faithful prayer. What can we
desire more? Behold here the victory of faith, and learn to try thy self by
these things, whether this deliverance has confirmed thy faith in God, whether
thou be in the, faith, or no? And for our further trial and conclusion of
these meditations consider we, what the holy Ghost adds. And all that are
upright in heart shall rejoice.

Therein (as I take it) giving us a notable touchstone to Psa. 73. 1. Math. 5.
8. The soundnes of the heart is the trial of true righteousness. Pro. 23. 26.
Psa. 51. 12. 1 Because the heart is that which as God requires first so he fits
it that it may beworthilie given unto him.
discern that true righteousness which is of faith, namely by the soundnes
and uprightness of the heart. So does the spirit describe those that are
truel^ righteous and so may true righteousness best be judged, even from the
sou^dnes and sincerity of the heart, for as the heart is that which principally
God requires as knowing that if it be given up unto him, the rest will follow.
So is it that, which first he fittes, that it may be yielded up unto him, as an
acceptable sacrifice unto his Majesty, by purifiing the same by faith, through
the Ministry of the word. And seeing the heart is the fountain, and
original of all our actions, therefore the fountain being purged, the
streams must needs be pure, and though happily (through imperfection) they
may in part be polluted, yet seeing the fountain is purged, therefore certainly
shall the streams one day be cleansed also, and in 2. The heart is the root
and fountain. And if the root be holy the branches are holy too. 2. Cor. 8.
12. 1. Ioh. 3. 21.
the mean time we shall be accepted, not according to the stream of our
outward actions, but answerable to the fountain, even the purpose of our
hearts. And surely seeing we have herein only boldness before GOD, ene^y the
testimony of our conscience, that it does not condemn us: and this, not so
much in regard of the present purity thereof (which is imperfect) as in that
by faith we still lay hold upon Jesus Christ, in whom only we have 3. Our
boldness before God proceeds from the evidence of the heart.
boldness to approach the throne of grace, and by whom we are assured of full
perfection. And seeing, we can have no comfort in what we do, nor
encouragement to go forward, unless we have the approbation of our
conscience for the same, if now our righteousness should 4. Without which we
have no comfort in any outward action. Heb. 10. 21. 22.
only be measured by the outward action, and not by the inward purpose of the
heart, what boldness could we have before GOD? seeing our best righteousness
so measured is as a menstrous cloth. What comfort could we have in our
outward well doing, seeing, our vines bring forth so small grapes? Besides
this, how should I clear my self from the note of hypocrisy, if I had not an
evidence 4. By this trial of our righteousness we are freed from hypocrisy.
from my heart, to justify my sincerity, seeing the hypocrite may for a time
make a fairer show then possiblely the sound Christian? Nay how shall I be
established against such slanders and reproaches, as are fastened upon me? how
possibly shall I not sink under the burden of these 5. And comforted against
all reproaches and slanders whatsoever.
imputations, if my righteousness were only measured by my good name, (which
is procured by my outward actions,) and not by the sincerity of my heart in the
sight of God? Oh this is it that makes the children of God not to esteem to
be judged of men, because their hearts are clear, they know nothing by
themselves: this makes them to disclame 1. Cor 4. 4.
the verdict of men, in the court of the world, and to fly to the approbation
of the Lord in the court of their consciences. By which as deceivers in the
opinion of men, yet 2. Cor. 6. 8.
they are true in the sight of God, their conscience bearing them witness of
the sincerity of their outward action, though it be mingled with much
corruption, and performed with much weakness. So the sincerity of their
heart, does not only approve them, in the sight of God, but does also
imbolden them, even against the forces of men, that so they may not be
discouraged in their greatest weakness, but the power of their sound
conscience approving what is done, does thereby provoke them to 2. Tim. 4. 7.
8. And so at length having finished our course, obtain the crown.
a further measure of well doing, that so having finished their course with
joy, they may in the end attain that crown of glory which is laid up for
them, which Jesus Christ the just shall give them at that day. Behold here the
evidence of this truth, concerning the trial of our righteousness, namely,
the foundnesse and sincerity of our hearts.

If now having proved a sound heart, to be the touchstone of true
righteousness, a further trial shall be required Now may this sincerity of
heart be tryee. Iere. 17.
how this sound heartmay be known: surely, seeing the heart of man is
deceitful above al things, who can know it, and the searching thereof, does
only belong to God, therefore as we dare not undertake herein any certain
determination concerning the hearts of others, yet because the Lord does
vouchsafe us the assurance of our salvation in this life, the test money whereof
especially proceeds from the spirit of God, witnessing unto our spirits that
we are his children: as by this we are sure of the soundness of our Romans 8. 19.
own hearts, so do we not want many excellent marks of this inward sincerity.

Would thou therefore know whether thy heart be sincere or no? Consider first
the means whereby it is purged, Act. 15. 9. Romans 10. 17.
namely by faith, applying unto us the blood of Christ Jesus, and ^eeing that
faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: Therefore if thou
would have a testimony of the ground work of sincerity in thy heart, thou
must be sure to fetch it from the power of the word. Now that thou may have
a testimony that thy heart is purged by this means, observe herein the
operation of the 1. It broke the heart. 2. Send us out of our selves. 3. Settle
us in Christ.
word upon thee: has the word broken thy heart, and sent thee out of thy
self, causing thee to hunger after Jesus Christ? Behold he that inuites the
broken heart to come unto him, and promises our release of that heavy burden,
is now ready to entertain thee, and will rejoice thy heart by his gracious
presence: Now shall thou be at 4. In whom we become new creatures.
peace with God, and rejoice in the spirit, and this joy shall no man take
away. Art thou in Christ Jesus rooted, and grounded in him now shall thou grow
up in newness of life, If thy heart believe to righteousness, thy mouth 5.
And so shall bring forth fruit accordingly.
shall also confess to salvation, and thy whole life shall be a sacrifice of
obedience unto GOD. Thou shall be zealous for thy GOD, without guile in thy
calling, humble in thy carriage, patient in thy troubles, tender hearted unto
thy brethren: charitable unto thine enemies: Constant shall thou be, in thy
profession, and yet fearful of thy standing: Thou shall rejoice in the
Saints, and be grieved at the wicked: obedient shall thou be unto authority,
and yet prefer God before men: desirous of death in respect of thy sin, and
yet willing to live in respect of others, not standing at a stay in these
things, but still growing in grace, not wedded to the In thankfulness to GOD. To
make sure our election. To stop the mouths of the wicked. To gain and hold
the weak brethren.
world, but still waining thy self from it, that so in the end thou may be
delivered out of the same. Thus shall thou be able to try the soundness of thy
heart by the means and several fruits thereof, and thus if thy heart be
right, shall thou rejoice in Gods mercies as being very gracious reco^pences of
thy syncerity in this life, and very undoubted pledges unto thee of everlasting
happiness, in the life to come.

Even so Lord, may all that are true in heart, re^oyce in thy mercies, which
thou have shown unto us in this great deliverance, as in an undoubted
evidence, that thou art Conclusion.
yet good unto Israel, so also a certain assurance that thou will never fail
us nor forsake us, but will deliver thy Church out of all her troubles. That
the assurance hereof quieting our hearts in thee, we may not be troubled with
any evil tidings, but continuing constant in our holy profession, even in the
greatest rage of all thine and our adversaries, we may cheerfully run the
race that is set before us, that having fought the good fight of faith, and ha
uing finished our course, we may in thy good time, reap the fruit of our
labors, and being taken away from the evils to come, may for ever be joined
with our head Christ Jesus, To whom with thine own majesty, and God the the
blessed spirit, be rendered and ascribed of us, and of thy whole Church, all
honor, praise, dominion, power, and majesty, with all humble and hearty
thanksgiving now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

