THE Estates of the Hypocrite and Sincere Christian.

Containing, Certain lively differences, between Synceritie and Hypocrisy;

Very necessary, For the Trial of our Estates in Grace.

By Tho. Cooper.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Creed, for Arthur Johnson, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the white Horse. 1613.

Observations in this First Treatise.
Observation,
1. The Hypocrite is a very Banquerout, even worth nothing, and hear 1 What an
Hypocrite has. 2 This that he has is nothing in truth.

And that because
1 He has no right to it. 2 Neither any right use. 3 Nor any true comfort. 4
Nothing to what he seems to have. 5 Nothing in comparison of the Elect. 6
Nothing to what he should have. 7 Nothing that he does is accepted. 8 Nothing
to that he would have. 9 Neither any thing in continuance.
Use, 1.
1 Not to fret at his prosperity, 2 Nor to rest in his measure, 3 To observe
his end, and 4 Try our Estate by him.
Observation 2.
The Hypocrite, though he has nothing, yet he makes himself rich, 1 And why:
2 By what means he does this, 1 By concealing his Estate, and not taking
notice of his beggary, being only rich in ignorance, or security,
Use hereof.
1 How to discern spiritual nakedness? 2 By assuming that he has not And how
to try our Estates hereby. 3 By ouer-rating that he has, and so thereby how
to prevent this mischief, 4 Arrogating more then he has, with the
Furtherances hereto, as also
Use.
1 How to try our selves thereby, and 2 Prevent this mischief. 5 The
Hypocrite makes himself Rich, by usurping Gods blessings:
Use.
How to try and prevent usurpation, 6 The Hypocrite makes himself rich in
singularity, and despising others. Use.
Our trial hereby, and how to prevent this evil.
7 Other policies discovered, whereby the Hypocrite enricheth himself, as 1 By
restraining where God gives liberty, 2 Advancing himself in Will Worship: And
so 3 Enlarging where Gods word restraines, 4 Drawing disciples after him, and 5
Enthralling their consciences, and reigning therein, above all that is called
God: 6 Presuming on Gods mercies, and abusing to this end the Patience of the
Almighty, 8 Measuring his inward Estate by outward prosperity.
The issue hereof,
1 He deceive himself, 2 And others: 3 The Use and Conclusion of al, for
trial and Comfort.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Companies of Fishmongers and Skinners my especial
good patrones and Benefactors. All necessary blessings to fit them to
everlasting happiness in Jesus Christ.
RIght Worshipful and beloved in the Lord Jesus, my hearts desires so long as I
abide in this house of clay, that I may be made manifest, especially unto the
consciences of those, who have been the means of my more comfortable
pilgrimage through this vale of tears. And therefore as the Lord has used
your bounty as a gracious morning rain to cherish the seed-time of my younger
studies, so have I esteemed it very equal, that you should reap some part of
the harvest of my riper fruits: Acknowledging my self much bound to my gracious
God, that has renewed my days to leave some memorial of your love, and my
respect thereof. And purposing as the Lord shall lend further health, not to
cease to stir up your pure minds to make sure your Election, by increasing
and abounding in love unto his Saints. Blessed be God even the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has taught you this holy wisdom, to make you friends
of your unrighteous Mammon, and to lay a good foundation against the day of
Christ Jesus; And faithful is he that has promised and will accomplish his
work in you, that you may be constant and abound in the work of the Lord,
that your labor may not be in vain in the Lord: Hold on the^ in the name of
God Beloved, while ye yet have time, and the Lord prosper you in this blessed
work of weldoing to the household of faith. Oh how shall you maintain the true
honor of this famous City to be still the treasury of the poor, and
nurserie of learning, and true religion? how shall you sanctify the portion
which the Lord has lent you, to make it constant to your posterity, when you
shall thus offer the first fruits of your increase unto the Lord? Shall not the
loins of the poor bless you, do not their prayers keep away the vengeance
from your City? Are you not the means to continue and derive the Gospel to
posterity, do you not thereby prepare the Church of God to eternity? And
shall not the generatio^s to come esteem you blessed? shall not your
posterity be nursed up in the Church? shall not the memorial of the just live
for ever? Surely if my poor life and means may any whit further hereunto: as
I do offer unto you unfeignedly this pledge thereof: So let me entreat you in
the merits of Jesus Christ, to take it as a glass to try your estates by,
and so hold what is good and warrantable for your souls happiness. I doubt not
but you are wise to discern of the evils of the time: And howsoever the
proverb now if ever, may be verified, that he which knows not to dissemble,
knows not how to live: yet I trust you have learned by gracious experience,
that as the Lord lives, truth in the inward parts, and has no need of our lie
and hypocrisy to maintain his truth, so he has and will daily confound the
equiuocating Jesuit and lukewarm professor, the dissembling Papist, and
shifting Ambodexter, that so we neither need fear their malice, nor eat of
such things as please them: Only the Lord make you so wise in the dispensation
of your Stewardships; that as you distribute to others, so you may reserve for
your selves, being humbled in your weldoing here, that you may not loose the
comfort of it in an other life. And giving God the whole glory of all his
means toward you, that has given you an enlarged heart for the adua^cement of
his Gospel: that so you may more and more be emptied of all preposterous love
of earthly things. And considering, that he that scatters shall have
plenty: you would therefore learn to live by faith in the fear of God,
casting your bread upon the waters. And the more you discern the world to be
given over to abominable Sacrilege, Even to rob the Lord in his Tithes and
offerings, the more you would hereby approve your selves to be chosen out of
the world, that you seek not your own, but that which is Jesus Christ's still
ministering unto the necessities of the Saints. And ouercomming, and confounding
the evil of the time, by judging wisely of the cause of the afflicted, and
husbanding well, yea increasing daily the Treasury, which your Perdecessors
left unto you, that your posterity may be encouraged and blessed by your holy
example. And the poor Church of Christ may now ye better be maintained, by how
much the world esteems it Gods best service, to empty and spoil the same.

For mine own part; As it has pleased my good God to exercise me with
continual afflictions, and lingering sicknesses; disinabling me from my
calling, and so casting me into many extremities: so it is my great comfort,
that I have found a strong and faithful GOD, in my greatest infirmities: who
as he has restored life, though in some weak measure, so will he not also
fupplie means graciously? Yea surely: Blessed be his name, that though the
Lions want, and suffer hunger, yet they that fear the Lord shall want nothing
that is good: And I bless God, that I have found more good in my greatest
Afflictions, then ever I could have hoped for in my greatest prosperity.
Surely, if it were no more, but to know our selves truly, to discern the
insufficiency, and deceitfulnes of worldly things, and so to be wayned from
the love of them, the most sharpest Afflictions were not bought too dear: But
that our light Afflictions, whicb are but for a moment, should not only prove
means to try and increase Gods graces in us, but to procure unto us i^y even
unspeakable and glorious: and so to seal us unto salvation,.2 Pet. 1. 9. 10.
and so give us possession of happiness, even in this life: yea, to cause unto us
a far more excellent, and eternal weight of glory in Heaven: must we not
truly account that the Afflictions of this present Time, are not worthy of the
glory that shall be showed unto us? And is not the Lord merciful unto us, (my
Beloved) that has not only stored up unto us so many blessings (in our
afflictions,) but has also herein dealt so mildely, and kindly with us, as
not to sweep us away, with the Beesom of destruction, as the Powder Treason
intended, and our sins had deserved: but to weaken us by degrees, and to
confound us in our carnal confidence, that so we might be invited to
Repentance, and have gracious laisure thereto? The Lord make us wise to see the
plague, and hide our selves. Is it not high time to turn unto the Lord? when
the First Borne being smitten, the next that succeeded, was palpable Darkness:
And then the next, the red Sea, to swallow up quick? Who so is wise, shall
understand these things, and to whom the arm of the Lord shall reveal them.

For this shall I not cease to pray unto God, for you, that the Keeper of
Israel, may keep you from security, and recover the things that are ready to
die. To whose blessed protection, I do most heartily commend you, in Jesus
Christ.

Resting in him, Your Worships ever bounden, Tho. Cooper.

The Hypocrites Estate.
Proverb. 13. 7. There is that makes himself rich, and has nothing: And that
makes himself poor, having great riches.
THe holy Ghost (as I take it) in these words shadoweth out unto us, the
difference between an Hypocrite, and a sincere Christian. And that

First in their Estates: as that,

1 The Hypocrite has nothing; that is, Is a very banquerout; Jude. 1. 12.
An Empty vine: a cloud without water: Mark. 11. 13.
A figtree having only Leaves, having a form of Godliness, 2. Tim. 3. 5.
but denying the power thereof. Use. 6. Jude. 12. 2. Tim. 3. 5. ^. Tim. 4. 8.


2 The sound Christians estate is good, Math. 13. 12.
he Has great riches, he is rich infaith, and plentiful in good works. Romans
14. 15.


But how do these husband and manage these several estates? ^acob. 2. Philip.
1. ^1.
What is their wisdom in making the best of them? This the Spirit of God
further reueales unto us.

As first, for the Hypocrite though he be worth nothing, has nothing in truth,
nothing in the right use, nothing in acceptance, yet he makes himself rich:
that is, Revel. 3. 17.
he does not see his emptines, nay he will not see it, Luke 12. 18. 19.
yea he would feign be esteemed rich, and in his carnal wisdom he makes
himself rich: thus does he make the best of his nothing, thus does he set out,
and lengthen his banquerout estate.

As for the upright in heart, Romans 8. 21.
it is not so with him. Though he have great riches in truth, 2. Tim. 4. 8.
and greater in expectation, yet says the Spirit he makes himself poor: that
is, he stands not upon the show, nor sets them out to sell, Matt. 5. 3
he proclaims not his riches, Luke. 5. 8.
nor depends thereon, Luke 14. 11.
but abaseth himself that he may be exalted, Matt. 16
denies himself that he may be ^ound in Christ; forgets that which is behind,
that he may hasten to that which is before, though he know nothing by
himself, yet he is not justified. 3. Phil. 1 Cor. 4. 4.

2 Yea though he were perfect, yet he knows not his own soul. Job. 9. 27.
Nay, he knows that God is greater then his conscience, and knows al things,
even the secret sins which he cannot discern. And therefore he abhorres his
life, and bears the yoke from his youth: he sits alone and keeps
silence, because he has borne it upon him: he puts his mouth in the dust,
if there may be hope: he gives his cheek to him that smites him, he is
filled full of reproaches: For he knows that his God will not forsake for
ever; but though he send affliction, yet will he have compassion according to
the multitude of his mercies. 1. Ioh.. Ps. 19. Lam^^t. 3. 27. 28 29. 30. 31.
32. Psalm. 97. 4. Psalm. 96. 15 1. Cor. 10. 13. Hebr. 2. 18.

Thus does the true Nathaniel husband his estate. And thus generally of the
purpose of the holy Ghost, and sum of these words.

Now let us more particularly consider of these differences.

And first of These estates.

The Hypocrites estate you have heard to be desperate. As he has nothing, so
he will have nothing, he will not see his want, he makes himself rich, Reave.3.
he says that he sees, and therefore his sin remains on him. Ioh. 9. more
hope of a fool, then of such a wise man that is only rich in (...)

1 (...), he has whatsoever the regenerate possesses; (...) he many times in
(...) goes beyond him. (...) 1^.

2 In substance he has much common with the regenerate, 1. How.
as first, communion of outward means of religion, the Word, Sacraments,
conference, example. etc. Secondly, use of outward means, 2. What the Hypocrite
has.
for this life in an outward manner, and for external ends. As first, love to
himself, and so generally of salvation, 2. Knowledge supernatural, whereby
he discernes the true means of this salvation.

3 Faith temporary, whereby for a season he assents to the means, rejoices
for a season in them, wishes that he may be partaker of the end, to which they
lead, enters into the way which may lead him to that end, and so long as
Wind and Tide serves, Sails very contentedly to that wished Haven. Ioh. 5.
Balaam. Number. 23. Luke 8. Matt. 6. 24.

3 Yea, Insubsta^ce he has some graces, even beyond the Elect. As he may do
Miracles, and have extraordinary knowledge of many mysteries; for the good of
others, and to make himself without excuse. Math. 7.

4 Yea, he may be restrained from some evils which the Child of God may fall
into: that, so he may have his desire, in affecting an outward form and
glory of religion, thereby more dangerously to deceive himself, by resting
therein, and to deceive others, by tying them to his measure. Tim. ^. 5. 13. and
causing them to stumble at the infirmities of the Saints.

5 Yea, he may live all his days in prosperity; that so he may the rather
flatter himself in the worth of his profession: and he may die in a glorious
carnal peace, to the great slu^bling of the world, and abusing of his vain
heart, Job. 21. 13. Ierum. 12.

And so he may be justified and approved of the world that o^nes him: whereas
the Saints may live in continual afflictions, and die in much trouble, and
anguish of spirit, and so for a time be condemned, both in life and death: of
an unbelieving, and unjust generation. Psalm. 34.

3 All this and much more in particular, (of which else where (God willing) is
the portion of the hypocrite: And yet for all this, ^ow this ^at he has
nothing.
in the truth, he has nothing.

How so?

First, because he has no right in any thing that he has, he is but a
thief, and a Robber, an Usurper of Gods graces. And therefore whatsoever he
has, ^. Because ^e has no ^^ght.
is none of his. Well may he provide, and prepare it as a Cook, but the
righteous shall be fed therewith, he shall gather silver as the dust, but the
Saints shall divide it. Job. 27. Ioh. 10.

Secondly, ^. No right ^se.
he has no right use of any thing that he has; his conscience is defiled. and
so all things are impure unto him: and how can he but abuse and pervert the
same? Either missing in the ground, as not doing it in Faith, or failing in the
manner, not according to the rule of the word, or abhorring from the right end
the glory of God. Tit. 1. 15. Romans 14. 1. Cor. 10. 31.

That which he does proceeding from natural knowledge or good intention and
meaning, or at the best a vain presumption, or temporary faith: his manner of
doing, being in wilworship and bodily service, which profits nothing, his end
being to rob God of his glory, and transfer it to himself, and so to
express some degrees of the sin, of Antichrist, even to advance himself
above all that is called God, and yet to satisfy the flesh, and make his belly
his God. 2. Coll. 3. Phil. 19. to sacrifice to his net, and so make his wit,
and industry his God. In a word, merely to seek himself, and to put out all
sense and use of the divine power. Matt. 13. 2 Coll. 25. 1. Tim. 4. 8. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. Abac. 2.

Thirdly, No true ^omfort.
also the hypocrite may be said to have nothing, because he has no true
comfort and success in what he has. Though the Lord give him his desire, yet
he sends leannes into his soul: Psalm. 106. 15. he has either some inward
gripe of conscience, or some outward leprosy accompanying his greatest and
securest reuellings, in his most glorious happiness, Proverb. 14. 3. 2. Romans 5.
27. somewhat there is, so scarres and crosses him, that all his honor is
nothing unto him, the co^scionable walking of the Saints, confounds his pompous
and outside profession. Hester. 5. The poor vineard of Naboth lies so
convenient, that he cannot hold up his head, nor eat his meat, unless he may
embrue his hands in blood, to enjoy the same, 2. Kin. 29. some such like thing
there will be still to procure envy, and discontent; that so though he has
somewhat, yet indeed beholding it often in the true glass of the word, and the
holy examples of the Saints, 4. Nothing in regard of others.
he sees it to be nothing, in comparison of what others have. And yet such is
the strength of delusion, that he is given up unto: that what he wants in
substance, that he will make up in complement, and show; and so indeed is
nothing to that he seems to be, 5. Nothing to what he seems to have.
feign would he seem to be perfect, if you will believe his shows: nay, if
you will believe his own word: he says he is rich, and increased in Goods,
and has need of nothing, Revel. 3. 17. And yet the spirit tells him, 6.
Nothing to that he said he has.
he is poor and blind, and miserable, he has nothing of what he says,
because he makes himself rich: therefore he has nothing.

And well were it with him if he might be his own Judge, though he were
deceived in himself, yet he might be approved of God: But observe I pray you
a further measure of Gods judgment upon him, that what is highly esteemed of
M^n, is abomination in the sight of God, Luke, 16. 15. because the hypocrite so
ouerrates his goodness, and stands upon his terms of vprightnes and
perfection: therefore the Lord reiects his confidence, Ierem. 2. and condemns
his painted shows, and vain boasting. The Publicane that confesses his sin,
is accepted, 7. Nothing, because not accepted.
when the proud Pharisie that boasts of his righteousness, making it seem
greater then in truth it is, is therefore rejected of God, Luke, 18. because
his person is abominable. Thus has the hipocrite nothing, because it is not
accepted of God; whose acceptance only gives true valuation, and worth to all
our actions: which in themselves are worthy nothing but shame and confusion,
Dan. 9. And can the Just and holy Lord do otherwise?

Does he not love truth in the inward parts? Psalm. 51. Is the Hypocrite any
thing in the truth, 8. Nothing to that he should have
Is that he has ought to what he should have? surely, he should be upright in
heart, but he has seven abominations, yea, deceitfulnes the root of all: he
should have his profession and practice answer each other: but alas, must not
his Iacob-like profession condemn his Esau-like practice? Is he not of his
father the devil, even a murderer of his brethren, though he profess
himself to be the son of Abraham? John. 8 44. Thus is the hypocrite nothing
to that which he should be. And therefore it is just with God, that

He shall be nothing to what he would be. He would be happy: And yet of all men
shall be beaten with most stripes. 9. Nothing to what he would be^
Math. 25. He would be honored of the people. 1. Sam. 15. And yet is hated,
because he makes profession; yea more justly scorned, because he shames his
profession; he would enjoy the pleasures of sin with greedines: yet is he
often brideled with the credit of his profession. And so is more inwardly
enflamed to Lust, and enraged against God: And that we may yet further behold
and admire the Justice of our glorious God: Observe (I pray you) that

Howsoever the Hypocrite denies the power of goalines, yet would he feign
retain form and show thereof: 10. No, not so much as in show.
that so he may still deceive himself and others. But does not the Lord eue^
reuert this his confidence often times? Does he not take away his restraining
spirit, and give him up with all greedines to break out into gross sins?
Romans 1. 25. 26 Does not the Hypocrite hereupon labor to dead his conscience,
by rejecting knowledge, that so he may commit sin more secretly without
controlme^t? F^hes 4. Does he not plainly (...), Departs from us (...) the
knowledge (...) Io^. 15. 21. As ^u^^ifying the Lord* that it were better for
him never to have known the ways of righteousness, then thus with the dogg^
to return to his vomit: 2. Pet. 2 Does not man being in honor become void
of understanding, loosing the very light of knowledge, together with the
shipwreck of conscience, and so may be compared to the b^asts that perish? Ps.
49. Is not now that which he seemed to have, taken away from him? Matthew. ^5.
His madness shall be made manifest to all men; No longer shall he prevail, to
deceive Gods people 2. Tim. 3. 9. He shall no more wear arough garment, to
beguile instable souls. 13. Zach. 4. Thus will the Lord uncase the Hypocrite
in this life. And thus has he nothing of what he would have, though he would
have nothing but a show, which indeed is nothing.

Lastly, Not to pass over the reason of the holy ghost: 11. Nothing, because
he makes himself rich.
Even because he makes himself rich, therefore, he has nothing: For can that
be any thing in Truth, which he makes himself to be, seeing it is of God,
whatsoever is good in us: And because he makes himself rich, and will not see
his want, therefore has he nothing, neither in hand nor in hope, he is not
only poor but desperately miserable: he must necessarily live and die, A
corrupt tree, and without fruit being now twice dead by the rejecting and abuse
of grace, and so fit for nothing, but for eternal vengeance? Iud. 12. Math. 3.

2 And can he have any thing, 2. Because Gods gives him nothing.
unless the Lord do give it him in mercy? And will the Lord give him grace,
who refuses the same? has by sin disabled himself for^ the right use
thereof? Iud.4. And shall not all that is given him further his condemnation?
Well may the Lord lend him his goods, well may he entrude upon them: But free
gift he has none, nor freely shall enjoy them: but as he abuses them to Gods
dishonor, so shall he be stripped of them with shame, and be cast off from
all hope, ever to attain them again: Yea, be cast into eternal punishments,
for the abuse of them, Math. 25. 30.

Well, thus we see in what respects the hypocrite has nothing. As also the
reasons that he must needs have nothing: seeing as neither that which he has,
is given him to enjoy, Tim^t, 6. and so it is no better then nothing: Nay
better never to have had any, then at such a rekoning: Neither does he desire
the substance of goodness, but the show thereof, ^. Because he desires it ^as
nothing in show, no^ substance,
which is as nothing. And ye^ eft soones is he weary of the show, because it
hindered the enjoying of the pleasures of sin. Nay, in the end rejects the
very show.


1. Whence we may learn, 1. Not to ^nuie the cracking of the Hypocrite, nor
any prosperity which furthers the same, seeing al is as nothing, yea worse
then nothing, even vanity and deceit, Psalm. 37. 1. 8.

Secondly, Use, 2.
not to Content our selves with the Hypocrites measure, neither to square our
selves according to his line, seeing all he has is no more then nothing: Nay,
less then nothing, a mere lie, an Idol, 2. Cor. 10.

But rather so try our selves by the hypocrites scantling, 3.
as wherein he has any thing, therein not to excuse ourselves, if we come short
of him, upon pretense, because he abuses it, therefore we may be without it,
or not safely venture on it, but rather, wherein he is any thing, therein
labor we to be much more, not contending in the show, but laboring to
express the substance, and making good in our practice, what we have received
in knowledge, and so growing in Knowledge, that we may increase in obedience,
till the work of Christ be perfited in us, 1. Phil. 10. 2. Pet. 1. 6. 7. 8. 2.
Cor. 5. 6. To this end, As the Hypocrite thinks he is somewhat when he is
nothing, and so deceiues himself, Gal. 6. 4 So let us acknowledge, that of our
selves we have nothing, as of our selves: that, in us, that is, in our flesh,
dwells no goodness, Romans 7. that so we may be partakers of the fatnes of the
Olive, How vice may go beyond the hypocrite.
and be truly ingraffed into the true vine Christ Jesus, Ioh. 15. that so we
may bring forth fruit in him. Thus having our right in goodness, through Jesus
Christ, we shall also have grace to use it well, and being faithful in a
little, we shall be entrusted with greater blessings, Math. 25
our faylings shall not be imputed, and our infirmities daily purged; and we
daily renewed by Christ, that we may grow up in him, which is the head, doing
all in thankefulnes unto our God, for his Son in Christ Jesus, in all things
guiding our selves according to his blessed word, Psalm. 119. 9. and above al
things, aiming at the glory of our eternal God, 1. Cor 10. 21 that so good
will may still flow down upon the sons of men, whereby being enabled to
constancy in weldoing, we shall fight the good fight of faith, and finish our
course with joy And so obtain the end of our faith which is the salvation of
our souls. 2. Tim. 4. 7. 8. 1. Pet. 1. 9.

Thus have we heard of the Hypocrites Estate. Shall we now a little further
consider of his wisdom in the husbanding thereof.

The spirit readies us herein He makes himself rich, observe I pray you the
manner of the speech, he says not, that he is rich indeed of himself; The
mane^ of this, Tha^ The hypocrite makes himself rich.
for so neither he is: neither indeed can he be; neither does the spirit say:
that he is made rich, for this only belongs to the Saints: Jacob. 2.
whom God has chosen in Christ to make them rich in good works: but, as the
Jews would thereby challenge our Savior to be a counterfeit, because, say they,
that he said, I am the King of the Jews, Ioh. 19. 21. therein intending that
he took upon him the calling he had no right unto: neither indeed was the
person he pretended to be: So the holy Ghost does herein justly challenge the
Hypocrite of cousenage, because he makes himself rich; when he is a
banquerout: thereby implying his legerdemaine, that had devices, not only to
hide his poverty, and color his emptines: but further also was grown such a
Master of his trade, as to make himself rich, at least so to seem to
himself, yea to other also: to gain credit of such esteem: when indeed he
was no better then quite out at heels. Observe we then here a double
property of an hypocrite. 2. ^. Obser. Hypocrite ^oth not neither will
^iscerne his ^mptines.
First, that though he be worth nothing, yet in no hand can he abide to hear
of this: he does not see his nakedness, he knows not that he is poor and
blind, and miserable, nay which is his desperate estate: he will not see it.
And no marvel.

1 For as he desires not to see his spiritual nakedness, least by the view
thereof, his seeming happiness might be disgraced: and carnal devotions
confounded: 2. ^o is he justly given up by the Justice of God, to be besotted
with outward pomp, and prosperity: that so, he may not discern his inward
wants. 3. And so does he fall into the hands of Satan, the God of this world,
2. Cor. 4. 5. by whom being blinded and further infatuated, either with a false
judgment of things, or misapplying the true, The Gospel is hereby hid unto
such as perish, that so not being now able to discern his nakedness, because
he wants this heavenly Eye-salue, he might be made more inexcusable in
rejecting this true light, and so be justly given up to strong delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12. because he will not obey the truth. Whereupon it comes to
pass, that as before, he desired not to see his nakedness, but rather to have
it covered, and co^cealed from himself; And to this end, being dazzled with
shows, and outward baits, has not laisure to look home; So: because, he
reiects the birthright in comparison of the mess of pottage, Genes. 27. is
therefore given up to strong delusions: By these delusions his Judgment is so
perverted and true light corrupted, that now taking light for darkness, and
darkness for light, he blesses his soul in this wilful ignorance of his
estate: Libertine.
as if it were his greatest happiness to be senseless in his misery, that
herein he may deceive his soul, that his sin is pardoned, because though he
commit the same with greedines, Ephesians. 4. 19. yet he has no feeling of it, no
sting of conscience for the same. And therefore he resolves, that he may follow
it still. Pro. 23.

And, hereunto furthers an other policy of Satan, who by leading his eyes
abroad, to view other men's estates, does increase hereby this spiritual
blindness: And that, when either 1. co^paring himself with others, ye are short
of his measure, he thereby resolves ye his estate is good, he sees no evil in
it: or else secondly he is so quicksighted abroad, that his eyes are put up at
home, he sees so much in others, he has such cause to look abroad, that he
has no need, or leisure to look home: nay by looking abroad, he makes show
that all is well at home. 2. By the ^eceitfulnes of sin seeking to hide
^^selfe.


Add we hereunto, the deceitfulnes of sin which must not be seen into; that
it may not be repented of. And that it may not be seen into, has many
colors. First either God knows it sufficiently, and therefore what need I
trouble my self to examine the same, By what means.
or I can never attain unto the depth thereof, and therefore in vain do I
labor to search and discover the same, 3. or the precise knowledge hereof may
drive me to dispa^e: and therefore it is not good to buy repentance at a rate
so dear. 4. and what need I trouble my self to renew those wounds which are
alraedy healed by the Blood of Christ?

Thus does the Hypocrite hide his Nakedness, these are the means and cloakes
hereunto.

By which we may learn. Use. ^
1. As to reject the confidence of the Hypocrite, who because he hides his
sin, and will not see his nakedness, therefore he shall not prosper: Pro. 28.
his sin shall be laid open to his shame and confusion: 2. So to discern the
deceitfulnes of sin, and cunning o^ Satan in keeping us in this spiritual
blindness, and ignorance of our misery. And therefore that we may prevent this
desperate condition

3 Learn we in the fear of God to discern our spiritual misery.
Instruction.
And that

1 First by often viewing our selves in the glass of the law. How to discern
Spiritual nakedness.


Romans 7. 9. 10.

2 And justly observing, Means ^ereto.
the checkes of conscience convinced thereby.

3 Not neglecting to take notice of the examples of Gods chaistisements upon
others for sin, as knowing that ye like may befall us. Ps. 119.

4 Especially observing the secret and invisible hand of God upon our selves,
meeting with our sins by special chastisements.

5 And that either those ordinary and strange buffetings and renewed quawmes of
the conscience, Inward and outward.
or else the wounding of our good name, our crossings in the family by wife,
children, servants, emptying of our estates, by casualties. etc. Psalm. 31.

6 Above all things, labor we to discern the worthiness of our Savior and our
privileges in him, together with that inestimable price he paid for us, and
this will most profitably bring us to ye sight of our nakedness, that so we may
desire to be clothed with his righteousness.

7 And seeing: So long as we live here we shall have somewhat to blind and
deceive us:therefore behold we our estates often in the grave, Consider the
excellent price of our salvation.
where corruption shall be our mother, and the worms our brethren and sisters;
And this will be a notable means to call us home to view our selves, ^.
Meditation of death.
that so we may yet further discern our poverty. And

8 To this end, arrest we our selves often before the Judgment seat of
Christ, ^. Meditation of the day of judgment.
and prepare we our souls thereto by a daily examining of our selves and
casting up of our accounts, that so we may yet more and more take notice of our
vileness.

And to make our unworthiness more truly to appear unto us, ^. Glory that ^all
be re^ealed.
set we before the eyes of our minds the incomparable weight of Glory that is
laid up for us, view we our present estate often in that glorious glass.
And this shall much further the discovering of vileness.

As for the World, and pomp thereof: seeing this is no small means to blind
us in our estates, making us seem better then we are, therefore learn we to
discern the true Nature of all earthly things. And knowing their best worth to
be but vanity, and vexation of spirit, Lam. 1. Learn we to give them such
room in our hearts, Discerning* and renoun^cing earthl^ things.
as that we can learn to be abased when we do abound: and to abound in
content and thankfulness, when we are abased: Phil. 4. let our proportion be
not to seek after great things: and our desires be, to cast our care upon God.
Let us use the world, as if we used it not. Let us enjoy the best, as we were
still willing to leave them for a better Let us more account, of our right in
these things the^ to be cloyed with them. And prepare we our souls daily for
afflictions: Examining our obedience to any one particular Command.
that so we may yet better see our emptines and unworthiness, Ie^e. 45. 1. Pet.
5. 1. Cor. 7.

And least we should err in co^tenting our selves with generals. Note.
That we may discern our spiritual poverty indeed: Examine we our strength
in the keeping of any one of Gods Commandments: Not so much waying our
failing in the Outward actions, which are finite, and may be excusable, as
rather discerning the inward corruption, and rebellion of the heart, the
blasphemous thoughts, and vile imaginations, which credit, and fear of
punishment, restrains from the Act, this will much further the discerning of
our vileness. Genesis 6.

And to this end, take we our selves to task how we have, or can keep any
one of the Commandments. In keeping of the Sabbath.
Examine we our selves (for example) how we fail in the keeping of the
Sabbath: how we fail in preparation: how in binding our thoughts to the good
abearing; how in accompanying the ordinances of God, with the intention of the
mind, to conceive the will of God therein: how to profit by that we understand:
how to communicate, what we conceive for the good of others: how to keep our
peace with God, in holy meditation, and conference with his Majesty: how to
labor peace with men, by reconciling them unto God: how to order our Christian
liberty on the Sabbath, (as being Lords thereof) that it be not occasion to
the Flesh, and interrupt our sweet communion with our blessed God. Galat. 5.
And I am persuaded, that if we had no other means to discern our emptines and
insufficiency; even our best striuings, for the sanctifying of the Sabbath,
(as being the maine trial of the power of sanctification) would sufficiently
convince us, both that of our selves we are able to do nothing, and that,
corruption, remaining in us (if the Lord should enter into judgment with us for
the same) were sufficient to infatuate all the graces of God in us: and to
confound even the best service we can do unto his Majesty. And this I take to
be a lively practice, whereby we may attain to the power of spiritual
nakedness.

And thus does the Lord raise Light out of darkness: the desperate policy of
the hypocrite in hiding his estate: you see, has taught us to discern and
discover the same, Ierem. 17. 10. And let this be an especial rule, yet further
hereunto: that though we cannot know the depth of corruption in us, yet let us
not fail still to sound the bottom by the power of the word, Though we
cannot know the deph of corruption, yet let us not give over searching.
and so far as it pleases the Lord to discover unto us: let us not be
ashamed to shame our selves therein: At no hand give we here way to Carnal
wisdom, to suppress or smoother what we know, either by excusing it, as
the common condition is, or diminishing, that it is not so bad, as it is made,
or as others have done, or by putting it off from our selves, as if Divine
providence, or necessity, or some sufficient cause provoked thereto; or lastly,
by outfacing, and denying, yea, impudent justifying of the same: (For this will
make way to a reprobate sencee,) Romans 1. 28. But in the name of God, And what
we can and, that to remove.
labor we to discern the utmost of our vileness: And as we discern, to deal
faithfully with our own hearts: clearing all other, and condemning only our
selves; that so judging our selves, we may not be judged of the Lord. And thus
much of the first property of the hypocrite, that he cannot endure to
discern his nakedness.

But does he stay here? No surely, this will not serve his turn, to think
himself not miserable: but as he would be accounted happy, and to this end,
assumes the Cloak of religion, so does he hereby: through the divine justice,
giving him up to the abuse of this Sacred profession, so far prevail, by the
strength of delusion; that he makes himself Rich: that is, not only in his
own conceit; has knowledge and happiness enough for himself, yea, some
overplus for others: but also to others ofttimes makes so fair a show, As that
his measure is only approved, and all others rejected: yea, happy is he
that has now found such a last for his foot: whereby he may serve God and
Mammon too, carry the credit of Religion with the foremost, and yet enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, with the most Licentious.

Behold then an other property of the Hypocrite, that though he be a stark
Beggar by nature, and by tampering with Religion, becomes twice dead, and
plucked up by the roots, made more inexcusable: A very desperate banqueroute.
faster bound to condemnation: yet see the power of delusion.

He makes himself rich: that he alone might have the glory, 2. Obseru.
Property of an hypocrite to make himself rich.
he makes himself rich, abusing holy things, to further this delusion, that
so his glory may be his shame, when his folly shall be made manifest, when the
true owner shall call to account, and recover his right, and give him hise
portion, even the fruit of his own counsels.

What then, is this, that the Hypocrite makes himself rich? surely the meaning
of the holy Ghost (I take it) is,

Not only, that he hides what he truly is, but also that he makes show of
what he is not, and pretends great riches, by that little he seems to have: Yet
so, as that he comes not by them, by the right means, they are not given unto
him from the mercy of God, but rather as an usurper, he intrudes upon them;
and so accou^ts that his own, which he has no right unto: Or else he makes
himself rich, ascribing that to himself, which is the gift of God, as if his
own wisdom and indu^stry, had procured them unto him. 1. Corinthians. 2. Ierem.
9. Dan. 4.

So that in this grace of speech, the Spirit of God implies generally two
things:

First, that the Hypocrite makes himself rich, either of what is not in him at
all: boasting of what he never enjoyed, or if he have ought he makes it more
then it is: makes himself rich: Matter wherein he is rich.
whereas indeed he wants sufficient: setting the best side outward, and making
his wild grapes seem right good Fruit.

And so the Spirit has reference to the matter of his riches: or,

Secondly, in that it is said, He makes himself rich: This (making of
himself,) either implies the manner of the Action. Namely, by Intrusion and
usurpation, as if it were not given, but rather craftily creapt, and incroacht
upon: or else it implies the ground, and end of the action: namely, his own
glory: The manner whereby he makes himself rich.
as making himself rich: and being beholding to no other for the same.

All which, as they are lively properties of an Hypocrite, so let us in
particular consider of them briefly in their places.

And first, that an Hypocrite makes himself Rich, that is, makes great boast
of what is not truly in him at all, 3. Obseru. Hypocrite makes himself rich
of what he has not.
adua^cing himself in the things he not so much as knows, neither ever saw.
2. Col. 18. and speaking evil of the things he knows not, that so he might
gain the estimation of more zeal and holiness, 2. Pet. 22. being as wells
without water, and clouds without rain; speaking swellings words and yet which
are but vanity, and promising liberty unto others, when himself is but a
slave of corruption. The spirit (you see) gives plain evidence hereunto. And
no marvel.

1 For is he not of old ordained to condemnation, Reasons.
and therefore must be given up to conceive and boast of what he has hot, that
so he may not see what he wants: nor seek to what should truly make him
happy? Iud. 4 Ioh. 9.

2 Is he not to make up the measure of his condemnation, and increase the same,
by deceiving himself, and ^others, and therefore does he not make show of what
is not in him, that so he might beguile unstable souls, Ma. 23. 2. Pet. 2. 17.
18. in drawing them by these shows to make a mock of religion and so either
to keep from embracing thereof, or to nouzle them in a deceitful
entertainment of the same. Heb. 6. 45.

3 And can he otherwise walk as an Angel of light, and arrogate perfection
unto himself, if he did not boast of what was not in him. 2. Cor. 11.

4 Is ^he not hereby provoked, to esteem basely of religion: ^ob. 21.
seeing it can serve as a broker to make him seem what he is not: And so is
nourished in his Athiesme, and contempt of God?

5 And does he not exalt himself hereby in voluntary devotions and formal
complements even above all that is called God? 2 Thessalonians. 2. Col. 2

6 Can he do otherwise, that is so blinded by the God of this world, as to take
light for darkness, and darkness for light? 2. Cor. 4. Esaias. 5.

7 Is he not as a deceived Dove without heart, having his judgment perverted,
and so must needs imagine himself to be what he is not. Hose. 7.

8 Does he not measure his estate by false rules, As, Custom, Time, Examples,
especially such as have less then he: letter of the law, his own vain
heart, and so by these broakers is further flattered to conceive himself to be
what he is not, Ioh, 7. 48. Hester. 3. Learn we hence.

1 To convince the hypocrite by this, Use.
that he boasts of what good is not in him, and withal denies the evil that
is in him.

2 To try our estate in sincerity by this, How to try our estates ^ereby.
that we be so far from boasting of what is not in us; or assuming that to
our selves which is vainly ascribed unto us; As, that though we are possessed
of many excellent graces, yet we assume no right in them but by the right use
of them, Job. 31.
therefore take we heed of beholding the son when it shines; that is, of
being dazeled with the graces of God in us, least spiritual pride be
nourished, and security maintained, and so through negligence and
unprofitableness we be stripped of Gods blessings. Rather in the fear of God,
Let us fear our selves most when we have greatest mercies. And be jealous of
exactnes and worthiness thereof in it self. And of any warrant as from our
selves, to persevere and continue in weldoing.

And seeing do what we can, vaineglorie will steal upon us; and so provoke to
boast of what is not in us, How to prevent this evil.
least we should be accounted negligent, short of others, unthankful, etc.

Therefore learn we in the fear of God to prevent this sin.

And that by these means.

1 Labor we, sound and particular knowledge of our estate, and measure, by
daily viewing our selves in the glass of the word, and examining our hearts,
and privy corruptions, and daily Judging our selves by unfeigned repentance.

2 Keep we our Judgment sound, and spiritual, by cleaving close to the power
of the word, and hating all vain, and false rules, Psalm. 119. As opinion,
custom, example, multitude, flesh and blood, etc.

3 Resolve we our selves; that though we must strive to be with the foremost,
yet there are many that may, and do go beyond us in grace, whose examples we
are to admire, reverence, and imitate so far forth, as that we strive not to
leap up to them by a vain conceit of what is not in us; but rather soberly
submitting our selves to such means wherein we may follow after them: Note.
that (whereas the hypocrite being not willing to take the pains, which may
bring to perfection, and yet through ye pride of his heart arrogates no less,
and therefore in steed of the long and tedious way of practice, makes a shorter
cut even to brag of what he has not: we notwithstanding may in patience
possess our souls, comforting our selves so in the truth of the measure, we
have already attained unto: as that still we forget what is behind; 3. P^il.
13 14.
And hasten to that which is before, following hand after the mark for the
high price of our calling in Jesus Christ.

4 Lastly, above all things labor we for assurance of faith in the son of
God Hebr. 10. which though it be attained by conscience, and power of weldoing,
yet because it sees a far off; therefore does it still carry us out of our
selves: both to rest wholly on Christ for the matter of our rejoicing, and in
him alone to the recompense of the reward, that so we may be so far from
assuming what is not in us, as that still we deny our selves, that we may be
found in Christ not having our own righteousness. Yet

Though we abase our selves, let us not dishonor our God in denying, or
betraying any of his graces in us, seeing this may be a means to be given up
to boast of what is not in us, if we shall deny the truth, or abase the worth
of any of Gods mercies bestowed upon us.

And therefore take we heed of running into the other extreme.

1 But, As God has given, so let us acknowledge a truth, to confound
hypocrisy, though we cannot challenge perfection, which makes for our
humiliation.

2 Let not Satan or the world, take away our innocence from us, though before
the Lord we are not thereby justified. Job. 27. 1. Cor. 4. 4. 5. Wherein the
child of God may advance Gods grace.


3 Let us propose our example to those that are short of us; though we must
follow the examples of such as are gone before. I. Cor. 11. 1.

4 Let our rejoicing be even the testimony of our good conscience, that in
simplicity and Godly pureness, though not in perfection, yet not in fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world,
and especially where we have had an especial calling. 2. Cor. 1. 12. 13.

5 Let it comfort us against infirmities, and Satan's buffetings, that the same
God which has begun the work will perfect it in us. 1. Phil. 6.

6 Let us also give God the glory of al his mercies, though to us we confess
also there is nothing due but shame and confusion of face for ever Dan. 9.

And seeing as with the heart we believe to righteousness, so with the mouth we
confess to salvation. Romans 10. Therefore be we wise to distinquish of
spiritual duties: so being private with God, that we do nothing whereof
before men we may be ashamed?

And so behauing our selves in the public worship, as that we do all things as
in the presence of God; both preparing our selves to the public by private
humiliation: and after trying and sanctifying the public by private meditation
and conference with God.

Thus does the hypocrite boast of what is not in him: that so he may, upon
pretense of what is not in him, more dangerously deceive himself, and others;
But what? has he nothing at all? Yea surely; we have before allowed him some
wrong possession of many excellent blessings: yea some abuse thereof.

But are these sufficient to make him happy? Surely no: They (as you have
heard) tend to make him inexcusable, that he may be beaten with more stripes,
because he knows his Masters will and does it not, because to whom much is
given, much shall be required at his hands. Romans 2. 1.
Math. 2. Luke 12. 48.

Yea, but for all this, does he not desire to be happy? Yea surely: he has
some knowledge of the true end, some desire thereof. And he has a price in
his hand: yet such a fool he is, that he has no heart to buy it, he sees a
future happiness, and he would be thought to chaffer for it, Luke 18. yet in
truth the Bird in the hand is the prize he means to enjoy: his belly is his
God, his credit his Idol: Phil. 3. 19. And therefore though he have many
notable graces, which might (being rightly used) further him to the best: and
so by them, to the true end; yet in his best wisdom he is content so far to
use them, Note,
as thereby to nourish his deceived heart, that he has some reach to the
happiness of a better life: And yet to make them his maine brokers, to enjoy
the happiness of this life.

And how does he bring this about? surely by that 2. property, which now
follows. Even by ouerrating the blessings which he has usurped, esteeming
them to the sanctifying graces of the spirit, sufficient to salvation; when
indeed they are but gifts of illumination, tending by his abuse, to his
further condemnation.

Behold here then a second property of the hypocrite, 4. Hipocrit^ ouerrates
the blessings of God, As knowledge.
Namely, to ouerprize and set upon the Tentors, such blessings as he has
usurped upon. Thus having some knowledge, he is puffed up therewith, esteeming
that he knows sufficiently, when he indeed knows nothing as he ought to
know, 1. Cor. 8. stinting himself in the means of Religion, and condemning
other that will not be measured by his line, as giddy spirits, mad fellows,
etc. 2. Cor. 10.

Thus having a temporary faith, he makes it more then it is, Means whereby the
hypocrite deceives himself.
contenting himself to believe in general, though he have no particular hold
of the promises, no assurance of salvation, esteeming this, presumption, the
other, Popish faith
modesty, and humility: Or, if he have any hold, In temporary faith.
yet letting it easily go, when once his carnal proppes fail, and affliction
ouertakes him, Luke 8.

Thus performing some outward devotions, he esteems them meritorious and
warra^table for salvation, In external obedience.
upon pretense, that they must needs proceed from a good meaning, and so an
honest heart, or else upon this advantage, that his heart is only known to
God, Ierem. 17. 10. he cannot judge of it himself: and why then may he not
measure himself by outward actions? At least, whatsoever he knows by
himself, yet why should not you take him in charity, according to his outward
practice and semblance. Math. 26. Especially, if he continue, and hold on his
profession, as Judas did, In formal constancy.
till the very end, may not this be a means, that he shall bless his soul
therein? ^. Has not he stood when others are fallen? Reasons.
2. Has he not obtained these Graces from the right means? 3. Has he not by
them be^e a means to do good to others? 4. Does he not increase in
knowledge, and go on in many notable duties. 5. And are not the best subjects
to many slips?

Add we hereunto, the policy of Satan, to further this ouerprising of the
blessings of God. That whereas indeed the drift is, to abuse them to be Bawdes
for present pleasures, and so to ab^se and vnderrate the same, Note.
that we should not esteem them as the good gifts of God, but rather such as
come by chance, or our own travel. Job. 21. 16. that we should think them
not worth our retaining, when for the further enjoying of the pleasures of
sin, we shall be willing to part with them: Yet that we might not discern
this our base account of the^: It is the subtlety of this old Serpent, that
we should thus conceive more of them, then indeed they are: that so pride of
Conceit may hinder the right use: and blind the false, and thereby keep us
from desiring, and enjoying better.

1. Abusing to this end both the charity of others, Furthera^^^ hereto.
who are willing to conceive the best of what they see, and know not to the
contrary.

2. Abusing also the flattery of the World, who is ready to make the most of
every thing, that so it may hold us still captives to the lusts thereof.

3. Especially abusing our own self-love, which is easily blinded in the
judgment of it self: and our secret desires, and lusts, 4
which tending to enjoy the pleasures of sin, or by this ouerweening conceit
much warranted and increased thereto.

Above all, the Justice of the Allwise and mighty God appears we (...) fully
herein: who having (as a judgment of his deceitfu^nes) ordained the Hypocrite
to greater condemnation, does therefore so far give him his desire and
portion in this life, Psalm 1^. ^4. that whereas he aff^^cteth some means, and
show of religion to this end, as tending to hide and color sin, that it may
be committed more greedily, and more impudently maintained: he shall therefore
be partaker of such a measure thereof, which though it be not sufficient to
bring him to the true happiness, yet shall it prove very dangerous to nuzzle
in the false, and so to lead him on more securely to vengeance, and that
especially, by ouerprizing, and, too high esteem thereof.

For hereby concluding that he is in ye right, he does not only despise and
condemn all further measure, but finding them to stand with, and further his
present enjoying of the pleasures of sin, he grows to sacrifice to his Net,
and make Idols of his gifts, now keeping state with them: and extending them
rather to show, and outward pomp, then any whit husba^ding or employing ye
same. Mat. 25. By which it comes to pass, that not exercising his Talents,
the Lord purposes to strippe him thereof, and yet not until the hypocrite be
most willing thereunto. And to make him willing, Note.
serves very justly the maine abuse of his gifts, which wounding his
conscience, and so laboring his reformation, he is so far from answering the
Lord herein: As that rather then he will endure this scourge, he is contented
to part with knowledge, yea to be rid of conscience, yea all sense of divine
power, that so he may enjoy his pleasures more securely without controulement.
By which as he makes up the measure of his sin, so he hastens upon himself a
greater measure of condemnation. Lo here the confusion of the hypocrites
wisdom. Behold the wicked taken in their own craftines.

And Learn we hence in Gods fear to suspect and try our selves.

Are we given to make Molehils Mountains? Use of Trial.
to ouerprise the blessings of God bestowed upon us? certainly, as it is a
sin to diminish any good blessing of God: and a greater evil to deprave, and
disgrace the same: seeing the least we are not worthy of; and he that is
faithful in a little and thankful for it, shall be entrusted with greater
blessings. So on the contrary: It is a dangerous evil, to ouervalue any
favor of God;

Especially, seeing howsoever every blessing of God is good, and as a hand to
lead us to the greatest good: Yet the difference of Blessings, Difference of
blessings how to be discerned.
is both in regard of the diverse persons, that do enjoy them, but most of
all, the right use of the blessing gives the true rate thereunto, as yielding
us in the sound comfort the just valuatio^ thereof. So that, as to the Impure,
all things are Impure, because the conscience being desiled, they can not but
be abused, and therefore the best to the wicked, (in regard of themselves) does
but further condemnation, and so to them loses it worth and value: So unto
the elect, the least being sanctified, as it shall further to nying, the best,
so it cannot be too highly esteemed in regard of the Giver, and the more highly
we esteem thereof, the more shall we be provoked to a more conscionable use,
the more enabled to thankefulnes unto our God, and so still prepared to further
blessings; and so at length made fit for eternal happiness.

2 Labor we therefore in the next place, to try our estate, not so much by
the enjoying of the blessing, as by the right use thereof. So may we lawfully
advance the blessing; In that it is not wholly defiled by our corruption, and we
justly deprived of it: And yet abase our selves, in regard of our great
infirmities, accompanying the best use of Gods mercies sufficient, ^om.7. ^uk.
17. ^o. Math. 24.
if the Lord should enter into judgment with us, not only to corrupt the
blessings utterly, and so make us unprofitable servants: But, as unprofitable
servants to be stripped thereof, and to be deprived of all further hope to
enjoy the same.

3 And labor we to discern the cunning of Satan, who indeed, by this
ouerrating of Gods mercies, procures their abasing, that so we may not be
deceived with his glorious pretenses, that we may suspect him and his most when
they most flatter us.

4 Lastly, seeing it is so dangerous to ouerprize the mercies of God, therefore
learn we to prevent this practice of the hypocrite. And so to keep our
selves in an holy use of Gods blessings, there by to prepare our selves to the
continuance and increase of them.

To this end be we careful not to have such conceit, How to prevent Satan's
policy herein.
or give such Epithet unto any blessings of God, as are proper attributes to
his Majesty as perfectly good, mighty, etc. which yet are ordinary in our
communion speech, unless the circumstances and manner of speech do restrain
within the true compass.

2 Neither let us absolutely measure the constant goodness of our gracious God
by any of them: as if we believed not more, then we felt, or expected not more
then we for the present enjoyed: persuading our selves even for the present,
that though the providence of God be subordinate unto means, yet to tie Gods
providence absolutely to them, is to make any Idol of the means; and an Idol
of God: and therefore, if we have means, Note.
let us so use them, as that by trusting in them, we do not ouerrate them: if
we have no means, yet let us not distrust our God, least we vnderrate his
power and freedom in government. Ps. 62. 10. Romans 4.

3 And seeing the true estimate of the blessing, proceeds from the Acceptance
of the person, and his right use thereof: therefore, let us not flatter our
selves, either because we have such and such above others; therefore we may now
highly esteem of our selves, and gifts: But rather labor we in the fear of
God to have the testimony of the acceptance of our persons: that so we may
have comfort in the acceptance of the blessing: And from the comfort of
acceptance, ground we the right use, and by the use measur^ we so the worth of
the blessing: as that we then discern it best when we see our unworthiness
most in the use thereof.

4 Lastly, fasten we stedsted fastly upon the merit of Christ, and look we in
him, unto the recompense of the reward: and so shall we prevent all ouerrating
of present blessings: as finding them to be swallowed up in these bottom less
fountains, and boundles Oceans of eternal happiness. Hebr. 11. 26. 1. Ioh. ^.
^.

Well, Thus we have now discerned two properties of an hypocrite, even in this,
that he makes himself Rich: Either he boasts of that which is not in him at
all, or else, what he has, he sets upon the Tenters; making it the worse for
use, by how much it is more in show, and so necessarily abusing the same to his
further condemnation.

Shall we now consider further the reason of all this: The holy Ghost resolves
us he Makes himself rich, he is not made rich; receiving Gods blessings in
mercy, but he makes himself rich, usurping, and encroaching upon the
blessings of God: whatsoever is lent him, for ye good of others, he claims
propriety as to his own, yea he pretends singularity; As whosoever were
poor, yet he is rich, none rich to him, he is more holy then any. Behold here
then two further properties of an hypocrite, whereby he makes himself rich.
And in the fear of God, let us try our selves by them.

First, He makes himself rich, That is, though he have no power of true
riches, nor any right use of them; yet he makes himself rich of that he has
no right in.

An Hypocrite is an usurper and encroacher upon the blessings of God: ^4.
Property of an hypocrite, an intruder upon Gods blessings.
though he have them, yet be has no right in them, they are not freely given,
but lent unto him, Reasons. 2.
he must pay the utmost farthing for the abuse of them. 1. They are for others
good, and not his own, he has them in anger, and not in mercy, 2 he is not
of Gods household, and therefore an Intruder himself, and how can he then but
intrude upon the blessings of God? 3. he comes in at the window and not at the
true door, Ioh. 10 And therefore he shall one day be indicted of forcible
entrance: Friend how come thou in hither? thou have no right in this
business, It is not for Tobiah, but for the true Israelite to build the house of
the Lord: And does not his manner of building prove him no less? does he not
build with untempered mortar? does he not pluck down with the one hand, what
he has built with the other? Is not his building the tower of Babell, to
outface heaven, and confound himself? Gen^s. 11. Ezech. 13. Use. 13. Ma. 22.

Learn we hence, Use. 1.
not to envy at the glory of an hypocrite? Are his feathers his own? when
each shall require his own, will not his Nakedness, be his shame, though
himself cannot be ashamed of it? when the Lord takes away his blessings,
because they are abused, when the world withdrawes her applause, because she is
inconstant: when the conscience recouers her feeling, being revived by divine
justice; when hell shall gape on him being enlarged by his delusions: shall he
not now be turned out naked, into everlasting vengeance? shall not the God of
this world that great usurper, and enuier of the divine power, by his limited
authority seize upon this usurper, And hail him, to most boundless, and
endless torments? Math. 27. Ierem. 6. Iesa. 66.

2 Learn we here therefore in ye fear of God, to try our selves whether we be
usurpers of Gods blessings or no. How we may try and prevent usurpation.


1 Do thou not come in at the right door? Is not Christ thine, and so all
thine? 1. Cor. 3. 3. 2. Is not thy person accepted, and so thy sacrifice?

^ Do thou stand upon thy merit: and not the mercy of thy God? 4. Do thou
pretend natures privilege, and not hold of grace? 5. Do not thou daily
renew thy right in Christ, and hold wholly and entirely of him? Do thou not
renounce thy self to be justified thereby, though thou know nothing by thy
self, 1 Cor. 4. 4. 5. that still thou may be found in Christ not having
thine own righteousness? 6. Do thou not still live by faith in the son of
God, Gal. 2. 20. so using present, as that thou forgettest them, in comparison
of what is to come? 7. Do thou not so enjoy the blessings of the God, as
that like a feeling member thou communicates them to others? Luke 22. 32. 33.
endeavoring to strengthen thy brethren and raise up such as be weak, Gal. 6.
1. Art thou not careful to give up thy account daily, by renewed repentance? 2.
Cor. 5. 9. 10. 9. Do thou not prepare thy self daily to a more full
possession, renou^cing the world, and dying daily to it; 1. Cor. 15. hungring
after Christ Jesus, that thou may enjoy his glorious presence? Surely if
these things be not in thee and abou^d 2. Pet. thou art no better the^ a thief
and a robber: thou shall one day be spoiled, because thou have spoiled others:
Thou have robbed God of his glory, and thy self of the true use, and comfort
of his blessings, thou have been straight ha^ded to thy poor breth^^^, in not
communicating unto them. And therefore the Lord will strippe thee thou
glorious sepulcher: thy skirts shall be discovered, and filthy nakedness
proclaimed, yea, thine own tongue, and wisdom shall fall upon thee. Isay.
47. Psalm. 64.

3 And therefore, seeing it is so dangerous to be an usurper: learn we in the
Name of God to prevent this great evil: As first,

1. Disclaim we Nature, and all the painted shows thereof. 2. And labor we
to renew our right alone in Jesus Christ: 3. That we may find him, let us
seek him in his own ordinance. 4. And that we may seek him aright: let us
seek him by Faith. 5. Having fou^^ the Lord JESUS, let us labor to be found
in him: denying our selves by unfeigned repentance. 6. Let us renew our
repenata^ce, that we may renew the evidence of our right in CHRIST: that so we
may be renewed to a further use, and increase of all his means, 7. Casting away
to this end every thing that presses down: and using the world, as if thou
use it not, 8. And so laboring after the best graces, that thou art still
contented to be abased, that God may have the glory, preferring the same even
before thine own salvation. Hereby thou shall approve thy right in Gods
mercies: by this thou shall prevent all intrusion, and usurpation of the same.
Romans I. Phil. 3. Ioh. 5. 35. Hebr. 4. 1. Phil. 3. 8. 9. Math. 16 Heb. 12. 1.
Cor. 7. 1. Cor. 12. Romans 9. Exodus 32.

4 Lastly, seeing the hypocrite is but an usurper of what he holds, 1. Cor. 3*
therefore let it comfort us, that as we have a right in all, so the small
things that we have shall be better then great riches of the ungodly. Psalm. 37*
And rather then fail, whatsoever the hypocrite has, as he has it for our
good and not his own, Job. 27.
so he shall prepare it for us, to prevent our care and trouble therein, but
we shall put it on, we shall divide the silver and enjoy the blessing that he
has abused, and usurped upon.

But how does the hypocrite prove himself to be an usurper? Behold says the
spirit, He makes himself rich: that is, though he has right in nothing, yet
he thinks himself the only man, whatsoever others have, yet he is rich, he
wants nothing: Nay in comparison of him, all others are but Beggars, profane
persons, uncircumcised, publicans: This is an other property of the hypocrite,
to despise all others, Property of ^n Hypo^rite, to des^ise and abase ^ll
others, ^ regard of ^imselfe.
in regard of himself, to affect singularity, and run to separation, stand
apart, come not near me: I am more holy then thou. So did the Pharisees,
those great Hypocrites, Esaias. 65.
separate themselves from the vulgar and publicanes: so do they account no
better of them, then of an accursed people that know not the law. Ioh. 7 47.
48. And thus further does the Hypocrite make himself rich. Wherein, mark (I
pray you) the particulars of this singularity, and ground thereof: that so we
may distinguish between things that differ, and learn so to maintain the bond
of communion, that still we separate the precious from the vile: that they may
return unto us and not we unto them. Ier. 15. 19

1. First, the Pharisees ground of singularity and separation, is Intrusion,
into Gods prerogative: Namely, And so proves himself an I(...)truder.
to judge of men's estates before the time, this people is accursed, so do they
judge of the vulgar and ignorant people, they take upon them to determine their
estate: A certain note of an accursed Pharisie, to account those accursed,
that are not of his Last, to condemn such as have not attained, or will not be
stinted by his mesure, and in the fear of God let us try our selves: 1
for this peremptory judging co^uinces us to be intruders: and therefore we may
fear, By peremptory judging.
that while we thus exclude others, Use.
our selves may be cast out, how came thou hither? will one day be ye enquiry,
and the issue is, Go, take him forth, and cast him, etc. Mat. 22

2. Consider we the particulars of this singularity, By unnecessary separation.
he will not wash with the publican, he will not eat with him, he will not
communicate with him, no not in civil occasions. Certainly, if it were in our
choice, to sort our selves, this were not amiss: In private where we have
power, to have such nere communication with gross and open sinners, is an
abuse of holy liberty. The man of God would not endure this, Ps. 101 and 119.
But here we must be wise, only to judge by the outward appearance, and the
present time, as for the har^, or state of the person, in the purpose of the
Almighty, these two only belong to the absolute, allwise, and allseeing God.
And therefore we must be able so to discern of the present state, so to tender
the same, as that the more apparent and dangerous the sin is, because now
there is most need, we must not fail to provoke to repentance.

And here we must also be patient toward evil men, bearing with them wisely,
and raising them up with the spirit of meekness, so long as they will endure
to be handled and launced of us. And yet in our launcing and searing, we must
be exceeding careful, that we neither take away any but the dead flesh. And
that we take it away tenderly, even by degrees, least Nature being desirous to
thruste out her Enemy, thrust out her self: and the conscience being humbled
for sin, be fainted in casting it out: Oh where is a Friend found, but in
the day of adversity? And therefore howsoever, we may not admit such to our
bosoms: Yet in the Name of God, let them come to our oratories, let them be
partakers of our prayers, though yet we may not admit them to our Tables:
fail we not to counsel them, though yet we may not comfort them.

And therefore though we are to deny them the seals of mercy, least they
should be puffed up before the time, as being admitted to the Feast, before
they have on their wedding garment. Yet are we to bring them, yea we may
safely compel them to come to the wedding, and to take hold of the Key of
mercy, the preaching of the Gospel, that so their hearts may be gaged and
opened to repentance. Math. 22

Comforting our selves, 1. that our labor shall not be in vain, though they
will not leave to be ashamed, Isay, 49. 1. 2. Zeph. And howsoever they shall
proclaim their impude^cy, by intruding upon ye things of God, thereby to hide
their sin, by affecting credit of profession, though we ought to be grieved
with their desperatenes, and so to eat the Passover with sour herbs. Yet
shall not their presence by Gods mercy drive us away, we have tried our selves
and so we may eat for our comfort and strengthening in Jesus Christ:
Howsoever they shall eat no better then Judgment for their boldenes and
presumption, 1. Cor. 11. 59. 20. Shall not to the pure all things be pure? Tit,
14.

Is the light of the Sun abased, by shining on the dunghill? Shall not the
Lord be glorified in accomplishing hereby his work, as well for the greater
condemnation of the wicked, that are now made more inexcusable, as for the
furtherance of his Childrens happiness, by trying their Faith and Patience, by
exercising their Wisdom, in this communion with the wicked?

Well, who so is wise shall understand these things, and to who^ the arm of
the Lord shall reveal them. But as for the Hypocrite, these things are hidden
from him: Luke, 19. 41. 42. John, 9. He is ordained to condemnation and yet
must flatter himself, that he is in the right way: yea, rather then he will
not choose the right, he will go alone, and seem to outrun all, he forsakes
the society, least it should stay him in his course: And so he makes himself
rich, in singularity and separation.

And thus have we a little traced the hypocrite in this mystery of iniquity:
Thus whiles he makes himself rich, in pretending to outrunne others, he
outrunnes Gods ordinances, and so loses himself. And these are the ends of
all his masking, he would not seem what he is, but rather, what he is not, and
so deceiues himself. And by his glorious shows he deceiues others: drawing
Disciples after him, and making them twofold more the children of hell then
they were before: As furnishing them with means to commit sin more greedily,
and yet to hide it more cunningly, that so being made more inexcusable, and
abusing great blessings, they may be beaten with many stripes. 2. Tim. 3. 13.

Whereby we learn, Use.
as to prevent and avoid singularity, 1. by suspending our judgment of others,
How to prevent fin^ gularitie.
2. and judging our selue, 3. by laboring especially after the power of
Godliness, 4. and measuring the same, by truth in the inward parts. So hereby to
try our selves, whether we be tainted with this leaven of the Pharisie or no.
And to order and guide our selves wisely in these evil days, that we may
maintain the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Ephesians. 4.

To this end, be we wise to observe the policies of the hypocrite in making
himself rich: as also carefully to discern the ends of this policy.

And here, let us not forget in the first place, that the ground of this
policy, is not so much to attain to any substance of riches, as rather to
conceal his poverty from himself, and others. To this end, howsoever he will
admit the letter of knowledge, Math. 5.
yet he cannot abide the spiritual power and application thereof, to search
his inward corruption And hence it is ye he will acknowledge no more then what
is broken out into Act. And herein also he is grown so wise, as to take notice
of no more, then the world discernes. And that he may seem to be perfect, or
at least, not be shamed: he will labor to hide, even what the world
apprehends. And to his purpose he has many fetches according to the divine
Justice meeting with him in his wisdom, and confounding the same.

As first, because he boasts of the pride of the holy mountain, How the
Hypocrite hides his vileness.
and will still have religion to be his cloak to hide sin. Therefore does
the Lord according to his desire offer him such deceivers as may now wilfully
blind him. And thus he heapeth up teachers according to his own lusts, 2.
Tim. 4. 2. which may not only help to excuse, and diminish sin, crying
peace, peace, God is merciful: what need this strictnes, have not all their
infirmities: but may further also cry aim to his lusts, prophesying of new
wine and strong drink, yea promising constancy and security in this belly
happiness, to morrow shall be as to day, and much more abundant. Mich. 2. Esaias.
56. Ierem. 6.

And if now it shall so fall out that the Lord shall make such deceivers vile
before the people, Malach. 2. giving up to gross wickedness, to their just
reproach before men that thus abase the ordinances of God to the satisfying of
their lusts: Amos. 7.
So that now the Prophet shall be come an example of his own loose and corrupt
doctrine: Oh what a warrant, proves this to the hypocrites licentiousnes? have
not they knowledge? are not they my guides? if I do as they say; Nay what they
say, they confirm by practice; may not I safely imitate the same? behold here
another means, whereby the hypocrite justify himself.

And yet that his confusion may be the greater, even wherein he affects
perfection: Behold a further degree of Gods Justice, in giving him to this
policy, that he which can device starting holes for himself to break out
into all licentiousnes; yet to color his vileness, Note.
he must now put on a face of severity and strictnes against others: not only
restraining them wherein himself takes liberty, as if he had some privilege
to sin, or could more command repentance, but whispering many times in their
care, Math. 2.
that they must do as he says and not as he does: Thus does he further hide
his own nakedness, by reproving others, and by looking too much abroad, he
becomes stark blind at home. And if now in looking abroad, he can stumble at
some straw, finding somewhat amiss, though he have no calling to amend it, or
at least have greater reason to see the good he enioyes, and so in thankefulnes
to use ye good, mourning so for the evil, that he maintain the peace of the
Church. Oh what a further occasion, does this prove not only to hide his
former nakedness, but much more to enrage and increase the same: so just is the
Lord to confound him in his policies; so merciful unto his Church to make him a
Physician to the same: Now must he be accounted the only zealous man that can
cry out against abuses? Now must he hide his own nakedness, by clamouring
against the nakedness of his betters: Now personal abuses must be imputed to
the callings: and the abuse of the calling, must necessary challenge the goodness
thereof.

And if now he can prove so happy, Act. 4.
as to draw disciples after him, because the multitude is apt to affect
novelties, and especially through envy grows disconte^t with superiors, Rich
in followers.
that so he may become a leader of a Faction, and have the multitude to
justify what himself shall practice: will not this be a further means to
hide sin? Nay will not this give occasion to broach new Opinions, that so his
followers being still entertained with more matter, might less look unto the
nakedness of their leader, might more admire, and so be dazeled with his rough
garment. I mean pretense of zeal, and further illumination? Practice of the
Anabaptist.
will not this prove a notable means to advance our hypocrite in the hearts of
these deceived people, even above all that is called God? Especially, if we
shall consider, a further policy of Satan, namely, under pretense of
reformation to make way for further liberty in the flesh, by hoping to make
spoil of the fat offals of popery (A shrewd spur to our carnal Reformers)
and further under pretense of this open strictnes, to claim privilege for
secret loosenes, especially under color of wilful poverty, to broake for
covetousness, for ye maintenance of the flesh; can the hypocrite desire more
then to have the glory of a Reformer. And yet make his belly his God, that his
glory may be his shame. And yet that he may keep his disciples in awe.

Add we hereunto, that other stratagem of the hypocrite, namely, to lay
grievous burdens on others, Math. 23.
which he will not himself touch with his little finger, so promising
liberty, as that it shall prove the greatest bondage: as being jealous to
loose his train which he only reserues to make booty of. Oh they must not be
free to try all things, to try the spirits, but they must swear to the
Judgment of their Oracle, Practice of the Jesuit.
and seek after no other: Gal. 4.
he is jealous over thine amiss, even to exclude them that they should love
none but him. Him only they must follow in his judgment, though they must not
follow him in his practice: nay though he every day vary in his Judgment, And
Seperatist Smith.
according to the gift of Illumination: Yet they must alter with him, though it
be from worse to worse, yea rather then he must want, they must be wholly
emptied; if he do but censure, they must tremble and submit, though it be
contrary to the word, yea contrary to himself. In a word, they must be mere
slaves and bauds to his lusts enduring to be brought into bondage, Cor. 11.
yea smitten on the face (and yet esteem themselves highly graced as suffering
for the Gospels sake.) Behold the bondage of the hypocrites Proselites, ^y
making others ^ore both ^wardly ^d our^ardly.
and therein observe the riches of the hypocrite, how he makes himself rich in
enthralling the poor conscience? oh how triumphs by this means in the flesh
of his deceived followers?

And if now he can further yet get this start of the^, as to make them,
through his own inconstancy of opinion, upon pretense of new revelations, now
to stagger in their judgment, and so apt to be carried about with every blast
of vain Doctrine, as hereby they must necessarily be brought to seek of
their estates, and so to pin them wholly upon his sleeue: how does he by
this means now tyrannize over their consciences? How does he spoil and empty
them at his pleasure? Must they not now, though he should call in question
their salvation, yet yield unto it? And will they not be willing to give even
the first fruit of their body for the sin of their soul? What shall be too
dear to obtain a good look, some fair word to make such fools feign? does
not the Hypocrite here advance himself above all that is called God, presuming
to shut and open Heaven at his presu^ption to let in, and thrust out, whom he
pleases? Is not this his chiefest treasury whereby he preuails with all? Is he
not especially rich by this presumption, to bind and loose at his lust? Does
he not hereby promise security of his happiness unto himself? Does he not
now resolve that he sits as a queen, and shall never be removed? Revel. ^8.
Esaias, 47.

And is not this presumptuous usurping of the power of God: a just occasion to
provoke the Lord to fight against him, and to give him up wholly to a further
delusion; even to fall to further presumption in sin, that so the Lord may
not be merciful unto him? Does not this security give the bridle unto sin?
Is not the measure of sin hereby made up? And does not the vengeance hang
over his head? But can the Hypocrite discern the plague? No surely: The god of
this world does yet further blind him: He still says he is rich, and wants
nothing: For can he want so long as God has mercy? Has he not had good
experience? And can the Lord fail him? shall not all things turn to the
further advancement of the mercies of God? And may he not therefore sin,
that grace may abound? Romans 6. And though he do continue in sin, can God
forget to be merciful? Thus does the Just Lord give up the Hypocrite to
presumption, on his mercies, as a just punishment of his presumptuous intruding
into his absolute sovereignty. And thus is now the Hypocrite only rich in
presumption: he sowes the wind, and must necessarily reap the whirlewinde.
For, shall not the Jealousy of the Lord break out against such presumptuous
sinners, that in vain do flatter themselves in their iniquity? shall they
not at length be found out in their month? shall not their iniquity appear
worthy to be hated of God and men? Ierem. 2. Psalm. 36. 4. 5. Surely, the Lord
will not be merciful unto him, that thus^ adds drunke^nes unto Thirst,
blessing his soul, that he shall have peace though he walk after the
stubbornness of his heart: Deuter. 29. 18. 19. Though he has a long time
held his peace, yet will he cric like a Traveling woman, he will destroy and
devour at once: Isay, 42. 15. And yet see a further power of delusion: My
Master has deferred his coming; Matthew 24. 1. Pet. 3. 4. And therefore where
is the promise of his coming (says the Hypocrite?) And thus does he make
himself further rich, in abusing Gods patience. Thus does he open his mouth
against Heaven, and defy the Justice of the Lord, Abuse of Gods patience.
that whereas the Lord in great patience bears with such vessels, as are
appointed to greatest condemnation: Does not the wicked abuse this patience, to
the nourishing and defense of his presu^ption? Is he plagued like other men?
Has not he been spared when others have smarted? Psalm. 73. and therefore does
not the Lord love him? Nay, is he not more righteous then others? And if now
this patience of the Almighty, Abuse of Prosperity.
shall be a means of the continuance and increase of his prosperity, does not
this further increase this delusio^? would the Lord so bless him, if he did
not love him: If his paths were not acceptable, could he so wash his feet in
butter? could he so abound and increase?

And has not Satan yet a further means to increase this delusion? yea
surely, the prosperity of fools shall prove their destruction: Pro. 1. The
more the Hipocrite enioyes the pleasures of sin, the less does he think of
GOD as he should: the more does he conceive basely of him. And because the
Lord holds his peace, therefore does he conceive, that either the Lord sees
not, and so denies his providence, or else he will neither do good nor eull: and
so denies his Justice: or else he is like un to him, he likes of his sin, and so
denies and depraues his goodness. But will the Lord take this at the hypocrites
hands? Surely no: Behold, because when he knows God, seeing he will not
glorify him as God, therefore shall he be given up to are probate sense: Eue^
to call Light darkness, and darkness light: Isay, 5. 19. Isay, 3^. 3. Flattering
himself hereby in his Iniquity, though he commit it with greedines, and
blessing his soul herein, as a great purchase, that now his conscience can
excuse for sin, that so with authority he may more securely revel therein.
And thus through custom of sin, his deceived conscience becoms at length past
feeling: And this proves a further^ occasion to increase this delusion, that
now his estate is good, All is well with him: seeing the Bird in the bosom
has lost her tongue, the dead Conscience says nothing to the contrary.

And if now all being hushed at home, the cry shall go well abroad, the world
shall so flatter the Hypocrite, because he sawnes upon it: does he not make
himself rich with the words of men? Is not his case good, seeing all speak
well of him?

And say that some in the world will not be measured by his line, say that his
holiness is confounded by some one in a City, or two in a Tribe, some rare
Byrds that the world knows not, and is not worthy of; Yet shall not this any
whit take down the conceit of his Riches: his estate is yet good enough,
though he cannot attain unto them: For why?

Does not God bestow his graces diversely, to some one, to some five talents, and
yet he that has but one, has thereof sufficient: will God require any more at
his hands then he gives?

May not the prime times require greater strictnes the^ those that come after,
will not a less measure serve at one time, then at an other? May not less be
required of him then of other men?

Nay, has he not more reason to be borne withal then others, he has had
more hindrances, and therefore though he have less, may it not be sufficient?
And though he come short of some, yet does he not exceed others? and may it not
be presumption, to seek to be with the foremost? nay, is it not dangerous to
be singular, and to be like nobodie?

And does not the Hypocrite now make himself rich, in his pretended zeal, for
the preservation of unity, curbing and suppressing all true measure of
holiness, as being singularity, and so an enemy to Concord? Revel. 14. Does not
he think to do God good service, In compelling to his measure? that so he
may yet further flatter himself in his riches, because none shall exceed him?

And does not this power of delusio^ make way for all desperate wickedness, Is
not the measure of sin hereby hastened? does not the Lord now put in the
sickle? Is not the dead conscience now revived to begin the execution? and yet
for all this the hypocrite will make himself rich: Either now his repentance
must hereby be appoued of the Church, and so be received again to do more
mischief: or else if he cannot be received of the Church, Note.
he will set up a new Sinagogue of his own, by despising the ordinary
means, as too base for his illuminated spirit, whereas indeed he reiects the
means, because they enraged his conscience.

Thus does he mask it still under his veil of holiness, Anabaptis^ Familists.
that so he may commit sin more greedily without controulment, pretending he
has the Annoynting, and so no need of the word, when in truth he hates ye
word as conuincing his conscience. And casts it from him, that he may take his
fill of sin, and so makes himself only rich in the devils treasure, and yet
pretends the riches of the blessed Spirit. Behold the polices of the Anabaptist
and Libertine the familist and Papist. And yet does not Satan help the^ with
another policy, that they may make themselves rich? Surely, as harlots when
they want natural beauty, use to adulterate their feature with paintings
thereby to seem that which they are not: Even so the hypocrite wanting the
inward beauty and power of religion, labors to enrich himself in the outward
form thereof, and as if the native form were to plain and abject, behold he
adulterates the same with far fetched painting; borrowing some colors from the
Jew, and some ornaments from the Gentile: And so makes himself rich in
whorish fashions, and outward pomp.

Behold the height of Antichrists wisdom, Use.
And blessed be God for the truth of the Gospel: yea blessed be the name of
his Majesty for ever, that gives us hearts to labor, the power and
simplicity thereof. Shall not the Lord root out every plant which his own hand
has not planted? Shall he not advance his blessed Son Jesus upon his holy
hill of Sion? Certainly Antichrist is falling, and the Jews must come in: and
happy is he that can possess his soul in patience: that can keep himself
unspotted of this present world? Does not the blessed word abide with us? and
is it not able to make the man of God perfect to every good work? The Lord
make us thankful for the good things we enjoy: If we be faithful in a little,
shall we not be entrusted with greater blessings? If we believe, shall we not see
greater things then these? Only let us be so wise to discern these cloakes of
shame, as not to stumble at them: what is good in the hypocrite, let us not
refuse, because he does abuse it: what is evil in him, let us so detes^, as
that still we love his person, and labor his reclayming. So shall he return
unto us, and not we unto him, though we be all in all unto him that we may
win him unto Christ Jesus: so if we cannot better him, yet he shall not make
us worse, though happily we may be abased by his malice and frowardnes, yea
ought to be humbled that the Church is troubled with him. But shall be not he be
troubled that troubles Israel. Behold and tremble at the issue hereof, does he
not very fearfully deceive himself and others? Yea surely.

The evil and unbelieving shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being
deceived. 2. Tim. 3. 13.

Observe how the glorious Lord confound the wisdom of the wise, and takes
them in their own craftines.

First the hypocrite deceiues himself. As

First he is blinded, he knows not his own estate, and so must needs be
deceived because he will not see it. And so is given up.

2 To conceive better of it then it is. And because he will not take the pains
for a better, therefore he deceiues himself esteeming this sufficient. And to
this end he deceiues himself further.

3 By rejecting the power of the word which might lead him to a further
measure: upon pretense that he has no need of it, or it is not sufficient to
inform him.

4 Choosing such false waights, as may make his copper cu^r^nt, as, Example,
and reuelatro^, tradition, multitude: And that he may yet furter deceive
himself, Behold,

5 He abuses the true Rule to further this delusion: either sticking in the
letter, and so deceiving himself thereby in an outside holiness, or abusing the
same to justify his ambitious tyranny, over the consciences of men: Nay, he
cannot keep himself within this narrow compass, unless he also abuse the
Lord of glory himself, and so further deceiues himself most dangerously
hereby To this end he arrogates the prerogative of God, to Judge of men's
estates, that the Lord may Judge him justly, that unjustly Judges of others.
Thus does he encroach upon, and abuse his Justice in corder^ning the righteous,
and absoluing the wicked, that so he may be an abomination to the Lord. Thus
does he presume of his mercies, that he may exclude repentance. Thus does he
abuse Gods patience to nourish security, that so a sudden destruction may
come upon him. And thus does the hypocrite deceive himself.

And does he not also deceive others.

Yea surely, and that many ways, and so also deceives himself by increasing
his condemnation.

As first he deceives them of their outward estates under pretense of
devotions devouring their substance, and emptying their purses upon a vain
hope to have some true riches for their souls.

Secondly, he deceiues them in their estimation and good name, making them
either partakers with him in his filthiness, or else for the credit of
profession to conceal and justify the same.

Thirdly he deceiues them in the maine matter, of their salvation. And that

1 In their affections: making them through his scandal, to hate religion
before they know it, and so keeps them out from entering into the fould.

2 In their Judgments when they are entered: either stinting them to the letter
of the word, or his sense thereof: not enduring the trial of the spirit: or
upon pretense of insufficiency in the word; stumbling them with his own
fancies in steed of Gods revealed will: and so keeps them from practice, as
being not certain what to do.

3 In their practice he also deceiues them: as either tying them to his scant
measure, or stumbling them by his crooked turnings and wanderings out of the
way, whereby either they never attain to the right way of practice, or else
are turned out of it again, Gal. 3. by his profane and deceitful walking.
And so he further deceiues them of the true recompense, either provoking to
vain glory, or deceiving of others for the satisfying of the flesh, by
attaining honors, riches, etc. 2. Col. 23.

And thus he deceives himself and others.

1 The sum and use of all is,

That we wisely measure the glory of an hypocrite by the issue thereof, that
so we may not be dazeled and deceived thereby.

2 That we daily labor to see our poverty in our selves, that so we may seek
after the true riches, Math. 5.

3 That we account our only riches, the righteousness of Christ, apprehended by
faith, and transforming us into the same Image, from glory to glory, Plut. 3.
8. 9.

4 That we expect and hunger after these riches, not to be fully enjoyed in
this life, but rather to be obtained when corruption shall be put off. Phil. 3.
13.

5 That considering the terrors and glory of that day, we are daily made
manifest unto our God, and also unto the consciences of such his servants, with
whom we are most co^uersant. 2.Cor.5. 11.

6 That we endeavor the hastening of the appera^ce of Christ, and our own
fitnes thereto, by plucking some daily from some noisome lust. 1. Cor.13.

And prepare we our souls daily to afflictions that so suffering with Christ
we may reign with him. 2. Tim. 2.

Even so Lord Jesus let thy Kingdom come, to subject us under thy Scepter,
that so we may be made meet partakers of that glorious Inheritance with the
Saints in Light. Thus far of the Estate of the Hypocrite and his wisdom in
making the best thereof. Now let us consider on the other side, the estate of
the Regenerate.

Hitherto thou have heard ( dear Christian,) of the true estate of the
Hypocrite: Namely, that he is worth nothing; all he has is only for the good
of others, and his own further condemnation. And that it may appear ye our
destruction is from our selves, thou have also heard of the Hypocrites carnal
wisdom, in the Husba^ding of his estate: Namely, that he makes himself rich;
Assuming the esteem and show of what he has not, that so he may the better
hide what he is, and so ripen his sin, and hasten his condemnation. And shall
not the consideration hereof cause thee to fear thine estate, and depart from
evil: daily? shall it not send thee to the true Touchstone, to try and
examine thy self?

Behold then a lively pattern follows for thy instruction, and being
directed hereby, thou shall find sound comfort. Though out of the former
discovery thou shall safely conclude, that there are but few good hearts, that
so thou may not content thy self with the broad way, yet shall thou now see
that God has not left himself without witnesses, thou shall not go alone.
Blessed be God thou have a clowd of witnesses, the way is well beaten and
traced for thee. And therefore in the name of God walk in it, and the Lord give
thee wisdom and understanding in all things.

And for thy better encouragement hereto; Take this short view of the subject
and sum of these ensuing Observations. Obser. I.

Doctrines and Observations, contained in this second Treatise.
1. The Elect alone is possessed with true and great Riches.

The Reasons hereof, and, hence concluded.
1. The Excellency of their Estate. 2. How we may know whether we are
partakers of this riches or not. 3. How we may preseru^ and increase this
Estate.
2. Gods Children are poor in spirit, though they have great Riches, Obseru.
they make themselves poor.

The Reasons hereof, together with the ground of this poverty, serving for
trial, as also.
2 the manner, and 3 Measure tending thereto, and 4 Lastly, the Practice and
Use thereof.
The Estate of the true Nathaniel.
That makes himself poor, Having great Riches.
Herein remember, First his Estate, having great riches.

Secondly, his Wisdom, in Husbanding the same; He makes himself poor.

WHat then is the Estate of the true Nathaniel? Surely He has great Riches: He
is not only Rich, but he has great Riches, Obseru.
and no marvel, For All is his, Because CHRIST is his, in whom are hidden all
the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge. The sincere Christian, a great rich
man.
Colloss. 2.3. To whom all power is given, in Heaven and Earth: Matthew. ^8 who
is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Revel. 16. and that not so much for
himself, as to make us Kings and Priests unto our God, yea through Christ, we
are Heirs even fellow Heirs, of a Kingdom Immortal and undefiled, that
fails not, and cannot be shaken, Revel. 1. Romans 8. Hebr. 12. 2. Cor. 5. 17.

2. Thus being in Christ, we become new creatures, and so are invested with
true Godliness, which is great gain, even durable riches, which the world
cannot strip us of, which shall continue and abide with us, us for ever, 1.
T^^n. 4. Prou. 8. Matthew. 6.

3. And enjoying Godliness, we are satisfied therewith, learning true
contentment in all things, as well to want as to abound: And so having nothing,
yet we possess all things: Phil. 4. 2. Cor. 6. Though the wicked have
prosperity, yet we fret not at it, though we endure affliction, yet are we
exceeding rich, in joy unspeakable and glorious, yea rich in conquest* and rich
in patience, that we may not fainte. Psalm. 37. 1. Pet. 1. 8 Romans 8. Iac. 1.

4 Thus as in Christ we obtain the right, and royalty of all things, so also
by him we receive grace to use them aright. And so though in the Justice of
God, we might be accounted unprofitable Servants, yet through the merit of
CHRIST we become rich in good works, growing in grace, and increasing mightily
in ye power of godliness, eue^vn till we shall be filled withal fullnes of God:
Ephesians. 3. Luke ^7.10

5. And howsoever our portion of this life be usually but a small thing, yet by
the blessing of God it is great riches, as being much better the^ great riches
of the ungodly: both in that we have grace to use it well: and it is also as a
pledge of further heavenly riches as by the true use whereof, storing up a good
foundation against the day of Christ Jesus, Psalm. 37. 1. Tim. 6.

6. And to say the truth, would there be any riches in the World, would there
be any world continued, but for the Elects sake? though for the Elect, the
worlds time shall be shortened, that they might more speedily enjoy the fulness
of their riches. Nay, Is not the riches of the wicked, treasured up for the
just? Are the worldlings any other the^ the childrens Factors, and Stewards to
bring it in, and lay^ it out for them? Matthew. 24. Job. 27.

7 What shall we say, if any be rich for the present, it is only the true
owner, he may justify his estate. he may only promise security thereof: if
any be rich in hope, surely the child of God i^ the only man, who is the
undoubted heir of the immortal and superexcellent weight of glory, which ca^
not be co^c^iued by the largest heart. 1. Cor. ^. 2. Cor. 4.

And to conclude, even when he seems to be most poor, then is the child of
God m^st rich, then is the trial of his faith, then is he most rich in Hope,
most fervent in prayer, most glorious in patience, then has he most boldness
and interest in the favor of God, then is he sent to renew his estate in the
merit of Christ, and so is partaker of the exceeding riches of the mercy of
his God. Ephesians. 2. And is it not great equity that he that is poor in the
world, should be rich in faith? ^acob. 2. Is it not meet that if Dives have his
portion in this life, Lazarus should have his portion of comfort which the
other despised? Luke 16. Does not profane Esan contemn the birthright in
comparison of the mess of pottage? Genes. 27. And is it not just with God to
give them this Heavenly pearl, that like wise merchants are content to sell
all they have to buy the same? 2. Tim. 4 Matthew. 13 10. Is it not meet, that the
members should be conformable^ to the head? 11. Can the members be poor, when
all treasures belong to the head? 12. Must they not be made rich and abounding
in good works, least they may seem to labor in vain? 1. Cor. 15. 13. Are
they not to be purged that they may bring forth more fruit, Ioh. 15. 2. that so
they may be pertakers of that glorious inheritance with the Saints in light.

And are they not rich in humility that they may still be more enriched by
Christ are they not rich in patience to expect the recompense of the reward.
Thus abasing themselves? are they not exalted? are they not increased in riches
by making themselves poor. Behold the estate of the Saints: they have chosen
the better part. Luke 10. They have great riches, Jesus Christ: and all things
with him. A blessed portion, making them truly blessed: are not their lines
fallen in pleasant places, have they not a goodly inheritance? Ps. 16. that
have heaven for their Kingdom, and the earth for their footestoole, that have
all good things here to enjoy, and so fitted by these things to fulness of joy.

1. Behold then the estate of the Saints of God, And tell me if any may compare
with him in happiness? Do not they, I pray you, serve the best master? have
not they the best father that thus prouides for them? Is any God like unto
their God, that does so unto them that wait upon him? Esaias. 64. 5. And shall
we then repent us of our choice? shall we think it is in vain to serve this
blessed God? Psalm. 23. Mal. 3. 3. Shall we not be enc^uraged to his service,
though we must run through fire and Water to such a wealthy place, by the
recompense of so great a reward.

1. Have we any cause to doubt, seeing all shall turn to our good? Nay, Are
not our afflictions the bruches of Gods favor? Is not our Gold thereby Refined,
and made more pure and durable? Hebr. 11. ^6. Ps. 66. Romans 8. 29.

3 Oh let us distrust all other portions, Of Trial.
if we have not our part in this riches: And if ever we have tasted how sweet
the Lord JESUS is, let us not seek after great matters, seeing Christ is
sufficient. If God shall cast upon us earthly possessions, let not our hearts be
set up on them, Psalm. 62. 10. least we exclude this heavenly treasure: If the
Lord shall empty us of outward things, yet let it suffice that we cannot loose
the best treasure: Nay, let it comfort our hearts, that now we have more
trial of our love thereto: nay, more le^sure^, and occasion to employ the same.

And yet howsoever the world may basely esteem of us, for want of these outward
things, Hebr. 11. Ioh. 16. 2. and shall think it does God good service in
stripping us of them: yet let us here learn to overcome evil with good: Romans
12. praying for them that persecute us, and doing good to them that hate us:
that so we may prove our selves the Sons of our heavenly Father: and so
maintain our Right in this heavenly inheritance, preparing our selves hereby
graciously thereunto. Math. 5.

4 And seeing the Saints have only the true, and great riches: All are beggars
and banquerouts in comparison of them: let this teach us what to think of such
Ignorant Protestants, and obstinate Papists, what of al Turks and Infidels,
that yet are without Christ, surely they are a poor people and without
understanding, Ierem. 4. 22. they have no part in Christ, and therefore no
portion of heavenly riches. And therefore let this provoke us further, to
lament their estates, and to mourn for the general ignorance of the Land: Let
us acknowledge the Justice of God in pleading his controversy against the
same, Use. 4.1. because there is no knowledge of God in the Land. And if the
Lord has emptied us of our wine and oy^^, our first borne, his outward
blessings, if we sow much and reap little, and that which we reap be put into
a broken bag Agge. 1. 9. Let us consider the true cause, because the house of
God lies wast, we despise, and reject the true and spiritual riches. And
therefore let us learn the true remedy. First secke the kingdom of God and
the righteousness thereof, and then all these things shall be cast upon us.
Math. 6. 33. And seeing the harvest is great, and the laborers few tha^ should
bring unto us these heavenly treasures.

Oh let us mourn, especially, for the hand of God, in this particular
Judgment:

4 And let Ezechiel be asigne of the consumption decreed, Ezech, 12. Esaias, 28.
22. Oh let us pray for, and labor the conversion of our brethren, Let us not
forget the Firstborne of our Father, of whose fatnes we are now partakers, who
has been made poor, that we may be made rich: seeing our poverty now sh^l
be the means to enrich him again.

Howsoever; Let every one labor to save his own soul: Laboring to store up
against the days of ^amine, And to employ his Talent, while there is yet
light, John, 12. That so he may maintain and increase his estate: Is not the
night coming, when no man can work? are not the shadows drawing to the West?
Romans 11.

And seeing many boast of their Riches and Righteousness, and yet who can find
^ Faithful man? Proverb. 6. Therefore in the fear of God, labor we to try
our estates, whether we are partakers of that durable Riches.

Surely, Rules of Trial.
by Nature we are stark Beggars: and by abuse of the means of grace we
become Desperate Banquerouts: even twice dead, and plucked up by the roots. And
therefore if we would approve our selves to have this heavenly riches, we must
not rely on our nature, any glory thereof, seeing the wisdom thereof is
enmity against God, excluding the hope of heavenly riches. Romans 8* 7.

1 Would thou the^ attain to the true riches in Christ, Let thy first
practice now be to discern thy natural poverty, (by the means before laid
down.) 2. And having discerned thine estate in nature, thou must in the next
place, deny thy self, Math. ^6. 22. acknowledging, that neither in nature is
there any dram of this true riches, neither can nature further thee
thereunto. Nay thy greatest enemy in ye obtaining thereof, thou shall find to
be even thine own wicked heart: thy best wisdom, and counsel, will cause
thee most to rebel against thy God, and resist thy chief good: Esaias.

47. Thus shall thou prepare thy self to receive this heavenly treasure, by
emptying thy heart of ^ what cannot profit, and so castingaway such
impediments, thou shall be in some measure fitted to entertain the same.

1 To this end take unto thee the true glass which many discover truly unto
thee thy natural estate, namely, the law of God. Romans 7. And when thou have
seen thy face therein, cast not away the glass, least thou forget thy true
feyture, lacob.1. But rather reuiewe thy self often therein, according to the
checks of thy conscience, co^uinced by the word, and make use of such outward
Afflictions which do accompany the word, the rather to abase the pride of thy
flesh, and to confound thee in thy carnal happiness And prosecute the Enditement
of thy conscience by Justifying the Lord, and condem^ing thy self, arraigning
thy self, at the bar of his Majesty, and casting down thy self at the
Throne of his Grace, begging Pardon instantly for thy sins, and quite
renouncing all thy former ways; That so thou may be found in CHRIST, not
having thine own righteousness.

Now that thou may be found in CHRIST, thou must (in the next place) labor
to seek CHRIST, where he may be found, Esaias, 35.

And now thou must seek him in those his precious promises of the Gospel:
Apprehending ( through him alone) free pardon of all thy sins; And so
recovering grace from him, to walk in new obedience.

And least seeking him here, thou might happily miss of him, thou must
seek by Faith, that so thou may apply these promises in particular, unto
thine own Soul: And thou must wait with Patience, at the gates of Wisdom,
being contented to submit thy self to the means, till thy heart be captiuated
therewith, and thy whole man brought in subjection to the obedience of Jesus
Christ. Proverb. 8.

And lastly, thou must seek in perseverance and constancy of endeavor, Ye
though thou fail in practice, yet the willing mind may be accepted, according
to that which thou have. 2. Cor. 8. 12. resolving thy self, that thy great
riches, stands rather, in the acceptance of thy endeavors, then in any worth of
thy weldoing, though yet thou shall exceed herein the Scribe and Pharisie. Yea
ye God may ^aue only the glory of all his mercies. Let this be the trial of
thy greatest riches: that though the Lord bestow great things on thee, yet thou
see thy self most unworthy of them. Genes. 32. Yea the more graces thou
receiuest, the more thou art abased by them, Yea in the greatest sense of Gods
favor, thou art so emptied of all carnal confidence, that thou then most
fear thy self, when grace does most abound: that so thou may work out
thy salvation in fear and trembling. Phil. 2. 12. And yet in thy greatest
abasings, thou must give glory to thy God, in depending on his precious
promises beyond al feeling thereof, though he should kill thee, yet trusting
in him.

And seeing thou art an Heir, and not an Hyreling, Romans 8. Job. 1. Se^uing
GOD, not simply for what he gives, but because he commands, and merely for
his glory, doing his will cheerfully: therefore howsoever, he has promised
thee Heaven for thy service, and to encourage thee thereunto, does enable thee
by faith, to see a far off, and to have respect unto the recompense of that
reward, yet herein shall be the trial of thy greatest riches: that not
simply for that reward, thou performest obedience unto God, but as (rather
then the glory of GOD shall be diminished, thou could be contented to be
without thy greatest happiness: Exodus 32. Roman. 9. because thy chiefest
happiness, shall be attained and enjoyed, in giving glory alone unto thy God,
so that thou may the better be prepared to that happiness.

Thou shall still deny thy self: so far to give glorievnto thy GOD; and
that in thy best endeavors thou shall discern thy greatest unworthiness, that
thy God may have the glory of all his free mercy, in thy greatest Feelings of
joy, and partakings of comfort, thou art most emptied of all Pride and
confidence. That so, Security being prevented, thou may still by Faith see
a far off, and run with joy the race that is set before thee. Hebr. 12. 5.
Romans 4. giving God the glory, still in hoping above hope. Yea interressing
hereby thy self daily, as an heir, in the assurance of thy heavenly
possession, by this, that though thou art now the son of God, yet because
thou know est not what thou shall be, Ioh. 3. 1. therefore thou art careful to
walk so far as thou know: so making sure thy election by constancy and
power of weldoing, 2. pet 1. 10. that it is rather thy comfort, that thou have
done the will of thy God; yea rather herein thou art comforted, that thou see
in thy shortness of weldoing, thy unworthiness, and so have no cause of thy self
to expect that glorious recompense, that either any such glorious prize
remains for thee: or that there is any proportion betwixt thy finite and
corrupt obedience, and that infinite and most perfect recompense of the reward?
Romans 8.

And therefore, as thou can not so serve thy God, as by the worth thereof, to
obtain, and expect that recompense, so yet that thy free obedience may more
graciously be manifested, though there were no such recompense, yet thou
could willingly serve thy God, eue^ for the worth and goodness that thou
discernest in him, though no other goodness should herein redound unto thee,
then that herein thou have approved thy self a loving and obedient child to
so gracious a father.

Thus shall we attain these heavenly treasures. And thus we may also try our
selves, whether we do truly enjoy them or no.

And seeing it is as great a virtue ( to preserve and increase) as to obtain
the same, Rules how to increase.
therefore learn we further, how to increase in grace, how to thrive in
heavenly substance.

1 To this end know we, that the means of obtaining, must be the only means
of increasing.

2 By Christ we obtain this riches, through the ministry of the word, and
therefore by the same means we must increase the same. 1. Pet. 2. 1.

3 Submit we our selves therefore constantly to a powerful ministry, whereby
the graces we enjoy, may still be stirred up, and provoked to use, and
knowledge may be increased to see our wants, and our wants may besupplied, by
seeking still to be renewed in Christ. And hereby try we our selves, if ever we
truly attained this heavenly riches, then surely we shall not either fall to
no ministry, or to liuelesse and flattering means (as the manner of
hypocrites is) but rather still keep our selves from security and Apostasy,
by cleaving to a sound and conscionable ministry. And lest hereby we deceive
our selves.

2 Therefore in the next place, Let us labor that the word may come home, and
dwell with us in our families, and private ways, Coll. 3. 15. that it may be
the guide of all our courses, and keeper of us in a constant course of
Godliness: not entertaining it by starts, or only making it an Idol, when we
come abroad: but informing our Judgments daily hereby, and reforming our lives
also by this rule. And this is my intent in the Daily sacrifice.

3 And yet that these things may be so in us, that they may abound, labor we
thirdly, to revive our estate daily in Christ, by renewed repentance, from whom
only we must derive all our durable riches. 2. Pet. 1. 8. 9. Romans 12. 12.

4 Yea that we indeed may thrive in all the graces of God, seeing that we are
enriched in every part at the first in some measure: no faculty of the soul,
but is in some measure renewed, yea the members of the body made conformable to
the will of God, Note*
Romans 6. therefore that we may grow in grace, and increase this heavenly stock,
Let us labor to come forward, in each part together, having that principal
care of the greatest, that we neglect not the least as having respect to all
Gods commandments, Psalm. 119. 8 so maistering one sin, that we give no
indulgence to any; least the least thiese remaining, let in all the rest at
pleasure: so laboring the inward man, as that we also bring forward the
ou^ward, having our conversation holy, as that which must try our inward
sincerity: that so our whole nam, even body, and soul, and spirit, may be
kept blameless, unto the day of Christ Jesus. 1 Thessalonians. 5.

5 And to this end, because without the remainde^, we shall not be perfited:
therefore, Hebr. 11.
that we may thrive our selves, let us labor to bring on others with us,
watching over each other by an holy Iealou^ly, and gracious admonitions, yea as
need shall require, saving with fear plucking some out of the fire. Iud. 22.
22. Ezekiel. 32.

6 And seeing our blessed GOD alone, will perfect the work, which he has
beg^n in us, 2. Phil. 6. Ephesians 6. therefore be we instant with him, in fervent
prayer, that he would hasten his work, and glorify himself perfectly in us,
and though for temporal things we are to beg with condition, both in regard
we know neither what is fit, neither what measure is most convenient for us,
yet concerning heauen'y blessings, we are to coue^ and desire the best graces.
1. Cor. 12. And therefore take we heed of entertaining such delusions in
judgment* that we may be too holy, that such a measure will serve the turn.
But rather resolve we, that we can never sufficiently be thankeful unto our
blessed God, for his mercies bestowed and provided for us, Psalm. 16.
yea acknowledge we that when we have done all we can, we are but unprofitable
servants. And therefore, howsoever we fail in practice, Luke 17. 10.
yet let us stand sound in judgment that God is worthy of the best, that
though we condemn our selves, yet we may justify our God, that he, may not
judge us, according to our unworthiness.

8 And though we can not in practice, answer our purposes, yet let this be a
means to continue our spiritual thrift, that here we give not over practice
at all, because we cannot attain perfection herein (as the manner of the
A^hiest is) neither stint our practice by any false rules, 1. of example,
multitude, flesh and blood, our own ability, custom, etc. (as if because we
cannot do what we would, or should, therefore it is sufficient, ^ to do what
we may: can flesh and blood do more? ^. Or to do as others do, Z^cha. 3.
would you have us like no body, monstrous person^? 3. Nay would you have us
hypocrites, taking more upon us then we can do? ^or all this will prove no
better then the plea of the hypocrite. But rather, let us justify God, by
endeavoring what we cannot do, and let us condemn our failing in practice
from the constancy of our purpose, proposing the best pattern, though we come
short thereof: that it may appear we hold by mercy, and not by any merit of
our own, and resolving perfection, when we do but follow after it: that so the
Lord may Crown our constant resolutions, with such a measure of practice,
which may in truth answer our desires, though in measure and extent, it still
came short thereof.

Comforting our selves, Use of Comfort.
that howsoever in ye worlds esteem, we are accounted most base and beggarly,
yea many times in our own Carnal eye, appear to be nothing, even to have
lost all, yea also sometime in our spiritual discerning, see our selves far
from great riches, yet notwithstanding, in the acceptance of the Almighty,
vouchsafing us in Christ, and inuesting us with his righteousness, we have right
in all riches, and by the assistance of the spirit, have so far use of them,
as shall fit us to fulness of happiness, in a better life: persuading our selves,
that either we may misiudge ou^ estate, esteeming it poor, when we are rich,
through violence of tentation, or want of spiritual Judgment, which shall not
be imputed unto us: or though we discern the truth, yet seeing we l^ue by
faith, seeing a far off unto the recompense of the reward, therefore, if now
in comparison of what we shall enjoy, we esteem of what we have already not
to be great riches. It is not because our estate is not rich indeed, but as a
drop is not discerned, being cast into the sea, so well may the sense of our
present riches, be swallowed up in the hope of that infinite sea of happiness
which is laid up for us.

And yet that we may not prove unthankful for what we have received, here ^.
let us compare our present estate in grace, with what we were in nature. And by
this it shall appear, How we may d^cerne ^^hat we have attained great riches.
we have attained to great riches. 2. Let us compare our selves with others
that mask it in their she shows, and we shall find, that our grfts are gold
in comparison of their dross; (...) least the abuse of our graces may seem to
diminish the worth of them, 3. Let us measure them by the free bounty of the
giver, and not by the weak hand of the receiver: 4. Let us consider them, not
by the possession, but by the use thereof: nay let us not rest in the use,
which at the best is imperfect, but rather comfort our selves with the
acceptance of our weldoing through Jesus Christ.

Let not the opinion of others prevail to diminish our estate. Let not the
suggestion of Satan deceive us herein, But labor we to measure our riches by
the truth of the word. And if ever we found any truth, Note.
and power thereof, know we for a certaintio, that the grace of God cannot be
in vain, once rich in Christ, and ever increasing, though not sensible to
flesh, yet justifiable by faith: though not discerning at all times, the
leading forward thereof, yet believing the promise, that God will perfect his
works. And in the accomplishment thereof, will work strangely, and by
contraries, that he alone may have the glory, bringing light out o^ da^^nes,
and turning all about to our good, which shall be discerned in the issue,
though for the present we may be to seek, that so we may live by faith, and
not by sense, giving glory unto our God, in hoping above hope. Yea though it
may fall out, that we shall have sometimes less riches then heretofore we have
had, Note.
having leftour first love, Even when we have le^ our first love.
and so wanting that life, and power in holy duties, not feeling that comfort
in them, as heretofore we have done, yet for all we may have great riches,
because we have that which shall be sufficient to conduct us to happiness, yea
happily more fitly, then the former measure, 1. seeing now we shall be more
exercised in says, by how much we have less feeling: 2. we shall now be more
humbled in the sense of this decay, Note.
and so be more purged of spiritual pride and hypocrisy, which might hinder
our following hard after the mark: 3. by humility, we shall be more fitter for
such communion with our blessed God, although it be not in the same manner as
was needful before, Note.
to confirm us in the truth and difficulty of a conversion, against these
troubles and contradictions which may call in question the same. Yet now it
shall be much more auayleable to further us to perfection. Benefits of our
decay.
1. As casting us more entirely upon the mercy of God in Christ Jesus, 2.
weaning us from the love of the world, and 3. provoking us to groan and hunger
after those durable comforts of a better life, seeing the best comforts here
are so short and mutable: 4. And making us more fearful and watchful to
preserve and recover what we may, that so we may be made meet for that glorious
Inheritance.

Thus are the Saints endued with great riches, thus do they manage and
increase the same: so the holy Ghost adds, that He mak^th himself poor:
the meaning whe^^ of, is not, that either he de^ieth what God has bestowed on
him, or d^ss^mble^h it to be less then indeed it is, neither that he plays
the ill Husband, and so diminishes his estate, in effect, though yet his
estate be subject to decays: B^t the blessed Spirit would herein commend unto
us the good husbandry of the Saints, who though they have great riches, yet in
wisdom They make themselves poor:

That is, because what they have is given, ^easons.
therefore they empty themselves of all desert thereof; And so ascribe their
righteousness to their maker. 1. Cor. 4. 7.

2 Because what they have, is at the best im^erfect: therefore they abase
themselves in hungring after a f^rther portion: ^hil. 3.
and so in comparison of what is before, forget what is behind: so rejoicing
in their present estate, as that they cannot measure Gods favor simply by it,
and so are abased and impaired in themselves: so comforting themselves in the
truth of grace, as that still they live by faith hastening to perfection, so
approving themselves by the present work, as that still they deny themselves,
that they may be found in Christ, by whom the work must be led forward to
perfection.

3 Because whatsoever we have, we are most unworthy of as of our selves,
therefore though we are rich in God, yet are we poor in our selves, abasing
our selves, and condemning our unworthiness, that we may be increased in riches,
by giving the glory only unto our God, of all his free mercies, who will
honor those that honor him.

4 Because, the least which we have is subject to most abuse; The more grace,
the more ^entations; therefore also does the child of God make himself poor,
not only fearing himself daily to prevent security, and so prepare for
tentation: but also i^dging himself daily, by renewed repentance, for giving
occasion to the tentation, and entertayning the same: and can he but make
himself exceeding poor, when he considers how he yields to the tentation?
must he not abase himself that he may advance the free mercy of God that
sanctifi^s the tentation, though it preuailes for a time, turning his very
sins to good, all together furthe^ing his happiness, has he not cause here to
mag^^fie the ^ree mercy of his God? Does he not make himself more poor, the
more he aduanceth Gods mercy?

5 Yea, has he not cause to fear most, when he gets most ground of tentation;
when he attaines greatest conquests, is partaker of most sweetest comforts,
Saints most fear, when they have greatest graces.
lest these comforts should prove occasions to the flesh, lest he might be
puffed up thereby, to rob God of his glory? has he not now most need to be
in his own eyes v^le? has he not now greatest cause to glorify his God, and
does he not give God most glory in these his grea^^st denial of himself?

6 Seeing the Saints though they have great riches, in regard of the new man,
yet 2 still they are exceeding, 3 poor in the old, therefore seeing 4 the
means to grow in the spirit, 5 is to decrease in the flesh: 6 Is it not then
great wisdom to crucify the Old man, daily, and mortify the deeds of the
flesh, that so the new man may grow to perfection? Col. 3. 5. Romans 8. 10. 11.
15.

7 And seeing it is the Lord, that as he gives the Blessing, so he only
gives grace to use it aright. And at the least we must no more abase the same,
we have not ability at all to use it aright, ought we not in this respect to
make our selves poor, both acknowledging our sufficiency to be of God, ^.
Cor. 2. and not of our selves: How to abase our selves in the gifts of God.
Confessing that in us, that is, in our flesh, dwells no good thing: Romans 7.
2. Ascribing only unto the Lord the will and the deed. Phillip. 2.

Yea, especially condemning our selves, even when we have done our best, that
so we may not be judged of the Lord, Luke 17. 10.

8 And seeing that though we know nothing by our selves, yet hereby we are
not justified: Have we not cause herein to make our selves poor? still
denying ourselves, that we may be found in CHRIST, 1. Cor. 4. 4.

9 Ye^, especially, seeing we know not our own heart, we may be deceived in
our estates, or deceive our selves by the same, in resting ^oo much upon the
worth thereof, ought we not in this respect to abho^^e and ab^se our s^lues?
should not this make us poor in our own eyes, and Jealous over our selves,
least we have laid a wrong foundation, or built hay and stubble upon the right?
Job. 9. Ierem. 1. 10. 1. Cor. 3. 15. Math. 7.

1^ And seeing, the best through security (...) full fearfully, though not
fi^ally, to the dishonor of God, The danger and measu^e of the falls of the
Saints.
and ^ounding of his own conscience, to the reproach of his pro^^ssion: and
stumbling of his (...) brother, opening the mouths of the wicked* and grieuing
the spirit of God, procuring hereby grievous Judgment to himself, and his
posterity, ought not this much more to make us fear, that we may depart from
evil? should we not in regard hereof, work out our salvation with fear and
trembling? Phil. 2. 12. Is not he blessed, that thus fears always? Pro. 28.
being lowly in his own eyes, and so submitting himself under the mighty hand
of God? 2. Sam. 12 Pro. 14.

11 And whereas our riches are daily to be scoured, lest they gather rust, and
to be exercised with afflictions, The cross how to be undergo.
that they may be more purified: Is it not wisdom to undergo willingly, what
necessarily will follow: Though we must not seek the cross desperately, yet
must we not take it up, when it is offered? Matthew. 16. 22. Is it not here the
best wisdom to be poor in our own unworthiness, that so we may hereby be
prepared to afflictions, that by this means, we may the better endure and
conquer the same?

12 Lastly, seeing Blessedness is promised to the poor in spirit, Math. 5. 8.
not to him that is made poor outwardly, by crosses and afflictions, as to him,
that through this outward abasing, is brought to a sight of his inward wants,
and so in the sense thereof, humbles himself under the mighty hand of his GOD,
begging pardon for his sin, and so confessing his poverty, desirous to be
found in CHRIST, and so renouncing his own righteousness;

13 And seeing the life of grace, is nothing else but daily renewed repentance,
So much we truly live, as Christ lives in us. And he lives only in us when we
die to sin, must we not make our selves poor? yea, daily sacrifice our selves,
by mor^ification of the flesh, that so we may be daily revived by JESUS
CHRIST? Galat. 5. Romans 6. 2. Cor. 5.

14 And though we have many excellent graces, yet seeing they are nothing in
comparison of what we shall have; ought we not to make our selves poor in
the conceit and confidence of all present good, that so we may still aspire to
that eternal happiness 1. Ioh. 3. 1. 2. P^il. 13.

15 To conclude this point, Is no corruption to be put off, that we may be
clothed with incorruptio^? 1. Cor. ^5. 2. Cor. 5.
And are we not to sigh and groan, that we may he clothed upon? Are we not to
be poor in our own eyes, because while we are presentin the body, we are
absent from the Lord? nay so long as we are in the body, we cannot please our
God as we would, we grieve his spirit, offend his maiesti^: surely if we make
not our selves poor in the sense hereof, we never yet had true riches, much
less shall increase them. 2. Cor 5. 1. 2. 3 4. 5. 6.

Do we not daily increase sin, as we multiply our moments, and have we not
cause to be abased herein?

Well thus you see there is great reason why Gods children should make
themselves poor.

Shall we now consider the ground and manner how they do abase themselves?
shall we discern a little further the measure of this abasing?

Surely for the ground of this their poverty, 1. It is not forced from them by
fear of vengeance, G^ound of spiritual poverty.
which they are freed from, but rather from an holy desire, to be avenged of
themselves, for the abuse of Gods mercies, that so judging themselves, they may
not be judged of the Lord.

2. Neither does the fear, that God accepts not their persons, wring from
them this emp^ying of themselves, because though they feel not this always,
yet by Faith they live in the Son of God, and so above present feeling,
either comfort them selves, with former ^ assurance, or wait upon the Lord,
in believing under hope above hope: but the ground of this abasing, Is an holy
fear of our selves, least either we may fall into such gross evils, as may
deprive us of former comfort, or may be ^ainted with some spiritual
wickedness, of pride, vainglory, when we stand and abound in comforts: that
so robbing GOD of his glory, we may be stripped of further comforts.

3 Neither does this abasing proceed frrom hypocrisy, that so we might the
rather be magnified of others: Although who shall hinder the light to break
out, and if we be approved of men, shall not this tender to their further
condemnation, that will not be like unto us?

If we have cause to make our selves poor, what little cause have they to
brag of their beggary? But we make our selves poor, to prevent hypocrisy,
not hereby to deny what we are, but least we should assume what we are not, or
seem to be better then we are: hereby we prevent slightnes and customarines in
holy duties, which breeds hypocrisy: ^hereby we prevent pride* the damme and
nurse of hypocrisy: 3. hereby we still yield up our hearts to the s^arching
and view of the Al^^igh^ie, to clear us of hypoc^isi^: 4 hereby we renew our
repentance daily, and so scour off all tainture of hypocrisy.

4 Neither are they co^uinced with the inward sense of their begg^rie, and so
are forced to make themselves poor, as the hypocrite often is, denying his
profession, being ashamed of his shows, rejecting the means, etc. But they
are convinced ^ith the want of what they should have. And therefore, though
they have great riches yet, seeing it is nothing to what they should have,
therefore they still empty themselves of all confidence and conceit of
sufficiency, which the hypocrite flatters himself in, that so still they may
be prepared to receive further riches. And to this end they are further
co^uinced with many wants in the use of present graces: And so are daily
provoked to deny themselves, that they may be found in Christ Jesus, and in
him grow to perfection: yea they are further convinced with the rebellions and
continual oppositions of the old man: And so have cause to make themselves
poor, Note.
considering what they have been, yet considering what the least relicke of
corruption might do, if the Lord should look upon us in judgment, even to
infatuate all present grace, and deprive us of all hope of further measure,
this is the means to make them abase themselves, that so still they may fly
into the bosom of Gods mercy.

These are the grounds of this heavenly wisdom, that the Child of God, makes
himself poor.

By which we may try the truth of Grace in us, and also be led forwa^d to
perfection.

To this end consider we further the manner how the Saints make themselves
poor, by what means they abase themselves, what is the practice of this
heavenly wisdom.

Surely the Lord that ordaines the end fitteth also the means, suitable
thereunto. And therefore the manner of this practice is holy and warrantable.

Though they are said to make themselves poor, yet this is not to exclude the
grace of God, by which only they do all good, but rather to exclude conction,
and all by respects, which might move them hereunto: and indeed to implie, that
freely and comfortably they make themselves poor, In great wisdom and
equi^ie are moved thereunto: according to the manifold reasons and grounds laid
down before.

That this may the better appear, observe we the manner? Can they avoid the
presence, ^ow the ^aints make ^^emselues ^oore.
of the Almighty? And do they not abase themselves in his glorious presence?
Do they not bring their hearts to be searched by him? do they not submit
themselves in all things to his blessed will? do they not fear to offend him,
care to please him in all things, grieve because they have displeased him, yea
because they cannot please him as they would; strive to approve themselves in
all things unto his blessed majesty.

And in all these abase them selves, making themselves poor, in, and by the
practice of all these.

2 Can they do any thing without the grace of Christ lesus? And do they not
abase themselves, by denying their own righteousness, neither resting in the
measure, nor approving the perfection hereof, nor iustisying themselves
thereby, that so they may still hunger after the righteousness of Christ Jesus?
do they not make themselves poor by laboring still to be covered with the
righteousness of Christ, by ascribing the work of salvation merely to Gods
mercy through him; by giving God only all the glory of his truth and
faithfulness?

3 And can they seek unto Christ, until they be lost in themselves, And
therefore do they not make themselves poor, by often meditation of their first
estate in nature, Discerning and (...) ^^^ure.
yea considering even what hinderance, the very relicques of corruption prove
to weld^ing of themselves, how (if God should give way) they might wholly
abolish grace, do they not make themselves poor, in the serious discerning
and casting off this body of sin that remains in them, Humble^ in greatest
pre^ent^g^ace.
and hangs so fast upon them.

4 Lastly, seeing our life is hid with Christ in God, we know not what we shall
be, we have nothing in comparison of what remaynes, to be enjoyed, do not the
Saints therefore make themselves poor, By rejecting ^r not resting in sense.
either in rejecting carnal sense, or not resting in spiritual sense, of any
present good, do they not abase themselves by learning to live by faith, still
out of themselves, so using present grace, Living by faith abon^ feeling.
as that still they are abased in it, in regard of what, is before them: 1.Ioh.
3. 1. Col. 3.

And seeing afflictions are the means to try and perfect grace: Do not the
Saints make themselves poor, in taking up the cross daily, following such a
measure of holiness, which the world hates, and so necessarily persecutes while
power is in it hand: keeping that straight way, Vnde^ go^ing (...).
which lies full of crosses, that so ons. they may be tried and fitted to
perfection.

Behold here the manner how the Saints abase themselves.

And let this teach us to entertain this practice: Let it comfort us against
the contradictions and imputations of the world, which either would hinder, or
chaelenge the same.

To this end consider we in the last place the measure of this abasing. How
far he saints ^o abase ^hemselues.
1. How far the Saints do impouerish themselves. As first

1 In their greatest abasing, they only confound and subdue the flesh, to
which they are not debtors: As for the spirit and inward man, that is hereby
cased, and much more advanced to liberty of weldoing, and comfort therein, by
how much the more, flesh and blood is not consulted with, nor honored in the
same: 2. Gala. 25. Now the hypocrites abasing, is to satisfy the flesh: 2.
Coll. 23. Gal. and to the abasing and so renouncing by degrees of all
spiritual duties, and graces: Math. 25. Job.21. 15.

2 The greatest abasings of Gods children, whether they be outward in the
body, or inward their spirits, serve to the advancing of God, and only the
humbling and denying of themselves, if they are afflicted, never so gri^uously,
they justify God, and judge themselves; 2. If they are wounded in cons^ience:
they complain off, their want of faith, to lay hold of comfort; and not of
Gods faithfulness in supporting without comfort, Job. 13. 15.
If they despair, it is only in themselves, and of themselves, they dare not
though the Lord should kill them but trust in him, they cannot despair of God,
Ps. 37. Note.
seeing his hand is put under, in their greatest faintings he answers them
not according to their infidelity, and therefore, he is in mercy with them.

If they condemn their unworthiness, they only condemn themselves herein, 1.
because they abuse Gods blessings, not because they were not worth the
rec^iuing; 2. because they cannot discern any reason as of themselves, why God
should be so good unto them, not because they see no reason in God, that he
shall love, Note.
where he pleases, and keep his promise, where once he has loved: Ioh. 15.
3. because through want of faith they cannot see their worthiness in Christ, not
because the worthiness of Christ, does not belong unto them.

3 And though the Saints, do so far abase themselves, that the more service
they do unto God, the more they see their faylings: And therefore are yet more
vile in their own eyes, because hereby they see themselves more unworthy
worthy to do God any service; Yet are they not hereby distracted in their
obedience, or dejected from further performance thereof: they do not now remit
their zeal, and abate their courage in weldoing (as the hypocrite does) but
rather the more they see their ^aylings, the more are their desires enflamed,
^ote
and resolutions confirmed, that they had need to be more diligent, and
constant in weldoing, though they find little comfort in the Action, yet still
in obedience to Gods commandment, they will do good while they may: living by
faith, instead of comfort, and waiting with patience ye crowning of the work,
Gal. 6. Ioh. 12. And will not the glorious Lord return unto* them at the
length, shall not they that humble themselves be exalted? Yea surely:

4 There is not the lowest measure of humiliation the child of God shall bring
himself unto, but as the Lords hand is lower, to hold him up from further
sinking: So Jesus Christ his head, being exalted, Psalm. 37.
will also reach his hand in time, to raise him up again, Ioh 8 32.

Yea, even this work of humiliation is a great advancement, 1. As hereby
getting conquest of pride, Benefits of abasing
security, and hardness of heart? 2. What sin is there, which is not crushed
by this means? 3. what grace is it, that is not tried hereby? 4. what virtue
which has not in this work received some enerease: and can such co^quests
want their triumphs, Rom.8.
shall not such trialls yield joy unspeakable and glorious? can increase of
grace be without sound comfort, 1. Pet. As for the hipocrite, State of the
Hypocr^te in affliction.
it is not so with him, if he be outwardly afflicted, he is usually driven to
despair: if he despair, he renou^ceth mercy: if he be wounded in spirit, he
cannot ^ndure it: if he see his unworthiness, it is rather because God bath not
given him better, And that Outward.
then thst he has not deserved it, he rather accounts God beholding unto him,
for the receiving the blessing, then himself beholding unto GOD, for the abuse
thereof: as for the righteousness of Christ, well may he make an Idol of it to
cloak his hypocrisy, either he thinks he has no need of it, or if he have
it for compleme^t, that's all he seeks.

But if the Lord once begins to reckon with him, and to call upon him, though
it be in the cool of the day, reviuing his dead conscience: and quailing his
carnal co^forts: by arresting him with some sharp and sudden seourge: How
does the hope of the hypocrite perish in a moment? Inward.
If carnal wisdom and natural courage will not serve, to bite in the
affliction, or ouermatch the same, but that out it must, and our counterfeit
must come down: does not he fall into mischief? pro. 24 never rising again,
will not all his carnal help further to keep him down? yea, to en^rease his
torment, and so to begin his hell, even in this life, can he expect
deliverance, that makes a mock of Christ? Heb. 6. 5. 6. can he have comfort,
that refuses trial? can he rise again, that casts away his confidence, yea,
is confounded therein?

Well, thus we see, the measure of the Saints humiliation, how far they make
themselves poor, that they may increase their estate; we see herein how they
differ from the Hypocrite. What do we learn hence?

1. Surely, to try our selves, by this measure of humiliation, whither we
have received grace of God in vain, by examining our selves in the former
degrees:

And for Conclusion, Use.
seeing it is the practice of the Saints, thus to abase themselves, How to make
ourselves truly poor in spirit.
let us take heed of presuming above that which is meet. Let us avoid the
means, which may flatter us in our estates: either keeping us in the ignorance
thereof, that we may not attain to the true Riches: or dazeling us, with the
knowledge thereof, being rich, to hinder our increase.

To this end, avoid we ignorance of the measure of our riches, and labor we
still to cast up our just account daily by our Use, and acceptance of well
doing: For so rich just we are, as we are accepted.

2 Take we heed of flattery and* daubing whereby we are provoked to esteem
our case, better then it is, and so never labor to be abased in our selves:
and submit we ^o a powerful and conscionable ministry.

3 Avoid we multitude of worldly business, and seeking after great matters, and
learn we contentment, in the meanest estate, and this shall prepare us to abase
our selves in our spiritual condition.

4 Meditate we often upon the failings of the Saints, and such abasings of
themselves, which proceed^ thereupon: and if we come short of their graces,
let us consider that we have need to be abased.

5 Consider we the policy of Satan, which will not stick, if he cannot
tickle us with pride, and lull us in security, at least to deiect us with the
conscience of our unworthiness, and insuffi^iencie of Gods Blessings, 1.
Because others have more, 2. Or they are given not for good, Note*
because we cannot but in some measure abuse them. 3 Or they are decayed, and
therefore not entending our perfection, 4. Or they are common and ordinary:
and ther^ore not to be regarded: To prevent this abasing, had had we not need
to make ou^ our selu^s poor? to see our unworthiness of the least, and
therefore to bless GOD for any: to see the sufficiency of what we have above
our desert, that so we may give God glory, that makes what we have to serve
the turn: to be so abased in our decay, that still we are contented to abase
our selves further, in giving unto our GOD the glory of his faithfulness, that
he will recover and satisfy us again: to be so abased in our abuse, that yet
we can be more abased, in renouncing our own righteousness, because we are
corrupt; and yet the more ab^sed, in giving the Lord the only glory of all
his free mercies, by resting alone upon CHRIST, for the acceptance of well
doing: Thus must we abase our selves, to prevent satan's abasing.

6. Lastly, let us consider, that if we make not our selves poor, to prevent
securiritie and unthankfulness, Our God will abase us, and that many ways, 1
both denying comfort of his graces: Yea, 2 Taking them from us, How God abaseth
his children, and why.
yea, leaving us to reproachefull and gross offenses: yea, yielding us to the
smiting of a wounded spivite, and shall we not then preserve peace of
conscience, by abasing our selves? shall we not prevent the reproach of our
profession? Comfort in the practice of this.
shall we not preserve the comfortable use of Gods blessings? yea, shall we not
take down the pride of our hearts, that the graces of God may not be taken from
us?

Well, let these motives serve to provoke us to this holy wisdom, comforting
our selves, that we can never be losers at Gods hands, if he win glory by our
abasing of our selves:

2 Nay the more we loose, in conceit of Gods blessings, the more we shall
gain in the use of them, the more we shall reap c^mfort by them.

And therefore, in the fear of God, let us set upon the practice of this
duty: And the Lord give us understanding in all things, and accomplish his
own work which he has begun in us, even for his blessed son Christ Jesus
his sake our only Lord, and ^all sufficient Savior. To whose glorious
Majesty with God Almighty the father of all spirits, and God the holy Ghost,
the guide and comforter of the Elect. Three persons in Trinity* ou^ God in
Unity, Mig^^, and Ma^estie* As we acknowledge to be due, so from the ground of
our hearts we desire to be given. All glory power dominion might, majesty,
thanksgiving, and entire obedience of us and all the Churches from this time
forth, and for ever more Amen.

Conclusion to to the Reader.
THus have thou ( Christian Reader,) a brief of such Meditations which it has
pleased my good God to impart unto me, concerning the Estates of the Hypocrite
and sincere Christian, as also of their several wisdoms, in Husbanding their
Estates: My hearts desire is, that thou would lay these things close into
thy heart: neither stu^bling at the want of complement, which my leisure and
weakness, yea indeed the matter it sesfe, would not afford, or at such
obscurity, which partly the brief ha^dling, but especially the matter being
experimental, may give occasion unto: But in the name of God, Judge wisely of
my drift herein. And labor with thy God in prayer, that thou may s^und the
depth thereof. And seeing thou will hardly plough without my hayfare, therefore
let this experience be a means to provoke thee to discern thine estate: And
so buy thou in the tear of God, that spirifuall eyesalue, Revel. 3. 18. 19.
o^ thy Savior Tesus Christ, laboring to be found in him, not having thine
own righteousness; That so being pertaker of his spirit, 2. Cor. 2.
thou may be able to discernt all things, comparing spiritual things with
spiritual things. And so being able there by to try all things, (...) These. 5.
thou may hold that which is good that it may hold thee for ever.
Certainly, if ever Times had need of direction, and resolution; these are
they: wherein because we will not obey the truth, ^. Thessalonians. ^2.
it is ^ust with God to give us up to strong delusions to believe lies. In so
much that if it were possible, Math. 24.
the very elect might be seduced, I would it were not more then manifest, that
even the most are grown cold and careless, of what they should, i^ not
staggering in their Judgments, yet unstable in that practice ready to embrace
this present world, but that the world flies from them. Blessed be our God, who
knows what is best for us: how gladly would we serve God and Mammon too, how
willingly would we have our heaven here, and yet not forgo our right thereof
in another life. But our GOD will not endure our halting, he confound^ our
confidence, in exceeding mercy. And happy is he that can prepare his soul to
afflictions. Certainly, if we will not try our selves, the Lord will take us
further in hand: have we not had enough already for the iniquity of Baal
peor, for our sparing of B^nhadad, and enduring the viper in our bosoms, that
poisons our people daily, and stings them to death, but that Ham^n must be
further advanced, and poor Mordekay humbled. Has not the spanish Invasion,
yet scholed us to have no fellowship with Gods open enemies, has not the
powder Treasons taught us, what to expect of secret Enemies.

The Lord make us wise, to see the plague, and hide our selves. Has not the
Lord fought against us, with all the Elements? has not the Infections air
brought upon the land even A seven years pestilence, raging and scowring our
most secure and eminent places, even round about. And has this Judgment yet
brought us to see the plague of Atheism and Security, the plague of
Hypocrisy and Pr^phanenesse, that is in our hearts, and spreades it self as a
leaprosie over all the quarters of the Land? Have not the fearful
Earthquakes, so often of late renewed, in our most lof^tie palaces signified
plainly unto us, that the Land is weary of her burden, and does threaten to
spew us out? do they not forewarne, to tremble and stand in awe of the
Maiest^e of our God, and obey his Prophets, lest being pertakers of the
gainsayings of Core, our mother earth at length shall swallow us up, and so in
the midst of our security, we shall sink down into Hell? can we forget how
the Lord has pleaded his controversy, further against us? Nay do we not see
how still this controversy is renewed, even by most strange and fearful
fires, arresting, not only our solitary corners^, and obscure Villages, as if
the poor igno^a^t people were the greatest sinners, but ^easing upon our most
popoelous Cities, and best affected places, thereby conuincing their coldness,
and deadnes in religion: And that, (as it has been observed;) usually upon the
Sabbath days: meeting therein with the reigning sin of the time (the
profanation of the Sabbath.) And confounding herein the pride of our holy
mountain, as causing hereby the Sabbath to become the day of greatest
distraction, and business which ought to be the day of holy rest: to be the day
of greatest grief, and astonishment, which should be a day of joy and
thankesgiuings unto our God? And has not the hand of the Lord been yet further
stretched out? has he not convinced our coldness in religion, by that cold
Element of the water, have not the mighty waves pleaded the Lords controversy
against us, breaking their ac^ustomed bounds? and taking away the pray; and
none could deliver, convincing herein our daily rebellions that will not be
kept within the bands of obedience, either to God or man* Is not the hypocrite
like the raging of the sea, foaming out his own shame? Esaias, 48.
has not the proud waves convinced the hypocrite, has he not vomited out his
own shame, in seking his glory, has he not cast up mire and dirt, while he
iustifies the wicked, which are of his own humor, has he not condemned the
government, and resisted Moses and Aaron, And so in seeking to amend others
has confounded himself. And is not the hand of the Lord stretched out still,
The first borne.
has he not confounded our carnal confidence in taking away the first borne,
eue^ the hope of our happiness, that so at length, out Eyes might be toward
him alone.

Has he not sent A spirit^ of division among us? even Ephraim against
Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim, Isa.9.
and both against Judah? the Papist against all sectarie, and both against the
true Israelite, Inward division.
the wise and sober protestant, that seeks after peace, in truth and holiness:
Well, who so is wise, let him understand these things: Let him know, that as
the Lord has seven plagues more; Leuit. 2^.
Yea, a consumption decreed, even to sweep us away; Isay, 18.
So also his hand is not so shortened, that he cannot save. Blessed be our God
for the experience of his great Salvation: has he not preserved our
Anointed often from the snares of the hunter, and from the noisome pestilence?
Has he not given him an heart to begin, and go forward in the most glorious
work of detecting Antichrist, and demolishing his kingdom: And will he not
graciously preserve him to accomplish that work? Has he not supplied our
former loss in some gracious mesure, by that happy Marriage? Has he not left
us an hopeful Prince, for the continuance of the Gospel? Has he not
recompensed us the years that the pestilence has consumed: Joel. 2.
And if we believe, shall we not see greater things then these?

The Lord make us wise, to be tha^kfull for what we have; Surely, as the least
we have is mor^^ then we deserve: Math. 2* 5
so if we be faithful in a little, the Lord will increase us: and if we First
seek the best things, all these things shall be cast upon us. Matthew. 6* 33.
Labor therefore in the fear of GOD, as we have received CHRIST, so to walk
in him: Have we not received him in Truth? Is he not daily crucified unto us
in the Conscionable Preaching of the word? and lively administration of the
Sacraments? Coll. 2. 5.
And shall we yet crucify him again by our unnatural contentions, shall we
crucify him again, by our tearing and devouring one another: Blessed be God,
even the Father of our Lord Jesus, G
Jesus Christ, that experience and wisdom has well cooled our unnatural heat,
and kindeled it more kindly against the common Adversary. And shall not the
patie^t abiding of the righ teous be joy? shall not the meek and quiet spirit
possess the Land, when the turbulent Sectary shall spue himself out? shall we
not be thankful for the Truth, though we are far from perfection? And if we
cannot amend all, shall we not therefore labor more carefully every man to
mend One. The Lord give us wisdom to walk uprightly, in these Evil times;
that we may neither Wound where we should heal, nor heal where we should
wound, Ezech. 13. Laboring wisely to heal what we have rashly wounded: and to
wound more deeply, what in carnal wisdom we would cure. That so, sound peace
may redound to our Church, and comfort to our souls: Is it not more then time,
now to cover the nakedness of our mother, whom we have unnaturally stripped,
both of credit and maintenance, reproching her as an harlot and so worthy to be
dispoiled? might we not do well to recover her credit, by discovering our own
nakedness? Our ignorance in speaking evil of the things we know not, or have not
been able to discern, our pride in censuring what we have no calling to
amend, our curiosity, in seeking a knot in a rush, our Hypocrisy, in
stumbling at strawes and leaping over blocks, our unthankfulness in not
acknowledging the good things we enjoy, our unprofitableness in neglecting our
necessary callings under pretense of scanning and iudg^ng of the callings of
others.

What should I say? have we been free from malice and birternes in our
censuring and deprauings, condemning callings for personal abuses, and
exasperating the Magistrate by our presumtuous importunity and insole^t
calumniations, has not our inco^stancie and differences discovered apparently
the matter of our Building? has it not brought distraction and confusion to
our selves, and others? has not our carnalnes and covetousness in the manner of
our building, each seeking to build up himself with the ruins of his mother,
and yet under pretense to repair the same? Has not this discovered ye plague
in our hearts while we have sought to remove the plague in our Churches.

And is not the Lord exceeding merciful thus to bring to pass, that we have
wisely discovered our own soars, while we have unwisely labored to lance the
diseases of our mother, that so we might be either forced to seek help for
our selves, and so hereby give some rest unto the Church of God, or else by
purging out, and healing our particular evils, we may by this ^canes the better
further the healing of the whole body when every member shall labor it own
soundnes. Surely if I fail not in my skill, this will be the best way to
procure peace abroad, is to maintain war at home. If each could discern how
much he had to do here, he should rather crave the help of the Church for
his private cure, then to undertake a public cure which does not concern him.

The Lord open our eyes that we may see our own nakedness, that so finding how
bad we are, we may esteem of other better then ourselves, especially whom the
Lord has in mercy set over us: that we may give unto Caesar the things that
are Cesars even al holy conceit, reverent behavior, and all hearty obedience,
to what is commanded in the Lord, and all patient subjection to what is
inflicted by him, we would rather lease our lives then lease our obedience,
rather have no peace at all then not seek the public peace. Oh let us pray
for the peace of ^erusalem, let us deny our own wisdom that we may be wise
to sobriety, bearing with evil men, patie^tly expecting their salvation, and
employing our selves faithfully in the good things we may enjoy, that the
constant keeping up of the Arc, may be the overthrow of Dagon even of every
thing that the hand of the Lord has not planted: surely if my poor help may
further hereunto: As I have to this end lent thee (dear Christian) heretofore
some light, and do now tender thee, to this purpose, this touchstone:

So, as the Lord shall give health, and wisdom, as thou shall digest this,
thou may shortly have more. Only I stay til some unnatural heat be past
over, that Affecti^n being purged of carnal respects; The truth may be
tendered unto thee with more sincerity, and received, with more profit. And so
I commend thee to the word of Gods grace: submitting my self thereby to be
judged of thee, desiring thee especially, to judge thy self thereby: that so
thou may truly discern of thine Estate. And labor to keep thy self
vnspo^ted of this present world: That so thou may be presented blameless,
at the day of Christ Jesus: To whose blessed protection. I do unfeignedly
commend thee; And, In whom I rest.

Thine in the best bonds; Tho: Cooper.


