THE BLESSING OF JAPHETH, Proving THE GATHERING in of the Gentiles, AND Final
Conversion of the Jews.

Expressed in diverse profitable Sermons.

BY Thomas Cooper.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Richard Redmer, and are to be sold at the West
end of Paul's. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR THOMAS HAYES, LORD MAYOR OF THE City of London.
The Right Worshipful, the Aldermen his Brethren; and the Sheriffs of the
said City; Together, with the worthy Commissioners, for the plantations in
Ireland and Virginia: Grace and peace from God the Father, through our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, be multiplied.
Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, And dearly beloved in our Lord Jesus.
IT is the holy commandment of our blessed Savior Christ Jesus, unto his
servant the Apostle Peter, that he being converted, should strengthen Luke
22. 33
his brethren And it is the duty of every faithful Servant unto his heavenly
Master; Hereby does he approve himself a living member of Jesus Christ, even
to teach the ways of God unto the wicked; that sinners may be converted Psalm.
23. 8. etc.
unto him, that the ways of God may be known upon earth, his saving Ps. 51.
15. 16.
health among all Nations; Accordingly hereunto, it was, that the blessed
Apostles after the glorious Resurrection of the Son of GOD, when they had
received their Commission, and were furnished with gifts accordingly: First
tendered the Gospel unto their Brethren in the flesh, the Nation of the Jews,
as being sent unto the lost sheep of Math. 28
the house of Israel; And when they had put it from them, and did account
themselves unworthy of eternal life, Lo they turned to the Acts, 2. 3. 4
Acts, 3. 4.
Gentiles: and so the barren and desolate became fruitful, and has had more
children then the married Wife. Thus by the ministry of Apostolic Acts. 13
Esaias. 54. 1
men, was the Gospel first published to this Nation. And after many fearful
and yet most righteous judgments iustscted thereupon, for the contempt of the
some, together with the outward settling of the State, in the reuniting of those
Royal houses of Lancaster and York, The glorious Gospel also of Jesus Christ
was restored unto us: that so we might be constantly settled in the favor of
God. And propagate the some, to our posterity and brethren, the Nations far
(...) u^till the great day of the glorious appeara^ce of Jesus Christ. To this
end was it, that the Lord of the Harvest did not only water this precious
seed, with the blood of the M^^^tirs abundantly, that so it might take ro^te
downward, but very graciously also cherished the samewith a most glorious
sunshine of long peace and prosperity: that so it might bring (...) fruit
upward to amendment of life. And notwithstanding our continued unthankfulness
for so great salvation: for which we had deserved, that when the light of our
eyes was taken from us, the li^^t also of the Gospel should have been removed:
Yet still has it pleased our graciou. God to visit us from on high, with his
saving health: and by the ministry of our gracious Sovereign, lames (whom the
Lord in mercy proster in this holy work, that he may enlarge the bounds of
this glorious Kingdom far and near:) By this blessed nursing Father are we
not only now united into one government, and so the great occasions of Inward
hostility mercefully quenched; but further also, by his gracious Authority it
has been, that the barbarous and desolate places of the Land are now
replenished, with the power-of the Gospel. Yea, the rude and sauadge nations
far and near, in Ireland and Virginia, have had this blessed light conuayed
and enlarged unto them. And who are they that have been forward to help the
Lord against the mighty? Who have enlarged themselves for the enlarging of the
glorious Gospel of Christ: Surely, as the Lord has enlarged himself
abundantly, unto this honorable City, above all the places of the Land, both
in the fitnes of the earth, and the deaw of heaven, even in all outward
benefits, and spiritual blessings, in heavenly things: So blessed be the name
of his Majesty for ever, that has hereby sanctified these portios unto you
(Right Honorable, worshipful, and my dear Countrymen) that your hearts and
purses are enlarged plentifully, to the furtherance of this great and glorious
work of the gathering in of the Gentiles: that the plantations in Ireland and
Virginia, are much furthered by your industry. And have you not already
received the first fruits of your labors in Virginia? Is not a Virgin lately
married unto Jesus Christ, and become one with you in the Household of faith?
Has not the Prince of our peace hereby established an inviolable league
between those Nations, and our Colonies; that so we may not doubt of good
success, in those enterprises? In the name of God, therefore (Right Honor:
Right worcester:) go on in this glorious work: Can you do God better service, then
in promoting his Kingdom, and demolishing daily the power of Satan? Can you
do better service unto your selves, then not only to ease the Land of that
rank blood, which threatens some great sickness: but especially, to provide
some retiring place for your selves, of so be the Lord, for our unthankfulness
should spue us out? And if that the Lord shall hereby translate his Gospel
from one nation to and here or rather, as we hope, shall provoke us by such
Foolish for lorne Nations, to a greater zeal unto the Gospel, to hold fast
that which we have, least no man take away our crown from us; shall we be any
loosers hereby* if we exchange some of our transitory Blessings which we
have forfeited by our abuse, for the establishing and recovery of durable
riches, that they may not be taken from us. Surely, if my poor endeavor can
avail ought hereunto: As I have heretofore, and now in this Blessing of
Iapheth) done my endeavor to approve unto your wisdoms, the just undertaking,
and performing of so holy a work; So by the grace of God, neither shall my
poor prayers, nor any future industry be wanting; that so I may strengthen
the things that are ready to die at home, and nourish the things, that are
newe-borne abroad. And thus I humbly entreat your Honor, and your worships, to
conceive of me, and to accept graciously these Meditations, as a true pledge
of my love unto this honorable City, wherein I was borne, and bred up: and a
seal of my labors for the furthering of what soever may tend to the
advancement of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ. To whose blessed
protection, I do most heartily commend you all: and do rest in him.

Your Honors, and worships, ever bounden: Tho: Cooper.

THE GENERAL CONTENTS OF THIS TREATISE.
FIRST, it discovers the marvelous and gracious work, of the Conversion of
a Sinner: both by the Author, Nature, Means, whereby; and the Marks and
effects thereof. Secondly, It declares the true estate and condition of the
CHVRCH of GOD; both that which is Invisible, and the Visible also: Together,
with it several Qualities and Marks in this life. Thirdly, It proves the
Calling of the Gentiles. Fourthly, It avouches the Conversion of the Jews.
Lastly, it confirms, that Jew and Gentile, shall be united together in one
Visible CHVRCH.
Together, with many particular Observations, incident to these: as appears
by these particular Doctrines, and Instructions following.

Observations in these Meditations are,
1 GODS Decree, orders second causes. 2 Prayer, the most effectual means to
accomplish Gods will, for our good. 3 God only the author of the Conversion
of a Sinner. 4 The Conversion of a Sinner, is by persuasion of the sweet
promises of the Gospel. 5 The Faithful have only right in Gods blessings. 6
The Gentiles to be converted. 7 The Posterity of the Church, to be respected
and provided for. 8 Good Parents may have a wicked Generation. 9 The faithful
shall be recovered out of their greatest falls. 10 The Jewish Religion, True.
11 The Church a little Flock. 12 The Church obscure and invisible in the
world. 13 The true Invisible Church consists only of the Elect. 14 The Church
of God moveable, not tied to any place. 15 The Church weak and corruptible,
subject to infirmities. 16 The Church Militant in this life. 17 The Church is
the resting place, and safe-gard of the Elect. 18 The Church a stranger and
Pilgrim in this life. 19 Constancy and Perseverance a note of a true member.
20 The Saints shall abide, and dwell for ever. 21 The Jew to be converted, and
finally gathered in. 22 The Churches Unity, and so perpetuity and perfection.
23 There is a Malignant church as well as a True. 24 The Malignant church
mingled with the true believers. 25 The wicked and Malignant shall be in
subjection to the true.
THE BLESSING OF IAPHETH;
God persuade Iaphet that he may dwell in the Tents of Shem. Genes: 9.
THAT these words may the better tend to our edification, we are to consider;

First, the Occasion and Coherence of them.

Secondly, the words themselves.

The Occasion is laid down in the 7. former verses: Namely, 1. Noah his first
sin of Drunkenness, with the Occasion of it. verse: 20. 21. And thereupon,
his other sin of Inciuilitie, he lies naked and uncovered; eue^ briutishly in
the Tent.

Secondly, Cham his sins,

1. Of beholding his Fathers Nakedness; Not with grief, as he should have
done: but with a kind of delight and derision thereof.

2. His malice and cruelty, in acquainting his brethren with this infirmity
of his Father: Thereby both to make his aged and reverend Father despised in
the eyes of his Children, and also to make them partakers with him in this
sin, of rejoicing at, and deriding the corruption of the Ancient.

3. The pietic of the other two Sons of Noah: Shem; and Iapheth, discovered.
1. In their courage and constancy, that would not be drawn by his example, to
fellowship in evil. 2. In their modesty, that they would not so much as look
upon their fathers nakedness: as also 3. In their wisdom, that by a strange
gate of going backwards, and putting a garment upon their shoulders; by this
means, without offense, they performed a Christian and civil duty, of
covering their Fathers nakedness. Verse: 23.

Hereupon it follows, that Noah, being thus fitted to sobriety, partly, in
that his Distemperature is well qualified by rest; partly also, his nakedness
being covered as a figure, no doubt, also, of his sin covered, and pardoned
by the LORD; Is said to Awake from his wine, (that is) from his sin, that
was caused thereby: as appears plainly by that which follows: Namely,
because, he not only knew what his younger Son had done unto him:
whereunto, because he was enabled by the spirit of Prophecy, therefore his
sin had not deprived him of the use of that gift, which not being repented of,
it must needs have done for the present: But further also, as the Father of the
Family, yea, as the Prince and Judge of the world, even in Gods stead, he
both executes his Authority over his Sons, and that in cursing this wicked
Cham: as also, in Blessing the other two gracious Children, orderly.

First. Shem, as the eldest, both in age and religion.

Blessed be the God of Shem, and let Canaan be his Servant: therein bestowing a
double blessing upon Shem; One upon his soul, that he might continue in the
worship of JESUS CHRIST, (his GOD) and Savior: That the God of Shem, being
blessed of Shem, constantly; might continue to bless Shem, the father Romans 11.
26. 27. Esaias: 5^. 20. Esaias: 27. 9. Ierem: 31.
of the Jews: performing his faithful promises unto them, even to their last
conversion, and restoring in the last days, when All Israel shall be saved: as
it is written, The delieuerer shall come out of Sion, and shall turn away the
ungodliness from Jacob; And this is my everlasting Covenant with them, when I
shall take away their Sins.

2. Shem is also blessed, in his outward estate, in that he shall be Let
Canaan be his servant.
Lord over his cursed brother, and his posterity. The true Church of God shall
prevail: and overcome all the enemies of the same.

Thus Noah having blessed his eldest son Shem, partly, in recompense of his
present well-doing, but especially, as in Gods steed, discovering the free love
of God, in confirming an infinite reward, far beyond all proportion, of an
imperfect and finite obedience; Proceeds yet farther, to bless his other
son Iapheth; as being partner in the good action, and therefore in equity,
to be partaker of the recompense thereof.

And this blessing upon Iapheth, is not so much personal unto himself, that
as he had begun, so he would dwell in the Tents of Shem: that is, continue in
the true worship of God. But because the holy Patriarch by the spirit of
prophecy, did foresee, that the posterity of Iapheth, as fell out within few
hundredth years after, should fall from God to Idols: Therefore he not only
prays unto God, for the restoring of the Gentiles, which were the posterity
of Iapheth, to the sincere worship of GOD, in JESUS CHRIST; but prophetically,
also declares therein the will of God, that Iapheths seed should believe in
the Promised-seede; and withal, adds the Ioynture of this new-married Bride
unto her Savior. Namely, that the believing Gentiles shall also be enlarged
Esaias 2. The calling of the Gentiles.
far and near upon the face of the earth, as rulers and conquerors of the
world, and all the enemies of the Church. And let Canaan, (that is) the
posterity of the wicked, for ever, be subject unto the servants of Jesus
Christ. Thus is Iapheth also blessed, God enlarge Iapheth.
by his father Noah, being the mouth of God himself, both declaring what was
to come to pass, concerning the posterity of Iapheth; even the Gentiles,
confined especially in this part of the world which we inhabit, called
Europe; and extending to all those nations, in all parts of the world, that
are not, either properly Jews, or of that cursed race of Cham; scattered
toward the South in Africa, etc. As also auouching the certainty thereof: as
by the riches of Gods mercy, has been already for this six hundred years
accomplished: and is daily persiting, until the coming of the Lord Jesus.

So that these words do properly contain the Decree of God, 2: cor: 4. 6. Rom:
8. 29.
concerning the Calling, and bringing-in of the Gentiles, to the Faith of Jesus
Christ, occasioned by the sin of Noah: So is 1. God able to bring light out
of darkness, 2. so does he turn the evils of his Children to their good, as
all things else. 3. So have Parents Authority, to bless or curse their
children, as occasion serves. So ought Magistrates: 4. Yea, even Parents also,
to have an holy care, for a Religious posterity, Deuteron: 6. 7. Genes: 1*
But my purpose is not to stand upon these points, I come rather to the words
themselves.

Which are to be considered, either as, 1. A prayer for Iapheth: 2. as
Prophecy, what God had decreed to perform unto Iapheth and his posterity
hereafter. 3. As Prophecy in part accomplished: and further yet to be
finished, concerning the calling of, and bringing in the fulness of the
Gentiles. And first, In that they are a Prayer, for the accomplishment of that,
which they with all, do avouch Gods decree for it certain performance: We
learn;

That seeing the Decree of God is subordinate unto means; or rather does
subordinate means unto it: So we are not to presume or build thereon,
without using the ordinary means I. Doctr: Gods decree orders second causes.
thereunto. Howsoever likely, or unlikely, in our Judgment, we must not hope
for salvation, unless we climb the ladder of Sanctification, as being the
likely means thereto.

Nay, though it be unlikely, that Abraham's offering up of his son, should be
a means to have him restored, and in him, the To: 829. 30.
accomplishment of the promise: though it be unlikely, that washing in Jordan,
should heal Naaman of his leaprosie: yet where Genes: 22.
God commands, there the unlikeliest shall prevail: 1. for the exercise of our
Faith, and trial of our Obedience: as, 1. both making 2. Reg: 5.
that which is otherwise sin, to be warrantable, 2. and advancing Gods power
and glory, in working so far above, and contrary to the means. And though
it be foolishnes to the Grecian, and a stumbling-blocke to the Jew, that the
hearing of an earthen vessel, should raise up Earth and hell to Heaven,
delivering 1. Cor: 1. 21. 22. 23.
a slave of Satan, to be the Son of God, yet what God ordayneth, that he
also blesses. That the glory may be Acts 26. 11.
unto him, and not unto man. Not that the Lord is not able to work without
means, but that he is to deal with men: that cannot conceive him but by
means. Math: 3. Exodus: 20. 21. 2. Cor. 4. 7. 8.


And therefore seeing the Lord has decreed and ordained some to salvation,
others to perdition: Even so has he ordered his works in a different
variety, for the more holy, and righteous Reasons, 1. Difference of means,
and their reasons, in the Elect, Reprobate
accomplishment of his will, concerning those contrary ends of the Elect and
Reprobate.

Whereof, some he has ordained to be likely, and easy: 1. thereby to
encourage his Children, the rather to entertain them: 2. and to make the
wicked more inexcusable, that will nevertheless despise them, being so ready,
and profitable.

Other means the Lord of wisdom has also disposed, hard, 1. and unlikely,
thereby to try the Faith of his Children: and 2. exercising their Patience, in
waiting on God, for the issues of them: 3. and to teach them Humility, to give
God only the glory of his mercies, notwithstanding their best endeauours, tried
by the difficulty of them.

4. As also by this providence, the Reprobate are justly hardened and
confounded; Who, as they would not embrace the other Math: 13. 13. 560. Ioh: 6.
66.
means, (as being easy) and so in their eyes contemptible: So they shall not
conceive and digest these, as being hard, and unlikely, passing the reach of
reason and carnal wisdom. And so not submitting to any, which the Lord
has appointed for good, they shall stumble upon such, that lie in their way
for evil: being justly given up to their own councels, because they have
forsaken God; that so being satiate with their own ways, they Psalm: 82. 12.
Prou: 14. 14. Rom: 8. 2 Thessalonians: 1. 6. 71.
might reap the fruit thereof: even the ripening of sin in this life, and
the full measure of vengeance in the life to come.

1. And do not they then justly exclude themselves from heaven, that build
upon Gods Decree, concerning their salvation, without conscience of holiness:
presuming that Gods decree shall stand, howsoever they daily grow worse and
worse? shall not Uses.
the issues of this way, (howsoever seeming good) to these deceived men, be the
issues of death? do they not by this desperate tempting of God; run headlong
to destruction? 2. Tim: 3. 13


2. And do not they also justly exclude themselves of the comforts of the
earth, that say; A Lion is in the way, the means are difficult, or God will
provide: What need we use any? Is it not a Decree, that as, He that sows
shall have plenty; So he Pro. 11. 2 Thessalonians 3. 12
that labors not, shall not eat? Do not these men dream of a Feast, but
when they awake, they are an hungry?

3. Have we any further warrant of the protection of the Almighty, then, that
we walk in our ways? Psalm: 91. Can Beggars and Gentlemen look for a
blessing, that usually walk in no calling? Can Players and Gamesters, Usurers,
and such like, expect other Esa: 29. 8. 3.
then a curse, that walk only in an unlawful calling? And shall Oppressors
and Cheaters think to prosper? shall not ouer-reaching buyers, and
deceytfull-Sellers, that abuse a Lawful calling, put all their gains into a
broken bag, and to win the world, loose their own souls?

4. And whereas there is difference of means, and therefore to be used in
their order, the spiritual first, Matthew: 6. 33. and then those for this life;
Do not they renounce Heaven, that make sure Luke 10. 4
first for this life? Oh that we were wise with Marie, to choose 5
the better part. As not to refuse the vnlikelyest, where God 6
commands: yea, not to distrust our God, where no means are offered, 7
so to choose the fairest, as they lie in our ways, and yet not to rest 8
upon them, lest we rob God of his glory, and our selves of the 9
comfort of them. Abac: 1. Psalm: 62. 10.

10. Oh what comfort is here stored up unto us, that the Lord submits to our
infirmity, in offering means, to lead on our weak Faith. Matthew. 13.

11. What Wisdom is here taught us, to become all unto all? that we may
win some unto Jesus Christ? 1. Cor: 9. 12. How gracious is our God unto us,
that seeing we cannot hear him speaking unto us and live? Exodus: 20. 21.
therefore he tenders salvation unto us by such instruments, as being subject
to our infirmities, might with better experience teach us, and with more
compassion wait on us, 2. Tim: 2. 23. that at length we may be saved. 13.
Lastly, here is sound comfort unto the Saints, that be the means never so
unlikely, all shall turn to their good; they are Rom: 8. 29.
subordinate to Gods will, he will surely give a blessing. Thus does Noah use
the means; thus God gave, and daily gives a blessing thereunto.

But what means is it that Noah uses?

Surely, most excellent and effectual, Even Prayer unto God, that he would
hasten his work, in the blessing of Iapheth, in the calling of the Gentiles.

1. So must the Saints pray, for the accomplishment of Gods will: 2. Doctr:
Prayer, the most effectual means for accomplishment of Gods will for our
good. 2. Chron: 6. 21. 22. 23.
Prayer is the most effectual means to prevail with God: So does the Son
of God teach us to pray: That the will of God may be done: 2. So have the
Saints practiced usually to obtain Gods mercies. 1. Sam: 2. Iam: 5. Ioh: 14.
Math: 12. Math: 6. 3. So have they prevailed for the remoueall of his
judgments. Ion: 3. Esaias: ^8. 37. Psalm: 105.

4. And so has God promised by this means, ever to be found of us; both to
deliver us out of evil: Psalm: 50. 15. And to heap blessings upon us. And no
marvel, For

1. Is not Prayer that life of our Faith, wherein we renew our right in Christ
Jesus, and so in him prevail with God? Ephesians: 6. 18. 19. for all things that
make for our good. Psalm: 34. 1. Cor: 3.

2. And does not Prayer sanctify the blessing unto us, that as we have it in
love, so we may use it to Gods glory, and therein lay up a good foundation
against the day of Christ? 1. Tim: 4. 5. 1. Timoth: 6. 17.

3. Nay, does not our prayer comfort us; that though we obtain not what we
desire, yet we have done Gods will, and so shall have better then we desire,
even the grace of sweet Communion, with our blessed God? yea, the grace of
patience, to wait his leisure; yea, the grace of Contentment in him above all
things; yea, the grace of Supply, of that which shall enable us in our wants;
2 Cor: 12. 8
yea, the grace of abundant recompense of our stay: a double Restitution of
whatsoever we have wanted; yea, an hundredth fold in this life, and an infinite
recompense in heaven. 2. cor: 4. 17. 18 Job. 41. Matthew: 19.


4. And shall not Israel that preuailes with God, prevail also with men? Osee:
11. 2. 3. Genes: 32. Exodus: 16.

Use 1. Surely, so we pray in Faith. 1. 6. without doubting, and Ignorance. In
Patience, without wearysomnes, submitting to the will of God. Math: 27. Galath:
6. so our prayer be in love to our God, respecting his glory: in love to our
selves, desiring the best for Jacob:
us: and in love to our neighbor, without wrath or envy: so we pray in hope:
So contenting our hearts with the enjoying of the present, as that still we
wait and beg for the things to come; forgetting Reasons why we must both
pray, though God know what we have need of.
what is behind, in respect of that's before. Phil: 3. Howsoever the Lord need
not to be put in mind what he will give, yet we must pray, to put our selves
in mind, of what we have need: as also to approve our right, for the supply
thereof: Assuring our selves that the Lord will fulfill the desires of them
that fear him. Psalm: 25. 21. Psalm: 14. 5. And he will certainly fill the
hungry with good things, so they witness unfeignedly their wants, by their
earnestnes in begging, and labor to be found of GOD, not having their own
righteousness, but clothed with the righteousness of JESUS CHRIST; as well
Praising God for what they Phil: 3.
have, as begging what they want: and submitting to Gods will, for the manner
of the supply, though being otherwise confident on God, that he will certainly
provide. Genes: 22. If we be denied, either wisely faulting our selves that we
have asked amiss, or not faulting God howsoever: who gives, how, and when i^
pleases Jacob: 4. 3
him, sufficient to our Faith, though happily crossing ^ence and reason.
Comforting our selves, that the crossing of nature will be the trial, and
increase of grace, so that we do still use our spiritual weapon of Prayer;
thereby prevail we shall still with God, howsoever we decrease in the flesh,
and who would not weaken such a treacherous and noisome enemy: Can we better
disgrace and abuse the same, then when we have done our best therein: yet not
only we crave a blessing from God thereon, therein signifying it utter
inabilitie in it self to good: but further also, entreat Note.
the Lord to pardon the best endeuouts, and not to enter into judgment with
us, for our best services: Psalm: 143. Oh how does this utterly condemn and
crucify the flesh? Nay, does Psalm. 143.
not here a gracious heart wholly abase and deny himself; that so he may
fully and wholly be interessed in the free mercies of God in Jesus Christ.

So does Noah by prayer, interesse his son Iapheth and his posterity, in the
Covenant of grace: and so by Faith does he prophecy of the Calling of the
Gentiles. And so from these words, as a Prayer, we come now to consider them as
a Prophecy.

God persuade Iapheth, to dwell in the Tents of Shem; That is,

The Lord shall in the acceptable time, by the Ministry of his Gospel,
through the mighty operation of his holy spirit, incline, and allure the heart
of the Gentiles, to return unto him by kissing the Lord Jesus; and for their
salvation, rely only on the merits of the promised Messiah.

For the better opening of which Prophecy, consider we briefly these
particulars therein;

1. The Author that must accomplish this great work of the couersion of the
Gentiles: Namely, the Lord our God. God persuade.

2. The manner and means, whereby this conversion is accomplished, namely, by
persuasion, and alluring the reasonable part. God persuade Iapheth.

3. The Parties to be converted, or rather returned to the embracing of Jesus
Christ: namely, Iapheths posterity, eue^ the Ge^tils.

4. The Religion and Faith, to which they are to be converted, Namely, the
Religion of Shem, and this is amplified: First, by the subject of this
Religion, namely Shem: signifying therein diverse especial marks of true
Religion, As,

First, in that here the true worship of God is noted, by the Tents of Shem,
as having it Agnomination from him, who was the eldest in his Fathers house,
the father of the Jews, which were the first borne: first in the Love of God.
First in the simplicity Icrem: 2.
and purity of divine worship; First, in the outward endowment of the Marriage
bed. First, in the privileges, and love tokens of Rom: 3. 1. 2. 3.
the Bridegroom: does not this make to the confirmation of that excellent
truth, that Truth is most Ancient: and so therein leads The first Church the
truest.
us to an excellent mark of the true Church* namely, whose foundation is that
first and most ancient Truth.

Secondly, In that the Church of God is here confined to the Tents of Shem,
who though he were the Father of that posterity, which afterward, (as a figure
of the inward beauty of the true belieuers) was enlarged in outward pomp,
multitude, and beauty; yet now, in the greatest purity, and simplicity of
godliness, which she was to recover and practice under Jesus Christ, was
neither for multitude so populous, nor for outward glory and beauty? so
conspicuous: Does not this also lead us to two other Church, a little flock.
Cantic: Church invisible.
marks of the true Church of Jesus Christ, namely, that it is a little flock
in respect of those which are without: And 2. that it is black, and many times
Invisible to the carnal eye, at least wise subject to contempt in the world,
as wanting the outward complement, and ornament of the strumpet.

Lastly, In that the Church is here confined to the Tents of Shem, who being
the first borne, and the portion of God, and therein a figure, of that true and
only portion, which the Lord from all Eternity, has set apart to salvation;
to show forth the riches of his glorious grace, Namely, the Elect: Does not
this plainly teach us, that the Elect only, are properly the true Church The
Elect only the true Church.
of God, but the Hypocrite only in show: and as we say, ((...)) by
representation, etc. abusiuely. Thus are we led by this consideration, to
discern the substance and true members of the Church of Jesus Christ. And

Secondly, In that this Religion of Shem, is amplified by the quality and
condition thereof, when it is called the Tents of Shem: herein the holy Ghost
does express unto us a six-folde condition of the Church of God in this life.

1. That it is a place of abiding, and shelter for rest and protection, etc. as
is a Tent, which in those days was the best, and most convenient means for
the comfort and protection of mankind: 6. Conditions of the church; 1. That it
is the place of refreshing and safety.
therein deciphering unto us the benefits of the Church of God: Namely, that
it is the place both of refreshing, and protection, that wherein we receive
ease to our minds, and supply to our wants, and protection from danger, and
injuries.

Secondly, howsoever the cursed posterity of Cham and Canaan, are said to
build Cities, and dwell in them, thereby expressing their affection to this
life, and desire of constant enjoying the happiness thereof, most deceitful and
transitory: yet the Saints of God are commended unto us, to remain in Tents,
which being Hebr: 11.
Habitations not only weak, and slight in comparison, but moveable also upon
every sudden occasion, and especially used in military affairs: Does therein
shadow out unto us three other conditions of the Church of God in this life.
Namely, 1. That it is Imperfect: 2. And subject to many infirmities: 3. 2.
Imperfect.
That it is Militant here on Earth, as being to fight the fight of Faith. 3.
Militant.


4. That it is also a Stranger, and soiourner in this wretched world, having
here no abiding City, but looking for a City 4. Stranger. Hebr. 11.
which is above, not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.

5. Lastly, In that the Church is here said to lie in Tents: which being to
be removed from one part to another: and thereby to be pitched in whatsoever
place convenient. Does not this also point out unto us two other conditions of
the Church militant in this life? Namely, that she is not tied locally to any
certain 5. Not t^ed to any place. Math: 21.
place, but remooueable, for the contempt of the Gospel, from one Nation to
another: and 6. that by this means she is dispearsed over the face of the
Earth: So that in every Nation, whosoever fear God, shall be accepted of him.
Thus by this 6. Dispersed every where. Act. 10. 34. 35 Coll: 1. 6.
Metaphore of Tents, are we led to the consideration of the true conditions of
the visible Church in this life.

Lastly, That we may also know who are the true members of this Church; the
holy Ghost points out these unto us, when h^e says, that he may dwell in the
Tents of Shem: signifying by this The true member abides and dwells in the
Church.
phrase of dwelling, that he is a true member, that dwells and abides
constantly in the Church of God: not making it his Inn for a Night. Much
less, using it as his Theater for delight: but using it as his dwelling and
mansion continually. Yet so, as he remembers it to be but his Summer-parlor;
or rather his moveable Tent: And therefore so resolving constancy of abode
here, as that still he be preparing to that durable house in Heaven: so keeping
residence in this his moveable Tent, as that he be ready, 2. Cor: 5. 2.
yea, desirous to remove to that City of God, the new Jerusalem, which shall
never be removed. And,

These are the particulars that are contained in this prophecy: Of which by
Gods grace, I will entreat briefly and plainly, in their order. And first, of
the first Author, and means of true conversion: 3. Doctr: God only the Author
of the conversion of a sinner.
This is here avouched to be the Lord only.

God persuade Iapheth; God is the only Author of the conversion of a sinner.

This is that prerogative that he chalengeth proper to himself, Prou: 31.
Ezech: 11. Zechiel. 36. Hebr: 7. 9. 2. Tim: 2. 23. This do the Saints
willingly and thankfully attribute unto him. Ierem: 10. Ierem: 30. 1. Lament:
5. Psalm: 80. Ps: 49. And surely,

First, Who is able to bring light out of darkness, but God only? Reasons.
2. Who able to dissolve the works of the devil, but the Almighty God? Hebr:
2. Luke 11. 3. Who able to forgive an infinite 2. Cor: 4. 6.
debt, but an infinite power? 4. Who was able to satisfy an 1. From the power
of God 1. Rom: 3. 4.
infinite wrath, but an infinite Deity? 5. Who would have sent God to dye, but
God alone? 6. Who could have raised up man from the dead, but only God? 7. Who
gives the blessing to the Word, the ordinary means of conversion, but the
mighty God? 1. Cor: 3. 8. Ierem: 10. 23 14. 2. His free love. 1. Pet: 15. 11.
12.
8. Who searches and moves the heart, without which there can be no true
conversion, but only God? Ierem: 17. o. 9. How could our conversion be free,
if God were not the Author of it? 10. How could it be constant, if the mighty
God did not keep us? 1^. How could we know the truth thereof, but by the
spirit of God? Rom: 8. 1. Cor: 2. 12. Who can do more then create a thing of
nothing, but only God? Ephesians: 2. 4. 5. etc.

Let then man's free will keep silence, that Gods Free-loue Use. 2. Phil:
may be advanced: And let man's power be confounded, that Gods power may be
exalted. Let none despair in his greatest Impotencie: seeing it is God that
conuerteth. Neither let the greatest gifts presume, seeing God conuerteth of
nothing. If the poor receive the Gospel, Blessed is he that is not offended:
And if heaven suffers violence, by the ignorant and conte^ptible, 1 Cor: 1. 27.
Let the many Noble and mighty acknowledge their destruction to be of
themselves. Seek we unto God in his Word, the ordinary means of our
conversion. And pray we that God Matthew: 11.
will set up his King upon his holy hill of Syon: that he would thrust forth
laborers into his Vineyarde, that the Harvest may come in: and Iapheths
posterity may dwell in the Tents of Shem. Marvel we not that the Word
hardens many, seeing God must give the blessing thereto: and therefore adioyne
we to the outward Ioh: 5. 39.
Ministry thereof, conscionable preparation before, and examination after the
means, by prayer and Meditation with our God, that he may give the increase
to what has been sown. Abuse we not the patience of GOD, in not hearing when
he calls? least after when we cry, he will not hear us: but to day, let us
hear his voice, and not harden our hearts. Heb: 3. Psalm: 95. Neither let us
stumble at the infirmities of the vessel, seeing the Lord gives the blessing:
but rather give the glory unto God, and for his sake honoring the instrument.
Comforting our selves that hell shall not prevail, seeing God is the stronger.
Math: 16. Luke: 11. 22. 23. And no less then Heaven is the reward, seeing 2 Thessalonians: 1. 6. 7.
God is Recompencer.

Thus is God the Author of our conversion. But by what means does he
occomplish the same? Does he use miracles, to amaze, or tortures to compel?
Does he use Euthasiasmes, to inspire, or Dreams, to reveal a work unto us?
Surely no: The holy Ghost (says) God persuade Iapheth: That is, God incline
the heart, and allure the mind of the Gentiles, by convincing their
consciences, with the power of the truth, and framing their will; and
affections to embrace the same, subduing their whole man to the obedience
thereof. As if the spirit of God had plainly taught us, That; The Conversion
of a sinner, is a persuasion of the mind to believe; and inclining of the will
and affections to embrace the Lord JESUS.

And this shall appear unto us by these circumstances. 2. Doctrine: The
Conversion of a sinner by persuasion


1. First, by the Subject of Conversion, Man. 2. By the Matter and means of
Conversion; Namely, the word of GOD, applied and made essectuall, by the
operation of the spirit of God. 3. By the Manner and order of a true
Conversion. 4. And lastly, by the Substance and Marks of true Conversion.
Concerning the Subject of conversion, Man and woman, these consist of two
parts: 1. Of a corruptible body. 2. Of a reasonable and immortal soul.
Of which Two, the Body serves only as an instrument, to convey the means of
conversion to the soul, and to execute outwardly the effects of true
conversion, and therefore is not properly the subject of conversion: As being a
spiritual work, effected by a spiritual means, and therefore fastening and
working on a spiritual substance. And this is the soul of Man, which being
Spiritual and eternal, is therefore capable of this work of the spirit, and
means of happy eternity. Notwithstanding, because the body shall be
partaker with the soul of the fruit of Conversion: Namely, conformity, and
subjection to the spirit, and eternal glory: Therefore, as it cannot be
separated from the soul in the work of conversion: So it must be ordered by
such means, as it is subject unto, thereby to further our conversion: And so
to Obser: The body how far subject to force in conversion.
be as an instrument in the work of Sanctification; So also a partaker of the
benefit thereof. Hence is it, that howsoever the mind cannot, neither ought
to be forced by man, as being beyond his reach, and power, yet the body, being
therefore subjected to the power of Man, that by man, it may further the
conversion of the soul, is thereby also subject to some compulsion from man;
Who in Gods stead, is both to tender the means of Conversion, by the care unto
the Heart; by the body unto the mind; which is the duty of the Minister; as
also, (if need require, Duty of Minister.
when the refractorie mind will detain the body from the use of the means,
is further, even to force the body, by bringing it, even against the minds
will to hear the Word: That so, by the power thereof, either the rebellious
mind may be reclaimed, or at leastwise made inexcusable: especially, that in
performing this duty, he may be free from the blood of his people: or rather
become a true nursing Father unto them, And this is properly the office of the
Magistrate, who though he have power ever life, Of Magistrate. Deutro: 13.
in the case of refractorie and obstinate blaspheming of the Truth, and
desperate continuance in Atheism, and Heresy, and therefore ought not to
suffer cyther Idolater, or Blasphemer, either Atheist, or damnable seducer of
the people to a false worship, any longer to breathe, to the infection of
others, yet in the case of conversion, and bringing men to God, he is no
^^rther to force ^^e body, then that still it may be serviceable to the soul*
Le^i^g converted; and also further the mind to be subdued, by these spiritual
weayons; By which the Reason being captiuated, and conscience persuaded and
convinced: and so the ^ill inclined and allured to embrace the Truth, when once
the h^^rt 2. Cor: 9. 14 Psalm: 18.
shall endite a good matter, and (...) with the love of God, then shall the
tongue become the pen of a ready writer, the outward man shall put cheerfully
in execution, what the ^^ward man desires and purposes: That (so glorifying
our GOD) ^n Psalm: 45.
body and soul, which he has thus renewed, in this reasonable Sacrifice of
the New-byrth; we may in due season be crowned both bodies and Souls, with
that glory in the new Jerusalem, 1. Cor: 6. Rom: 12. 1. 2
which is above.

And therefore, as this condemns all Antichristian Tyranny, whereby all hope
of sound Conversion is utterly cut off, whilst Use.
by extremity of torture the bodily life is deprived: so also the negligence
of the Christian Magistrate is justly reproved, in leaving the papist to his
liberty, or winking at him, showing extreme cruelty to his soul, while he
pretends clemency to his body. And if the refractorie must be compelled from
a false worship to the means of a true: Oh then! fair be it from the heart of
the godly Magistrate, to tolerate a false religion; Is not this the way to
provoke the wrath of God? that so he may divide us in Jacob, and so destroy us
in Israel. And seeing the just man must be a law to himself, If then the
body must be the means to convey grace to the soul, If it may further our
entertainment of true conversion: Oh then, let us learn to subdue this enemy,
and beat down this corruption. 1. Let us humble it by fasting. The body how
to be fitted to be serviceable to the soul, to the work of Conversion.
2. And not advise with it in spiritual worship. 3. Fear we the complement
thereof: 4. and rest we at no hand in any ceremonial devotion of the same. 5.
Take we no care for the Flesh, to satisfy the lusts thereof. Romans 18. And
avoid we all affectation in gesture, etc. with an intent to be observed of
men; so shall we offer holy violence to the body, in preventing it
ministry, to satisfy the lusts of the mind, and thereby make it serviceable
to the soul: as furthering the same in the work of holiness. And thus is the
outward man subject to a kind of violence, not only from others, but even
from our selves. Persuaded it cannot be, and therefore it must be forced.

Now for the soul of man; The case hereof is otherwise: Spiritual The soul
not to be forced, but persuaded.
it is, and therefore not subject to outward violence. And reasonable: and
therefore only liable to such a violence, which rather ouercoms by persuasion,
the^ forces by persecution, as rectifying the reasonable part, not destroying
the nature thereof: as delighting the understanding with the light that
ouershadoweth it; So convincing the conscience, that it gives peace unto it: So
reclayming the will, and captiuating the Affections, that it restores them to a
most gracious liberty, to perform a reasonable service unto God.

This shall further appear most evidently unto us, if we consider in the
second place, the means of true Connersion: Namely, 2. From the means of
Conversion. Rom: 7.
the Word of God, assisted by the blessed Spirit; which in that it consists of
two parts, to wit, the Law, and the Gospel: Howsoever by the Law we are
brought to a sight of sin, and so thereby prepared to Conversion, and as it
were entered therein, as being cast out of our selves, and cast upon JESUS
CHRIST, yet by the sweet promises of the Gospel, we are allured and
persuaded to believe in the Lord JESUS; which is the very work and perfection
of our true Conversion. So are our hearts more Rom: 5. 5.
and more suppled, and broken, through the love of CHRIST, shead abroad in our
hearts: So are we bound unto our GOD, with the cords of love, as that we
attain a most glorious liberty Rom: 7.
of the sons of God: So are we led captive under sin, that in the inward
man, we delight in the law of God: So are we subject to Afflictions, as that
we are more then Conquerours over them: So is Death the end of our sin, and
entrance to our glorious liberty. Thus does the Word discover the estate of
our conversion: thus does it allure and satisfy us in the whole process and
consummation thereof.

And does not the manner of our Conversion avouch as much: Rom: 8. From the
manner of Conversion.
that it is by persuading, and mollifying of our hearts?

Does not the Lord himself allure and inuit us to embrace these means,
proffering us wares with money; wooing of us, to open unto him, by testimony
of his patience, and pledges of his love, stretching out his hands unto us all
the day long. And those not empty, but dropping down myrthe, and tendering
most invaluable riches, the rather to allure unto him. Does not wisdom invite
us to a Feast and allure us with her delicates? Does not the Lord prevent us
with his grace, that we may be plentiful in good works? Does he not allure us
to holiness, when he imputes the righteousness of his Son unto us, and not
only accounts that ours, which he freely gives, but accepts that to be his,
which by our corruption is defiled? Does not the Lord offer parley? Come, let
us reason together; Has he been a wilderness Esa^ 1.
unto us? Nay, what could he have done unto us, which he has not done?

Thus does the Lord persuade and allure our Conversion: And are not his
Ministers led by the same spirit? Do they come unto us with a rod? or not
rather with the spirit of meekenes? Are they not his Ambassadors to treat with
us; Nay, his Orators to beseech us to be reconciled unto God? Are they not
ready so to woo us, that they not only are contented to deliver the Gospel
unto us but even their own souls, so dear are we unto them: so little dear
is their life unto them, in regard of preaching the Gospel, that we may be
saved? Are they not our fathers, to beget us in all love and compassion to be
the children of God? Are they not our Noursing-mothers, to dandle and suckle
us, as newborn babes, with the milk of the Gospel, that we may grow up
thereby? Are they not our shepherds, to lead us into the green pastures, to
dress, and tenderly look to us, as the tender lambs of Jesus Christ? Are
they not Gods fisher men, to allure us as with a bayte: thereby, not to
constrain us by force, but to catch us with a wile. And do they not in all
this persuade us reasonable men, by most reasonable and tractable means, to a
matter most reasonable, even to return unto God?

For to proceed now to the substance of our conversion: and thence to prove
this manner of our Calling, by Alluring; as also 4. From the substance of
conversion. Rom: 1.
the equity thereof? Is our Conversion any other, then a restoring us to that
estate which heretofore we enjoyed in Adam, and lost by the malice of Satan?
And ought there to be any thing more acceptable unto us, then to come forth
of Darkness into a marvelous light, to be delivered from bondage? yea, from
bondage of Satan: unto the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, to be
plucked out of the horrible pit, and advanced to the highest Heavens, to be made
Lords of all, who before were vassalls unto all; To be at peace with all, who
before had all against us. Such is our conversion. Is there any thing more
reasonable?

Is it not most reasonable and equal, that God should have his will, who has
decreed our conversion? that he should enjoy the service of his creature, which
is obtained by conversion? that he should be loved of his children, that are so
made by conversion? Is it not meet and convenient, that we should be holy, as
our God is holy: that to eternal happiness, we should be made meet by
perfect holiness? Ought not members of the body to have the like (...)? Ought
not citizens of the same heavenly Jerusalem, to be of one mind? Nay, ought not
fellow-heirs of the same kingdom, be of the same nature, of the like beauty,
and glory? Such are we with Jesus Christ: and such are we made by conversion.
And is it not most equal that the Lord Jesus should have what he has
purchased at so dear a rate? 1. Pet: 1. 1. Cor: 6. Lastly, what true mark is
there of our conversion, which does not own this truth, that we were not
compelled, but persuaded and allured thereunto?

Have we peace of conscience, and so are at peace with God? 5. From the marks
of conversion.
who could have procured this, unless God had given it? how could we have
received this, unless the mind had been allured, and nourished with the love
of God? no entertainment of Gods love, but by ouercomming the heart with love;
No true evidence of Gods love unto us, but by out love unto him again. No
sound evidence of our love unto our God, but by our readiness to forsake all
for his sake, but by our delight in the excellent, and enlarged heart toward
them, not by constraint, but of a ready mind: 1, Pet: 5. 3. 4. So much we love
our God, as we desire his continual presence, and perpetual fruition of his
blessed society: By this do we know that we are of God, that we come boldly to
beg, or rather challenge his promise, that we will not be said nay, but are
answered in our chief desires. Thus God freely promises, Rom: 8. Math: 15.
and offers means to us not deserving it, that so we may not be discouraged,
but rather invited to embrace the same. And because Gods love is free,
therefore it preuailes upon the most unlikely: delivering the captive, and
giving sight to the blind: swallowing up despair in mercy, and crowning
corruption in glory. And because he makes us partakers of ye divine nature,
therefore also he enables us freely to love him, and cheerfully to obey him: 2.
Pet: 1. 3 Psa: 119. 46
to run the way of his Commandments, after he has set our hearts at
liberty: yea, he makes our feet like Hearts feet, so that by the help of our
God we leap over a wall: yea, he gives us wings, as to avoid unnecessary and
desperate extremities, so to fly speedily in the execution of the will of God.
That by this willing mind, we might not only be comforted, in respect of our
outward Use, Twofold.
failing, seeing the Lord has promised Not to quench the smoking Flax, nor
break the bruised Reed: but encouraged also, and enabled to constancy, and
perseverance, that so continuing to the 2. Cor: 8. 12.
end, the Crown may not be taken from us. Thus by the marks of conversion, is
the manner thereof confirmed unto us; Thus by Esaias: 42. 3.
this manner thereof, are we assured of the continuance of the same.

And is our Conversion then a work of grace, and free compassion Reuela: 3.
from the Lord? Is it accomplished by the word of peace? and sweet promises of
the Gospel, applied to the fainting soul, Use.
by the Spirit of grace and Compassion? Is it conveyed unto us by vessels of
Infirmity? which might better have compassion on us, and allure us to mercy,
as being subject to it: and therefore having experience of our misery. Is it
effected by melting the heart, Zach: 13.
with the apprehension of the love of God? Is is perfited by enlarging the
heart, to the obedience of our God? Well then may fire 2: Tim: 2. 23.
and faggot confound both body and soul: well may Antichrist enlarge an
earthly monarchy, with sword and outward violence: Ps: 119. 32. 0. Sweeter then
honey, and the hony-combe. Ps: 19. Joel: 2. 14. 1. Cor: 14.
but the mild voice of the Gospel must convert the soul: The means to fill
Heaven, must be the alluring of the spirit.

Oh why despair we to convert, though now miracles are ceased? seeing by the
power of the Word, the secrets of the heart are made so manifest, that God will
be acknowledged to be in us, that so we may convert unto God. If they will not
believe Moses and the prophets, neither will they believe though one come from
the dead; and yet to convert a sinner is more wonderful, the^ to raise from
the death. How vainly do they brag of a Church, that exclude the word of
God? how can we hope for the continuance of a Church, where the sound thereof
does not co^tinne? what hope is there of conversion, where doctrine is not
delivered, by which the mind is persuaded? what fear of further peruersion,
where laws are not executed, to compel men to persuasion? where deceivers are
permitted to poison with corrupt persuasion? Who so is wise, let him consider
Uses of Instruction. Pro: 1^. 3. 1. Col:
this, Let him see the plague, and hide himself: Let him try his conversion,
by the persuasion of his Judgment, that he is rooted in knowledge, and not
wavering in opinion: Let him examine his effectual calling, by the readiness
of his mind, and cheerfulnes in obedience, even to all the will of God: not a
part thereof: and that constantly and continually; not being weary of
well-doing, being more ready to do well, then for the present he is able: and
so enabled to well doing, that at length he may attain his desire; as of
perfect Marks of constant obedience, and means thereto: Gal: 6. 2. These: 3.
Ierem: 23. 1. Ioh: 4. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. Ioh: 2. Ephesians: 4. Esaias: 30. 24 25.
obedience, which he shall attain: so of perfect happiness, the recompense of
his labors, and full contentment of his utmost desires. And therefore let him
pray, for the continuance of the gospel, to quicke^ his desires. Let him
earnestly desire the confusion of Antichrist, that son of darkness, and enemy
to this glorious light. Let him be wise, to discern between the chafe and
the wheat: to try the Spirits, and hold what is good. Let him especially make
much of the Annoynting, and hearken to the voice behind him, not grieuing the
Spirit, nor quenching the motions thereof: that still there may be light in the
Land of Goshen, in the days of Famine, he may have enough. Exodus: 8. Job: 5.

Comforting himself, that seeing his conversion is from Gods alluring of free
love, and persuading by a power irresistable, not desired by him: therefore
being converted, he shall surely hold, Uses of Comfort.
when Heaven and earth shall pass: though thousands fall daily at his right
hand, and ten thousands at his left hand, yet shall not this plague of
Apostasy seize on him, who is kept by the mighty Ioh: 17. 12.
power of God, unto that great day, that he may be presented blameless unto
the Lord Jesus. And therefore not being discouraged 1. Pet: 1. 5.
for their going out from us, that were never truly of us, but rather enlarged
with continual praise unto his God, that 1 Thessalonians: 5. 13
leaves not him also to himself, to fall away with this present evil world,
but still humbles his flesh, to keep life in his soul, and 1. Phil: 29.
counts him worthy to suffer with his Christ: that so the life of Christ might
daily appear, for his approaching to glory. Thus does God persuade Iapheth to
dwell in the Tents of Shem. Thus is a Christian converted by persuasion. And
thus does God give him a Dowry with his marriage. Iapheth being persuaded, is
also enlaged. The kingdom of heaven being bestowed, interesses also God
enlarge Iapheth. Math: 6. 22. 5. Doctr: The faithful only have right in the
blessings of this life. Reasons.
the Faithful, in the possessions of the earth. The true belieuer alone is the
right owner of all Gods blessings. He that first seeks the kingdom of heaven,
shall have these things also cast upon him. Matthew: 16. 33. So profitable is
godliness, as well for this life, as that which is to come. 1. Tim. 4. 8. 9. So
Christ being ours, who is Lord of all in heaven and earth, Math: 28. all with
him is ours, both in heaven and earth. 1. Cor. 3. Rom 8. So have we only
grace to use those well, and therefore are only fit for them. So are those
only fit for us, as being sanctified by us, unto us.

Oh how vain then is their boasting, and labor, that toil Uses. Psalm: 127 1.
1. Tit: 1. 13. Psalm: 37. 1. Tim: 6. Matt: 6. 33, 1. Tim. 4. 5. Psalm: 62. 10.
Math: 16. 8 Eccl: 11. 1.
for these things without grace? how fearful is their account that possess
them without Christ? What comfort have we in the least, seeing it is unto us as
all? what hope of that which shall be sufficient for us? What wisdom ought we
to use, to make first sure of the best? what conscience in approving our right,
by our holy using of these things? What Faith in a better right, by renouncing
Confidence in these? by our williingnes, upon just occasion to part with them,
either to the good of our brother, though we cast our bread upon the waters,
or to the glory of God, though we even cast our lives after them?

Shall not he which thus leaves House or lands have recompense an
hundred-folde? shall not he find his life, that thus is Matthew: 19.
willing to loose it? Oh how can we better show our free power over these
things, the^ by keeping them short, that they may have no power over us:
neither over our hearts, by Covetousness, which is Idolatry; nor over our
bodies, by pinching and niggardlines, Ps: 62. 10. 1. Tim: 4. 2. 1. Cor. 8. 10.
nor over our Co^s^^^nce, by making difference, where God has made all good:
nor over our liberty, by abiectnes, and scrupulositie?

Oh that we would learn to renew and increase our sovereignty over the
Creature, by our daily subjection unto God, in acknowledgment of our
unworthines of the least, in craving his blessing, even upon the greatest. As
by the sense of our unworthiness, renewing our right in Christ, and disavowing
confidence in the greatest by submitting the blessing thereof unto our God,
that so giving Genes: 2.
God the glory of his mercies, he may enlarge himself unto us, to the making
of us meet to be vessels of glory: And thus are the Saints Lords of the earth.

And thus is the Church of JESUS CHRIST spread far and Josh. 4. 22.
near over the face thereof. That not only the God of them may be blessed by
one Nation, at Jerusalem, but that Iapheth also may be enlarged and diffused,
to dwell in the Tents of Shem; that the Gentiles being dispersed far and
near, might receive the Gospel; and also being Converted, might Convert their
Brethrem, even all the Nations upon the face of the earth.

GOD enlarge IAPHETH.
So then Iapheth must be persuaded and enlarged, as well as 6. Doctrine. The
Gentiles to be converted. Reasons. Ruth. 1: Job. 1. Rahab. Judge. 2. Romans 11.
Shem. The Gentiles must be converted, as well as the Jews. And why? Surely
God has so decreed it from all Eternity; and reuealeth the same by his
eternal Word, long before the accomplishment thereof. He accomplisheth it in
particulars, as pledges of a more plentiful Harvest: and he permits
obstinacy to come upon the Jew, that the wild Olive might be engraffed. So in
the fullness of time was this harnest brought in; in part by the Husbandmen of
the Lord JESUS, and in the fullness of time, shall the fullness of the Gentiles
be brought in, that the remnant of the castaway Israel, may be reaped in with
glory. And are not the ways of God most equal herein.? Shall not the Acts 10.
34. 35. Heb. 11: Revel. 12. 1. Col. 6. 1. Tim. 2. 2. Cant. 8. Esaias.
wind blow where it pleases? Has God any respect of persons? Is not God the
Lord of all the earth? Was not the blood of Christ available, to save even a
thousand worlds? Must not the Church to this end be a Traveler upon the face
of the earth? shall not the sound of the Word, go to the ends of the world?
Must we not pray for all sorts, because God will have some among all sorts to
be saved? Is not this our little sister that has no breasts, and yet shall
give suck? Is not this the barren, that shall bring forth, and have more
children then the married wife? Are not these the infinite number which none
could reckon, which should stand before the Throne, and the Lamb with long
white robes, and Palms in Revel. 7.
their hands? Thus shall the Gentiles embrace the Gospel.

1. And is not the word of God, Yea, and Amen? Is not Iapheth Use. 1. Cor. 1.
persuaded, and the Kingdom of Christ enlarged among us? Has it not a long
time rested in the tabernacles of Iapheth? 2. And was it removed from the
tents of Shem; that so it be planted in the inhabitants of Iapheth? Oh, then
let let us consider, that Shem is to be replanted. 3. Let us desire the
restoring and reclaiming of the first born. 4. Let us fear the casting off, of
the Little sister, seeing the elder was cast off, and is to be recalled 5. And
let us look for the remoueall of the Gospel from one nation to Note.
another, where it is not retained with conscience and profit. And if God will
not forsake us, till we forsake him; take heed 1. Chro: 15. 2. Act: 13. 48.
then we put not from us the word of life. And what if we be preparing a place
in Virginea, or Ireland; to receive the same? 6. These must have a calling, and
we a cooling, for the time: that we may be provoked to zeal, even by foolish
and forlorn nations; and recover our first love, by extending it to our
brethren. That as Note.
the falling of one Nation may be the raising of another; so this reuniting of
the Gospel may bring in the number of the Elect: that so our war-fare being
finished, our glory may begin, never to have an end. Thus shall Iapheth be
persuaded to dwell in the moveable tents of Shem; that Shem and Iapheth, may
dwell for ever in full and constant happiness.

But some will say, what need Iapheth to be persuaded to dwell in the Tents
of Shem; who already was a member with A. Question.
Shem, of the true Church, as performing the duties of piety, to God and men?

We answer; that the holy Ghost, not only entendeth the person of Iapheth,
as desiring his continuance particularly in the Answer.
true worship of God; but especially has reference to Iapheths posterity, as
foreseeing their declination from true Religion, to Idolatry, which fell out
not long after: and therefore directing the Spirit of holy Noah; not only as a
Father, to desire the return of his posterity to the Church of Christ, but
especially, as the mouth of God, to pronounce their restitution in the ages to
come. Whence we learn many notable Lessons.

As first, that godly parents and believers, ought not only to have care for
the present, but also for the future estate of their 7. Doctrine: Saints must
have care for the posterity of the Church. Reasons.
posterity: the true Church of God, that so it may abide in the Faith of JESUS
CHRIST. So do they imitate GOD, who prouides for Eternity: so do they
approve their Faith, when they see a far off: so do they testify their love,
which abides for ever. 1. Cor. 13. So do they manifest their hope in the full
accomplishment of the Elect: So do they further the propagation of the Church
to her perfect consummation, and Communion in heaven. To this end, are they
commanded to declare the will of GOD, Deuteronomy: 6. 7. Josh. 4.
unto their children. To this end, did they set up Monuments of Gods special
love, and memorials of his will and favor, not only to testify their
thankfulness for the present, but to teach the Generations to come, that the
people which were to be Psalm. 132. 8. 1. Tim. 5.
created should praise the Lord. And if they were worse then Infidels, that
provided not for the outward estate of their posterity: where is then their
Faith, that neglect the souls of their successors?

Oh, what a curse then is Barrenness, and deprivation of posterity? Use.
How much greater a plague to make wicked our posterity, by preposterous
worldly provision, and neglect of Spiritual Legacies? How happy those parents,
that sendssuch wicked seed before the^? But thirce unhappy they, that rejoice
in their wickedness; provoking them by evil example, to imitation of evil:
and applauding evil imitation, under pretense of ligitimation; as if to differ
from them in sin, were to be degenerate and bastards. How can they call GOD
their Father, that neglect to be nursing fathers to his Church? either caring
for their own, as if the time to build Gods house were not yet come, and
therefore they neglect the restoring of it: or else lay it further desolate, as
eclipsing their glory, and confounding their pleasures. Oh, where shall such
Iulians appear, that seek to repair Babylon again, and deriding the poor
members of CHRIST, that they must suffer affliction, do therefore add
affliction to affliction, and cry, down with it, down with Psalm. 131.
it, even to the ground.

Surely, though Abraham know us not, and Israel has forgotten Esaias 69. 15.
us, yet the Keeper of Israel does neither slumber nor sleep. He is our
Father, and will have compassion on us: and when he sees that we are
confounded thoroughly in our carnal confidence, and take unto us words, and say
unto him: Take away all our iniquity, Ose. 14. 3. 4.
and receive us graciously, so will we render the calves of our lips, Ash^^
shall not save, neither will we ride upon horses; neither will we say any more
unto the work of our hands, ye are our Gods: then will the Lord heal Zeph: 3.
Esaias 59. 16.
our rebelion, and love us freely: then shall his own right hand sustain him,
when all help from men fails. Then shall he take away out of the midst of us,
them that rejoice in our pride, and we soal no more be proud of his holy
mountain. Then will he leave in the midst of us, an humble and poor people,
and they shall trust in the name of the Lord: and in those shall it appear,
Zoph. 3. 11. 12.
he has care of the posterity of the Church. Forthere shall be of these, that
shall build the old waste places; they shall raise up the foundations, for
many generations, They shall be called the repairers of the breach, and the
resteres of the paths to dwell in. And this shall be written Esaias. 58. 12.
Psalm. 102. 18.
for the generations to come, that the people which shall be created and
converted in Virginea, Irelan, or elsewhere, may praise the Lord. Oh, prosper
the works of our hands, o Lord, for the accomplishment of thy will, in
bringing in the fullness of the Gentiles: Oh, prosper thou again, and again,
our handy works, and holy desires; that thy King may be set upon the holy
Hill of Sion; and Psalm. 2. 6.
our King, and his happy issue, may continue the Gospel to the generations to
come; that so he having care for the advancement of thine earthly Tabernacle,
thou may continue and so advance his corruptible crown, as to make it an
undoubted pledge unto him and his, of an incorruptible crown to all eternity.

Thus may there be care for the posterity of Sion. And is there not great
reason it should be so? Have not the best fallen, where this care has bin
neglecte? ddid not Iapheths posterity falaway to the worship of Idols? May not
good Parents have a wicked generation?

1. Is God tied to nature? 2. Or, shall nature necessarily 8. Doctrine. Good
parents may have a wicked Generation.
enforce grace? 3 Are there not usually evil seed of an holy stock? 1. To
confound nature, and 2. advance the free election of Grace? 3. yea, to chastise
gracious Parents, for presuming onthe present, and so neglecting holy
discipline, to humble nature to grace. 4. Can it otherwise be, where only
nature, and not grace, is the seeds-man to posterity? 5. And must it not be
so, that grace only may be magnified, and God only glorified? 6. Are not Gods
ways unsearchable? 7. Is not his Wisdom infinite? 8. Is not his will as
absolute, and 9. his Justice a great deep? Romans 11. Use. John 8. Matthew. 16.


1. In vain therefore does the Pharisie boast of Abraham, and Antichrist; and
very foolishly do parents abuse, the providence of God, either in neglecting
Discipline; either upon fear that it is bootlesse, as if it must needs fall
out that their children will prove graceless; or in pampering the flesh, in
hope that their issue will not abuse it. They are holy, and so is their seed,
and therefore why should they not use their liberty, though it be an occasion
to the Call. 5. 13.
flesh. And are not they as much faulty, that punish the infants for Gal. 5.
15. Eccl. 18. 2.
their fathers offense, making a necessary conclusion, that grapes cannot come
of thorns: And therefore condemning peremptorily the children of wicked
parents, vpbraiding the poor infants, with their parents vices; denying them
means of salvation, as Baptism, etc. Because their parents happily have
abused it. Is not this to restrain God to man? Is not this for man to intrude
into Gods prerogative, who is the only discerner of the Ierem. 17. 10. 2. Tim.
2. 19.
heart; who only knows who are his? Oh, how much better were it to leave the
secret things to God. Deuteronomy. 29 29. and make trial of the means which are
revealed, and obuious unto us: not making the sin of the parents a bar of
Gods mercy to the children, Who will have mercy upon whom he will have
mercy: but rather Romans 9.
admitting the child to the means of mercy, where the parents obstinacy and
contempt is no present bar thereto, and so watching over the^ more tenderly,
the more their estate is to be feared; that so by holy education they may be
fitted to that grace, whereunto in such case usually they are appointed, for
the advancement Note.
of Gods free mercy.

Surely, howsoever it fall out, yet here is our comfort, that when we have
done our part, our labor shall not return in vain: either our care shall be
a means to maintain an holy posterity, or keep us from being partakers in
the judgment of a wicked posterity. Well, they may be a griese unto us, to
make us hunger after our happiness, and so happily, they may be means to
hasten us thither: how soever, our labor shall return into our own bosom, to
make us more holy though they prove more wicked. And though the world shall
upbraid us, with that, wherein they should pity, and rather keep silence,
seeing it is Gods doing; yet shall this also turn to our good. God shall be
justified by the world, while it reproacheth us: as having done herein his good
will and pleasure: and we shall be comforted, in regard of their reproaches: so
we have this testimony, that having done our best, we submit to Gods will, as
giving him leave to do with his own what pleases him, yet not neglecting to
do his revealed will in displeasing our flesh; and so in Gods stead, executing
his wrath, where otherwise we must love; and hating the sin, though we
reverence his work. Thus, though good parents may have a wicked posterity,
yet may they either by this means reclaim them, or at least avoid fellowship
in their plagues: And does not the Lord here, give good hope of their
reclaiming? Did he not provide a Savior, before man had sinned? does he not
here foretell of it, and so assure the return of the Gentiles, before yet they
were; much less were fallen away? Did he not provide an Hester to deliver his
Church, before ever Hamans plot was dreamed of to endanger the same. Oh, the
faithfulness of our God! how certane is his love, how certainly shall we
return, though we fall for a time.

Can the truly Righteous, possibly fall away finally? 1. Is there any 9.
Doctrine. The faithful shall be recovered out of their greatest fall. 1. Job.
3. Romans 7. Romans ^. ^4. 1. Cor. 11. 31. Psalm. 89.
end of Gods mercies? 2. Was there any beginning of his love? 3. Have not all
the Saints returned? 4. Does not our Savior live for ever, to quicken his
eternally? 5. Shall not thy Spiritabide with us for ever? 6. Shall our
iniquity cancel what our righteousness did not confirm? can the Lord deny
his word? 7. W^l he give his glory to another? 8. Does he which is born of God
sin at all, either in the regenerate part, whereby he still pleases God, or
finally in the unregenerate; which finally, shall be perfectly cleansed, or
abelished? 9. Shall not all things work together, for the good of the elect?
and shall their sin then, otherwise provoke God against them, as to judge them
in this life, that they may not be condemned in the life to come: so to
chastise them with the rods of men, that his mercy be not taken from them?

A way then with that hellish doctrine, that robbes God of the glory of his
faithfulness, and power; and man of the sound comfort Use.
of his salvation, by evacuating Christ's death, and auouching the uncertainty
and inconstancy of salvation. And avoid we, presumption to fall, though we
shall rise again, seeing God will not be merciful to presumptious sinners:
and the least fall of the Saints, though it cannot finally exclude from
salvation, yet may it grieuoufly deface the beauty of sanctification; and so
make this present life very bitter and uncomfortable unto us: howsoever it
cannot utterly deprive us, of the comfort of the life to A Christian how
preserved from falling.
come. Rather learn we in Gods fear, To keep our selves from falling: by,
1. Fearing our selves: 2. and walking always in Gods presence: 3. rest we
wholly on the word, 4. and renounce carnal wisdom, 5. avoiding all occasion
and appearance of evil, 6. learn we to use aright our Christian liberty, 7.
and commune we daily with our hearts to prevent security. 8. Walk we in our
calling to prevent idleness and curiosity, 9. and call we earnestly on our
God that he suffer us not to be led into tentation. 10. Keep thy judgment
sound that we cannot be too holy, 11. and conscience tender, by racking it
daily by the Law: 12. reprove we sin boldly in others, to keep us from the
like. 13. Meditate we on the punishments of sin, to keep us from
presumption, 14. and remember we how the dearest Saints have smarted, to
prevent singularity; 15. Especially look we up unto Jesus, and what he has
done for us: that the consideration of his infinite love may keep us from
dishonouring him, that the meditation of his intolerable plagues, may preserve
us from crucisying him again. 16. Consider we the difficulty of being saved,
and therefore let us do our best: and lastly, remember we our end and
reckoning we must give up, the one so uncertain, the other so sure, and
unavoidable, that so at no time we be found unready.

Thns may we be kept from falling into sin: And thus also How recovered and
raised up again. Ezech. 18. Ierem. 18. Ose 6. 2. 1. Josh. 1. 7. 8.
may we learn to arise out of the same. As, by meditation of Gods
commandment to have us return: and pondring of his promises that he will
heal and renew us. To this end, look we up unto JESUS, that triumphs over
sin, and makes daily intercession for pardon thereof, and see we our
inquitie through the glass of his mercy, that so despair being prevented, we
may find our sin pardonable. Then press we to the Throne of grace, with a
broken and humble spirt, and testify we our just hatred and indignation
against our sin, by justifying our God, and imposing some Spirtuall
humiliation on our selves. Oh, let our souls refuse all other comfort; till
the conscience be quieted in 1. Cor. 7.
the blood of the Lamb: and give we the Lord no rest, till he return to his
rest, and restore unto us, the joy of his salvation? Psalm. 5. 12. 13. Psalm. 32.
5.
Now let sin be confessed in particular; the more to break the heart, and
that against our selves, to the justifying of our GOD. Now let Vows be
renewed; not only to avoid the like sin, but to be more wary of all
occasions, and appearance of evil: Redeem we the time more conscionably, and
watch we more narrowly over our own hearts, and outward man; withdrawing them
from the love of the world, and arresting them in the presence of God:
persuading our selves that we are not thoroughly returned, till at least we
have had some glimpse of Gods favor renewed in JESUS CHRIST, though not
discerned in that glorious object which dwells in the light that none can
attain unto; yet apprehended by the beams thereof reflected on our hearts, by
our peace with God, and contentment in his will: who though he happily restore
us not presently to that full measure of feeling and joy, we heretofore
enjoyed, yet remember Use of comfort. 2. Cor: 5. 7.
we, that we live by Faith, and not by sense: and that our whole life is no
other then renewed repentance. And therefore comfort we our selves, that what we
feel not, we must and shall believe; as by Faith seeing a far off: so
contenting our selves 2. Pet. 1. 8. 9.
with what is presently restored to be sufficient: as that still we live by
faith, hungring after the best graces: not only the restitution of such
measure, which heretofore we enjoyed: but even the inioying of that fullness of
joy and pleasures which is at the right hand of GOD for evermore. Wisely
discerning the providence Reassons. Why God denies unto his child that measure
of comfort which heretofore he enjoyed.
of our God, in not resting so much on feeling, as heretofore we have had. Not
only for the trial of our Faith, if now we can rest on our God without
feeling, but also for the preventing, and subduing of spiritual pride; to
which, seeing extraordinary feeling of Gods favor, is a great occasion, through
the malice of Satan, raising hence singularity, and so security and remissenes
in well doing: if not robbing God of his glory: Therefore it pleases our good
God, though he restore peace unto us, yet to withold from us wisely, such
draughts of joy, that so we might forget what is behind, and hasten to that
which is before, as both taking less delight in any worldly contentment which
before was sweetened unto us, by that ouerflowing of Spiritual joy: and
fainting the more earnestly, after that full and constant measure thereof in
heaven, that so our joy may no more be taken from us. And therefore striving
more diligently, to make us meet partakers of that glorious inheritance, that
so in due time, as a ricke of corn, we may be carried into the barn, and
received into our Fathers eternal joy.

Thus may we recover out of our most desperate falls; thus may we be comforted
in the measure of our recovery: as being that which is fittest to hasten us to
glory.

And thus shall Iapheth be brought again to the Tents of Shem; the Gentiles
shall be restored to the true worship of God, as a true and lively figure unto
us, of the constancy of Gods love, in restoring his children, and recovering
them out of their greatest falls. And these are the lessons we may learn from
this, that Iapheth shall dwell in the Tents of Shem.

And is it a small thing, that the Gentiles, which were originally without God;
yea, who had forsaken God, shall once be restored again to the knowledge and
worship of Jehovah: Surely meruellous things are spoken of thee thou City of
God? Wonderful are the mercies that hereby the Gentiles have been invested
with. Shall we wade a little further into the particular consideration of
them? Follow we then the spirit of God in the unfolding of them: What is the
general sum of the Blessings, that Iapheth shall enjoy? It follows, That
Iapheth may dwell in the Tents of Shem This is the sum of the Blessing, to
dwell in the Tents of Shem. 1. That is, to be joined unto the Jews, both in
the true worship of God, as also in the privileges thereof.

2. What is the true worship of God? This is described unto us, 1. by the
subject, Shem: who was the Father of the Jews, fignifying thereby unto us,
that the religion of the Jews for substance, is the true worship. How shall
this appear? Surely by these circumstances. 10. Obseru: Thereligion of the
Jew, Why the true religion and thence the marks of true religion. Ierem: 6.
11. It was not so from the beginning says our Savior Christ.


First, Shem was the eldest Son; not only by Nature, but by Grace; He first
in his Fathers house, called on the Name of God; The Jews of him, were also
the firstborn; First, in the temporal Election, first, in the set worship of
God, and so also, in the spiritual election. And therefore seeing the truth is
most Ancient, the old way is the true way: Therefore the religion of the Jews
is the true worship of God.

Secondly, That which was commanded of God, and performed, both for the
substance and manner, is the true Religion; Such was the religion of the Jew;
wholly commanded of God, both for matter and manner; informed from Gods own
mouth. Exodus: 20. Directed by his own finger, even to the square and building
of the Tabernacle. And therefore the Religion of the Jew, was the true
Religion. And so all will worship is a false religion; that which God only
commands, is the truth only. Pet: 2. 1. 19. Colloss: 2. 23.

Thirdly, That which procures salvation to the performer is the truth; Such is
the religion of the Jew: As not only pointing at Christ to come; But apply^^g
Christ as come al^eady, though not in the Flesh, yet in power and efficacy; as
being a Lamb, slain from the beginning of the world.

Fourthly, True godliness is not only available for the life to come, but even
for this life also: Such was the religion of the Jew; so long as they walked
after this rule, so long the Lord blessed them, and advanced their temporal
estate maruellously, as he promised: Deutron: 2^. Leuit: 6. and accordingly
abased them, as they failed therein.

Fifthly. And is not that the truth, to which all must yield? by which all must
be directed? Must not they return unto us, and not we unto them? Ierem: 15.
12. Shall not all nations take hold of the skirt of a Jew and say, we will go
with you, because the Lord is with you? Zach: 8. Must not Iapheth dwell in the
Tents of Shem, not Shem in the Tents of Iapheth?

Sixthly. And shall not the Truth abide for ever? Shall not the remnant of
Israel be saved? Shall not the Jews (though for a time Ierem: 31. Ezech: 11.
cast off) yet be brought in again? And so the promise of God certain, Gods
covenant with the Jew everlasting. And so the original truth, the everlasting
truth. The Jews religion, as most ancient, so most permanent, and perpetual.

Seventhly, Was not the Jew an abomination to the Aegiptian? Hated of the
world.
Is not that the truth, which is hated of the world?

Use.
Behold then, the true notes of the true Church, and worship of God, and

1. Try we our selves by these, whether we be in the faith or no? Know we
not that Jesus Christ dwells in us, except we be reprobates? 2. Cor: 13. 5.

2. Discern we wisely our estate by these, that it is not so well with us, as
happily we may flatter our selves: Ioh: 8. He is not a Jew, which is a Jew
outward only, Rom: 2. It is not the circumcision of the Flesh, but the
circumcision* of the heart, which Joel: 2.
God accepts. Rent we therefore our hearts, and not our garments, and turn
to the Lord our God, whose mercies are everlasting: who loves Truth in the
inward parts. And though he correct us with the rods of men, yet will not
take his sure mercies from us: Iapheah shall dwell in the Tents of Shem.

And is the Church of God the Tents of Shem: Howsoever afterward glorious in
Shems posterity, both for number, and outward magnificence; yet now mean, and
contemptible, as abiding in Tents. Now little, and almost invisible, as
confined to one Family, and not containing all thereof, consisting only of
eight persons, whereof the one was a Castaway.

Behold we here then the condition of the Church of God, and therein
consider we further these necessary Adjuncts thereof.

First, It is a little Flock; Luke 22. 32. for whom it pleases our heavenly
Father to provide a Kingdom, though many are called, The Church a little
flock.
yet few are chosen, Matthew: 22. though without number in it scife, yet in
comparison of the reprobate, but a little flock: even as the gleaning of
grapes after the Vintage. Matthew. 7. 1. Yea, Revel: 7. Isay: 5. 19. Matthew: 11.
Reasons. Matthew: 17.
as signs and wonders, so are they in the world.

1. So is the good pleasure of our God: who will have mercy on whom he will
have mercy.

2. So narrow is the gate, that few enter therein.

3. So hard a saying it is to Flesh, to hate it self; to be borne again; to
take up the Cross; to become Fools; that we may be wise, that no marvel if
the wisdom of our Flesh be Enmity against God, that the most forsake Christ,
it will necessarily 1. Cor. 3. Rom: 8. 7. Esaias. 53. 1. Cor: 1. 27. Luke: 10.
Use,
follow, Ioh 6. Who will believe our report, which is so unlikely, so
distasteful, to corrupt reason?

And if not many Mighty, many Noble, etc: are chosen, It is no wonder; Because
they will not with Marie, choose the better part, which shall not be taken away
from them.

First, Oh how vain then is their conceit, that dream all shall be saved? How
fearful is their course that so live, as unless all be saved, it is
impossible, but that they must be condemned?

Is it safe following the multitude, seeing few shall be saved? Psalm: 44. 1.
Pet: 1.
Will the example of great ones deliver from Hell, howsoever they may shelter
us from bodily punishment? Why then do we make them our warrants, to run
the broad way? Why then do we advance them above all that is called God? as
if their Laws were absolute, their authority uncontrollable? Is it not better
to obey God then man? Must we needs run to Hell for company? Is it not
enough to yield our bodies and goods, which they gave us not? Who so is wise,
Use of Instr: Matthew: 10. Psalm: 37. Math: 22. Psalm: 131. 2. Tim: 3. 12. 13. Heb.
12. 8. 9. 2: Cer: 44. 15. 16. 17. 2. Nehem: Ioh: 14. Use of comforts.
let him consider these things. First, Let him fear him that can kill both
body and soul. 2. Let him not freat at the prosperity of the wicked; and yet
give unto Caesar the thing which are Caesare. 3. Let him be little in his own
eyes, that so he may be contented with his portion, though it be the Crppe of
Affliction: So it be a proseruatiue from sin, a Badge of his Master Christ,
a Pledge of his loving Father, a spur to perfection, a procurer of an
incorruptible crown. 4. Let it not grieve him to be salsely charged with
singularity, that he is an odde-Fellow: that he walks alone, that he is more
nyce then needs; that he is no Good Fellow; No Friend to Caesar; seditious,
pestilent: This was the portion of the Saints. This they had because they were
contrary to the world, because they were of this little flock. And, Let this
comfort the Saints, that wisdom is justified of her children; Nay, it shall
be justified of the enemies thereof. When Joseph is tried, and his Math: 27.
Psalm: 105. 16. 17.
cause is known, the Princes shall deliver him, and do homage unto him.
Balaam shall desire to die the death of the righteous: Pilates Wife shall wish
him to have nothing to do with that just man: Nay, Judas shall confess he
has sinned, in betraying of Number: 23.
Innocent blood; And shall not the Saints judge the world? Is not this the
victory of our faith, that it ouercometh the world? Matthew: 27. 1. Cor: 6. 2.
13. 1. Pet: 5. 4. 5 Ioh: 17. Luk: 22. 32. 1. Tim: 2. Rom: 16. 1. Cor. 15. Ps:
112. 8. 9. Rom: 5. 3 To. 8. 36. 37
Shall not this little flock be preserved blameles unto the day of Christ?
Will the great shepherd of our souls loose any, that he has washed with his
blood? And is the servant above the Master? Is it not our honor to be
entertained as Christ Jesus was? If we suffer with him, shall we not reign
with him? Shall we not treadsathan under our feet? Shall not death be
swallowed up in victory? Shall we not see our desire upon our enemies? Shall we
not laugh at destruction, and rejoice in tribulation, because we are more then
Connquerours through Jesus Christ? Mean while, least the hope that is deferred
should prove the fainting of the soul, Are not the Saints Lords of all the
earth? Have they not right to all? Have they not grace to use all well? Have
the wicked any thing but for their sakes, though they can beteeme the Saints
nothing? Is not the small thing that the righteous has, better then great
riches of the ungodly? Psalm: 37. Shall not the righteous put on the Raiment
which the wicked have made? Job: 27. Do the wicked heap up silver as the
dust, and shall not the Saints divide it? If they be in Affliction, must not
the Saints pray for them? Genes: 20. If any trust be to be committed, who then
faithful but the Saints? If any desperate Judgment come, who then delivered,
but the Saints?

Ebedmelech shall have his life for a prey, because he spoke kindly for the
servant of God: and Jeremy shall be delivered, and possessed with the Revenues
and commodities of his enemies. He shall have his liberty to serve God in the
land of Judea, Ierem. 39.
when the great ones shall be carried captives into Babylon, and there loose
their honors and lives.

Lo thus shall this little flock prevail in this life; and shall it not also
be crowned in the life to come? Shall not God wipe all tears from our eyes,
and crown us with eternal happiness? Revel 27: Means to discover the power
hereof. 2. Cor: 3. 7. 2. Pet: 1. 8. Psalm: 73. 3. Ps: 91. Psalm: 37. 1.


Oh that we were wise, to know our own strength, to use it to our best
behoof, to live by faith, that sense deceive us not. To see far off, that
present things distract us not. To enter into Gods Sanctuary, that we may be
kept sound in judgment, to discern aright of Gods providence; and to walk in
our ways, that, so we may not fret at the prosperity of the wicked, nor
desire to eat of such things as please them; That we may not tempt our God, by
not keeping in our ways: and thereby exceeding the bounds of his providence,
exclude our selves his protection.

1. That we could learn true Contentation in our God, in whom we shall be
abundantly satisfied, in recompense of any worldly disaster whatsoever; will
not he be better unto us Phil: 4. 12.
then ten Sons? Is not his favor more worth, then all the deceitful
savors of Princes? Are not his riches durable? Is there any vexation in his
ways? Oh that by prayer and meditatton we would grow familiar with this
glorious God, that he may open his treasures unto us, and reveal his sweetness
unto our 2 Cor: 12. 1. Cor: 15.
souls; Should we not be ravished, and taken up into the third Heavens?
should we know any man after the flesh? should we not discern all things, and
yet be judged of none? Should we not possess all things, even when in a sort
we have nothing? Should we esteem to be judged of men, or of man's judgment?
1. Cor: 2. 2: Cor: 4. 6. 1. Cor: 4. 4:
Should we be afraid of men?

Should we not walk constantly with our God? Should not Virginia receive us?
Shall not Ireland be our sanctuary, to call on the name of the Lord? seeing
there it shall be well with us? Nay, if we pass through fire and water, will
not the Lord be with us? Esaias: 4^.

Who so is wise, let him again consider of these things: This little flock is
as dear unto the Lord, as the apple of his eye. It is his glory, his delight,
here will he dwell for ever. And if he be with us, who can be against us?
Could the gu^pouder treason take effect? shall not Antichrist be confounded?
shall not Jerusalem be a cup of poison to all the enemies thereof? shall not
the Church be a stumbling stone, that whosoever seek to remove it, shall be
broken in pieces therewith? Has the Lord begun to enlarge us Zach: 12.
far and near to Virginia, and Ireland, and are not their hopes in vain,
that seek to root Gods church out of England? Are not their chalenges
unnatural, and wicked, that denievs to have a Church of God in England? has
not God wonderfully preserved this little Island, this Angle of the world? that
in former Ages was not known, or accounted to be any part of the world? Has
it not been the Sanctuary of all the Christian world? Have not all the
neighbor-nations taken hold of the skirt of an Englishman? have Et penitus toto
deuisos orb Britannos. Zach: 8.
they not joined themselves to us, because the Lord is with us? Are they not
happily sheltred under our gracious government? Are they not one with us, in
this late renewing, and increase of our blessed UNION.

So may the Lord still more unite us in the unity of the spirit, that the
bonds of our peace may be more holy and inviolable. So may the desire of all
Nations be unto us, that our desires may be enlarged to all nations, for their
comfort and conversion.

So may the Lord bless all our holy designs far and near, for the
establishing of peace, and setting up the Kingdom of his Christ, both abroad
and at home. So may all the devices of Antichrist and his Locusts be still
confounded: So may their eyes rot in their heads, in looking for the day to
build up Babell again.

So bless thou oh Lord the holy meetings of the State, that in the continuance
and increase of the liberty of the Gospel, we may secure our liberty, and
advance thy glory, we may provide for the liberty of our posterity, in
conueying thy worship unto them, more glorious then we found it. That so, in
the increase of thy glory, thy Church may be continued, and propagated, in the
happy issue of our anointed, thy servant, James our gracious King and
Governor, and his posterity, even till it have accomplished it warfare, and
be taken up to glory. Thus is the true Church of God a little flock. Thus
shall this little flock be preserved, and presented glorious unto her
bridegroom Jesus Christ: And shall not this little flock have a certain
evidence thereof, even in her condition in this life? May she not assuredly
persuade her heart, that the Lord will make good his word; as advancing his
free love, and giving him the glory of all his mercies? 1. And does not the
Lord reserve the glory entirely to himself, when he brings light out of
darkness, and shows his power in weakness, working by none, or most unlikely
means?

Consider we (I pray you) to this purpose, the Condition of the Church of
Christ militant here on earth; yet further shadowed out unto us in these Tents
of Shem. What great outward beauty was there here, when the house of God was
in Tents? what pomp and visibilitie, in this simplicity and meeknes?

Behold then another mark and cognizance of the true Church of God in this
life. The glory that she has, is especially within: Her Psalm: 45. Ezech: 16.
Obs: 12. The Church obscure and invisible in the world. Reason. 1. Pet: 2. 11.
2. Tim: 2. Ps. 73. 23. Cantic: 5. Psalm: 130.
beauty, is that which God has imparted unto her? She is fair by my
beauty, which I have put on her Spiritual beauty, from an invisible God. As
for her show in the world, she is black and contemptible, 1. even as her head
Christ Jesus; that had no form nor beauty in him, and other she cannot be, so
long as she is a Stranger, a Soldier in this world: She must needs have
blows, and falls too. How can she choose but be soyled, being to travel in
such slippery and myrie places? 1. And is it not good she should be thus
black, to prevent spiriruall pride? Does not this manifest the carnal
desposition of the wicked; who stumble at this outward baseness? Are not the
Saints hereby purged of corruption, and so prepared to glory?

Is not the Lord glorified in accepting such blacknes? does not his free mercy
triumph in saving such deformity. Is not Christ's sacrifice available to heal
such infirmity? Can a true member be discerned by sense? Is not our greatest
part in Heaven? 1. How Use 1
deceitful then is that Church which is always glorious, and 2
visible: How does the pomp and bravery of the strumpet, 3
deforme and defile the chaste spouse of Jesus Christ? Is not the word Ioh: 6.
of God truly glorious in the spirit, does not the outside kill? Is it not
the spirit that quickens? does not the Authority of man, abase and
annihilate the power thereof? Are not the Prophets Malach: 2. 4. 5.
justly vile before the people, because they are partial in the law?
adulterating the same by the intentions of men? obscuring and deprauing the
simplicity and inward beauty of the gospel Matthew: 15.
by their outward vernish, and carnal pollishing? And shall not Dagon fall
before the Ark of the Lord? Is it not enough that 1. Sam: 5: Esaias: 8. 19. 1.
Cor: 4 18. 19.
the foundation of God stands sure? the Lord knows who are his.

Though we be as Wonders, yea, as the Off-scowring, in the reputation of the
world: Are we less dearer unto God, then the apple of his eye? Are we not
all fair in his sight, and no spotte to be found in us? Is not the Church
even then the glory of Zach: 2. Cantic: 1. Esaias: 4: 5.
God, when she is most inglorious in the world?

Is it not because we are accepted with God, that we are despised of men? And
are we not despised of men, that so we may hate the world, and cleave more
firmly to our God, that Ioh: 14.
so we might be more and more cleansed, to be made fit for our glorious
God? Does not our inglorious estate in this life, prepare us to the glory of
the life to come?

Let it therefore content us that we are known unto our God; and let it be our
comfort, that our life is hid with Christ in God: Coll: 3. 3.
that so, when Christ which is our life shall appear, we may also appear
with him in glory.

Let them beg Honor of the people, that are cast out of Gods favor. And let
such build up resting places and mansio^s 1. Sam. 15. Genes: 4.
in the earth, that are runnagates from God, castawayes from his favor, having
no hope nor right in the heavenly ma^sions. If God cast these things upon us,
we have a right in them, and so have Gene: 42. 43
grace to use them. The Church obtains honor in Aegipt and Babylon, even in the
la^d of her captivity, she prospers, and is renowned. Only let us not
ambitiously seek this worldly greatness. It must not Matthew: 19.
be so with us. The servant is not above his master; and the Master (though
Lord of all) yet was servant unto all: that so we might learn of him to be
humble and meek; that we might learn to be abased, as well as to abound;
that we might become all unto all, to win some unto CHRSIT JESUS. Let us not
therefore, much less, stand peremptorily upon this outward pomp, as if the
Church were but in her infancy, when she was in her native purity, and
simplicity; but the more outward glory she has gained, the more she grows to
perfection: and therefore as the times are, cannot be without worldly dignity.
All things are lawful, but all things to all sorts not expedient. Greatness
1. Cor. 10.
breeds envy, not love usually: and how shall we win them if they do not
love us? Fullness breeds security, and security idleness; how then shall we
pluck them out of the fire, Jude 23.
if we will take no pains? How shall we give up our account with joy, if we
bury our talent in a napkin? How shall we make 2. Tim. 2. 2. Tim. 4.
our Ministry fully known, without suffering afflictions?

The Lord give the Church more and more favor with Princes, that as it has
begun, so it may increase, even in outward peace and prosperity, and a
flourishing estate, which may serve as a good means for the propagation of the
Gospel; that Iapheth may dwell for ever with Shem in his fathers house. Thus,
though Iapheth dwell herein tents, meanly and obscure, yet shall both Shem and
Iapheth shine gloriously for ever, in most durable mansions, even in the
Kingdom of heaven, which shall not fade nor be diminished.

Shall we consider yet further the ground thereof. Must not Iapheth dwell in
the tents of Shem, the first borne of his father, the son of the inheritance,
the stock of the promised seed? Acts 13. The true invisible Church, consists
only of the Elect.
And are any then of the true Church of CHRIST, but they alone, that have the
privilege of the first borne, who are of the election of God, for whom the
father has ordained a kingdom? And will the Son loose any that the Father
has committed unto him? Did he die for any but for his Church, who is the
Savior of his body, which is his Church? Is he the Savior of any especially,
but those that do believe? 1. Tim. 4. 8. And do any believe, but those that
are ordained to everlasting life? Acts 13.

Behold, here the true members of the Church of Jesus Christ; even they alone,
whose hearts are purified by Faith; only such are they, that are dead unto the
world, and know no man after Acts 11. 13.
the flesh: that have their conversion in heaven, whose names are written in
heaven, whose head CHRIST JESUS, is ascended, to draw them up into heaven after
him.

Oh, that we were wise to try our selves, that we did not content our selves to
be branches; unless we bring forth fruit, seeing Use. John 15. Zach. 13. 8. 9.
1. John 2. 19.
then the fruitless shall be cut off: and yet the fruitful shall be cut and
lopped, yea pass through the fire; though it be not consumed thereof. Does
the hypocrite make a show? his candle shall be put out. Is he gone out from
us? he was never with us, yet must be still be with us, that he may purge out
our coruption, and be cast out from us, when his iniquity is ripe, and sin
being made out of measure sinful, becomes inexcusable and desperate. Yea,
which is the wonderful providence of God, and power of the word, he cannot
choose but be with us.

The sweetness of the Word allures and inticeth him, he is Luke 8. Mark 20:
Psalm. 149. 7. Acts 24. 6. Acts 26. 28. 1. Cor. 8. 2. Matthew. 9. Cant. 5. Exodus
5. John 7. 46.
caught thereby, to give consent unto the same, to receive it with joy, yea, to
do many things galdly, yea the power of the Word binds kings in chains. It
makes Felex tremble; and brings Ahab to his sackcloth: yet for all this,
Agrippa will be (at the best) but almost a Christian: Knowledge puffes us, and
so not accompanied with grace, hardens the heart against grace. What is this
Carpenters son? What is thy Beloved, more then other beloueds? Who is the
Lord, that I should let Israel go? that I should part with my sin, for a
dream, or a report? Do any of the Rulers believe in him? Are not Abanah and
Pharphar, Rivers of Damasco, better then Jorden? must I be taught by an earthen
vessel? See how David is become as a fool, that uncovers himself 2. King:
5. 3. Sam. 6.
in the eyes of carnal Micholl. The Jew now seeks a sign: and the Rich man
despises Moses and the Prophets; none will serve his turn but a messenger
raised from the dead. This base Micheah, prophecieth no good unto him: he will
not give him leave to bury his father; and therefore you must pardon him:
hear you happily he will, for his credit, and advantage: but the truth is,
his heart is taken up with his covetousness; pleasure, Ezech: 33. Matthew: 22.
etc. He has bought a Farm; or married a Wife; he has knowledge enough:
he must live, and he may be too holy; he may run mad, or seditious; and
therefore he cannot come: Or, if yet he come, he wants his wedding
garment: and therefore the issue is, he must receive his sentence, and comes
only to be cast out. Thus is the wisdom of GOD, 1. Cor. 1. 21. 22. 23. Romans
8. 7. 8. 1. Cor. 3. 18. Deuteronomy. 4. 6.
foolishness to the flesh, and therefore the wisdom of the flesh, is enmity
against GOD: the more it hears, the more it is hardened, and ripened thereby
unto the day of vengeance.

Only the true Believer becomes a fool, that he may be wise; his wisdom
appears in obeying the Word: his wisdom shines in converting and confirming
others. It is his true wisdom to abide in the Church, his abiding in the
Church makes the Church eternal, and the Church crowns his constancy, with
eternal glory in heaven.

Shall we proceed yet further, to the confirmation hereof. Consider we then
the providence of our GOD, in the government of his Church; how does he guide
her by his counsel that he Psalm. 37. 26. 1. Cor: 12. 8.
may bring her unto glory? how does he advance his power in her weakness? how
does he perfect his power by her weakness?

Behold, Iapheth shall dwell in the Tents of Shem, he shall dwell for ever, and
that in tents that are to be removed: And shall the Church endure for ever, and
yet dwell in moveable Tents. Oh, consider, and wonder at the wisdom and power
of God. Obser. 14.


The Church in this life dwells in tents. It is not tied to any place, least
Gods power should not be infinite, and his mercies The Church of God moveable.
2. Cor. 5.
not free, and everlasting to his people: nay, it is not tied to any time, it
is so permanent on earth, that it is moveable to heaven: because, while it is
in the body it is absent from the Lord, and therefore it is moveable to the
attaining of hit full desires, even for ever to be united unto her head JESUS
CHRIST, for ever to enjoy the fellowshippe of her GOD, the fruit of her labors.

Why then do we flatter our selves in vain, with the continual Use.
mercy of our GOD? why do we boast of his glory and habitation among us,
seeing we drive him from us, by our unthankfulness: and cast his words
behind our backs? Shall not the Kingdom of heaven be taken away from us, and
given to a nation that will bring forth better fruit? Shall not the Lord give
us up to our own counsels, and saciate us with our own ways? Let the man of
God hear the rod, and who has appointed it: let him see the plague, and
hide himself: let it comfort Joseph that Egypt shall receive him, when Canaan
casts him out: let it comfort Israel; that when Egypt is renounced, Canaan
shall be ready for him. Our God is the God of all the earth; his Church is
moveable, that it may be spread over the face of the earth. This traveling of
his Church, is for the gathering of the Saints; when the Saints are gathered,
the Churches warre-fare has an end. When her warre-fare is ended, her present
glory begins: and now she has an immovable and durable house, for to
enjoy for ever her constant and everlasting glory.

Shall we yet further wade into the consideration hereof, that Obser. 15. The
Church of God weak and corruptible, subject to infirmities. Romans 7. 24.
she may be fully satisfied with the reason of the same?

Behold then; the Church of God in this life dwells in Tents; she is not
only mooueable, that she may be enlarged to perfection, but she is also
weak, and subject to infirmity; her best abiding here, is a transitory Tent,
a very fit, yet frail habitation, even a body of sin, and lump of
corruption, though finding some shelter, and refuge thereby: yet in great
weakness, and not exempted from storms, so exposed to weather, as thereby
greater Reasons.
storms are prevented; so subject to infirmities, that infirmities may be
healed, and corruption abolished: a very earthen vessel, frail, and
contemptible, that the glory might be of God and not 2. Cor. 4. 7. 2. Cor. 12.
8. 9.
of us: having a stubbe remaining in the flesh, notwithstanding all earnest
desire to be eased of it, that Gods power might be seen in weakness, and his
mercy perfited by infirmities, that while we wrestle with these infirmities,
we may have experience of the sufficiency of his grace, and may sigh to be
delivered from Romans 7. 2. Cor. 5.
this burden of corruption, that we may be clothed with sufficiency of glory:
that out of the sense of our weakness, we may have more compassion of our
brethren, and so laboring their Heb. 2. 4.
conversion, may make sure, and enlarge our Crown: and being daily covered
with Christ his righteousness, to cover her infirmities, Heb. 10.
might have free, and daily access (with comfort) unto the Throne of grace, to
be accepted in her service, and supplied in her wants: being always gracious
in the eyes of her Husband, and fitted by his grace, to her full and final
Communion with him for ever in Heaven.

And is the Church of God in this life subject to infirmities? Is she not
perfect, and entire; but laboring to perfection? Is she Use.
growing in grace, and following hard after the mark, that she may daily deny
her self, and take up her cross, that being conformable Phil. 3. 3.
to her head, she may be crowned with him in glory?

What life then is in that member, that is not daily quickened by Christ? What
truth in that Church, that boasts of perfection? what hope of that Church
which grows worse and worse? shall corruption discourage from, of not rather
d^iue unto Christ? shall infirmity cast off, or not rather interesse in our
Savior: let not darkness stumble thee, where Christ does cover with his
beauty: neither forsake thou the society, that is accompained with
corruption, least thou forsake thy Savior that heals corruption; and came
not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

As thou shall find him sildome in the house of the Pharisie, so by this thou
shall there find him, that the Pharisie is abased and consounded in his
righteousness: and therefore so comfort thy self in corruption, as to have it
abolished, not nourished in thee: so approve thy self, a lively member of
Jesus Christ, as that thou daily dyest unto sin, in submitting to the will of
thy God, and daily killest sin, in doing Gods will against thy self: For
what?

Does not the Church of God abide in Tents? Has she not pitched Obser. 16. The
Church militant in this life. 1. Tim. 2. Reasons. 1. Tim. 4. Romans 34. 35.
her field to fight the battles of the Lord? Does she so dwell in Tents, as
not to remove from them? is she otherwise subject to corruption, then daily
to fight with, and conquer the same? Is she not a pressed soldier under her
Captain Christ Jesus, that so in him she may be more then conqueror, not
only over all affliction, but even over all sin, and the wages thereof
whatsoever? And is there not a necessity laid upon her, as she will maintain
her peace with God, to exercise continual waree against her self: can she
otherwise conquer sin, than not to suffer it to reign over her? Can she
otherwise sigh earnestly for her 2. Cor. 7. 1. 2 Romans 7. 24. 2. Tim. 4.
delivery from that bondage, then to strive against that tyranny, and daily to
cast off the yoke thereof. Can she expect the crown, before she have sought the
good fight of Faith? except she strive as she ought to do? Do not many seek
to enter in, and 2. Tim. 4.
shall not be able? Do not many run in a race and yet one obtains?

And ought not then the Church to strive even for the best, with the best? Must
she not so run that she may obtain? Can she choose but fight continually,
that carries a living enemy Romans 9. 24. 25. Flesh. World.
continually within her; that has the world, that deceitful and importunate
enemy, daily to assault her without? That has that old adversary so
subtle, so violent, so mighty, so unwearied, daily plotting her destruction
on every side. Now casting in his fiery darts of fearful tentations, then
casting out Satan.
whole floods of persecution to swallow her up: sometimes assaulting on the
right hand, with pride and presumption; eftsoons oppugning on the left hand,
with horrors and despair? Can she be like unto her Master, if she do not
suffer with him? Can she reign with her Savior, if she do not conquer with
him?

What peace then can there be, since the whoredoms of our nature are so rife,
and corruptions so rebellious continually? Use.
Is there any way to procure our peace, but by maintaining continual war
against our corruptions? Are not they deceived in Luke 2.
the estate of grace, when the strong man armed keeping the house, all is
quiet? Do they not in vain boast of perfection, who necessarily must fight
daily, if they will proceed in grace? Do not they in vain plot for ease to
the flesh, whose true peace is procured, by daily curbing and subduing thereof.

And seeing many begin in the Spirit, that end in the flesh: How to fight that
we my conquer.
Oh, that we were wise; to sit down before we enter into Christianity, to
cast up our reckoning, what our Religion will cost us, that we must have
blows at the least, if not resist unto blood.

Oh, that we would learn to strive lawfully, that so we may stand fast, and
finish our course. Surely, if our cause be good, and we lawfully called
thereto: if our weapons be spiritual against our spiritual enemies, if we
strike with the word, and bear of blows by Faith and patience. If we are
always feafull of our selves, and watchful over our privy corruptions. If we
daily renew our strength in CHRIST, by continual and fervent prayer. If we
fence our head with the brest-pate of hope, and arm our hearts with daily
repentance, and examination of our ways. If we prepare continually for new
assaults, and have our eyes fixed upon the recompense of the reward. If we
assist our weak brethren by counsel and correption: And multiply our
thanksgiuings unto our GOD, as he crowns our combats, keeping special
Records of our special combats, and erecting Trophyes of them to the glory of
our GOD. If we take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof: but
daily put on the LORD JESUS, by a renewed, and quickening Faith.

And so committing our selves in well-doing, into the hands of our faithful
Creator, we suffer afflictions, and bring forth fruit with patience, not
casting away our confidence, which has so great recompense of reward; but
continue to the end, and stand fast having finished all things: there is laid
up for us, undoubtedly a crown of righteousness, which the LORD JESUS, will
bestow upon us in due time, as those that have fought the good fight of Faith,
and finished their course with joy.

And may we not hence reap assured comfort in all our combats, that seeing
our Captain is CHRIST JESUS, our cause the Lord, our end Salvation, our
enemies such, as are both necessary, and yet spoiled and conquered to our
hands.

Therefore, as our quar^ell will be glorious, under such a Captain, against
such enemies: so our conquest will be certain, even as our Head is Conqueror.

Oh, how may this establish us, against the reproaches and contradictions of the
World, that we are contentious persons, and Ierem. 15. Luke. 12. 45.
strive with the whole Earth, that we bring a sword, and set variance in our
own flesh?

Did we desire this day of affliction; or rather, are we not called: yea,
thrust out thereto? Do we not labor peace, Matthew. 10. 2. Cor. 5.
and is it not the world that spurns against it? Is our war to any other
end, then to procure peace with GOD? Is it not by most sweet and peaceable
means: even by Prayers, and Tears: by en^reaties, persuasions, humblings of
the flesh? Is 2. Cor. 15.
not this Yoke exceeding sweet, and this burden passing light? Is it not most
reasonable to offer up this sacrifice unto Romans 12. 1.
God?

Is it not most acceptable, to be offered up in Jesus Christ? Is 2. Cor. 1. 6.
it not most comfortable, that as our troubles do abound, so our consolations
do much more abound in CHRIST JESUS, to uphold us for the present: that so
many combats, so many conquests, so many conquests, so many crowns to
establish us for the time to come.

Oh, what a comfort is here unto the Saints of GOD! that though they have
pitched their Tents, yet still they dwell in Tents, the place of their
war-fare, is the place of their safety. The Church exposes to the combat,
and provides means for the conquest, being their retyring place in their
falls, and resting place for their refreshing: Their Armorie to serve them
with weapons; and their forge also, to whet and sharpen them to the battle.
She that presses them to the warre-fare, teaches their hands to fight, and
binds up their wounds, and gives rest unto their souls.

The Church is the safeguard, and shelter of the Elect. Obser. 17. The Church is
the Tents: A place of repose and shelter for the Elect. John 16.

No salvation without it, though no carnal rest within: no true happiness but
from it, though to be of it, is of all men, (if our hope were only in this
life) most wretched and miserable. Here is no rest to corruption, that
incorruption may be obtained. Here is all peace in CHRST JESUS, though in the
world we must look for nothing but afflictions from the world: yet the Church
is in the world; and therefore shall have Kings and Queens to be her Nursing
Fathers, and Foster Mothers, that the Elect may be gathered, and the reprobate
convinced. Here she sleeps with her beloved, and finds his Cant. 2.
yoke easy: here she is refreshed with his Flaggons, and ravished with his
perfumes: here she delights in his presence, and is Loue-sicke with his
beauty.

What shall I say; the Church is Gods House, yea the gate of Heaven: and can
there be greater safety, where GOD is the Owner? Can there be happier
security, where heaven is the purchase?

The Church is Christ's spouse, his beloved, his undefiled. And can there be
danger, where sin is not imputed? Is there any lack or loss in Love? shall
not all the world be forsaken, to cleave to the wife of our bosom, to give
her rest and contentment, to delight in her beauty, to give her honor, as the
weaker vessel, to provide abundantly for her, to spread the wing of the
garment over her, for protection, to dwell for ever with her; to rejoice in her
love continually? Is not the Church the Lords portion, and inheritance given
by God the Father, to his son Jesus Christ, by him to be preserved unto
perfection and glory? Psalm: 2. Ioh: 17.

Is it not the bed of Solomon, wherein the Christian soul takes his sweet and
sure repose, as being guarded with the Lord worthies, his blessed Angels; to
put off all dangers, and prevent disquietnes? 3. Cant: 7. Psalm: 34. Is it not
the mountain of the Lord, even as Mount Syon, the place of his Holiness, that
shall never be removed? Psalm: 125, 1. 2. Is it not the pillar of truth? 1. Tim:
3. 57. contenting and establishing it followers therein? Psalm 2. 6. and 3. 5.
Is it not as a cup of poison, and as coals of fire, to confound and devour
all the enemies thereof? Zach: 12. Is it not as an heap of stones, to break
in pieces whomsoever shall oppose thereto? 1. Pet: 3. Is it not the Arc, to
preserve the true belieuer in, amidst all the Tempests and ouerslowings of
sin and sorrows? Is it not the Marketplace, that affords the childrens
food, even milk for babes, and strong meat Esaias: 55. 1.
for men? Hebr 5^. Is it not the privy Chamber of Jesus Christ, wherein he
communicates that joy unto his Elect, that the world hnowes not of; which is
unspeakable and glorious, passing all understanding? Cantic: 1. 3. 1. Pet: 1.
8. Is the Church otherwise black, but that she is also comely and acceptable
in the eyes of our Savior? Does she remain in the Tents of Kedar, any
otherwise, but that still there is light, and all safety in the land of Goshen,
though all Aegipt be filled and consumed with the Arrows of Gods vengance? Is
not Peter a sleep sweetly, even in the prison, laden with bolts? Act: 12. Do
not the Apostles rejoice in Tribulation? Do they not gain and thrive in their
greatest troubles? Act: 5. Do they not live, though they die daily? Possess
they not all things, though they have nothing in comparison? Do not the weak
gain, by their sufferings to speak more boldly? Are not the wicked confounded
by their meruellous protections and deliverances? Is not Heaven sealed up unto
1. Phil: 10. Psalm: 107.
them, by their Heavenly and gracious conversation, by their mighty
preservation, in, and out of all there troubles? And is not the Church the body
of Christ? Is not he our head, and we his members? And did ever any hate his
own flesh? Will not Christ preserve, and cherish this mystical body, that to
redeem and purge the same, spared not his natural body, but gave it 2. Tim:
4. 18. 89. Gal. 3. Ephesians: 5.
even to the death, even the cursed death of the Cross, that he might
sanctify and wash us, to present us as a pure Virgin unto himself, to make
us glorious, and perfect without spot or wrinkle?

1. Why are we then fearful, Oh we of little Faith: why awake we this
beloved with our contentions and outcryes? seeing our Husband has deeepely
charged his beloved should not Use
be awaked? Why seek we not our peace, in the peace of Syon? why hasten we
not the confusion of Antichrist? why do we not labor the peace of Iesusalem,
and welfare of Syon? Why dream we of carnal peace, seeing our beauty is
within? why plot we for the flesh, which is an enemy to our peace, whose peace
is perdition, and contentme^t confusion? Should we not ioyn together against the
common enemy? Oh let our unity be in the spirit, to maintain the true bond
of peace. Surely, if we could pray unfeignedly for the peace of Jerusalem, and
take these little Foxes How to procure the quiet and welfare of the Church.
that destroy the vineyards: If we shall cast out those whippes of scorpions
that have made the breach, and give way unto the power of the word: which is
the only procurer of this peace. Setting 1
up the Lord and his ordinance only to reign over us; and 2
subiecting and compelling man by holy discipline, to the obedience 3
thereof, maintaining continual war against sin and corruption, 4
and making glad the heart that God has comforted: If we would 6
ease the Church of all unnecessary eye-soares, and pray for such 7
Nursing-fathers as God has raised up for the maintenance of it 8
peace. If the messengers of this peace be had in due estimation, 9
for their works sake. And the friends of the Church be 10
nourished and adua^ced. This is the way to procure peace to the Church, thus
shall the prosperity of Sion be maintained. And then if we we live by faith,
we shall delight in these Tents, howsoever moveable 1. Tim. 5.
and frail to a carnal eye. It shall be our comfort that Gods power shall be
seen in weakness, and his wisdom in humane infirmity, that God may have the
glory: and we further informed, so to rest in these Tents, as still to look
for a City which is above: As remembering that our greatest safety in this
life, is but to dwell in Tents, even as strangers and Pilgrims in this vale of
misery. The Church a Strranger on earth, 2. Cor: 5.


The Church is a Soiourner and dweller in Tents, She has here no abiding
City: She is absent from the Lord; And therefore, Is as A Stranger and
Pilgrim in the World.

So were the fathers of our faith of old, they dwelled in Tents, and wandered
up and down, seeking for a City to dwell in. So has the Church traveled
from City to City, from one Nation Genes: 14. Hebr: 11. Psalm: 119.
to another: By this means, the sound of the Gospel is gone through the
world: All nations have been convinced; the Saints have been gathered, the
elect meruellously protected, their faith increased, and preserved to things
not seen; their flesh has been humbled, and their sanctification perfited. And
can they look for better of the world, then to be handeled as Strangers? Can
1. Coll: 6.
they desire better, then to be used as Strangers? That so, they may use the
world as a stranger, and hunger after their Country 2
which is above. That so, being changed from Vessel to Vessel, 3
they might graciously decline the sins of the wicked; And 4
thereby also be delivered from their judgments. 5


Whence we may learn; 1. As what to judge of those that set Ioh: ^4.
up their rest in this life, promising and plotting here for perpetual 6
reside^ce. 2. So to try our right in heaven, by our account of and 7
entertainme^t upon earth. Namely, that we use the world as strangers, 1. Pet:
2.11.
and are used therein as strangers. Surely, If we set not our 8
hearts upon these things, but are contented with the portion that Ierem: 4.8.
our God does allot us: If we can learn to want, as well as to abou^d, Psalm:
55. How we must know our selves to be strangers.
and are willing to part with all, rather the^ to part with Heaven; esteeming
each in it true worth, as the blessing of God, and so using it holily, and
soberly, to the glory of the Giver: and our own fitting to grace, and yet
esteeming the best as dung, in respect of Jesus Chr: If we can impart
ple^tifully, to the necessity of our brother, and forgo cheerfully for the
advancement of Gods worship; If we do not envy the prosperity of the wicked;
and yet rejoice in the prosperity of the Saints; If we are enuyed and minted,
eue^ in the least portion in this life: So that the least is thought too much,
that goes beside the worlds mouth. If we be accounted Signs and wonders in
Esaias: 5. 19. 14. 1. Cor: 4. 15.
the world; and are made spectacles to Men and Angels. If we be esteemed
singular, and like no body: Men, not fit for society, not worthy to live. If
as the world would feign be rid of us, so we are desirous to be rid of it:
groaning daily under the burden of our sin, and yet bearing patiently such
afflictions as serve to purge our corruption: yet so, that we see by faith our
final deliverance, and earnestly sigh to put off this body, of sin. By these
marks we shall know that we are Strangers in the world. By these we may be
sure that we are Citizens with the Saints. And so shall we dwell in the Tents
of Shem, not only continue constant in the sincerity of religion, but also
dwell in the house of God for ever; even in that house which is not made with
hands, but eternal in the heavens. So it follows.

God persuade Iapheth to dwell in the Tents of Shem.
1. Though we are strangers in the world, and to the same, yet we are not
strangers and passengers in the Church: Here we dwell, if we be lively members:
if they went out from us, they were ^. Ioh: 2. 19. Obs: 19. A note of a true
member to be constant in holiness. Psalm: 92. 13. Hebr: 6. Galat: 3. 3. Luk: 8.
13. Ioh. 5. 35. Ose: 6. and 4. 1. Pet: 1. 18. Ose: 2. 14 Ioh: 15. 1. Pet: 1.
Revel: ^. Use.
none of us; The true member of Christ Jesus dwells in the Church: not Inneth
for a day, and so is gone, but abides and continues constant unto the end.
He that is planted in the house of God, abides in the Courts of the house of
God. It is not enough to have a taste of the heavenly gift. It is not
sufficient to begin in the spirit: for such may end in the flesh, and fall
away without recovery. To rejoice in Gods word for a season, and to bring forth
righteousness as the morning deaw: this is the propriety of Pharisees, and the
just challenge of hypocrites, and Apostataes. And is there not great reason why
we should be constant in the worship of the Almighty? Is not our God
eternal, and therefore will have continual service? Does he not bind us
hereto, with everlasting bonds of love? Does he not further, and enable us by
continual means? giving us his Spirit, to abide with us for ever, providing a
Mediator, to make continual intercession for us, promising a crown, if we
continue to the end.

1. Oh how vain then is their confidence, that think they may be too holy?
how fearful their condition, that esteem it great wisdom to abate in
sincerity: as if their former zeal courage were folly and rashness? How ought
the Saints to try their sincerity, by their abiding in Gods house? How ought
they to labor constancy, and perseverance to the end? Surely, 1. if Means
and Notes of abiding in the Church, and continuance in Religion.
they shall be settled in judgment, that they can never be sufficiently holy,
because the greatest measure in this life is too short, If the Lord measure it
by his justice. If they shall be faithful in the practice and power of
godliness, proposing Jesus Christ to be the pattern, and reward of weldoing,
leuelling it by the word, not by examples or custom. If they shall have
respectly to all Gods Commandments, not claiming immunity from the least, nor
dispairing to attain the greatest. As desiring and purposing more then
possibly they can do, and yet doing more then the ordinary service, though it
be of the most righteous and vainglorious Matthew: 5. 20
Pharisie?

If they shall be watchful over their ways, redeeming the time, and
neglecting no occasions, to make sure their election. If they do labor
unfeignedly, the conversion of their brethren: and be thankful unto God, as he
renues his mercies, giving him only the glory of all his gifts, as finding
themselves unprofitable Servants. And so quickening their Faith in the merits
of of their Savior? shall increase in knowledge, and abound in practice,
renewing their obedience, by daily repentance; and purging out corruption, by
suffering afflictions willingly? If they can wayt with patience, the recompense
of the tewarde, howsoever by Faith they see and lay hold thereof. If they are
prepared to their end, and have their Accounts ready: fearing themselves most,
when they have greatest graces, and resting most on God: when all sense does
fail them.

If they can use the world as a Stranger, not entangling themselves therewith;
and yet by their Christian liberty, enjoy a right therein.

If they can forget what is behind, and follow hard to what is before, not
thinking they have attained, or comprehended, but as they are comprehended of
CHRIST JESUS, until the Lord in them be all in all.

Thus, if they shall behave themselves, If these marks be found upon them: Oh
blessed is that Servant, whom his Master finds so doing; Shall he not give
him a crown of righteousness, that has thus happily finished his course?

And shall not the glorious Lord make good his word: Will he not give us
constancy, that requires it at our hands? Will he not perfect the work that
he has begun in us? Yea surely, Iapheth shall dwell in the Tents of Shem;
The Elect shall abide for 2. Tim. 4. 8.
ever in the sincerity of Religion: He cannot fall finally, though he fall
grievously for a time: He cannot fall wholly, for he delights 1. Phil: 6.
Obseruat 20. The elect shall continue to the end. Rom: 7. 22. Romans 8. 33. 34.
Ioh: 12. 32. To. 8. 28. Esaias. 1. 27. Rom: 8. 34. Job: 13. 15.
in the Law of God, in the inward man; the evil which he does, he would not
do: and therefore it is not he, but sin that dwells in him. It is God
that justifies, who then shall condemn? CHRIST JESUS has died for him; nay,
he is risen again: and seeing he is gone up, shall he not draw all after him?
And what then shall separate us from the love of God? What may hinder the
constancy of the Belieuer? Do not all things, yea, his very sins, turn to
his good? Do not his Afflictions pluck out corruption, and so prepare him to
glory? Is he not more then conqueror through CHRIST, that loves him?
Although the Lord should kill him, yet, does not he still trustin him?

Rejoice not then against me, oh mine enemy; For though I fall, I shall rise
again. And why art thou in heaviness, oh my soul, why art thou cast down,
and disquieted within me? Seeing, Miche: 7. 9. Psalm: 44. 30 Cause of the fall
of Gods children.
if thou trust in God which raises from the dead, Though thou art dead in
sin, yet shall thou be raised up again? If sin do not reign in thee, it
shall never Triumph over thee. Only be wise in the fear of God, to discern
the causes of these thy falls, that so thou may comfortablie recover again.

1. Have thou been exalted above measure, and pufft up with Spiritual Pride.
spiritual pride, of those graces that thy God has bestowed on thee?
Security.
and have thou hence grown secure and careless of welldoing, and yet
presumptuous of Gods mercies, spending on the former stock, as if thou had
no further need of Christ Jesus, Presumption.
or were so full of him, that thy cup runs over, not with sound joy in the
heart, proceeding from the fulness of thy SAVIOVR, but with a froathie and
carnal joy in the face, proceeding from the sense of thine own worthiness.

No marvel now, if the Lord confound this thy vain confidence, by
withdrawing the light of his countenance from thee, whereby now walking only by
thine own light, thou find nothing but darkness; either inwardly, in thy
conscience, speaking fearful things against thee, or outwardly in thy life,
being tainted with some gross sin, occasioned through thy vain presumption,
and carnal security, which increasing inwardly the horror of thy soul, and
charging it afresh, with the guilt of renewed actual sin; If now the laws of
Hell begin to gape upon thee; If thou art overwhelmed with the terrors of
the deep, observe herein thy just desert, that have thus tempted thy God; and
magnify the mercies of thy God, that will not tempt thee above thy strength.
For behold here Light, more gloriously shining out Exodus: 4. Hobs: 3. 5. Mich:
4. 6. 7. Zeph: 3. 10* Za^h: 8. 13* Matthew: 11* 20. Psalm. 38. 7. Psalm: 130. Ion:
2. Esaias: 26. 19*
of Darkness: when thou art thoroughly abased, and emptied of carnal
confidence. Then shall thou most fervently desire to be easied of thy Savior,
the more thou feel thy sins a burden which thou can not bear. And if
thou look up unto thy God, when all help on earth does fail, thy God will
hear thee, though crying out of the deep; yea, out of the belly of Hell. Thy
dead heart shall arise, and thou which dwell in the dust shall awake, and
sing when the Lord shall return with his countenance upon thee, and restore
unto thee, the joy of his salvation.

Have thou been careless of the means which should have vpheld thee in the
power of holiness. Namely, the powerful preaching of the word, and conscionable
administration of the Sacraments? Have thou neglected thy ordinary spiritual
sword, and 4 Neglect (...) the means (...) preservation
so grown fainte in thy calling. Have thou grown indifferent, in the use of
the means, admitting any so it uphold a form of godliness, and so neglecting
to try the spirits, thou have grieved Gods spirit in thee, whereby thou have
bin humbled, through the withdrawing of it assistance. Have thou hereby been
lest to thy self, and so fallen into some apparent and gross wickedness to the
reproach of thy profession, and wounding of thy conscience?

Have thou lain herein without repentance, for want of conscionable 5. Gross
si^^ vnrepe^ted o^
dealing. No Nathan has reproved thee; yea, let no man reprove: because the
Priests are like unto the people, the blind would lead the blind in
security to destruction.

Oh remember the wisdom of thy GOD herein, who would have thee certain of thy
state, eue^ in this thy fall, because it came by such a means as must
necessarily befall thee; seeing it has befallen the most excellent, no
te^tation otherwise has here overtaken thee, then what has, or may befall the
dearest child of God. Had thou fallen in thy calling, and thy conscionable
use of the means: had thou grown fainte, when there was food abundantly,
and unprofitable in the wholesome word of life, thy case had been more
singular, and so then the more doubtful. But if David being without means of
preservation, give way to tentation, and so is ensnared therewith: Though he
fall grievously, Rule.
yet he shall rise again; and his rising being effected by the true and lively
means, Namely, the reproof o^ Nathan, and his obedience thereunto, shall both
give evidence that his Fall was recouerable; as being through neglect of the
means, and that his recovery is sound and effectual, as being wrought Rule.
by the true means.

Indeed I confess, the Lord may work extraordinarily, in some particulars;
As that Job may fall, for his trial, and yet use the means conscionably:
stand faithfully in his calling: yet Note of Jobs trial,
seeing the end of Gods trial was so to justify the soundnes of his standing:
as yet to discover some imperfection therein; that so by this trial he might
be led forward to perfection, may we not challenge Job of imperfection, and so
of failing in the measure of his calling, which though the Lord did not
principally intend to chastise, in this his gracious trial, but rather to try
the soundnes and truth thereof. Yet did he by this exercise, both prevent
Apostasy, and also most happily further to perfection.

And might not Job be subject to spiruall wickedness, as spiritual pride?
discovered by his Impatiencie, censurings, etc: howsoever he could not be
charged with gross open crimes? Which being far more dangerous, then any
outward evil: was therefore more necessarily (though not to be punished of
God, as an enemy) yet to be purged out of the Lord, as a gracious Father, and
that with a sharp medicicine answerable to such a disease? Job: 19. 28. Job:
29. 10.
Surely though the holy man reached at an higher matter, yet did he not
unwillingly acknowledge Gods purpose, in this refining and purging of him: not
justifying his friends, who charged him wrongfully to be only plagued for his
sins. Yet justifying his God, who not only might thus deal with him, as
being his creature, but ought so to deal with him in mercy, to make him more
conformable to his Creator.

And had not the Lord his end herein? Did not just Job come forth of the
furnace, more purely and gloriously? shall not thou also being purged, be
graciously delivered? And shall not thy greatest falls further thee thereunto;
as making thee more humble, more hunger after Christ? And what then can
separate thee sro^ the love of God, in JESUS CHRSIT? Who is more ready to
receive thee, then thou to run unto him; who inuites thee to him; who will
keep thee in him, that so thy falls shall make thee more wise, not to rely
on thy self, nor any other broken reed, but to root thy self more firmly on
the Rock, and so grow more constantly in grace; that still walking in fear of
thy self, thon may walk in the faith of thy Savior, and so trusting Psalm.
125.
in the Lord; thou shall never be removed?

And that thou may have an undoubted evidence hereof: Behold what follows.
Iapheth shall dwellin the Tents of Shem. Though Shem for a time be rejected,
that Iapheth may be gathered in: though the Jews be cast off, that the
Gentiles may come in; yet when the fulness of the Gentiles shall be accomplished,
then shall Shem return again to the true worship of God: and howsoever the
Jew has stumbled a long time at the Cross of Christ, yet shall he at length,
so embrace the Lord JESUS, that the glory and zeal of his profession, shall
allure and receive the scatterings of the Gentiles, who after the fullness is
come in, shall either remain to be called, or being called, and yet dispoyled
of the outward beauty of their profession, shall now take hold of the skirt
of him that is a Jew, and be provoked by his zeal, to join with him in the
power of Religion, that so there may be one shepherd, and one sheepfold,
prepared to meet the Bridegroom, when he shall appear in glory.

So then, If Iapheth shall dwell in the Tents of Shem, the Jews shall then
have a full and glorious conversion, before the second Doctrine 21. The Jews
to be restored.
coming of the Lord JESUS: And why not principally at Jerusalem, the old place
of their worship, though not in the pride of the holy mountain, which is
destroyed, yet in the power of the Spirit, reigning in the midst of his
enemies; and in that pure language serving the Lord with one consent. Shall not
the Lord be as able to plant in the Jew again, as he was able in his room to
plant in the Gentile for a time? Must not the Jew be provoked by the Gentile
to embrace the Messiah; even as the Gentile was provoked by the falling of the
Jew. And have we not daily experience of the Jews coming in again? Does not
the Lord every day give pledges hereby, of a fuller harvest? Are not these
Haruengers and Forerunners of the great Armies of the Lord? And can the day of
the Lord JESUS be accomplished, till this Word be fulfilled? Do not all the
Prophets bear witness hereunto? Shall not the Lord be glorified in the
salvation of the first borne? must not Jew and Gentile, make up one body of
CHRIST, and worship the Lord JESUS, in one Spirit? Shall not the restoring of
the Jews prepare the Gentiles to meet the Lord JESUS in the clouds? Is not
this that Revel. 21. 1. 2. 3.
new Jerusalem, that holy City, which comes down from God out of Heaven
prepared as a Bride trimmed for her Husband? Which though for a time, in regard
of her present state of Apostasy, s^e turn an enemy for the Gentiles sake,
to occasion their calling: yet s^eing she is eternally beloved for the Father
sake? Can her imquitie make the election and Faith of God of none effect? Nay,
rather shall it not make for the further revelation of Gods free love toward
his children, in receiving them again into mercy; even as the prodigal
son, when in regard of their present state, they appear most unworthy thereof?
And is this obstinacy any other but in part till the fulness of the Gentiles be
come in, so that the remnant of the election shall certainly be gathered in?
Shall not this restoring of the Gentiles be the reviving of the world,
restoring new glory and beauty unto the the same: when as the Jew and Gentile
shall join together, in the pure worship of God?

Thus shall the Redeemer come unto Sion, and unto them that turn from
iniquity in Jacob, says the Lord. Esaias 59. 20. Thus Jacob shall hereafter
take root, and Israel shall flourish, and grow and the world shall be filled
with fruit. Esaias 27. 6. In those days will the Lord make a new covenant, with
the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah; he will put his law into their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and he will be their God, and they
shall be his people: Yea, he will forgive that iniquity, and remember their
sins no more. Though he have forsaken them for a season, Ierem. 51. 33. 34. 35.
yet in everlasting compassions will he gather them again. Esaias 54. 8. Does
not the Lord gloriously figure out their return, Ezech. 36. 24. 25. 26. 27.
28. etc.
by their deliverance out af Egypt, and return out of the captiuiof Babylon?
So that though Israel shall remain many days without a King, and without a
Prince, and without an offering, and without an Image, and without an Ephod,
and without a Seraphin: Yet afterward shall the children of Israel come out and
seek the Lord their God, and David their King; and shall fear the Lord and
his goodness in the latter days. Hosea 3. 4. 5.

Lo, this has the Lord promised, and shall he not make it good? shall not
this receiving of the Jews, confirm, and forerunne the most comfortable
doctrine of the resurrection? As being shadowed out most lively hereby. Revel.
21. 2. Ezech 37. Esaias 29. 18. 19.

Which as it justly condemns our base and odious account Use.
of that holy Nation; and also reprooueth our cruel dealing toward them: so
it teaches us, to pray heartily for their Conversion, and to use all holy
means for the effecting thereof; praising God, for the labors of our holy
Countrymen, (and others) to this end, and rejoicing in those gracious pledges
of this undoubted blessing. Tremellius, and many others, Comforting our
Tremellius, and others.
selves; that our posterity shall enjoy more glorious times of the Gospel,
when Jew and Gentile shall join together, and worship the Lord with one
shoulder: assuring our selves that this great coming in of the Jew cannot be
far off, seeing the fullness of the Gentiles, is well-neere come in. And
preparing our selves in this fullness of the Gentiles to greater troubles,
which does and will certainly arise by this Apostasy of the Gentile. And yet
in patience possessing our souls, seeing the end will not yet be; the Jew must
come in, and Antichrist must be destroyed. And then let us lift up our heads,
Because our salvation draws nigh. Even so, hasten thy Work; O God: for the
glory of thy great Name. Thus shall the Jew be gathered to the Gentile; and so
they shall be one sheepe-fold, and one Shepherd? Thus shall Shem be restored
that Iapheth may dwell in his Tents: so though the Church consists of Jew and
Gentile, yet shall both dwell in the same tents: contentions shall cease. and the
partition wall, shall now surely down, that both Jew and Gentile, may serve God
in one Mich. 4. Zeph. 3.
pure language and worship their God with one shoulder.

Behold now the Churches UNITY, and consent: though Doctr. 2. The Church his
Unity, and so perpetuity and perfection. Ephesians. 4.
differing in the fle^h, yet still agreeing in Spirit, though divided for a
time, yet at length again so compact and knit together, as that as one man, it
shall be ready to meet their Savior, and for ever to be with him.

This the God of Unity, in his good time shall accomplish, and that by one
Baptism to unite them, by one Word to eng^affe them again, by one spirit to
incline them, by one faith to confirm them, that so they may be one body,
though consisting of many members; serving one God and Father of al, through
the 1. Cor. 12.
gift of JESUS CHRIST their alone, and all sufficient Savior.

And threfore, though outward Unity can be no certain note, Use.
of a true visible Church, where in there must be heresies, that the faithful
may be tried; wherein there must be hypocrites, to provoke to soundness and
sincerity; especially, where verity is excluded, or miserably corrupted. As
it falls out in the Romish Synagogue, which must necessarily therefore fail,
as wanting this pillar of Truth: as being a kingdom fearfully divided
against it self; Yet when the Lord in mercy, shall join both Jew and Gentile
together, by one bond of Truth; even to kiss Zach. 8.
the blessed Son of righteousness: then shall they be also of one mind and
heart, consenting happily together, in the pure worship of the Lord, and so
waiting (very wisely) their Masters second coming to Judgment, even as they
sweetly continued together in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, in breaking
of Bread, and Prayer; to confirm their holy entertainment of Acts 2. 42.
the Lord JESUS, first coming in mercy.

So faithful is the Lord to perform hereby his promise, that the gates of
hell shall not prevail against this little flock: so wise to confirm our
Faith, in the accomplishment of this promise, to wait upon the Lord, for the
performance of all the promises, that are revealed in the word; that so we
might be made meet for the inioying of them, and by the power of Faith, lay
hold of eternal life.

THE SECOND PART. THE SVBIECTION OF CANAAN.
And let Canaan be his servant.
WELL, thus have we heard, the nature and properties of the True visible and
militant Church. Thus have we also discerned the Privileges thereof. Now let
us consider further, of the Church malignant:

It follows.

And let Canaan be his servant: That is, Seeing Canaan is the son of the
bondwoman, and therefore must have no inheritance with the son of the free
woman; howsoever he may for a time abide in the family, and enjoy both outward
communion, and privileges with the sons of Adoption: Yet, let Canaan be
servant to Iapheth, and to his posterity, the malignant Church shall be in
subjection to the true; though for a time the hypocrite may provoke and insult
over the true member, yet shall this both serve for the good of his Saints, to
purge out their dross, and provoke them to perfection: and when their war-fare
is accomplished, all their enemies shall be brought in subjection. Psalm. 72.

So then, first, it appears that there is as well, a Cham to mock and curse,
that he may be accursed; as a Shem to bless, that he may be blessed: as well a
Cain to murder, that he may heap up damnation to himself: as there is an
Abel to offer up an acceptable sacrifice, and so be made a sacrifice, that he
may be freed from corruption; that he may be so crowned with incorruption and
eternal glory: not the Family of our Savior CHRIST himself shall be free
from a Judas, ^tray or to betray his master, that he may offer up his soul a
sacrifice for sin: and perform a plentiful redemption for his mystical
body.

A malignant Church there has been, and must be to the worlds end.

It is the decree of the mighty God, that some shall be on the There is a
malignant Church. ^3. Doctr. Reasons. Matthew. 25. Use.
left hand, everlastingly appointed to be vessels of wrath. And therefore, the
fall of man is also determined and so disposed, that the malignant Church may
be left in that estate, which it has willingly chosen, and may be ripened
thereunto, by refusing or abusing the means of salvation. And therefore, vain
is that dream, that al shall be saved and vainer their conceit, that though in
their daily practices, they are hastening to destruction: yet still they are
confident, their estate is as good as any: their hearts are good, they mean
well: they are but flesh and blood: the Lord is merciful. And will the Lord be
merciful to presumptuous sinners? If the heart be good, will not the fruit be
according? can we gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Surely no:
They are of their father the devil, because they do his works: they are led
captive at his will, into all manner of wickedness. And therefore his servants
they are, to whom they obey; he will pay them John 8.
their wages, even the wages of sin, the second death.

And therefore if thou will know that thou art not of this accursed race, diue
not into the secrets of God, and say; If thou art damned, thou can not do
withal. It is in vain to strive against Gods will: in vain to wash thy hands
in innocence. But in the Name of God, go to the revealed word: and therein
discerning what thou art by nature, labor by the power thereof to feel this
thy How to ap^roue our ^elues not to ^ee of the malignant Church.
wo^ull condition; yea, to feel it a burden that thou can no way endure: and
so hunger thou after Jesus Christ, to be eased thereof: apply him by faith, for
the acceptance of thy person into the favor of thy God: and put him on by
faith, that so thou may be renewed in the spirit of thy mind, towalke worthy
of so great salvation, and yet still labor how to be found in him, not having
thine own righteousness, that so renewing thy repentance daily for former
failings, thou may receive continual virtue from this fonntain, to the daily
cleansing of thy polluted nature, and to enable thee daily to more constant
obedience; that so thou may grow up in him (which is the head) into all
holiness, in the fear of God: when thou have finished all things, yet standing
fast in him, that thou may with patience expect the recompense of the reward,
and patience may bring forth the perfect work in the trial of thy Faith, that
so thou may receive the end of thy Faith, which is, the salvation of thy
soul. Thus must thou assure thy self, that thou art not a reprobate. 1. Cor.
1^. 5. 6.

But where is this Malignant Church to be found? Surely, reprobate Came suckes
of the same breasts with chosen Abel: both Shem, and Cham are nourished in the
same Family, and preserved in the same Arc. The Lord is the Savior of all
men, but especially of those that do believe. 1. Tim. 4.

The malignant Church is sorted even with the Elect, and chosen Generation. 24.
Doctr. Militant Church a mixed company. Matthew. 13. 1. Ioh. 2. 19. John 15. 22.
Luke 12. 47
The hypocrite and true believer, make one Militant Church. The Tares must grow
up with the wheat, until the time of harvest; least in plucking up the tares
we pluck up the wheat also: and there must be deceivers, to try, and purge the
Elect: Yea, to assure the Saints, that the house does of right appertain to
them, when those that are in the Church shall willingly go out thereof,
howsoever for a time they have roosted therein: that it may appear, they were
never truly of us. Shall not the hypocrite hereby be made inexcusable? Must he
not be beat with many stripes, because he knows his masters will and does it
not? Does not the admirable power and wisdom of God appear, in ordering these
two contraries in the same fold, that each may further other, to their contary
end? Shall not the justice of God be made glorious, in seuering the Sheep from
the Goats, at that great day? That unto the Lord alone, may be ascribed the
glory of all his works.

And therefore, as this serves to reprove such, as dream of Use.
such a Church in this life, which may be free from this mixture, because it is
only proper to the Church tryumphant, to have all her vessels holy unto the
Lord, to have every member truly sanctified. So it also condemns those which
shroude themselves under pretense of this mixture, assuming therefore their
state to be good, because they are only members of the visible Church: They
are Professors: They will come to the Church: They are Christians, they hear
the Word, partake of the Sacraments, etc. Have not those which have boasted of
greater matters, and been truly interressed in more glorious outward
privileges: Matt. 7. 23.
yet not withstanding, heard that fearful voice; I know you not, depart from
me, ye workers of iniquity. Has not the court which is without the Temple
been cast out, and given to the Gentiles? Have they not trodden underfoot the
holy Revel 11. 2. Esaias 33. 4.
City? Have sinners in Sion lived afraid? Has not shame come upon the
Hypocrites? could they be able to dwell with the devouring fire? could they
endure the everlasting burning, because the common privileges be abused?

Surely, as we may not leave a Church because of this mixture, lest we also
deprive our selves of the true and special privileges thereof: So we must not
content our selves only with the outward evidence, lest in the day of
reckning, we be found too light.

And therefore labor we so in the Church, that we may be also true and
living stars, even lively members, and true branches of the Vine, CHRIST
JESUS.

And that we shall do, if not despising and rejecting the outward means; as
the word, Sacraments, because the hypocrite abuses them upon pretense of
revelation, or a more Spiritual How to approve our selves not to be hypocrites.
worship. We do not yet rest, and content our selves heerewith, but rather
try all things by the blessed Spirit; praying in the Spirit, and understanding
by the Spirit, what the Letter delivers; and by the grace of the Spirit,
abiding in the Spirit: and not only in the outward man, still hungring in the
spirit, after the best graces, and walking by Faith, and not by sin: aiming
above all at the glory of our GOD; and endeavoring that our whole spirits, and
souls, and bodies, may be kept blameless, unto the coming of out Lord JESUS.

Thus may we approve our selves, to have chosen the better part. Thus may we
discern our selves, to be chosen to the better part, not to love the world,
though we must needs be in it. Not to be of the hypocrites, though in the same
Church we are conversant with them.

Comforting our selves, that as there is a time, that the son of the
bondwoman shall be cast out; so while yet it is our Lot to abide in the flock,
to be troubled and tried with this viperous generation.

Yet shall Canaan be but a servant to Iapheth.
The Hypocrite, so long as he abides in the Church, is subject to the true
Believer.

All his gifts shall serve only for the good of the Elect, Prou: 25. The
hypocrite a servant to the Elect. Job: 27.
though for his own further condemnation. Though he should heap up silver as
the dust, and prepare Raiment as the clay: He may prepare it, but the just
shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver. Has he knowledge
for any other end but to confound others, though himself be a cast away? Do
his gifts abused, serve to any other end then for a touchstone, whereby to
try and compare the gifts of the elect, that they may not rest in any outward
gifts, but only upon JESUS CHRIST?

Is he not the purse-bearer for the good of the Church, doing good for
vainglory, or by respects, that so having his reward already, he may be
excluded the reward to come.

Is he any other then a stool, to dress food for the children? well may he
lick his Fingers, he may have a taste and glimpse Hebr: 6. 4. 5
thereof, but his Stomach is ouer-cloyed with the love of the world. It is
enough to taste, and it will be too much that he has tasted.

And is he not in the day of trouble, a servant to the Elect? Does he not
prove a ransom for the just? Is he not for his Use.
prosperity and vainglory, the object of the enemies malice? Him they
envy, for the pride of his holy Mountain. Him they thirst after, for his
pomp and riches. And while they are rifling him, do not the righteous escape?
Is not that desire of the wicked satisfied? Is not Gods purpose accomplished
for the purging of his Church, for the preservation of his chosen? Lo thus
Canaan is a servant unto Iapheth.

And therefore, 1. let this serve to humble the Hypocrite in his greatest
pomp, he is no better then a slave for the Churches good; So that the more
he enjoys, the greater shall be his condemnation.

And let this comfort the Elect in their greatest abasing, their greatest
Enemies shall serve their turn: And can the LORD then fail them, or forsake
them?

Only be we wise, not to loose our right, let us not despise the Hypocrites
gifts, because he abuses them; Neither let us How to make use of an
hypocrite. 1. Cor: 10. Galat: 6. 12. 2. Cor:: 15. Galat: 5. 1. Cor: 7.
cloase with him in his shows, and yield our selves to be measured by his
line, least now he insult, and rejoice in our flesh, and so bring us into
bondage.

But in the Name of GOD, stand we fast', in the liberty which CHRIST has
purchased for us, and be we not Servants unto men, but to win them to
Christ, So shall Canaan still be a servant to Iapheth, until the Bondwoman
be cast out with all her Children; that Iapheth may enjoy alone the Heavenly
Canaan.

FINIS.
CASES OF CONSCIENCE resolved in this Treatise.
1 HOw the Providence of GOD subordinates means. pagin: 4. and 5. 2. How we
must pray, with the special marks thereof. page: 7. 3. Of true Con^^e^sion,
together with the Causes, Manner, and several Marks thereof. page: 11. 12. 13.
14. 4. How to approve our right in all outward Blessings. page 20. 5.
Information to Parents how to behave themselves, in regard of their
posterity, whether they be good or evil. page: 24. 25. 6. How to be preserved
from falling into sin. page 26. 7. How to be raised from sin. page: 27. 8.
Why the Saints ofttimes miss of such Comforts, which heretofore they have
enjoyed. page: 28. 9. Marks of true Religion. page: 28. 10. How we may know our
selves to be of the little flock. page: 32. 11. How to discern the worth and
Excellency of our Estate in grace. page: 33. 12. Of the Estate of the Church in
this life, subject to infirmities; the use and benefit thereof. page 40. 13.
How to perform the Christian War-fare, that we may conquer. page: 4^. 14.
The security of the Church, and how to procure the peace and welfare thereof.
page: 46. 15. How we may know our selves to be strangers in the world. p 47.
16. How we may procure and assure our constancy in holiness. p. 49. 17. Causes
of the falls of Gods children. 50. 51. 52. 18. Proofs of the general Calling
of the Jews. page: 54. 10. How to know that we are not Reprobates nor
Hypocrites. pagin. 56. 57. 20. How to make use of an hypocrite.

