An Exposition of the Hymn commonly called Benedictus: with an ample and
comfortable application of the same, to our age and people.

By A. Anderson Preacher.

Stay profane and vain bablings, for they shall increase unto more ungodliness.
2. Timothe. 2.16.

But if you have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, rejoice not, neither
be liars against the truth. This wisdom discendeth not from above, but is
earthly, sensual, and devilish. For where envying and strife is, there is
sedition, and all manner of evil works.

James. 3.14.15 16. Imprinted at London by Henry Middelton, for Raufe Newbery.

The book to the Reader.
To praise the Lord is my desire,
To help his Church all that I can:
To quench if could, such burning ire,
As Satan late has cast in man:
While pen does carpe at brothers ill,
Sin takes rest, the Church does spill.
For other state some men do crave,
And cut themselves from this we have,
In heart they hate thy state and life*
They joy to see thee at such strife
And they at ease: do by disdain
Invent all means t'encrease thy pa^^^
Their Pope and Mass they long to see,
Our Christ, his law and unity
They do blaspheme, through our descent,
In cases new of government:
Thy brawle, their broyle would come to end,
If cease thou could thus to contend.
Join hands in one, embrace remorce,
To banish sin bend all thy force,
Thy self restrain, Gods truth respect,
His Church, and peace of his elect.
Vouchsafe us Lord thy Christ his grace,
Our Queen thy sprite, but sin deface.
Amen. A.A.

To the right reverend Father in God THOMAS by the merciful providence of God,
Bishop of Lincoln his good L: Anthony Anderson Minister of the good Gospel of
God, wishes all health and peace, in Christ our only Savior.
THe holy Apostle says, that Romans 15.4.
whatsoever things are written before time are written for our learning, which
sentence (reverend father) as often as I do remember, by the hand leads me
deeply to consider with reverent regard what I read in the holy Scriptures,
and urges me by fervent prayer, to crave of God, the geuer Iac. 1.17.
of all good gifts, in Christ, the true understanding of the Scriptures sense,
and the Math. 13.5^
hidden treasures therein comprised. And so has it pleased the lord of life to
open the windows of heaven, (his name be ever praised) and from thence by his
spirit, most familiarly to speak unto me by his written word: So that to his
great praise, and my endless comfort I see that no jot of his Law is void of
most excellent comfortes to the heart, that simply in integrity of soul
seeks to quench his thirst in this fountain of health, the Gospel of God.

In this word I find the knowledge of God and Christ his son, with promise of
his holy spirit shall in all his elect open their hearts, and write in them the
true understanding of his laws. Ezec. 36. The which most excellent gift by the
learned books, since the time of the Apostles, and penned travels of sundry
godly fathers in the Church, (as well before our times as in these our days)
does appear to be eue^ now most flourishing in the church of God, his name be
always praised therefore.

And wherefore did the Prophets by his spirit speak? or Christ and his
Apostles preach? or the godly Fathers before us? or these our learned writers
in this age? Wherefore I say with heart, mouth, and pen, have they
travailed? But to utter the testimony of gods gift, and confess his name to
the people of the earth, to the life of the elect, and the inexcuse of the
reprobate. So will the Lord have his spirit ever resiant in his Church, to the
end of the world.

To follow these Fathers as they follow Christ, I account it my part, having
for further example amongst the many worthy works of our writers now, your L.
profitable work lately set forth, to the better taste of Gods good will, in his
expressed word in the appointed Lessons at common prayer. Of which work I
cease to speak further, and seek to follow as I can such good examples to the
end before touched. What if my Mite be not much worth? Yet as it comes from
the Lord of heaven, so shall it no doubt profit thither to his ability, and
that is my whole desire. Let the learned ears accept as in inferior place this
my small coin, yet good curra^t silver (I trust) tried by the touch of truth,
and give him license to pass, to the less learned and poor country people,
whose state requires yet mornings milk, not all able for solidate questions
or deep digested mysteries. Their souls are precious in the sight of God:
their lives ought to be dear in our consciences: their wounded hearts require
some sovereign medicine of gentle digesture, and quiet operation: yet so, that
their ignorance and weakness may be removed, which God for his mercies sake in
Christ, vouchsafe them richly in his love. This is not the least cause why I
have stirred up the small gift of God in me, to exercise the same upon this
Hymn used in and at the morning prayer. Judging, as by order through use the
words are ready at the lip to vouch the Prophets speech: So if their
tender hearts had some help to open thereto the hidden cause of joy in that
holy letter, no doubt (I say) the same of them should both with heart and mouth
joined in one consent of grateful harmony, cry out the praises of the Lord in
the temples of the holy Ghost, which is the Ephesians. 5.19.20.
song that deliteth only the musical ears of Gods majesty.

Assuredly al other chaunting notes and changing keys, seem they never so
pleasant in the ears of men, are far estranged from the good like of god, al
if set up in his house of prayer. Esaias 29.13. Math. 15.8. Marc. 7.17.
This people worship me (says God) with their lips, but their hearts are
far from me. In vain do they serve me. etc. And albeit I cannot touch the
style worthy so high a matter, or set down such deep doctrine as the nature
of the place requires, or yet approach such the hidden treasures as are here
laid up, or the finenes of this our age expects: yet, nay the less, the
wydowes Myte Luc. 21.2.
is my boldninge comfort: And on the other part the sorrowful looks of the
slothful Miser to whom the Lords Talent Mat. 26.24.
was imparted, makes me afraid to quench the spirit, or stay the fiery word
kindled in my heart (if I may use Ieremies words) at this present. Ier. 20.
But be it that I should blushe to present my simple skill, to the scanning of
the wise and sharpened sight of the lofty learned and deep Doctors of our
time, knowing that my own weakness, is to sundry of them known also enable to
this exploit, in respect of infinite others* yet I joy at this refuge, my
conscience bears me witness tofore GOD and men, that the only end and scope
of this my pen is chiefly to promote Gods glory, then to use rightly my loned
penie in dutiful sort to the holy Church of God, here in this our state and
Realm by his great mercy, firmly set upon the foundation stone 1. Cor. 3.11.
Christ Jesus. This Ancker is to me a stay, and frayeth all fear from me, so
that I (as I can) seek to help forwards the Lords labors, though wants in
me, do force the wish of learned frame, and eloque^t phraise to help my willing
mind and godly purpose. But I accept with thankfulness, that which God has
vouched safe to give (being because of my many sins, unworthy of that in him
I have) I only desire of God in Christ, that his spirit of truth may guide my
ragged rows and simple style, and that the less learned (for whom chiefly I
presume these presents) may something herewith be profited.

The matter that I exhibit to your L. is An Exposition with an ample and true
application of that Hymn which by order of the constituted Laws of England is
now appointed to be used at Morning prayer: which Hymn commonly is called
BENEDICTVS. Not at all purposed to control, much less to condemn the minds
of some of our brethren, whose Censure has exiled his use at the Common
prayer: Or yet to lend my like to fantasies lust, where sound warrant has no
place. And waighing with my self, that neither they may by their private
power, or can with the quietness of Gods Church in England, (which ought
necessarily of all Christians to be had in most regard) to take from her that
and those things which by Law she has established. Furthermore reuoluing my
cogitations, that this Hymn (howesoeuer of some it be disliked to his
appointed use) is tho, a part of holy scripture. I thought it better (to that I
could) to open some of the hidden treasures laid up in the same for the Church
of God: then to feed some foreign fantasy, or to pollute my pen in contending
to pull down that which may well enough stand, and nothing abate the beauty
of Gods house.

Yet do I not think this Hymn so necessarily set in the order of prayer, as
without the same it were blemished, for that were more than frivolous: but
because the matter therein contained (indifferently looked into, and well
weighed) does enstruct, comfort, and also administreth light to our spiritual
senses, and understanding of Gods mercies, in his promised Christ to us given,
and long since commen in the Flesh, (which matter in time of prayer is
expedient.) I can not yet learn or be of other mind, then that the said
Psalm as it is appointed, is both tolerable and profitable to all godly
hearts. And were these my weak labors worthy by their valor, to force the
favor of christian friend, and to refell the fury of Popish foe, to your good L.
of right I ought to dedicate the same: not only because you are my learned godly
Ordinary, who can with good judgment, discern the doctrine therein contained,
if either sound or contrary, (that so in stead of milk the meat for babes, I
power not out poison to infect the well grown up children in Christ, for that
God grant ever to be far from me:) but also for that in respect that I
should not loyter, but labor in the vineyard of the Lord, your goodness at
the request of the right honorable my singular good L. and Master (as you know)
did commit unto me a special flock with in your Diocese, to foster up in
Christ their souls, which he has purchased with his most blessed blood. Let
this little book bear witness of my diligent care (therefore my good L.) that
I bear, both to the same my peculiar charge, amongst whom, and of whose labors
I reap my portion and liuelyhode, and to the whole church of God elsewhere,
where these my low lines, with others godly works, may fructify by his holy
grace and spirit, in the apt soil of their poor hearts, had they store of
godly teachers.

Finally I beseech your L. that my poor pen may pass the raging Seas of
curious censure, under the harbor of your protection: So shall it with much
more quietness arrive in the port of the poor man's heart, desirous not to
cavil, but to catch earnest hold of such plain doctrine, as truly, though
simply, teaches him the way to life. This if I may of your good nature
obtain, it will encourage me, the further adventure of godly study in the
sacred Scriptures, if so it may please the almighty in his Son Christ, to
bestow a greater portion of me, that I may still bring food into the church of
God.

The Lord God of mercy, love, and peace, send to this our church, her
maiestrate our godly Queen, state and people, the peace of Christ unfeignedly
in our hearts for his names sake, and to your L. increase of godly knowledge,
like zeal, and perfect strength to continue with godly care, ever more and
more profitable to his Church, by the power of his spirit, whose defense be
ever yours, and you with all us that invoke truly the name of God, for ever
his, in Christ our Lord.

Your L. ever in Christ. A. Anderson.
From Medborne this 15. of January. 1573.
The argument of the Prophetical Hymn
THe author of this song was the holy married Priest of the Lord Zacharias,
Luke. 1.
who had to wife Elizabeth the cosen of the virgin Mary the mother of Jesus
Christ, in whose old age the Lord by his Angel promised him of his said wife
a Son, and called his name John, which John the Lord had appointed to be the
same Prophet, and fore runner of the Messiath that the prophets Malachy and
Esaias had prophesied to precede Christ. At the birth of this babe, Zachary his
tongue was miraculously lowsed (which before for a season was dumb for his
hard beliefes sake,) and he with exceading joy, then, in the sight of all the
company, made and sung this Song. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel etc. In
this hymn is commended unto us,

An exposition of the Hymn commonly called Benedictus.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, Luke. 1.68.
for he has visited and redeemed his people.
THe holy ghost more earnestly now then before, provoke and forces his
Prophet Zachary to sound forth his praise as in this Hymn is apparent: his
heart being set down in the Chair of deep consideration of Gods mercy to
Jsraell, begins with laud and praise to God for their and our Salvation in
Christ Jesus. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, says he, he calls God the
God of Israel, not because he reigns only over Israel, for he is also the
God To. 3.29. and 15.12.
of all the World, and in him says the Scripture shall the Gentilles trust:
Esa. 11.10
But because he Deuteronomy. 7.6.7 8.9.14.2.26 18. Exo. 19.5. 1. Pe. 2.9.
chose them from among the nations, not for their worthynes, but in his mercy,
to be a peculiar people to him self, Exo. 13.21. et 14.19.20 1. Sam 4.4
from heaven by his presence he guided them: to them he gave his Re. 9.4
statutes and ordinances, his Priests and Prophets, with them he made his
special covenant, and gave unto their Tribes the Sacraments, seals of his
faythfulnesse: to them he promised, that of the kindred of Israel, he would
raise up his holy Child Jesus, which should be, and before all times was of the
same our eternal God determined to be, the savior of al ye true Israelites.
These be the causes why he terms him the God of Israel. Because he has
visited and redeemed. etc. Three principal causes moving forth such praises,
the Prophet here declares: first that our God notwythstanding that Esaias.
59.2.3 Ier. 5.25. Esai 5.18.
the sins of his Church seperateth his presence from her, and in stead
thereof draws his vengeance upon her, as it were with cords, yet the malice
of her sins cannot break Es y. 4^.12 13.^9.1^.
the faythfulnes of him, her God. But according to his word, by oath also
warranted, 1. Cor. 1.9. 2. Tim. 2.13 To. 3.3.
he would vouchsafe in her most misery, so lovingly to visit the same his
Church and people. Secondly he visits his chosen Church with inestimable
love, moved with compassion upon the vewe of her great misery, who for her
sins was by his justice Captiued into servitude (not only to Caesar) but
also to Satan, and so holden of him in thrall, that no way could she avoid
Satan's force, or at the tribunal seat of Gods judgment escape the just
sentence of condemnation, necessarily following her wickedness, as a meet merit
to the same. At his appointed time according to his good pleasure, he with his
Tit. 2.11.
apparent favor, so visits the same perplexed Church, that from her
Captivity in sin, and satan's bonds, and also from the just sentence of his
great wrath, he by his son Christ has perfectly raunsomed, and so redeemed
her (not by violent force taking her from her bondage, as erst from Exo. 14.30.
Pharao) nor moving the hearts of her Conquerors, to pity her misery, and
favor her deliverance, (as sometime he Nehe. 2. Esaias. 1.2.3.
did) when she was in Babilons captivity, but aunswering his justice with the
Esaias. 53.5.6 7.8.9. etc. 1. Pet. 1.18.19.20.
blood and death of his immaculate and just son Jesus, has paid there by
the due price of her sin, and deliverance from his wrath and from Satan's
malice, to the end that she so redeemed should lead a Tit. 2.12. 1. Pet. 2.24.
purchased life void of sin, and by his holy spirit Ephe. 5.14.15.
redeem hereafter such ill time, as erst they wasted with Ephe. 4.19.22.
greediness to iniquity, and by newness of life walk as children which in
the dungeon of darkness have seen so great light, that as by their former
actions his holiness was blasphemed, so now by their good Mat. 5.16.
works his name may be glorified. He has redeemed his people, he sturreth all
Israel to a double joy: 1. Tim. 6.15 Apo. 1.5. and 17.14. and 19 16.
Lord of Aungelles, of Men, and Deuilles, and has al at his beck, rules al
at his pleasure, staieth the rage of Esaias 11.5.6.7.8. Dan. 14.
Lions, and defends the innocence of Doves, and the simplicity of his
beloved sheep: As also that he is a visiting God, does not only Pro. 16.4.
create but daily direct by gouernements from an hye, the Pro. 16.9.
steps and rhodes of all things, and in his jealousy over the Pro. 16.5.
wicked for their cruelty to his people, Esaias. 53. Esa. 27.1 Ier. 14.10. Gene.
12.17 Ier. 44. Amos. 9.10
visits their sins with scourges, and with the sword of his plagues. But
his people he in visiting finding in them like corruption of nature, the
mountains of sin, the like little regard of duty to God, and remorse of
themselves, does not with the wicked destroy them, but as a most merciful
Father (regarding for his names sake, not their deserved plague, but the
enemies rage against them) does acknowledge them for his, and from the shadow
of death, Dan. 6.16.23.24.
the Lions den, the Dan. 3.8 25
burning Oven, the manifold captiuities and fiery cheynes of sin (because
they are by his own work his people) he redeemeth them, and translateth them
into the kingdom of his dear son our saving health Christ Jesus. Now let us
(good readers) apply the words of this verse to our selves, which not only
in the morning, but at all times of prayer, finding the like causes working in
us, we ought with joyful hearts to the Lord unfeignedly to say and sing,
Blessed be the Lord. etc. First this Lord and God belongs to us now as to
Israel of old. For as they were after the flesh the sons of Abraham: So,
many of them not having the Romans 4.13. et. 9.31.32.
faith of their father, lost the promise to him and his seed, and we now are in
To. 11.17.18 19. etc.
their steed grafted into Christ, by whose spirit and word preached, we are
made the children of Abraham, not by birth in flesh, for we are of another
stock Gentilles, but by the gift Gal. 3.7.29.
of faith, whereby our heavenly father makes us the members of his son Christ,
who is the true seed of Abraham, with the rest of ye true Israellites.
Therefore as many as are the children of faith, may they, and ought they, as
sons of Abraham in deed, to sing with thankefulnes unto God. Blessed be the
Lord. etc. The visitation of our Lord then had, and now continually of him
used, chalengeth always joy of us. For, in Psalm. 101.8.
visiting the wicked with his sword, he cutteth the occasion of evil from his
people. In visiting his people with his rod, he deserves great praise, for to
the same his people, whenever he sends his Rod to correct their sins,
Psalm. 23.4
his stafe of divine providence, is also by his mercy therewyth exhibited, to
be to them a stay of comfort and defense. All which most wisely he guides
with his merciful hand, oftentims not taking from his servants, the smarting
salve of his correction, until the itching sore of their iniquity, by the
power of his spirit be taken from them. As a most loving Father, he visits
us, for in the midst of his anger he is ever mindful of his mercies. Esai.
54.4.1 6.7.8.
He strikes us but for a season, but he consumes the wicked in his wrath, he
Psalm. 119 67 71. 1. Cor. 11.32
beats us to our good, to bring us under his yoke But with his visiting
plagues, he Psalm. 2.9
breaks in sunder, and beats into morsels, the children of iniquity, for
the which his holy works sake, we ought ever thankfully to say with heart and
tongue to the Lord our God. Blessed be the Lord. etc. Thirdly have not we
manifest cause with Zachary daily to praise God? when with him feeling our
deserved death ready to devour us, and our sins provoking Gods justice to
condemn us to perpetual captivity to imprison us in Iud. 6. 2. Pet. 2.4.
eternal cheynes of darkness with Satan) he by his spirit does assure us
that we are his children, To. 8.15.16.
and 1. Ioh. 4.18. Gal. 4.6.
enboldeneth us, (not whisperingly for fear bringing painfulness: But to
cry out with courage enriched with his love) that he is our Father, and that
his Io. 3.16.
Christ is by his goodness given to us, and by his spirit has he grafted us
into his Christ, as the branches are into the true vine, by whose sap even
his said spirit we have not only our Arra, and Ephesians. 1.13.14
earnest penie of his assured covenant: But also are set so sure into eternal
life, that it is impossible for sin, satan, flesh, or whatso ever, to
condemn us. For it is our Lord which has redeemed us his people, and we are
by Romans 8.1
faith grafted into him our Lord: So that to us can come no condemnation, nor
any want of that which is good. Therefore again with the whole Church of God
we most joyfully ought to say. Blessed be the Lord God etc. For he has
visited and redeemed his people.

Finally, note here that the Papists in their Mattins using, or rather into
abuse bringing and chaunting this song did never a right as Zachary the good
Priest did, therewith praise the Lord, for they worshipped him with lips
alone, without understanding the causes why: but he first waigheth the cause,
before he pours out by weight the Lords praise. His heart was wholly fraught
with conceived matter of joy, they void thereof and laden with terrible
doubtfulnesse, dare not presume (say they) to bost of their deliverance, which
popish vice as it is their devotion in their life, so it purchases for them
after death the dregs of Gods angry Cup, as dreaming Dirgis, and restless
Masses, to purchase requiem, where none is to be had, and a never ceasing pay,
till land and revenues will serve no more. And yet if eftsoon of them it be
asked, never can it by them be answered, the soul the Lord visiting has
redeemed: for then their popery should decay. But thanks be unto God, who by
his infallible truth in his written word has assured as many as believe in him,
of eternal life: yea and that presently after, and from the moment of natural
death: our Lord and redeemer so saying Io. 11.25. and 5.24.
he that believes in me, shall not die for ever. etc. but shall pass from
death to life. O ye Papists learn to repent (which God if it be his good will
grant you for Christ's sake) and to perceive with us the causes why we bless
the Lord, for he has erected up an horn of salvation in the house of his
servant David, for the Church of true Israel, as this our good Priest and
Prophet Zachary speaks on this wise saying.

Albeit (says the Prophet) that in the eyes of all men Israel, was cast down,
his strength worn out, and his light extinct, his hope gone, and no glory left
in the house of David: yet do I now see thee O Lord, mindful of thy former
promises. For in that thou have sent my son the Baptist, thy messenger, and
enriched the womb of the virgin with child, thou have assured us of thy
erected Christ in the Tabernacle of David, which is to us a most mighty
salvation by thy spirit, in the mouth of the same David promised saying. There
will I make the horn of David to bud, Psalm. 132.17 Iere. 23.6
for I have ordained a light for mine anointed. And the time now, thou have
respected to the inestimable comfort of thy Church, in which Herod and thy
enemies have perished (in show) thy David's line, and have usurped his throne.
As thou before time have promised, saying: Jn that day will I raise up the
Tabernacle of David that is fallen down, Amos 9.11. Acts. 15.16.
and close up the breaches thereof. And J will raise up his ruins, and J will
build it as in the days of old. A horn he calls Christ our Savior
significantly, thereby checking the pride of Satan in his members, that seek
to destroy the kingdom of Israel, as also declaring that he shall be of
strength to overcome their strength: yea and that his place and dignity is no
where else the^ from the Lord, who does anoint this Christ above his fellow
Priests and Princes, with the Horn of his Everlasting strength for his
people. Understand therefore that this word Cornu a horn in scripture sometime
signifies Dan. 7.7.24. 1. Sa. 16.1.
kingdom and princely power, as in Daniell and in Samuel. Sometime it is taken
for strength and great might, as in Daniel again, and in the Psalmist, Psalm.
75.10.
All the horns of the ungodly will J break, but the horns of the just (says
he) shall be exalted. The sum of ye Prophets words are, as if he had said: To us
deprived of strength, hope and comfort, by the mighty enemies of god in the
world, the Lord in despite of them that throw us down to the dust, has
erected in the midst of them his promised Christ, which is to us that believe in
him, a mighty king, a strong salvation. That, and the only saving health of
God, given to al nations, that fear him, and call upon his name. Yea, and
that in the same lineage and stock which the mighty of the world are now in
hand to destroy, even in the house of his servant David. Since to us this horn
with his honor and strength is erected, let us consider something further of
these the Prophets words. And first note that in Christ alone, which is borne
of David's stock, the virgin Mary, (not in the popish wheaten and coniured
counterfeit Christ,) has the heavenly father placed our Math. 17.
saving health and in no other: wherefore in him alone must we repose our
trust, as in whom the Col. 1.19. and 2.9.
fulness of the Godhead and his whole favor dwells corporally, and in whom
alone Mat. 3.17. and 17.5.
he rests with us pleased, whose name is Iere. 23.6.
the Lord our righteousness. Secondly he is of God, set up to be our salvation,
therefore may we not else where seek for health, of Man or Angel, neither fear
any other power, for neither To. 8.38.3^
sin, Satan, world, or Hell, can take our saving health from us that rest in
him, nor separate from him and his merits, those which the Io. 6.37.39 and
16.22. and 17.24.
father has given to him. Thirdly the same horn that to the wicked is
terrible and ugly, Dan. 11.12.
destroying their kingdoms and tyranny, is to the faithful the horn of their
health in God, from the sickness of their sin. And also it is to them life
into heaven, from and against the death in hell. As the same water which drowned
the wicked of the world, neither sparing Ship, City, Town, or Castle, at
the same instant carried the Arc of the obedient Genesis 6.7.8
Noah and his family from destruction. Yea, and as natural death it self, is
to the wicked, the door to eternal fire: So is the same natural death, by
this our strength Christ Jesus (who has overcome death, and her sting) to us
that rightly believe in him, 1. Cor. 15.55.56.57. Heb. 2.14.
the passage to eternal joy and bliss. Let the Papists therefore tremble at
the presence of this our strength, for neither they Mat 16.18.
or the gates of hell, shall or can prevail in battle against us, because
Romans 8.31.
God is on our side, and therefore we fear not what the Pope or any other
Carnalite can do against us. David. When did Israel feel most the presence of
the horn? When Exodus 14.21 23.27.
Pharao entered with greatest rage, to destroy the Lords heritage. When did
Daniel perceive his might, and where? Dan. 6.14.19.22.
Even when his friend the King wanted strength to help him, and in the place
provided for his destruction? Where did 1. Reg. 19.14 18. To. 11.4.
Helias the good Prophet behold this wonderful horn erected? But where
idolatry had prevailed over all, and then also, when not one seemed to stand
with the Lord. And did not Israel now decay? and the heathen enter into their
possessions? Was not David's house above al persecuted? Then and there did the
Lord send his promised horn Christ our Lord, by whose sapience the wisdom
of all flesh is proved foolishness, and through whose strength Mat. 12.29
ye strong armed man is spoiled of his treasure. Be of good comfort, O thou
little flock afflicted, for the Lord has, and will have his Christ to have ye
Io. 16.33.
victory. Mar. 3.27. Luc. 11.21.
Yea, death is the instrument of life, and he makes persecution to be the
seed time of his Gospel, and the blood of Martirs, the budding time of the
same. Wherefore always with this and other such places of the holy Scripture,
take comfort thou that trustest in the Lord: And let the experiment of ye last
persecution in England assure thee that the power of this horn is eftsoon
increased. Where and when did this Christ show forth to our age his might? But
when the blood of his saints, in our English bloody Church, became as rivers
of water, and in the time of their greatest pride and ripenes of their Butchers
acts? Then and there has the Lord again in this nation erected his Christ
and Gospel, and from the prison of the Tower, has to the Throne and diadem
of this land, raised his more then half dead Elizabeth our godly and gracious
Queen, under whom the ruins of the decayed walls of true Religion, are
greatly repaired once again. God make us mindful of his mercies, and
thankful for his benefits: And give her Majesty such increase of his zealous
spirit, that the remnant of the Hydra and seven headed beast may be banished
this nation, that in her gracious reign, and by her godly hand with the state
of her ecclesiastical and civil government in God, as Gods holy instruments,
Christ alone may be erected, as he is set down by the Psalm. 132.17
Psalmist to be our strength and our light. So shall her days be many, her
throne 1. Sam. 12.14.15. Ios. 1.7.8. Deuteronomy. 28.7.
established, and her and our enemies utterly ashamed. And in the mean space,
grant us O Lord (for Christ's sake) true and perfect obedience to her
Majesty, with pacient abiding, in humble peace, till the time which thou have
set to frame her heroical heart further, to those things which shall most sound
forth thy glory, her Majesty's honor, and the profit of thy Church: that so
we may depend upon Christ our horn of salvation, and God of strength.

The Prophet not contented to stay with this summary speech, dilateth the same
more amply, and says as follows in the next verse.

Least the salvation by him now preached in Christ, should seem to the world a
new novelty, freeed from utility and truth, he voucheth the same to be long
since, determined of God: and the same open to all ages before, by the holy
Prophets in their times. Genesis 3.15.
Eue^ from ye voice omnipotent to Satan at the fall of Adam, until the hour of
this joyful song, so sending as to our certain stay, the written word of God.
As if he had said, other saving health to look for at the hands of God, then
he has promised, and to refuse the same by him set and given, according to
his promise, is mere wickedness. To give credit to his word, and to subscribe
thereto, is true godliness. Wherefore come hither ye sons of God, this is the
Genesis 3.15. and 22.12.
promised seed, the Esa. 7.14. and 9.6
little stone, the virgins son, Esa. 11.
Jesse his branch ye Messiah, and the anointed Savior of ye Lord promised by all the prophets since the beginning of the world. This verse exhibiteth as by
hand to our senses excellent matter.

Dan. 2.34.45.
and till the last day and hour of the same world, there is no salvation to be
looked for (by that perishing world) else where: then in David's house, and in
and by the horn Christ Jesus alone, by God, and not men, erected up in all
sight, in that house, not set with, or under other helps, but alone and above,
all other seeking their help at him. Of saints the virgin Mary is of most
worthy fame, yet is she far of Act. 4.12
from having power to help in earth the sons of men. Therefore she in her
life for a lesson till the end of death to all David's house, in the Gospel
being called upon of the seruitors at the marriage, says: Io. 2.5.
Whatsoever he bids you do (speaking of her son Christ) se that ye do it.
And when Elizabeth this holy priests wife had saluted her, she acknowledged
Gods mercy to be the cause and said: Luc. 46
My soul does magnify the Lord. etc. And my spirit eke rejoices in God (my
Son) which is my Savior: for else had I with the rest of the sinful world,
both soul and body perished into eternal fire, had not this Christ by the
spirit of God my Lord been conceited and borne, not of me alone, but to and
nor me also.

Secondly he has promised by all his Prophets (to deliver us from error) that
this Christ is not to be found else where then in Luc. 1.32.
David's house, by ye which as all false Christ's are descried, so also the true
Church is hereby approuedly known. For as after the flesh Christ is of ye Mat.
1.1 Luc. 3.23.
line of David, so spiritually David's house signifies his new Church, and in
the same wise Christ is by the Prophets called sundry times David, as well by
Iere. 30.9 Eze. 34.23.
Jeremie as Ezechiel, where ye church is prophesied, to serve God and David
their king, vz. christ the son of David. For David was now long since departed
to the Lord, and again says the Lord, I will set up a shepherd over them, even
my servant David. etc. And my servant David (that is Christ) shall be the
Prince among them, I the lord have spoken it. Therefore (good Reader) of force
it must be so. The house wherein this Princely David reigns, and this priestly
Prophet teaches, is the church of true Israelites, the unfeigned house of Luc.
1.33.
Jacob, to the which and for the which, Genesis 28.12.
the Angels descend, and ascend daily, by the commandment of our King, to the
ministering comfort of his elect. This Christ's church where this horn is
erected, is builded not by man's wisdom, nor mayntained by popish policy and
devilish divinity, but ye chief Mat. 16.18
builder hereof is Christ himself, and by his commission his Prophets before
him, which by his 2. Pet. 1.21.
spirit and word builded the hearts of the fathers to the faith in his erected
son. And ever since his Ephe. 4.11.
Apostles, Evangelists Pastors, Doctors and preachers, which 1. Cor. 11.23
receive of his holy Gospel, and therewith edify the church, are likewise 1.
Cor. 3.9.10.11.
builders of this holy temple and house of our heavenly David. Of which house
Ephe. 1.22. and 5.23.
Christ is the head and chief corner stone. The Ephesians. 2.19.20.21.22
family and building of this house are such* as by ye Apostolical and
Evangelical Doctrine are brought to the rules which are therein set, by the
Lord herein erected: of him also to the same end they have their name, eat of
his bread and work (as he is by calling in such good works, as are of the
same Lord Ephe. 2.10.
for them prepared even from the time of calling, till the last hour of the
Mat. 20.8
penies receite. The continual 1. Cor. 3.10.11. Ephe. 4.11.12.13.
building of this David's house, is by preaching the word of truth, not by
popish pressing in of false Doctrine: by giving the sacraments of the Lord to
the people, as they themselves have of the Lord 1. Cor. 11.23
received them. And not without commission, and against the word to take the
same from the people, and offer them up to the Lord as do the Papists. Also
to keep the house in order, by civil and ecclesiastical government with the
law of Christ our David. By this and such like building, where so ever the
Church is thus set up, the same is true David's house.

And where the power of this horn, is in the hearts of the people, by the
work of Gods spirit surely settled, and through the instrument and organ of
preaching, the same Christ is naked, and without corruption in Doctrine, Gal.
3.1.
described simply, and depaynted so plain with the pensell of the Scriptures
that he is to them manifested, as he is of the Father given, the only
promised Christ crucified, our 1. Cor. 1.30.
salvation, redemption, and justification, Deuteronomy. 18.15 Act. 7.37.
that Prophet, the only Heb. 20. and 7.17.21.28.
Priest, and our King, and that all men by such means are Io. 14.6.
drawn alone to the Father by him: there may we assure our selves, that that
Church and Nation is David's house, and therein is Christ to be found, erected
for our salvation. Mat. 16.18.
Against this building, the gates of Hell shall not prevail. For as many as
believe in him, shall Io. 3.14.15.
not perish with the serpent Satan's sting, but by this holy serpent, void of
poison (Christ Jesus,) shall have eternal life. Against this church and to the
subuersition of his house, the Apo. 2.1.15 17.
old enemy has set him self with his whole power, continually to persecute
the same, and has so prevailed in the eyes of men, that this house, has
eftsoon seemed, a forsaken cottage in the Lords vineyard, and the family
destroyed. But even when it seemed of least value, then from the hands of such
strength, the mighty God has valiantly taken of that number such as should
continue his house elsewhere. And whereas ye wicked seeks ye destruction of this
house: God by his might uses the same another way and that to two principal
ends. First to teach other nations Act. 8.4
into ye which they are dispersed that heavenly doctrine, which else they had
not known. And secondly, that at their return they might bring with them again
not only his word and law, but therewith many mo children, begotten in that
time, by the persecuted gospel, eftsoon to the enlarging of the borders of
that late nobled church. 1. Sam. 22.16.
Go and kill (says raging Saul) the priests of the Lord, (which were the
remnant of Elie,) for their hand is with David and they have not bewrayed him
to me. At whose commandment, that cursed Doeg did kill of them 85. priests of
the Lord, that were the lynnin Ephod. Their City 1. Sam. 22.19.20.
Nob also he destroyed from the most, to the least, some, and all, for the
hate he bare to them that favored David. What then? Did he herewith kill ye
church? No surely. In this sharp persecution Abimeleck his son called
Autathar, one of these priests escaping, fled to David, which was him- 1. Sam.
21.10.
self also from the fury of the said Saul, fled to Achish the King of Gath,
a heathen prince, where both he had succor, and Auiathar continued with him
to the continual increase 1. Sam. 23.9
of Gods Church.

Note here with me (good Reader) that God by his providence does use the
bloody hand of Saul, whose purpose was to destroy by his kingly power, both
priest and people, in Gods Church to an other end, for he made him his
instrument, thereby to spread the same his church among the gentiles, that not
only in that place their hearts might have experiment of his power, but that
also his Church of Jesus then, to the comfort of the same now, might behold
his secret work, far passing al their expectations, which was to foster for a
season in such flight, such two principal persons, as after should erect that
persequuted cause and people, in the same persequuted Nation, and that by no
less mean, then whereby for a time, the same was repressed, nor in any other
place then in Saules seat (that is to say) David his faithful fostred king,
and Auiathar, his good preserved pressed. When cruel 2. Re. 11. 2. Cr. 22.10
Athalia, the Mother of Ahasia King of Jerusalem, sought to extirpe the kings
seed, that she might usurp the kingdom, she murdering the rest, did she
destroy the house? No, Joash one of his sons was from her hand of slaughter
saved, and that by the hand of a maid his Sister, till the time that the Lord
had appointed, for the said Ioashe the true King to enter into his realm, and
so to render recompense, by just pay of deserved death, to that wicked usurper
Athalia, which after Seven years he brought to pass, setting this reserved
Ioash in his fathers seat. Mat. 2.16. Illiricus ce^t 1. lib. 1. cap. 30. fol.
22.
Herod also seeking by the death of the innocents to kill the Messiah, not
only failed of his pray, but was himself devoured of GODS Justice. And
although the Papists follow these and such other their forefathers in like
murdering cruelty, as lately in England, and since in France: yet will the
LORD, and has the LORD set up, (as he has promised by the mouth of all
his Prophets since the world began) his Christ, to be his strength in spite
of them. Who yielding as it were for the time, does thereby nothing loose, but
less ableth, the aduersarye: While by Satan's fury the Church is else where
gone, as before is said, to bring forth (by her Christ) in a more quiet
place, many more Children. At whose return, the loss of her former are
restored, with infinite more her borders enlarged, her honor increased, and
her fame spread over all. For the LORD her strength, has, and will Mic. 7.10.
(confounding her ennemies, and treading them in the mire) give her the
victory. Add unto the holy Scriptures testes, our own experimented testymony,
in the late persecuting time, of Queen Marie, and therewith well consider the
increase of his Church, and number of her children, which by the persecuted
Preachers then, with others their brethren since, through their ministry in
the Gospel, are begot in Christ, and in this Church of England fostered, to
the praise, and in the profession of the same our Lord. To conclude let every
faithful man assure himself of the same continual work of God in his
church, to the end of the world. For his Psalm. 33.18. Psalm. 34.15.
eyes with remembrance of his promise, are ever over the righteous, to
perform, to all perpetuity, yt which by so many holy witnesses, as his
patriarks and prophets, he has to ye same promised from time to time so
assuredly. Now let us repair again to our prophet Zachary, who proceeding, does
set forth at large ye performed promise of God, and the effects of the same,
to his beloved Church, saying as follows.







of our enemies, should serve him with out fear.



This whole text depends upon the former expounded verse. As he promised to
our fore. etc. And declares by manifest proof, the faithfulness of God, which
has fulfilled his promises and oath, not by the Prophets alone, but long before
made to the Patriarchs, that was to Abraham saying: Genesis 12.3*
I will bless them that bless thee, and I will curse them that curse thee. And
also thy Genesis 22.17
seed shall possess the gates of their enemies, and in thy seed shall all
the Nations of the earth be blessed, and this promis, he confirmed with an Genesis
22.16
oath which Zacherie here repeateth, saying, I have sworn by my self, I will
bless thee, and multiply thy seed. His living covenant also with Abraham was
this, Moreover Genesis 17.7
I will stablish my love, between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in
their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be god unto thee, and to thy
seed after thee. And I will give thee, and thy seed after thee, the land
wherein thou art a stranger: even all the land of Canaan for an everlasting
possession, and I will be their God. And with our Father David he made a covenant
also, which by oath eke he established, that it might be every way, Heb. 6.17.
most firm: and now in sending his Christ (says Zachary he has performed the
same, which erst thus spoke, I Psalm. 89.3.
have made a covenant with my chose^, that these and such other covenants by
GOD, with the Fathers made, for, and to them, and the rest of his Church, may
seem to sound temporal things: yet beside that this Psalm shows them to
be spiritual, our Prophet here, as a most true Paraphrast, expounds the
same couenantes and promises, by oath of the LORD also confirmed (to their
infallible stabilitie) to be understood of us spiritually, and in Christ to
possess them, by him likewise, as victorius men, and more then conqueroures to
triumph over and against our Romans 8.
spiritual ennemies, sin, Satan, the world, and the flesh, Ephesians. 6.12.
Principalities, powers, worldly gouernoures, (that is to say, such as govern
by, and for the worlds lust,) Princes of darkness of this world, spiritual
wickednesses, which are in high places, and whatsoever opens it self to the
work of our Salvation. Neither did Christ deliver the Jews from the tirranny
and bondage of the Romans, but yielding himself to that authority, Mat.
22.17.
paid the tribute thither due: Teachinge us thereby to look for a further, and
a more blessed deliverance, of which as before, Paul speaks to the
Ephesians. And the Angels from Heaven preached the same to Joseph, saying, he
shall be called Math. 1.21
Jesus. For he shall save his people, (not from temporal government of
Strangers) but from (the spiritual captivity of) their sins. That being so,
from fear of sin, satan, hell, world, and flesh, spiritually, and safely
delivered, they may serve the Lord, not with Jewish rites, or popish devotion,
but with 2. Tim. 2.22
sincerity of heart, and 1. Tim. 2.8.
pureness of hands in every place, in true holiness, and like righteousness
by him accepted, and in his sight free from hipocrisy, all the days of their
life. Lo this is the fruit of the blessed promises, oath and couenantes, which
our Prophet here speaks of. This is the victory which God gives to his
faithful fighting soldiers and sanctified people. On this sort shall they
possess the gates of their ennemies, they shall through Christ their head,
remain and dwell as Lords over all things. And shall tread Satan under
their To. 9.30.31
feet, notwithstanding his daily assaltes and subtle fight. The battle is
betwixt Satan and the soul of man, it begins with man's life, and is fought
in the field of a good conscience, enduring by faith till death, for both
parts sound the retire. But the (a) victory, by Gods spirit is ever assured
to the faithful, and shall be perfected with (b) Christ in his kingdom, to
our endless happy and most blessed state. Now having the text thus opened, by
Gods mercies, and grace of his spirit, let us according to our former rule
observe some such profitable notes, as the same does reach apparently, to our
considerations. And first in this second verse of this section, (for of the
first, we shall speak more herafter, Christ so willing,) let us upon the
words note, that the Fathers, Patriarchs and Prophets, albeit they are of the
prophet here called, and that truly (holy) yet did not their holiness demerit
such great treasures, and heavenly fruitfulness, either for their selves or
their posterity, as by his words he here expresses. that with them he should
make so Solemn and Honorable a covenant.

And if the Fathers whose holiness the sacred Scriptures so much recounteth,
had not wherwyth to meritte the covenant of peace with God, Where shall their
Children obtain such price. Nay, such as have sought by their worthynesse
and Obedience to the Law, set down by the LORD in his word, to have
Justification without measure, because of their numbered virtues, such I say
have lost that they sought for, nor could atteyne to that they would, to say
deliverance from their Spiritual Enemies, and to be accounted just before the
Lord, the Apostle so witnesses saying. Rom 9.30.31.
Israel which followed the Law of righteousness, could not atteyne to the
Law of Righteousness, because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by
the works of the Law, for they have stombled at the stombling stoane, that
is, they are offended at the Christ which GOD has set to be the
Righteousness for his people, and refusinge him and his merits, they rest
upon the shyuering staff of their imagined holiness. But the Gentilles
(says Paul) which followed not righteousness have atteined unto righteousness,
even the righteousness that is of faith, that is to say, the true righteousness
which cannot be bought by desert, but is atteined by faith in ye promise of
God. Here let our enemies the papists wey well with them selves how far they
are from the sense of truth. If ye holy fathers accepted with God in great
favor received not otherwise, the^ by his mercies his promised christ, and in
him their salvation and full deliverance, and also if they seeking him
unfeignedly with sincerity of heart, came so far short of merit, ye had not the
exhibiting mercy, prevented his provoked justice the same our fathers had
perish. How then can they, or man or angel for the^, obtain for us
salvation, or remission of our sins, by any merit yt can proceed from a
creature or creaturs? The merits of ye papists, Popish merits.
are either the weight of their Massing Sacrifyces, men. As for the meritte of
their mass, out of all question, it meriteth neither pardon with God the
father, nor place in the church of christ his son. But it being used does
derogate (as much as it may) the Power of Christ which alone of God is set up,
to and for his church in David's house: and arrogateth the honor of Christ and
his office to that abhonable Idol. But (beloved children of God) give
attentive ear to the Apostolical words written to the Hebrews, and thou
shall plainly perceive by the power of Gods spirit, that the Heb. 10.14.
one oblation of christ's natural body on the cross, in his death has for
ever, not only taken away from us ye wrath of God, and reward of sin, but has
therewith abrogated, ye solemn sacrifices, commanded by himself in his
written word, and also has taken away (for all times to come) all power from
any man or angel to set up, any other sacrifice or oblation propitiatory in
place thereof: wherefore he says by the will of God (by ye sacrifice of Heb.
10.9.
Christ ordained of God) we are sanctified, even by the Offering of the body
of Jesus Christ once made. Psalm. 110. 1. Cor. 13.25
be made his footstole. And that all men might be Satisfied, he adds a reason
wherefore, saying Heb. 10.14.
for with one Offering has he consecrated for ever those that are Sanctified.
And moreover he calls the Holy Ghost for witness of the same as in the 15.
and 16. verses following, and so concludes up his Assertion. That since Christ
Jesus has thus redeemed us, Heb. 10.17.
there is no more Offering for sin of one or other, but in place thereof
there is (says he) set up to and for us, an entering into life by a more
beautiful manner, which he there calls a new and living way, prepared for
us through the person Christ, which is our hye Priest: who requires not
sacrifice of us, Genesis 4.4.
Cayn, or his Sacrifyce, and contrarily he accepted Habell and his Oblation:
which sturred up Cayn his wrath to kill his Brother Habell. Here it is plain,
God respects first the man, and then his sacrifice, if the man be not
acceptable, his sacrifyce is abominable, as in the Prophet Esa.
1.10.11.12.13.14.15
Esaias, the Lord reproves the Jews for their paynefull serving in will
worship. and says, he abhors their devises, and will not turn toward
them with favor, though their sacrifices be costly, because they are sinful
that offer them. And the people for whom they are offered, are the children of
sin, their hands are full of blood, yea, and they give to God that which he
asks not, and therefore dislyking utterly thereof, he says, Esa. 1.16.
who required this at your hands? And there teaches them to amend from their
Wicked ways, to wash them from their sins, and so will he accept them and
their Oblations. Christ himself also does nothing more pacify ye Fathers
wrath, in his most holy sacrifyce, then in respect, that according to the
Fathers will, he has yielded himself for an Oblation as he was of him
appointed, by his written word saying, a Heb. 10.5.
body have thou ordained me, and lo I am here to do thy will. Let the Pope
and his Clergy (as Christ here does) show us the heavenly God or Father his
holy written will, for their accepted persons in Sacrifysing for the Quick
and Dead, and for such their feigned propitiatory Sacrifyces: and we will not
shame for loss of credit to subcribe unto them. But this they can not, and
therefore they hate the scriptures, and would not that we should Study in
them: Because they know that there by their Idolatrye is bewrayed, and their
Treachery made known, and that both they and their Sacrifyces are with Cayn
odious in Gods sight. Oh that therefore we could with our Zachary return the
Phrase of Popish speech to the Forge, that first framed the same, and could
acknowledge our Saluatson to consist in Gods mercy alone, by the meritte of
his Son Christ in that his Sacrifyce, in his 1. Pet. 2.24
natural Body Crucified on the cross once for all, and al ages. By the which
(says the Apostle Peter) we are delivered from Sin to live in
righteousness, Esaias. 53.5.2
for by the (b) strypes of Jesus Christ's Death we are made whole. The blood
of Saints, is their other Imagined meritte for men's Saluations and Gods
favor. But (good reader) of Saints the Apostles are chief, and has not
Christ taught them to say, forgive O Lord our sins? Mat. 6.12*
Has not the chief of them whose life was angelical, whose person to death
was eftsoons assailed ( Paul I mean) has not he written; does not he thereby
yet speak, that the Gal. 3.8.9.10.11.12.13.14. etc.
merit of eternal life is Gods mercy, not man's merit? And yet speaking of the
suffringes and blood of martired saints, for the testimony of God and his
Gospel, he acknowledges that the To. 8.18.
afflictions of them in this life, are not worthy of the glory which shall be
showed to them in the triumphant kingdom of our heavenly father. But their
merit (says he) is Gods love, who has chosen them to be his sons, and
has (says he) annexed them with Christ, as heirs of the inheritance. Note
well eternal life comes not by the blood and afflictions of martirs, not by
purchase of men's merits, but by the inheritance given us in Christ thorough
Gods mercy. Thus good reader thou see that this popish post is rotten for
age and want of heart, what shall we say of the third matter, the Popes pardon?
in earth, controler in the heavens, prince in Purgatory, and Master of Hell.
Be not offended that I call him that tail of the people, for the warrant is
given me, by the holy Ghost, so to term him. Esa. 9.15.
The ancient and honorable man, he is the head, says Esaias, and the Prophet
that teaches lies, he is the tail of the people.

To. 14.23.
before faith, they are sin, and therefore move Gods fury, rather then
merit his mercy. If they follow faith, they then merit not that which of
God is given before their birth, but express by such fruit, what well Psalm.
1.3.
planted tree brought them forth. But as no tree meriteth life by the Apple
which he bears, but fast settled in the ground, lives of the juice that
comes from the root, so the faithful merit not Gods favor (which is their
life) by their works, (the fruits of their faith) but settled and grafted into
Christ their foundation, they do receive their common life from the same
root, by the sap his spirit which from him is sent and Io. 14, 26.
given, to every of them sufficiently, to life eternal. What, shall we then
not work? Ephesians. 2.10.
God forbid: Always do and continue in that which is good, but cause not a
good thing commanded of GOD, to become a pestilent evil to thy conscience.
Live and walk in good works, which God has prepared for thee: The end of
good works.
but let them be done to the same end which GOD has directed to them. Phil.
5. Heb. 6.10 2. Pet. 1.5
And further that the Church of GOD may be profited by them. Mat. 5.16.
glorify thy Father which is in heaven. This is the voice of holy scripture,
declaring the end of good works to be as we have said, but that they merit not,
Paul plainly shows to the Romans, for and to al in the person of Abraham,
saying: if To. 4.2. etc
Abraham were justified by works, he has wherein to rejoice, but not with
God. For what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted to
him for righteousness. Now to him that works, the wages is not counted by
favor but by debt, hut to him that works not (vz. to merit thereby) but
believes in him that justifies the wicked, his faith is counted for
righteousness. Thus then we see, that the fathers with us have not merited
Christ our only felicity, but Gods mercy and love surmounting (as I may
reverently say) his justice in just wrath, has not of duty, but by love,
given, and not sold to us that believe in him his Son Christ, that we Io. 3.16.
should not perish, but by him being delivered from our enemies, should have
everlasting life and power in him to serve him, in this time of our mortal
flesh in all holiness, and virtuous exercises before him, all the days of our
life. Moreover I note that our Lord God will not have us to dwell in
uncertainties for our salvation, and therefore he sends us to his written
word, where his promises and covenant is by his own spirit set down to all
flesh, for the which cause Zachary has relation in this verse to the 1. Pet.
1.10
written promises and covenant. And to the same says Io. 20.31
John also is the Gospel written to us now, that we should by that written
truth, believe that Jesus is the Christ the son of God, and that in believing
we might have life through his name. As for the unwritten verities of the
Papists, as they are counterfeit and forged of their own brain: so can they
bring no comfort to the conscience of the wounded man, or satisfaction to the
thirsty soul that Mat. 5.6. and 11.38.
labors to seek the water of life, which God does give to those that hunger
and thirst after the same. For nothing else work they, Heb. 10.14
but draw to hell all such as trust and are led by them. But he that thirsts
after the water of life: else where then in the written sacred scriptures can it
not be found. Seek this water in the Scripture therefore (good Reader) and the
Lord will make heavenly Io. 4.14. and 7.37.38.
rivers to flow out of thee, wherewith thou shall satisfy thine own
conscience in the same Christ fully, and be able also to bring many other to
the same Io. 17.2
salvation, the^ in christ Jesus, God ye father makes us partakers of his holy
covenant. Or yet by any other means are we kept within the compass thereof,
then by the cause it self which is Act. 4.12
Christ the Lord, the Apo. 1.8. and 21.6. and 22.13.
Alpha and Omega of the same: So voucheth ye Apostle saying, in To. 4. Gal.
3.16.
thy seed which is Christ, shall al nations be blessed.

The observations of the sixth verse, are also comfortable and profitable.
Comfortable when we perceive that our sins deserve the breach of Gods love
and extreme judgment: yet God in his mercy does promise and swear to keep
his word given to the fathers, and to deliver us from the said judgment, as the
Prophet in the text says, Verse. 6. And the oath which he swear. etc.
and the oath which he swear. etc. The profit hereof ensues, in the doctrine
following. In no case may we gather, because God is said here to swear, that
his word without an oath is doubtefull, for the Scriptures every where approve
them absolutely, Amen.

Also Christ him self says that Mat. 5 18. and 24.35. Mar. 13.31.
heaven and earth shall pass, but not one jot of my word shall pass till all
be fulfilled. And the Apostle says, that the doctrine of the Lord is not 2.
Cor. 1.17.18.19.20.
yea, and nay, but yea and Amen. He Psalm. 33.
speaks the word, says David, and they were made, Psalm. 19.1. To. 1.19.20.
the times before us till this present, and witness of time ye beautiful
heavens show forth ye faythfulnes of God in his word, that the same is most
true and strong to the salvation, of all that believe in Christ through it.
Neither may we imagine that he did swear thereby to hiue us example or
warrant, to use vain and blasphemous oaths (but leaving to the weakness of our
faith Heb. 6.17
the Lord swear the more to confirm his promises in us) for he has forbid us
to use the^ by his holy word, where Mat. 5.34.35.
nothing is permitted us to swear by in heaven or earth, no not by ye hears
of our head: but there are we commanded to frame our hearts to honesty and
truth, which shall out of all occasion of oaths and blasphemies from us, and so
keep far from our consciences the accusing Mar. 9.44 Esa. 66.24.
worm of ye same, and the Zach. 5.4.
vengeance of god, which never departs from the house of the swearer. Albeit
sometimes we may and ought to swear to ye glory of god, Ier. 4.2.
and the end of controversies in and amongst his people, being called thereto
ordinarily, and the^ must we swear in truth and righteousness.

Here would I gladly help my country of England, (if in this place I might
borowe so large a license) which much uses this kind of swearing in
westminster hal, and other the Tribunal seats of this land. Many of them
swear, and sweat to swear and offer oaths, and both borowe and lend the same
to satisfy their friends, and what is the charge of an oath, for the most part
many forces not: so, to win their expectation by oath, they may dispatch
their proposed intent. But learn a little here of oaths (good Rearder) and
first what an oath is. An oath, is a taking Gods name to witness, to the better
and more stable Heb. 6.16. Deuteronomy. 6.13.
confirmasion of those things which we vouch in communication or testes, Mat.
28.20. Psalm.
or else in covenant or promise, assuring those to whom we swear, that nothing
but truth proceeds from us. Act. 1.24
Herein in his due place, god is greatly honored and worshipped, hereby we
confess him to be every where present, to behold the hearts and actions of all
men, to be a To. 1.18. These. 4.6.
revenger of evil against the offenders in this point. But if either falsely,
or for any other respect then for his glories sake, and the peace of his
people, we swear, or seek to swear, though it be true that we do swear,
notwithstanding we sin, though not in the substance of the matter, yet in the
accidental part thereof: because either the favor of the one, or dread of the
other, or lineage, blood or other worldly respects, compels us thereto, and
not the sorce of truth it self, and this God will plague. Surely he will also
plague al such as mixed in their oaths the creatures of heaven and earth with ye
name of God, by whom Deuteronomy. 6.13.
alone we must swear being called thereto. Esa. 65.16
He that swears (says Esaias) shall swear by the true and living God. And
again Esaias says in the person of God, Esa. 45.23.
Al knees shall bow to me, and every tongue shall swear by my name. And as
this is commanded in Scripture, so are we there forbidden to swear by them
that are no Gods, Exo. 23.13. Psalm. 16.4.
All that which J have commanded you, see that ye observe the same, and think
not upon the names of their Gods, nor let them be once named of you. And in
Sopho. 1.^
Sophony ye Lord promises, and threatens to destroy and cut of all those that
swear by God and by Malcham. That God Maazim the Mass, or such blind Joshua
23.7
judges as offer and give charge to swear by God and all saints, or either
that wicked use, God and our Lady, God and saint John. etc. Or such as not
daring to swear, yet invent to swear by feigned and new found oaths, as mat
for Mass, and gob for GOD, and hods body and blood for our Lords blessed body
and blood. etc. There is no less wickedness in the one then in the other, for
therein we still break his commandment that says, Mat. 5.34.
swear not at all, and we declare thereby our willing desire to blasphemy,
which as we dare not enter into, for fear of his vengeance: so we frame our
selves as near thereto as we can, by devilish daliance: much like to Master
Hardinges pleasant speech of our Ladies spiritual sport with Christ her Son,
when she in the popish Primer is prayed to say lube natum. etc.

Considering that these evils are to be removed, and that swearing is not
only in some respect of GOD permitted, but also we have now heard commanded,
and is a chief part of the true service and worship of our God, let us
learn to serve him herein in true holiness and righteousness, such as may
well be accepted before him. The which to do we, must observe that rule in
swearing which the Prophet gives to every man appointed to swear, saying:
Iere. 4.2.
Thou shall swear (says he) in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness.
Four points he teaches us to observe in our swearing.



Secondly, that we swear in veritate, in truth, as if he had said, play not
the hypocrite, calliditas, which in plain English is lying craftines, swearing
outwardly to subscribe etc. and softly saying to himself, as far forth as they
are warranted etc. Now surely, to have safe warrant of God, is necessary for
our subscription in doctrine, but to swear to observe and to To. 22.23
allow of that whereof he stands in doubt, is a halting with God, a mocking
of men, and a manifest show of an ill conscience in him that uses the same,
which can not be far from the curse of God. To. 14.23
Swear truly therefore, let heart and tongue go together, and vouch both one
thing, else thou do heap Gods wrath upon thine own head.

iudicio, that is, with discretion, not rashly or ouerlightly, but first
weighing the cause why he swears, the matter which by oath he is to witness,
the good that may come thereof, and the wrath of God following false swearing:
he is to swear truly, that which he himself knows by sight, or self
hearing, and not to lean upon other men's reports. Furthermore, let no man
frame himself to swear for trifling things or lightly provoked, but in mere
necessity, and then with grave consideration and reverent regard of Gods
presence, before whom we all stand, whose eyes behold the deeds of all men,
whose ears receive the whispering speech of the deep dissembling heart.
Tremble therefore to swear for light matters, or at every man's first
persuasion, for an oath is the extreme point of Gods ordinance to be used of
men, and before Magistrates to banish braules and contention, and to conserve
the peace and utility of his church.

Justicia. Let not your oaths, says he, be contrary to right and godliness, but
thereby seek to give to every man that which of right is due unto him, whether
in cases pertaining to God, to godly Magistrates, or to any other sorts of men.
And let the love of God, and of eour Christian brethren, with regard of the
only truth, he always your guide in swearing, and not the faces of sinful
men. In any case beware of too much credit in other men, give thy self his
true Iusticia, that is to say, let thine own eyes, thy reason, thy conscience,
thy faith, thy honesty, thy person, with his name, fame, and craving credit,
keep him self subject to the Lord his God in holiness, and righteousness, in
the middle of the evil world, all the days of thy life. Far be it from thee
to become the slave of the rich in thy swearing, the foresworne tenant of thy
leude provoking landlord, or a chayned lump of flesh to the bones of thy
kindred, by such means, or any ways else to be carried from the truth, to the
hurt of an other, though he be thine enemy, or to the condemnation of thine
own soul, by a false oath to purchase thy friend his pleasure. Finally if
thou shall embrace that which here thou art exhorted unto, and shall abhor
that which thou read here forbidden of God, thou shall in such swearing
bless his name, and he shall acknowledge thee for his child, and in his Christ
shall defend thee from the force and rage of the mighty wicked in earth, and
shall give thee in the end of this thy life thy resting place and dwelling
house, his holy Tabernacle the heavenly bliss, as the Prophet David does
witness in the fiftenth Psalm Psalm. 15.
most comfortably to the reading of the which I refer thee.

Now are we come to that which we erst promised vz. to speak of our
deliverance from our enemies by this erected horn Christ, Verse. 7 That we
should be delivered from the hands of our enemies. etc.
whereto god has sworn that we should not only give him the more credit, but
also should frame our selves in him, to lead the life that such redemption
requires at our hands. But this redemption reaches to the Heb. 10.14 Heb. 13.8
ends of the world, therefore what kind of enemies so ever, or in what sort they
bend their battrie against us, God by this Scripture, with other his promises,
has assured us the Esa. 54.15.
victory, and from our foes full deliverance. Our enemies are sin, Satan, the
world and the flesh, who in all ages, have not only troubled the church and
people of god with gross and carnal vices, but have set up in the said
Church a form of Exodus 32.1.
Religion devised in Hell, carrying the title of holiness and Gods service,
wherewith they have more easily drawn the multitude of men, from GOD to such
sin, under the cloak of devotion, to their perpetual confusion and shame.
This imagined holiness and humane religion, did Satan first broche in the
church of Jesus under Exo. 32
Moses, and eftsoon renewed the same as he could, changing him self after
the Judge. 11.39. and 17.18. 1. Sa. 28.8 1. Re. 11.4. and 12.28. and 16.31. and
18.26. and 21.9.10. 2. Re. 1.2 2. Para. 24.17.18. and 25.14. and 33.2.3 5.6.7.
Dan. 3.1.2.3. and 6.7.8.9 1. Macab. 2. Macab. wholly.
fashion of every age, preuayleth till the time of Christ, and the Pharisees,
and since also, has played his part in the Synagoge of Rome, of whose filthy
cup the Kings and Nations of the earth have tasted, to their extreme Apoc.
14.8 and 18.3.
dronkennes.

This is the greatest enmity that Satan can work to Gods people, under
color of seeking and serving him, to draw them quite from his Majesty, and
in such sort blyndeth their eyes, and with his fiery Darts so kendleth their
carnal zeal, that in the will worship of their own invention, they spare
no cost, or Col. 2.23
shun any pain, to seem more then religious therein. In this our age the
Church of England is vexed with two horrible Impes, and messengers of our
enemy Satan, as sent of him to molest our happy state, to stop the joys
that we are to conceive in our most comfortable Christ.

The first imphe is the foreign papisticall foe, the second is our
domestical English hipocrites. The forrayne Papists beyond the seas, have
bent their force against the truth professed here in England, and to encounter
with the same, have prepared a double shot against this frontire, our religion.
The one shooting slander by railing pen at the truth, and persons professing
the same: the other charged with treason and Popish powder, shoots at the
state and person of our sovereign as at the Liefetenaunt of the Lords band.
But from them both the Lord in his great mercy, has, and does deliver us.
And with the truth of his Gospel, by such ability, as he gives to his church
and ministry, in these our days does so overtake the wiliness of our
adversaries, that their penned books are in every respect learnedly and truly
made known as they are, to be over weak to break the Walls of Gods church,
much less to confound the Doctrine professed in the same. Wherefore, as men
alwearied in woeful wast labors after sundry conflictes, having spent all
their popish muniments in this war, they pray a peace, and take a day of truce,
and so by scilence subscribe to the conquering truth, which by his force and
their poverty they are compelled unto.

The charged shot of treason, which the Romanistes have trayled to this nation,
are they not by the Lord, before the time of their discharge, and without the
strength of man broken al in pieces? Esa. 54.15.
The smith that framed them, (the pope I say) is he not ashamed to see his
Platform put to foil? What Nation does he more envy, then this our happy
Land? What confederacies does he make with sundry conspiracies, both with in
and with out the Land, against the Lord Psalm. 2.2
and his anointed Prince? What offers of aid, what practices for proof of
good success, has his unholy holiness assayde in this Land? and yet the
Lord has delivered and preserved from al his subtle engines, both her
majesty and us, that she should be, (mauger his bearde) the Esa, 49.23
Nurssing Moother, not only to the Church under her government, but also to
the Afflicted members of Jesus CHRIST, which that Huge Apo. 12.9
Dragon, does Persecute from place to place. And happy may her Majesty be,
that GOD vouchsafes to select her, (being a weak woman) from among the
mighty Monarchies of the world, to be his chosen nurse to his peculiar
persecuted people. So may all we her subjects acknowledge our selves more then
most bound to god for her majesty, since we under a maiden Prince, whose
person is unapt to bodily wars, are so defended, that against the force of
the worlds fury, both our souls and bodies are conserved in much peace, far
above the nations round about us. The only cause thereof is Jesus Christ, our
mighty Apo. 12.7.
Michael, who himself without our fighting hands, or armed bodies, breaks the
Dragons force, and disapointeth him of his pray.

The second diabolical imphe, is the domestical foe which ye Church harboreth
and carries in her arms, and to quiet and make still his wanton and wrauling
cries, Dandleth him on her Mootherly Knee, hoping to surpresse his brawling
voice with her patient compassion. For show of recompense, this poisoned brood
calls her by the name of mother, and her spouse Christ, they worship by the
tittle of Lord. But in deed they are the bond slaves of Gal. 4.24.25.
Agar, and bear a deadly hate to Sara. Their minds be set on Sina that
gendreth bondage, (vz. rotten Rome) 26.
and Jerusalem they seek but to feed upon, to florishe in, to enriche
themselves under her. And espying her Gal. 2.4.
liberties, and preheminences, they do from time to time busy themselves to
betray the same. The true church of God now in England, seek they to betray
to the hands of the wicked, and by Esa. 87.20.
slanders to polute the sanctuary of the Lord. The engines that these enemies
use against us, are scoffing speches, railing voices, and slaundering words.
See you not say these men, what discord, sundry sects and religious are
amongst these new broched brethren, how they preach, write, dispute, and ever
seek to beat down another? Is not this a mark of Satan's Sinagog. And the
common refuge of these euilles, is to couller their cankred malice, with the
Act. 17.6.7.
covert of desired obedience to Laws, whylest such for the most part live as
though they themselves were priuileadged from all good government. The
contempt of godly Laws set down in this state and present government, is to
be with diligent eye, and earnest care redressed. And I would to GOD such
rulers Ecclesiastical and civil were selected as would more diligently look
hereto. So should the mouths of men have less cause of their great outcryes
against the present state. For I think it no reason to pull down the whole
house, for the weakness of on rotten sparre, or to cut of the hand for the
fault or defect of a finger, or yet utterly to subvert the state because every
part has some Esa. 42.3.
infirmity. But as concerning the contentions amongst the learned, I answer I
lament both the cause and the action: yet here by has the papist no warrant to
Blaspheme our Religion, or to condemn the Prince or Preachers and professors
of the same, for if contention amydde the learned and in the Church of God be a
sufficient cause to refuse her, to slander and to revile her with reproachful
terms, yea, and condemn the people, state, and ministry of christ's spoused
wife this holy church: then shall we find this Church in no age among the
children of men planted, free from such sharp censure.

As if we look into the church of Israel brought from Pharao into the desert,
we shall see ye same often to rebel against Ex. 15.24.17.2.32.1. Nu. 20 2.
Moises, yet not all the Israelits. Wherefore ye Church then could not be free
from contention. Nu. 14.2.
Nu. 16.1.
Dathan and Abiram disliking ye priesthood which god over them had set upon Ex.
28.1.
Aron his line, stirred up sharp contention and tumultuous uproar for ye same.
Consider her condition in ye time of Saul, his persecuting of David, and
behold small unity: Saul commended of some, Sa. 18.7.8
David reaping the greater praise. What unity had ye church, when 400. salse 1.
King. 18.
prophets, contended with Helias the prophet of ye Lord for ye idol Baal their
false god? After Israel returned from her captivity was not ye church cut into
diverse sects and factio^s? in outward show they professed gods law penned by
Io. 9.28.
Moises and the Prophets: but in deed and truth they were separated into
diverse opinions and sundry sects. and every party received his name according
to his opinion. The holy scripture and approved authors tell us yt in ye Jews
church there were Pharisees, Saduces and Esseis, yet who dare say yt at this
present there was not in ye place the^ gods holy church? It is therefore now, no
stra^g or new thing to have disse^ting opinions, in and amongst me^ professing
one religion, about some points contained in ye same. The new Testament
witnesses ye like. In ye time of ye Apostles what sharp contention was there
betwixt Paul and Peter at Antioch for cause in religion Peter offe^ding
against ye Gal. 2.11.12.13.14.
rules thereof, was openly reproved by Paul. Also betwixt Paul and Barnabas
was such unity, yt they parted asonder ye one from ye other, about Act. 15.39.
John Mark a disciple. Notable is that long and sharp disputation and sore
contention which crept into ye church, betwixt Paul and Barnabas on ye one
part, and the Pharisees which were converted to ye gospel at Antioch on ye
other, about Act. 15.1.
justification, whether it came by faith alone, or that circumcision and the
law were of necessity to be joined thereto. This strife was such, that it
could not nor was otherwise abandoned the church, then by that Apostolical
council holden at Jerusalem. About this time, and shortly after the Apostles
there arose out of the church sundry sectaries, as the Verse. lib. 3. c. 28.
Illir. cent. 1. lib. 2. c. 5. fol. 481.
Corinthiani, Eccl. histo. lib. 4. c. 11
Martionisti, Eus. li. 4 c. 8.
Gnostici and Eus. li. 4. c. 22.
Carpocratiani. The Gentilles then as some papists do now, said the
christians are troublesome and contentious, they cannot agree about their
christ and his religion, but we: hold one unity in our profession, therefore
they offer us more then great cause, to have in suspense our have to subscribe
to their professed Gospel. Yet all this their frivolous speches set a part,
both the Apostles and others with them at that present, joining in the
sincerity of the professed truth, were of the true church of God. Also that
church whereout these wicked Sectories, and Heritykes came, was that, and the
best beloved Wife the Church of Jesus Christ, notwithstanding such contentions
and variable minds, as then that state carried to the posterity. And even so
is our church now holding fast the substance of Doctrine given by the
scriptures, and the administration of the Sacraments, according to his word.
Likewise in substance, though in some matter accidentreth there arise question,
the same yet offe-no joy to the professed papist for as they contend, so do
both sides strive to be far from popish affects. This our Church also I say, of
and in England, is the true church of God, and the reverend fathers the
Bishops, with others the preachers of his holy word, in this our nation, and
now government, abiding in ye truth of doctrine, (though there be) amids their
harmony, in ye substance of our religion some little iarring crochet in less
matters out of music her concord, are to be accounted as members of that
musical body, whereof Christ is the head, and worthy 1. Cor. 3.9.10.
buylders of that spiritual house of which Jesus our Lord is the Ephesians. 2.20.
chief corner stone. If I should stand to rehearse the contentions of the
Church, since the first Church till this present, I should pass the limits of
a large book, farsed with only testimonies to that end. As for example the
contention among the learned and Godly fathers in the Cent. 2. cap 8.
East and west churches. for the time and day: wherein the Easter day should be
kept, was great and perilous a cutting asunder of the said church, and an
absolute breach of perfect unity, till Ibidem. fo. 158.
Nicene council ended the cause, but salued not the whole sore. For the high
authority of places and men Ecclesiastical, it is a world to read and see
how Epist. Gre. lib. 4. Epi. 34.38. E. 78
John the Bishop of Constantinople began, and the Roman Gregory encountering
him, Prophesied his Romish seat to be prepared for the same Antechristianisme
after his days, which Palmerius Vesperius.
Boniface the worker of evil enthronised in his full pomp, which contention I
fear will not be banished, till the spirit of the Lords ^. These. 2.8.
mouth consume ye authors and fautors thereof. This sore how in those better
days, and more pure times it has festered into the hearts of Godly and learned
men, then most famous, by this little taste ye may at the first perceive. But
let us (as ye would have it, O ye fawning papists) grant ye that some Heresies
do breed in our English church at this day, shall ye? therefore accuse the
same to be estraunged from God, shall you with wylye subtletie (to that ye may)
deface the Church our Spiritual Moother, and carye the names of her Sons
and Children, and lovers of our gracious Nurse, ELIZABETH? Nay, rather ought
ye to like of our Religion that manifests such Heresies, and confess that
where the Lord has first sown Wheat, there the Mat. 13.24.25.
Enemy coming after, has in the same chosen Land sowed Tares. And ye ought
to know that the Lords will is, to have Verse. 30.
both for a season to grow together, that the blade of the Tare might the
better make known the ear of the good wheat. So is it (good reader) ye
wisdom of Gods purpose, that Heresies springing up with true doctrine, ye
verity should more clearly appear, and the sowers of truth should more
diligently study to refell the false opinions of the wicked, by the forcible
power of that first sown Mat. 13.19. Mark. 4.14 Luke 8.11.
truth, the word of God. Let not the wicked therefore persuade thee that our
Church and Religion is evil and false, because of scismes and Heresies which
some wicked, not yet by ye sentence of ye Church fully cut of, percase do hold,
for it began in ye Apostles time, that Heritykes and Seismatykes should from
the true church have their proceedinge, and of the same their first place to be
1. Io. 2.10. Act. 15.24.
trained up in truth, that their Judgment should be the greater. And Rome it
self, (which is now wrapped in horrible heresy, and manifold scismes, though
they yet boast of unity) came out of Gods church, and has made manifest
Apostacy there from: as if you set the Religion in Rome now professed, with
the Doctrine which the same did hold what time Paul wrote his Epistle to them,
you shall most plainly see, that the Romanistes are gone out of Gods Church
great and Huge Herityques. Came not Arius, that pestiferous man (who has by
his Books denied Christ's Eternity with the Eus. lib. ecl. hi. li. 7. cap. 10.
Father, only acknowledging him to be made as a Creature. (Oh mighty and
Monstrous Blasphemy) came he not out I say of the Church of GOD at
Alexandria, where he was first a Scholemaster and after an admitted Preacher?
did he not of malice, Trip. hi. li. 10. c. 12.
against Alexander the good Bishop, there first broche forth his Heresies.
Where had Agelius;* his place to spread his Heresy (which was of the sect of
Nouatus that Heretic, hatched up in the Church at Rome, and was the Father of
the Heretykes, Eus. lib. 6. cap. 34.
called Katharoi) but even where the christian Chrisostom was chief Pastor
and Bishop, and in his Church at Constantinople? Trip. lib. 5 cap. 32.
Shall the contentions in the Apostles age, in Christ's Church then, or the
controversies amongst the learned in the Christian Churches since, cut the one
or the other? from being the Church of God? God forbid. Yea, if from the church
of the Apostles there proceeded scismes and Heresies by the wicked amongst
them, if since in all times, as the Eccl. histories tell us, Satan has so
troubled ye good corn with counterfeit cockle, why shall we think it strange
to have ye same tentations now, which our fathers before us, and our children
after our departure, shall be assalted with* yea your holy mother of Rome (ye
papists) has nursed up such wicked children her self (in whom and whose popes
alone, ye repose your whole trust) as may bear ye bell, before ye devil the
patron of your religion, for their great heresies. And they are sundry in
number. As Liberius. Anastatius, Honorius, Siluester, and the merry monster
John, ye B. above others more notable. Adhere to all the rest in that sea, since
Antechrists possession first thereof taken. Albeit ye cannot deny the premises,
or keep from our sight your many and sundry iarring opinions, yet ye would yt
your sinagog of Rome, should be accounted the holy monarch and mother church of
the world, and that notwithstanding the procreation of such a pestilent and
poisoning brood: why should ye then abridge us, of the like liberty which ye
challenge to your selves, and that seeing we do with all might seek to
repreffe the opinions of them that be wicked with the power of the Gospel, and
to mayneteyne unity in Godliness, to all our powers. Herein you do but pour
out your much malice and striving to hinder us. You have exhibited against your
wills, much like to your graundsire Io. 11.50
Caiphas, to our side, and with us, the Testimonye of truth. So mighty is God
our defender, that he draws with violence out of your wicked mouths, to your
greater condemnation if ye repent not, the vouch of verity. But to conclude
this point (Christian reader) take and taste this Antidotum, here confected to
thy use, against their venomous speeches, and it shall not only comfort thy
afflicted mind, (which God grant for his Sons sake,) but also shall keep
thee steadfast, until the Lord perform the promise, long sith by his holy
Prophets solempnely made to his Church for ever. As first in Micah Micah. 7.20
thus. Thou wylt perform thy truth to Jacob, and mercy to Abraham, as thou
haste Sworn to our Fathers in old time. Esa. 54.11.12.
And again in Esaias wholly and specially from eleventh verse to the end of the
same, which Chapter is most comfortable against these our subtle days. Verse.
11.
Oh thou afflicted and tossed with Tempests (says the Prophet to Gods
Church) thou that have no comfort: behold I will lay thy stones with Carbuncle,
and lay thy foundations with Sapphire, and I will make thy windows of Emraudes, and
thy gates shining stones, and all thy borders of pleasant stones, and all thy
Children shall be taught of God, and much peace shall be unto thy Children, in
righteousness shall thou be established and be far from oppression, for thou
shall not fear it, and from fear, for it shall not come nie thee. Behold the
Enemy shall gather himself, but without me, whosoever shall gather himself
in thee, against thee shall fall. Behold, I have made the Smyth, that blows
the Coals in the Fire, and him that brings forth an Instrument for his
work, and I have Created the Destroyer to destroy, but all the Weapons that
are made against thee, shall not prosper. And every Tongue that shall arise up
against thee in Judgment, thou shall Condemn. This is the Lords Heritage and
their righteousness is of me says the LORD. Thus far the Prophet
speaks, to teach thee (good Reader) great cause of comfort and courage
against despair, though England, which is Gods church, have now many enemies
risen up against her, and her religion, yea, though her own skirtes do carry
such as insult against her, she is Promised that their Weapons and the smith
that framed them shall not prosper. Their lybelling books which seek to
persecute her, though they come from the house of counsel, and seem to
proceed from the seat of learnings judgment, yet shall this church of God be
set a Judge over their weary travels and toyling spite, and shall condemn
them.

Let that worthy Jewel of famous memory, the holy confessor and Saint of and by
Jesus Christ, treasured up in the Lapydarie of the heavens for the glory of our
God, let his excellent works (I say) stand for an ample warrant hereto, to
this age and to her posterity for ever. And let others whether at home or
abroad look for the same end of their molesting troubles, which they cast
into this our age and Church. But thou will say, why does the Lord suffer so
long our weak consciences to be troubled with these contending strifes? What
art thou (O man) that wilt dispute with God? These troubles to us yet in
respect of the Schisms of old, are but as an entering into the first moment of
the day. Wait thou the lords leisure and be still, learn thy song framed by
firm hope in truth, which Micah has taught the church of God, always in her
trouble to sing, and thou shall be relieved though thy enemies yet seek to
triumph over thee. Micah. 7.8
Rejoice not against me, O my enemy, (says ye church there) for though I fall,
I shall arise, when I shall sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me, I
will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he
plead my cause and execute judgment for me, then will he bring me forth to the
light, and I shall see his righteousness. Then she that is my enemy shall look
upon it, and shame shall cover her, which said unto me, Where is the Lord thy
God? my eyes shall behold her, now shall she be trodden down as the mire of ye
streets. etc. Thus much forth of ye prophet Micah, where thou may learn to
accuse thy self for thy sin, as 2. Sa. 24.17
David did, seeing the people afflicted, and not with 1. Re. 18.17
Achab to charge ye Lord, or his profession and Prophets, when troubles and
plagues arise in the church, but to turn thy eyes into thy own conscience,
and see the book of thy iniquities there written, and to confess before god
and man, that thy sin is ye cause of such trouble and plague brought into ye
church and people by Satan his malice, and ye policy of these his wicked
impes. Last of all, discourage not at the romish scoffs and taunting
reproaches, nor yet despair in ye bottom of her dark dungeons, and sharp
persecutions, for the lord will comfort thee in them, if thou rest upon his
laysure, and remain constant, and in ye end delivering thee will stamp thy
enemy into dirt, and make thee beautiful in the sight of al men, that thou
may serve him thy god, thus delivered from fear, in new holiness deuoid of
hypocrisy, in justice and righteous dealing, to, and with all men, in the place
of thy abode and traffike else where amongst men in earth. And ever respect thy
deliverance from sin, and regard thy state so, that Satan eftsoon pull thee
not to thy former sin, which co^pelleth his erst bondage, for the end of such
as so fall, is worse then ye beginning. And thus much for ye first part of this
Hymn, in which I have been more prolixe then first I purposed, but I trust
that the profit which may rise upon the attentive reading of the matter
simply set down, will cou^teruaile ye tedious sight of so much blotted paper,
since my willing trauayles has forced me to dwell in comfortable speech with
the less learned, some thing the longer, because they of themselves can not
conceive such profitable matter, as this our text does exhibit to the serching
eye: assuredly persuaded that the better (so godly) learned will vouchsafe
sovereign Censure to this my unpolished pen. And wherein I err from the
truth, if by the same I may hear lovingly thereof, as I hope I have given no
poison to the Church, so I will be glad to reform that and those things which
godly reasons with learned truth shall require at my hands. The Lord grant
continuance of his gospel in this Nation, preservation to her Majesty, with
increase of Gods knowledge, and zeal to his holy name, and to us and his whole
Church, from all heresies, Scismes, and civil dissentions, if it stand with
his good will and pleasure, once full deliverance, that we may serve the Lord
our god in sincerity of heart, and integrity of life in his sight, by his holy
spirit all the days of our life, to whom, by and with Christ our Lord, to
that deity in the trinal unity, be al praise power and glory for ever. Amen.

As the sacred Priest before had declared Gods great benefits and faithfulness
in performing his loving promises, to the redemption of his elect: So now he
returns to this present action, and using the person of an interpreter
expounds the Oracle of God, declaring his son this child, to be the same
preacher and Doctor, which erst by the Prophet Malachy was promised Malach. 3.1
Esa. 4.3
to precede Christ. By whose travel in Doctrine, the way should be prepared for
the Lords coming, his and our Messiah. Which office this babe in his
appointed time executed right well with sincerity of heart* sparing no person,
place, time, or people, or omitted any occasion when he might most aptly
perform such his calling. This Baptistes voice was ever crying against the
sins of all, exhibiting ye remedy for that horrible gilt to as many as
aproched his presence, or to who^ he could send forth his heroical voice
crying: Mat. 3.1
Repent for the kingdom of god is at hand. In these.2. verses we have as
before to consider ye sugared sense, and comfortable doctrine which in them is
contained.

And first as touching the speech of Zachary to his little babe, note the
mercy of God to Zachary himself, for albeit he returned incredible speech,
to ye Angel, saying: How shall J know Luc. 1.18.
this, for J am old, and my wife is of great age. Yet god caused the Angel to
proceed in his message, and correcting his incredulity said, Luc. 1.19
I am Gabriel, that stand in ye presence of god, and am sent to speak to thee,
and to show thee these good tidings, and behold thou shall be dumb and not be
able to speak until ye day that these things be done, because thou beleuedst
not my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season. A notable example of gods
mercy and justice Psalm. 101.1 and 85.10.
met together in ye person of this holy priest. For when he refused to give
credit to ye preaching Gabriel, Gods justice ouertoke his sin, and proclaimed
his gilt, by ye Censure of his judgment in the preachers mouth, which
presently took effect in him. For he coming forth of ye sa^ctuarie, was seen
not able to speak, but made signs Luc. 1.22
unto ye people, and so remained till ye same merciful God by his holy spirit
opened his mouth, to vouch his praise by this Prophetical Hymn. Whereout we
rightly gather his inestimable mercy, measured by his love, which could not be
cut short of his purpose, by To. 3.3.4.
ye malice of Zacharies sin, or would deprive this holy man of so great a
benefit, though his soring sin deserved it. And is this done for him alone?
No: for us also that believe in Christ Jesus, to us is god the one and same that
here he was to Zachary. And therefore is Zacharies sins 2. Sa. 11.4.13.15.
David's iniquities, Jonas. 1.3.
Jonas gilt Exo. 32.2
Aaron his fall, Iere. 20.14.
Ieremies heat, Mat. 26.65.
Peter's denial, Luc. 7.32
Magdalens vice Mat. 20.21.
Zebedes sons with their ambition, set down to the church in ye holy
scriptures; yt we might have hope and consolation, so often as we imitate into
their manners, and take survey of gods justice, pondered with his mercy unto these
and others the godly fathers. For he accepting not ye persons of flesh, but in
all places, ^o. 20.^^
whosoever calls upon his name shall be saved, from their sins of what
condition soever they be. To all the elect of God it is said, Esa. 1.18.
Jf your sins were as red as Scarlet, J will make them as white as Wool. No
one of those are excluded from this comfort, Mat. 11.28
Come to me all you that travel, and be heavy laden, and J will refresh you.
Assured of this, also shall all the elect of God be, that in whom there
remains ye canker of sin (as it does in all corrupted flesh) in them the
merciful justice of God shall by his 2. Sa. 24.16.
striking Angel, be found to correct their sin. For he scourges every Heb.
12.6.
son that he receives: He sometimes chasteneth with the scourge of 1. Cor.
11.32
natural death his beloved, that their iniquity should not cast them with the
1. Cor. 11.32
reprobate into eternal fire. And in whom can be found his quickening spirit, to
mortify their killing To. 8.13.
flesh, in them his proving hand is ever exercised to Io. 14.2
purge their sin, and force more fruit. But here note with me ye hate which
god does bear to the 2. Cor. 10.6 Psalm. 82.5.6
discredit of his word, uttered by the teachers of his truth. He spares not to
plague the same in his Esa. 28.12.15.16.19.20 Marc. 6.
holy ones, yea, be they never so necessary members, and helps to his Church.
Luc. 1.20^
Rather should all Jerusalem be destitute of their preaching Prophet, and their
sacrifising priest Zachary, then god would spare to chastise the doubtful
hearing of his absolute word. Where note, he more requires an obedient ear to
his truth, 1. Sa. 13.9.10.11.12.13.14.15. and 15.3.9.19.28.
then al painful toil in wilworship, or sacrifices by him self else commanded.
What shall then the obstinate and rebellious Papists, the heritiques of our age
do, that flatly contemn the same? Truly this is the Censure of God against
them Prou. 1.24.
I have called (says the Lord) and ye have refused, I have stretched out mine
hand, and none would regard, but ye have despised al my counsel, and would
none of my correction, I will also laugh at your destruction, and mock when
your fear comes like soddaine desolation: and your destruction shall come
like a whyrle wind, when affliction and anguish shall come upon you. Then shall
they call upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early but they shall
not find me, because they hated knowledge and did not choose the fear of the
lord. They would none of my counsel, but despised al my correction. Therefore
shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own
devises: for ease slaieth the foolish, and the prosperity of fools destroys
them. Secondly we may perceive ye riches of gods mercy, who does not only
forgive Zacharies sin, but enritcheth him with a most special gift of
prophecy, that no man should despair to do well, because erst he has been
evil, or that any should deny all them apt to the function of God, which
tofore have been inobedient, or rebellious to his word. No: measure not the man
by that he was, but accept him to that he now is made by the grace of God Gal.
2.7.8.9.10.
powered into him: And be not thou severe, where God is sovereign. Condemn not
ye person for those evils, which the lords mercy has not only pardoned, but
also has and does endowe with fresh and more bountiful gifts then erst he
had, or possible, some others which malice such men, can make apparent to dwell
in them selves. Idolatry no dout is an huge sin, but is not infidelity the
mother thereof? And incredulity a beam of that building, 1. Cor.
12.2.3.4.5.6.7.8 9.10.11.27.28
yet from infidelity God calls to his Christ. Yea such as have been nursed
up in Idolatry, to his service. And the incredulous to the preaching of faith.
In whom we see this simple conversion, let us acknowledge it for Act. 9.26.27.
gods work, and do not seek to apall the place, and credit of such, but
rather assist (yea to the face of ye Apostle, and governors in the church)
them, and every of them, to whom the Lord has made himself known, and has
spoken to their hearts so, that they by his grace (with Paul) have seen the
Lord in their passage, and embasing themselves before him, have confessed him
to be ye lord, and boldly do vouch him tofore kings and men. Know well this,
that at what time Ezec. 1^.
the wicked part from their ill, their sins ye lord puts quite out of his
remembrance. Now as of Zacharies person hitherto we have bestowed the view of
gods mercy toward him: So let us consider now his prophetical words, to, and
concerning the purpose of God in this Baptist. Thus he says: And thou little
babe shall be called the Prophet of the highest. etc.

By these words we are put in mind still of Gods abundant mercy, in his Christ,
who not only makes Zachary an old and comfortable father: but opens also
unto him the arcane counsel of his divine disposition. And by the spirit of
prophecy, assures him and the Church committed to him of the heavenly
benefit, their spiritual deliverance in this Christ their true Messiah, of
whom this little babe that yet can nothing say shall be the most noble preacher
and Prophet. When he calls him ye Lords Prophet, he acknowledges him to be
ye interpreter of ye lords Law and Oracles, the Doctor and preacher in and to
the Church of God, by whose mouth the Lord him self speaks to the same,
opening to them his secrets, and manifesting his holy will, as appears by
that which follows: To give knowledge of Salvation. etc. Which prophecy of
ye father was fulfilled in his son the Baptist, in the the first year of
Tiberius, at which time Christ was about thirty years of age. Mat. 3.1.2.
And John began to preach publicly saying, Repent for the kingdom of God is
at hand. Two notable things in the words of this his text he promises to his
son, by his warrant received from God. First that albeit he be in respect of
natures work, and the worlds reputation, but a small child, and of low
degree, yet has the lord chosen and appointed him from his cradell: nay,
before his creation Luc. 1.13.
to be the instrument most apt to the Lords labor. The second is the nature
of his office, which is to prepare and make Luc. 1.16.17 18.19.
straight the way of the Lord, as the Angel before had said to Zachary in the
vision. Who being corrected for his doutfulnes assured him self, and others,
most constantly of the Lords promise, which was, that this holy Prophet the
Baptist should be great in the sight of God, and should not give him self with
the wicked Priests of the earth, or the false prophets of Israel, to gorge
their crawes with bibbing cheer, but should lead an austere and temperate
diet, having his heart wholly set upon his office, which the spirit of God
selected him to from his mothers womb, Luc. 1.16.
that he should turn the children of Israel to their Lord God, by that
heroical spirit, which God erst gave to Helias: to turn the hearts of the
fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just men,
to make ready a people, prepared for the lord. This was the most excellent
office of the Baptist, in consideration whereof this Zachary song this Psalm to
ye lords praise. Now let us note here (good reader) yt not by chance, but by
gods providence al things are guided to his glory and the churches profit. Not
any man is by chance set into place, authority, or any office, but are
appointed of god in his wisdom, yea before they are to be men Esa. 44.28 Exo.
2.2. and 3.5.10. and 4.27. and 28.1.2. 1. Sa. 9.1.15. cap. 16.1.12.13. ca. 3.4.
Amos 7.14 15. Iere. 1.5. Esa. 1.1 Heb. 5.5.6 Gal. 1.15. Mat. 10. etc
and beyond his search, suit, or expectation, to ye service of his god. As
Moses, Aaron, Saul David, Samuel, Amos, Jeremie, Esaias, Christ him self,
Paul, the Apostles else, and all others before and since. The very wicked
Magistrates their office and authority is of the Lord, Prou. 8.15.
by him kings do reign good or evil. In that they are kings ^o. 1^.1
of his good wisdom it is, but as they are evil Wisd. 6.4 7.19.3.1 1. Pet.
3.13
it is of their own frowardnes and Satan's malice, from which persons neither
may the action of Gods justice in any wise be separate. Pharao Exo. 14.4.8
his heart the Lord hardened, Nabuchadnezar 2. L. 24.1.2.3. and. 20.17. and 33.27
he stirred up against the children of Israel. Pilate and Herod with the
Gentiles and cruel Jews were in their malicious hearts furiously bent, and did
in deed gather them selves together against Christ the anointed of the Lord.
But it Act. 4.24.25.26.27.28 29.30
was to do whatsoever the hand and the counsel of the Lord had before
determined to be done. All which emphatically Zachary voucheth under this word
(Thou shall etc.) Wherefore let us depend upon our heavenly fathers providence,
and what government, reign, policy, or order so ever we see, praise God for
the good, pray God to amend, rectify or remove the evil at his good pleasure,
and for his spirit to direct our steps, knowing that as a sparowe falls not
to the ground without the heavenly fathers providence, So shall nothing come to
pass without his good pleasure to his elect. And the event shall ever be to
them (because they fear the Lord), good and prosperous. Oh that ye Papists,
Atheists, and other the Macheuils of this our age, could consider this then
would ye not so range at the Gospel, or so envy the professors thereof, or yet
conte^ne so gracious government as is set over you and us, by the which (not by
casualitie, but by divine destiny) gods word is so amply preached, and
forcibly beaten into your ears, that were you not 1. Pet. 2.8.
appointed to the slaughter in ye day of wrath, impossible should it be for you
to remain rebellious. But so is it Gods good pleasure to raise up little
Baptists, and lowly babes to possess that grace Mat. 11.25. Luc. 10.21
which you wise and mighty Giants of ye world despise and persecute. All
praise be to thee O heavenly father therefore, and continually vouchsafe thy
blessing to this our nation, grant our David to consider thy choice of her
Majesty, which was not from the fold of simple sheep, but out of the Lions
teeth the Papists claws, out of the Towers prison, and tirans death, to feed
thy people of England, in the Psalm. 78.70.
sincerity of her heart, and the portion of her gracious gifts bestowed upon
her. Moreover, I note to thee (good reader) the yet more mercy of our good
GOD, who spilleth not, but spares the world for the electes sake, and before
he sends destruction for sin, he exhibiteth to that people his Prophets,
to call them to repentance Joel. 2.14. Ier 18.8.
that he in like sort, may torn from ye evil which he has determined against
them. As to Adam in Paradise Genesis 3.
he appeared by him self. To Ex. 3.4.5.6 7.
Cain by his voice from heaven. To Pharao Ex. 3.4.5.6 7.
by Mosses. To Achab and his age 1. K. 17.1.2.
by Hely. To the Jews before the destruction by Esaias. Je. and sundry others.
To Jerusalem Ma. 3. Ioh. 1.
by John Baptist. Christ Jesus and his Apostles, forty and od years after his
death, and all to call these to repentance, and true turning to the Lord, by
the warning of the Trumpe of God, the mouths of the Preachers. But alas, these
ages as they are past before us, so have they left to their posterity, as yet,
their former vices of security, and contempt of the preachers voice. So that
Esaias may well say at this hour Esa. 53.1.
Lord who believes our saying? or to whom is the arm of ye Lord known? But
woe ouertooke them, and so shall it all such as despising the light of the
word, Io. 3.19.
wallow still in the mire of man's devises against God. Where God offers his
word, therewyth he shows himself bent to mercy. But if both he spare to
strike, and spend his holy labors by his Prophetical preachers in vain, to
the people to whom he sends them: then and there will he pour out his double
plagues to their utter confusion. Let Jerusalem alone suffize to testifye the
same. And grant (O Lord, more grace to England yt we in no sort receue this thy
long suffering and abundant gracious light of thy blessed truth in vain, for
thy sons sake. For then assuredly, as it now appears by thy handy work, and
is become to be the best Receptacle, for thy afflicted members: So shall it
then be seen, an horrible Cage for every foul bird, and fylthie gryppe, and
instead of songs of mirth and joy, howling, lamentation and mourning: for her
great desolation shall found her sorrow to the heavens, and redou^d to the earth
again, accompanied with thy most terrible plagues, in vehement sort. Oh the
security of England. Oh, the manifest contempt of the English nation. Oh ye
deep dissimulation that enuironeth so ye borders of this land, as no where
thence, it were permitted to have his passage. Well: God se^deth to thee, yet
once Zachary and John Bap. in plentiful sort, to cry with exalted voice
incessantly, repent for the day of the Lord is at hand. And through the
preaching of truth they open the way to salvation in Christ. Happy be thou, ye
twice blessed, oh miserable England, can thou in time lend thine Ears, and
lay thy heart to the touch of truethe in this the day of thy most loving
visitation. And thy day of appearing, can be ready to turn to thy Lord,
who shall purge thee like unto most pure Mala. 3.3.
Silver. But if the Lord take from thee (Oh England) his Word and Preaching,
then Desolation is imminent. For when Preaching fails, the people perish and
dye for want of their spiritual bread, ye force Mat. 4.4
of their life. Where is the beauty of the former Jerusalem? What is become
of the Learned Chorinth, the pride of all Achaia? And where is the former glory
of that Christian Antioche? Is not the east Church wholly become an Apostata
from God, and them selves betrothed to ye servitude of sin, and his huge
enemies? And what shall we say of that roging Rome, which sometime was ye dear
church of God, is she not now become the seat of Antechrist, and the Sinagogue
of Satan? Yes forsooth. Whence flowed the Floudes of Godliness, thence
comes the Waters of fylth, in the stream of Idolatry, superstition,
adultery, homicide, treason, murder, covetousness, and sins against nature,
and the holy Ghost. There as in a mirror, we may see the testimony of Paul
(speaking of the Heathen Idolators) to the Godly Romans, verifyed. For when
they To. 22.23.
professed themselves to be wise, they became fools, turning the glory of the
incorruptible God, to the similitude of a corruptible man, etc. Wherefore God
gave them up also to their hearts lusts, unto vnclearnesse, to defyle their
own bodies, between themselves, which turned the truth of God to a lie, and
worshipped and served the Creature, forsaking the Creator, which is blessed for
ever. Amen. For this cause says Paul, God gave the^ up unto vile affections.
The spirit of god foreseeing the like Idolatry and sin to follow in this
satanicall Sea, warned them by these former plagues to avoid the second
destruction, set down by John the divine in the Revelation Apoc. 14.^
17.8.18.2.
But since this seat is set for Antechrist, and that no man can safely under
her harbor, be sure from Gods wrath, or can be permitted to nussle (as the
Sow) in the myery puddles of her Ier. 2.13.
broken Cesternes. Let us with on consent, recoyle to the commandment of the
Spirit, which sounds the retire from Romish Babylon, and her damnable
desolation, lest running in her chase, we be overtaken by the Lord, which
persecuteth her. with al arma of sundry and sodeyne Fyghtes to her most
terrible overthrow. And always have before thine eyes that pyller of Salt,
which sometime was Genesis 19.26. Luke 17.32.
the holy Lots wife, who for her great love she bare to her line and blood,
which would not lend their ears to God, received a monstrous shape, and lost
the beutie of her first Creation: A notable example certaynely.

The office of John, and how he is to prepare the way of the Lord, is here by
Zachary set down: namely by the Preaching of Mat. 3.5.6.7.8.9.10.
repentance, and driving the Jews to ye view of their sins, whereby they might
be the more apt to receive Christ by faith, and in him salvation for their
sins, true righteousness and eternal life. This preparation is so requisite, as
without the same, neither shall the wounded man feel his grief, or the
dreined conscience gasp and thirst after christ's blood, ye founteine of
health to every dry sinning soul, and pined sinner, that hungreth his water of
life. Wherefore his inestimable merit has not only given a savior, but has
sent a heavenly voice, to cry out to our dead and deaf bodies, the knowledge
of life and way to salvation which comes to us, by ye forgeuenes of our
sins, at ye hands of our good God and most merciful father, he having fully
satisfied his justice, in the person of our crucified Christ, the Esa. 53.
chastisement of our peace.

Three especial points this verse contains: first by what means salvation
is atteined, even by the forgeuenes of sins.

Secondly whose sins are forgeuen: Only the sins of Gods elect and chosen
people. Thirdly the way by the which they atteine to so hie a price. Even by
that they have this salvation made so apparent to them by the ministry of
Preaching, that they apprehende by faith, Gods spirit opening the heart of the
hearer. Concerning the first whence new justification is had, is apparently
seen by our Prophet, namely that their sins be forgiven the^: Neither is
there in any one to purchase such remission, for then should not our
justification stand in forgiveness, but in man's purchase, and so god in
bestowing life should not give us his son, but according our merit, and his
debt, pay to us christ our desert, which were to uttermost pestilent blasphemy
against God and his Io. 3.
Gospel. So God loved ye world (says Christ) yt he gave his only begoten
son. etc. But this verse teaches us yt our salvation is had by ye remission
of sins and seteth down both the mean for us to apprehende life, and the
cause of life also. The mean or hand whereby we take hold of christ which is
our life is faith, Gal. 2.16.17.20.
norished and bred in our hearts by the word preached, To. 10.
which accepts christ as of the Father he is given, and by the scriptures he
is Gal. 3.1.
discribed unto us. The cause here expressed is gods love, who has
predestinate to life, all those whom he has translated from the point of
death Col. 1.13.14.15.
to the kingdom of his dear son, and from among the wicked of the earth
has taken them, and according to his good will being before Ephesians. 1.2.3.
the foundation of the world was laid, has chosen them to be his people.
This is the mind of our Prophet, saying. To give knowledge. etc.

If we should ask of the Papists, whereby we apprehend Salvation? they will
say to us, partly by christ, and partly by the worthiness of man's works. Such
blasphemies they bray out of their helly hearts. But (dear reader) be not
deceived by their delusions, lend thy self some leisure, to take view for thy
wealth of that which here is said. Were it that salvation could be atteyned by
the works of the law (as true it is, the law of-God says To. 2.13.10.6.7.8.
he yt does fulfill ye law, shall live by ye law) yet are there two absolute
reasones, overthrowing all meritte in man, what, or whosoever by the Law. The
first is the impossibilytie, that is, men to perform the Law. The other is
the frayltie of man, which fulfylling (if he could) yet can not always stand
free from transgressing the Law of God. And at what time he falls, his
righteousness tombleth down with himself in to the dyche, and so frustrate is
his vain trust, before reposed in his own holiness. For the first, he that
shall by the works of the Law become just before God, must in heart be pure
from Sin, for as out of a filthy puddle can naturally come no sweet water,
so out of a wicked heart can proceed no pure action, nor is God pacified from
wrath by any work which proceeds from a sinful and a corrupted conscience.
Search and seek from east to west, north and south, among the sons of men,
and behold, no where shall thou find a man whose heart is pure Pro. 20.9
from sin, Nay, 1. Io. 1. 2. Cro. 6.36 1. d. 8.46.
whose heart is not altogether a lump of that Massy poison, so that if God
should Psalm. 130.3.
look strayghtly upon him, his holiness should not be able to abide the trial
of the Lord. Finally the wisdom of the flesh is death, and is at set battle
in enimytie with God, for it is not subject to the Spirit nor the Law of God,
neither in deed To. 8.7.8.
can be. So that I conclude with Paul, that they which be in the flesh (and
that is every Popish iusticiarie) cannot please God. Wherefore since the
founteine of man's heart is corrupt and poisoned, what pleasant action can
proceed from his conduites? But ye will say, the regenerate man, meriteth. Yet
Paul says to the man regenerate, what have thou that thou have not received?
I suppose Paul was regenerate, when he wrote his Epistle to the Romans and yet
he of himself says that his heart is combred with the Canker of sin. So that
he dare not boast of meritte, but rather cries out, for woe against that guylt
of his Regenerate flesh, saying. To. 7.23.
I see another Law in my members rebelling against the Law of my mind, and
leading me Captive into the Law of Sin, that is in my members. Oh wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death, I thank God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. His desert here he confesses to be such, that
were it not God through Christ our Lord, he carried nothing with him, but a
body (he means soul and body) deserving by meritte everlasting death. And of
his impossibility to perform the act of Justification by works, he in that
place, a little before, shows saying, To, 7.18.
for I know that in me, that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing, for to
will is present with me, but I find not means to perform that which is
good, for I do not that good thing that I would, but the evil that I would
not, that do I. If in the best sort of men and most perfect, Sin has such
power, how shall the Papists the ofscourings of the Church boast of their
worthinees? Nay neither we, or our Fathers are able to fulfill Act. 15.10.
the law, and therefore God To. 8.3.
sent his son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned
sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the law should be fulfilled in
us (that is to say by christ imputed to us) which walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit. And that no man should bost of his works being
regenerate, he more tells us, that God the father, which raised To. 8.11.
up his son christ from death, shall also quicken our mortal bodies, (not for
any worthiness in us, but because of his own gift) eue^ because his spirit
dwells in us. Thus his divine wisdom has disposed ye matter, that both the
action and the cause of our true righteousness, may not descend one step
from the majesty of his throne of grace. Assure thy self therefore (Christian
reader) that in man is no meritte, unless to death for Sin, which makes al
men To. 3.19.
culpable before god: So it is his goodness to have mercy upon all. Therefore
if thou will atteyne to true righteousness, it is by the law, not of works
To. 3.22.
but of faith in Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all that believe. For the
redemption is not in man regenerate or carnal, but in Verse. 24.
christ, who has reconciled us to the father in his blood, and declares our
righteousness to come To. 3.26.
by the forgiveness of our sins, so preaching confusion and shame to us, and
the glory to him self. And albeit, that faith which saves, is called To.
10.9.10 Io. 6.29.
a work, yet is not the work coming from the pour of man, for it is the
work of God, and his To. 6. Phil. 36.
only gift by the which we obtain christ, in whom we have plentiful
redemption from all our sins. Now let us speak of ye second branch, that is of
man's impossibility to stand always fulfilling the law. The Scripture says
Deuteronomy. 17.26 Gal. 3.10.
cursed is every man that continues not in all things which are written in the
law, to do them. And again, when a Eze. 18.
righteous man tourneth away from his righteousness and commits injury, he
shall even die, for ye same. If once departure from well doing, demerit death,
and the just Pro. 24.26.
falls seven times, and since there is no flesh that sins not, nor any be
he never so pefect, that always continues in well doing, I ask, where shall
we find the meriting man? or who shall dare to present him before the Lord,
the revenger of sin? Or yet what is he yt can deliver himself from the danger
of Gods Curse, due to his transgressions? Vain therefore, and devilish is the
confidence in such Popish doctrine, and pernicious is the evil which this
opinion brings to the soul, and great is the injury by it committed against
christ Jesus, the price of thy forgiveness. The man meritor thrusts Christ
Crucified under his feet, and sets himself up in his stead, for his own
savior, by his works. But cast thy account by scripturs audite and at ye foot
of ye same thou shall find this debt apparent to such wastfull spenders of
their Lords treasure, To. 9.30.
that such as have sought righteousness by ye works of the law have lost the
same, and this remains recorded for ye just, that all which sought it by
faith and not by works To. 9.30.31 32.
have atteined to true righteousness in deed. What then does it profit good men
to work good works. The good wors of holy men profit 2. ways. First weighing
their valor with our duty, they cast down our Peacoks tail, and Egles
heart: being so far short, of that they should, they call man's cry, to
vouche his state unprofitable Luke 17.10. Mat. 25.30. To. 3.12.
to his Lord. And so with crauinge Pardon for his sins, fogetting his few
deeds now Phil. 3.14.
past, he hasteneth with humblenes to the degrees of increase, 1. These. 4.1
to walk and please God as he ought toward the throne of grace, where he
sees by faith, himself drawn up with courage to rest in Christ for life,
since his spirit lives in him. Secondly they work a most assured
corroboration, in our hearts, whylest we consider, of whom we have such grace.
Even that our hearts of Adamant, are changed to fleshye (not fleshly) hearts,
and into the same Eze. 36.26.27.
Gods holy spirit is put (and powered) by the power of which we are cause to
walk in his laws, and keep his statutes. Al which though we do not, or can,
in such sort as we should, yet because his holy finger has written his sacred
law Iere. 31.33.
in our hearts, and put the sin into our inward parts, and is himself become
by his covenant in christ, our god, and has chosen us for his holy people, for
this cause I say he accepts us as just, though we be all sinners, and our
works are acceptable in his sight, and are not without their reward, yet of
his mercy deuoyd of our merit, and thus through our infirmity works he his
own praise. So end we the first part of this verse. To give knowledge. etc.
The second point is, to note whose sins are forgiven, and so consequenly
what kind of persons atteine truly and in deed to this salvation by his
Prophets preached, and this I note of this word, To his people. For albeit that
Christ is of the father given to the whole world, to be unto them their
savior, and that there is no age or people unto who^ the death of christ is
not sufficient to their salvation, and is therefore by himself and the word
vouched the savior Luke 2. Io. 3. Ephesians. 5. 1. Io. 4.14.
of the world, yet are not al people by him saved, nor any but such as here be
called his people. Now have we also to consider, that neither all that call, or
challenge to be his, are so in deed. For then should not the Infidel and
Saracene with the Turk only be condemned, because they refuse life, Col. 33.
1. Io. 5.20.
which is only in christ Jesus to be found, but also of that number which
profess christ in show, and receive the badge and seal of righteousness in
Baptism, and in the days of their flesh invoke christ as God, and call the
Father Lord, be furthermore accounted to be of ye church, and People of God,
of this multitude shall infinite walk the wandering path to eternal pain.
Mat. 7.21
Not every one that cries Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of God.
etc. These are for a time in, but at no time are they of the church of God.
These either have Satan to Mat. 13.
pull the seed out of their hearts, least they should believe and be saved, or
believe with joy for a season, and in fiery trial, vade and consume to dust
and ashes, and turn to their erst conceived death. But salvation stands at
the 1. Cor. 9.
end of the race, happy is he that endures to the end, for he shall be safe.
Or else do they with the faith in Christ, and gospel of the son of God,
intermedle the cares of this world, and pleasures of ye flesh, which do choke
ye growth of the seed, that no Wheat can come to ripenes for the Lords
barn, they begin in the spirit, but they Gal. 3.3
end in the flesh. These albeit they are bidden ghestes, yet shall they not
Luc. 14.24. Mat. 22.7
once taste of the Bridegromes supper. For they being called daily, and the Lord
with open arms ever ready to embrace them, refuse to come Pro. 1.26.27
therefore shall desolation devour them, neither shall Jerusalem save them, or
the Sinagoge of Satan, the Church of Rome, deliver them from the weeping state
and woeful pains prepared for all hypocrites. Where in steed of popish piping
and carnal delights, shall be mourning and howling in perpetual chains, nailed
fast to damnation his gaol. And yt because they neither heard or sought the
Lord, with integrity of soul, or worshipped him else, then with their own
inventions, having their hearts a long estranged from his delight. And albeit
they were nourished up in the bosom of his beloved spouse, Papists compared to
Mice.
yet they are to him as Mice in the householders barn, whose purpose is to
feed them fat, and fill their young of the corn, but not at any time to have
the presence of the Masters face. For whom also the husband prepares engines
and destroyers them to consume, though for a time he permit them to their
devised pleasures. Such shall be the end of al Papists, carnal protestants, and
fained hypocrites, which seek the^ selves altogether, and not ye lord at all.
As daily those persons pass their time in such wicked lusts. But of far
other nature are the true people of God. As the other in the day of trial,
cannot be known of him, for he shall say Mat. 25.
depart from me, I know ye not ye workers of iniquity, so ye lords people are
known to him by their name, they are borne Io. 3.5
again of the spirit. They are 1. Pet. 1.2
sanctified by the holy Ghost. They are graffed Io. 15.1.2.3. To. 8.1
into Christ their vine. They are Ephe 1.2.3.
predestinate to life. Chosen to be the (f) sons of God. Called to the To.
8.30
knowledge of the word of salvation, and taught of God. The spirit of the son
is, by the love of the most loving father, powered Gal. 4
into their hearts, which causes the^ to cry to him Abba father. Their stony
hearts he mollifieth and turns into hearts of flesh, and into them for their
direction and life he Ezec. 36.25.26.27.28
puts his spirit, by whose power through the word sown and taught, he
teaches them his Laws, and gives them grace to walk in his statutes. Thus
wrought by GOD, they bring forth holy fruits. They only hear Io. 10.3.4.5.
his voice. All strange sound, and charminge incantation, they utterly avoid,
charm they (c) never so wisely. They hunger after the truth, and Psalm. 119
thirst the Lords righteousness. They claspe their hearts by faith in Christ,
that through him alone they may apprehend the loving countenance of the
heavenly Fathers face. They lay their Psalm. 53.
sins upon his cross, and crave by comfortable cries in earnest and ardent
prayer, to be 1. Cor. 1 To. 5.21
clothed with his righteousness. They ever confess their many sins, and
assure them selves by faith, of his salvation. They drive away To. 5.1.2.3.
terror, and rest in the harbor of a quiet conscience, and in most humble wise
approach his throne of grace, as Gal. 4.5 To. 8.15
dear children adopted in Christ, to their best beloved father. They love to
labor in godly works, as by his word they are commanded. They seek to live
by faith Abac. 2.4 2. Cor. 1.24
in Christ, as by the Scriptures they are taught. They joy to suffer and bear
his cross, and aspiring by lowliness of mind, they pray his aid and help
there in, with comfort 2. cor. 1.4.5
continuing under the same. They appoint no time for their Heb. 11.
release, but patiently abide his lotted leisure. They look not on the present
troubles, but weigh their sins and his decreed purpose and place, as opposite
to their aspect, the joy that is Heb. 12.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.
set before them. They run with patience the race for them appointed, and
despising the present shame, they still endure ye cross, always looking to
Jesus christ the author and finisher of their life. They Mat. 5.44.45.
bless those yt curse them, they love their enemies, and do good to To.
12.17.20.21.
all, but their chief delight is to join with the household of faith. They
challenge to themselves by nature confusion for sin, and shame for their
infirmities, and to God the father in Christ our Lord, by the instinct of his
holy spirit, they attribute all honor and glory, and forgetting their works
past, Psalm. 3.13.14.15.
assay to go forwards to the price set before them, expressing themselves by
their good works to be the Lords building, who has made them an holy
habitation, and a royal priesthode. In him they offer up themselves for a
spiritual sacrifice, daily yielding forth the fruits of holy Hose. 14.3 Heb.
13.15
lips to his priest, and willing obedience to his holy will. They by the
spirit desire not to follow, but defy and kill the lusts of the flesh. They
fight against Satan, and his impes continually. They bear an unfeigned Psalm.
4.2 Gal. 4.9
hate to alsuperstitious vanities. They contemn and despise the beggarly
ordinances Gal. 4
of the wicked world, disdayning to become bondslaues to sin any more. They
rejoice in their deliverance, and walk in the way of the lord with a sincere
heart and single mind. Though slide they may eftsoon by frayltie, yet never
flat fall they by falshode, from the Lord their God. Lo these are they of
whom our Zachary speaks, and the Angel poynteth Joseph Mat. 1
unto, when he affirms Jesus to save his people from their sins. And all if
these have so many fraylties, and be of such weakness, that they cannot as they
would, or do as they should, perfectly walk before the Lord: Yet shall they
not fear, for his Christ is theirs, and with him they have 1. Cor. 1
in him justification, sanctification, redemption, and perfect wisdom. By
whose virtues and merits they are ever presented before God, as a just and
holy people peculiar to the Lord. To these can come To. 8.1
no condemnation, or any accusation shall be admitted against the^, nor any gilt
procure sentence to their loss. For it is the Lord that does justify them.
Finally no power shall or can conuenting, convince them. For they have in their
hearts the word, which is To. 1
Gods power to salvation. And God him self stands on their side for their
defense. So that it is more possible for light to become darkness, good evil,
and evil good, which never shall come to pass: then that the Lords people
should not be delivered from death, or yet want the knowledge of their
salvation. Which knowledge teaches them to feel in heart and find by truth,
that the same saving health consists not in their remuneration, but comes
of god: (for his Christ's sake) by full remission of and from all their sins.
The Lord grant us to labor so in his vineyarde, which profess his name, that
we may be (not called only) but appear in deed his chosen people. Then shall
we be sure of our deliverance in Christ our Savior. And thus much for these
words his people, in this present verse mentioned.

The third and last branch of this verse is, to consider by what means his
people are brought to feel and perceive yt their salvation does consist in the
remission given of god Namely by this, that the same is made known to their
consciences, by the ministry of the word preached unto them. For all if, the
price of Christ's blood, be they most sovereign salve for ma^s sin, as by
ye which it is wholly washed away: Yet unless the Church of God have sense, and
perfect feeling hereof in her inward parts and depenesse of heart, the same
shall nothing profit her. For the which cause Christ promises being once lift
up Io. 3.14.15.
as the serpent in the wilderness was, to draw all men to look and come to
him by the instrument of faith, and to his heavenly father, in that his most
comfortable prayer a little before his death, for the comfort of his elect, he
witnesses that life eternal consists in the knowledge of God the father and
Christ his Son. Also reproving the Jews for their rebellion, he charge
their Io. 8.37.55.
ignorance to be the cause thereof, as also showing his Disciples of their
persecuted state and perils to death, affirms Io. 16.2.3.
ignorance to be ye forcing mean hereto. This shall they do says he, because
they neither know the father nor yet me. Paul ye Apostle testifies this to be
the mean to apprehend salvation, even to come to the knowledge of the truth.
Thereto he joins it to the branch preceding, saying 1. Tim. 2.4
God will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth.
Lo: a thing most incident to salvation, is to have knowledge of the truth. To
conclude, who are they which are taught of god, but his people? And what are
they taught of him, but the truth of his word? Which he writes with his finger
in their hearts, as the scripture says, that they may be a knowing people, and
not ignorant as the Papists teach, but falsely, the same to be the mother of
devotion. But Christ says, that ignorance is Io. 8.19
the mother of error, which leads to damnation. Behold now, the scope of this
Baptists office was to prepare the Jewish hearts, by the knowledge of their
sins and repentance for the same to prevent Gods Justice, by fruitful
acceptance of the Gospel by Christ presently preached, to have him for there
God, and by him salvation and full deliverance from their sins. For the which
cause the Angel also before to Zachary Lu. 1.15.16.17.
adorned him with noble titles, and not to him only do they belong, but to all
the true preachers of God with him, wherefore they are here of thee (dear
Reader) the better to be weighed, as words that do import the glory of his
heavenly Embassage, to thine earthly heart. He is first said to be full of the
holy Ghost, Titles given by God to John Baptist.
a thing most necessary to be in the true preacher of the word, as without
the same he can neither preach, much less profit the people of the Lord.

The Apostles from christ therefore received the fulness of his spirit by portion
to their aptnes, and power to Act. 2.3.4.
execute their office, and he breathed John. 20.22
on them, and gave them his holy spirit, that thereby they might not only
abound in gifts, but also should without terror speak his will, and preach his
name to all nations. So in like manner Paul witnesses that both the gift of
prophesying, and Prophets, Ephe. 4.11. 1. Cor. 12.11 27.28.
Doctors and teachers, is by the spirit of God. Of which grace he has
promised continuance to the end of the world, saying: J Math. 28.20
will be with you to the end of the world. And therefore John warns thee
(reader) not to believe every 1. Io. 4.2
spirit (so he calls the doctrine by the preacher brought) but commands
thee to try whether they be of God. He shows thee absolutely that in the
preachers of thy age, Gods spirit also speaks, saying: Hereby shall ye know
the Spirit of GOD. Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come
in the Flesh, is of GOD. There were false Prophets among the Jews, which kept
ye people back from the faith in Christ. There were certain heritiques which
denied Christ to be come in the flesh, as ye scriptures teach him. And these so
vexed ye Church, and molested the consciences of the godly brethren, and began
to make such shipwreck of the faith of many, that the Apostle was driven (from
the Doctrine to frame their hearts in Christ,) to arm by instruction the
church of GOD, against Cerinthus Ebyon and other heritiques, that would not
acknowledge Christ wholly as the Scriptures proved him to be. The like proof
of Gods spirit is left to thee, to the ends of the world, to try the Preachers
which come unto thee, whether they have in them, or do by Gods spirit speak
unto thee. He that preaches Jesus Christ as he is set down in the written
Scriptures, is of God. He that denies him in any part their vouched to be in
Christ, is of Antichrist. Whosoever has not this 1. Io. 4.3.
spirit, and is a preacher, cannot but by the spirit of Satan utter as by
his received spirit, all lying fables, as 1. Re. 22.23.24
Zedkia the false prophet did to Achab. And both Paul and Peter manifestly show
unto us, that many such false Prophets shall rise up in the last days, which
shall also deny christ in deed, albeit they confess him with naked words.
Paul gives thee notes infallible, that ever shall lead thee to a right
judgment of these spirits of error, and docto^s of devils. 1. Tim. 4.1.2.3.4.
First they shall speak lies by hypocrisy fayning truth, but try them by the
rule given of christ, search the scriptures, which order the Citizens of
Berrea, Act. 17.11
are said to observe when the Apostles taught them. 2. They shall forbid to
marry, and who does forbid I pray thee (take view) that ministers may not
Marry, not the scripture, but rather the flat 1. Tim. 3.2 Tit. 1.6.1.102.9.1.2.
contrary? Who does forbid that holy ordinance of god in Paradise to avoid
sin, but the Pope ye minister of sin? he does forbid it to all his
sacrificing priests, at all times, yet whoredom he permits to the^ under
purchased warrant to al time, To al other christians he forbids marriage at
certain times, as Aduent, Lent, Jmber days. etc. and Siricius one of the
Popes, condemns marriage to be a fruit of the flesh, as in ye which state a
man can not please god. Meats which god has created to be received with thanks
giving, and is made 1. Tim. 4.5.
holy by his word and prayer, does this beast of ye Dragon Apoc. 1..11.12.
Satanas in pain of damnation, forbid to al at his appointed times. And the
breakers of his law, (though blessed of God) are of him cursed with book,
bell and candle, out of his heaven (as Pasquine calls it) earth, and this
natural life, as Lollords and heriticks not worthy the benefit of temporal
quiet. These says Paul in the place before quoted are the doctrines of
Devils. 1. Tim. 4.^
Behold the popish doctrine from whence it comes, and of what spirit it is.
Fly from it, as from hell it self. Peter.2 Pet. 2.4
warning our times of the like false spirit says, But there were false
Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teathers among you,
which privily shall bring in damnable heresies, eue^ denying the Lord that has
bought them, and bring upon them selves, swift damnation. And many shall
follow their damnable ways, by whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of:
And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you,
whose judgment long agone is not far of, and their damnation sleeps not.
Lay this Scripture before thy heart, and indifferently measure thereby the
Popish Church and doctrine, and thou shall see (as it were) the Apostle to
paynt the sinful Sinagoge of Rome unto thy prospect. With what humblenes of
Angels creep they craftily into the consciences of men? what opinions breed
they flat condemned by the word? How open they their mouths to slander the
gospel of our Christ? and call it heresy, though not as it lies in leaves, but
as it is truly preached by gods holy prophets in this our days? And what love
they have to ye word it self (do thou judge) when having the government, they
burned the Bibles, rased the scriptures from of the walls in churches and else,
and to that they could burned ye graue^ letters in ye sacred flesh of christ's
martirs. What marchaundise of men's souls is there in popery? when their God,
their pope, their relics and saints merits, their Paul and Peter, their
heaven and helly purgatory, their Masses and pardons, their whole power and
pelf is set at price, and al for monei? What sin in man so horrible, that
should not there have pardon for money? What wicked fact pretended, shall not
there for money not only be pardoned, but warranted? Amongst the sins against
the 2. Table, is there a greater then Treason? I say treason to god his
religion, his prince and vicar, by his great mercy set over us in this nation?
And is not the Pope ye head practiser of ye same? Does not he loose that in
earth by his Bull, which god has most surely tied fast in heaven by his word?
the sworn and natural due obedience to her Majesty? Does not he promise
absolution, where God pronounces curse and damnation? Romans 13.^.
To whatsoever person which resists his power? And is this for any other
cause the^ to bring your purses to his coffers, and your souls to swift
damnation? Look upon the Gnat, by that most precious Jewel, the reverend
Bishop late of Sarum, brought forth to the view of all men's sight, in his
learned Def. Apol fol. 793
answer to halting Harding, and thou shall not marvel though he would have us
his again, that Camels in great number (and yet scarsely could) might yearly
convey his huge sommes of money out of this nation. Rejoice O England for thy
deliverance, embrace the word by Gods spirit put in the mouths of thy learned
Bishops and others their godly brethern, in most pleniiful wise: So shall thy
heart yield faithful love and true obedience to our godly Queen, and thou shall
reap her aid for thy quiet, but chiefly Gods blessing for thy souls health
in his Christ, against the spirit of error and Satan himself.

Secondly to him vz. to his office and exercise is ascribed a certain power to
turn ye hearts of ye fathers to their children. This power is by his preaching
the word, ye spirit of god directing him: where note that the word preached, is
of power to Psalm. 19.7
convert, because it is the (b) mallet of God to beat down sin, and his two
edged Ephe. 6.17
sword, to cut down vice. The 1. Pet. 2.2
milk of GOD, to nourish and alter the crooked nature, of man's corpupted
flesh. The seed to Mat. 13. 1. Pet. 1.23.
make him a fruitful ground, the pleasant 2. Cor. 2.15. Psalm. 119.
Odor, to delight that faithful scent. The faithful witness and the pour
To. 1.
of God, to overcome Satan and his assaults. To beat down strong holds, and
every 2. Cor. 10.
height that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and to bring and
lead captive to the obedience of Christ, every thought: and full power the
word has to be revenged of all the obstinate, when the obedience of the
faithful is fulfilled. It is not for other cause that God does spare the
wicked, then that the Godly should first be brought to more perfection, and the
wicked should wax more ripe in their iniquity, and that the Godly by their
tyranie, might daily Iud. 2.22.23
be exercised, and that for a season they devour the noisome creatures Ex.
23.28.29
of the earth, that else would more hurt the children of God. But when the
Aples Amos. 8 Iere. 24.9.
be ripe, the Lord will pull the tree, and cast the fruit into the fire. For
the wicked as he cannot forget, so will he in his appointed time, pour out the
dregs of his angry (...) must be taken away and removed. Every valley must be
exalted, every mountain brought low, the crooked must be straight framed, and
the rough ways made plain, and this preparation must be by the preaching of
the Gospel: so expounds Luke the place, or rather the Angel when he says to
Zachary, yt J. Bap. should make ready a people instructed for the Lord. As
Jhon behaved him nobly, so did the Apostles faithfully, and the Fathers of old
sincerely in this their charge, Remains that the Princes and Preachers now be
diligent therein, as best beseems their vocation, to prepare his holy ways.

The way of the Lord is in man's heart, which against the coming of his God, How
the Lords way must be prepared.
the king of al kings, he must so prepare, that there be nothing to offend his
eye, or hinder his loving coming. If an earthly Prince shall come to a Town or
City, how are the ways skoured, the path made plain, the streates so sanded,
that the very Horse shall not have whereon to trip. The house painted, the
Conduites running wine, the place perfumed, and so garnished, that his delight
may feed with pleasure upon the view of this prepared way. This would the
Baptist have us to think upon, when he alludeth to the comfortable coming of
their mighty kings, and the pompous preparations of the people for his
receipt. But since Christ's coming is into the soul of man by his Spirit, the
path of man's conscience must be prepared in dese^t sort, as well in matters of
conscience touching religion, as in ye reformation of his former wicked life,
for no man ca^ be in christ Jesus 2. Cor. 5.17.
unless he be made a new creature. The path of our religion, ought to he framed
unto us by ye word of God, neither ought we, or may we, Deuteronomy. 12.32
without mere sacrileadge, add thereto, or diminishe, in the worship of the
mighty love, in Christ, any thing at all. Thrice Cursed be the Papists
therefore, that leap up into Christ's Throane, and thrust him to the walls,
setting up a will worship Col 2.18.19.22.23.
of their own invention, having no other warrant then the flesh that framed
that Idolatry. But the Scripture hold all them Esa. ^.11.20
accursed that set up false worship unto him, or that build their nests in
man's strength, To. 23.24.1.25.26. etc.
or put their trust in fleshly wisdom, or turn the glory of God to a mortal
man, or set their affiaunce in their inventions.

O ye mighty magestrates, in and of the church of christ, to you this chiefly
does be long, so to prepare this heavenly path, ye no offensive matter be there
left to stay or stop his godly presence from our hearts. You are to 2. Re. 22.
enter the path appointed to the lord his use, and to remove out of the way,
every base and beggarly matter that is to the dishonor of God, set up as to his
worship, or garnishing falsely of his house, the rudiments of men, which can
never edify in the Church of God. And to command and send abroad the
Preachers and forerunners of this king, to cry for preparation to every rugged
heart, and depressed conscience, with the weight of sin, that by the comfort of
christ's gospel, they may be brought to lift up the eyes of their faith, to the
lord in Sion. There Jesus christ is set up for their salvation, there shall
their heavy hearts and laden souls, have Mat. 11.28.
new refreshing in him, the Lord crucified, and of his Father again raised to
life Romans 4.25.
for their justification. And you Baptists of ye Lord, your duty is to pull
out of men's hearts, by sound and moderate doctrine, the God Dan. 11.30 39.
Maisim, and every height that exalts it self 2. Cor. 10.
against God. The pride of man's heart, by the power of the word, must you
beat down, which proudly say with Popish spyte. Sic volumus, The popish
speech of English papists.
so we will have it, and not by the word to measure the time and cause, whether
so it ought to be. All such as set up their horns on high against Christ's
lowly members, and nothing like of, that the path might something be skowred:
such be they which fight for life with tooth and nail (as the proverb is) to
keep up the troublous thickets, and the lofty hye hills that can not
stoop to the Lords law. The Papists, Atheistes, and Hypocrites, of our
days I mean, which all though they be woll shrubbed, and shred, yet they
begin even now before the spring, to budde, and hope again in time to
flourish as ye green bay tree. Psalm. 10^
But were they lopped dazie height, or proined ye with princely David's a
cutting knife, they as the shred willow, flourish in a moment, but never
eftsoons could they take root. The ragged hearts, which with the Hare skipe
here and there, to fly from truth, whose smothed lips embrace
dissimulation, your seasoned sound with Helias heart (oh ye Prophets of the Lord)
must ring with power into their ears. For most abominable is the halting
Hypocrite, he is a Micah. 7.4
Thornie Hedge and Bushe of Briers, to wound and stinge as many as be
partakers of his company. The heart Psalm. 42.1.1.
chaffed with flight, seeks to the Rivers of water for his comfort. But the
Hypocryte pursued by Satan to his destruction, has no lust to look after the
water of Io. 7.38.39.
life, which God does give to all that fathfully thirst therefore. Oh let them
know that wholly, chiefly, and for life, they ought to seek the same, in
sincerity of heart, without Hypocrisy. Thus my dear Brethren we ought in my
Judgment to teach the Lords flock, Division in the church perilous.
to kill Satan, and beat down sin, and not with bitterness of pen, and
carping speech in Pulpits, through biting one an other, to bring that promise
(or just threat) upon us, you shall be Gal. 5.15.
devoured one of another. Gal. 5.15.
The LORD amend this evil, and grant us more Call. in 1. Epis. ad Cor. cap.
11. verse. 16. contentrosum. etc.
careful over his Heritage for his names sake. Wheresoever the Preacher
finds the people void of these effects, (as where is not this ragged
desert?) There ought he to prepare a path by the doctrine of the word, which
is of power to convert the lost child of Israel. To preach the comfortable
causes in Christ to allure us, and to show us the horrible state of our own
corrupted nature, and the greedy desire that satan has of our destruction.
Can men think with doubleness of heart to please the Lord? Can they serve
God by halfes? Or go toward him as far as the laws of men lead or compel
them and no further, and yet of God be well accepted? If God be God 1. Re.
18.21.
follow him, if Baal be he, go after him. If Nicodemus, (whose weak coming
many make to the^ selves a sinister refug) had not proceeded to more perfection,
he had not adventured to Io. 7.65.
answer in Christ's behalf to the counsel, or yet Io. 19.38.39
of so great a tiran as Pilate was, durst he have begged the Io. 19.38.39
body of Jesus, or against the malice of so many cruel ennemies, have joined
with noble Joseph in so hard a suit. The luke warm persons, that be neither
hot nor cold, are as a burden and surffet to the Lords stomach, which he
has promised to Apoc. 3.16 Good council to hipocrites.
vomit out of his mouth. Love the Prince, and live in and under her gracious
government, ye Papists and Atheistes, and Hipocrites also, for the Lords
sake. Let his holy Law force you, as a most absolute Iniunction, to her godly
Laws, and not (as you say pollitiquely, but popishly,) to lean to his law
because of her graces injunctions. Neither halve before God, to refuse your
obedience to religion; Gods Sacraments, and divine service in the Church, now
godly set down: using your clawing coolour, because some and such do not
observe the said Injunctions. The perfect Papist abuses the law to hinder the
gospel, and to creep into favor and escape trial.
For it is more then seen to al, that a number of you make those Injunctions,
(which at the first were set down to bring you forward) a present let to
your obedience, and a cloak for your maliciousness. The acts and words of
such as molest the godly quiet, and desired peace of the church, I will not, or
may defend. I lamente the cause, and pray God to cease the action, to his
glory, Marloratus in 1. Cor. ca 11 ver. 19. probatus.
the peace of his Church, and the extirpation of the serpent, and all his, at
his good appointed time. But you dissembling Hipocrites, are like unto the
wicked persons in the days of Darius, Da. 6.1.2.3.
who fearinge least Daniel with his religion should be preferred, The papists
policy to stop the passage of the word.
sought by all means to claspe that holy Prophet under the Kings Iniunction,
to his destruction. So it is not the love ye have to our godly Elizabeth, whom
ye wish to give place to your Darius, but the Lord will and does laughe your
devises to scorn, his name be praised therefore and her graces good Laws, but
the hate which you have conceived against Daniel the (e) Prophets of the
Lord, Act. 24.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8
) because, they seek to enstruct you the right way, to make you prepared for
the Lord) and to reclaim you from popery to the professed truth: many of you
having blind eyes, void of sight, by the reason of hardness Heb 6.6. Ephesians.
4.18.19.
of your hearts the which cannot repent, pray aid at the same law, which your
selves most deadly hate. No doubt, concerning the ministers and preachers
(admit they be good protestants) they be al of like account in your audite,
as well the true and faithful pastors, which observe the appointed order, as
such other their godly Brethren, Rites not refused, for contempt of moderat
ministers.
which (wading no further) unwilling were to use the same, not contemptuously
refusing because of the precept, but moderatly by petition (regardinge their
peoples quiet or hurt) with humbleness of heart pray God and crave, at the
Gods (a) in earth (by his power placed over us) as follows. Mercifully
vouchsafe, O ye godly Princes of the Lord, Psalm. 82.
that as Act. 16.3.
Timothy, may not refuse circumcision, where Paul sees the infirmities of
the Jews to require the same, and the Chuche her need of such a teacher: So
let not Gal. 2.3.4
Titus be compelled thereunto, where as false Brethren privily creep in, to
bring into bondage the children of the lord. No place would Paul admit to such,
though elswher he Act. 21.21.10. and ve. 27
consideringe the weakness of the Jews, refused not to asociate the Nazarets
at Jerusalem, with the shauing of his head, according Nom. 6.13
to the law, though amid the gentiles, he reproved Peter Gal. 2.11
for the like Jewish observation. And when it shall please thee (O Lord) grant
our gracious Princes heart, further prepared to scour the Lords pathe, by
godly advise of her noble councellers, that by her public authority, and not
our private affectes, all such matter may be removed as work no way the
profit of his church. And to us ministers and men, her graces subjects, prayer
and true patient obedience, regarding more the love and quiet of the Church,
then our own like or private 1. Cor. 9.18.19.20.21.22.
desiers. No less praise deserves the good Emperor Theodosius, in destroying
His. tripar. li. 10. ca. 27.
the idolatrous temples, then godly VVolphi. in 2. Re. ca. 23. Trip. hist. li.
6. ca. 1. fo. 412.
Constantine, in shutting up their gates. Faithful Josias, in his reformation
thought it best to breaks 2. Re. 23.12. and 25. verse.
Aulters, and cast the duste of them into the brook Kedron, and the Scripture
says to his commendation, that before him there was no such king that turned
to ye Lord, with all his heart and all his soul, and with all his might,
according to the law of Moises, neither after him arose there any such. This
example says one learned VVolphius in.2. Re. ca. 23.
writer is written to teach us, to overthrow and utterly destroy all Idolles,
and every entisment of superstition, that no part of such monumentes, be left
t^ admonish the posterity. Musculus upon the sentence by God given to the
serpent, (the instrument wherewith the Serpent deceived Heua, Genesis 3
and brought Adam to sin) asks a question, Musculus in Genesis ca. 3.4.1.
whether the sentence were just, since the serpent was not the author, but the
organ wherewith: nothing privy to Satan's purpose or wisshing hurt, but was
sorced by Satan thereto? He also answers, yea: not only because it proceeded
from the just God, but giving reason for the same, says: it is very right that
to the greater detestation of satan's malice, fraud, and disceit, not only
himself, but all his instruments wherewith he works his malice, become
subject and receive like judgment with him. For like as says he every such
instrument, wherewith any good thing or felicity is brought to pass,
deserves, and is worthily beloved and had in estimation: So by the same right,
the instruments of destruction, of what nature or condition so ever they be,
are together with the author of them to be punnished and condemned. Hereto he
alleges certain examples of scriptures, as of Ios. 7 Nomb. 6.
Achan, of Corah and his company. In end he thus concludes. If to condemn ye
organ with the wicked spirit the author, it be Iniquum: So by ye same reason
must it be wicked, that the bodies of the faithful, together with their souls
be made partakers of eternal life and heavenly felicity. But far be such
thoughts from the minds of the godly, etc. Thus far Musculus. That old father
and great learned Doctor Chrysostom, upon the same place of Genesis, gives
in effect the same censure, whose words upon the Serpents judgment are (as
they are reported also by Peter Martyr, that famous man) thus. Pet. Martit. in
Genesis 3. c.
God in this action dealt like unto a man that is a most natural loving Father,
who when he sees his dear son slain, does not only covet the death of the
murderer, but ye sword, Spear, and every the instrument wherewith he
perished, will he likewise seek to destroy. Should I stand to speak of al
lets and rubbish in this nation, I should from my self to al flesh, without great
search, see such matter abou^d, as no reasonable volume could co^taine their
description. Idolatrous papists Atheistes, Carnalites, Hipocrites, Adulterers,
Drunkardes, and sundry wicked vices else, in many places, many times, are less
looked upon with justice censure, then such as (many ways else) are profitable
members in the church of god. This is a perilous shrub, it would be stubbed up
by the roots. The Lord grant better regard, lest the majesty on hye take the
matter into his own hand, from such as be over negligent Psalm. 82.5.6.7.8.
Gods in earth. The Preachers, of God must cry out in Sion, and tell Jerusalem
and Judah Psa. 58.1.
of her faults, from the hiest to the lowest, to one and other, for and against
this and that evil. In pain Eze. 3.32.
of damnation must the preacher cry out, that ye desert may be tracked, and the
hills, the valleys, the ragged, the crooked, the old, and rotten for age, may be
altered or quite removed: that in England his prophets may so To. 15.16.
exhibit to the lord at his coming, a prepared people, and well instructed,
whose souls by his spirit being To. 8.11.12.13.14.
governed, their bodies by his force shall walk in all holiness, in his sight
as the days of their life. Then will the Lord yet more delight in our Church,
state, and people, he will take pleasure to walk into the garden of our hearts,
there to receive the redolent smell of the sweet fruits, spreading themselves
far abroad, all a long the beds of faith, he will bless her with beauty, and
build her with precious stones Esa. 54.
of great price, he will teach this nation himself by his word, and will give
thee ye more abounding spirit to walk in his statutes, he will be for thee
against thy foreign foes and domestical enemies, a tower of strength to assist
thee, and bruise the^ in myerie streates Micah. 7.10
before thy eyes, he will destroy the smyth, and all Esa. 54.16.17.
his instruments: the Pope and his pelf, and all diuelishe devises against
thee, of what force so ever. To his faithful ministers and Teachers, will he
grant his Iere. 1.18.
aid and power, to be for them a well fenced city, with walls of Brase,
against all Popish practices, bent to their destruction. Finally to some and
all, from thy virtuous Queen, to the faithful Plowman sowing his seed, will
he pour forth his grace and spirit, his christ and heaven, to be thine for
ever.

This knowledge of Salvation, where by man is brought to the forgiveness of
sins in christ, comes not to us by purchase of gold and silver, or any
other man's merit, but by the inward mercy of our God (says Zachary) even as a
natural mother seeing her child wounded in her arms, or taken violently from
her to be slain, all the parts of her body, and soul are therewith moved
with singular compassion: so have thou O God (says he) beholding our most
miserable blindness and bandage under sin, taken most merciful pity, and in
the bowels of thy Fatherly mercies, have sent to us this branch, thy Christ,
and day spring, as the beauty Col. 1.15 Heb. 1 3
of thy flesh, to visit our darkness with the light of his truth, and by his
life to deliver us from the gloming dark death of ignorance and sin, and to
set our conscience quiet in ye Justification by his blood to embolden us to
approach thy presence; as Children to their best beloved Father, without terror
of death for Sin, or fear of any worldly want. For through the comfort of
this bright shining sun of righteousness and virident branch of Jesse his
root, the anointed Christ, we shall overcome whatsoever shall set it self
against us.

To our instruction and further comforts, let us as before, so in these two
verses observe some such pith as lies within ye virtue of these happy words.
By this manner of speech, the Prophet would have us to consider deeply the
chief and abundant 2. Cor. 1.3.
love of the ineffable God, whose study and care (as it were) is only bent to
do us the best good, though we in no part demerit the same.

Three special, things I observe to thee (gentle reeder (in these last verses
whereof the first follows. Io. 3.16.
To. 5.8.9.10 11.
his ennemies he saved us. Upon the which most merciful act he persuades us,
that now much more sense we belong to him, will he deliver us from wrath. Psalm.
101.1 Psalm. 85.9.10 11.12.13.
and justice, have met together, and mercy and peace, have kyssed each other,
for in that Christ Jesus, took upon him our He. 1.9.10 11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.
nature, and sanctifiing the same by his conception and joined it to his god
head. He took that person of sin upon him, which could be subject to the
cross, and aptly received the curse due thereto for our iniquity, and accept
to the full, the fury of his fathers just conceived wrath. In which body 1. Pet.
2.24
he did fully bear the same upon the cross in his bitter death, at what time
the angry countinance of his God, with the full pains of hell, for man's sin
was wholly laid upon him: he was compelled with vehemence to cry Mar. 15.
my God my God, why haste thou forsaken me?

The fruit of this death is such yt as no one of us has put our hand to this
cross, with him to carry his Fathers wrath for our sin: so has he obtained
such redemption, as none of us that To. 8.1 Io. 3 1. John. 2.2. Math. 3.17.
believe a right in him, shall or can taste any part of comdemnation. Further to
us our Salvation is most free: But in respect of the Gal. 3.13 Esai. 53.5.
price, it is the full satisfaction of ye fathers justice, and the valor is the
blood and death of our redeemer Christ Jesus.

The end is that we being delivered from sin (c) should depart from
iniquity, and dedicat our selves to the lord in newness of life as chilldre^
redeemed from sin and death. He. and 10.26 27 To. 8.1.
by wilful lusts will tread his death under his feet, cannot be partaker of
his glory and life.

The third thing to observe is the allusion which our Prophet uses in this
place to the former prophesies, calling him the day spring, or as other the
learned translate the word, a Branch. For the former translation great comfort
is given thereby to thee (dear reader) the word rightly considered in such
sense as it ought, that is to understand by Oriens not the place where the Son
rises, but the Son himself, and so does Malachie use that metaphorical
spech, when he calls Christ Mala. 4.2.
the son of righteousness, under whose wings (or beams) lies health. Note
hear our Zachary alluding to this Bucerus in Luke 1
Scripture, teaches Christ to be the true Messiah, and the same which was of
them promised to be the lord of life, by whom the church should have her light
and full safety. Further look into the Metaphor, the sun is the guide of the
world, the beawty of the Heavens, the light of the stars and firmament: by
him the vapors noisome and pestilent are taken from men, the spring, the
Harneste, the times and seasons have their comfort and validity of him. The
Moon (the figure of Gods church) has her whole light of his light, of him
depryued, she is in her darkness and eclipsed state, by his presence the night
vanishes, the storms and tempestuous times, are abandoned, as barrennes
turned into fertility, every crooked occurrent vadeth, and all comfortes to
men and creatures else,) present the^ selves. To aplie the same (with a thousand
more fruit,) thou ought whenever thou say this Psalm, to thy heavenly
Lord the only begotten of God, the Son of righteousness which is the light
Io. 1. and 8
of the world, the glory of Heb. 1.3
the father, the governor of al things, the way, Io. 14.6
ye truth and life it self, to all that shall be saved, which by him self
redeemeth us, with his fathers mercy clotheth us, and by his spirit
regenerateth, sanctifies, and guydeth us in him, to life everlasting.

The Sun entering the house every dark corner is full of light, and what filth
remains, is by him manifested: So where christ by faith appears in man's
heart, all ignorance is banished, and the light of his word reproves all
iniquity, and drives all error forth of man's soul. The learned Beza
translateth the word not Oriens but Germen, Beza in Annotati. in Luc. c. 1.
and in his learned Annotations, gives his reason upon the nature of ye Hebrew
word tsemach which, says he, signifies not Oriens, but germen a branch, and
he affirms there ye Prophet to allude unto the words of Zachary before,
Zach. ^.8 6.8 Iere. 23.5
and Jeremy which promised Christ to spring up as out of the withered stock
of persecuted David, of whom the world should make small account, but his groth
should be maruailous, and therefore he adds (from above) that so he may show
his coming up to be contrary to ye plants of ye earth. This is the Dan. 2.44.
stone which comes out of ye mountain without hands, and does prevail
against all the mountains of the world, though ye builders refuse him, he is
chief of ye corner. This Christ is that despised branch which seemed Esa. 53.2
Gal. 11.1.
withered and beaten for his own sin, but in ye days of his flesh he so
visited us, that by his stripes we ^^e made whole. This is the Luc. 23.3*
green ^^irident tree upon whom ye cruel Jews bestowed their whole tirannie.
This is ye tree* and vine of whom ye faithful branches receive their light,
and knowledge, and salvation and power to pass the passage of heavenly peace.
This is that branch by ma^s judgment so eaten into the earth, as no b^dding or
spring should be permitted him which by his own power defends his own cause
against the Monarchs of the world, and yields foil to the gates infernal,
and spoyleth Satan of his pray. This is the Lord and king of heaven and earth
to who^ the powers above, the spirits below, and ^^n in earth, do stoop and
fall before his throne, as to their only Lord and God, in whose hand is life
and death. Now (dear reader) this branch is thine, given thee of God to be thy
staff of defense in the day ^f battle, and has come himself to visit thy
weak state* and give to thee his mighty aid. The Church of God shall dwell
^ost safely under the shadow of this branche, for whosoever strives against
her, ^re sure to find him present in her, to whom he has distended from above
to give comfort to her miseries which he c^^leth here darkness and the shadow of
death, he that lifts at her shall find her as Zach. 12.3.
an heavy stone which shall crush them to pieces. Further note he suffers
oftentimes his holy ones to be led into dark troubles and points of death,
but then is it his nature to visit them: So he came to Joseph Genesis 39.20. and
41.37. Psalm. 105.16 17.18.19.20 21.22.
in Pharaos chains. He suffered the Israelits to be driven to ye Exo. 14.25.
brinke of the seas backset with Pharaos whole power, but then he visited them,
gave the light of life and lead them in peace, the way of the troublesome
waters. Hezekia, Susanna, Sydrach, Misach, and Abednego, Daniel, Jonas, Paul,
Stephen, and many ye fathers since has he by their trial brought forth Satan's
power, and she^ed in his delivery his secret judgments, and their weakness
not able to wound, or confound his instruments, which of them selves are of
most feeble force. For neither 2. Re. 18.30. story Susan Dan. 3.24.25. Dan.
6.22. Iona. 2.10 Act. 9.24. 2. Cor. 11.32
Sennacheribs blasphemy, the Priests accusation, the burning oven, the Lions
den, the Whalles belly, Aretas ire, or Saules fury, could cut short his
dear children of his presence in the middle of these their deaths but even
when their lives were thought (with Peter's in Herod's person) to be subject to
present death, then did the Lord beyond all expectation deliver them.

Finally to some such as he beyond al time has predestinate Ephe. 1. Lions
turned into Lambs.
in time to be called, has he appeared to their conciences and body, in the
extreme darkness of their fury in their shadowed hell, conspiring against him
and his elect, and has given them the light of his salvation, and turned their
raging race to war with his Church, into the most happy tracke of pacient
sufferings, and precious persecution for his names sake. Wherefore let us pray
for all persecutors of his gospel for neither we or yet themselves do know
whether ye Lord has predestinate the^ to life. Did ye church of ye Apostles
expect Paul's coming to their fellowship, who was ye most cruel enemy that ye
Roman power and the Pharisaicall Jews sent forth to their persecution? and
did not ye lord lead this Lio^ to lie under ye feet (as it were) of those holy
la^bes, even then when he came with raging and roaring Act. 9. etc.
hunger, to devour the^? Did ye famous prince and most noble Monarch of the
world, king Henry the Eight, purpose to foster the Lords people in England,
when he sat himself Fox. Act.
in judgment, against the Godly Martyr of Christ Lamhert, and yet did the
Lord visit his Princely heart so, that by the light of his Christ, (the
spirit of God opening his heart) he was made the Lords instrument, utterly to
thrust out that horrible Pope, with all his power, which no king before him
could bring to pass, albeit they eftsoons attempted, sundry times to cut him
short. Which argues Gods good like of his ministry, and with him, of all such
Bishops and ministers as did by doctrine stir up his heart her to themselves,
or most of them before, being sworn to the Romish obedience. The noble Father
and Martyr of Christ, M. Cranmer, M. Cranmer Archbi. of Cant. some time an I^
(...)
late the Archbishop of Canterbury, shall we not account him amongst the
lawful ministers of God? a trust none will be so wilful as once to ^^inke him
unworthy, most reverence, (...) Catalogie of Gods true and fayth^ ministers,
in his time. And yet my (...) brethren in his persno and actions (...) found
apparent, such (a) blemishes, as for the same, all of his like institution are
of some vouched vmmeete for the ministry of the Church of God. I speak not
this to injury the fame of that holy man, whom the heavens have received, but
to offer such comfort to others, as I have (I trust rightly) received my self:
Gods mercy has called the author from Idolatry, to the gospel.
being in the days of Queen Mary, hatched up in Popery, and made an
Idolatrous Priest, often committing most horrible sacrileage to God, by the
sacrifising that Idolatrous Cake and counterfeyted Christ, to God the Father,
against the glory of Christ his son. But I daily praise the Lord my God, who
has taken mercy upon me, and called me from that power of darkness, and has
translated me unto the Col. 1.13.
kingdom of his dear son Jesus, and of and from an Idolatrous Priest, being
ignorantly carried into error, has chosen me with many others my Godly
Brethren, to be a faithful minister and true Preacher of his holy Gospel,
and yt I crave for restes to the world, the congregatio^s which have tasted of
the sweet gyltes of his holy spirit, by his mercifulness and rich goodness,
powered into their hearts, by my ministry though a sinner. But through christ
called by grace to ye preaching of the word of truth, through whose good gifts,
by ye portion of his sacred spirit, given unto me for their good, and my
continual comfort, they are to confess his grace apparent in my ministry, with
others our godly brethren called to ye office. This I say not bostingly after
the flesh, but witnessing, Gods great graces in me (unworthy the least) after
his calling me, with many others from idolatry to his service: And not to yield
my self, and such like whose hearts be truly turned to the Lord, to subscribe
to such sharp censure as passes to the offense of many a soul. But Saul as he
is not ashamed to 1. Tim. 1.11 12.13.14.15 16.17.
confess his error and blasphemies: So being by the Lord in mercy changed to
Paul, warra^teth us (with him) good courage and comfort to proceed in our
offices: and daring to say of himself (erst a persecuter) as of his fellow
ministers which never were such, seeing 2. Cor. 4.1
we have this ministry etc. He does hereby ye more embolden us, with humblenes
of heart to challenge the like authority, to preach and to administer the
sacraments of the lord, with and as well as such others our brethren by the
singular grace of god, either preserved from such idolatry, or since that time
called to the function ecclesiastical. These speeches therefore, Q. Mary's
priests, K. Henry's priests, Indecent speeches against charity
etc. are not so warely set down, as becomes the place of such which seem
sufficient to supply ye wants of this ecclesiastical government. But the lord
assist in his mercy ye state present with his holy spirit, and grant to this our
mighty monarch, a zealous spirit in him, yet more and more to remove and
retain, as the word of God, the honor of this his holy church in England, and
the condition of our age and time, shall approve for truth most convenient. The
places of Josias and EZechiel, are not to beat us down, Their alleged
scripture considered.
or to bear ye contrary opinion, from lack in my judgment. Omitting ye private
example, of ye godly Josias, which can not in good divinity be drawn to a
public commandment, I will only note of the other place, which seems to
sundry, to stand for a law preceptorie, as well to us now, as to the Leuits
then. First I say, that Idolatry is an horrible sin, but not estranged is the
Idolater from grace, if the Lord vouchsafe him Eze. 18.22 23. Eze. 44.10.
repentance. And where as the Lord there cutteth those Leuits from his Alter at
Jerusalem, and the office of the Priest, which fell to Idolatry, he does not
say, and this shall be a perpetual law to my house and Church for ever:
Neither did the Leuits alwais, so deal to fore, in ye time of Moises law. Did
not Aaron, fall to Idolatry, when he made (...). 32.1.
with a graven tool the molten image, and proclaimed a solemn feast day
therefore? attributing that self Idolatrous worship to the lord, and made an
Altar before the Idol, and if well we weigh whose office it was in that
congregation to offer up sacrifice, we shall further touch Aaron his person, as
also Moises seems to lay the whole crime upon him. Aaron not removed from
the priesthood notwithstanding his great sin in Idolatry.
Yet behold ye great mercy of God in the time of the law. Nor is Aaron by god
ye lord, or by his magistrate Moises deprived of his dignity, removed from his
ministry, nor slain with the slaughter of the sword at Moises his hands,
when.3000. of the Isralits were the^ slain for ye same horrible and Idolatrous
fact. This example may not move such whom it does concern to boldness of sin,
neither is the place of EZech. written to tie al times to that Judicial law.
But so has gods wisdom enriched his written scriptures with Justice in
severity and mercy in his christ, that sin may be condemned, and the penitent
sinner find favor in ye sight of God. Ez. 44.10.
It might be asked whether all the whole Chapter be of like authority, or
only that part against the Leuits? if all, then further matter is to be
considered, then either would be liked of many, or tolerated of any true
christian in the church of god. If only that remain, touching the fallen
Leuits, and not that in the.9. verse. 17.18.22. etc. For gods cause, show us
some priueleadge, for that matter only from the rest. But dear brethren, the
whole chapter considered, sends us to the same mind that erst we were of,
that is, that this law was to the Jewish priesthod, and not to us: and the
shrinking subscribing hands of men most famous in the ministry rightly
measured with the abundant gifts of gods spirit, to them, after repentance
given of god, to seal his good like of their elected place, and continuance in
the function of the ministry, as well to his Apostle Peter as to sundry his
excelent disciples in our, times gives not a little comfort to those in that
predicament, notwithstanding the severe censure of sundry zealous and learned
persons. I purpose not at all to favor such popish Mass priests, whose
hearts remaining without Religion, have and do frame themselves to every
change, thereby to satisfy their lucring lust: for these being only
Temporarii, are not in any sort tolerable in the holy ministry of Christ's
word and sacraments: neither yet to support such Queen Mary's priests, as
beeinge in her darcke reign admitted by that Popish ennoyling, do yet with
the former, cover their now Idolatrous hearts, with the mantell of externe
obedience. But if so it be, that God in his great mercy have fully altered, and
to him self by him self changed the hearts of some of these, and called the
Persons as extraordynarily, (which may be perceived by his gifts and Spirit
in them,) then I see not, after their public confession, and time of trial,
(which were very necessary) why either the Church should refuse to readmitte
them to the ministry of the Gospel, or any the children should impugn such
their godly Mothers recepte. For this cause was 1. Tim. 1.16
Paul received to mercy, that Jesus Christ should first show upon him all
long sufferinge, to the example of them, which in time to come should believe
in Christ, to eternal life. This mercy, note (good Reader) is not ended, when
Paul is thereby received to grace, but it contynueth (and that for our
comfortable example) admittinge that persecuting Convert, to the preaching of
the Gospel. And as the Gospel yields grace to this our convert: So the law
is not altogether void of favor the slyding Priest Aaron, as before. Neither
yet do I speak to confyrme the general Troop of the Idolatrous priests
admitted, especially sith they have not turned to the LORD, until the mighty
God has taken from them their vain trust, and placed again his true
Religion, which Priests have continewed till the day by Law set, in their
massinge, and wish the same yet in heart, in the middle of their ministration,
these wheresoever they be, I do lament that so they are and cannot by law as
yet be removed. But I only set down my dislike of this opinion, that if once a
Queen Mary's priest, or King Henry's and King Edwardes Priest (so they be
termed) then can they not in any case, howsoever beautified with spiritual
gifts, or converted in conscience, be admitted to the function of the
ecclesiastical ministry. As I willingly confess that there may because of
distrust into the most of such: So yet I cannot achieue the sight of this, that
from all such the grace of God is so far shortened. If through repentance by
his holy spirit they be purely sanctified and accounted in Gods sight for his
son Christ, in whom they believe, as if they had remained innocent: Why should
the severity of men in earth shut from ye ministry in his Church, those whom
his mercy from the heavens has received as most dear to himself? Or yet from
the pastoral office such persons as the Lord accompteth innocent? But it may
be said the Church is offended at them, they therefore cannot profit the
congregation. I say, the godly in the church do respect the gospel, which the
man brings, and not the man his messenger, neither shall the wicked reprobate
2. Cor. 2.19 Jude. 4
be helped by the purest minister, or yet the children of adoptton be hindered
or want their promised commodity in the weakest pastor. Could the Israelites
be ignorant of Aarons fall? or the Apostles and Church then of Peter's denial in
the judgment hall, or his eftsoon infirmity Gal. 2.
at Antioch? Whose crimes were not small, yet was not the one or the other for
the offense of the Church through their fall, abandoned the ministry. These
things by occasion thus touched for thy taste and stay of conscience, I have to
ye end of these my labors, with this last observation to whom it may concern.
Christ is given of God his father to give light to the^ that sit in ye darkness
of error and sin, and to guide their wa^dring steps and wide walking feet,
into ye gospel, which is the way of peace. Now is the time wherein most amply
this his office is by his grace executed in this nation, and yet are there many
which having in the darkness of the late persecution, seen and received great
light of the Gospel, are now in clear shine of the same, either with the
Moules digging and dwelling in earthly things, and covet the darkness of Mammon,
reserving to Christ and his word their lips alone: Or else with Julian that
Apostata, when they should seal up the fulness of their joy in receiving their
salvation sent, and obeying his kingdom present, they as men all wearied of
eternal life, shut up their hearts from the Lord thereof, reject his gospel,
resuse their former faith, and return to the vomit of popery erst cast from
them. To all such Christ is a stumbling stone, a stone of offense, but in deed
to them he is a terrible judge to pronounce the end due to their Apostasy so
relapsed: Heb. ^. and 10. 2. Pet. 2.20.21.22.
hell and everlasting damnation. The lord in his great mercy keep us from
this fall, and give us to apprehend his Christ our light and leader, that we
may daily walk in his shining law, by the conduction of his ho-spirite, until
we attain the fruition of his eternal peace. To whom with the father and the
holy ghost, three persons distinct, one and our eternal God, be al glory and
power for ever. Amen.

FINIS

