A White Sheet, OR A Warning for Whoremongers. A Sermon preached in the Parish
Church of St. Swithins by London-stone, the 19. of July, Anno Domi: 1629. the
day appointed by Honorable authority, for penance to be done, by an Inhabitant
there, for fornication, continued more then two years, with his Maide-servant.

BY RICHARD COOK B: of D: and Parson there.

Fornication and uncleanness let it not once be named amongst you as it becomes
Saints.

Ephesians. 5. 3. Fornicatio nulli impune conce^itur.

August: de conflict^ vitior (...) vi^tutum. LONDON, Printed by John Dawson,
for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at the entrance into Popes-head-Alley,
out of Lumbard-streete. 1629.

TO THE RIGHT VVORSIPFVLL, AND HIS worthily respected friends Mr HVMFRY SMITH,
ALDERMAN. M. William Essington. M. Richard Glover. M Richard Caswell. M. Matthew
Craddocke.
Common Counsel men of the Parish of St. Swithins, and to the rest of my kind
and loving neighbors there, GRACE and GLORY.
RIght Worshipful, and the rest, I little thought when I preached this Sermon,
(the rude and undigested meditations of some few hours) that it ever should
have gone further then where you found it, God is my witness, I have ever been
so conscious to my self, of so much weakand disabilitie, of making any thing
of mine own public, that I have ever held it true, been qui latuit, been
vixit, he lives contentedly, that lives retiredly, accounting my self happy
enough if I could but give content to them by my private labors, by whom I
live and have my means, and maintenance.

From the Pulpit it is now come to the Press, and had not some of my good
friends at home; and other loving acquaintance abroad, earnestly pressed and
importuned me for the publication of it, it had seen no Sun: but being
vnwiling to deny many a thing so reasonable, and hoping it might be profitable
for many, and especially for him, who that day was the cause of so great a
concourse and conflux of people) I have adventured to present that unto your
hands and eyes, which at the first I, only intended for your ears; though
mine hopes have failed me, and the success I expected, give me but small
encouragement, or comfort in it.

You have heard I persuade my self, since I preached the Sermon, how vildly
and vncivilly I have been traduced by him: the thing that I feared is fallen
upon me, I could look no better fruit from such a Crab: Men do not gather
Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of Thistles: Who can expect sweet water, from an
unwholesome fountain, or a pleasing Odor from a stinking Dunghill? but regium
est male audire, and my comfort is the testimony of mine own conscience with
me, and for me, that what then I did or spoke, was intended for his good,
both for his humiliation and for his comfort.

But as the best meats, received into a foul stomach, turn rather to
corruption, and putrefaction, then unto good and wholesome nutriment: so is the
word pabulum animae, the food of our souls, to feed us, and fit us for the
kingdom of heaven; when it is entertained into a wicked heart: The Bees suck
honey out of common and course flowers, when Spiders, and Toads, gather nothing
but payson out of the best and sweetest. The word of God is alijs odor vitae ad
vitam, alijs odor mortis ad mortem, as the Apostle tells us, 2. Cor. 2. 16. unto
some the savor of life unto life, and unto others the savor of death unto
death: I am heartily sorry it wrought no kindlier, or no better with him.

And as for my self, whatsoever his baseness and unbefitting behavior has
since been unto me, I thank God, I can as easily contemn it, as he obtrude
it, with Socrates answer only, as Laertius reports it, who being reviled made
no other answer, nor was further moved at it, but with been loqui non didicit,
he had not yet learned to speak well; I know his tongue is no slander: why
then should I be moved, or discontented at any thing invented, or vented by
such a man? Philip being told, that the Graecians spoke evil of him,
notwithstanding the much good he had done them, and therefore being solicited
to punish them for it; mildly replied, what would they do, if I should do
them any hurt? Ego vero sic vitam instituam ut nemo illis sit crediturus: but I
will so order my life, that no man shall believe them, what soever evil they
shall speak of me: I say no more, for my self, or of him, but Father forgive
him, and Lord lay not this sin unto his charge.

What my life and conversation has been amongst you, for now more then
twenty and four years, you best know, in whose eyes I have ever lived: who,
I presume, will easily vindicate my reputation from all malevolent and
scandalous aspersions. I appeal unto you all, how unjustly, and vndeservedly
he has defamed me. I comfort my self with David's answer to Abishai,
concerning Shemies railing and reviling him: Let him alone, it may be the Lord
will look on mine affliction, and that the Lord will do me good for his
cursing this day: 2 Samuel 16. 13. and I am confident of that truth of the wise
man; The curse that is causeless shall not come. Pro. 26. 2.

We use to say, they run far that never return: all were not called into
the vineyard at the first hour of the day; Some at the third, some at the
ninth, and some at the eleventh. Mat. 20. 3. etc. I hope that this Prodigal
may come home again into himself, and that by the goodness and mercy of God
unto him in Christ, he may be more careful of his own salvation, and
conscionable of my good name and reputation: which God grant. The Lord knows
that I neither thought nor meant him ill, in all I said or did: If I dealt
plainly, and and to purpose with him, it was the good of his soul, and the
discharge of my conscience to God and men, that I only aimed at: and if for
this I shall be either evilly thought of, or spoken of, blame me not if I be a
little moved, pardon me this passion, and pity my disgrace, and save me what
you can, from the lash of lewd and slandering tongues, we are both sufficiently
known unto you and what our lives have been amongst you; Judge and spare not,
which of us two have most offended.

I have thus far presumed of your love and favor, (my kind and loving
neighbors) to dedicate these my poor and plain labors unto you, and unto
none but you: for unto whom should I, or could I give both my self and
whatsoever that little (that Christ enabling me, I shall be able in the work
of my ministry) next unto God, then unto you, amongst whom for these many
years I have lived, as comfortably, and as contentedly, (I bless God for it)
as any poor Minister in this City?

I presume you will not deny the Patronage and protection of this worthless
work of mine: you have somewhat suffered through the sin of him that
suffered that day, that condign shame and punishment. I would it had never
been told in our Gath, nor published in the streets of our Askalon, or that so
bad a Bird had not defiled so sweet a nest. I did my best to free you all,
from either concealing, or conntenancing of the sin, and gave them their due
that did their best to have it punished; whose pains to that purpose may
justly callenge a thank full remembrance from us all: Refuse not to countenance
his pains, that did what he could to maintain your honor.

I have hitherto blessed God, and rejoiced in your liberality: your many
favors, from many of you in private, from most of you in public, shall ever
oblige me unto you all, in all thankful love and observancie: Add I pray
unto the great heap of your former beneficencie, a favorable acceptance of
these few leaves of my weak labors; It is a Child that was both begotten and
borne in your Parish, I hope it shall not find the less favor for the Fathers
sake.

You have been I am sure, and still are (as I think) at this time also, at
the care and cost of keeping some poor men's children: what this may cost you I
cannot tell: howsoever, I persuade my self, you will not see it starve in the
streets. Silver and Gold have I none, but such as it is, it is only yours;
and so is he, that living and dying resolves to be an humble petitioner unto
the throne of Grace, for the happiness and prosperity of you all, here and
hereafter. Now the very God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your
whole Spirit, and Soul and Body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of
the Lord Jesus Christ; so it becomes him to pray, who is your servant in the
work of his Ministry, and heartily desires the continuance of your love and
favor, and to remain.

Yours (...) RICHARD COOK.

A White Sheet; OR A Warning for Whoremongers.
HEB. 13. 4. Whoremongers and Adulterers, God will judge.
YOu will not much wonder I persuade my self, that I have this day changed
mine ordinary and usual Text, while you cast your eye upon this penitentiary
spectacle, of a black soul in a white sheet: The first of this kind and
nature, (I thank God) that since my time we ever had; and I hope both we and
he also will pray God, that as he has been the first, so also he may be the
last.

A Spectacle causing I know not whether, greater sorrow or rejoicing: in me I
can assure you, it causes both: If natural parents having children, that
prove unnatural and disobedient, cannot but lament and grieve for them: as for
a murdering Caine, a mocking Ismael, a profane Esau, etc. but to have in the
family a Reuben, climing up to his fathers bed, an Amnon, to defile his sister
Tamar, or an Absalom, to lie with his fathers concubines, in the sight of all
Israel, and of the Sun: how can this but cut them to the very heart and soul?

How then can those, whom God has made to be spiritual Fathers but mourn as
much to have such monsters? God is my witness this is no pleasing sight to me,
further then I consider in it digitum Dei, the finger of God in this justly
inflicted and imposed punishment upon him; which I hope through the mercy of
God may be for the destruction of the flesh that his soul may be saved in the
day of the Lord Jesus, which God grant.

It has been often said that it is a fair flock that has never a scabd
sheep in it. The fruitfullest fields of corn when they have been freest,
have had some weeds growing, as well as grain: Crescunt cum tritico Zizania
tares amongst the wheat, and what Congregation ever was yet so fortunate to
have all stand sound and strieght amongst them: In the primest times and purest
days of the Gospel, the Apostles had an Ananias and Saphira, an Elimas, a
Simon Magus and the like. 1 Cor. 5. 12
In the Church of Corinth, for all Paul's zealous praying for them and preaching
to them, there was such a sin brake out amongst them, that was not named
amongst the Heathens; That a man should have his fathers wife. Yea John 6. 70.
Christ himself, amongst those few he had, even of twelve one proved to be a
devil.

Sorrow and compassion is never more sweet and seasonable, then when God is
dishonored, the souls of men endangered, and religion blemished, by the foul
and filthy sins of ungodly and graceles men.

When Zimri and Coshi had committed fornication in the camp of Israel, Numb.
25. 6
you shall find all the congregation of the people of Israel, weeping before
the doors of the Tabernacle of the congregation: 2 Sun. 18. 33
What made David to take on so pitifully for the death of Absalom, but for his
sins the maine cause of his untimely death, he died a rebel to God, and a
traitor to his Father; hinc illa lacryma, this caused that sorrow.

S. Cyprian in his sermon de lapsis a little from the beginning testifies of
himself; that when he saw, or heard of any that fell away from the Orthodoxe
faith for fear of persecution, that he could not but shed many tears for
them, and that he felt himself as deeply wounded with their apostacy;
Tanquam persecutoru^ gladijs vulneratus fuisset, as if he had been wounded
unto death by the swords or other weapons of cruel persecutors.

When that incestuous person in the Churh of Corinth had brought that scandal
on the Church, and had nothing said or done to him for it, S. Paul went not
behind their backs to blame them for it, and to tell them 1 Cor 5. 2
they were rather puffed up, then sorrowed, that he which had done that fault
might be put away from amongst them.

It is a masterpiece of religious wisdom in sorrowing for the sins of
others, to put a difference betwixt their sins and their souls having
compassion Jude 23
(...) diligendo homines, odio habendo peccata: hating them as sinners but
loving them as men: And thus and no otherwise stand I this day affected, to the
sin and the shame of him that stands here before us.

And as I am sorry for the foulness of his sin, so I profess I rejoice and
am glad with all mine heart, for the execution of justice by those Honorable,
Reverend, and Worshipful persons in the High Commission-Court, that have so
justly and worthily inflicted this punishment upon him. No more I am confident
then law permitted, though not so much I dare say, as his sin deserved: If
such a fly had fallen on weak spiders webbs, God knows where he would have
light and fly-blowe^ next.

There is nothing that causes such boldness and impudency in sin as
impunitie. Eccle. 8. 11
Because sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed, the hearts
of men are fully set in them to do evil.

1. Sam. 18. 9. 10. 11.
Saul can no sooner swear to the witch of Endor for her safety, at the
raising of only seeming Samuel, but she presently, falls to her sorcery,
which till then she durst not for her life have attempted. Hope of escaping
draws men to sin barefaced and with boldness.

Which made Cato wisely to say that it were better i pro collato beneficio
nullam reportare gratiam quam pro maleficio non dare paenam, to receive no
thanks for doing well, then no punishment for doing evil.

We should therefore be so affected, when we see the hand of God in the
punishment of offenders, as the author of them is, who delights not in them, as
they make his creatures miserable, but as thereby his justice is made more
conspicuous and glorious: It should not only joy us to see God kind and
gracious in his mercies to his own, but also to see him terrible and just in
the punishment of his enemies. It (...) no cruelty to rejoice in justice, the
foolish pity of men is cruelty in Gods esteem.

It was a wise and religious answer of Lewis K: of France who was styled the
Saint, who having signed a pardon for a malefactor, and afterward calling it in
again, being asked the reason of it replied nothing nor made no other answer
to it then with these words of the Psalmist. Psalm. 106. 3.
Beati qui faciunt judicium et justitiam in omni tempore, Blessed is he that
does judgment and justice at all times. And I have read of that Isabell of
Spain that was wont to say, of four things which she loved to look at, one
was this, to see a thief upon the ladder at the Gallows, rejoicing to see the
execution of justice.

The Psalmist tells us that Psalm. 58. 10.
the righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, a text not to be
tontured to private revenge, or meant of that joy when men are tickled to see
or hear of some mischief to befall their enemies, such a kind of rejoicing is
unchristian and vancharitable; and the contrary is commanded, Prou. 24. 17
rejoice not when thine enemy falls and let not thy heart be glad when he
stumbleth, least the Lord see it and it displease him: but of the justice of
God when he meets with offenders for their sins.

Metellus Macedonicus and Scipio Africanus were always out with one another,
and as cross and contrary each to other as might be, yet when Metellus heard
of the death of Scipio, he ran about the streets and lamentably cried out,
p concurrite, concurrite ciues, maenia vrbis nostra subuersa sunt, help
neighbors, help, the walls of our city are overthrown: And when Caesar saw
the head of Pompie, vberrimas lachrymas profudit, he wept bitterly.

The joy of the godly never is, or ought at any time to be in the hurt or
punishment of the wicked, but in this that God hereby is glorified and his
justice magnified, Gaude^dum non de malo impij, sed de bono iudice as Anselmus
well observes, we may not rejoice that the wicked suffer, but that their
sufferings come from a righteous Judge: and thus and no otherwise I profess my
self, and I hope I may promise as much for you all, do no otherwise rejoice
in this man's shame and punishment this day.

If he has but so much grace as to do both these for himself, he is an happy
man: for though happily he has hitherto deceived the expectation of the world,
who as yet see but small sign of either, yet hereby he may conceive some hope
of finding God more favorable, in forgiving this that is past, and the world
also more friendly, to help him; by their prayers for mercy and forgiveness
at the hands of God if this be wanting, if this be not obtained, what can be
expected after all these earthly shames and censures, but eternal tortures
both of soul and body, in those easeles and endless flames of fire and
brimstone? that very doom which here is denounced against the sin of
uncleanness and filthiness, for Whoremongers etc.

The whole verse as it lies in the lump, if you please to consider it, as it
is compact together, consists of these two principal parts and members: A
Commendatio^ and secondly a Commination; The gracing of marriage; And then the
disgracing of the polluters of marriage, the first honorable, the last damnable.

Marriage is honorable, an honorable testimony of that holy institution of God
in the time of man's innoce^cie, when Genesis 2. 22.
God seeing that it was not good for him to be alone, out of man made he an
help meet for man, that for ever after for the avoiding of fornication, every
man might have (...) his own wife, and every wife her own husband, 1 Cor. 7.
2.
that such as have not the gift of continency might marry, and keep
themselves undefiled members of Christ's body, as we have it well in our
litturgie of marriage.

But if any such should happily be borne, that like wild beasts would needs be
breaking over the pale of this park of God, and like fed horses fall Iere. 5.
8.
a neighing after their neighbors wives, as God complains of such in Ieremies
time, Ezekiel. 22. 11
or that should discover their fathers nakedness, or humble her that was set
apart for pollution, or committed abomination with his neighbors wife, they
might know they should do it at their own peril, and pay sweetly and dearly
for it first or last, for Whoremongers etc.

Which words being for the sum and substance of them a definitive and
peremptory sentence against unclean and filthy persons, may it please you to
take into your observation three several circumstances, whereby it is
exemplified and enlarged, first the sinners to be censured; Secondly the Judge
that shall set upon them: and thirdly the punishment that shall be inflicted.

The persons punishable and to be tried, are two ways discovered, first by the
nature of the sin: secondly by the number of offenders. Whoremongers and
adulterers, The Judge before whom they shall be arraigned is God, Whoremongers
and adulterers God will judge, the censure and punishment to be inflicted is
Judgment, a word of large extent aggravating the soreness and severtiie of
their punishment, for Whoremongers and Adulterers (...) or (...) as Gualter
truly has observed.

Let us first look upon the prisoners at the bar: there are here two sorts
of sins and sinners named (...) Whoremongers and adulterers.

Both apparently peccants and delinquents against that peremptory commandment
of God, Exodus 20. 14.
Thou shall not commit adultery, but not offenders alike, faulty enough both,
and bad is the best: both condemned and with these and whatsoever other
vneleanesse else, by that commandment and law of God is also interdicted.

I know Divins have well distinguished them: Whoredom to be filthiness and
uncleanness committed by those that are at liberty and loose, Soluti cum
Soluta and therefore called single fornication, the sin of such as be both
free, not yet knit together, nor of twain made one by anytie of matrimonial
conjunction; such as was the sin of Genesis 34. ^
Shechem with Dinah and of Numb. 25.
Zimri with Coshi.

The other kind of this uncleanness is Adultery: which is a plain and a
palpable breach of holy marriage: The word adulterium some have thought to have
been derived of quasi ad alteram of coming to, or accompanying with an other:
which I think is something short: others better tell us that adulterium is ad
alterius thorum accessio: the climing up unto the bed of another, as y Aquinas
defines it to be the unlawful companying together of them, that are coupled
together, such as was the sin of Gen 49. 4.
Ruben, 2 Samuel 11. 4.
David with Bathsheba, and of 2 Samuel 16. 22.
Absalon with his Fathers concubines, both which the Apostle tells us God will
judge.

Secondly we have them discovered by their number whoremo^gers and adulterers,
meaning not some one but all such speaking indefinitely and generally in the
plural number, aiming at every man and mothers son. God in cases of justice,
being Hab. 1. 13.
a God of pure eyes, that can behold no iniquity a God that takes no pleasure
in wickedness Psalm. 5. 4.
neither shall any evil dwell with him. He is neither accepter of places nor
persons: He that gave such a strickt charge to his delegates and deputies not
to Exodus 23. 3.
countenance a poor man in his cause, and charged them also, Deuteronomy. 17.
not to have respect of persons in Judgment but to hear the small as well as
the great and not to fear the face of men.

This God I say, thus strict and punctual in his precept unto others, that
justice might be carried in a right line and level, will not lay heavy burdens
on other men's shoulders, and not move them himself with one of his fingers,
but will be as impartial against all sorts of sinners, whose repentance and
humiliation after sin committed comes not forth speedily to meet this God as
Abigail did David, or the inhabitants of Tyrus and Sidon to pacify Herod
displeased with them.

Let no unclean person dream of a dispensation in his sin, I know God never
has nor will grant any: that is enough for Dominus Deus noster Papa of Rome
(as his base claw-backes and Sicophants blasphemously style him) God scorns to
live by so base and beastly rents and commings in: anima Ezekiel. 18. 20.
quae peccat morietur, that soul that sins shall die.

Isay 9. 14.
The Lord will cut off head and tail, branches and rush in one day, and if
happily it should find any favor with men, (which God fobid) yet let it hope
for none with God: Gods purpose is otherwise (if such mend not their manners)
for Whoremo^gers etc.

The next thing to be handled and dispatched in the text, is the Judge before
whom they should be tried and that is God, for Whoremongers and Adulterers,
(...), God then shall be their Judge: truly termed and styled by Abraham, to
be the Judge of all the world: Genesis 18. 15
shall not the Judge of all the world do right? and surely so he is, the only
Lord chief Justice of all the world riding no lesser or shorter circuit then
the compass of all the world.

Two ways is God said to Judge, per se, per suos, by himself or by some
others, immediately or mediately, usually by both and in both together. In
taking vengeance and inflicting punishment upon offenders, what or who is it,
that is not at his command, readily and chearefully to be at his beck to do
his pleasure?

When God goes about the devastation and conflagration of Sodom and Gomorrha:
by the judgment of hell out of heaven, by raining down Genesis 15. 24
fire and brimstone from the Lord out of Heaven. God will be their Judge, but
Gods Angels shall be his executioners: When God intendes to coope up that
blasphemous mouth of 2 Kin. 19. 35 37
Rabshekie, and to take down the pride and insolency of his Master, God will
bring it to pass by an Angel and men. Yea what creature is so mean,
despiseable, or contemptible which God cannot quickly arm with strength and
power enough, to avenge the quarrel of God in the confusion and destruction of
the proudest offenders? Exodus 8. 16.
Lice, frogs, catterpillers, out of the very dust and ashes of the earth can
God muster up an army to fight against Pharaoh, when he comes to plague him
and his people; By all which, or by any of which whatsoever is effected, these
are but the instruments, God is primus motor, the especial agent and mover,
God by these and in these bringing to pass his intended purposes and good
pleasure, in the punishments of such as shall dare to provoke him by sinning
against him.

It is true that usually and most an end God has put the power of punishing
into the hands of subordinate authority, of whom he has said Psalm. 82. 6.
Dij estis, yea are Gods, by God appointed, Romans 13. 4.
to take vengeance of them that do evil, yet whatsoever these do in courts
and causes of Justice: justly and sincerely is Gods own act, it is he that
does it: these are the mouths and hands of God from whom they speak, and for
whom they strike; when offenders suffer.

If any shall ask why the Apostle tells us that God naming none but God, will
have the hearing and ha^dling of such foul matters as these, and himself will
sit in judgment upon whoremongers and adulterers. I suppose that happily it
might be for these several causes and reasons. First the church and people at
this time being under persecution and dispersion, they could have no public
court of Justice, nor any law civil, or Eclesiastick to punish this sin: or
secondly if there were means for the suppressing of it: yet it was not so
stricktly looked after as was fitting, as may appear by that indulgencie which
the incestuous person found in the Church and Congregation of Corinth.

But the chief and principal cause as I conjecture, was in terrorem
peccatorum for the greater terrifying of such offenders, that al such filthy
wretches and beastly livers might be assured that they could neither sin so
secretly, but they should be discovered, nor after sin committed escape
unpunished: if there were none that either would or could look after them, yet
God himself would plague them for it, for whoremongers and adulterers God, etc.

Two things amongst many make the wicked bold and presumptuous to fall upon any
sin with greediness. Hope that their sin shall not be seen, and secondly
weakness in authority, if found out and taken with it, It often happens that
as other sinners, so Whoremongers and adulterers, are so close and cunning in
their uncleanness, that the most vigilant and observaut eye of authority can
take no notice or knowledge of it, it is a piece of the mystery of their
iniquity, and a trick in that black Art, Si non cast tamen caute, if they
can be but secret they think they are safe enough.

Job 24. 15.
The eye of the Adulterer waits for the twilight, and says none eye shall
see him, and disguiseth his face: Prou. 7. 7. 9.
and the simple young man when he goes to a bandie house and to meet with his
har lot takes his time in the twilight, in the morning in the black and dark
night. Thus indeed they may be too cunning and to crafty for the eyes of men,
but they are to young to hide their sins from God: for there is no darkness
nor shadow of death where the workers of iniquity can be hid as Elihu speaks
in Job Job. 34. 5. 22.
can any man hide himself in secret, that I shall not see him? Ier. 23. 24
do not I fill heaven and earth. The darkness is no darkness with him but
the night is as clear as the day, the darkness and the light to him are both
alike, And (...) Psalm. 139. 12. 13.
all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do.
Heb. 4. 13.


Psalm. 94. 9. 10.
He therefore that made the eyes must needs see, and he that planteth the ear
must needs hear, and he that chastneth the Heathen shall not he punish? yes
surely: and as he never winkes at any sin, so will he not at this, for
whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.

The other thing that flesheth men in their filthiness, is weakness of
authority, when either those that would may not, or those that may, do not, or
dare not meddle with them: when these beastly creatures think they can either
over-looke or overtop authority, by being greater or better, either by their
persons, or places, or purses, then the Magistrate: for this is not always or
alone the sin of beggars, as it was wont to be said of drunkenness, as
drunk as a beggar: But Erasmas called it long since Lusum magnatu^, the sport
of great men, and therefore through their greatness know how to deal well
enough with Authority, presuming that either by fraud, or force, or fear, to
escape well enough by breaking the cords of Magistrates, and casting these bonds
from them.

It Is true it may so now and then fall out, that greatness of offenders may
manumit malefactors and free them from the force of the stroke of a mortal
Magistrate, but they are like to meet with their match, when they meddle with
their maker: he neither wants eyes to see, nor hands to smite, nor courage to
punish the proudest whoremo^ger, or the greatest adulterer; when he shall come
to sit in judgment. The strongest will be to weak to deal with him: Isay 27. 4.
who will set the briars and thorns against him in battle? 1 Cor 10. 12.
do we provoke the Lord to jealousy, are we stronger then he? what is a pot
of earth to a scepter of iron; or the stabble to the fire Heb. 12. 29.
for our God is a consuming fire; Mat. 10. 28.
He can tear in pieces and none shall deliver, he can kill both soul and body
in hell.

And this is that judge, which here the Apostle tells us, shall give this
sentence upon these and all other impenitent sinners; Whoremongers and
adulterers by name in this text, for whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.

The third and the last thing in the trial of these persons, is to hear their
judgment, for God will judge them.

There is a two fold kind of judging given to God, iudicium liberationis and
iudicium condemnationis, a judgment of absolution and another of condemnation,
the first is gratiae, the other irae: that comfortable, this other terrible:
The judgment of absolution is only for such which after sin committed, have
heartily repented and humbled themselves to God, and through Christ have made
their peace with God, for whose only sake, they have their pardon sealed, and
hear no more of them, but some sweet words of grace and mercy, like that of
Nathan to David, 2. Sam. 12. 13.
Dominus transtulit peccatum tuum: The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall
not die, or as Christ said to him that he had cured of the palsy, Mat. 9. 2.
Confide fili, remittuntur tibi peocata tua: son be of good comfort, thy sins
are forgiven thee, So that there is now no condemnation to those that are in
Christ. Romans 8. 1. John 5. 29.
For he that hears my words, and believes in him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation. And thus only are the
godly judged, and none thus but these

The other kind of judging is a judgment condemnatorie, binding over all
remorsles and impenitent sinners, to all those temporal and eternal plagues
and punishments, which God the righteous Judge has not only nominated and
threatened, but undoubtedly shall be inflicted as severely as threatened. And of
this kind of judging only is this in the text intended, thus Whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge.

A terrible saying, but a true: A word of astonishment and amasement, like that
hand writing which appeared to Belshazzar on the wall, at the very sight
whereof, before he knew what it might be or meant, Dan. 5. 6.
his countenance was changed, his thoughts troubled him, the joints of his
loins were loosed, and his knees knocked one against another: little less
terrible then Peter's words to Ananias and Saphira, at the hearing whereof,
Acts 5. 5. 6.
they both gave up the Ghost and died. As much amasement well may this word
cause in Whoremongers and adulterers, to deter them from this sin, for God
will judge them.

But if God be purposed to judge such beastly livers, where, when, or how, will
some man ask, will God effect it? I answer for the time, that is in his own
appointing, and at his own pleasure: sooner or later or whenever he lists:
only let such know that first or last at one time or an other, God has
appointed a day in which he will judge them: There damnation sleeps not, it
may come suddenly; Gods hands are never so bound, never so pinioned that he
cannot punish at his pleasure: If not suddenly, yet certainly: h Scra venit,
sed certa venit vindicta deorum, slow but sure.

Has not God met with some in the very act of their abominable filthiness;
Thus perished Numb. 25. 7. 8.
Zimri and Cosbi by the hands of Phinees, Plutarke reports that Alaebiades was
burned in his bed with his Curtizan Yimandra, and Paulus Diaconus that
Rodoaldus King of Lombardic was slain with a certain Matrone, even in the
action of their concupiscence: But what if present execution be not done, shall
they therefore escape scot-free? will God put it up, or pass it by unpunished?

(...).
I have a long time held my peace, I have been still and resrained my self;
but I will cry like a traveling woman, I will destroy and devour at once.
Quod differtur non aufertur; forbearance with God is no payment, the longer he
stays, the liker to pay, home at the last, quanto diutius sustinet tanto
disstrictius iudicat; the further he fetches his blow, the heavier it must
needs fall wheresoever it lights. But of this let all those be fully assured,
that whenever it comes it will be to their cost, whether here or hereafter,
now or then, temporally or eternally, it may be in both, Whoremougers and
Adulterers God will judge.

And as for the manner how God will punish them, that also is as he will, and
how he pleases: Non desunt Deo vlciscendi modi: God never wants weapons to
wound his enemies, or rods in piss to whip ungracious and rebellious children,
Genesis 19. 24
Fire and brimstone for Sodom and those Cities: when God sees the old world
so foul with sin, he knows how to wash it, Genesis 7. 7
with a flood of waters, he has a ten stringed whipp for Exodus 7. 8. 9. cap.
Pharaoh: The Number. 16. 31
earth to swallow up Corah and his Company: Number 12. 10
Leprosy for Miriam and Gehazi; The Ezekiel. 6. 12
sword, famine, and pestilence for Israel; Acts 12. 23
Lice and worms for Herod and the like: and what not indeed to meet with
sinners? Oh that we could ever think of that after-reckonning for sin! Or
that we knew the worst or what it would cost us, before God has done with us
who knows? who can presage, how God may deal with him when by his sins he
has once provoked him?

What punishment originally, and by that first law that God made against
Adulterers, you know was no less then death. The mercy of the Gospel in some
Churches has mitigated that severitie, into more mild and merciful
proceedings, not taking away allcensures or punishments from that sin, but has
left it in the wisdom and power of Deuteronomy. 22. 22.
Authority, to have that sin severely and sharply punished, though not with
death. God grant this sin may find no hole to hide his head in, nor that
there may be no daubing, nor dallying, no dandling of it: We see where this
man's sin was lately censured, it has had but little countenance, and less
encouragement. The blessing of him that dwelt betwixt the bush reward them
seuen-fold into their bosom, for their singular Justice and Sincerity.

But shall I tell you how this sin has prospered, and what entertainment it
usually finds at Gods hands: I must tell you then, but them especially that
find such pleasure in this sin: that God never gives other then sower sauce
to such stolen meat: as will pregnantly appear by those fearful
presidents, and examples of Gods heavy hand, in revenging and punishing this
sin of uncleanness; what a pitiful massacre followed upon the deflouring of
Genesis 34. 25
Dinah, Jacobs daughter by Sechem the son of Hamer? how dearly did Amnon pay
for his incest with his sister? When (though full two years after,) yet God
nor man and not yet forgotten it, he 2 Samuel 13 28. 29.
was suddenly murdered by the servants of his brother Absalon, as he sat at
the Table: What an heavy time was it, what a black day in the Camp and
Congregation of Israel, for this very sin, when not only Number. 15. 8
Zimri and Cosbi perished by the hand of Phinees, but 1 Cor 10. 8
twenty and four thousand of the people besides, were swept away suddenly by
the hand of God?

Yea the very heathen have had this sin in such detestation, that they
thought no punishment bad enough for the committers of this sin Zaleucus King
of Locris, adjudged them by Law to loose their eyes both man and woman; and so
strickt was he to see his Law observed, that when his own son was taken in
Adultery, and should have lost both his eyes, the people importuning his Father
to forgive him, rather then justice should not be done, he commanded that one
of his own and another of his sons eyes should be put out, and so they were
as Peter Martyr upon the 2. of Sam: Nebucadnezzar, hearing that one Acub and
Zedekiah, Jews, had committed fowlenesse with two married women, broyled them
both to death on a gridiron.

Amongst the Egyptians the man that was taken in Adultery, was beaten with a
thousand stripes, and the woman had her nose cut off, as Dio: Siculus
reports; The Ancient Germans used to set the Adulteress naked before her
kindred, and to cut off her hair, and then her husband was to drive her before
him through the City, beating her with cudgels.

The Cumeans placed the Adulteress in the open market place upon a stone, in
the public view of all the people, that she might be derided and scorned of
all, and then setting her upon an ass, to ride through the streets, and she
was ever after called in mockage (...) an asse-rider, and that stone she stood
on, was ever held and abhorred as a thing filthy and unclean: as Plutarke has
related.

And has God at any time been less friendly or favorable to this sin then
so? has his sight been weaker that he cannot see, or his power wasted that he
does not smite, now as of old? his anger is not now turned away, but his hand
is stretched out still: we see enough every day to make us believe it: How
many fearful sights are daily in our eyes, representing Gods justice upon
such offenders in their souls, bodies, goods, good name, and in their issue
and posterity of these (if any be) for by some of these ever, by many of these
often, by all these now and then, God meets with them, and pays them home for
their beastly living.

Look upon his justice in their souls, what impressions of his wrath he has
left there? by the substraction of his grace, a plain presager, of a
Precipitation, and downfall into sin: blinding their understanding,
besottiug their affections, hardening their hearts, delivering them up to a
reprobate sense, and giving them up to uncleanness through the Iusts of their
own hearts, as S. Romans 1. 24.
Paul speaks of the Gentiles, and at last in his justice suffering them to
perish in the vanity of that sin, and to carry it with them to the grave;
from which while they lived, neither Laws of God, or man could possibly
reclaim them.

Look upon them in their goods and estate, though fair and great, how God
has blown upon it, and how soon has it been blasted, and brought to
nothing.

That which Solomon speaks of another sin, the sin of drinkenes, a
companion I am sure, if not Cozen-German to the sin of filthiness, That the
Prou. 23. 32
drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty. I am sure he tells us it will
be no better with whoremongers Pro. 6. 26.
For by means of an whorish woman, a man is brought to a morsel of bread,
whores and Jesuits (I may well couple them together) like Simeon and Leui
brethren in evil, for those as well as these, are, if not carnal yet
spiritual fornicators: those I say have ever been wheresoever they come the
only soakers and sinkers of the fairest inheritances. Horse-leech-like ever
crying give, give. That which Diogenes sometime said of a drunkards house with
a bill on it, to signify that it was to be let, I thought as much said the
Cynck, that ere long he would spue up his house also; And so will these do
that follow this, it is a thousand to one, if they leave not that, that will
not leave them worth a gray groat: Misery and beggary will be their end: for
if he that follows vain persons shall have poverty enough: they shall be
sure to be beggarly enough that follow this sin: I can give them no comfort,
but if their lives be so bad, the reward of their sin can be no better, and
seraerit in fundo par simonia; to the shame of their faees, and in the sorro^w
of their souls, they shall say we are wise too late, it is too late to spare,
when all is gone and spent

Look upon their bodies more near and dear unto them then all they have
besides; how have they been stigmatized by the hand of God? What foul, what
filthy, what infectious diseases have lighted, yea, loaded the bodies of such?
How many have hereby had the very noses of their faces consumed and eaten off?
That that face which could not blush at the sin, might carry in it, like
Caines mark, a perpetual stamp both of their sin and shame.

Look upon their credit and their reputation, and how lies all their honor,
not in the dust, but even in a dunghill: The most precious thing that a man
has in this world is a good name, Pro. 22. 1.
A good name is rather to be chosen then great riches, Eccle. 7. 1.
better then the most precious ointment: Whence the Heathen could persuade men
to it (...): labor rather to get a good name, then any thing: yet how soon is
that precious ointment made to stink by this dead fly of filthiness? Job 18.
17
Their rememberance shall perish from the earth, and they shall have no name in
the streets, as Bildad speaks in Job. Pro. 10. 7.
And when the memory of the just shall be blessed, Pro. 6. 33.
the name of the wicked shall rott.

Lastly, look upon them in their issue, and posterity, (if any be) and how
they are branded with baseness and infamy.

By the law of God they were not to Deuteronomy. 23. 2.
enter into the congregation, and by the laws of man a base son cannot
inherit, if he has any right to inherit any thing, it is nothing but the
fruit of his fathers filthiness, shame and disgrace, like the leprozie of
Gehazi shall cleave unto him and his seed for ever: and what greater blemish
then to be filius populi, a spurious seed, and who knows whose? for how high
so ever they may carry their heads, and look big upon such as know them not,
yet knowing themselves to be no better, they must live and die with the shame
of bastardie: This is the portion of those wicked filthy livers from God, and
the heritage appointed unto them from God. as Job 20. 29.
Zophar speaks in Job. Hae^^ortio calicis eoru^, Psalm. 11. 6.
this is their portion to drink, accursed in their souls, plagued in their
bodies, beggered in their estate, blemished in their reputation, and infamized
in their posterity, Thus whoremongers, etc.

And all this but in this life; God has two places to keep Courts of Justice,
one here below, the other in heaven above: here he keeps a but quarter
Sessions, there his general Assizes: Oh happy were it for Whoremongers and
Adulterers, if the mountains and hills could fall upon them, or the hills hide
them, from the terror of their trial at that day!

But alas, alas! it will not be: as it will be teribile apparere, so it will be
impossible latere, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
we must all appear before the Tribunal seat of Christ? How merry might
such wretches be, if they might covenant with God by temporal punishments, to
be dispensed with, and exempted from eternal torments? But woe worth the day
that ever they were borne, if they be not borne of water and the Spirit: this
is not all: the worst is yet to come, all these are, but initia delorum, the
beginning of sorrows, these are but flea-bitings to that which is behind, 2 Samuel 2. ^6.
As Abner told Ioab, about his wars, Know thou not that it will be bitter in
the latter end? or as Solomon tells the Drunkard concerning his cups, and
carowsings, Pro. 23. 3^.
that at the last it will bite like a Serpeut, and sting like a Cockatrice; So
will it be with these before God has done with them, the latter end of these
will be worse then their beginning, it will be bitter at the last: Pro. 5. 3. 4.
The lips of a strange woman etc.

What greater bitterness then eternal torments with the Devil and his Angels?
what fouler shame then perpetual banishment, and everlasting abdication from
the glorious and blessed presence of the everlasting God? What is the sorest or
the sharpest censure of an earthly Judge, to the final and vniverfall
judgment of an angry God? what is the paying or parting with a little money,
to the loss, at the last, of the soul and body? Shame amongst men, to the
disgrace of Saints and Angels? A white sheet in a Church, to the eternal
flames of Hell? This and nothing else can such expect, unless their repentance
and humiliation to God, like an other Moses stand in the breach, to stop this
gap: to turn away his indignation and displeasure from them: for except they
repent, they shall surely perish.

To come then by the way of conclusion, to that which is the life and power of
preaching, I mean to application of all that has been spoken. This Doctrine
meets first, with the cursed and corrupt opinion of our adversaries of the
Church of Rome, who in their conclusions and propositions concerning this
Doctrine of the Apostle, are as cross and contrary, as Belial to Christ, and
darkness to light, for it has been a common and current tenet amongst them,
that Simplex fornicatio non est peccatum, simple fornication is no sin, no
sin it may be because they think so, or no sin because so common with
them: Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccandi, custom in the sin blindes
them, that they think it is no sin.

But if it be no sin, why, I would know of them, has God so precisely
prohibited, and so severely punished it?

There shall be no whore of the Daughters of Deuteronomy. 13. 17.
Israel, nor a whore-keeper of the Sons of Israel, these be the express
words of the Law. 1 Cor 6. 18.
Flee fornication, Says the Apostle,b Let us not commit fornication. S. Paul
reckoning up the fruits of the flesh, which (I hope) our adversaries will not
deny to be sins, names Adultery and Fornication, First, The Gal. 5 19.
works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, etc. Colo. 3. 4.
Mortify your members which are on earth, fornication first, uncleanness,
inordinate affection and the like, 1 These. 4. 3
This is the will of God your sanctification, and that you should abstain from
fornication; what mean these plain and precise dehortations from it, if it
were not apparently a sin against God?

S. Augustine proves it thus to be a sin, because it is a plain breach of
that Law, Exodus 20. 19.
Thou shall not commit adultery, a commandment forbidding all kind of
uncleanness, and therefore fornication: if fornication be not here forbidden,
vbi sit illa prohibita in decalogo, vtrum inveniri possit ignoro: whether it
can be found prohibited else where in the decaloge, I cannot tell, but it is
most certain that is either forbidden here or no where in the moral Law,

The same Father in his book, de 10. Chord. cap. 9. answers an objection
which might seem to defend it, Vxorem non habeo, ad meretrice^ vado, I am
unmarried, and make use of an harlot: S. Augustine answers, In Deum peccas,
eius imaginem per diffluentias libidinis in te violasti, thou do sin
against God, whose image in thee thou defacest in thy self by thy overflowing
lusts: Dominus qui scit quid tibi vtile sit, vxorem concessit, hoc praecepit,
h^c iussit: The Lord who knows what is best for thee, has granted thee a
wife: this he prescribed, thus he has commanded; it is therefore surely a
sin against God.

Tostatus argues well to prove it a sin, Q: 22. in Exo.
every natural act not used or employed to the right end is evil, as to eat
and drink, non propter conservationem individui, not to preserve the body, but
for riot and excess is evil, so to use carnal copulation of lust not propter
conservationem speciei per generationem, not for the preserving of the kind by
generation, for the which it is appointed, must needs be evil, and so it is in
fornication.

Reverend M. Latimer maintains it to be a sin against God, out of this text
thus: ex quo discimus Deum benedixisse coniugio, where we read that God
blessed marriage, it is easy to gather on the contrary, that all other
companying of man and woman not in marriage is accursed, and proves it by the
words of my text and concludes thus, seeing therefore the sanctity and
chastity of marriage is commanded in the Law, and the contrary is forbidden,
and all other acts of uncleanness whatsoever, which are a violation of
marriage: adding also to this reason the testimony of Hosea 4. 11.
Hosea, Whoredom and wine take away the hearts: and the punishment of the
Israelites for their fornication out of 1 Corinthians. 10. 8.

But we must give these Apes leave to hug their own, and these crows to
think their own birds the beautifullest. It is one of the Popes purviors that
carries in his provision? no marvel then, if they have so many Champions to
mainetaine it, and so many monstrous whoremongers and adulterers amongst them
to practice it; and so they do both agere and docere: who knows not this
that has read any thing concerning the filthiness of both Popes and Priests in
the Church of Rome; Theodoricus of Niem will tell us, that in Norway and
Ireland it has been lawful for the Bishops and Priests to keep their
Concubines, and when twice a year they visited the Parrish Priests that were
under them, they were wont to carry their Concubines with them: yea, their
Concubines would not suffer them to visit without them Here was good doing,
this was good stuff, and singular holiness.

Vdulricus, B. of Auspurg, reports, that when a certain Pope sent to draw a
Pond for fishes, there were taken up and brought him above six thousand Infants
heads. Alvarius Pelagius complains that the Priests live incontinently, and
wishes they had never vowed continency, Alvarus Chartier, The ministers of
the Church, leaving the use of marriage, follow wandering, dissolute, and
unlawful lusts, Nunn Bridget, Priests and Deacons, keep whores, that with
their great bellies walk up and down with other women, and Pieus Mirandula,
to name no more, speaks as broadly and truly of them, The Priests once lay
with the women at the door of the Tabernacle, (alluding to the sin of Elies
sons) but in our time, they break into the sacred houses, and (Fie for
shame) women are to be brought in to satisfy their filthy lusts: and no
marvel then if it be not sin with such, that are such egregious and
shameless beasts.

What means their common Stues, and open bawdie houses allowed by the Pope,
and even under his nose: out of which sin he suckes no small advantage:
persuaded that dulcis oder lucri ex re qualibet: Gain is sweet howsoever it
comes in, as he said of the ill sent of Urine, yea the hire of an whore, and
the price of a dog, which were had in detestation, and held a thing abominable
to be brought into the house of God, must not miss his mouth, nor shall escape
his greasy chops: All that bring such greest, come welcome to his Mill, amici
curiae bed and bosom friends, though never so base or beastly to the Court of
Rome, and Chamber of the Pope. But leaving these like Swine to wallow in their
own mire, or like Boares and Beasts to satin in their own filthiness, let
us in a word or two, see how this Commination concerns our selves.

The use for us may be in a word, by the severitie of the punishment, to be
deterred from the filthiness of the offense against which it is threatened,
recollect but briefly the particulars already dispatched, and you shall soon
see reason sufficient to dissuade you from it; Is uncleanness a sin? come not
near; he that touches this sin must needs be defiled: he that comes too
near this fire, shall surely be scorched: Pro. 7. 27.
for the house of an whore is the way to hell going down to the chambers of
death. Again will God be avenged of it, if no body else will punish it? is it
that God from whom we cannot hide it? nor from whose power we can not be
delivered? will it light so terrible first or last, either in our souls or
bodies, goods, good name, or posterity? or in one of these? perhaps in all of
these? are we liable to such deadly strokes of Gods hand here, and in danger of
eternal torments in hell fire for ever, after all the plagues and judgments
either by God or men to be inflicted? shall neither 1 Cor. 6. 9.
Whoremongers nor Adulterers inherit the Kingdom of heaven? Revel. 26. 27.
shall no unclean thing enter into that new Jerusalem? shall dogs, and
sorcerers, and whoremongers be without? Revel. 22.
then let him that has an ear to hear, hear what the mouth of the Lord has
spoken. 1 Cor. 6. 18.
Flee fornication, Colo. 3. 5.
Mortify your members which are upon the earth, fornication, uncleanes, etc.
Ephe. 5. 3.
fornication and uncleanes, let it not be once named amongst you, etc. 1 Cor 6.
15.
know you not, that your bodies are the members of Christ? make them not the
members of an harlet. 1 Cor. 3. 17
For if any man defile the Temple of God, him will God destroy. Romans 12. 1.
I beseech you therefore brethren, by the mercies of God, that you present your
bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God; 1 These. 4. 3.
for this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that you should
abstain from fornication; and that every one should know how to possess his
vessel in sanctification and honor. And as those shall be sure with Psalms in
their mouths, and Palms in their hands, as conquerours, to follow the Revel.
14. 4.
Lamb wheresoever he goes, which have not defiled themselves with women, but
are virgins, so those that have given themselves over to fornication, in going
after strange flesh as Jude 7.
Jude speaks, shall suffer the vengeance of eternal fire: for whoremongers
and adulterers God will judge.

And now before we part, I must speak a word or two to you, not long, (and yet
too late) our unworthy neighbor, I must say to you as Judge. 3. 10.
Ehud said to Eglon, I have a message unto thee from God: but not with a Dagger
in my hand to kill you, but with good counsel from my heart to keep you that
you cast not away your self. The words of the wise, Eccle. 12. 11.
they are like goads and nails, not like Iaels nails to be driven into your
head; but like S. Peter's nails, to be fastened in the heart, and I pray God
they may have no worse success then his had, for they were pricked in their
hearts, and said Acts 3. 37.
men and brethren, what shall we do? Sorrowful and ashamed of the evil
past, and desirous how to learn to go and sin no more.

And while I shall perform this last work of charity to your soul, (which
God make profitable unto you as my soul desires) let me entreat this favor
from you, which Daniel desired of Dan. 4. 27.
Nebuchadnezzar, let my counsel be acceptable unto you, and suffer a word or
two of exhortation: Account me not your enemy because I tell you the truth,
hate me not because I have not used to prophecy good unto you, dealing
plainly, when I found you faulty, or (if you do) it shall be all one with me,
Ego liberabo animam meam, I will discharge my conscience, before God, and men,
and then your blood be upon your own head, you shall fall or stand to your
own master.

You have heard out of this text, the foulenes of the sin of fornication, and
how roundly and tartly God usually proceeds in the punishment of it; This
has been your sin; and this sin has brought you to this days shame; ut
poena ad paucos, timor ad omnes, God grant it may do you good, and that others
by your punishment may learn to be wise; How long you have loved and lived in
this sin, your own conscience can tell you best, by your own confession
since October, 1626. near three years, and that which is worst, to keep an
whore under your wives nose, too long, and too much, if you bethink you well,
if it had been less and never so little.

You have heard, that Whoremongers and adulterers, God will judge, if such a
thunderclap will not startell and awake you, I may justly fear you have slept
your last, and that you are not only dead, but with John 1^. 39
Lazarus stink in the grave.

Rowse up your self, Ephe 5. 14.
Awake thou that sleep and stand up from the dead, that Christ may give thee
light: I have heard of that public protestation that you made, where you
first did penance in that Honorable and Worshipful presence at Pauls-crosse,
of an ample and large restitution and satisfaction to such as you had wronged,
even to threefold: had you said more you had not promised too much, and had you
ever climed up on a tree to see Luke 19. 18
Christ, as Zacheus did, and with no worse heart then he, you would have
enlarged your tongue, whatsoever you would have done with your hands, and
promised to restore fourfold as he did.

But words will not carry it. Good trees are known by their fruits and not by
their leaves, and good Christians not by their words, but by their lives. I
will not wonder to see light ears of corn to prike and pear up themselves,
above all in the furrows or field, not to hear an empty caske to make the
greatest noise: I should think my self an happy man, if I might presume to
take you at your word, in the mean time, let me tell you what I think, that
the world or (wise men at the least) will never believe it, till they see it,
and till then, you shall show some wisdom to say less and do more, be not
verbal in your purposes and protestations, but real and royal in your
performances.

Let me tell you plain, what I think, and that is this, yt you have run your
self mightily in debt by this your sin, and unto diverse, which must be
discharged or you must lie by it a while, and die for it at the last. I speak
not of your purse or charge before your filthiness was found out, while you
lived closely in uncleanness; I have heard, then you were base and fordid
enough, perhaps so provident as to provide something against a rainy day: I
speak not of your expenses in Newgate, or other prisons whither you have been
most justly committed by Authority: I know you are not behind hand for paying
these scores, these you have cleared.

But some other Creditors have entered actions against you, and will be paid
before you can be discharged.

What do you think you owe to God, whom you have so highly dishonored in the
violation and transgression of that sacred and holy Law of his, peremptorily
forbidding the sin of uncleanness. Item to the world, I mean not by the
world, such as your self, such as love filthiness as well as your self: for I
know that birds of a feather will fly together, those that run with you to
the same excess of riot, will easily forgive you, and not stand with you, if
it were a greater matter then this: but I speak of those that profess
Religion in truth and sincerity; and so cannot but hate this sin wheresoever
they find it, here you have drawn blood, and that will bear an action, and
must be answered, you have wounded Religion, given just cause to the sons of
2 Samuel 12. 19.
Cham, to laugh at your nakedness, and as Nathan told David, by this deed, you
have given great occasion to the enemies of God to blaspheme. What satisfaction
can you ever make to that servant of yours, who by your base and beastly
fornication with her, came to a shameful and untimely death? Blessed had you
both been, if you had never seen each others faces, for had she never known
your face, nor you her body, you might perhaps (I say verily perhaps) have
proved a better husband then before, and she lived in time to have been a wife
for as good a man as your self: she lost her life; and living and dying helped
to save yours, I dispute not by what means, she was wrought and brought to
it: the Law was satisfied and I am contented.

What satisfaction can you make to God or the world, for the blood of that
sweet newborn babe, murdered and made away by her, by putting it alive, by
some secret conveyance into the house of office, (an office fit for a whore and
no mother) I do not say nor charge you to be privy to the putting of it into
the privy; I shall leave that to God and your own conscience, who (if you
were) will not go behind your back, when time shall serve to tell you of it;
I judge you not, you were acquitted from the Law of man, God grant you may come
off as fair with God, that he may never lay this sin unto your charge. Amen.

Last of all, what satisfaction can you make, to this place and parish where
you lived of late, and a little too long? What dishonor have you done us, in
bringing this disgrace, and casting this aspersion on us? What favors have you
had successively amongst us? How often have you been invited to our public
feastings? How usually called to our counsels and meetings? How preferred to
several places of offices with us? And after all this, to reward us thus; to
cast this filth in our faces, to leave this stink behind you is base
ingratitude: it must needs be a bad bird that thus defiles her own nest: we
can count you no better, you have used us so badly: we shall be willing to pray
for your well doing elsewhere, but not for your dwelling here, till you be a
little sweeter.

Shall I tell you in a word or two, how you may make all well? I would set you
this way, if I were worthy to be your guide. First begin with God, and make
your peace with him: as Elihu said to Job, so I can advise you no better, Job
22. 21.
Acquaint thy self with God and be at peace, thereby shall good come unto thee.

And there can be no peace to be had with God, but by hearty humiliation, and
sincere and sound repentance for former sins, and unfeigned resolution for
future holiness, Isay 57. 21.
Nulla pax impijs, There is no peace says God unto the wicked, what peace said
2 King 9. 22.
Iehu unto Ioram, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Iezabel, and her
witchcrafts are so many? Rebels must lay down their arms, if they look for
peace or pardon: The best means to obtain remission of sins from God is
man's submission for sins unto God: where God takes the one with the one hand,
he ever gives the other with the other.

Let it now I beseech you be your care to return speedily unto God, let this
days punishment beat you home to God, and like a sovereign medicine work
kindly with you, to purge your soul of your sins, for the health and
recovery of your soul, and when you go about this business, beware how you
slight and slubber it over: it must be no easy or ordinary repentance that
will serve the turn: your offense has been great, your humiliation must not
be less: Magna peccata magna egent misericordia: if you make not the plaster
as large as the sore, it will do you little good.

Cry therefore mightily unto God, and roar for the very disquietnesse of your
heart: Joel 2. 13.
Rent your heart, and not your garments, and turn to the Lord. with Psalm. 6. 6.
David make your bed to swim, and water your couch with your tears, with Ier.
9. 1.
Jeremy wish that your head were waters, and your eyes a fountain of tears,
that you might weep day and night for this sin: with Ier. 31. 19
Ephraim smite upon your thigh and he ashamed: and with Math. 26. 75
Peter go out and weep bitterly.

Eusebius in the 6. book of his Eccle: hist. cap. 8. reports of one that
having sworn falsely against Narcissus Bish: of Jerusalem, and seeing Gods
hand upon two other of his companions, for their perjury, wept so abundantly,
that according to his own imprecation, he lost both his eyes. I shall have
much a do, to persuade you to be so cruelly merciful to your own soul, as
to weep out but one eye: yet for your comfort let me tell you, that it is
more profitable, Math. 5. 29.
That one member should perish, and not the whole body should be cast into hell.

If you cannot mourn so much, yet do what you may; blessed shall you be if
you thus mourn, and that thus sowing in tears, you may reap in joy: God send
you such weather: a wet time here of sowing, and the Sunshine of
blessedness at the time of Harvest, when God shall wipe away all tears from
your eyes.

And for that satisfaction which will give all the world best content, it will
be when they see you prove an honest man: blind not the eyes of the world with
seeming holiness: Satan can, (to serve his own turn,) seem a Saint by
transforming himself into an Angel of light; Judas heard many a good Sermon
from his Masters mouth at Church, and had many a good admonition in private,
and yet miscarried: and so may any such, whose heart is not upright. James 1.
21.
Not the hearers, but the doers of the Law shall be justified.

To shut up all in a word, let me give you that holy counsel and gracious
admonition, which Simon Peter gave Acts 8. 22. 23.
Simon Magus, Repent of this your wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the
thought of your heart may be forgiven you; I will not add that which follows,
I hope you are not in the all of bitterness, nor in the bond of iniquity: God
never suffer you to come so near to hell. Turn over a new leaf, resolve to
practice our Saviors counsel, to one that (but changing the sex) was faulty
as you are, found and taken in Adultery, John 8.
Go and sin no more.

I have read of a certain Nun, that reading in a book she had, at the
bottom of the leaf, she found these words written, Bonum est omnia scire,
it is good to know all things, whereupon she resolved with her self, to know
what the carnal copulation of man and woman together might be: but turning
over the leaf, the next words were, sed non vti; but not to use it: whereupon
she presently changed her mind: So shall you do well to resolve to go from
hence, with a settled purpose to become a new man: as it is said of Genesis 9. 29.
Noah, that when he awakt from his wine, Graviter pius senex a crapula ad se
reversus, de peccato indoluit, as Pareus observes, the good old man awakt from
his wine, and was very sorrowful for his sin: and as it is said of Gen 38. 26
Judah concerning his uncleanness with Tamar: He knew her again no more: so
let your repentance testify to the world, a perfect detestation not of this
sin only, but an hearty reformation of all besides.

And as for me, let me promise and profess to you, and for you, as Samuel did
unto the people terrified with a terrible tempest of thunder, in the time of
harvest, desiring Samuels prayers, 1 Samuel 12. 23
Pray unto the Lord for thy servants, whom Samuel comforted thus, As for me,
God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you. I
will God willing do no less for you, I would to God with all mine heart, I
could do so well; And I hope I may promise as much for all here, whose
sorrowful faces be deawed with so many tears at this time, make me to
persuade my self they pity your shame, and pray to God for mercy to forgive
your sin: Even so, God of mercy hear and help, and let all here present
say, Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

