The Cheating Age: Or LEONARD of Lincolnes journey to LONDON to buy Wit.
To a pleasant new tune.


FRom old famous Lincoln that is seated so hye,
Well mounted and furnished, with gold did I fly,
To Londons famed City some wit for to buy,
Which cost me so dear, makes me sigh, sob, and cry.
For this is the cheating Age,
For this is the cheating Age.
Before I had entered Bishops wide gate,
The Mouth m^^e an offer as if it would pr^te:
But one scrapt acquaintance unto my hard fate,
And made me consume there most part of my state.
For this is the cheating Age, etc.
For after a neat comely French salutation,
His tongue he did order in such a scut fashion,
As I for to hear him amazed did stand,
But he in the Tavern me pulled by the hand.
For this is the cheating Age, etc.
When each one had tasted a cup two or three,
What knowledge of Country and kindred had we,
How bountiful Bacchus with us did agree,
That no'^e till this hour did each other see.
For this is the cheating Age, etc.
He asked my affairs? I made him reply:
And told him my coming was wit for to buy:
(^uoth he) I Will be^^iend you with that presently,
He vnlatcht a window that Westward did fly.
For this is the cheating age, etc.
Then straight a strange whistle he to the street sends,
Audaciously blown from his Thieves fingers ends,
The Drawer runs up, says, there is some of your friends
Has called for some wine, and your coming attends.
For this is the cheating Age, etc.
He cheard me, and told me, for them he had sent:
Should teach me wit gratis ere homeward I went:
But I never misdoubting, the Knavery he meant,
Have swallowed a bait which has made me repent.
For this is the cheating Age, etc.
Up straight comes a Roarer with long shaggy locks,
New broke out from Newgate, the Cage, or some Stocks
Or else from the Spittle, half cured of the Pox,
But I Will careful be, least he pepper my box.
For this is the cheating Age, etc.
This totterd grin? Rascal amazed me to hear,
The terrible oaths which for nothing he swear,
With that stamped his foot, and straightway did appear^
Such horrible faces that made me to fear.
For this is the cheating age, etc.
Up marches two creatures in torn totterd cases,
With long rustie Rapiers, swollen eyes, and patcht faces
As if that black Pluto from Limbo had sent,
These horrid grim visions to make us repent.
For this is the cheating age, etc.
The second part.
To the same tune.


MY former Companion straight rise from the board,
And courteous kind greeting to them did afford:
Saying, pray sir bid welcome my friends of the sword,
That gain credit by deeds sir, and not by their word:
For this is the cheating age, etc.
First having saluted, we sat down again,
And called for Tobacco, burnt Claret amain:
The Drawer officious to give us our bane,
With cups plyde us hard to put's out of our pain.
For this is the cheating age, etc.
These chimney-nos'd-Rascals did make such a smother,
I never saw the like since I came from my mother:
Such cloud of blew vapor from their nosthrils did come,
Had like for to choakt me, and fired the room.
For this is the cheating age, etc.
Then up comes a Poet with a Rooke at his tail,
That feeds all the Winter of Toasts drowned in Ale,
And in the Summer so sets to sale,
Inventions of others before, his time stale.
For this is the cheating age, etc.
Then straightway one calls to the barre-Boy for Dice,
Which wrapped in a paper, was brought in a trice,
Requesting to put off a little odd time,
They would play for no more then a pottle of Wine.
For this is the cheating age, etc.
I gave my consent, and with them did play,
From wine for dry money, till next break of day,
Where vexed at my losses, I set at one cast,
Full forty good pounds to be rid of my last.
For this is the cheating age, etc.
My money being set, the cast straight was thrown,
And he like the devil cride, All is mine own:
So every penny he from me did get,
And bad me to Lincoln go back by my wit.
For this is the cheating age, etc.
They having my money, did all steal away,
And left me with nothing, five pound for to pay:
But my cloak lined with velvet, and my rapier guilt gay,
Did make clean the score, and all charges defray,
For this is the cheating age, etc.
A Pox of all Cheaters, and grim roaring Boys:
All rooking base Pandars and nitty Decoyes:
And all that make practice to thrive by such fits,
The three cornerd nightcap once cocker their wits.
For this is the cheating age, etc.
Now Leonard of Lincoln with grief bids adieu:
My journey to London long time I shall rue:
I never in my life met with villains so vilde,
To send a man home like the Prodigal Child.
For this is the cheating age.
For this is the cheating age.
By William Cook.
Finis.
Printed at London by E. A. for John Wright.


