YET MORE WORK FOR A MASS PRIEST.

NVMBERS 25. 16, 17, 18, verse. The Lord spoke unto Moses, Vex the Midianites,
and smite them: for they trouble you with their wiles. LONDON, Printed by
WILLIAM JONES, and are to be sold by William Sheffard at his shop in Popes head
Ally. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL AND MY MVCH HONORED good friend Sir Tho. Sauyle,
son to the noble and worthy Patriot Sir John Sauyle of Houly in Yorkshire.
SIR,
THis Book has been printed and reprinted, yet without my name, though not
without the knowledge of many that it was mine, who now do father it. Its
reported there is an Answer made, or in making to it. Some tell me, they have
seen it in print: some tell me, it is but yet in writing. The truth is, I
hitherto can learn no certainty: but time will try the truth. Perhaps both
the reports are like that whereof I am certified by the Printer, viz. That the
Author of More work for a Mass Priest is turned Roman Catholic. A lie, as
shameless as that which is spread far and near of that worthy last Lord
Bishop of London his reconcilement to Rome. For discovering whereof, I have
added somewhat tending to the further shame of Popery, to the former
Impressions: which I make bold to dedicate unto you, as to the worthiest of my
friends, next unto the most reverend Father in God Tobias the Lord Archbishop
of York his Grace, and your noble father. To them, I owe my self, and more: to
you, I owe much for kindnesses already received, and live in hope to be further
indebted hereafter, even in respect of the care which, I doubt not, but you
will have of the common good of the whole country, and especially of the Parish
wherein I live. For I trust, that as in time you are to succeed your father in
fair and large possessions; so presently you will show your self to be his
son, in succeeding him in doing justice. Whereof you have given some proof
already, (though yet you have but lived a small time amongst us) gaining much
credit unto your self thereby, and putting the country in expectation of great
things, when it shall please God your private occasions will suffer you to
settle your self among us. Which I pray may be shortly. And so with
remembrance of my humble duty and service, I commend this little Pamphlet unto
you, and you to the gracious blessing of God, resting always

Your Worsh. at co^m. Alexander Cook.
Leeds in Yorkshire, April 4. 1622.
YET MORE WORK FOR A MASS PRIEST.
Our noble King reports, Premonition to all Christian Monarchs. page 33.
that his Mother sent word to the Archbishop who did baptize him, to forbear
to use spittle in his baptism: For she would not have a pockie Priest to spit
in her child's mouth. Your Cardinal Bellarmine answers, Apolog. pre Re^^. sua
ad lib. Iacobi magnae Britann^^ R^gis, cap. 7
Credibile non est eam caeremoniam a Catholica Regina fuisse prohibitam: It is
not credible that the Queen his Majesty's mother required him to forbear that
ceremony. And his only reason is this, Non est verum ea caeremonia saliuam
Presbiteri in os infantuli inspui: It is not true that the Priests spittle used
in baptism, is put into the child's mouth. Yet we read in Guido de monte
Rocherij, (...) Appar. sacer. verbo.
who lived 250 years ago, that Sacerdos mittit digitum in aures eius
[baptizandi] and ponit de sa^iua in ore eius: Guido.
and signat quod baptizandus debet habere aures aptas ad audiendum verba Dei
and documenta fid^i: Mani^ulus Cisrat^rum. cap. 8. de annexis baptismi. Imperss.
positio saliuae in ore signat, quod debet esse promptus adresponde^dum and
loquendum de fide, Iouanij. Anno 1485.
quia loquutio fit mediante saliua: The Priest puts his finger into the ears
of him who comes to be baptized, and spittle into his mouth: the putting of his
finger into the ears, signifies that the party to be baptized should have his
ears always open to hear the word of God; and the putting in of spittle into
his mouth, signifies, that he should speak roundly and readily of faith,
because spittle helps speech. Now good Sir Priest tell me, how your Cardinal
can be cleanly excused for calling in question the truth of so great a Kings
report, so well grounded, not only on the certainty of the fact, but also on
the authority of their good Master of Ceremonies for the thing de iure.

2 Again, ^^aemo^^tion, etc. supra citata page 111.
our noble King writes, That the title of Cardinal, Priests and Deacons, is
restrained only to the Parish Priests and Deacons of Rome. Apolog. supra
citata, cap. 4.
And your Cardinal Bellarmine answers, Non est verum nomen Cardinalis ademptum
alijs and solis Romany reseruatum: nam vsque ad hanc diem Ecclesia
Compostellana habet suos Cardinales: That is not true which our King writes,
for the Church at Compos^e la has her Cardinals to this day. Yet we read in
Mosconius Vicar general to the Archbishop of Bononia, De maistate liccles.
militantis, lib. 1 part. 1. c. 5 Impress. Venet.
that Pius 5. in suo diplomate, Anno 1568. penitus hoc nomen in omnibus alijs
Ecclesiis praeter quam in Romana extinxit, and solummodo Cardinalis nomin Anno
1602.
competere voluit Cardinalibus S. R. P. a Papa creatis: Pius 5. by his Bull
bearing date 1568. cried down the name Cardinal in all other Churches but in
Rome; decreeing that such only as are created by the Pope Cardinals of the
Church of Rome, shall be called Cardinals. And does not this argue your
Cardinal an audacious Prelat, who seeks to outface at once two of his
betters, a learned King in his own book, and a late Pope in his own Bull?

3 Cardinal Bellarmine affirms, Prafat. incout. 7.
Nefas apud eos [Protestantes] quenquam creart Episcopum nisi vnius saltem
vxoris virum: The Protestants hold it an heinous offense to make any man a
Bishop, who is not at least the husband of one wife. Yea, he affirms, that
Nulli apud eos [Protestantes] continent: Lib 2. de Monach. cap. 9.
No man (neither of the Clergy, nor of the Laity) among Protestants lives
continently, that is, according to his meaning, unmarried. Yet to omit the
single life of many Laiks, As Grind^ll, Whitgist, Bancroft, and now B. Abbot,
all Archbishops, with above 20 other Bishops unmarried.
it is well known that the more part of our Bishops since the reformed times,
were and are unmarried men. Deserves not your Cardinal, for these Cardinal
lies, to be rewarded with a whetstone?

4 You all affirm, That all the Apostles were continent from their wives after
they followed Christ, and we deny it. Now thus I argue for us, and against
you: Saint Peter begat of his wife, after he followed Christ, a daughter called
Petronilla. Ergo all the Apostles were not continent from their wives, after
they followed Christ. The Antecedent of which Argument, Alfonsus V^llegas in
the life of Petronilla, May 31 translated out of Span in into English, and
printed 1610.
is proved thus: Saint Peter had a daughter called Petronilla, borne in lawful
matrimony, who was so fair and beautiful, that Count Flaccus a man of great
account in Rome, and of an high lineage, doted on her, Anno Christi 98. which
was about 68 years after Peter began to follow Christ. For he began to follow
Christ An. 30. Ergo S. Peter had a daughter called Petronilla, begotten by him
of his wife after he followed Christ. The consequence of which Argument is
proved thus: Petronilla in the 98 year of Christ, could not be so fair and
beautiful, that a man of honor and worth could dote on her, unless she was
begotten by her father of his wife after his Apostleship. For in that year,
viz. 98. if she had been begotten by her father before his Apostleship, she had
been 68. years old, past fairness, past beauty. Ergo Saint Peter had a
daughter called Petronilla begotten of his wife after he followed Christ.
Answer Priest, and deny not the Legends of thy Church, and I will burn all my
books but my Bible.

5 You all affirm, Rhem Annot. in Tit. 1. 6.
That if the studious Reader peruse all antiquity, he shall find all notable
Bishops and Priests of Gods Church to have been single, or continent from their
wives, if any were married before they came to the Clergy. And we deny it. Now
thus I argue for us, and against you, in this. If by antiquity it appear,
that some notable Bishop had two sons by his wife; to the elder of which he
spoke thus a little before his death: (...), Nazianz Carm. de rita sua. Edit
Paris. in. 1611.

(...):
Nondum tot anni sunt tui, quot iam in sacris
Mihi sunt peracti victimis, etc.
The years of thine age are not so many as the years of my Priesthood, etc.
Then the studious Reader perusing antiquity, may find, that all notable
Bishops lived not continent from their wives, whom they had married before they
came to the Clergy. For how could a notable Bishop have the elder of his two
sons by his wife, of fewer years then he had bin in Priesthood, unless he
begat him and his younger brother after he was in the Clergy? But the
Antecedent is true. Ergo the consequent. That the Antecedent is true, is proved
by this, That in antiquity we find Gregory Nazianzen and Caesarius were
brethren, sons of one Gregory, a notable Bishop, by his wife Nonna; and that
Gregory Nazianzen was the elder, to whom his father Gregory said as is
abouesaid.

6 You have set us out at diverse times, Indice^ li^^ probibitorum.
diverse Indices of forbidden books, of which I have seen three. One made by
the Inquisitors of Rome, and printed Anno 1559. by the commandment of Paul 4.
Another, made by the Deputies of the Council of Trent, and printed Anno 1564.
by the commandment of Pius 4. A third, enlarged by Sixtus quintus, and
reuiewed and printed an. 1594. by the commandment of Clemens the 8. In the
first of these Editions, I found forbidden, L^^era l.
Abdicis de vitis 12. Apost. Ibid.
Itinerarium Petri per Clement^m. ^it. O.
Opus imperfectum in Matheum. ^it. ^.
Nicolas Cabasila. ^it. ^.
Almaricus, ^it. ^.
Gulieimus de sancto Amore, (...)
Iacobus Alman contra Thomam de Vio, by whom is meant Cardinal Caietan; and
(...).
Ioh. Casae poemata. But I can not find any of them either in the second or
third Editions. Again, in the first Edition of these Indices, I found
Desiderius Tit. ^.
Erasmus Roteradamus placed in the rank of writers, quorum libri and scripta
omnia prohibentur, whose books and writings (of what argument soever, Religion
or humanity) are absolutely forbidden. And I found in the same rank
forbidden, Litera N.
Nilus Thessalonicensis, Ibid.
Nicolaus Clemangis, ^it. ^.
Beatus Rhenanus, and ^it. V.
Vearicus Zaesius. Yet in the two latter Editions of the Indices, I found all
these removed out of the first rank into the second, which are not so severely
censured as those in the first. And in the last of Clemens 8. I found a Lit. B.
Append.
Catechism of Charanza Archbishop of Toledo forbidden, which was History of
the Council of Trent. lib. 8. page 750.
approved by the Deputies of the Council at Trent, upon perusal and relation
made, that nothing worthy of censure was found in it. Now I desire to know the
reason of all this shuffling; why Abdias, Itinerarum Petri, Opus imperfectum,
Cabasila, Almaricus, Gulielmus de S. Amere, Alman against Caietan, and Casae
poemata, which were forbidden in the first Edition, are left out in the later
Editions; seeing the leaving of them out argues allowance of them. And, upon
what consideration all Erasmus works were forbidden, seeing Versio noui Testam.
some of them were approved by the Bull of Leo 10? Prafix, versioni noui Test.
per ^rasm.
and why Nilus, Clemangis, Rhenanus, Zasius and Erasmus were removed out of a
worse rank into a better; seeing that argues great diversity of judgment in
Popes. And by what authority Charansaes Catechismes is forbidden, which was
approved by the Council of Trent? I hope your later Popes will not disanull
what the Council of Trent established: Ioh. Casae Arch. Beneuent. in tota
venetoru^ ditiene Pauli Papae Legaius. etc. Vergerius annot. in Indicem Romans
impress. 1599.
and I hope they dare not justify the books cried down by Paulus quartus,
especially Iohannis Casae poemata, which were written in commendation of the
sin of Sodom, though the writer was Archbishop of Beneuentum, and the Popes
Legate throughout the whole estate of Venice; nor yet Abdias, whose lives of the
Apostles, fabulis similiores sunt, quam verae narrationi, are more like to
tales of Robin Hood, then to truth, in De script. Eccl siasticis verbo Abd^as
Babilonius.
Bellarmines opinion.

7 As you have set us out diverse Indices of forbidden books; so you have set
us out diverse In lices libroiu^ expurgandorum.
Indices of books which stand need of purgations, and must be purged before
they can be used: of which I have seen four: the Belgic, published by Anno
1586. after the original thereof printed by Pla^tin, an 1571.
Iunius: the Spanish, by Anno 1584. at Mudil in Spain.
Quiroga: the Neapolitan, by Anno. 1588. at Venice.
Gregory Capuccinus: the Roman, by Anno 1607. at Rome.
Fr. Joan. Maria, Master of the Popes Palace. In one or two of these purgatory
Indices, order is taken that these and such like propositions shall be razed
out of the Indices and margents of S. Austin, S. Ierom, S. Hilarie, S.
Chrysostom, and S. Epiphanius, viz. Ex quibusdam In dcibus Trobemani^ in opera
Ang. delen le su. 1 subiecta p^^positiones Qu ^oga. lib. citat. fol b. Index
P^^gic^^ fol. 8. (...).
Eucharistiam non esse sacri cium, sed sacrifi ij memoriam: The Eucharist is
not a sacrifice, but a commemoration of a sacrifice. Fides sola iustificat
Faith only iustifies. Imaginum vsus prohibitus: The use of Images is
forbidden. Machabaeorum liber Apocryphus: The book of Machabees is
Apocryphal. Matrimonium omnibus concessum qui continere non volunt: Mar^age is
free for all who will not live unmarried Peccata venalia damnant: Venial sins
are damnable. Sanctorum inuocationem praeuenit Johannes: Saint John prevented
invocation of Saints. Ex Indic bus in opera (...). ad (...) subiecta
pro^^sitiones Qu^roga. fol. 100.
Adorare statuas vel imagi^es, cultores Dei non debent: Religious persons
should not adore statues or images. Fides sola iustificat: Faith only
iustifies. Opera non iustificant: Works do not justify. Opera si
iustificant, Christus gratis mortuus est: If works justify, Christ died
causlesly. Apostoli omnes aequales: All the Apostles were equals. Opera omnia
commixta sunt aliquo errore: Our best actions have some want. Oration pro viuis
valet, non pro mortuis: Prayer profits living men, not dead men. In In^ice
H^larij delcuntur sequentia, Quiroga, fol. 110.
Alienis meritis and operibus nemo iuuatur: No man is the better for other men's
merits and works. Meritum hominis nullum: Man has no merits. Non ex meritis
salus: Salvation comes not of merit. Ex Indice in Chrysollomum delend^ subictae
propesitiones. Quiroga, fol. 138.
Apostolorum doctrina facilis, Scripturae diuinae omnibus volentibus peruiae
and faciles: The holy Scriptures are plain and easy for every man. Confitenda
Deo peccata, non homini: Confession is to be made to God, and not to man. A Deo
solo omnia petenda: We must pray for all things to God only. Ecclesia non
super hominem, sed super fidem ae dificata: The Church is built not on Peter,
but on Peter's faith. Fide sola iustificari: Faith only iustifies. Coram
Imaginibus procumbere, quanta stupiditas: It is a great foolerie to kneel
before Images. Iustus ne in operibus confidat, quantumcunque bonis: Let not a
good man trust in his goodness, be he never so good. Mandatis Dei addere,
diaboli est consuetudo: It is the devils practice to add unto Gods
commandments. Martyrs colere pseudo Christianos: False Christians worship
Martyrs. Prophetas omnes vxores habuisse: All the Prophets had wives. Punire
pios post mortem impossible: It is impossible that godly men after their death
should go to Purgatory. Sacerdotes etiam Principibus iure diuino subditi:
Bishops are subject to Princes by Gods law. Sine Scriptura diuina nihil
asserendum: Nothing is to be taught without warrant of holy Scripture.
Scripturarum lectio omnibus necessaria: It is necessary all men should read
the Scripture. Scripturas legere, omnibus, etiam mundanis, praeceptum: Every
man, even lay men, are bound by commandment to read the Scriptures. Ex
annot^^. in Epiphan. del antur sequentia, Quiroga fol. 66
Creaturam non adorari: Creatures are not to be worshipped. Mortuis viuorum
praeces non prodesse: The prayers of the living do not help the dead. See
Quiroga, fol. 7. and Ind. impress. Romae 1607. fol. 47. but especially
Capuceinum fol. 167.
Imagines damnatae: Images are condemned. Sancti non adorandi: Saints are not
to be adored. Yea, in these Indices, order is taken, that these and such like
propositions shall be razed out of the Indices and margents of certain Bibles:
viz. Leuit. 21. 5.
Sacerdos non radat barbam: Let not a Priest shave his beard. 21. 13.
Sacerdos virginem ducat vxorem: Let a Priest marry a virgin. 25. 18.
Praecepta Dei custodienda: Gods precepts are to be kept. Exodus 20. 4.
Sculptilia prohibet fieri: He forbids the making of graven things. Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
Verbo Dei nihil addendum aut detrahendum: Nothing is to be added or detracted
from Gods word. 1. Cor. 10. 14
Idolatria fugienda: Idolatry is to be avoided. 1. Sam. 7. 3. and M^th. 4. 10.
Illi soli seruiendum: Him only shall thou serve. Deu. 12. 8 32
Faciendum quod Deus praecepit, non quod nobis rectum videtur: We must do what
God commands us, and not what seems good in our own eyes. Psalm. 27. 1. and 61.
3.
Salus and spes nostra Deus: God is our salvation and our hope. Psalm 62. 8.
In Deo spes ponenda: Our trust is to be reposed in God. Psalm. 96. 9.
Adorandus Deus: God is to be worshipped. Psa. 119. 18
Optat doceri a Deo: He wishes that he might be taught of God. Rom 3 4.
Omnis homo mendax: Every man is a liar. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Christus iustitia nostra: Christ is our righteousness. Exodus 15. 2
Deus fortitudo nostra: God is our strength. Eccles 7. 22
Omnes peccatores: All men are sinners. Acts 17. 24
Non in manufactis templis habitat Deus: God dwells not in temples made with
hands. Iet. 17.
Maledicti confidentes in homine: Cursed are they who put their trust in men.
Habak. 2.
Iustus ex fide viuit: The just man lives by faith. Mat. 23. 10
Doctor Ecclesiae Christus: Christ is the master of his Church. Math. 17. 5.
Christus dilectus audienaus: Christ the Well-beloved is to be heard. Mat. 19. 17.
Mandata Dei obseruanda: The commandments of God are to be kept. Luke 8. 48.
Fides saluat: Faith saues. Act. 20. 34. and 1. Cor. 4. 12
Laborat manibus Paulus: Paul wrought with his own hands. 1. Tim. 1. 9.
Lex non iusto, sed impio, data est: The law is not given to the righteous man,
but to the ungodly. Deuteronomy. 16. 19
Respectus personarum non habendus: There ought no respect of persons to be
had. Heb. 9.
Christus pro nobis mortuus: Christ died for us. Apoc. 19. 10 and 22 9.
Angelus non vult adorari: The Angel would not be adored. Ioh. 11. 26.
Credens Christ, non morietur in aeternum: He that believes in Christ, shall
never die. Act. 15. 9.
Fide purificantur corda: Hearts are purified by faith. Ephesians. 2. 8.
Gratia Christi saluamur: We are saved by the grace of Christ. Romans 11. 6.
Gratia Christi saluamur, non operibus, alioquin gratia non est gratia: We are
saved by the grace of Christ, and not by works, else grace were no grace. Math.
15. 9
Hominum mandata docens, frustra Deum colit: In vain they worship God, who
teach for doctrine men's precepts. 1. Cor. 7. 1. 2
Homini bonum mulierem non tangere; propter fornicationem tamen habeat vnus
quisque vxorem suam: It is good for a man not to touch a woman; but for
avoiding of fornication, let every man have his own wife. 2. Sam. 22. 7
In infirmitatibus inuocantibus Deum salus: There is help for them who pray to
God in the time of trouble. 2. The. 3. 10
Qui non laborat, non manducet: He that will not labor, let him not eat. 1.
Co. 10. 25
Manducet Christianus quicquid vendi solet in macello: Let a Christian eat
whatsoever comes into the shambles to be sold. Romans 9. 13.
Miseranti Deo tribuenda salus: Our salvation is to be ascribed unto Gods
mercy. Phil. 2. 13.
Operatur in nobis Deus and velle and perficere: God works in us both the will
and the dead. Prou. 16. 6.
Misericordia purgantur peccata: By mercy iniquities are forgiven. Ioh, 14. 13.
Petentes in nomine Christi obtinemus: We obtain what we ask in Christ's name.
Heb. 1. 3.
Purgatio peccatorum nostrorum facta per Christum: The purging of our sins is
wrought by Christ. Though these be in sense and meaning in the current of the
text it self, and most of them formally, even in so many words, (as appears
by the marginall quotations) yet by commandment of your Church, they are to be
blotted out of the Indices, and Margents of such Bibles as you allow men to
keep. Now I desire to know, what greater harm these propositions set down in
the Margent and Indices of your Bibles are like to work, then the same which
are read in the current of the Text? And why, if you fear any danger by them,
you purge not the Text from them, as well as the Margent and the Indices? And I
desire to be satisfied in like manner, what greater mischief might happen by
suffering the propositions found in the Indices and Margents of the Fathers,
then by the matter in the current of the Text, whereunto they have reference?
And why, if any mischief be feared, the Text of the Fathers is not purged, as
well as the Margents and Indices?

8 There was printed at Bononia in Italy, An. 1590. a book entitled, Liber
conformitatum vitae B. ac Seraphiti patris Francisci, written by one
Bartholomew Pisanus, and published by one Jeremy Bucchius, of which book it is
affirmed in the Title page, that it is liber aureus, a golden book. In this
golden book so lately set out, I read, that Copia literae a Pisan^ gratiali
Capitulo directae. ad mitrum lib. Conformitat.
Christus ipsum patrem Franciscum sibi per omnia s^milem reddidit and
conformem: Christ made Friar Francis like and conformable to himself in all
respects: and that Lib. 3. Conformitate 31. fol. 303. ecl. 3. and fol. 306.
col. 4.
in monte Aluernae Franciscus cum Deo and Domino Jesus Christo vnius spiritus
efficitur: In the mount of Aluerna, Friar Francis was made one spirit with God
the Father and his Son Christ Jesus. And, that Friar Francis said the words
of Christ, Math. 25. 40.
Quod vni ex minoribus meis fecistis, mihi fecistis, Lib. 1. fruct. 1. fol. 13.
col. 3.
That which you have done to one of these my little ones, you have done it unto
me; were spoken by Christ ad literam.
literally, and specialiter.
particularly of his Friar Minorites. And that Lib. 3. conformitate 3 ^ fol.
300. col. 3.
B. Franciscus titulatus fuit titulo Jesus Nazarenus Rex Iudaeorum: Friar
Francis had the title of Jesus of Nazareth king of the Jews given him. And
that Lib. 1. fruct. 1. fol. 13. col. 2.
Nemo fuit minister and seruus Christi vt Franciscus, and ipsius perfectus
imitator: Christ had never such a servant as Friar Francis; there was never any
man who imitated Christ in so perfect manner as Friar Francis. Lib. 1. fruct.
9. fol. 112. col. 4.
Similis B. Francisco and suo Ordini non est inuentus, qui seruauit ad literam
legem excelsi: There was never such a peson heard of as S. Francis and his
Order, who kept Gods law literally. Lib. 2 conformit. 17. fol. 228. col. 1. and
conformit 25. fol. 272. col. 2.
B. Franciscus totum Euangelium ad literam obseruauit: Saint Francis kept the
Gospel literally. Nec apicem vel vnicum transgreditur, nec iota: He brake not a
tittle of it, nor a iod. These fooleries and blasphemies are in that book, and
no dele set upon them. Yea though it was wont to be held an heresy to say,
Director. Inquisit. part. 2. q. 8. test Capuccino in Enchirid. Eccles. fol.
236.
Quod B. Franciscus est ille Angelus, de quo dicitur in Apocalypsi, Vidi
alterum Angelum habentem signum Dei viui; That S. Francis was that Angel, of
whom it is written in the Revelation, I saw another Angel which had the seal
of the living God: yet so much is written in this book in these words, Lib. 3.
conformit. 31 fol. 300. col. 4. ei fol. 301. col. 1.
Quod prophetia Apoc. 7. fuerit ad literam de B. Francisco, diuinitus Domino
Bonauentura Cardinali fuit, ostensum; and no dele set upon them. Though it was
wont to be held an heresy, at least an error, to say, Capuccinus lib. citato.
Quod B. Franciscus semel in anno descendit ad Purgatorium, and extraxit inde
animas illorum qui in hac vita, fuerunt de Ordine suo, seu de Ordinibus per eum
institutis, and ducit ad Paradisum: That S. Francis went once a year down to
Purgatory, and brought thence all the souls of them which in this world were
of his Order, or any other Order instituted by him, and carried them to heaven
with him: yet so much is written in this book, in these words, wherein Christ
is brought in speaking to Friar Francis thus: Lib. 3. ^conformit. 31. fol 306.
col. 2.
Sicut ego in die obitus mei ad Limbum accessi, and meritis ac virtute
stigmatum passionis meae, omnes animas quas inuen^ extraxi; sic volo quod and
tu, vt sis mihi conformis in morte, sicut es in vita, in die Natalitij tui
vadas quolibet anno ad Purgatorium, and omnes animas trium Ordinum, scilicet,
Minorum, sororum S. Clarae, and Continentium 3 Ordinis quos ibidem inueneris,
in virtute and efficacia tuorum stigmatum eruas, and ad gloriam Paradisi
perd^cas; and no dele set upon them. Though it was wont to be held an heresy
to say, Capuc lib. cit.
Quod nullus potest damnari qui deferat habitum B. Francisci: No man could be
damned who ware the habit of Saint Francis: yet it is written in this book,
that Christ revealed it to Friar Francis, Lib. 1. fruct. 9. fol. 130. col. 4.
Quod nullus qui moreretur in habitu esset damnatus; and no dele is set upon
it. Though it was wont to be held an error, Capuc. lib. cit.
Quod Ordo B. Francisci in perpetuum durabit; Though Saint Francis Order should
continue till doomes day: yet Agnoscente Sedulio lib. 2. Apolog. pro S. Franc.
cap. 10 page 114
that is in this book, and no dele set upon it.

In other of your books we read, that the virgin Mary promised a young man
marriage, saying, Casarius dial. 7 de S. Maria, cap. 33. Discip. de mirac. B.
Virg. Exempl. 27.
Ego ero vxor tua, accede ad me, and da mihi osculum, and coegit eum: I will be
thy wife, come and kiss me; and she conpelled him to kiss her. And
afterward, when the youth was ready to take horse, she held his stirrup, and
bad him get up. We read, Caesar. dial. cit. cap. 51. Discip. lib. cit. Exem.
59.
that she came to another youth, who served her very deuo^t^y, Collumque
brachijs suis stringens dedit illi osculum, and halsing him about the neck
kissed him. We Caesar. dial citat cap. 35. Discip. lib. eit. Exem. 25.
read, that she in an Oratory supplied personally the place of one Betris an
arrant whore, by the space of fifteen years together, whilst Betris the
whore came up and down after a wh^remaister Priest, so that no body knew in
all that time that Betris was missing. We Vincent. Spec. hist. lib. 7. cap. 86
Discip lib. citato. Exempl. 24.
read, that to save the credit of an Abbess who was with child, she came unto
her with two Angels attending her, commanding the Angels to play the Midwiues;
and to carry the child in her name to a certain Heremite, willing him to keep
it for her till it was seven years old. We See Fox Acts and Monum. iu Edw. 4.
ad Ann. 1484 page 667. Edit. 1610.
read, that she came to the Cell of one Alanus, and was so familiar with him,
that she not only espoused him to her husband, but also kissed him, and opened
to him her paps, and powered great plenty of her own milk into his mouth. We
In the life of S. Catharin, written in Italian by D Caterinus Se^cnsts, and
translated into English by John Fen priest. printed Anno 1609 part. 2. cap. 16.
read, that S. Katherin entreated Christ to take away her heart, and to give
her a new heart: and that one day Christ came and opened her side sensibly with
his hand, and took out her heart, and so went his way, leaving her indeed
without an heart; and that she notwithstanding being in prayer, lift up her
heart to God in prayer: and that as she was going homeward, Christ met her with
a heart in his hand, who opening her side, and putting the heart he had in his
hand into her body, said these words, Lo dear daughter, as I did the other
day take away thy heart, so do I now in stead of it give thee my heart; and so
closing up the wound which was made in her body, went his way. We Gold. Legend
in the life of S. Duastan.
read that S. Dunstan took the Devil by the nose with a pair of tongs of
iron burning hot; or English Martyrolog. Sept 7. printed Anno 1608.
with a pair of pinsers by the upper lip, and held him fast. We Antonin, hist.
part. 3. tit. 23. cap. 4. sect. 6. seu Canus loc com. lib. 11. cap. 6.
read that S. Dominick caused the Devil to hold him a candle so long, till
the devil burnt his fingers, and fell on roaring. We Discip ser. 110 de
Tempore. S.
read, that the Devils for fear of holy water, ran so fast out of a sick
man's chamber, that alter in alterum impingebat, one of them crowded another,
and trod of their fellows heels for haste. We Discip. in Prom ptuar. Exempl.
lit E^exempl. 16, and Tractat de h^rit Canon. cap. 25.
read, that S. Brice saw the Devil get a good knock on his pate by the wall
which was behind him, whilst for want of paper to write the Friars faults in,
he labored to stretch out a paper with his teeth, as shoo-makers do their over
leathers: for the paper rending, the Devils head (ere the Devil was aware)
flew backward and hit upon the wall. We Petr. de Natal. in Catal sanct. lib. 6.
cap. 120.
read, that S. Margret caught the Devil by the hair, and cast him to the
ground under feet, and that she set her right foot upon his neck, and kept
him there as long as she thought good. We Idem lib. 3. cap. 131.
read, that S. Iuliana caught hold of the ^i^e^, and bound his hands behind
him, and whipped him with the chain that was about him, and draggd him after her
along a street, making him a laughing stock to all the boys in the town, and
at last cast him into a iakes. We Id. lib. 8. c. 70.
read, that one S. Niceta served the Devil much after the like manner, tying
him up in a dunghill. And Id lib. S. ca. 20. and Gold^n Legend in the life of
Lupe or Low.
that one S. Lupus shut up the devil so close in a basen of water, that the
devil howled and brayed, but could not get out, till S. Lupus let him out. And
Discip. de mirac B. Virg. Exe^p. 58
that S. Peter did drive away the devils with a great Key he had in his hand.
We Gabr. de Barale^e si^ia S. Hebd 6. An diuites possint saluars.
read, that S. Zeno following a woman with a train gown, saw many devils
lying and sleeping on the skirts of her gown: and that as she was passing over
a dirtie channel, upon holding up of her skirts for fear of miring, the
devils fell into the filthy channel; whereat other devils, who followed on
foot, and S. Zeno, laughed heartily. We read in your books, Golden Lege^d in
the life of S. Blase, and Leonard de Vtino, ser. 64. de S. Catharins. Sexto.
that God promised S. Blase, whosoever desired his help for the infirmity of
the throat, should be healed. And Golden Legend in the life of S. Roche.
that God promised S. Roche, whosoever prayed in the name of Jesus to him,
should be preserved from the pestilence. And Leonard de Vtino loco citato. Pet.
de Natal. lib. 6. cap. 120.
that God promised S. Margaret, whatsoever woman with child prayed to her in
time of her travel, should have safe deliverance. And Pet. de Natal. lib. 10.
cap. 111.
that God promised S. Leonard, whosoever in prison desired his help, should be
set at liberty. And Antonu^ hist. part. 1. tit. 8. cap. 1. sect. 38. Pet. in
Catal. lib. 10. cap. 105.
that God promised S. Katharin, whosoever called upon her in any necessity, he
should be heard. And that he promised as much to those who called upon Pet. in
Catal. lib. 5. cap. 137.
the 10000 Martyrs, upon Idem lib. 5. cap. 106.
Onuphrius the Heremite, upon Engl. Festival printed 1521.
S. Erasmus, upon Pet. in Catal. lib. 10. cap. 60.
S. Venerandus, upon Idem lib. 10. cap. 61.
S. Veneranda, upon Idem lib. 4. cap. 81.
S George, upon Horae B. Virg. ad vsum Sarum fol. 77.
S. Christopher, upon Legend. Lat. in vita Cadoci.
S. Cadoc, upon Gold Legend in her life.
S. Martha, upon Pet. in Catal. lib. 8. cap. 70.
Niceta, upon Portiforium ad vsum, Sarum, Oct^b. 9.
S. Denis, etc. We read in your books, that Engl Festival in the life of S
Mathias.
Judas the traitor slew his father, and lay with his mother; and because the
fiends might not draw out his soul by his mouth, which had lately kissed
Christ's mouth, his belly burst, and then the fiends took his soul and carried
it to Hell. We Gold. Legend in the life of S. Prandon. and Pet in Catal. (...).
cap 117.
read, that this Judas has certain play days, in which he comes not in
Hell; as namely every Ladies day, and every Saturday afternoon til Euensong be
done on Sunday. And Ibid
that some of the Angels which stood not in the truth, were never adjudged to
hell, but to sit as birds in a tree, and to sing Mattens and Euensong, and all
such service as Christen men use to sing. We read, Pet. in Catal. lib. 1. cap.
25.
that S. Barbara baptized her self in a well of water; and that flying from
her fathers fury, she had passage made her by God through a great rock, which
opening it self, received her in the foreside, and let her out on the further
side: and that a Shepherd who discovered this Barbara unto her father who
pursued to kill her, was turned into a stone, and his flock of sheep either
into stones or into Locusts. We read, Golden Lege^d in his life.
that S. Patrick caused a stolen sheep to bleate in his belly who had stolen
and eaten it: and that he prevailed so far with God, that no Irish man should
abide the coming of Antichrist. We read, Discip. de mirat. B. Virg. Exempl. 57.
that a Soldier who had no other good property, but that he said one Auc Mary
in the morning and another at night, was saved by the means of the virgin
Mary. We read, Gold. Legend in his life.
that S. Macarius is commended for that he repented six months for killing of
a flea. English Festival, de S. Tho. E^isc. p. Cant.
That Thomas of Canterbury is commended for wearing louzie breeches. That S.
Francis is commended Antonia hist. part. 3. tu. 24. cap. 2. sect. 8.
for gathering worms out of the way, that they should not be trodden on: and
Pisan. conform lib. 1. fruct. 10. fol. 140. col. 1. lib 2. confor. 13. fol.
191. col 4.
for calling all manner of beasts, wolves, Asses, etc. his brethren: and V^at
Canum los. com. lib. 11. cap. 6.
for taking lice of beggars, and putting them on himself. We read, Engl.
Martyrolog. ^nuar. 16.
that S Henry of Denmark is commended for that when little worms crept out of
an Ulcer in his knee, he took and put them in again, saying, Go into your
inheritance where you have bin nourished. And S^dul. lib. 3. Apologet. pro S.
Franc. cap. 2. (...). 2. p. 132.
that Friar Ruffin was commended for wishing that he might stink on his
deathbed, and be cast out without burial, that the dogs might eat him. These,
and ten thousand such tales as these, which are partly ridiculous, partly
blasphemous, many of them (in your own opinions) false, are read in your
Martyrologies, Legends, Service books, etc. Now that which I desire to know,
is, why you have not Indices to purge your Martyrologies, your Legends, your
Festiuals, your Vincentius, your Antonius, your Caesarius, your Discipulus,
your Peter's Catalogus Sanctorum, and such like, from these ridiculous
fooleries, and blasphemies, and falsities, as well as you have to purge Bibles
and other good writers, from much good matter contained in them?

9 You Campian Rat. 5
brag much of the Fathers, as though they were all as wholly on your side, as
any of your later Popes: and you inuey much against us, as contemners of the
Fathers. You would make the world believe, that Douly in his Instruction of
Christ. Relig. Chap. 8.
we despise all the Churches Doctors, and ancient Fathers; that Hills Quartern
of Reasons Reason 10
we make no more account of the Fathers, longer then we can wrest them to
serve our turn, then we do of Beuis of Hampton or Adam Bell That Seba ^.
Plaskius (...) Cathol. (...) ^
we make indeed no more account of the holy Fathers, then we do of the Turks
Alcoran or Esops Fables. That B^^^ow Mo^^^ (...)
it is well known to such as hear our Sermons, or be in place to hear v^
talk boldly and familiarly together among our selves, we are not afraid
plainly to confess, that the Fathers all were Papists, That Answ to M. (...)
pref^ce page 30.
though the ancient Fathers referred all their controversies to the trial of
old Doctors which lived before the controversies began, Ibid. page 23.
and that you are willing to do the same; yet Ibid page ^0.
me do fly the means of trial. Bis^op. in ^is 2d. part (...) title or
Repe^t^nce, page 214.
We in no one point will be tried by the judgment and consent of antiquity.
But mark (Sir Priest) what ^ say. I am of (...)
Scultetus mind, That that great light of Cambridge D. Whitakers spoke nothing
but the truth, when in his answer to Campian he avouched, Patres in maximis
iudicijs toti sunt nostri, in leuioribus v^rij, in minutissimis vestri: The
Fathers in the main controversies are wholly ours; in the lesser, some ours,
some yours; in some trifles yours. Yea I am of the same mind with that other
great light of Oxford D. Rainolds, who in his Cap. 8. sect. 6. in fine.
Conference with your Heart, solemnly protested, that in his opinion, Not one of
all the Fathers was a Papist. And if you dare put your self on the ancient
Fathers (which you may not do by your book learning, for it is the present
Church, that is, your present Pope, and not the ancient Fathers, who by your
book learning is the sole Judge of all controversies;) but if you dare put
your self on the ancient Fathers to be tried by them, for the discovering of
your vanity in bragging; and clearing of us from your unjust calumniations, I
will name you thirty several points of doctrine, taught by you, denied by us,
for proof of which, I am very confident, you are not able to name one Father,
no not one Father, who lived within a 1000 years after Christ. And the
doctrinall points I mean are these. Latria may be given to Images. reason be
called the Lords Supper. Pope is to be appropriate to the Bishop of Rome only.
fundata est a solo Domino, was founded by Christ only. the Heathen. discutere
de fide, determine a point of faith, but your Pope.

10. You brag much of the unity that is among you. You would make the world
believe, that ^ellar. lib. 4. de N^tis Eccles. cap. 10.
Nunc omnes Catholici toto orb dispersi de omnibus dogmatibus fidei idem
sentiunt: All Catholics dispersed throughout the whole world, are of one
opinion in matters of faith. That Hills Quartern of Reasons, Reason 3.
Whosoever they be, or in what place or region soever they remain in all the
world, if they be Catholics or Papists, they have all one faith, one heart and
one soul. But if this be true, I desire to know how it came to pass, that
Iacobus Almain a Doctor of Paris writ against Cardinal Caietan? why Soto the
Spaniard writ against Ferus? and Medina a Spaniard in defense of Ferus against
Soto. Why Guilielmus Occham our countryman writ against Pope John 22. Why
Nicolaus de Tudisco, best known by the name of Abbat Panormitan, writ a book
pro Concilio Basiliensi, in defense of the Council at Basil. Why Sigebert a
Monk of Gemble, writ one book against an Epistle of Gregory 7. and another
against an Epistle of Paschalis 2. Why Fisher B. of Rochester writ a book
against James Faber: and Marcus Grandeuallis another: and why Iodochus
Clychtoueus writ against Grundeuallis: and Fisher against Clictoueus. Why
Alexander Carerius an Italian writ a book de potestate To. Pont. aduersus
impios politicos, meaning such as Bellarmine. Why Turrian writ against Pighius.
Why Ecchius railed upon Taulerus. Why Catharin writ against Caietan. Why Soto
writ against Catharin. Why The book was printed at Rome 1593. fatente
Posseuino in Apparat. sac. verb. Cornel. lansen.
Didacus Castillus writ against Iansenius. Why your Seminaries writ so many
biting books against the Jesuits, and the Jesuits so many biting books
against your Seminaries. Proceeded these books from men of one faith, one
heart, and one soul? or will you deny that they who writ them were
Catholics? or that the matters about which they contended were matters of
faith, or bordering thereupon? The men run under the name of Catholics in all
your book. And if the points about which they contended do not concern ^^th,
why are they so earnest in c^nsu^ing one another? As for example, why does
Archbishop Catharin charge Cardinal Caietan with such opinions touching the
Epistle to the Hebrews, In his book (...) per Coli^. 1535. page ^.
qua^ pijs auribus h^rri^ilia, as are horrible to be heard* and with such
opinions concerning the Sacraments, Page 154.
quae noua and foeda, and omnino Catholicis auribus absona, nec ferenda; as are
new and filthy, and not fit to be heard or tolerated by Catholics: and with
such opinions concerning the plurality of wives, as are Page 196.
prophanissima, most profane: and with one opinion touching marriage between
persons of different Religion, which is Page 225.
impium and irrationabile, both wicked and unreasonable: and with another
touching the resurrection, which is Page 286.
irrationabilis and contra Scripturam, and indigna vt cadat in mentem
Christianam, an unreasonable opinion, contrary to Scripture, and unworthy of
any Christian: and with other expositions of Scripture, Page 298. 299.
Quae nouum and infandum dogma introducunt, and multa falsa and incredibilia:
whereon follows one new and grand paradox, besides many lesser falsities and
incredulities. Yea, why does Catharin charge Caietan with words touching the
Godhead of Christ, Page 104.
quae manifest horribilia and omnium sententia detestanda, which are
apparently horrible, and by common consent to be detested? and with another
opinion, of which he says thus, Page 106.
Hanc ego procul dubio vt haereticam and detestabilem toto spiritu pronuncio, I
do with open mouth proclaim that this opinion is heretical and detestable.

Again, if there be such unity among you, as you brag of, why forbid you
Index Clem. 8. litera A.
Masias Commentaries upon Joshua? Ibid. lit D.
Didacus Stella his Commentaries upon Luke? Ibid. lit. I.
Ferus Commentaries upon Matthew and John? Ibid. lit C.
Claudus Espencaeus his Commentaries upon Titus? Lit. l.
James Faber his Commentaries upon the Evangelists and S. Paul's Epistles? Why
forbid you Lit. B.
Charanza Archbishop of Toledo his Catechism? Why forbid you Lit. A.
Catharinus his two questions de verbis quibus Christum sanctissimum
Eucharistiae sacramentum confecit? Why forbid you Lit. B.
Baptistae Cremensis works? Why forbid you Ibid.
Beatus Rhenanus his Scholies upon Tertullian; and his Epistle de primatu
Petri? Why forbid you Lit. O.
Onus Ecclesiae? and Lit. S.
Stephen Gardiners book, de vera obedientia? Why have you purged already
Confer the Edition 1551. with the Editions 1576. and 1589. and 1610. and the
truth of this will appear.
Guitmundus de Sacramento, who lived ad an. 1070; and This is confessed by
Posseuin in Apparat. sac. verbo, Tho. Aquin.
Tho. of Aquins his sum of Divinity, who lived ad an. 1240; and See edit.
^ran. cofurti 1581, and compared with that An. 1502.
Ioh. Petrus de Ferrarijs his practica, who lived ad ann. 1414. and Bernardinus
de Busti his Mariale, who lived in Sixtus 4. his days, about the year 1470?
Why have you purged already Cardinal Contarenus his works? and Sir Thomas
Mores works? and Viues his Commentaries upon S. Austin de Ciuitate Dei? Why
have you given direction for the purging of Bertram de corpere and sanguine
Domini, who lived about the year 870? and for the purging of Antonius
Rampegolis, or Rampelogis, (...)
a great stickler in the Council of Constance, An. 1414. against John Huss?
and for the purging of Antonius de Ros^llis, who lived ad ann. 1467. and for
the purging of a special book, entitled Ordo baptizandi, cum modo visitandi,
printed at Venice, An. 1575. in (...)
this book last mentioned, your Priests were enjoined to ask these two
questions of him that was sick, Credis non proprijs meritis, sed passionis
Domini nostri Jesus Christi virtute and merito ad gloriam peruenire? Do thou
believe that thou shall go to heaven by the virtue and merit of Christ's
passion, and not by thine own merits? Credis quod Dominus noster Jesus
Christus per nostra salute mortuus sit, and quod ex proprijs meritis vel alio
modo nullus possit saluari, nisi in merito passionis ipsius? Do thou believe
that our Lord Jesus Christ died for us? and that no man can be saved by his
own works, or by any other means then by the merit of his passion? And upon
the sick man's answering, that he believed so, your Priests were enjoined to
tell him further, Non erit desperandum vel dubitandum de salute illius, qui
suprapositus petitiones cord crediderit, and ore confessus fuerit: There is no
cause to despair, no not to doubt of his salvation, who believes with his
heart and confesses with his mouth the truth of the abouenamed questions. Yet
Cap^^^inus and Quiroga (...) citatis.
by order from your Church, all this is to be blotted out.

Again, if there be such unity among you, as you brag of; how (I pray you)
comes it to pass, that Lib. 1. de verbo Dei cap. 10.
Bellarmine holds, Tobith, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, the 1. and 2. of
Macab^es, to be Canonical Scripture; seeing Arias Montanus holds them to be
Apocrypha, saying in the title page of his Interlineall Bible, printed by
Plantin at Antwerp, An. 1584. Huic Editioni accesseru^s libri Graece scripti,
quos Ecclesia orthodox^ Haebraeorum Canonem sequuta, inter Apocryphus recenset:
In this Edition you have the books written in Greek (meaning Tobith, Judith,
etc.) which the Catholic Church following the Hebrew Canon, reckons among the
Apocrypha. How comes it to pass, that Epist. ad (...) pro Mor^a Erasmi.
Sir Thomas More, Lib. 2. de verbo Dei. ca^. 2.
Bellarmine, and many others of you, deny that the Hebrew and the Greek are
wilfully corrupted either by Jews or Heretics; seeing our Preface to the
English reader, set before the Bible printed at Doway, An. 1609.
Dowists tell us, that your vulgar Latin is more pure then the Hebrew or the
Greek, those Editions being foully corrupted by Jews and Heretics, since the
Latin was truly translated out of them? How comes it to pass, that in Spain
it runs for current, Az^r. institut. moral part. 1. lib. 2. cap. 13. page 104.
That the Cross of Christ is to be worshipped with Latria; and that yet in
France that doctrine is not liked? How comes it to pass, Nau^r^us ad Caput
N^uit. Notab. 3. nu. 84. de Iud.
that at Rome no man dare teach, That a Council is above the Pope; and that yet
no man dare teach at Paris, that the Pope is above a Council? How comes it to
pass, that your Dialogue between a Secul^r Priest and a (...) page 9^.
Jesuits in Scotland permitted the Catholics there to go to Church with
Protestants: and yet your Jesuits with us in England would not permit your
Catholics here to go to Church with us that are Protestants? Do not Rhem. in
Ro^. 3. 22.
some of you teach, That we are justified by the righteousness of Christ
inherent in us, and not imputed to us? and yet do not others of you, as namely
Lib. de Iustificatione.
Cardinal Contarenus and (...)
Albertus Fighius teach flat contrary, even that which we teach, viz. That we
are justified by Christ's righteousness imputed to us, not inherent in us? Do
not Rhem in Romans 3. 2^.
some of you teach, that we are not justified by faith only? and yet is it not
confessed by (...)
Alfonsus de Castro, that Claudius Guillandius a learned Papist was of opinion,
that we are justified by faith only? Do not Rhem. in Romans 8. 38.
some of you teach, that no man can be sure of his salvation, without special
revelation? and yet did not the same Comment. in 2. Tim. cap. vlt. c.
^^iliatione 2.
Claudius Guillandius maintain the contrary, and Catharinus too, both in and
after the Council of Trent? Did not Michael Baius, Atfons de Castr^ (...)
citato
who was one at the Council of Trent, and Deane of the University of Louaine,
and died in the year 1589. teach, Nullum est peccatum ex natura sua veniale,
sed omne peccatum meretur poenam aeterna^, There is no sin which is venial of
it own nature, but every sin deserves eternal death. And that, Omnia opera
infidelium sunt peccata, and Philosophorum virtates sunt vitia: All the actions
of infidels are sins, and all the virtues of Philosophers, vices. And that,
Liberum arbitrium sine gratiae Dei adiutorio, non nisi ad peccandum valet: Free
will without the help of Gods grace, can do nothing but sin. Pelagianus est
error dicere, quod liberum arbitrium valet, ad vllum peccatum vitandum: It is a
Pelagian error to say, that by the power of free will, a man may avoid some
sin. Omnia quod agit peccator, vel seruus peccati, peccatum est: All that is
sin which is done by a sinner, or by him that is servant to sin. Ad
rationem and definitionem peccati non pertinent voluntariam: It is not
necessary that sin should be defined to be a voluntary action. Praua
desideria, quibus ratio non consentit, and quae homo inuitus patitur, sunt
prohibita praecepto, Non concupisces: Wicked lusts, whereunto reason gives no
consent, and such as man falls into against his will, are forbidden by the
commandment, Thou shall not covet. Definitiua, haec sententia, Deum homini
nihil impossible praecepisse, falso tribuitur Augustino cum Pelagij sit: This
definitive sentence, viz. God commanded no man any impossible thing, is falsely
fathered on S. Austin, for it was Pelagius, not S. Austin. Nemo praeter
Christum est absque originali peccato, hinc beata Virgo mortua est propter
peccatum ex Adam contractum, omnesque eius afflictiones in hac vita, sicut and
aliorum iustorum, fuerunt vltiones peccati actualis vel originalis: No person
besides Christ is exempt from original sin; the virgin Mary died by reason
of original sin; and all the afflictions which she suffered in this life,
befell her as then befell to other good men, viz. as punishments either of
actual or original sin. Satisfactiones laboriosae iustificatorum non valent
expiare de condigno poenam temporalem restantem post culpam condonatam: The
painful satisfactorie works of such as are justified, do not condignely
satisfy for the temporal punishment remaining after the fault pardoned. Did
not (I say) Michael Baius your Deane of Lonaine teach these doctrines, and
above 70 more, much like unto these, all which are condemned by (...)
Pius 5. and Gregory 13. as partly heretical, partly erroneous, partly
suspicious, partly temerarious, partly scandalous, partly offensive? And are
you not ashamed to brag of your unity? Me thinks your unity is like that of
the Madianites, who thrust every man his sword into the side of his fellow.

11 You brag much of the commendation that S. Paul gave unto the Church of Rome
in his Epistle to the Romans, and Rhem A^not. before the Epistle to the Romans
page 38.
say, It is much to be noted. And is it not as much to be noted what
commendations God by his Prophets gave unto Jerusalem, Theodo^^^ hist lib 9.
cap. 9
the mother of all other Churches? Is it not as much to be noted, how God by
his Prophets affirmed, 2 Chronicles. 6. 6
that he chose Jerusalem that his Name might be there, and 2. Chro 7. 16.
that for ever? How God by his Prophets affirmed, Psalm. 132. 14.
that he meant to dwell there for ever, because he had a delight therein. 2.
Chro. 7. 16.
His eyes and his heart should be on Jerusalem perpetually. Jerusalem should be
called Zach. 8. 3.
a city of truth, and the mountain of the Lord of hoasts, the holy mountain.
Do not these commendations surpass those which are given by Paul unto the
Church of Rome in his Epistle to the Romans? And if the Jews now, have no
occasion to brag of the commendation given to the Church of Jerusalem of
old; why should you stand so much upon it, that S. Paul in his time, gave
commendation to the Church of Rome in his time? May it not be, that as (...) 1.
21.
Jerusalem, of a faithful City became a harlot: so Rome, since S. Paul's time,
of a virgin, is become a strumpet? Many virgin Churches lost their virginity
soon, as you may see by Egesippus words recorded in Hist. lib. 3. cap. 32. et
lib. 4. cap. 22. (...) interpret.
Eusebius. Again, was not the Church of Corinth as much commended, if not
more, by S. Paul in his Epistle written to the Corinthians, as the Church of
Rome in his Epistle to the Romans? The 1. Cor. 1. 5. 7. 8.
Apostle writes of the Corinthians, that they were rich in Christ, in all kind
of speech, and in all knowledge; that they were not destitute of any gift:
affirming further, that our Lord Jesus Christ will confirm them to the end.
Which he writ not of the Romans. Of the Romans continuing in that fame and
renown of faith, for which he commends them, he speaks nothing: and yet the
Church of Corinth has lost her maidenhead, and why not Rome? If the natural
branches, the Jew, notwithstanding all their promises: and the branches of the
same Olive plant with the Romans, I mean the Corinthians, notwithstanding all
the commendations which S. Paul gave them, be cut off, be deceived: what reason
have you, who hold of Rome, to please your selves with conceits of I know not
what dry Summers, because Saint Paul commended your predecessors?

12 You brag, that the faith which you profess at this day, is the same with
that which the Apostle commended in the Romans in his days; and yet though
the Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans, wherein he commends the Romans faith,
comprehends all kind of doctrines, and handles them very fully and exactly, as
Praefat. Epist. ad. Romans
Theodoret witnesses, and the Annot. before the Epistle to the Romans page 380.
Rhemists confess; he speaks nothing therein of the Popes Monarchy, of his
power to judge and determine all ^auses of faith, of his calling of Councels,
of his Presidentship in Councels, of his right to ratify their decrees, to
decide causes brought him by Appeals from all the coasts of the world: of
censuring Kings, by deposing them; on their kingdoms, by interdicting them: he
says nothing herein of his right to bind Bishops, Metropolitans and Patriarchs
with an oath to be his faithful subjects: to give Church-liuings and Offices
to whom he list: to break the bands of all Councels with dispensations. He
says nothing of the Mass, of the real presence, of Transubstantiation. He
says nothing of the vows of poverty, of obedience and chastity, He says
nothing of Images, of the Cross, of Pilgrimages, of Iubiles, of pardons, of
Purgarori^s, of praying to the dead, or for the dead. He says nothing (I say)
no not a word, not so much as in show, for the proof of these, or any such
doctrines as these, whereon ye stand most in these days: but on the contrary,
in many places he speaks directly against many of your now-doctrines, against
many of your present positions. As for example, whereas you both in books and
windows paint God the Father in the likeness of an old man, and Bellar. lib.
2. de Imag. cap. 8.
defend it as lawful. The Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans teaches, that
it is unlawful, To. 1. 22, 23.
calling them fools, who turned the glory of the incorruptible God, into ye
similitude of the image of a corruptible man. Secondly, whereas Rhem. Annot. in
Heb 11. 21. and in Apoc. 19. 10.
you teach, that religious worship is due to creatures, to Angels, to men, to
Images, to Crucifixes, etc. The Apostle in this Epistle Romans 1. 24. 25
shows how grievously they were punished by God, who worshipped and served the
creature, forsaking the Creator; implying therein, that it is not lawful to
give religious worship unto creatures. Thirdly, whereas Rhem. Annot. in (...).
2. 21.
you maintain, that the doctrine of faith only justifying, is an old heresy:
the Apostle in this Epistle teaches it for a Catholic doctrine; for we
conclude ( To. 3. 28.
says he) that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law;
which is all one as to say, a man is justified by faith only. Fourthly,
whereas Rhem. Annot. in Fo. 5. 14.
you teach, that the virgin Mary was free from original sin: the Apostle in
Romans 5. 12.
this Epistle writes, that in Adam all men (and by consequent the virgin Mary)
sinned; what exception have we but Christ? Fifthly, whereas Rhem, Annot. in hom.
1. 31.
you teach, that some sins are venial, that is, pardonable of their own
nature, and not worthy of damnation: the Apostle in this Epistle teaches
contrary, Romans 6. 23.
saying, The wages of sin (meaning every sin) is death. Sixthly, whereas Rhem
Annot. in Romans 6. 23.
you teach, that everlasting life is a stipend: the Apostle in this Epistle
teaches it is a gift, The gift of God is eternal life, Romans 6, 22.
says the Apostle. Seventhly, whereas Rhem. Annot. in Romans 7. 7.
you teach, that concupiscence is no sin; and besides, Non licet nobis ita
loqui, etc. Posseuin Apparat. sac. verbo. ^a^^es antiqui.
that we may not safely call it sin: the Apostle in this Epistle, Idem. ibid.
by your own men's confession, Romans 6. 12.
calls it sin. Eighthly, whereas Censura Colon. dial. 3.
you account it heresy to teach, that a justified man cannot keep the whole
Law: the Apostle in this Epistle stands guilty of this heresy; for speaking
in the person of a justified man, To will is present with me, Romans 7. 18. 19
says he, but I find no means to perform that which is good. for I do not
the good thing which I would, but the evil which I would not, that do I.
Ninthly, whereas Rhem. Annot. in Heb 13. 16. and 1. Cor. 3. 8.
you teach, that good works be meritorious, even so meritorious, that the
joys of heaven are a thing equally and justly answering to the time and weight
of our works: the Apostle in this Epistle teaches, Romans 8. 18.
that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory which
shall be showed unto us. Tenthly, whereas Rhem. A^n^t. in 1. Cor. 9. 27.
you cry out against the certainty of faith, calling it an unhappy
security, presumption, and a faithless persuasion: the Apostle in Romans 4, 20.
this Epistle commends the faith that is free from doubting, Romans 8. 38. 39
professing that he was assured neither life nor death, nor any creature, was
able to separate him from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Eleuenthly, whereas Antenin. sunt. Theol part. 3. tit. 13. cap. 6. sect. 16.
you teach, that Christ is upon every of your Altars: the Apostle in Romans 8. 34.
this Epistle teaches, that since his rising he is at the right hand of God.
Twelfthly, whereas Rhem. in Act. 10. 2.
you teach, that works done before justification, deserve of congruitie at
Gods hands the grace of justification: the Apostle in this Epistle teaches
flat contrary, Romans 8. 7. 8.
saying, The wisdom of the flesh (that is, a man unjustified) cannot please
God. 13. Whereas (...)
you teach, that every creature must be subject to the Pope, and that the Pope
is subject to none: the Apostle in this Epistle Romans 13.
exhorts every creature to be subject to the higher powers, meaning by the
higher powers (as the Agniscente Bellar. lib 3. de (...), cap. 3.
circumstances show) the Civil magistrates, and not the Pope. 14. Whereas you
(...)
teach, that the Clergy is and ought to be free from whatsoever impositions of
the Ciu^^l ^agistrate, and that by the laws of God and man: the Apostle in
this Epistle Romans 13. 7.
persuades every creature, the Clergy as well as the Laity, to pay tribute
and custom to the Civil magistrate. 15. Whereas (...) de vita lgnatij (...),
lib. 5. cap. 4.
you teach, that inferiors must do whatsoever superiors command them, though
it be against their consciences, unless they have plain reason for their
refusal: the Apostle in this Epistle requires, Romans 14. 5.
that men be fully persuaded in their minds of the lawfulness of that which
they do; meaning they should not only for bear the doing of that which went
against their conscienes, but whereof they doubted in their judgments. Lastly,
whereas Rhem. in Romans 14 23.
you teach, that some actions only of the Infidels are sins: the Apostle in
this Epistle affirms, that all the actions of the Infidels are sins, saying,
Romans 14. 23.
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Now that which I desire to know, is, why
the Apostle (if the faith of our Romish Church now, be the same that it was
then when he writ to the Romans) spoke nothing of the principal points of
your now-faith; but many things for us, and against you?

Your Confess. Petrikoniae. cap. 48 de sacr^m. Poenitentiae fol. 127.
Cardinal Hosius, to prove satisfaction, alleges these as the words of Saint
Paul, Romans 6. Exhibeamus membra nostra seruire iustitiae in satisfactione: Let
us exhibit our members to serve justice unto satisfaction. And your Answ. to
Iuels Apology, par. 2 chap. 16. fol. 117
Doctor Harding for proof of the same point, alleges these as the words of
S. Paul, 2. Cor. 7. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit, making perfect our satisfaction in the fear of God. Both of them
putting the word satisfaction in place of the word sanctification, used by the
Apostle. Was there any great sanctity showed by them in this? or rather, are
they not bound to make satisfaction unto the Apostle for this their bad
dealing, think you?

Your Bishop Gardener ( D. Fulk in his defense of (...) against Matt^n. An^w.
to the preface. nu. 4
some say) to prove the carnal presence which you maintain against the truth
and us, alleges these as the words of the 110. Psalm, Escamse dedit
timentibus eum, He gave himself for meat to them that feared him. Was there
any fear of God in your Bishop to add the word se. himself, of himself to
the text, think you?

Your Lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 12.
Cardinal Bellarmine, to prove that holy things may be religiously worshipped,
alleges these as the words of God, Exodus 12. 16. Dies prima erit sancta, and
septima eadem religione venerabilis: The first day shall be holy, and the
seventh day with like religion shall be venerable; descanting upon them thus,
Hic vides pro eodem accipi rem sanctam, and religiose venerabilem; yet the word
religiose is not in the text, but the word festiuitate. Now I pray you, was it
not irreligiously done of your Cardinal, to chop into the Text the word
religiously falsely?

Your Epist. ad Alho^num de Caelibatu Eccles. Col. 75. quae habetur ad finem
To. 2. desen Bell per G^^tsirum.
Bernaltus a Priest of Constance, writing in defense of Gregory 7. his
prohibition of Priests marriage, affirms, that S. Peter commanded even the
Laity (1. Pet. 3.) vt parcant vxoribus suis, ne impetrantur orationes earum,
that they should forbear companying with their wives, lest their prayers
should be interrupted: whereas in Saint Peter there are no such words as vt
parcant vxoribus, they should forbear companying with their wives. Did not
this Priest of yours deserve to be accompanied with whores, who forged this
Text to prove, that a man may not keep company with his wife?

Your ^ib. supracit. cap. 58 de spe and orat. fol. 189.
Cardinal Hosius, and your Loc. Com. lib. 7. cap. 3. fol. 232.
Bishop Canus, in way of proouing that we may believe in Saints, allege the
words of Saint Paul to Philemon, Gratias ago Deo meo audiens fidem quod habes
in Domino nostro, and in omnes Sanctos: I give thanks to my God, hearing of the
faith which thou have in the Lord Jesus, and in all Saints; leaving out the
word charitatem, love or charity, which the Apostle coupled with the word
fidem, faith: meaning, love or charity should be referred to the Saints, as
the object of it; and the word faith to the Lord Jesus, as his object. Was
there any love or charity in these toward the Apostle, who suppressed the
mention of that love toward the Saints, which he commended in Philemon? or is
it safe, I do not say to believe in, but to believe such saints as these, who
cite the Scriptures so diuel-like, leaving out, as the devil did Mat. 4. what
made against him?

Your Sess. 11 (...). 4. Conc. e^t. B^^nianae. page 639.
Pope Leo 10. affirmed in the Council of Lateran, that Christ ordained Peter
and Peter's successors to be his Vicars; who, by the testimony of the book of
Kings, must needs be so obeyed, that he who obeyes them not, must die the
death. In what book of Kings, I pray you, find you this? for there is no such
testimony in those books of the Kings which are in my Bible.

Your Lib. 1. de Purg. cap. 3
Cardinal Bellarmine (to return to him again) in way of proouing Purgatory,
alleges these as the words of the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 4. 4. Purgabit Dominus
sordes filiorum and filiarum Sion, and sanguinem emundabit de medio eorum,
spiritu iudicij and combustionis: Our Lord shall purge away the filthiness of
the sons and daughters of Sion, and shall wipe away the blood from the midst
of them with the spirit of judgment and burning. Yet in the vulgar Latin
(which he is bound by oath to follow) the words lie thus: Si abluerit Dominus
sordes filiorum and filiarum Sion, and sanguinem Jerusalem lauerit de medio
eius in spiritu ardor is and iudicij. Why (I pray you) did he change the word
abluerit into purgabit, and and the word lauerit into emundabit, and the word
ardoris into combustionis? was it not for that the words abluerit and lauerit
and ardoris, suite not so well with fire, which you maintain to be found in
Purgatory; as the words purgabit, emundabit and arderis do? or what else was
the cause that he varied from his Text? And how can you excuse his from
perjury?

This same Lib. 4. de Christ. cap. 11.
Cardinal of yours, in way of proving that Christ brought souls out of
Purgatory when he descended thither (as you dream) after his death, alleges
these as the words of Zachary, Chap. 9. 11. Tu autem in sanguine testamenti tui
eduxisti vinclos tuos de lacu in quo non est aqua: But thou by the blood of thy
testament have brought out thy prisoners out of the Lake wherein there is no
water. Yet in the vulgar Latin it is not eduxisti, have brought forth, but
emisisti, have sent forth: which will not afford the like conclusion.

Again, this Lib. 2. de lus^if cap. 3.
Cardinal of yours, to prove that inherent righteousness is the formal cause
of our justification, alleges these as the words of S. Paul, Tit. 3. 5. Cum
apparuit benignitas and humanitas Saluateris nostri Dei, non ex operibus quae
fecimus nos, sed secundum suam misericordiam saluos nos fecit, etc. When the
bountifulness and love of God our Savior appeared, not by the works which we
had done, but according to his mercy he saved us, etc. Yet the Apostle says
not barely, Not by the works which we had done; but, Not by the works of
righteousness which we had done: excluding our good works, our inherent
righteousness from justification. And your Cardinal unrighteously leaves out
the word righteousness.

Your Vicar general to the Archbishop of Bononia, called De maiestate
militantis Eccles. l. 1. de batriarch. etc. par. 1. cap. 8. p. 227. ^dit.
Venet. 1602.
Isiodorus Mosconius, to prove that all Bishops owe extraordinary obedience to
your Pope, alleges these as the words of Cyprian, lib. 4. Epist. 9. Episcopi,
vti qui Apostolicae ordinationi subiacent, etiam ei hanc reuerentiam debent, vt
singulis annis Apostolorum liminibus sese repraesentent: Bishops, as persons
subject to Apostolical ordination, owe this reverence to the Pope, that every
year they visit Rome. But I cannot find this in any edition of Cyprian.

De Tradit. part 3. tit. de cultu Sanci. fol. 197.
Bishop Peresius, and the An^^dagma Colon. tit. de Innocent. sanct. fol. 36. ^.
Prebendaries of Colen, to prove Invocation of Saints, allege these as the
words of S. Austin, de Ciuitate Dei, lib. 22. Hec vsu ab initio traditum
tenemus, vt extra orationes quae in altari fiunt, etiam Deo dilectos sanctos,
contemplatione vnionis and communionis, quam cum Christo and nobiscum habent,
cum timore and deuotione erga Deum compellemus, atque vt pro nobis intercedant
inuocemus. But I cannot find this in any Edition of S. Austin.

Your ^ib. 2. sent. d. 11. ^.
Peter Lombard to prove That every man has a good Angel to protect him, and
an evil Angel to tempt him, alleges these as the words of Gregory, Quod
quisque bonum Angelum sibi ad custodiam deputatum, and vnum malum ad exercitium
habet. But I can find no such words in any Gregory's works, not in Nazianzens,
not in Nysseus, not in Gregory's the Great.

Your To. 2. de Sacramen. cap. 83.
Waldensis disputing about Transubstantiation, alleges these as the words of
^ib. ^. de corpore and sang^^e. Domini.
Austin, Nec credendum est quod substantia panis vel vini remanent, sed panis
in corpus Christi, and vinum in sanguinem conuertitur, solummodo qualitatibus
panis and vini remanentibus: Neither must we believe, that the substance o^
bread and wine remains, but the bread is turned into the body of Christ, and
the wine into his blood, the qualities of bread and wine remaining only. But I
can neither find such words, nor any such Treatise among S. Austins words.

The same To. 2. de Sacram. cap. 82.
Waldensis prosecuting the same argument, alleges these as the words of Beda
in a Treatise de mysterijs Missa, Ibi forma panis videtur, vbi substantia panis
non est: There the form of bread appears, where the substance of bread is
not. But I can neither find these words, nor any such Treatise among Bedaes
works.

Your ^ib. 1. de Purg. cap. 6.
Cardinal Bellarmine, for proof of Purgatory, alleges these words of S.
Austin, de Ciuitate Dei, lib. 21. cap. 24. Tales constat ante iudicij diem per
poenas temporales, quas eorum spiritus patiuntur, purgatos: aeterni ignis
supplicijs non tradendos: It is certain that such men being purged with
temporal pains which their souls suffer before the day of judgment, shall
not be committed to the torment of everlasting fire. But there are no such
words to be found in the printed copy at Friburge An. 1494. nor in that of
Antwerp 1576. nor in that of Paris 1586. nor in that of Basil 1596. nor in any
written copy that I can hear of, either in the University Library at
Oxford, or elsewhere.

Your Proemiall Annot. before the Bible translated by them into English,
printed 1609.
Dowists to prove Tobith, Judith, etc. Canonical, allege Council. Florent.
Instruct. Armen. Decret. 7. But there is no such Decree to be found in any
Edition of the Councels.

Lib. de F^. ^ont part. 1. cap. 1. page 22.
Isiodorus Mosconius the Vicar general spoken of before, to set out the
greatness of his Pope, tells us in sober sadness, that In Conc. Nicaeno
tempore Constant. mag. fuit terminatum, quod solum Romans Pont. nomen Pater
patrum competeret, and Papae nomen alijs non conuenire: It was decreed in the
Council of Nice, in the days of Constantine the great, that the title Fathers
of fathers, should be given to the Bishop of Rome only, and that no man should
be called Pope but he. Yet there is no such Decree to be found in any Edition
of the Councels.

The same Ibid. page 23.
Monsieur, handling the same argument, tells us, that In Council. Africae legetur
quod eo nomine Principis Sacerdotum solummodo Papa vteretur: It is read in one
of the Councels in Africa, that the Pope only should be called Prince of
priests. Yet there is no such thing to be seen in any of the Councels of
Africa, which are in any Editions of the Councels.

Your Opuscul. contra errores Graecorum.
S. Tho. of Aquin, to prove that your Pope has an universal sovereignty over
the whole Church of Christ, affirms, that in the Council of Chalcedon it was
decreed thus, Si quis Episcopus praedicatur infamis liberam habeat potestatem
appellandi ad beatissimum Episcopum antiquae Romae, quis habemus Petrum patrem
refugij, and ipsi soli libera potestate loco Dei sit ius discernendi Episcopi
criminati infamiam, secundum claues a Domino sibi datus: If any Bishop be
defamed, let him appeal freely to the Bishop of Rome, because we have Peter
for a father of refuge, and he alone has right with freedom of power in the
stead of God to judge and try the crime of a Bishop defamed, according to the
keys which the Lord did give him. But there is no such to be found in the
Council of Chalcedon, in any Edition of the Councels.

This In 4. sent. d. 24 Act. 2. q. 3.
Saint of yours, to prove that one Bishop is subject to another Bishop, etiam
iure diuino, by Gods law, alleges these as the words of one of the Councels
kept at Constantinople, Veneramur secundum Scriptur as etc. sanctissimum
antiquae Romae Episcopum primum esse and maximum Episcoporum: We define,
according to the Scriptures, that the most holy Bishop of Rome shall be the
first and greatest of all Bishops. But that any Council of Constantinople did
define that by Scripture, the Bishop of Rome was the greatest of all Bishops,
it is not to be found in any Edition of the Councels.

Your Lib. 1. de Conc. cap. 19. and lib. 2. cap. 11.
Cardinal Bellarmine, to prove that your Popes Legates sat as Judges in the
general Council of Chalcedon, tell us that Ipsi sententiam definitiuam
proferunt in Dioscorum nomine Papae and totius Concilij Act. 3. his verbis,
Sanctissimus ac beatissimus Papa caput vniuersalis Ecclesia Leo, per nos
Legatos suos, sancta Synodo consentiente, Petri Apostoli praeditus dignitate,
qui Ecclesiae fundamentum, and petra fidei, and caelestis regni Ianitor
nuncupatur, Episcopali dignitate Dioscorum nudauit, and ab omni sacerdotali
opere fecit extorrem: They in the name of the Pope and the Council, delivered
the definitive sentence against Dioscorus, even in these words, Action 3. The
most holy and blessed Pope Leo head of the universal Church, by us his Legates,
with the consent of the holy Council, being endowed with Saint Peter's power,
who is called the foundation of the Church, and rock of faith, the Porter of
heaven gates, has deposed Dioscorus from his Bishoprik, and restrained him
from all priestly functions. Yet there is no such definitive sentence to be
seen in any action of the Council of Chalcedon, wherein Leo is called Head of
the universal Church, or said to be endowed with S. Peter's power; or wherein
Peter himself is called the foundation of the Church, or Porter of heavens
gate.

FINIS.

